abatement (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French abatement, from abattre (see abate).


abate (v.)

put an end to (c.1300); to grow less, diminish in power or influence (early 14c.), from Old French
abattre beat down, cast down, from Vulgar Latin *abbatere, from Latin ad to (see ad-) + battuere to
beat (see batter (v.)). Secondary sense of to fell, slaughter is in abatis and abattoir. Related:
Abated; abating.


bate (v.1)

to reduce, to lessen in intensity, c.1300, shortening of abate (q.v.). Now only in phrase bated
breath, which was used by Shakespeare in The Merchant of Venice (1596).


unabated (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of abate (v.).


remiss (adj.)

early 15c., weak, dissolved, from Latin remissus relaxed, languid; negligent, past participle of
remittere slacken, abate, let go (see remit). Meaning characterized by lack of strictness is
attested from mid-15c.; that of characterized by negligence is from mid-15c.


overblown (adj.)

late 15c., blown over, passed away, past participle adjective from verb overblow to blow over the
top of, of a storm, to abate, pass on (late 14c.), from over- + blow (v.1). Meaning inflated, puffed
up (with vanity, etc.) is from 1864.


moderate (v.)

early 15c., to abate excessiveness; from Latin moderatus, past participle of moderari (see moderate
(adj.)). Meaning to preside over a debate is first attested 1570s. Related: Moderated; moderating.


abatis (n.)

defense made of felled trees, 1766, from French abatis, literally things thrown down, from Old
French abateis, from abattre to beat down, throw down (see abate).


abattoir (n.)

slaughterhouse for cows, 1820, from French abattre to beat down (see abate) + suffix -oir,
corresponding to Latin -orium (see -ory).


remission (n.)

c.1200, forgiveness or pardon (of sins), from Old French remission forgiveness (of sins), relief
(12c.), from Latin remissionem (nominative remissio) relaxation, diminishing, lit. a sending back,
sending away, noun of action from past participle stem of remittere slacken, let go, abate (see
remit). Used of diseases since early 15c.


discount (v.)

1620s, reckon as an abatement or deduction, from Old French desconter (13c., Modern French
d&eacute;compter), from Medieval Latin discomputare, from dis- (see dis-) + computare to count (see
count (v.)). Hence, to abate, deduct (1650s), and figurative sense to leave out of account,
disregard (1702).  Related: Discounted; discounting.


remit (v.)

late 14c., to forgive, pardon, from Latin remittere send back, slacken, let go back, abate, from re-
back (see re-) + mittere to send (see mission). Meaning allow to remain unpaid is from mid-15c.
Meaning send money (to someone) first recorded 1630s. Related: Remitted; remitting.


rebate (v.)

late 14c., to reduce; early 15c., to deduct, subtract, from Old French rabattre beat down, drive
back, also deduct, from re- repeatedly (see re-) + abattre beat down (see abate). Meaning to pay
back (a sum) as a rebate is from 1957. Related: Rebated; rebating.


stem (v.1)

to hold back, early 14c., from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse stemma to stop, dam up; be
stopped, abate, from Proto-Germanic *stamjan (cognates: Swedish st&auml;mma, Old Saxon stemmian,
Middle Dutch stemon, German stemmen stop, resist, oppose), from PIE root *stem- to strike against
something (cognates: Lithuanian stumiu thrust, push). Not connected to stem (n.). Related: Stemmed;
stemming. Phrase to stem the tide is literally to hold back the tide, but often is confused with
stem (v.2) make headway against.    Verbal phrase stems from (1932, American English), perhaps is
from stem (v.) in the sense to rise, mount up, have origin in (1570s), or is influenced by or
translates German stammen aus, probably from a figurative sense represented by English stem (n.) in
the sense of stock of a family, line of descent (c.1540; cognates: family tree, and German
stammvater tribal ancestor, literally stem-father).


