accessible (adj.)

c.1400, affording access, from Middle French accessible, from Late Latin accessibilis, verbal
adjective from Latin accessus a coming near, approach (see access (n.)). Meaning easy to reach is
from 1640s; Of art or writing, able to be readily understood, 1961 (a term not needed in the years
before writing or art often deliberately was made not so).


pervious (adj.)

penetrable, accessible, permeable, 1610s, from Latin pervius that may be passed through (see
impervious).


handy (adj.)

c.1300, skilled with the hands (implied in surnames), from hand (n.) + -y (2). Meaning conveniently
accessible is from 1640s.


speculum (n.)

1590s, in surgery and medicine, instrument for rendering a part accessible to observation, from
Latin speculum reflector, looking-glass, mirror (also a copy, an imitation), from specere to look
at, view (see scope (n.1)). As a type of telescope attachment from 1704.


accessibility (n.)

c.1800, from accessible + -ity.


walk-up (adj.)

in reference to an apartment not accessible by elevator, 1909, from the verbal phrase; see walk (v.)
+ up (adv.). As a noun from 1920 in reference to that type of apartment.


inaccessible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French inaccessible (14c.), from Late Latin inaccessibilis unapproachable,
from in- not (see in- (1)) + accessibilis (see accessible). Related: Inaccessibly; inaccessibility.
Earlier in same sense was unaccessible (c.1400).


Vulgate (n.)

Latin translation of the Bible, especially that completed in 405 by St. Jerome (c.340-420), c.1600,
from Medieval Latin Vulgata, from Late Latin vulgata common, general, ordinary, popular (in vulgata
editio popular edition), from Latin vulgata, fem. past participle of vulgare make common or public,
spread among the multitude, from vulgus the common people (see vulgar). So called because the
translations made the book accessible to the common people of ancient Rome.


climax (n.)

1580s, in the rhetorical sense (a chain of reasoning in graduating steps from weaker to stronger),
from Late Latin climax (genitive climacis), from Greek klimax propositions rising in effectiveness,
literally ladder, from root of klinein to slope, from PIE root *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)).
The rhetorical meaning evolved in English through series of steps by which a goal is achieved, to
escalating steps, to (1789) high point of intensity or development, a usage credited by the OED to
popular ignorance. The meaning sexual orgasm is recorded by 1880 (also in terms such as climax of
orgasm), said to have been promoted from c.1900 by birth-control pioneer Marie Stopes (1880-1958)
and others as a more accessible word than orgasm (n.).


