addiction (n.)

c.1600, tendency, of habits, pursuits, etc.; 1640s as state of being self-addicted, from Latin
addictionem (nominative addictio) an awarding, a devoting, noun of action from past participle stem
of addicere (see addict (v.)). Earliest sense was less severe: inclination, penchant, but this has
become obsolete. In main modern sense it is first attested 1906, in reference to opium (there is an
isolated instance from 1779, with reference to tobacco).


sensualism (n.)

1803, the philosophical doctrine that the senses are the sole source of knowledge, from sensual +
-ism. From 1813 as addiction to sensual indulgence.


Jones

surname, literally John's (child); see John. Phrase keep up with the Joneses (1913, American
English) is from the title of a comic strip by Arthur R. Momand. The slang sense intense desire,
addiction (1968) probably arose from earlier use of Jones as a synonym for heroin, presumably from
the proper name, but the connection, if any, is obscure. Related: Jonesing.


alcoholism (n.)

disease of alcohol addiction, 1852, from alcohol + -ism, or else from Modern Latin alcoholismus,
coined in 1852 by Swedish professor of medicine Magnus Huss (1807-1890) to mean what we now would
call alcohol poisoning. In earlier times, alcoholism would have been habitual drunkenness or some
such term.


dry (v.)

Old English drygan, related to dry (adj.). Related: Dried; drying. Of the two agent noun spellings,
drier is the older (1520s), while dryer (1874) was first used of machines. Dry out in the drug
addiction sense is from 1967. Dry up stop talking is 1853.


clean (adj.)

Old English cl&aelig;ne free from dirt or filth; pure, chaste, innocent; open, in the open, of
beasts, ritually safe to eat, from West Germanic *klainoz clear, pure (cognates: Old Saxon kleni
dainty, delicate, Old Frisian klene small, Old High German kleini delicate, fine, small, German
klein small; English preserves the original Germanic sense), from PIE root *gel- bright, gleaming
(cognates: Greek glene eyeball, Old Irish gel bright).    Largely replaced by clear, pure in the
higher senses [Weekley], but as a verb (mid-15c.) it has largely usurped what once belonged to
cleanse. Meaning whole, entire is from c.1300 (clean sweep in the figurative sense is from 1821).
Sense of innocent is from c.1300; that of not lewd is from 1867; that of not carrying anything
forbidden is from 1938; that of free of drug addiction is from 1950s. To come clean confess is from
1919, American English.


