adversity (n.)

c.1200, aduersite misfortune, hardship, difficulty, from Old French aversit&eacute; adversity,
calamity, misfortune; hostility, wickedness, malice (Modern French adversit&eacute;), from Latin
adversitatem (nominative adversitas) opposition, from adversus (see adverse).


survivor (n.)

early 15c. in the legal sense of one who outlives another, agent noun from survive. Meaning one who
has a knack for pulling through adversity is attested from 1971. Survivor syndrome is first recorded
1968.


hang in (v.)

persist in spite of adversity, 1969, see hang (v.) + in.


calamity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French calamite (14c.), from Latin calamitatem (nominative calamitas)
damage, loss, failure; disaster, misfortune, adversity, origin obscure. Early etymologists
associated it with calamus straw (see shawm); but it is perhaps from a lost root preserved in
incolumis uninjured, from PIE *kle-mo-, from base *kel- (1) to strike, cut (see holt).


stress (n.)

c.1300, hardship, adversity, force, pressure, in part a shortening of Middle English distress (n.);
in part from Old French estrece narrowness, oppression, from Vulgar Latin *strictia, from Latin
strictus tight, compressed, drawn together, past participle of stringere draw tight (see strain
(v.)). Meaning physical strain on a material object is from mid-15c. As an abstract force in
mechanics from 1855. The purely psychological sense is attested from 1955.


stour (n.)

c.1300, tumult, armed conflict, struggle with adversity or pain, from Anglo-French estur, Old French
estour a tumult, conflict, assault, shock, battle, from Proto-Germanic *sturmoz storm (cognates: Old
High German sturm storm; battle; see storm (n.)). Became obsolete, revived by Spenser and his
followers in various senses; also surviving as a Scottish and Northern English word meaning a
(driving) storm or uproar, commotion. Italian stormo also is from Germanic.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


