agitated (adj.)

1610s, set in motion, past participle adjective from agitate (v.). Meaning disturbed is from 1650s;
that of disturbed in mind is from 1756. Meaning kept constantly in public view is from 1640s.


agitate (v.)

1580s, to disturb, from Latin agitatus, past participle of agitare to put in constant motion, drive
onward, impel, frequentative of agere to move, drive (see agitation). Literal sense of move to and
fro, shake is from 1590s. Related: Agitated; agitating.


seismo-

word-forming element meaning earthquake, from comb. form of Greek seismos a shaking, shock; an
earthquake, from seiein to shake, from PIE root *twei- to agitate, shake, toss.


insouciance (n.)

1799, from French insouciant carelessness, thoughtlessness, heedlessness, from in- not (see in- (1))
+ se soucier to care, from Latin sollicitare to agitate (see solicit).


agitator (n.)

1640s, agent noun from agitate (v.); originally elected representative of the common soldiers in
Cromwell's army, who brought grievances (chiefly over lack of pay) to their officers and Parliament.
Political sense is first recorded 1734, and negative overtones began with its association with Irish
patriots such as Daniel O'Connell (1775-1847). Historically, in American English, often with outside
and referring to people who stir up a supposedly contented class or race. Latin agitator meant a
driver, a charioteer.


insouciant (adj.)

1829, from French insouciant careless, thoughtless, heedless, from in- not (see in- (1)) + souciant
caring, present participle of soucier to care, from Latin sollicitare to agitate (see solicit).
Related: Insouciantly.


discuss (v.)

mid-14c., to examine, investigate, from Latin discuss-, past participle stem of discutere to dash to
pieces, agitate, in Late Latin and Vulgar Latin also to discuss, investigate (see discussion).
Meaning examine by argument, debate is from mid-15c. Related: Discussed; discussing.


excite (v.)

mid-14c., to move, stir up, instigate, from Old French esciter (12c.) or directly from Latin
excitare rouse, call out, summon forth, produce, frequentative of exciere call forth, instigate,
from ex- out (see ex-) + ciere set in motion, call (see cite). Of feelings, from late 14c. Of bodily
organs or tissues, from 1831. Main modern sense of emotionally agitate is first attested 1821.


torment (v.)

c.1300, inflict torture on, distress, from Old French tormenter torture, torment, oppress, agitate
(12c.), from Medieval Latin tormentare to torment, to twist, from Latin tormentum (see torment
(n.)). Related: Tormented; tormenting.


emotion (n.)

1570s, a (social) moving, stirring, agitation, from Middle French &eacute;motion (16c.), from Old
French emouvoir stir up (12c.), from Latin emovere move out, remove, agitate, from ex- out (see ex-)
+ movere to move (see move (v.)). Sense of strong feeling is first recorded 1650s; extended to any
feeling by 1808.


whittle (v.)

1550s, to cut thin shavings from (something) with a knife, from Middle English whittel a knife,
especially a large one (c.1400), variant of thwittle (late 14c.), from Old English &thorn;witan to
cut, from Proto-Germanic *thwit- (cognates: Old Norse &thorn;veita to hew), from PIE root *twei- to
agitate, shake, toss. Figurative sense is attested from 1746. Related: Whittled; whittling.


ventilate (v.)

early 15c., to scatter, disperse (as the wind does), from Latin ventilatus, past participle of
ventilare to brandish, toss in the air, winnow, fan, agitate, set in motion, from ventulus a breeze,
diminutive of ventus wind (see wind (n.1)). Original notion is of cleaning grain by tossing it in
the air and letting the wind blow away the chaff. Meaning supply a room with fresh air first
recorded 1743 (see ventilation). Formerly with diverse slang senses, including shoot (someone),
recorded from 1875. Related: Ventilated; ventilating.


stir (v.)

Old English styrian to stir, move; rouse, agitate, incite, urge (transitive and intransitive), from
Proto-Germanic *sturjan (cognates: Middle Dutch stoeren, Dutch storen to disturb, Old High German
storan to scatter, destroy, German st&ouml;ren to disturb), from PIE *(s)twer- (1) to turn, whirl
(see storm (n.)). Related: Stirred; stirring. Stir-fry (v.) is attested from 1959.


boil (v.)

early 13c., from Old French bolir boil, bubble up, ferment, gush (12c., Modern French bouillir),
from Latin bullire to bubble, seethe, from PIE base *beu- to swell (see bull (n.2)). The native word
is seethe. Figurative sense of to agitate the feelings is from 1640s.I am impatient, and my blood
boyls high. [Thomas Otway, Alcibiades, 1675]  Related: Boiled; boiling. Boiling point is recorded
from 1773.


disturb (v.)

c.1300, to stop or hinder, from Old French destorber (Old North French distourber) and directly from
Latin disturbare throw into disorder, from dis- completely (see dis-) + turbare to disorder,
disturb, from turba turmoil (see turbid).    Meaning to frighten is late 13c.; that of to stir up,
agitate is c.1300. Related: Disturbed; disturbing; disturbingly. Middle English also had distourbler
(n.) one who disturbs or incites (late 14c.).


rare (adj.2)

undercooked, 1650s, variant of Middle English rere, from Old English hrere lightly cooked, probably
related to hreran to stir, move, shake, agitate, from Proto-Germanic *hror- (cognates: Old Frisian
hrera to stir, move, Old Saxon hrorian, Dutch roeren, German r&#252;hren, Old Norse hroera), from
PIE base *kere- to mix, confuse; cook (cognates: Greek kera- to mix, krasis mixture). Originally of
eggs, not recorded in reference to meat until 1784, and according to OED, in this sense formerly
often regarded as an Americanism, although it was current in many English dialects ....


toil (n.1)

hard work, c.1300, originally turmoil, contention, dispute, from Anglo-French toil (13c.), from
toiler agitate, stir up, entangle, writhe about, from Old French toeillier drag about, make dirty
(12c.), usually said to be from Latin tudiculare crush with a small hammer, from tudicula mill for
crushing olives, instrument for crushing, from Latin tudes hammer, from PIE *tud-, variant of
*(s)teu- to push, stroke, knock, beat (see obtuse). Sense of hard work, labor (1590s) is from the
related verb (see toil (v.)).


shake (v.)

Old English sceacan move (something) quickly to and fro, brandish; move the body or a part of it
rapidly back and forth; also go, glide, hasten, flee, depart (related to sceacdom flight); of
persons or parts of the body, to tremble especially from fever, cold, fear (class VI strong verb;
past tense scoc, past participle scacen), from Proto-Germanic *skakanan (cognates: Old Norse,
Swedish skaka, Danish skage to shift, turn, veer). No certain cognates outside Germanic, but some
suggest a possible connection to Sanskrit khaj to agitate, churn, stir about, Old Church Slavonic
skoku a leap, bound, Welsh ysgogi move.    Of the earth in earthquakes, c.1300. Meaning seize and
shake (someone or something else) is from early 14c. In reference to mixing ingredients, etc., by
shaking a container from late 14c. Meaning to rid oneself of by abrupt twists is from c.1200, also
in Middle English in reference to evading responsibility, etc. Meaning weaken, impair is from late
14c., on notion of make unstable.    To shake hands dates from 1530s. Shake a (loose) leg hurry up
first recorded 1904; shake a heel (sometimes foot) was an old way to say to dance (1660s); to shake
(one's) elbow (1620s) meant to gamble at dice. Phrase more _____ than you can shake a stick at is
attested from 1818, American English. To shake (one's) head as a sign of disapproval is recorded
from c.1300.


