air (v.)

to expose to open air, 1520s, from air (n.1). Figurative sense of to expose, make public is from
1610s of objects, 1862 of opinions, grievances, etc. Meaning to broadcast (originally on radio) is
from 1933. Related: Aired; airing.


air (n.1)

c.1300, invisible gases that make up the atmosphere, from Old French air atmosphere, breeze, weather
(12c.), from Latin aerem (nominative aer) air, lower atmosphere, sky, from Greek aer (genitive
aeros) air (related to aenai to blow, breathe), of unknown origin, possibly from a base *awer- and
thus related to aeirein to raise and arteria windpipe, artery (see aorta) on notion of lifting, that
which rises. In Homer mostly thick air, mist; later air as one of the four elements.    Words for
air in Indo-European languages tend to be associated with wind, brightness, sky. In English, air
replaced native lyft, luft (see loft (n.)). To be in the air in general awareness is from 1875; up
in the air uncertain, doubtful is from 1752. To build castles in the air is from 1590s (in 17c.
English had airmonger one preoccupied with visionary projects). Broadcasting sense (as in on the
air) first recorded 1927. To give (someone) the air dismiss is from 1900. Air pollution is attested
by 1870.


air (n.2)

1590s, manner, appearance (as in an air of mystery); 1650s, assumed manner, affected appearance
(especially in phrase put on airs, 1781), from French air look, appearance, mien, bearing, tone (Old
French aire reality, essence, nature, descent, extraction, 12c.; compare debonair), from Latin ager
place, field (see acre) on notion of place of origin.    But some French sources connect this Old
French word with the source of air (n.1), and it also is possible these senses in English developed
from or were influenced by air (n.1); compare sense development of atmosphere and Latin spiritus
breath, breeze, also high spirit, pride, and the extended senses of anima.


air (n.3)

melody, tune, 1580s, from Italian aria (see aria).


air conditioner (n.)

from air (n.1) + agent noun from condition; along with air-conditioning, first attested 1909,
originally an industrial process; main modern use in residences and office buildings is from 1930s.


air force (n.)

1917, from air (n.1) + force (n.); first attested with creation of the Royal Air Force. There was no
United States Air Force until after World War II. The Air Corps was an arm of the U.S. Army. In
1942, the War Department reorganized it and renamed it Army Air Forces. The National Security Act of
1947 created the Department of the Air Force, headed by a Secretary of the Air Force, and the
U.S.A.F.


air freshener (n.)

1949, from air (n.1) + agent noun from freshen.


air mail (n.)

also air-mail, 1913, from air (n.1) + mail (n.1).


air raid (n.)

1914, from air (n.1) + raid (n.); originally in reference to British attacks Sept. 22, 1914, on
Zeppelin bases at Cologne and D&uuml;sseldorf in World War I. The German word is Fliegerangriff
aviator-attack, and if Old English had survived into the 20th century our word instead might be
fleogendeongrype.    One didn't dare to inhale for fear of breathing it in. It was the sound of
eighteen hundred airplanes approaching Hamburg from the south at an unimaginable height. We had
already experienced two hundred or even more air raids, among them some very heavy ones, but this
was something completely new. And yet there was an immediate recognition: this was what everyone had
been waiting for, what had hung for months like a shadow over everything we did, making us weary. It
was the end. [Hans Erich Nossack, Der Untergang, 1942]


airborne (adj.)

1640s, carried through the air, from air (n.1) + borne. Of military units, from 1937.


aircraft (n.)

1851, originally in reference to airships and balloons, from air (n.1) + craft (n.); a term from
boating, as were many early aviation words. Of airplanes from 1907 and since 1930s exclusively of
them. Aircraft carrier is attested from 1919 (H.M.S. Hermes, launched September 1919, was the first
ship to be built from the hull up as an aircraft carrier).


Airedale

type of terrier, 1880, named for Airedale, a district in West Riding, Yorkshire.    Name registered
by Kennel Club (1886), for earlier Bingley (where first bred), or broken-haired terrier. [Weekley]


airfoil (n.)

1922, U.S. form of aerofoil.


airhead (n.)

empty-headed person, 1972, from air (n.1) + head (n.). Earlier as a term in mining (mid-19c.) and as
a military term based on beachhead (1950).


airily (adv.)

1766, from airy with ostentatious air (see air (n.2)) + -ly (2).


airing (n.)

action of exposing to air, c.1600, from present participle of air (v.). Meaning display, public
exposure is from 1870.


airlift (n.)

also air-lift, 1893 as a type of pumping device; 1945 in the sense transportation of supplies by
air, from air (n.1) + lift (n.). As a verb by 1949; popularized in reference to the response to the
West Berlin blockade. Related: Air-lifted; air-lifting.


airline (n.)

also air-line, 1813, beeline, straight line between two points on the earth's surface (as through
the air, rather than over terrain; from 1853 and in later 19c. especially in reference to railways
that ran directly between big cities in the U.S. instead of meandering from town to town in search
of stock subscriptions as early railways typically did), from air (n.1) + line (n.). Meaning public
aircraft transportation company is from 1914.


airplane (n.)

1907, from air (n.1) + plane (n.1); though the original references are British, the word caught on
in American English, where it largely superseded earlier aeroplane (1873 in this sense and still
common in British English). Aircraft airplane also is from 1907. Lord Byron, speculatively, used
air-vessel (1822).


airplay (n.)

1950 in radio sense, from air (n.1) + play.


airport (n.)

1919, from air (n.1) + port (n.1). First reference is to Bader Field, outside Atlantic City, New
Jersey, U.S., which opened in 1910.


airship (n.)

also air-ship, 1888, translating German Luftschiff motor-driver dirigible; see air (n.1) + ship
(n.).


airtight (adj.)

also air-tight, impervious to air, 1760, from air (n.1) + tight. Figurative sense of
incontrovertible (of arguments, alabis, etc.) is from 1929.


airy (adj.)

late 14c., of the air, made of air, from air (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning breezy is attested from 1590s;
that of lively is from 1640s. Sense of vain, unsubstantial is from 1580s. Disparaging airy-fairy is
attested from 1920 (earlier in a sense of delicate or light as a fairy, which is how Tennyson used
it in 1830).


affair (n.)

c.1300, what one has to do, from Anglo-French afere, Old French afaire (12c., Modern French affaire)
business, event; rank, estate, from the infinitive phrase &agrave; faire to do, from Latin ad to
(see ad-) + facere to do, make (see factitious).    A Northern word originally, brought into general
use and given a French spelling by Caxton (15c.). General sense of vague proceedings (in romance,
war, etc.) first attested 1702. Meaning an affair of the heart; a passionate episode is from French
affaire de coeur (itself attested in English from 1809); to have an affair with someone in this
sense is by 1726, earlier have an affair of love:    'Tis manife&#383;tly contrary to the Law of
Nature, that one Woman &#383;hould cohabit or have an Affair of Love with more than one Man at the
&#383;ame time. [Pufendorf's Law of Nature and Nations, transl. J. Spavan, London, 1716]   <hr />
Thus, in our dialect, a vicious man is a man of pleasure, a sharper is one that plays the whole
game, a lady is said to have an affair, a gentleman to be a gallant, a rogue in business to be one
that knows the world. By this means, we have no such things as sots, debauchees, whores, rogues, or
the like, in the beau monde, who may enjoy their vices without incurring disagreeable appellations.
[George Berkeley, Alciphron or the Minute Philosopher, 1732]


affairs (n.)

ordinary business, late 15c., plural of affair (n.).


Altair

bright star in the constellation Aquila, 16c., from Arabic Al Nasr al Tair the Flying Eagle, from
tair, participle of tara it flew.


anti-aircraft (adj.)

also antiaircraft, 1914, from anti- + aircraft.


armchair (n.)

also arm-chair, 1630s, from arm (n.1) + chair; adjective sense in reference to criticism of matters
in which the critic takes no active part is from 1886.


au pair (n.)

1897 of the arrangement, 1960 of the girl; French, literally on an equal footing (see pair (n.)).


backstairs

stairs at the back of a structure, 1650s, from back (adj.) + stairs (see stair). Figurative use is
attested earlier (1640s).


bairn (n.)

child (of any age), Old English bearn child, son, descendant, probably related to beran (to bear,
carry, give birth; see bear (v.)). Originally not chiefly Scottish, but felt as such from c.1700.
This was the English form of the original Germanic word for child (see child). Dutch, Old High
German kind, German Kind are from a prehistoric *gen-to-m born, from the same root as Latin gignere.
Middle English had bairn-team brood of children.


billionaire (n.)

1844, American English, from billion on model of millionaire. The first in the U.S. likely was John
D. Rockefeller (1839-1937), some time after World War I.


cairn (n.)

1530s, from Scottish carne, from Gaelic carn heap of stones, rocky hill, akin to Gaulish karnon
horn, perhaps from PIE *ker-n- highest part of the body, horn, thus tip, peak (see horn (n.)).


Cairo

city in Egypt, from Arabic al-Kahira the strong, the name given 973 C.E. to the new city built north
of the old one, Egyptian khere-ohe, said to mean place of combat and to be in reference to a battle
between the gods Seth and Horus that took place here.


chair (n.)

early 13c., chaere, from Old French chaiere chair, seat, throne (12c.; Modern French chaire pulpit,
throne; the more modest sense having gone since 16c. with variant form chaise), from Latin cathedra
seat (see cathedral).    Figurative sense of authority was in Middle English, of bishops and
professors. Meaning office of a professor (1816) is extended from the seat from which a professor
lectures (mid-15c.). Meaning seat of a person presiding at  meeting is from 1640s. As short for
electric chair from 1900.


chair (v.)

mid-15c., install in a chair or seat (implied in chairing), from chair (n.); meaning preside over (a
meeting, etc.) is attested by 1921. Related: Chaired.


chairman (n.)

1650s, occupier of a chair of authority, from chair (n.) + man (n.). Meaning member of a corporate
body chosen to preside at meetings is from c.1730. Chairwoman in this sense first attested 1752;
chairperson 1971.


chairperson (n.)

1971, American English, from chair (n.) + person.


chairwoman (n.)

woman who leads a formal meeting, 1752, from chair (n.) + woman.


clair-de-lune (n.)

1877, French, literally moonlight, also used as color of moonlight. See clear (adj.) + Luna.


clairaudience (n.)

1864, from French clair (see clear (adj.)) + audience; on model of clairvoyance.


Claire

fem. proper name, from French claire, fem. of clair literally light, bright, from Latin clarus
clear, bright, distinct (see clear (adj.); also compare Clara).


clairvoyance (n.)

paranormal gift of seeing things out of sight, 1837, from special use of French clairvoyance (Old
French clerveans, 13c.) quickness of understanding, sagacity, penetration, from clairvoyant (see
clairvoyant). A secondary sense in French is the main sense in English.


clairvoyant (n.)

1834 in the psychic sense; see clairvoyant (adj.). Earlier it was used in the sense clear-sighted
person (1794). Fem. form was Clairvoyante.


clairvoyant (adj.)

having psychic gifts, 1837, earlier having insight (1670s), from special use of French clairvoyant
clear-sighted, discerning, judicious (13c.), from clair (see clear (adj.)) + voyant seeing, present
participle of voir, from Latin videre to see (see vision).


concessionaire (n.)

1862, from French concessionaire person to whom a concession has been granted, from concession, from
Latin concessionem (see concession).


corsair (n.)

1540s, from Middle French corsaire (15c.), from Proven&ccedil;al cursar, Italian corsaro, from
Medieval Latin cursarius pirate, from Latin cursus course, a running, from currere to run (see
current (adj.)). Meaning of the Medieval Latin verb evolved from course to journey to expedition to
an expedition specifically for plunder.


dairy (n.)

late 13c., building for making butter and cheese; dairy farm, formed with Anglo-French -erie affixed
to Middle English daie (in daie maid dairymaid), from Old English d&aelig;ge kneader of bread,
housekeeper, female servant (see dey (n.1)). The purely native word was dey-house.


debonair (adj.)

c.1200, mild, gentle, kind courteous, from Old French debonaire, from de bon' aire of good race,
originally used of hawks, hence, thoroughbred (opposite of French demalaire). Used in Middle English
to mean docile, courteous, it became obsolete and was revived with an altered sense of pleasant,
affable (1680s).


