amenable (adj.)

1590s, liable, from Anglo-French amenable, Middle French amener answerable (to the law), from
&agrave; to (see ad-) + mener to lead, from Latin minare to drive (cattle) with shouts, variant of
minari threaten (see menace (n.)). Sense of tractable is from 1803, from notion of disposed to
answer or submit to influence. Related: Amenably.


unruly (adj.)

disposed to resist lawful restraint, c.1400, from un- (1) not + obsolete ruly (adj.) amenable to
rule. Related: Unruliness.


take (n.)

1650s, that which is taken, from take (v.). Sense of money taken in by a single performance, etc.,
is from 1931. Movie-making sense is recorded from 1927. Criminal sense of money acquired by theft is
from 1888. The verb sense of to cheat, defraud is from 1920. On the take amenable to bribery is from
1930.


inclinable (adj.)

amenable, disposed, mid-15c., from Old French enclinable and directly from Latin inclinabilis, from
inclinare (see incline).


justiciable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French justisable amenable to a jurisdiction, from justicier, from Latin iustitia
(see justice).


amenability (n.)

1761; see amenable + -ity.


treatable (adj.)

c.1300, amenable to reason, from Anglo-French tretable, Old French traitable, and in part from treat
(v.) + -able. Of wounds, diseases, etc., receptive to treatment, early 15c.


ruly (adj.)

conforming to (religious) rule; amenable to rule, disciplined, orderly, reuleli; from rule (n.) +
-ly (2).


militia (n.)

1580s, system of military discipline, from Latin militia military service, warfare, from miles
soldier (see military). Sense of citizen army (as distinct from professional soldiers) is first
recorded 1690s, perhaps from a sense in French cognate milice. In U.S. history, the whole body of
men declared by law amenable to military service, without enlistment, whether armed and drilled or
not (1777).


reclaim (v.)

early 14c., call back a hawk to the glove, from Old French reclamer to call upon, invoke; claim;
seduce; to call back a hawk (12c.) and directly from Latin reclamare cry out against, contradict,
protest, appeal, from re- opposite, against (see re-) + clamare cry out (see claim (v.)).    Call
back a hawk, hence to make tame (mid-15c.), subdue, reduce to obedience, make amenable to control
(late 14c.). In many Middle English uses with no sense of return or reciprocation. Meaning revoke (a
grant, gift, etc.) is from late 15c. That of recall (someone) from an erring course to a proper
state is mid-15c. Sense of get back by effort might reflect influence of claim. Meaning bring waste
land into useful condition fit for cultivation first attested 1764, probably on notion of reduce to
obedience. Related: Reclaimed; reclaiming.


