amorous (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French amorous (Modern French amoureux), from Late Latin amorosum, from amor love,
from amare to love (see Amy). Related: Amorously; amorousness.


footsie (n.)

amorous play with the feet [OED], 1944, from foot (n.).


petting (n.)

1873, fondling indulgence, verbal noun from pet (v.). Meaning amorous caressing, foreplay is from
1920 (in F. Scott Fitzgerald).


ardurous (adj.)

full of ardor, 1770, a variant of arduous with overtones of amorous, generally useful only to poets
and first attested in Chatterton; perhaps, then, like his works, an instance of faux medievalism.


advance (n.)

c.1300, boasting, ostentation, from advance (v.). Early 15c. as advancement in rank, wealth, etc.
Advances amorous overtures is from 1706.


daliance (n.)

mid-14c., confab, chat, from dally + -ance. Probably formed in Anglo-French, but not attested there.
Meaning amorous play, flirtation is from late 14c.; that of idle or frivolous activity is from
1540s.


smoochy (adj.)

amorous, meant for kissing, 1947, from smooch (n.) + -y (2).


Delilah

temptress, treacherous lover, 1590s, from the name of the woman who seduced and betrayed Samson in
Judges, from Hebrew Delilah, literally delicate, languishing, amorous, from Semitic root d-l-l to
hang down, to languish.


polyamorous (adj.)

by 1972, from poly- + amorous. Related: Polyamory.


nutty (adj.)

early 15c., nut-like, from nut + -y (2). Meaning crazy is from 1898 (see nuts); earlier amorous, in
love (with), 1821. Related: Nuttiness.


goo-goo (adj.)

amorous, 1900, perhaps connected with goggle, because the earliest reference is in goo-goo eyes. The
sense of baby-talk is from 1863. Use in reference to politics began 1890s, and seems to be a
shortening of Good Government as a movement to clean up municipal corruption in Boston, New York,
etc. It soon was extended to mean naive political reformer.


jollity (n.)

c.1300, jolyfte, iolite, from Old French jolivete gaity, cheerfulness; amorous passion; life of
pleasure, from jolif (see jolly).


smicker (adj.)

elegant, fine, gay, from Old English smicere neat, elegant, beautiful, fair, tasteful. Hence smicker
(v.) look amorously (1660s); smickering an amorous inclination (1690s).


lovemaking (n.)

courtship, mid-15c., from love (n.) + make. Phrase make love is attested from 1570s in the sense pay
amorous attention to; as a euphemism for have sex, it is attested from c.1950.


oeillade (n.)

an oogling stare, an amorous gaze, 1590s, from French oeillide (15c.), from oeil eye (from Latin
oculus, see eye (n.)) + -ade.


pass (n.2)

written permission to pass into, or through, a place, 1590s, from pass (v.). Sense of ticket for a
free ride or admission is first found 1838. Colloquial make a pass offer an amorous advance first
recorded 1928, perhaps from a sporting sense. Phrase come to pass (late 15c.) uses the word with a
sense of completion, accomplishment.


lovesome (adj.)

Old English lufsum worthy of love, from love (v.) + -some (1). Early 13c. as lovely, 1720 as
amorous. An old word that might be useful in its original sense. Related: Lovesomely; lovesomeness.


passionate (adj.)

early 15c., angry; emotional, from Medieval Latin passionatus affected with passion, from Latin
passio (genitive passionis) passion (see passion). Specific sense of amorous is attested from 1580s.
Related: Passionately.


coquet (n.)

amorous, flirtatious person, 1690s, originally of both sexes (as it was in French), from French
coquet (17c.), diminutive of coq cock (see cock (n.1)). A figurative reference to its strut or its
lust. The distinction of fem. coquette began c.1700, and use in reference to males has faded out
since.


ramble (v.)

mid-15c., perhaps frequentative of romen to walk, go (see roam), perhaps via romblen (late 14c.) to
ramble. The vowel change perhaps by influence of Middle Dutch rammelen, a derivative of rammen
copulate, used of the night wanderings of the amorous cat [Weekley]. Meaning to talk or write
incoherently is from 1630s. Related: Rambled; rambling.


ogle (v.)

1680s, probably from Low German oeglen, frequentative of oegen look at, from oege eye, from Proto-
Germanic *augon-, from PIE *okw- to see (see eye (n.)). Related to Dutch ogen to look at, from oog
eye. Related: Ogled; ogling. The noun meaning an amorous glance is attested from 1711; earlier it
meant an eye (1700).


love (n.)

Old English lufu love, affection, friendliness, from Proto-Germanic *lubo (cognates: Old High German
liubi joy, German Liebe love; Old Norse, Old Frisian, Dutch lof; German Lob praise; Old Saxon liof,
Old Frisian liaf, Dutch lief, Old High German liob, German lieb, Gothic liufs dear, beloved).    The
Germanic words are from PIE *leubh- to care, desire, love (cognates: Latin lubet, later libet
pleases; Sanskrit lubhyati desires; Old Church Slavonic l'ubu dear, beloved; Lithuanian liaupse song
of praise).    Even now, she thought, almost no one remembers Esteban and Pepita but myself. Camilla
alone remembers her Uncle Pio and her son; this woman, her mother. But soon we shall die and all
memory of those five will have left the earth, and we ourselves shall be loved for a while and
forgotten. But the love will have been enough; all those impulses of love return the love that made
them. Even memory is not necessary for love. There is a land of the living and a land of the dead
and the bridge is love, the only survival, the only meaning. [Thornton Wilder, Bridge of San Luis
Rey, 1927]    Meaning a beloved person is from early 13c. The sense no score (in tennis, etc.) is
1742, from the notion of playing for love, i.e. for nothing (1670s). Phrase for love or money for
anything is attested from 1580s. Love seat is from 1904. Love-letter is attested from mid-13c.;
love-song from early 14c. To fall in love is attested from early 15c. To be in love with (someone)
is from c.1500. To make love is from 1570s in the sense pay amorous attention to; as a euphemism for
have sex, it is attested from c.1950. Love life one's collective amorous activities is from 1919,
originally a term in psychological jargon. Love affair is from 1590s. The phrase no love lost
(between two people) is ambiguous and was used 17c. in reference to two who love each other well
(c.1640) as well as two who have no love for each other (1620s).


wile (n.)

late Old English, wil stratagem, trick, sly artifice, perhaps from Old North French *wile (Old
French guile), or directly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse vel trick, craft, fraud,
vela defraud). Perhaps ultimately related to Old English wicca wizard (see Wicca). Lighter sense of
amorous or playful trick is from c.1600.


jolly (adj.)

c.1300 (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French jolif festive, merry, amorous, pretty (12c.) of
uncertain origin (cognate with Italian giulivo merry, pleasant).    Perhaps a Germanic loan-word
from a source akin to Old Norse jol a winter feast (see yule), or from Latin gaudere to rejoice,
from PIE *gau- to rejoice (see joy). For loss of -f, compare tardy, hasty. Related: Jollily;
jolliness.


rant (v.)

c.1600, to be jovial and boisterous, also to talk bombastically, from Dutch randten (earlier ranten)
talk foolishly, rave, of unknown origin (compare German rantzen to frolic, spring about). Related:
Ranted; ranting. Ranters antinomian sect which arose in England c.1645 is attested from 1651;
applied 1823 to early Methodists. A 1700 slang dictionary has rantipole a rude wild Boy or Girl
(also as a verb and adjective); to ride rantipole meant The woman uppermost in the amorous congress
[Grose].


toy (n.)

c.1300, amorous playing, sport, later piece of fun or entertainment (c.1500), thing of little value,
trifle (1520s), and thing for a child to play with (1580s). Of uncertain origin, and there may be
more than one word here. Compare Middle Dutch toy, Dutch tuig tools, apparatus; stuff, trash, in
speeltuig play-toy, plaything; German Zeug stuff, matter, tools, Spielzeug plaything, toy; Danish
t&oslash;i, Swedish tyg stuff, gear. Applied as an adjective to things of diminutive size,
especially dogs, from 1806. Toy-boy is from 1981.


cradle (n.)

baby's bed, c.1200, cradel, from Old English cradol little bed, cot, from Proto-Germanic *kradulas
basket (cognates: Old High German kratto, krezzo basket, German Kr&auml;tze basket carried on the
back). From late 14c. as device for holding or hoisting. Cat's cradle is so called from 1768.
Cradle-snatching amorous pursuit of younger person is from 1906.    It's like cradle-snatching to
want to marry a girl of sixteen, and you ought to be ashamed of yourself, for you can't be much more
than twenty one yourself. [Edith Van Dyne (L. Frank Baum), Aunt Jane's Nieces Abroad, 1906]


jealous (adj.)

c.1200, gelus, later jelus (early 14c.), possessive and suspicious, originally in the context of
sexuality or romance; in general use late 14c.; also in a more positive sense, fond, amorous,
ardent, from c.1300, from Old French jalos keen, zealous; avaricious; jealous (12c., Modern French
jaloux), from Late Latin zelosus, from zelus zeal, from Greek zelos, sometimes jealousy, but more
often in a good sense (emulation, rivalry, zeal). See zeal. In biblical language (early 13c.)
tolerating no unfaithfulness.    Most of the words for 'envy' ... had from the outset a hostile
force, based on 'look at' (with malice), 'not love,' etc. Conversely, most of those which became
distinctive terms for 'jealousy' were originally used also in a good sense, 'zeal, emulation.'
[Buck, pp.1138-9]    Among the ways to express this in other tongues are Swedish svartsjuka,
literally black-sick, from phrase bara svarta strumpor wear black stockings, also be jealous. Danish
skinsyg jealous, literally skin-sick, is from skind hide, skin said to be explained by Swedish
dialectal expression fa skinn receive a refusal in courtship.


piece (n.)

c.1200, fixed amount, measure, portion, from Old French piece piece, bit portion; item; coin (12c.),
from Vulgar Latin *pettia, probably from Gaulish *pettsi (compare Welsh peth thing, Breton pez
piece, a little), perhaps from an Old Celtic base *kwezd-i-, from PIE root *kwezd- a part, piece
(cognates: Russian chast' part). Related: Pieces.    Sense of portable firearm first recorded 1580s;
that of chessman is from 1560s. Meaning person regarded as a sex object is first recorded 1785
(compare piece of ass, human beings colloquially called piece of flesh from 1590s; also compare
Latin scortum bimbo, anyone available for a price, literally skin). Meaning a portion of a distance
is from 1610s; that of literary composition dates from 1530s. Piece of (one's) mind is from 1570s.
Piece of work remarkable person echoes Hamlet. Piece as a coin is attested in English from 1570s,
hence Piece of eight, old name for the Spanish dollar (c.1600) of the value of 8 reals.    PIECE. A
wench. A damned good or bad piece; a girl who is more or less active and skilful in the amorous
congress. Hence the (Cambridge) toast, may we never have a PIECE (peace) that will injure the
constitution. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]


