analogy (n.)

1540s (perhaps early 15c.), from Old French analogie or directly from Latin analogia, from Greek
analogia proportion, from ana- upon, according to (see ana-) + logos ratio, also word, speech,
reckoning (see logos). A mathematical term used in a wider sense by Plato.


analogize (v.)

explain by analogy, 1650s, from French analogiser (17c.) or directly from Greek analogizesthai to
reckon, sum up, from analogia (see analogy). Related: Analogized; analogizing.


aqueous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin aqua water (see aqua-) on analogy of French aqueux watery (16c., which, however,
is from Late Latin aquosus abounding in water). Or by analogy of Latin terreus earthy, from terra
earth. Aqueous humor is the original use in English.


braggadocio (n.)

Spenser's coinage, 1590, as a name for his personification of vainglory, from brag, with
augmentative ending by analogy to the Italian words then in vogue in England. In general use by 1594
for an empty swaggerer; of the talk of such persons, from 1734.


divestiture (n.)

c.1600, from divest on analogy of investiture. Economics sense is from 1961.


dactyl (n.)

metrical foot, late 14c., from Greek dactylos, literally finger (also toe), of unknown origin; the
metrical use (a long syllable followed by two short ones) is by analogy with the three joints of a
finger.


sitzkrieg (n.)

1940, static warfare (such as prevailed in Europe in the winter of 1939-40), R.A.F. coinage on
analogy of blitzkrieg (q.v.), from German sitz a sitting.


catalyst (n.)

substance which speeds a chemical reaction but itself remains unchanged, 1902, formed in English (on
analogy of analyst) from catalysis. Figurative use by 1943.


litterbug (n.)

1947, from litter + bug (n.). According to Mario Pei (The Story of Language, Lippincott, 1949)
coined by the New York subways on the analogy of 'jitterbug' ....


aerodrome (n.)

1902, from aero- on analogy of hippodrome. Earlier (1891) a name for a flying machine.


axe (n.)

Old English &aelig;ces (Northumbrian acas) axe, pickaxe, hatchet, later &aelig;x, from Proto-
Germanic *akusjo (cognates: Old Saxon accus, Old Norse ex, Old Frisian axe, German Axt, Gothic
aqizi), from PIE *agw(e)si- (cognates: Greek axine, Latin ascia).    The spelling ax is better on
every ground, of etymology, phonology, and analogy, than axe, which became prevalent during the 19th
century; but it is now disused in Britain. [OED]   <hr />   The spelling ax, though better on every
ground, of etymology, phonology, &amp; analogy (OED), is so strange to 20th-c. eyes that it suggests
pedantry &amp; is unlikely to be restored. [Fowler]    Meaning musical instrument is 1955,
originally jazz slang for the saxophone; rock slang for guitar dates to 1967. The axe in figurative
sense of cutting of anything (expenses, workers, etc.), especially as a cost-saving measure, is from
1922, probably from the notion of the headman's literal axe (itself attested from mid-15c.). To have
an axe to grind is from an 1815 essay by U.S. editor and politician Charles Miner (1780-1865) in
which a man flatters a boy and gets him to do the chore of axe-grinding for him, then leaves without
offering thanks or recompense. Misattributed to Benjamin Franklin in Weekley, OED print edition, and
many other sources.


woven (adj.)

late 15c., past participle adjective from weave (v.) on analogy of stolen.


extrapolation (n.)

1867, noun of action from extrapolate by analogy of interpolation; original sense was an inserting
of intermediate terms in a mathematical series. Transferred sense of drawing a conclusion about the
future based on present tendencies is from 1889.


belief (n.)

late 12c., bileave, replacing Old English geleafa belief, faith, from West Germanic *ga-laubon to
hold dear, esteem, trust (cognates: Old Saxon gilobo, Middle Dutch gelove, Old High German giloubo,
German Glaube), from *galaub- dear, esteemed, from intensive prefix *ga- + *leubh- to care, desire,
like, love (see love (v.)). The prefix was altered on analogy of the verb believe. The distinction
of the final consonant from that of believe developed 15c.    The be-, which is not a natural prefix
of nouns, was prefixed on the analogy of the vb. (where it is naturally an intensive) .... [OED]
Belief used to mean trust in God, while faith meant loyalty to a person based on promise or duty (a
sense preserved in keep one's faith, in good (or bad) faith and in common usage of faithful,
faithless, which contain no notion of divinity). But faith, as cognate of Latin fides, took on the
religious sense beginning in 14c. translations, and belief had by 16c. become limited to mental
acceptance of something as true, from the religious use in the sense of things held to be true as a
matter of religious doctrine (a sense attested from early 13c.).


wealth (n.)

mid-13c., happiness, also prosperity in abundance of possessions or riches, from Middle English wele
well-being (see weal (n.1)) on analogy of health.


bankruptcy (n.)

1700, from bankrupt, probably on the analogy of insolvency, but with -t erroneously retained in
spelling, instead of being merged in the suffix .... [OED]. Figurative use from 1761.


civics (n.)

study of the rights and responsibilities of a citizen, 1886, originally American English, from
civic, by analogy with politics (see -ics).


pulsar (n.)

1968, from pulse (n.1), the form on analogy of quasar. When discovered in 1967, they were thought
perhaps to be signals from alien civilizations and astronomers informally dubbed them LGM for Little
Green Men.


merger (n.)

1728 in legal sense, extinguishment by absorption,  from merge (v.), on analogy of French
infinitives used as nouns (see waiver). From 1889 in the business sense; not common until c.1926.
General meaning any act of merging is from 1881.


sware

obsolete or archaic past tense of swear (v.), common 15c.-17c. by analogy of past tense of bear
(v.).


analogous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin analogus, from Greek analogos proportionate, according to due proportion (see
analogy).


rang (v.)

past tense of ring (v.1). Middle English, by analogy of sang/sing, etc.


disarray (v.)

late 14c.; see dis- lack of + array. Perhaps formed on the analogy of Old French desareer.


disservice (n.)

1590s; see dis- + service. Perhaps formed on analogy of French desservice (16c.).


myalgia (n.)

muscular pain, 1827, coined in Modern Latin (on analogy of neuralgia) from myo- muscle + -algia
pain.


acquitted (adj.)

freed, exonerated, 1670s, past participle adjective from acquit (v.). Formerly in this sense was
acquit (late 14c.), perhaps on analogy of pps. such as hit.


afresh (adv.)

c.1500, perhaps on analogy of anew [see note in OED], from a- (1) + fresh.


amain (adv.)

1530s, from main (adj.) by analogy with other words in a- (such as afoot).


diverse (adj.)

c.1300, spelling variant of divers (q.v.), perhaps by analogy with converse, traverse, etc. In some
cases directly from Latin diversus, and since c.1700 restricted to the meaning different in
character or quality. Related: Diversely.


climactic (adj.)

pertaining to a climax, 1832, from climax, apparently on the analogy of syntax/syntactic. Related:
Climactical.


haggis (n.)

dish of chopped entrails, c.1400, now chiefly Scottish, but it was common throughout Middle English,
perhaps from Old French agace magpie, on analogy of the odds and ends the bird collects. The other
theory [Klein, Watkins] traces it to Old English haggen to chop (see hack (v.1)).


fluorescence (n.)

1852, glowing in ultraviolet light, coined by English mathematician and physicist Sir George G.
Stokes (1819-1903) from fluorspar (see fluorine), because in it he first noticed the phenomenon, +
-escence, on analogy of phosphorescence.


noodle (v.)

1937 (implied in noodling), from noun meaning improvised music, 1926, probably from noodle (n.), on
analogy of the suppleness of the food and that of the trills and improvised phrases in jazz
improvisations. Related: Noodled.


chloride (n.)

compound of chlorine and another element, 1812, coined by Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829) from
chlorine + -ide on the analogy of oxide.


gradient (n.)

steep slope of a road or railroad, 1835, principally in American English, from grade (n.) by analogy
of quotient, etc. It was used 17c. as an adjective, of animals, characterized by walking; in that
case probably from Latin gradientem, present participle of gradi to walk.


scientist (n.)

1834, a hybrid coined from Latin scientia (see science) by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866),
English polymath, by analogy with artist, in the same paragraph in which he coined physicist (q.v.).


miniaturization (n.)

1947, from miniaturize + -ation. Minification in this sense attested from 1904, on analogy of
magnification.


morpheme (n.)

smallest meaningful unit in a language, 1896, from German morpheme, coined 1895 by Polish-born
linguist Jan Baudouin de Courtenay (1845-1929), from Greek morphe form, shape (see Morpheus), on
analogy of phon&egrave;me.


antechamber (n.)

1650s, from French antichambre (16c.), on analogy of Italian anticamera (see ante and chamber).


holography (n.)

early 19c., of writing, from holograph + -y (4); physics sense, process of using holograms, is from
1964, coined by discoverer, Hungarian-born physicist G&#225;bor D&#233;nes (1900-1979), from
hologram on analogy of telegraphy/telegram.


Galloway

district in southwestern Scotland, Medieval Latin Gallovidia, from Welsh Gallwyddel, Irish
Gallgaidhil, literally foreign Gaels. The adjective Galwegian is on analogy of Norwegian.


oceanography (n.)

1859, coined in English from ocean + -graphy; on analogy of geography. French oc&#233;anographie is
attested from 1580s but is said to have been rare before 1876. Related: Oceanographic.


alliterate (v.)

to use alliteration, 1776 (implied in alliterated), back-formation from alliteration, on analogy of
obliterate. Related: Alliterating.


oldster (n.)

1818, colloquial, from old + -ster, on analogy of youngster.


dissimilar (adj.)

1620s, from dis- + similar; perhaps on analogy of French dissimilaire. Related: Dissimilarity.


florist (n.)

1620s, formed on analogy of French fleuriste, from Latin floris, genitive of flos flower (see flora)
+ -ist.


mishap (n.)

early 14c., bad luck, unlucky accident, from mis- (1) bad + hap luck. Probably on analogy of Old
French meschance (see mischance (n.)).


musketry (n.)

1640s, from French mousqueterie, from mousquet musket (see musket), on analogy of Italian
moschetteria.


accordion (n.)

1831, from German Akkordion, from Akkord musical chord, concord of sounds, be in tune (compare
Italian accordare to attune an instrument); ultimately from same source as English accord (v.), with
suffix on analogy of clarion, etc. Invented 1829 by piano-maker Cyrill Demian (1772-1847) of Vienna.


kakistocracy (n.)

1829, government by the worst element of a society, coined on analogy of its opposite, aristocracy,
from Greek kakistos worst, superlative of kakos bad (which perhaps is related to the general IE word
for defecate; see caco-) + -cracy.


