Fallopian tube (n.)

1706, from Latinized form of the name of Gabriello Fallopio (1523-1562), Italian anatomist who first
described them.


Cowper&#039;s gland (n.)

1738, so called because discovered by anatomist William Cowper (1666-1709); see Cooper.


exoskeleton (n.)

1847, from exo- + skeleton. Introduced by English anatomist Sir Richard Owen (1804-1892).


incus (n.)

ear bone, 1660s, from Latin incus anvil, from incudere to forge with a hammer. So called by Belgian
anatomist Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564).


Pap test (n.)

1963, short for Papanicolaou (1947) in reference to George Nicholas Papanicolaou (1883-1962), Greek-
born U.S. anatomist who developed the technique of examining secreted cells to test for cancer.


Wisteria (n.)

genus of woody vines, 1819, formed by Thomas Nuttall, English botanist, in recognition of American
anatomist Caspar Wistar (1761-1818) of Philadelphia. The -e- apparently is a misprint. The Wistar
Institute was founded in 1892 by his great-nephew and named for him.


mitosis (n.)

1887, coined in German from Greek mitos warp thread (see mitre) + Modern Latin -osis act, process.
Term introduced by German anatomist Walther Fleming (1843-1905) in 1882. So called because chromatin
of the cell nucleus appears as long threads in the first stages.


areola (n.)

colored circle around a nipple, 1706, from Latin areola, literally small area, diminutive of area
(see area). Introduced in this sense 1605 by Swiss anatomist and botanist Caspar Bauhin (1560-1624).


chromosome (n.)

1889, from German Chromosom, coined 1888 by German anatomist Wilhelm von Waldeyer-Hartz (1836-1921),
from Latinized form of Greek khroma color (see chroma) + -some (3)). So called because the
structures contain a substance that stains readily with basic dyes.


cerumen (n.)

earwax, 1741, medical Latin cerumen, coined by Swiss anatomist Gaspard Bauhin (1560-1624) from Latin
cera wax (see cere (n.)) on model of albumen; or else from Greek keroumenos formed of wax.


epididymis (n.)

c.1600, fleshy mass at the back of the testicles, Modern Latin, literally that which is on the
testicles, from Greek epididymis, a word probably coined by Greek anatomist Herophilus (c.300
B.C.E.) from epi on (see epi-) + didymos testicle, literally double, twofold (adj.). To save his
Epididamies [Richard Brome, The Court Beggar, 1652].


chromatin (n.)

protoplasm in cell nuclei, 1882, from German, coined 1879 by German anatomist Walther Flemming
(1843-1905), from Latinized form of Greek khromat-, the correct combinational form of khroma color
(see chroma) + chemical suffix -in (2). Related: Chromatid. Compare chromosome.


psoas (n.)

1680s, from Greek psoa (plural psoai) muscles of the loins. Related: Psoitis.    Gk. [psoas], the
gen. of the feminine noun [psoa], was mistaken by the French anatomist Jean Riolan (1577-1657) for
the nom. of a (nonexistent) masculine noun. It was he who introduced this erroneous form into
anatomy. [Klein]


notochord (n.)

1848, coined in English by English anatomist Sir Richard Owen (1804-1892) from chord + comb. form of
Greek noton back, from PIE *not- buttock, back (cognates: Latin natis buttock, sopurce of Italian,
Spanish nalga, Old French nache buttock, butt).


velar (adj.)

1726, from Latin velaris, from velum sail, curtain (see veil (n.)). Originally an architect's term
for a type of cupola resembling a swelling sail; phonetics sense is from 1876, on notion of
pertaining to the velum, the anatomist's name for the soft palate (velum in this sense is attested
from 1771, in full velum palati). The noun meaning a velar guttural is recorded from 1886.


Achilles tendon

from Modern Latin tendo Achillis, first used by German surgeon Heister and so-called in reference to
the one vulnerable spot of the great Greek hero Achilles, whose mother held him by the heel when she
dipped him in the River Styx to render him invulnerable (though this story is not in Homer and not
found before 1c. C.E.). Earlier Achilles' sinew, from Modern Latin chorda Achillis, coined 1693 by
Dutch anatomist Philip Verheyden when dissecting his own amputated leg. Hence figurative use of heel
of Achillies for vulnerable spot (1810).


tympanum (n.)

drum of the ear, 1610s, from Medieval Latin tympanum, introduced in this sense by Italian anatomist
Gabriello Fallopio (1523-1562), from Latin tympanum a drum, timbrel, tambourine, from Greek tympanon
a kettledrum, from root of typtein to beat, strike (see type (n.)). Compare Old English timpan drum,
timbrel, tambourine, from Latin tympanum. The modern meaning a drum is attested in English from
1670s.


sympathetic (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to sympathy, from Modern Latin sympatheticus, from late Greek sympathetikos having
sympathy, from sympathein, from sympathes having a fellow feeling, affected by like feelings (see
sympathy). In English, the meaning having fellow feeling, susceptible to altruistic feelings is
recorded from 1718.    In the anatomical sense, subject to a common nervous influence, the word is
attested from 1769, from Modern Latin (nervus) sympathicus, coined by Jacques-Benigne Winslow
(1669-1760), Danish anatomist living in Paris. Related: Sympathetical (1630s); Sympathetically
(1620s).


tissue (n.)

mid-14c., band or belt of rich material, from Old French tissu a ribbon, headband, belt of woven
material (c.1200), noun use of tissu woven, interlaced, past participle of tistre to weave, from
Latin texere to weave, to make (see texture (n.)). The biological sense is first recorded 1831, from
French, introduced c.1800 by French anatomist Marie-Fran&ccedil;ois-Xavier Bichal (1771-1802).
Meaning piece of absorbent paper used as a handkerchief is from 1929. Tissue-paper is from 1777,
supposedly so called because it was made to be placed between tissues to protect them.


placenta (n.)

1670s of plants, 1690s of mammals, from Modern Latin placenta uterina uterine cake (so called 16c.
by Italian anatomist Realdo Colombo), from Latin placenta a cake, flat cake, from Greek plakoenta,
accusative of plakoeis flat, related to plax (genitive plakos) level surface, anything flat, from
PIE *plak- (1) to be flat (cognates: Greek plakoeis flat, Lettish plakt to become flat, Old Norse
flaga layer of earth, Norwegian flag open sea, Old English floh piece of stone, fragment, Old High
German fluoh cliff), extended form of root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane (n.1)). So called
from the shape.


clitoris (n.)

erectile organ of female mammals, 1610s, coined in Modern Latin from Late Greek kleitoris, a
diminutive, but the exact sense intended by the coiners is uncertain. Perhaps from Greek kleiein to
sheathe, also to shut, in reference to its being covered by the labia minora. The related Greek noun
form kleis has a second meaning of a key, a latch or hook (to close a door); see close (v.), and
compare slot (n.2).    Alternatively, perhaps related to Greek kleitys, a variant of klitys side of
a hill, itself related to klinein to slope, from the same root as climax (see lean (v.)), and with a
sense of little hill. Some ancient medical sources give a supposed Greek verb kleitoriazein to touch
or titillate lasciviously, to tickle (compare German slang der Kitzler clitoris, literally the
tickler), but the verb is likely from the anatomy in this case.    The anatomist Mateo Renaldo
Colombo (1516-1559), professor at Padua, claimed to have discovered it (De re anatomica, 1559, p.
243). He called it amor Veneris, vel dulcedo the love or sweetness of Venus. It had been known
earlier to women.


