animated (adj.)

1530s, alive, past participle adjective from animate (v.). Meaning mentally excited is from 1530s;
full of activity from 1580s. The moving pictures sense is attested from 1895; of cartoons from 1897.
Related: Animatedly.


anime (n.)

c.1985, Japanese for animation, a term that seems to have arisen in the 1970s, apparently based on
French anim&eacute; animated, lively, roused, from the same root as English animate (adj.). Probably
taken into Japanese from a phrase such as dessin anim&eacute; cartoon, literally animated design,
with the adjective abstracted or mistaken, due to its position, as a noun.   Manga (q.v.) is
Japanese for comic book, graphic novel, but anime largely are based on manga and until 1970s, anime
were known in Japan as manga eiga or TV manga. The two terms are somewhat confused in English.


cel (n.)

celluloid sheet for an animated cartoon, from celluloid; became current by c.1990 when they became
collectible.


stirring (adj.)

late 15c., replacing sterand, from Old English styrend in active motion; animated, rousing,present
participle adjective from stir (v.). Related: Stirringly.


planxty (n.)

in Irish music, harp tune of a sportive and animated character [OED], 1790, of unknown origin,
evidently not a native Irish word; some suggest ultimate derivation from Latin plangere to strike,
beat  (see plague (n.)). See also [Katrin Thier, Of Picts and Penguins -- Celtic Languages in the
New Edition of the OED, in The Celtic Languages in Contact, 2007.


idiomatic (adj.)

1712, from Latin idiomaticus, from Greek idiomatikos; from idios one's own (see idiom) + matos
thinking, animated (see automaton).


vivid (adj.)

1630s, from French vivide and perhaps also directly from Latin vividus spirited, animated, lively,
full of life, from vivus alive, from PIE *gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). Extension to colors is from
1660s. Sense of strong, distinct (as of memories, etc.) is from 1680s; that of very active or
intense (as of imagination, interest, etc.) is from 1853. Related: Vividly; vividness.


automatic (adj.)

self-acting, moving or acting on its own, 1812, from Greek automatos, used of the gates of Olympus
and the tripods of Hephaestus (also without apparent cause, by accident), from autos self (see
auto-) + matos thinking, animated (see automaton). Of involuntary animal or human actions, from
1748, first used in this sense by English physician and philosopher David Hartley (1705-1757). In
reference to a type of firearm, from 1877; specifically of machinery that imitates human-directed
action from 1940.


animate (v.)

1530s, to fill with boldness or courage, from Latin animatus past participle of animare give breath
to, also to endow with a particular spirit, to give courage to, from anima life, breath (see
animus). Sense of give life to in English attested from 1742. Related: Animated; animating.


spirituous (adj.)

1590s, spirited, animated, from Latin spiritus (see spirit (n.)) + -ous, or else from Middle French
spiritueux (16c.), from Vulgar Latin *spirituosus, from Latin spiritus. Meaning containing alcohol
is from 1680s. Related: Spiritously; spiritousness.


automaton (n.)

1610s, from Latin automaton (Suetonius), from Greek automaton, neuter of automatos self-acting, from
autos self (see auto-) + matos thinking, animated, willing, from PIE *mn-to-, from root *men- to
think (see mind (n.)).


loony (adj.)

also loonie, looney, 1853, American English, short for lunatic, but also influenced by loon (n.2)
and perhaps loon (n.1), the bird being noted for its wild cry and method of escaping from danger. As
a noun by 1884, from the adjective. Slang loony bin insane asylum is from 1919. Looney left in
reference to holders of political views felt to be left-wing in the extreme is from 1977. Looney
Tunes, Warner Bros. studios' animated cartoon series, dates from 1930.


frisk (v.)

1510s, to dance, frolic, from Middle English frisk lively (mid-15c.), from Middle French frisque
lively, brisk, from Old French frisque fresh, new; merry, animated (13c.), possibly from a Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch vrisch fresh, Old High German frisc lively; see fresh (adj.1)). Sense
of pat down in a search first recorded 1781. Related: Frisked; frisking. As a noun from 1520s.


