anthropologist (n.)

1798, from anthropology + -ist.


Australopithecus (n.)

1925, coined by Australian anthropologist Raymond A. Dart (1893-1988) from Latin australis southern
(see Australia) + Greek pithekos ape. So called because first discovered in South Africa.


Caucasian (adj.)

1807, from Caucasus Mountains, between the Black and Caspian seas; applied to the white race 1795
(in German) by German anthropologist Johann Blumenbach, because its supposed ancestral homeland lay
there; since abandoned as a historical/anthropological term. (See Aryan).


Eurafrican

coined 1890 by anthropologist D.G. Brinton to designate a race of dark-skinned people inhabiting
both sides of the Mediterranean; it was used 1920s to describe the colored population of South
Africa, and 1960s with reference to political situations involving both continents; see Euro- +
Africa.


phatic (adj.)

1923, coined by Polish-born British anthropologist Bronis&#322;aw Malinowski (1884-1942) from Greek
phatos spoken, that may be spoken, from phanai to speak, say (see fame (n.)) + -ic.


missionary (n.)

1650s, from missionary (adj.). Missionary position attested by 1963, said to have been coined by
Kinsey (1948), who identified its origin in work done by Polish anthropologist Bronis&#322;aw
Malinowski in Melanesia in the 1920s; allegedly from the term used by South Pacific peoples to
describe what Christian missionaries promoted to replace their local variations. By late 1960s it
became the general term for this type of sex, formerly also known as the English-American position.


rite (n.)

early 14c., from Latin ritus religious observance or ceremony, custom, usage, perhaps from PIE root
*re(i)- to count, number (cognates: Greek arithmos number, Old English rim number; see read (v.)).
Rite of passage (1909) is translated from French rite de passage, coined by French anthropologist
Arnold van Gennep (1873-1957).


animism (n.)

1866, reintroduced by English anthropologist Sir Edward Burnett Taylor (1832-1917), who defined it
(1871) as the theory of the universal animation of nature, from Latin anima life, breath, soul (see
animus) + -ism.    Earlier sense was of doctrine that animal life is produced by an immaterial soul
(1832), from German Animismus, coined c.1720 by physicist/chemist Georg Ernst Stahl (1660-1734)
based on the concept of the anima mundi. Animist is attested from 1819, in Stahl's sense; animisic
is first recorded 1871.


nuclear (adj.)

1846, of or like the nucleus of a cell, from nucleus + -ar, probably by influence of French
nucl&eacute;aire. Use in atomic physics is from 1914; of weapons, from 1945. Hence nuclear physics
(1933), nuclear energy (1941), nuclear war (1954). Nuclear winter coined by Richard Turco, but first
attested in article by Carl Sagan in Parade magazine, Oct. 30, 1983. General sense of central is
from 1912. Nuclear family, originally a sociologists' term, is first attested 1949 in Social
Structure, by American anthropologist G.P. Murdock (1897-1985). Alternative adjective nucleal is
recorded from 1840.


kangaroo (n.)

1770, used by Capt. Cook and botanist Joseph Banks, supposedly an aborigine word from northeast
Queensland, Australia, usually said to be unknown now in any native language. However, according to
Australian linguist R.M.W. Dixon (The Languages of Australia, Cambridge, 1980), the word probably is
from Guugu Yimidhirr (Endeavour River-area Aborigine language) /gaNurru/ large black kangaroo.In
1898 the pioneer ethnologist W.E. Roth wrote a letter to the Australasian pointing out that gang-oo-
roo did mean 'kangaroo' in Guugu Yimidhirr, but this newspaper correspondence went unnoticed by
lexicographers. Finally the observations of Cook and Roth were confirmed when in 1972 the
anthropologist John Haviland began intensive study of Guugu Yimidhirr and again recorded /gaNurru/.
[Dixon] Kangaroo court is American English, first recorded 1850 in a Southwestern context (also
mustang court), from notion of proceeding by leaps.


