ape (n.)

Old English apa ape, monkey, from Proto-Germanic *apan (cognates: Old Saxon apo, Old Norse api,
Dutch aap, German affe), perhaps borrowed in Proto-Germanic from Celtic (compare Old Irish apa) or
Slavic (compare Old Bohemian op, Slovak opitza), perhaps ultimately from a non-Indo-European
language.    Apes were noted in medieval times for mimicry of human action, hence, perhaps, the
other figurative use of the word, to mean a fool. To go ape (in emphatic form, go apeshit) go crazy
is 1955, U.S. slang. To lead apes in hell (1570s) was the fancied fate of one who died an old maid.


ape (v.)

to imitate, 1630s, but the notion is implied earlier, as in the phrase play the ape (1570s), Middle
English apeshipe ape-like behavior, simulation (mid-15c.); and the noun sense of one who mimics may
date from early 13c. Related: Aped; aping.


ape-man (n.)

hypothetical missing link, 1879, in a translation of Haeckel, from ape (n.) + man (n.). Man-ape is
attested from 1878. The name Martin Halfape appears in an English roll from 1227.


apercu (n.)

quick impression, sketch, brief survey, 1820s, from French aper&ccedil;u (18c. in this sense), noun
use of past participle of apercevoir to perceive (11c.), from Gallo-Roman *adpercipere, from Latin
ad to (see ad-) + percipere to perceive (see perceive).


aperiodic (adj.)

1874, from a- (2), privative prefix, + periodic.


aperitif (n.)

1894, alcoholic drink taken before a meal to stimulate the appetite, from French ap&eacute;ritif
laxative, laxative liqueur, literally opening, from Latin aperitivus, from aperire to open (see
overt). Compare Middle English apertive (adj.), a medical word meaning capable of opening or
dilating (pores, etc.), early 15c.


apert (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French apert and directly from Latin apertus open, past participle of aperire to
open, uncover (see overt).


aperture (n.)

early 15c., from Latin apertura an opening, from apertus, past participle of aperire to open (see
overt).


apex (n.)

c.1600, from Latin apex summit, peak, tip, top, extreme end; probably related to apere to fasten,
fix, hence the tip of anything (one of the meanings in Latin was small rod at the top of the
flamen's cap), from PIE *ap- to take, reach. Proper plural is apices.


a capella

1876, earlier alla capella (1847), from Italian, in the manner of the chapel, literally according to
the chapel, from cappella chapel (see chapel). Originally in reference to older church music
(pre-1600) which was written for unaccompanied voices; applied 20c. to unaccompanied vocal music
generally.


agape (n.)

c.1600, from Greek agape brotherly love, charity, from agapan greet with affection, love, of unknown
origin. Agape was used by early Christians for their love feast held in connection with the Lord's
Supper. In modern use, often in simpler sense of Christian love (1856, frequently opposed to eros as
carnal or sensual love).


agape (adv.)

1660s, from a- (1) + gape (v.).


anapest (n.)

also anapaest, two short syllables followed by a long one, 1670s, from Latin anapestus, from Greek
anapaistos struck back, rebounding, verbal adjective from anapaiein to strike back, from ana- back
(see ana-) + paiein to strike, from PIE *pau- to cut, strike, stamp (see pave). So called because it
reverses the dactyl.


anapestic (adj.)

1690s, from Latin anapaesticus, from Greek anapaistikos, from anapaistos (see anapest).


audiotape (n.)

1957, from audio- + tape (n.).


Budapest

Hungarian capital, formed 1872 from merger of two cities on opposite shores of the Danube, Buda
(probably from a word originally meaning water) + Pest, a Hungarian word meaning furnace, oven,
cove, also in Slavic (compare Russian pech'). Compare Ofen, literally oven, the old German name for
the place.


cape (n.1)

garment, late Old English capa, c&aelig;ppe, from Late Latin cappa hooded cloak (see cap (n.)). The
modern word and meaning (sleeveless cloak) are a mid-16c. reborrowing from French cape, from
Spanish, in reference to a Spanish style.


cape (n.2)

promontory, late 14c., from Middle French cap cape; head, from Latin caput headland, head (see
capitulum). The Cape of Good Hope in southern Africa has been the Cape since 1660s. Sailors called
low cloud banks that could be mistaken for landforms on the horizon Cape fly-away (1769).


Cape Cod

named 1602 by English navigator Bartholomew Gosnold for the abundance of fish his men caught there.
Cape Cod, in reference to houses reminiscent of New England architecture, is attested from 1916.


capeesh

variant spelling of capiche (q.v.).


Capella

bright northern star, the alpha of the constellation Auriga, by 17c., from Latin capella, literally
little she-goat (Greek kinesai kheimonas), diminutive of capra she-goat, fem. of caper goat.


caper (v.)

1580s, apparently short for obsolete capriole to leap, skip, probably from Italian capriolare jump
in the air (see cab). Related: Capered; capering.


caper (n.1)

type of prickly Mediterranean bush, also in reference to the plant's edible buds, late 14c., from
Latin capparis (source of Italian cappero, French c&acirc;pre, German Kaper), from Greek kapparis
the caper plant or its fruit, of uncertain origin. Arabic kabbar, Persian kabar are from Greek.
Perhaps reborrowed into English 16c. The final -s was mistaken for a plural inflection in English
and dropped.


caper (n.2)

by 1590s, playful leap or jump, from caper (v.); meaning prank is from 1840; that of crime is from
1926. To cut capers dance in a frolicsome way is from c.1600.


chapeau (n.)

1520s, from Middle French chapeau (Old French capel, 12c.) hat, from Vulgar Latin *cappellus, from
Late Latin capellum (also source of Italian cappello, Spanish capelo, Portuguese chapeo), diminutive
of cappa (see cap (n.)).


chapel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French chapele (12c., Modern French chapelle), from Medieval Latin cappella
chapel, sanctuary for relics, literally little cape, diminutive of Late Latin cappa cape (see cap
(n.)); by tradition, originally in reference to the sanctuary in France in which the miraculous cape
of St. Martin of Tours, patron saint of France, was preserved; meaning extended in most European
languages to any sanctuary. (While serving Rome as a soldier deployed in Gaul, Martin cut his
military coat in half to share it with a ragged beggar. That night, Martin dreamed Christ wearing
the half-cloak; the half Martin kept was the relic.)


chaperon (n.)

1720, woman accompanying a younger, unmarried lady in public, from French chaperon protector,
especially female companion to a young woman, earlier head covering, hood (c.1400), from Old French
chaperon hood, cowl (12c.), diminutive of chape cape (see cap (n.)). ... English writers often
erroneously spell it chaperone, app. under the supposition that it requires a fem. termination
[OED]. The notion is of covering the socially vulnerable one.  May I ask what is a chaperon?    A
married lady; without whom no unmarried one can be seen in public. If the damsel be five and forty,
she cannot appear without the matron; and if the matron be fifteen, it will do.    [Catharine
Hutton, The Welsh Mountaineer, London, 1817]    The word had been used in Middle English in the
literal sense hooded cloak.


chaperon (v.)

act as a chaperon, 1792, also chaperone, from chaperon (n.), or from French chaperonner, from
chaperon (n.). Related: Chaperoned; chaperoning.


cheapen (v.)

1570s, ask the price of, from cheap (adj.) + -en (1). Meaning lower the price of is from 1833, but
figuratively, to lower in estimation is from 1650s. Related: Cheapened; cheapening.


Chesapeake

from an Algonquian language, perhaps literally great shellfish bay. Early spellings include
Chesepiooc and Chesupioc.


crape (n.)

1630s, Englished spelling of crepe (q.v.).


date rape (n.)

by 1973, from date (n.3) + rape (n.1).


diaper (n.)

mid-14c., fabric with a repeated pattern of figures, from Old French diaspre ornamental cloth;
flowered, patterned silk cloth, perhaps via Medieval Latin diasprum from Medieval Greek diaspros
thoroughly white, or perhaps white interspersed with other colors, from dia- (see dia-) + aspros
white.   Aspros originally meant rough, and was applied to the raised parts of coins (among other
things), and thus was used in Byzantine Greek to mean silver coin, from which the bright, shiny
qualities made it an adjective for whiteness. Modern sense of underpants for babies is continuous
since 1837, but such usage has been traced back to 1590s.


diaper (v.)

late 14c., to put a small, repeated pattern on, from Old French diaprer, variant of diasprer, from
diaspre (see diaper (n.)). Meaning to put a diaper on (a baby) is attested by 1951. Related:
Diapered; diapering.


drape (v.)

c.1400, to ornament with cloth hangings; mid-15c., to weave into cloth, from Old French draper to
weave, make cloth (13c.), from drap cloth, piece of cloth, sheet, bandage, from Late Latin drapus,
perhaps of Gaulish origin (compare Old Irish drapih mantle, garment). Meaning to cover with drapery
is from 1847. Meaning to cause to hang or stretch out loosely or carelessly is from 1943. Related:
Draped; draping.


drape (n.)

1660s, from drape (v.). Jive talk slang for suit of clothes is attested from 1945.


draper (n.)

mid-14c. (mid-12c. as a surname), one who weaves and/or sells cloth, from Anglo-French draper, Old
French drapier (13c.) draper, clothes-seller, clothes-maker, agent noun from drap (see drape (v.)).


drapery (n.)

early 14c., cloth, textiles, from Old French draperie (12c.) weaving, cloth-making, clothes shop,
from drap (see drape (n.)). From late 14c. as place where cloth is made; cloth market. Meaning stuff
with which something is draped is 1680s.


drapes (n.)

curtains, 1895, see drape (n.).


dreamscape (n.)

1959, from dream + second element abstracted from landscape, etc. First attested in a Sylvia Plath
poem.


duct tape

by 1943; see duct (here in the electrical wiring sense) + tape.


escape (v.)

c.1300, from Old North French escaper, Old French eschaper (12c., Modern French &eacute;chapper),
from Vulgar Latin *excappare, literally get out of one's cape, leave a pursuer with just one's cape,
from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) + Late Latin cappa mantle (see cap (n.)). Related: Escaped;
escaping.


escape (n.)

c.1400, from escape (v.); earlier eschap (c.1300). Mental/emotional sense is from 1853. Escape
clause in the legal sense first recorded 1945.


escapee (n.)

1865, American English, from escape (v.) + -ee.


flypaper (n.)

1851 (though the item itself is said to have become commonly available in London in 1848), from fly
(n.1) + paper (n.).


gape (v.)

early 13c., from an unrecorded Old English word or else from Old Norse gapa to open the mouth, gape,
common Proto-Germanic (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch gapen, German gaffen to gape, stare, Swedish
gapa, Danish gabe), from PIE *ghai- (see gap). Related: Gaped; gaping. As a noun, from 1530s.


gaper (n.)

1630s, agent noun from gape (v.). Gaper delay in traffic control parlance attested by 1995.


grape (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French grape bunch of grapes, grape (12c.), probably a back-formation from graper
steal; grasp; catch with a hook; pick (grapes), from a Frankish or other Germanic word, from Proto-
Germanic *krappon hook (cognates: Middle Dutch crappe, Old High German krapfo hook; also see cramp
(n.2)). The original notion perhaps was vine hook for grape-picking. The vine is not native to
England. The word replaced Old English winberige wine berry. Spanish grapa, Italian grappa also are
Germanic loan-words.


grapefruit (n.)

1814, from grape + fruit. So called because it grows in clusters.  The fruit itself was known since
1693 (in Hans Sloane's catalogue of Jamaican plants); presumably it originated there from chance
hybrids between other cultivated citrus. It was known by various names before the current one
emerged. An ornamental plant chiefly at first, not much eaten until late 19c.


grapeshot (n.)

also grape-shot, 1747, from grape + shot (n.). So called for its appearance. Originally simply
grape, as a collective singular (1680s).


