archaeologist (n.)

1824; see archaeology + -ist.


Minoan (adj.)

1894, from Minos, famous king of Crete; applied by British archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans to the
civilization that flourished there c.3000-1400 B.C.E.


archeologist (n.)

alternative spelling of archaeologist. Also see ae.


fertile (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French fertil and directly from Latin fertilis bearing in abundance, fruitful,
productive, from ferre to bear (see infer). Fertile Crescent (1914) was coined by U.S. archaeologist
James H. Breasted (1865-1935).


time (n.)

Old English tima limited space of time, from Proto-Germanic *timon- time (cognates: Old Norse timi
time, proper time, Swedish timme an hour), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- cut up,
divide (see tide (n.)).    Abstract sense of time as an indefinite continuous duration is recorded
from late 14c. Personified since at least 1509 as an aged bald man (but with a forelock) carrying a
scythe and an hour-glass. In English, a single word encompasses time as extent and point (French
temps/fois, German zeit/mal) as well as hour (as in what time is it? compare French heure, German
Uhr). Extended senses such as occasion, the right time, leisure, or times (v.) multiplied by
developed in Old and Middle English, probably as a natural outgrowth of such phrases as He commends
her a hundred times to God (Old French La comande a Deu cent foiz).  to have a good time ( = a time
of enjoyment) was common in Eng. from c 1520 to c 1688; it was app. retained in America, whence
readopted in Britain in 19th c. [OED]   Time of day (now mainly preserved in negation, i.e. what
someone won't give you if he doesn't like you) was a popular 17c. salutation (as in Good time of day
vnto your Royall Grace, Richard III, I.iii.18). The times the current age is from 1590s. Behind the
times old-fashioned is recorded from 1831. Times as the name of a newspaper dates from 1788.   Time
warp first attested 1954; time-traveling in the science fiction sense first recorded 1895 in H.G.
Wells' The Time Machine. Time capsule first recorded 1938, in reference to the one deemed capable of
resisting the effects of time for five thousand years preserving an account of universal
achievements embedded in the grounds of the New York World's fair.    Jones [archaeologist of A.D.
5139] potters about for a while in the region which we have come to regard as New York, finds
countless ruins, but little of interest to the historian except a calcified direction sheet to
something called a Time Capsule. Jones finds the capsule but cannot open it, and decides, after
considerable prying at the lid, that it is merely evidence of an archaic tribal ceremony called a
publicity gag of which he has already found many examples. [Princeton Alumni Weekly, April 14, 1939]
To do time serve a prison sentence is from 1865. Time frame is attested by 1964; time-limit is from
1880. About time, ironically for long past due time, is recorded from 1920.


