archives (n.)

c.1600, from French archif (16c.), from Late Latin archivum (singular), from Greek ta arkheia public
records, plural of arkheion town hall, from arkhe government, literally beginning, origin, first
place (see archon).


archivist (n.)

1753, from Medieval Latin or Italian archivista or French archiviste (see archives).


archive (v.)

1819 (implied in archived), from archives. Related: Archiving.


archival (adj.)

1800; see archives + -al (1). Related: Archivally.


pornography (n.)

1843, ancient obscene painting, especially in temples of Bacchus, from French pornographie, from
Greek pornographos (one) depicting prostitutes, from porne prostitute, originally bought, purchased
(with an original notion, probably of female slave sold for prostitution), related to pernanai to
sell, from PIE root *per- (5) to traffic in, to sell (see price (n.)) + graphein to write (see
-graphy). A brothel in ancient Greek was a porneion.    Pornography, or obscene painting, which in
the time of the Romans was practiced with the grossest license, prevailed especially at no
particular period in Greece, but was apparently tolerated to a considerable extent at all times.
Parrhasius, Aristides, Pausanias, Nicophanes, Chaerephanes, Arellius, and a few other [pornographoi]
are mentioned as having made themselves notorious for this species of license. [Charles Anthon,
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, New York, 1843]    In reference to modern works by 1859
(originally French novels), later as a charge against native literature; sense of obscene pictures
in modern times is from 1906. Also sometimes used late 19c. for description of prostitutes as a
matter of public hygiene. The Medical Archives in 1873 proposed porniatria for the lengthy and
really meaningless expression 'social evil hospital' ....     I shall not today attempt further to
define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description [hard-
core pornography]; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I
see it, and the motion picture involved in this case is not that. [U.S. Supreme Court Justice Potter
Stewart, concurring opinion, Jacobellis v. Ohio, 1964]    In ancient contexts, often paired with
rhypography, genre painting of low, sordid, or unsuitable subjects. Pornocracy (1860) is the
dominating influence of harlots, used specifically of the government of Rome during the first half
of the 10th century by Theodora and her daughters. Pornotopia (1966) was coined to describe the
ideal erotic-world of pornographic movies.


