archaic (adj.)

1810, from or by influence of French archaique (1776), ultimately from Greek arkhaikos old-
fashioned, from arkhaios ancient, from arkhe beginning (see archon). Archaical is attested from
1799.


archaism (n.)

1640s, retention of what is old and obsolete, from Modern Latin archaismus, from Greek arkhaismos,
from arkhaizein to copy the ancients (in language, etc.); see archaic. Meaning an archaic word or
expression is from c.1748.


leman (n.)

sweetheart, paramour (archaic), late 13c., from Middle English leofman (c.1200), from Old English
leof dear (see lief) + man human being, person (see man (n.)). Originally of either gender, though
deliberate archaic usage tends to limit it to women.


weeds (n.)

garments (now surviving, if at all, in widow's weeds), plural of archaic weed, from Old English
w&aelig;d, w&aelig;de robe, dress, apparel, garment, clothing, from Proto-Germanic *wedo (cognates:
Old Saxon wadi, Old Frisian wede garment, Old Norse va&eth; cloth, texture, Old High German wat
garment), probably from PIE *wedh-, extended form of root *au- (3) to weave. Archaic since early
19c.


ween (v.)

be of the opinion, have the notion (archaic), Old English wenan to fancy, imagine, believe; expect,
hope, from Proto-Germanic *wenjan to hope (cognates: Old Saxon wanian, Old Norse v&aelig;na, Old
Frisian wena, Old High German wanen, German w&auml;hnen, Gothic wenjan to expect, suppose, think),
from *woeniz expectation, from PIE root *wen- (1) to wish, desire, strive for (see Venus). Archaic
since 17c.


begat (v.)

archaic past tense of beget.


compleat (adj.)

archaic spelling of complete (adj.).


e&#039;en

variant spelling of even, now archaic or poetic.


e&#039;er

variant spelling of ever, now archaic or poetic.


didst

archaic 2nd person singular past indicative of do (q.v.).


hath (v.)

archaic third person singular present indicative of have.


hast (v.)

archaic second person singular present indicative of have.


spake

archaic or poetic past tense of speak.


olde

pseudo-archaic mock-antique variant of old, 1927.


in&#039;t

archaic or poetic contraction of in it.


in&#039;t

archaic; 17c. as short for in it.


ancient (n.)

standard-bearer, 1550s, a corruption of ensign. Archaic, but preserved in Shakespeare's character
Aunchient Pistoll in Henry V.


sirrah

1520s, term of address used to men or boys expressing anger or contempt, archaic extended form of
sir (in U.S., siree, attested from 1823).


eld

poetic or archaic form of old; in some cases from Old English eald.


shock (v.1)

to come into violent contact, strike against suddenly and violently, 1570s, now archaic or obsolete,
from shock (n.1). Meaning to give (something) an electric shock is from 1746; sense of to offend,
displease is first recorded 1690s.


amalgamation (n.)

1610s, noun of action from archaic amalgam (v.) to alloy with mercury (see amalgamate). Figurative,
non-chemical sense of a combining into one uniform whole is attested from 1775.


molten (adj.)

late 13c., from archaic past participle of Old English meltian, a class III strong verb (see melt
(v.)).


smaik (n.)

mean or contemptible fellow, mid-15c., Scottish, now archaic, current c.1450-c.1900, perhaps cognate
with Old High German smeichari, from smeken to flatter.


mage (n.)

magician, c.1400, anglicized form of Latin magus magician (see magi). An archaic word by late 19c.
(OED), revived by fantasy games.


coign (n.)

archaic spelling of quoin (q.v.), surviving only in Shakespeare's coign of vantage (Macbeth I.vi.),
popularized by Sir Walter Scott, properly a projecting corner (for observation).


fast and loose

described as a cheating game played with a stick and a belt or string, so arranged that a spectator
would think he could make the latter fast by placing a stick through its intricate folds, whereas
the operator could detach it at once. [James O. Halliwell, Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial
Words, 1847]. The figurative sense (1550s) is recorded earlier than the literal (1570s).


riband (n.)

archaic for ribbon, late 14c., from ribbon, with excrescent -d.


frore (adj.)

frosty, frozen, archaic (but found in poetry as late as Keats), from Old English froren, past
participle of freosan (see freeze (v.)).


whilom (adv.)

at time past (archaic), c.1200, from Old English hwilum at times, dative case of while (q.v.). As a
conjunction from 1610s. Similar formation in German weiland formerly.


clepe (v.)

to call; to name (archaic), from Old English cleopian, clipian to speak, call; summon, invoke;
implore.


sware

obsolete or archaic past tense of swear (v.), common 15c.-17c. by analogy of past tense of bear
(v.).


corse (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French cors, from Latin corpus body (see corps for history and development).
Archaic from 16c.


chirurgeon (n.)

1530s, representing a failed Renaissance attempt to restore Greek spelling to the word that had got
into English as surgeon; now, thank the gods, archaic. Related: Chirurgery. Compare French
chirurgien.


het (adj.)

heated, archaic, late 14c., from variant past participle of heat (compare lead (v.)/led, etc.).


gratulate (v.)

archaic, 1550s, from Latin gratulatus, past participle of gratulari (see gratulation).


gangling (adj.)

by 1812, a frequentative of gang in some sense involving looseness.    GANGLING. Tall, slender,
delicate, generally applied to plants. Warw. [James O. Halliwell, A Dictionary of Archaic and
Provincial Words, 1846]


donut (n.)

see doughnut. It turns up as an alternate spelling in U.S. as early as 1870 (Josh Billings), common
from c.1920 in names of bakeries. Halliwell (Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words, 1847) has
donnut a pancake made of dough instead of batter, which Bartlett (1848) writes is no doubt the same
word as the American one.


weet (v.)

to know (archaic), 1540s, from Middle English weten, variant of witen to know (see wit (v.)).


wot (v.)

to know (archaic), from Old English wat, first and third person singular present indicative of witan
to know (see wit (v.)).


sennight (n.)

period of seven days, a week (archaic), c.1200, contracted from Old English seofon nihta; see seven
+ night. Also compare fortnight.


hithe (n.)

landing place (archaic, but still found in place names), from Old English hy&eth; landing place,
especially one on a river or creek, cognate with Old Saxon huth.


mun (v.)

auxiliary verb, now archaic or dialectal, must, c.1200, from Old Norse monu, a future tense
auxiliary verb ultimately meaning to intend and from the PIE root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).


throughly (adv.)

fully, completely, mid-15c., from through + -ly (2). Archaic alternative to thoroughly.


skit (n.)

piece of light satire or caricature, 1820, from earlier sense a satirical remark or reflection
(1727), originally (1570s) a vain, frivolous, or wanton girl (originally Scottish, now archaic),
related to verb meaning to shy or be skittish, caper, frolic (1610s), perhaps from Old Norse skjuta
to shoot, move quickly (see skittish).


lorn (adj.)

(archaic) c.1300, lost, ruined, from Old English loren, past participle of leosan to lose (see
lose). Meaning abandoned, left alone is from late 15c. Compare forlorn.


stricken (adj.)

1510s, wounded, affected (by disease, trouble, etc.), adjective use of archaic past participle of
strike (v.). Figurative meaning overwhelmed with terror, grief, etc. is from 1530s. An earlier
development is reflected in 13c. phrase striken in elde advanced in years, from strike in the sense
of to move, go, hence far advanced.


goes

third person singular of go, Old English ga&aelig;s (Northumbrian), displacing alternative goeth
(Old English gae&thorn;) except in archaic and liturgical use.


effable (adj.)

1630s, from French effable, from Latin effabilis, from effari to utter (see ineffable). Now obsolete
or archaic.


needs (adv.)

of necessity, necessarily, in archaic constructions involving must (late 14c.) is from Old English
nede, instrumental and genitive singular of nied (see need), used as an adverb reinforcing must,
hence the genitive ending.


Wardour-street (n.)

affected pseudo-archaic diction of historical novels, 1888, from street in London lined with shops
selling imitation-antique furniture.    This is not literary English of any date; this is Wardour-
Street Early English -- a perfectly modern article with a sham appearance of the real antique about
it. [A. Ballantyne, Wardour-Street English, Longman's Magazine, October, 1888]


