artless (adj.)

1580s, unskillful, from art (n.) + -less. Later also uncultured (1590s); then unartificial, natural
(1670s) and guileless, ingenuous (1714). Related: Artlessly; artlessness.


ingenue (n.)

1848, from French ing&eacute;nue artless girl, especially on the stage, fem. of ing&eacute;nu
ingenuous, artless, simple (13c.), from Latin ingenuus (see ingenuous). Italicized in English into
20c.


naive (adj.)

1650s, natural, simple, artless, from French na&#239;ve, fem. of na&#239;f, from Old French naif
naive, natural, genuine; just born; foolish, innocent; unspoiled, unworked (13c.), from Latin
nativus not artificial, also native, rustic, literally born, innate, natural (see native (adj.)).
Related: Naively.


ingenuous (adj.)

1590s, noble in nature, from Latin ingenuus with the virtues of freeborn people, of noble character,
frank, upright, candid, originally native, freeborn, from in- in (see in- (2)) + gen-, root of
gignere beget, produce (see genus). Sense of artless, innocent is 1670s, via evolution from high-
minded to honorably open, straightforward, to innocently frank. Related: Ingenuously; ingenuousness.


art (n.)

early 13c., skill as a result of learning or practice, from Old French art (10c.), from Latin artem
(nominative ars) work of art; practical skill; a business, craft, from PIE *ar-ti- (cognates:
Sanskrit rtih manner, mode; Greek arti just, artios complete, suitable, artizein to prepare; Latin
artus joint; Armenian arnam make; German art manner, mode), from root *ar- fit together, join (see
arm (n.1)).    In Middle English usually with a sense of skill in scholarship and learning (c.1300),
especially in the seven sciences, or liberal arts. This sense remains in Bachelor of Arts, etc.
Meaning human workmanship (as opposed to nature) is from late 14c. Sense of cunning and trickery
first attested c.1600. Meaning skill in creative arts is first recorded 1610s; especially of
painting, sculpture, etc., from 1660s. Broader sense of the word remains in artless.   Fine arts,
those which appeal to the mind and the imagination first recorded 1767. Expression art for art's
sake (1824) translates French l'art pour l'art. First record of art critic is from 1847. Arts and
crafts decorative design and handcraft first attested in the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society,
founded in London, 1888.    Supreme art is a traditional statement of certain heroic and religious
truths, passed on from age to age, modified by individual genius, but never abandoned. The revolt of
individualism came because the tradition had become degraded, or rather because a spurious copy had
been accepted in its stead. [William Butler Yeats]


