assail (v.)

c.1200, from Old French assalir attack, assault, assail (12c., Modern French assaillir), from Vulgar
Latin *adsalire to leap at, from Latin ad- at (see ad-) + salire to leap (see salient (adj.)).
Figurative use from mid-14c. Related: Assailed; assailing; assailable.


assailant (n.)

1530s, from French assailant, noun use of present participle of assailir (see assail). Earlier in
same sense was assailer (c.1400).


insult (v.)

1560s, triumph over in an arrogant way, from Middle French insulter (14c.) and directly from Latin
insultare to assail, to leap upon (already used by Cicero in sense of insult, scoff at, revile),
frequentative of insilire leap at or upon, from in- on, at (see in- (2)) + salire to leap (see
salient (adj.)). Sense of to verbally abuse, affront, assail with disrespect is from 1610s. Related:
Insulted; insulting.


iambic

1570s (n.); 1580s (adj.), from Latin iambicus, from Greek iambikos, from iambos metrical foot of one
unaccented followed by one accented syllable, from iaptein to assail (in words), literally to put
forth. The meter of invective and lampoon in classical Greek from the time it was used for such by
Archilochos, 7c. B.C.E.


belabor (v.)

1590s, to exert one's strength upon, from be- + labor (v.). But figurative sense of assail with
words is attested somewhat earlier (1590s); and belabored is attested from mid-15c. with a sense of
tilled, cultivated.


invade (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French invader to invade, and directly from Latin invadere to go into, enter
upon; assail, assault, attack (see invasion). Related: invaded; invading.


prosecute (v.)

early 15c., follow up, pursue (some course or action), from Latin prosecutus, past participle of
prosequi follow after, accompany; chase, pursue; attack, assail, abuse (see pursue). Meaning bring
to a court of law is first recorded 1570s. Meaning go into detail is from 1530s.


unassailable (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + assailable (see assail (v.)). Related: Unassailably.


infest (v.)

late 15c., to attack, assail, hurt, distress, annoy, from Middle French infester, from Latin
infestare to attack, disturb, trouble, from infestus hostile, dangerous, originally inexorable, not
able to be handled, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + -festus (able to be) seized. Sense of
swarm over in large numbers first recorded c.1600. Related: Infested; infesting.


circumvent (v.)

mid-15c., to surround by hostile stratagem, from Latin circumventus, past participle of circumvenire
to get around, be around, encircle, surround, in figurative sense to oppress, assail, cheat, from
circum around (see circum-) + venire to come (see venue). Meaning to go round is from 1840. Related:
Circumvented; circumventing.


petulant (adj.)

1590s, immodest, wanton, saucy, from Middle French petulant (mid-14c.), from Latin petulantem
(nominative petulans) wanton, froward, saucy, insolent, present participle of petere to attack,
assail; strive after; ask for, beg, beseech (see petition (n.)). Meaning peevish, irritable first
recorded 1775, probably by influence of pet (n.2). Related: Petulantly.


oppugn (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin oppugnare to fight against, attack, assail, from ob- toward, against (see ob-)
+ pugnare to fight (see pugnacious). Related: Oppugned; oppugning.


press (v.1)

push against, early 14c., to clasp, embrace; mid-14c. to squeeze out; also to cluster, gather in a
crowd;  late 14c., to press against, exert pressure, also assault, assail; also forge ahead, push
one's way, move forward, from Old French presser squeeze, press upon; torture (13c.), from Latin
pressare to press, frequentative formation from pressus, past participle of premere to press, hold
fast, cover, crowd, compress, from PIE *per- (4) to strike. Related: Pressed; pressing. Figurative
sense is from late 14c. Meaning to urge, argue for is from 1590s.


assault (n.)

late 14c., earlier asaut (c.1200), from Old French asaut, assaut an attack, an assault, attacking
forces (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *adsaltus attack, assault, from ad to (see ad-) + Latin saltus a
leap, from salire to leap, spring (see assail). In law by 1580s; historically, assault includes
menacing words or actions; battery is an actual blow.


offend (v.)

early 14c., to sin against (someone), from Old French ofendre transgress, antagonize, and directly
from Latin offendere to hit, strike against, figuratively to stumble, commit a fault, displease,
trespass against, provoke, from ob against (see ob-) + -fendere to strike (found only in compounds;
see defend).    Meaning to violate (a law), to make a moral false step, to commit a crime is from
late 14c. Meaning to wound the feelings is from late 14c. The literal sense of to attack, assail is
attested from late 14c.; this has been lost in Modern English, but is preserved in offense and
offensive. Related: Offended; offending.


be-

word-forming element with a wide range of meaning: thoroughly, completely; to make, cause seem; to
provide with; at, on, to, for, from Old English be- on all sides (also used to make transitive verbs
and as a privative or intensive prefix), from weak form of Old English bi by, probably cognate with
second syllable of Greek amphi, Latin ambi and originally meaning about (see ambi-).    This sense
naturally drifted into intensive (as in bespatter spatter about, therefore spatter very much). Be-
can also be privative (as in behead), causative, or have just about any sense required. The prefix
was productive 16c.-17c. in forming useful words, many of which have not survived, such as bethwack
to thrash soundly (1550s), betongue to assail in speech, to scold (1630s).


petition (n.)

early 14c., a supplication or prayer, especially to a deity, from Old French peticion request,
petition (12c., Modern French p&#233;tition) and directly from Latin petitionem (nominative petitio)
a blow, thrust, attack, aim; a seeking, searching, in law a claim, suit, noun of action from past
participle stem of petere to make for, go to; attack, assail; seek, strive after; ask for, beg,
beseech, request; fetch; derive; demand, require, from PIE root *pet-, also *pete- to rush; to fly
(cognates: Sanskrit pattram wing, feather, leaf, patara- flying, fleeting; Hittite pittar wing;
Greek piptein to fall, potamos rushing water, pteryx wing; Old English fe&eth;er feather; Latin
penna feather, wing; Old Church Slavonic pero feather; Old Welsh eterin bird). Meaning formal
written request to a superior (earthly) is attested from early 15c.


