astringent (adj.)

1540s, from Latin astringentum (nominative astringens), present participle of astringere to bind
fast, tighten, contract, from ad- to (see ad-) + stringere draw tight (see strain (v.)). As a noun
from 1620s.


catecholamine (n.)

type of hormone, from catechol (1880), from catechu, 17c. name for an astringent substance used in
medicines, dyeing, etc., which apparently is from Malay kachu.


astriction (n.)

1560s, from Latin astrictionem (nominative astrictio), noun of action from past participle stem of
astringere (see astringent).


stringent (adj.)

c.1600, astringent, especially with reference to taste, from Latin stringentem (nominative
stringens), present participle of stringere (2) to compress, contract, bind or draw tight (see
strain (v.)). Of regulations, procedures, etc., 1846.


acacia (n.)

1540s, from Latin acacia, from Greek akakia thorny Egyptian tree, perhaps related to Greek ake
point, thorn, from PIE root *ak- sharp (see acrid). Or perhaps a Hellenization of some Egyptian
word. From late 14c. in English as the name of a type of gum used as an astringent, etc.


alum (n.)

late 14c., whitish mineral salt used as an astringent, dye, etc., from Old French alum, from Latin
alumen alum, literally bitter salt, cognate with Greek aludoimos bitter and perhaps with English
ale.


styptic (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French stiptique or directly from Latin stypticus astringent, from Greek styptikos,
from styphein to constrict, draw together. As a noun, c.1400, from Late Latin stypticum. Related:
Styptical.


sumac (n.)

also sumach, c.1300, preparation of dried, chopped leaves of a plant of the genus Rhus (used in
tanning and dyeing and as an astringent), from Old French sumac (13c.), from Medieval Latin sumach,
from Arabic summaq, from Syrian summaq red. Of the tree itself from 1540s; later applied to a North
American plant species.


choke (v.)

c.1300, transitive, to strangle; late 14c., to make to suffocate, of persons as well as swallowed
objects, a shortening of acheken (c.1200), from Old English aceocian to choke, suffocate (with
intensive a-), probably from root of ceoke jaw, cheek (see cheek (n.)).    Intransitive sense from
c.1400. Meaning gasp for breath is from early 15c. Figurative use from c.1400, in early use often
with reference to weeds stifling the growth of useful plants (a Biblical image). Meaning to fail in
the clutch is attested by 1976, American English. Related: Choked; choking. Choke-cherry (1785)
supposedly so called for its astringent qualities. Johnson also has choke-pear Any aspersion or
sarcasm, by which another person is put to silence. Choked up overcome with emotion and unable to
speak is attested by 1896. The baseball batting sense is by 1907.


taste (v.)

c.1300, to touch, to handle, from Old French taster to taste, sample by mouth; enjoy (13c.), earlier
to feel, touch, pat, stroke (12c., Modern French t&#226;ter), from Vulgar Latin *tastare, apparently
an alteration (perhaps by influence of gustare) of taxtare, a frequentative form of Latin taxare
evaluate, handle (see tax (v.)). Meaning to take a little food or drink is from c.1300; that of to
perceive by sense of taste is recorded from mid-14c. Of substances, to have a certain taste or
flavor, it is attested from 1550s (replaced native smack (v.3) in this sense). For another PIE root
in this sense, see gusto.    The Hindus recognized six principal varieties of taste with sixty-three
possible mixtures ... the Greeks eight .... These included the four that are now regarded as
fundamental, namely 'sweet,' 'bitter,' 'acid,' 'salt.' ... The others were 'pungent' (Gk. drimys,
Skt. katuka-), 'astringent' (Gk. stryphnos, Skt. kasaya-), and, for the Greeks, 'rough, harsh'
(austeros), 'oily, greasy' (liparos), with the occasional addition of 'winy' (oinodes). [Buck]
Sense of to know by experience is from 1520s. Related: Tasted; tasting. Taste buds is from 1879;
also taste goblets.


