asylum (n.)

early 15c., earlier asile (late 14c.), from Latin asylum sanctuary, from Greek asylon refuge, noun
use of neuter of asylos inviolable, safe from violence, especially of persons seeking protection,
from a- without + syle right of seizure. So literally an inviolable place. General sense of safe or
secure place is from 1640s; meaning benevolent institution to shelter some class of persons is from
1776.


bughouse

1902 (n.) insane asylum; 1891 (adj.) insane, from bug (n.) + house (n.); perhaps originally tramps'
slang.


pad (v.2)

to stuff, increase the amount of, 1827, from pad (n.); transferred to expense accounts, etc. from
1913. Related: Padded; padding. Notion of a padded cell in an asylum or prison is from 1862 (padded
room).


bedlam (n.)

scene of mad confusion, 1660s, from colloquial pronunciation of Hospital of Saint Mary of Bethlehem
in London, founded 1247 as a priory, mentioned as a hospital 1330 and as a lunatic hospital 1402;
converted to a state lunatic asylum on dissolution of the monasteries in 1547. It was spelled Bedlem
in a will from 1418, and Betleem is recorded as a spelling of Bethlehem in Judea from 971.


penitentiary (n.)

early 15c., place of punishment for offenses against the church, from Medieval Latin penitentiaria,
from fem. of penitentiarius (adj.) of penance, from Latin paenitentia penitence (see penitence).
Meaning house of correction (originally an asylum for prostitutes) is from 1806, short for
penitentiary house (1776). Slang shortening pen is attested from 1884.


refugee (n.)

1680s, from French refugi&eacute;, noun use of past participle of refugier to take shelter, protect,
from Old French refuge (see refuge). First applied to French Huguenots who migrated after the
revocation (1685) of the Edict of Nantes. The word meant one seeking asylum, till 1914, when it
evolved to mean one fleeing home (first applied in this sense to civilians in Flanders heading west
to escape fighting in World War I). In Australian slang from World War II, reffo.


loony (adj.)

also loonie, looney, 1853, American English, short for lunatic, but also influenced by loon (n.2)
and perhaps loon (n.1), the bird being noted for its wild cry and method of escaping from danger. As
a noun by 1884, from the adjective. Slang loony bin insane asylum is from 1919. Looney left in
reference to holders of political views felt to be left-wing in the extreme is from 1977. Looney
Tunes, Warner Bros. studios' animated cartoon series, dates from 1930.


