August

eighth month, 1097, from Latin Augustus (mensis), sixth month of the later Roman calendar, renamed
from Sextilis in 8 B.C.E. to honor emperor Augustus Caesar, literally Venerable Caesar (see august
(adj.)). In England, the name replaced native Weodmona&eth; weed month.


Augustus

masc. proper name, from Latin augustus venerable (see august). The name originally was a cognomen
applied to Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus as emperor, with a sense something like his majesty.


august (adj.)

1660s, from Latin augustus venerable, majestic, magnificent, noble, probably originally consecrated
by the augurs, with favorable auguries (see augur (n.)); or else that which is increased (see
augment).


Wassermann (n.)

test for syphillis, 1909, from German bacteriorologist August Paul Wassermann (1866-1925), who
devised it in 1906.


autumn (n.)

late 14c., autumpne (modern form from 16c.), from Old French autumpne, automne (13c.), from Latin
autumnus (also auctumnus, perhaps influenced by auctus increase), of unknown origin. Perhaps from
Etruscan, but Tucker suggests a meaning drying-up season and a root in *auq- (which would suggest
the form in -c- was the original) and compares archaic English sere-month August.   Harvest was the
English name for the season until autumn began to displace it 16c. In Britain, the season is
popularly August through October; in U.S., September through November. Compare Italian autunno,
Spanish oto&ntilde;o, Portuguese outono, all from the Latin word. Unlike the other three seasons,
its names across the Indo-European languages leave no evidence that there ever was a common word for
it.    Many autumn words mean end, end of summer, or harvest. Compare also Lithuanian ruduo autumn,
from rudas reddish, in reference to leaves; Old Irish fogamar, literally under-winter.


Roosevelt

the family in America originally bore the name Van Roosevelt, of the field of roses, descriptive of
their estates in Holland. Claes Martenszen Van Rosenvelt, born August 1649, emigrated to New
Amsterdam. His son (1653) and all his descendants dropped the Van. Related: Rooseveltian.


-ane

word-forming element in chemical use, indicating a chain of carbon atoms with no double bonds,
proposed 1866 by German chemist August Wilhelm von Hofmann (1818-1892) to go with -ene, -ine (2),
-one.


formaldehyde (n.)

pungent gas formed by oxidation of methyl alcohol, 1869, a contraction of formic aldehyde; see
formic + aldehyde. Discovered in 1863 by German chemist August Wilhelm von Hofmann (1818-1892).


Triassic (adj.)

1841, from German, coined 1841 by German geologist Friedrich August von Alberti (1795-1878), from
Trias period preceding the Jurassic, from Greek trias triad, the number three (see triad). So called
because it is divisible (in Germany) into three groups.


plagioclase (n.)

triclinic feldspar, 1868, from German, coined 1847 by German mineralogist Johann Friedrich August
Breithaupt (1791-1873) from plagio- + Greek klasis fracture, from stem of klan to break (see
clastic). Related: Plagioclastic.


hecatomb (n.)

1590s, from Greek hekatombe offering of 100 oxen, but generally a great public sacrifice, from
hekaton one hundred (perhaps from hen, neuter of eis one + *katon hundred) + bous ox. The first
month of the Attic calendar (corresponding to July-August) was Hekatombaion, in which sacrifices
were made.


grog (n.)

alcoholic drink diluted with water, 1749, supposedly a reference to Old Grog, nickname of Edward
Vernon (1684-1757), British admiral who wore a grogram (q.v.) cloak and who in August 1740 ordered
his sailors' rum to be diluted. George Washington's older half-brother Lawrence served under Vernon
in the Carribean and renamed the family's Hunting Creek Plantation in Virginia for him in 1740,
calling it Mount Vernon.


Mobius

also Moebius, 1904 in reference to the Mobius strip (earlier Moebius unilateral paper strip, 1899),
named for German mathematician August Ferdinand M&ouml;bius (1790-1868), professor at Leipzig, who
devised it and described it in 1865 (Ã¼ber die Bestimmung des Inhalts eines Polyeders, Nov. 27,
1865).


handwriting (n.)

c.1500, from hand (n.) + writing, translating Latin manuscriptum. Hand in the sense of handwriting,
style of writing is from late 14c.    An ordinary note in his [Horace Greeley's] handwriting is said
to have been used for a long time as a railroad pass, then as a servant's recommendation, and
finally taken to a drug-store as a doctor's prescription. [Frank Leslie's Magazine, August 1884]


Protozoa (n.)

1828, from Modern Latin Protozoa, coined 1818 by German zoologist Georg August Goldfuss (1782-1848)
from Greek protos first (see proto-) + zoia, plural of zoion animal (see zoo). Originally including
sponges and corals; current sense is from 1845. Related: Protozoon (aingular); Protozoan.


Perseid (n.)

meteor from an annual shower that appears to radiate from the constellation Perseus, 1867, from
Modern Latin Perseides (plural), from Greek Perseis daughter of Perseus (see Perseus; also see -id).
The name might have been introduced in English via the writings of Italian astronomer Giovanni
Schiaparelli. Other recorded old names for them in English include August meteors and Tears of St.
Lawrence.


Semite (n.)

1847, a Jew, Arab, Assyrian, or Aramaean (an apparently isolated use from 1797 refers to the Semitic
language group), back-formation from Semitic or else from French S&#233;mite (1845), from Modern
Latin Semita, from Late Latin Sem Shem, one of the three sons of Noah (Gen. x:21-30), regarded as
the ancestor of the Semites (in old Bible-based anthropology), from Hebrew Shem. In modern sense
said to have been first used by German historian August Schl&#246;zer in 1781.


sere (adj.)

Old English sear dried up, withered, barren, from Proto-Germanic *sauzas (cognates: Middle Low
German sor, Dutch zoor), from PIE root *saus- dry (cognates: Sanskrit susyati dries, withers; Old
Persian u&#353;ka- dry (adj.), land (n.); Avestan hu&#353;ka- dry; Latin sudus dry). A good word now
relegated to bad poetry. Related to sear. Sere month was an old name for August.


taupe (n.)

dark brownish-gray color (the color of moleskin), 1906, from French taupe, the color, originally a
mole, Old French, from Latin talpa a mole. The story below lacks evidence appears to be a fanciful
attempt to divert the origin of the color name to something more appealing:    Before the season
advances very far you will find that taupe, pronounced tope, will be the most favored color in the
entire category of shades and blendings. The original word is taken from the German word taube
pronounced tob-a, which is the name for the dove, but the French have twisted the b into a p and
give us taupe. [The Illustrated Milliner, August, 1906]


rinky-dink (adj.)

1913 (from 1912 as a noun), said to be carnival slang and imitative of the sound of banjo music at
parades [Barnhart]; compare ricky-tick old-fashioned jazz (1938). But early records suggest
otherwise unless there are two words. The earliest senses seem to be as a noun, maltreatment,
especially robbery:    So I felt and saw that I was robbed and I went to look after an officer. I
found an officer on the corner of Twenty-fifth street and Sixth avenue. I said, Officer, I have got
the rinky-dink. He knew what it meant all right. He said, Where? Down at that wench house? I said, I
guess that is right. [testimony dated New York August 9, 1899, published 1900]    And this chorus
from the Yale Literary Magazine, Feb. 1896:  Rinky dinky, rinky dink,  Stand him up for another
drink.


orthopraxy (n.)

1840, from ortho- + Greek praxis a doing, action, performance (see praxis).   Errata -- Page 263,
line 9 from bottom, for 'orthodoxy' read orthopraxy. This is a new coin from the mint of Dr.
[Andrew] Wylie [of Bloomington College, Indiana], at least I have not before noticed it. Its
etymology places it in a just contrast with orthodoxy: for if that consecrated word indicates
thinking right, orthopraxy will legitimately import doing right, and hence, as Mr. Wylie says,
orthopraxy in the last dread day will pass the divine ordeal incomparably better than orthodoxy. O!
that a zeal for orthopraxy would transcend the zeal for orthodoxy! [The Millennial Harbinger, vol.
IV, no. VIII, Bethany, Va., August 1840]


tenderfoot (n.)

1866, American English, originally of newcomers to ranching or mining districts, from tender (adj.)
+ foot (n.). The U.S. equivalent of what in Great Britain was generally called a greenhand. As a
level in Boy Scouting, it is recorded from 1908.    Among the Indians, more than half of every
sentence is expressed by signs. And miners illustrate their conversation by the various terms used
in mining. I have always noticed how clearly these terms conveyed the idea sought. Awkwardness in
comprehending this dialect easily reveals that the hearer bears the disgrace of being a pilgrim, or
a tender-foot, as they style the new emigrant. [A Year in Montana, Atlantic Monthly, August 1866]
Tender-footed (adj.) cautious, originally of horses, is recorded from 1680s; of persons from 1854.


tuxedo (n.)

man's evening dress for semiformal occasions, 1889, named for Tuxedo Park, N.Y., a rural resort
development for wealthy New Yorkers and site of a country club where it first was worn, supposedly
in 1886. The name is an attractive subject for elaborate speculation, and connections with
Algonquian words for bear or wolf were proposed. The authoritative Bright, however, says the tribe's
name probably is originally a place name, perhaps Munsee Delaware (Algonquian) p'tuck-sepo crooked
river.    There was a hue and cry raised against the Tuxedo coat upon its first appearance because
it was erroneously considered and widely written of as intended to displace the swallow tail. When
the true import of the tailless dress coat came to be realized it was accepted promptly by swelldom,
and now is widely recognized as one of the staple adjuncts of the jeunesse dor&#233;e. [Clothier and
Furnisher, August, 1889]


calorie (n.)

1866, from French calorie, from Latin calor (genitive caloris) heat, from PIE *kle-os-, suffixed
form of root *kele- (1) warm (cognates: Latin calidus warm, calere be hot; Sanskrit carad- harvest,
literally hot time; Lithuanian silti become warm, silus August; Old Norse hl&aelig;r, Old English
hleow warm).    In scientific use, largely replaced 1950 by the joule. As a unit of energy, defined
as heat required to raise 1 gram of water 1 degree Celsius (the small or gram calorie), but also as
heat required to raise 1 kilogram of water 1 degree Celsius (the large calorie or kilocalorie).


harvest (n.)

Old English h&aelig;rfest autumn, period between August and November, from Proto-Germanic *harbitas
(cognates: Old Saxon hervist, Old Frisian and Dutch herfst, German Herbst autumn, Old Norse haust
harvest), from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (cognates: Sanskrit krpana- sword, krpani
shears; Greek karpos fruit, karpizomai make harvest of; Latin carpere to cut, divide, pluck;
Lithuanian kerpu cut; Middle Irish cerbaim cut).    The borrowing of autumn and the use of fall in a
seasonal sense gradually focused the meaning of harvest to the time of gathering crops (mid-13c.),
then to the action itself and the product of the action (after c.1300). Figurative use by 1530s.
Harvest home (1590s) is the occasion of bringing home the last of the harvest; harvest moon (1706)
is that which is full within a fortnight of the autumnal equinox.


kamikaze (n.)

suicide flier, 1945, Japanese, literally divine wind, from kami god, providence, divine (see kami) +
kaze wind. Originally the name given in folklore to a typhoon which saved Japan from Mongol invasion
by wrecking Kublai Khan's fleet (August 1281). The attacks began in October 1944 off the
Philippines.    As an aside, at war's end, the Japanese had, by actual count, a total of 16,397
aircraft still available for service, including 6,374 operational fighters and bombers, and if they
had used only the fighters and bombers for kamikaze missions, they might have realized,
additionally, 900 ships sunk or damaged and 22,000 sailors killed or injured. In fact, however, the
Japanese had outfitted many aircraft, including trainers, as potential suicide attackers. As
intelligence estimates indicated, the Japanese believed they could inflict at least 50,000
casualties to an invasion force by kamikaze attacks alone. [Richard P. Hallion, Military Technology
and the Pacific War, 1995]    As an adjective by 1946.


jitney (n.)

bus which carries passengers for a fare, 1915, short for jitney bus (1906), American English, from
gitney, said to be slang for any small coin, especially a nickel, because the buses' fare typically
was a nickel, the coin name perhaps via New Orleans from French jeton coin-sized metal disk, slug,
counter, from Old French jeter to calculate, literally to throw (see jet (v.)).    I'll give a
nickel for a kiss,  Said Cholly to a pretty miss.  Skiddo, she cried, you stingy cuss,  You're
looking for a jitney buss.     [Jitney Jingle, 1915]    The origin and signification of the word was
much discussed when the buses first appeared. Some reports say the slang word for nickel comes from
the bus; most say the reverse, but there does not seem to be much record of jitney in a coin sense
before the buses came along (a writer in The Hub, August 1915, claims to have heard and used it as a
small boy in San Francisco, and reported hearsay that It has been in use there since the days of
'49. In some sources it is said to be a St. Louis word, but most credit it to the U.S. West,
especially California, though others trace it to southern negroes, especially in Memphis [The
Pacific, Feb. 7, 1915].


camouflage

1917, noun, verb, and adjective, from French camoufler, Parisian slang, to disguise, from Italian
camuffare to disguise, of uncertain origin, perhaps a contraction of capo muffare to muffle the
head. Probably altered by influence of French camouflet puff of smoke, on the notion of blow smoke
in someone's face. The British navy in World War I called it dazzle-painting.    Since the war
started the POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY has published photographs of big British and French field pieces
covered with shrubbery, railway trains painted out of the landscape, and all kinds of devices to
hide the guns, trains, and the roads from the eyes of enemy aircraft.    Until recently there was no
one word in any language to explain this war trick. Sometimes a whole paragraph was required to
explain this military practice. Hereafter one word, a French word, will save all this needless
writing and reading. Camouflage is the new word, and it means fooling the enemy. [Popular Science
Monthly, August 1917]


katzenjammer (n.)

1849, a hangover, American English colloquial, from German katzen, comb. form of katze cat (see cat
(n.)) + jammer distress, wailing (see yammer). Hence, any unpleasant reaction (1897).    Pleasure
can intoxicate, passion can inebriate, success can make you quite as drunk as champagne. The waking
from these several stages of delights will bring the same result--Katzenjammer. In English you would
call it reaction; but whole pages of English cannot express the sick, empty, weary, vacant feeling
which is so concisely contained within these four German syllables. [Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine,
August 1884]   Katzenjammer Kids spectacularly naughty children is from title of comic strip first
drawn by German-born U.S. comic strip artist Rudolph Dirks (1877-1968) in 1897 for the New York
Journal. It was temporarily de-Germanized during World War I:    THE SHENANIGAN KIDS is the new
American name for the original Katzenjammer Kids. Although the original name and idea were pure
Holland Dutch, some people may have had the mistaken impression that they were of Germanic origin,
and hence the change. It is the same splendid comic as in the past. [International Feature Service
advertisement in Editor &amp; Publisher, July 6, 1918]


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


