awl (n.)

Old English &aelig;l awl, piercer, from Proto-Germanic *&aelig;lo (cognates: Old Norse alr, Dutch
aal, Middle Low German al, Old High German &auml;la, German Ahle), of uncertain origin. Earliest
references are to piercing of the ears, though later it was associated with shoemakers. Through
misdivision, frequently written 15c.-17c. as nawl (for an awl; see N).


bawl (v.)

mid-15c., to howl like a dog, from Old Norse baula to low like a cow, and/or Medieval Latin baulare
to bark like a dog, both echoic. Meaning to shout loudly attested from 1590s. To bawl (someone) out
reprimand loudly is 1908, American English. Related: Bawled; bawling.


brawl (v.)

late 14c., braulen to cry out, scold, quarrel, probably related to Dutch brallen to boast, or from
French brailler to shout noisily, frequentative of braire to bray (see bray (v.)). Meaning quarrel,
wrangle, squabble is from early 15c. Related: Brawled; brawling.


brawl (n.)

mid-15c., from brawl (v.).


crawl (v.)

c.1200, creulen, from a Scandinavian source, perhaps Old Norse krafla to claw (one's way), Danish
kravle, from the same root as crab (n.1). If there was an Old English *craflian, it has not been
recorded. Related: Crawled; crawling.


crawl (n.)

1818, from crawl (v.); in the swimming sense from 1903, the stroke developed by Frederick Cavill,
well-known English swimmer who emigrated to Australia and modified the standard stroke of the day
after observing South Seas islanders. So called because the swimmer's motion in the water resembles
crawling.


drawl (v.)

1590s, perhaps from Middle Dutch dralen, East Frisian draulen to linger, delay, apparently an
intensive of the root of draw (v.). Or else a native formation along the same lines. Related:
Drawled; drawling. As a noun from 1760.


flawless (n.)

1640s, from flaw + -less. Related: Flawlessly; flawlessness.


lawless (adj.)

c.1200, lawelese (see law + -less) Related: Lawlessly; lawlessness.


pawl (n.)

bar preventing a capstan from recoiling (nautical) 1620s, of unknown origin; perhaps from French pal
stake [OED] or &eacute;paule shoulder [Klein].


scrawl (v.)

1610s, write or draw untidily, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Middle English scrawlen spread out
the limbs, sprawl (early 15c.), which possibly is an alteration of sprawlen (see sprawl (v.)) or
crawl (v.). Related: Scrawled; scrawling. The noun is recorded from 1690s, from the verb. Meaning
bad handwriting is from 1710.


shawl (n.)

1660s, originally of a type of scarf worn in Asia, from Urdu and other Indian languages, from
Persian shal, sometimes said to be named for Shaliat, town in India where it was first manufactured
[Klein]. French ch&acirc;le, Spanish chal, Italian scialle, German Shawl (from English), Russian
shal all are ultimately from the same source. As the name of an article of clothing worn by Western
women, it is recorded from 1767.


sprawl (v.)

Old English spreawlian move convulsively, with cognates in the Scandinavian languages (such as
Norwegian sprala, Danish spr&#230;lle) and North Frisian spraweli, probably ultimately from PIE root
*sper- (4) to strew (see sprout (v.)). Meaning to spread out is from c.1300. That of to spread or
stretch in a careless manner is attested from 1540s; of things, from 1745. Related: Sprawled;
sprawling.


sprawl (n.)

1719, from sprawl (v.); meaning straggling expansion of built-up districts into surrounding
countryside is from 1955.


trawl (v.)

1560s, from Dutch tragelen, from Middle Dutch traghelen to drag, from traghel dragnet, probably from
Latin tragula dragnet. Related: Trawled; trawling.


trawler (n.)

1590s, agent noun from trawl.


yawl (n.)

type of ship's boat, 1660s, apparently from Middle Low German jolle or Dutch jol a Jutland boat
(according to a 1708 source), of uncertain origin. Also borrowed into French (yole), Italian (jolo),
Russian (yal).


