balm (n.)

early 13c., basme, aromatic substance made from resins and oils, from Old French basme (Modern
French baume), from Latin balsamum, from Greek balsamon balsam, from Hebrew basam spice, related to
Aramaic busma, Arabic basham balsam, spice, perfume.    Spelling refashioned 15c.-16c. on Latin
model. Sense of healing or soothing influence (1540s) is from aromatic preparations from balsam (see
balsam). Biblical Balm of Gilead, however, began with Coverdale; the Hebrew word there is tsori,
which was rendered in Septuagint and Vulgate as resin (Greek rhetine, Latin resina).


balmy (adj.)

c.1500, delicately fragrant, from balm + -y (2). Figurative use for soothing dates from c.1600; of
breezes, air, etc. mild, fragrant (combining both earlier senses) it is first attested 1704. Meaning
weak-minded, idiotic, 1851, is from London slang.


embalm (v.)

mid-14c., from Middle French embaumer preserve (a corpse) with spices, from en- in (see en- (1)) +
baume balm (see balm) + -er verbal suffix. The -l- inserted in English 1500s in imitation of Latin.
Related: Embalmed; embalming.


balsam (n.)

1570s, aromatic resin used for healing wounds and soothing pains, from Latin balsamum gum of the
balsam tree (see balm). There is an isolated Old English reference from c.1000, and Middle English
used basme, baume, from the French form of the word. As a type of flowering plant of the Impatiens
family, it is attested from 1741.


chrism (n.)

oil mingled with balm, Old English chrisma, from Church Latin chrisma, from Greek khrisma an
unguent, anointing, unction, from khriein to anoint, from PIE root *ghrei- to rub (cognates:
Lithuanian griej&#249; to skim the cream off). Chrisom baptismal robe, is a c.1200 variant of this.
Related: Chrismal; chrismatory.


lip (n.)

Old English lippa, from Proto-Germanic *lepjon (cognates: Old Frisian lippa, Middle Dutch lippe,
Dutch lip, Old High German lefs, German Lefze, Swedish l&auml;pp, Danish l&aelig;be), from PIE *leb-
to lick; lip (source also of Latin labium).    French lippe is from a Germanic source. Transferred
sense of edge or margin of a cup, etc. is from 1590s. Slang sense saucy talk is from 1821, probably
from move the lip (1570s) utter even the slightest word (against someone). To bite (one's) lip show
vexation is from early 14c. Stiff upper lip as a sign of courage is from 1833. Lip gloss is attested
from 1939; lip balm from 1877. Related: Lips.


