base (v.)

to place on a foundation, 1841, from base (n.). Related: Based; basing.


baseline (n.)

also base-line, 1750, originally in surveying, from base (n.) + line (n.). Baseball diamond sense is
from 1867. Baseline estimate in use by 1983.


baseball (n.)

in the modern sense, 1845, American English, from base (n.) + ball (n.1). Earlier references, such
as in Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey, refer to the game of rounders, of which baseball is a more
elaborate variety. Legendarily invented 1839 by Abner Doubleday in Cooperstown, N.Y. Base was used
for start or finish line of a race from 1690s; and the sense of safe spot found in modern children's
game of tag can be traced to 14c. (the sense in baseball is from 1868).


base (adj.)

late 14c., low, of little height, from Old French bas low, lowly, mean, from Late Latin bassus
thick, stumpy, low (used only as a cognomen in classical Latin, humilis being there the usual word
for low in stature or position), possibly from Oscan, or Celtic, or related to Greek basson,
comparative of bathys deep. Figurative sense of low in the moral scale is first attested 1530s in
English, earlier servile (1520s). Base metals (c.1600) were worthless in contrast to noble or
precious metals.


base (n.)

bottom, foundation, pedestal, early 14c., from Old French bas depth (12c.), from Latin basis
foundation, from Greek basis step, pedestal, from bainein to step (see come). The military sense is
from 1860. The chemical sense (1810) was introduced in French 1754 by French chemist Guillaume-
Fran&ccedil;ois Rouelle (1703-1770). Sporting sense of starting point ia from 1690s, also
destination of a runner (1812). As a safe spot in a tag-like game, suggested from mid-15c. (as the
name of the game later called prisoner's base).


basement (n.)

lowest story of a building except the cellar, 1730, from base (n.) + -ment.


baseness (n.)

1550s, from base (adj.) + -ness.


baseboard (n.)

1854, from base (n.) + board (n.1).


baseless (adj.)

c.1600, from base (n.) + -less. Related: Baselessly; baselessness.


off-base (adv.)

unawares, 1936, American English, from off (adv.) + base (n.); a figurative extension from baseball
sense of not in the right position (1898), from notion of a baserunner being picked off while taking
a lead.


basal (adj.)

relating to a base, 1828, from base (n.) + -al (1).


single (v.)

to separate from the herd (originally in deer-hunting, often with forth or out), 1570s, from single
(adj.). Baseball sense of to make a one-base hit is from 1899 (from the noun meaning one-base hit,
attested from 1858). Related: Singled; singling.


debase (v.)

1560s, from de- down + base (adj.) low, on analogy of abase (or, alternatively, from obsolete verb
base to abuse).


data base (n.)

also database, attested from 1962, from data + base (n.).


vilify (v.)

mid-15c., to lower in worth or value, from Late Latin vilificare to make cheap or base; to esteem of
little value, from Latin vilis cheap, base (see vile) + root of facere to make (see factitious).
Meaning to slander, speak evil of is first recorded 1590s. Related: Vilified, vilifying.


Tucson

city in Arizona, U.S.A., from Spanish Tucson, from O'odham (Piman) cukson black base, from cuk black
+ son base.


pedestal (n.)

1560s, base supporting a column, statue, etc., from Middle French pi&eacute;destal (1540s), from
Italian piedistallo base of a pillar, from pie foot + di of + stallo stall, place, seat, from a
Germanic source (see stall (n.1)).    Spelling in English influenced by Latin pedem foot.  An Old
English word for it was fotstan, literally foot-stone. Figurative sense of put (someone) on a
pedestal regard as highly admirable is attested from 1859.


torus (n.)

1560s, in architecture, large, rounded molding at the base of a column, from Latin torus a swelling,
bulge, knot; cushion, couch.


al Qaida

also Al-Qaeda; name of a loosely structured jihadist movement founded c.1989 by Osama bin Laden;
from Arabic, literally the base. A common Arabic term among Muslim radicals from the wider Islamic
world who came to Afghanistan in 1980s and fought alongside local rebels against the Soviets, and
who regarded themselves and their struggle not merely in Afghan terms but as the base or foundation
of a wider jihad and revival in Islam. Used by Bin Laden's mentor, Abdallah Azzam (1941-1989), who
referred to the vanguard which constitutes the strong foundation [al-qaida al-sulbah] for the
expected society. In U.S., the term first turns up in a CIA report in 1996.    Every Muslim, from
the moment they realise the distinction in their hearts, hates Americans, hates Jews, and hates
Christians. This is a part of our belief and our religion. For as long as I can remember, I have
felt tormented and at war, and have felt hatred and animosity for Americans. [Osama bin Laden,
interview aired on Al-Jazeera, December 1998]


steal (n.)

1825, act or case of theft, from steal (v.). Meaning a bargain is attested by 1942, American English
colloquial. Baseball sense of a stolen base is from 1867.


phenyl (n.)

radical base of phenol, 1850, from French ph&#233;nyle; see pheno-.


sacro-

word-forming element meaning of or involving the sacrum, the bone at the base of the spine. E.g.
sacro-iliac.


selah

1520s, Hebrew word occurring frequently at the end of verse in Psalter. Supposed to be a liturgical
direction, perhaps meaning pause, or perhaps a musical direction to raise the voice (compare Hebrew
base s-l-l to raise, lift).


hyperbola (n.)

1660s, from Latinized form of Greek hyperbole extravagance, literally a throwing beyond (see
hyperbole). Perhaps so called because the inclination of the plane to the base of the cone exceeds
that of the side of the cone.


basic (adj.)

1832, originally in chemistry, from base (n.) + -ic.


adenine (n.)

crystaline base, 1885, coined by German physiologist/chemist Albrecht Kossel (1853-1927) from Greek
aden gland (see inguinal) + chemical suffix -ine (2). So called because it was derived from the
pancreas of an ox.


Jethro

masc. proper name, biblical father-in-law of Moses, from Hebrew Yithro, collateral form of Yether,
literally abundance, from base y-t-r to be left over, to remain.


saliva (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French salive, from Latin saliva spittle, of unknown origin (perhaps, as
Tucker suggests, somehow derived from the base of sallow (adj.)).


thymine (n.)

nitrogenous base, 1894, from German (Kossel and Neumann, 1893), from thymic acid, from which it was
isolated, the acid so called because obtained from the thymus gland. With chemical suffix -ine (2).


nape (n.)

back of the neck, c.1300, of unknown origin, perhaps from Old French hanap a goblet, in reference to
the hollow at the base of the skull. The entire absence of forms with initial k makes it difficult
to connect the word with the apparently synonymous OFris (hals) knap [OED].


Eden (n.)

early 13c., delightful place, figurative use of the place described in Genesis, usually referred to
Hebrew edhen pleasure, delight, but perhaps from Ugaritic base 'dn and meaning a place that is well-
watered throughout (see also Aden).


Libra (n.)

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin libra, literally pound, balance, from
Mediterranean base *lithra- a scale. Nativized in Old Norse as skala-merki.


Cohen

Jewish surname indicating priestly descent, from Hebrew kohen priest, from base of kihen he acted as
priest, related to Arabic kahana he divined, prophesied.


bract (n.)

in botany, small leaf at the base of a flower, Modern Latin, from Latin bractea, literally thin
metal plate, of unknown origin. Related: Bracteal; bracteate.


mitzvah (n.)

Jewish rabbinical commandment, 1640s, from Hebrew mitzwah commandment, precept, from base of tziwwah
he commanded, related to Arabic wasa he bound, united.


Attic (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to Attica, from Latin Atticus, from Greek Attikos Athenian, of Attica, the region
around Athens (see Attica). Attested from 1560s as an architectural term for a type of column base.


pander (v.)

to indulge (another), to minister to base passions, c.1600, from pander (n.). Related: Pandered;
pandering.


slovenly (adj.)

1510s, low, base, lewd, later untidy, dirty (1560s), from sloven + -ly (1). Related: Slovenliness;
also in this sense was slovenry (1540s), which OED reports in common use early 17c.


-tion

syllable formed when the word-forming element -ion (from Latin -io) is fixed to a base or to another
suffix ending in -t or -te.


Adonis (n.)

a beau, 1620s, from Greek Adonis, name of the youth beloved by Aphrodite, from Phoenician adon lord,
probably originally ruler, from base a-d-n to judge, rule. Adonai is the Hebrew cognate.


banausic (adj.)

merely mechanical, coined 1845 from Greek banausikos pertaining to mechanics, from banausos artisan,
mere mechanical, hence (to the Greeks) base, ignoble; perhaps literally working by fire, from baunos
furnace, forge (but Klein dismisses this as folk etymology and calls it of uncertain origin).


uracil (n.)

pyramidine base, coined in German, 1885, perhaps from urea + German Acets&auml;ure acetic acid (or
possibly acrylic) + chemical suffix -il.


villainous (adj.)

c.1300, offensive, abusive, from Old French vileneus worthless, base, from vilain (see villain).
Sense of despicable, shameful, morally corrupt is from c.1400 in English. Related: Villainously;
villainousness.


coco (n.)

palm tree, mid-16c., from Spanish and Portuguese coco grinning face, on resemblance of the three
holes at the base of the shell to a human face. The earlier word for it was the Latinized form
cocus, which sometimes was anglicized as cocos.


thymus (n.)

gland near the base of the neck, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Greek thymos a warty excrescence, used of
the gland by Galen, literally thyme, probably so called because of a fancied resemblance to a bud of
thyme (see thyme). Related: Thymic.


Malcolm

masc. proper name, from Old Irish M&#225;el Coluim servant of (St.) Columba, from m&#225;el servant,
etymologically bald, shorn, hornless, from PIE base *mai- to cut (see maim).


sheik (n.)

head of an Arab family, also head of a Muslim religious order, 1570s, from Arabic shaykh chief,
literally old man, from base of shakha to grow old. Popularized by The Sheik, novel in Arabian
setting by E.M. Hull (1919), and the movie version, The Sheikh, 1921, starring Rudolph Valentino,
which gave it a 1920s sense of strong, romantic lover.


Malachi

masc. proper name, Old Testament name of the last in order of the Twelve Prophets, from Hebrew
Mal'akhi, literally my messenger, from mal'akh messenger, from Semitic base l-'-k (compare Arabic
la'aka he sent).


nabob (n.)

1610s, deputy governor in Mogul Empire, Anglo-Indian, from Hindi nabab, from Arabic nuwwab,
honorific plural of na'ib viceroy, deputy, from base n-w-b to take someone's place. Also used of
Europeans who came home from India having made a fortune there, hence very rich man (1764).


Luxembourg

European state, from Germanic lutilla little + burg fort, castle. Related: Luxembourgeois;
Luxembourger. Hence also lushburg (mid-14c.), Middle English word for a base coin made in imitation
of the sterling or silver penny and imported from Luxemburg in the reign of Edward III [OED].


