besiege (v.)

c.1300, from be- + siege. Related: Besieged; besieging.


obsess (v.)

c.1500, to besiege, from Latin obsessus, past participle of obsidere watch closely; besiege, occupy;
stay, remain, abide literally sit opposite to, from ob against (see ob-) + sedere sit (see
sedentary). Of evil spirits, to haunt, from 1530s. Psychological sense is 20c. Related: Obsessed;
obsessing.


beleaguer (v.)

1580s, from Dutch or Low German belegeren to besiege, from be- around (see be-) + legeren to camp,
from leger bed, camp, army, lair, from Proto-Germanic *leg-raz-, from PIE *legh-to- lie (see lie
(v.2)). A word from the Flemish Wars (cognates: Swedish bel&auml;gra, Dutch belegeren besiege,
German Belagerung siege). Spelling influenced by league. Related: Beleaguered; beleaguering.


obsession (n.)

1510s, action of besieging, from French obsession and directly from Latin obsessionem (nominative
obsessio) siege, blockade, a blocking up, noun of action from past participle stem of obsidere to
besiege (see obsess). Later (c.1600), hostile action of an evil spirit (like possession but without
the spirit actually inhabiting the body). Transferred sense of action of anything which engrosses
the mind is from 1670s. Psychological sense is from 1901.


beset (v.)

Old English besettan to put, place; own, keep; occupy, settle; cover, surround with, besiege, from
Proto-Germanic *bisatjan (cognates: Old Saxon bisettjan, Dutch bezetten, Old High German bisezzan,
German besetzen, Gothic bisatjan); see be- + set (v.). The figurative sense also was in Old English.
Related: Beset (past tense); besetting.


invest (v.)

late 14c., to clothe in the official robes of an office, from Latin investire to clothe in, cover,
surround, from in in, into (see in- (2)) + vestire to dress, clothe (see wear (v.)). The meaning use
money to produce profit first attested 1610s in connection with the East Indies trade, and is
probably a borrowing of Italian investire (13c.) from the same Latin root, via the notion of giving
one's capital a new form. The military meaning to besiege is from c.1600. Related: Invested;
investing.


sit (v.)

Old English sittan to occupy a seat, be seated, sit down, seat oneself; remain, continue; settle,
encamp, occupy; lie in wait; besiege (class V strong verb; past tense s&aelig;t, past participle
seten), from Proto-Germanic *setjan (cognates: Old Saxon sittian, Old Norse sitja, Danish sidde, Old
Frisian sitta, Middle Dutch sitten, Dutch zitten, Old High German sizzan, German sitzen, Gothic
sitan), from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    With past tense sat, formerly also set,
now restricted to dialect, and sate, now archaic; and past participle sat, formerly sitten. In
reference to a legislative assembly, from 1510s. Meaning to baby-sit is recorded from 1966.    To
sit back be inactive is from 1943. To sit on one's hands was originally to withhold applause (1926);
later, to do nothing (1959). To sit around be idle, do nothing is 1915, American English. To sit out
not take part is from 1650s. Sitting pretty is from 1916.


