bid (v.)

probably a merger of two old words: The sense in bid farewell is from Old English biddan to ask,
entreat, pray, beseech; order; beg (class V strong verb, past tense b&aelig;d, past participle
beden), from Proto-Germanic *bidjan to pray, entreat (source also of German bitten to ask, attested
from 8c.), which, according to Kluge and Watkins is from a PIE root *gwhedh- to ask, pray (see bead
(n.)).    To bid at an auction, meanwhile, is from Old English beodan offer, proclaim (class II
strong verb; past tense bead, past participle boden), from Proto-Germanic *beudan to stretch out,
reach out, offer, present, (source also of German bieten to offer), from PIE root *bheudh- to be
aware, make aware (cognates: Sanskrit bodhati is awake, is watchful, observes, buddhah awakened,
enlightened; Old Church Slavonic bljudo to observe; Lithuanian budeti to be awake; Old Irish buide
contentment, thanks). As a noun, 1788, from the verb.


bidden

past participle of bid and bide.


biddy (n.)

old woman, 1785; meaning Irish maid-servant (1861) is American English; both from Biddy, pet form of
common Irish proper name Bridget.


bide (v.)

Old English bidan to stay, continue, live, remain, also to trust, rely (cognate with Old Norse
bi&eth;a, Old Saxon bidan, Old Frisian bidia, Middle Dutch biden, Old High German bitan, Gothic
beidan to wait), apparently from PIE *bheidh-, an extended stem of one root of Old English biddan
(see bid (v.)), the original sense of which was to command, and to trust (compare Greek peithein to
persuade, pistis faith; Latin fidere to trust, foedus compact, treaty, Old Church Slavonic beda
need). Perhaps the sense evolved in prehistoric times through endure, and endure a wait, to to wait.
Preserved in Scotland and northern England, replaced elsewhere by abide in all senses except to bide
one's time. Related: Bided; biding.


bidet (n.)

1620s, small horse, from French bidet (16c.), of unknown etymology. Originally in French a small
horse, a pony, thus a vessel on a low narrow stand, which can be bestridden for bathing purposes, a
sense attested in English from 1766.


bidirectional (adj.)

also bi-directional, 1941, from bi- + direction + -al (1). Originally of microphones. Related:
Bidirectionally.


abidance (n.)

1640s, from abide + -ance.


abide (v.)

Old English abidan, gebidan remain, wait, delay, remain behind, from ge- completive prefix (denoting
onward motion; see a- (1)) + bidan bide, remain, wait, dwell (see bide). Originally intransitive
(with genitive of the object: we abidon his we waited for him); transitive sense emerged in Middle
English. Meaning to put up with (now usually negative) first recorded 1520s. Related: Abided;
abiding. The historical conjugation is abide, abode, abidden, but the modern formation is now
generally weak.


abiding (adj.)

late 14c., enduring, present participle adjective from abide (v.).


ambidexterity (n.)

1650s, from obsolete adjective ambidexter two-sided, using both hands with equal facility, also
double-dealing, from Medieval Latin ambidexter (see ambidextrous) + -ity.


ambidextrous (adj.)

1640s, with -ous, from ambidexter (adj.) double-dealing (1610s), from French ambidextre or directly
from Latin ambidexter, literally right-handed on both sides, from ambi- both (see ambi-) + dexter
right-handed (see dexterity). Its opposite, ambilevous left-handed on both sides, clumsy (1640s) is
rare. Ambidexter as a noun, one who takes bribes from both sides, is attested from 1530s and is the
earliest form of the word in English; its sense of one who uses both hands equally well appears by
1590s.


carbide (n.)

compound formed by combination of carbon and another element, 1848, from carb-, comb. form of carbon
+ chemical suffix -ide. The earlier word was carburet.


comorbidity (n.)

1985, from co- along with + morbidity diseased condition. Comorbid (adj.) is a 1990 back-formation.


forbid (v.)

Old English forbeodan forbid, prohibit, from for- against + beodan to command (see bid). Common
Germanic compound (cognates: Dutch verbieden, Old High German farbiotan, German verbieten, Old Norse
fyrirbjo&eth;a, Gothic faurbiudan to forbid). Related: Forbade; forbidden.


forbidding (adj.)

uninviting, 1712, present participle adjective from forbid. Related: Forbiddingly; forbiddingness.


ibid.

also ibid, 1660s, abbreviation of Latin ibidem in the same place, from ibi there, pronomial adverb
of place, + demonstrative suffix -dem.


law-abiding (adj.)

1839, from law + abiding.


libidinal (adj.)

1922, in psychology jargon, from libido (Latin genitive libidinis) + -al (1).


libidinous (adj.)

lustful, mid-15c., Old French libidineus (13c., Modern French libidineux), from Latin libidinosus
full of desire, lustful, from libido pleasure, desire, sensual passion, lust (see libido). Related:
Libidinously; libidinousness.


libido (n.)

psychic drive or energy, usually associated with sexual instinct, 1892, carried over untranslated in
English edition of Krafft-Ebing's Psychopathia Sexualis; and used in 1909 in A.A. Brill's
translation of Freud's Selected Papers on Hysteria (Freud's use of the term led to its popularity);
from Latin libido desire, lust, from libere to be pleasing, to please, ultimately cognate with Old
English lufu (see love (n.)).


morbid (adj.)

1650s, of the nature of a disease, indicative of a disease, from Latin morbidus diseased, from
morbus sickness, disease, ailment, illness, from root of mori to die, which is possibly from PIE
root *mer- to rub, pound, wear away (cognates: Sanskrit mrnati crushes, bruises; Greek marainein to
consume, exhaust, put out, quench, marasmus consumption). Transferred use, of mental states, is from
1777. Related: Morbidly; morbidness.


morbidity (n.)

1721, from morbid + -ity.


out-bid (v.)

1580s, from out (adv.) + bid (v.). Related: Out-bidding; out-bidden.


premorbid (adj.)

also pre-morbid, 1905, from pre- + morbid.


rabid (adj.)

1610s, furious, raving, from Latin rabidus raging, furious, enraged; inspired; ungoverned; rabid,
from rabere be mad, rave (see rage (v.)). Meaning made mad by rabies in English first recorded 1804.
Related: Rabidly; rabidness.


rabidity (n.)

1831, from rabid + -ity.


turbid (adj.)

1620s, from Latin turbidus muddy, full of confusion, from turbare to confuse, bewilder, from turba
turmoil, crowd, probably from Greek tyrbe turmoil, tumult, disorder, from PIE *(s)twer- (1) to turn,
whirl (see storm (n.)). Related: Turbidly; turbidness.


turbidity (n.)

1782, from Medieval Latin turbiditas, from Latin turbidus (see turbid). Turbidity current is from
1939.


unbidden (adj.)

Old English unbedene, not asked or invited, from un- (1) not + bidden. Similar formation in Middle
Dutch ongebeden, German ungebeten, Old Norse ube&eth;inn.


underbid (v.)

1610s, from under + bid (v.). Related: Underbidding.


