biennial (adj.)

lasting for two years (1620s); occurring every two years (1750), from Latin biennium two-year
period, from bi- (see bi-) + annus year (see annual). The vowel change is due to the Latin phonetic
law according to which the unaccented and closed radical syllable of the second element of
compounds, original -&#259;- becomes -&#277;- [Klein]. The noun meaning a biennial plant is attested
by 1770.


undecennial (adj.)

occurring every 11 years, 1858, in reference to solar activity cycle, from Latin undecim eleven +
ending from biennial, etc.


centennial (adj.)

1789, from Latin centum one hundred (see hundred) + ending from biennial. As a noun, hundredth
anniversary celebration, from 1876; the older noun is centenary.


quadrennial (adj.)

1650s, lasting four years; as happening once every four years, 1701; from quadri- + ending from
biennial, etc. Correct formation would be quadriennial (compare Latin quadriennium period of four
years). As a noun from 1640s. Related: Quadrennially.


quinquennial (adj.)

late 15c., lasting five years, from Latin quinquennis of five years, celebrated every fifth year,
from quinque- five (see quinque-) + ending from biennial, etc. Meaning happening once every five
years attested from c.1600. As a noun from 1895; earlier quinquennal (1610s).


salsify (n.)

biennial plant, 1710, from French salsifis, earlier sercifi, sassify (16c.), probably from Italian
erba salsifica, from Old Italian salsifica, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Latin sal salt +
fricare to rub.


decennial (adj.)

1680s, from Latin decennium, from decennis of 10 years, from decem ten (see ten) + annus year (see
annual). For vowel change, see biennial.


biennium (n.)

space of two years, by 1851, from Latin biennium two years, a period of two years, from bi- + annus
year (see annual). For vowel change, see biennial.


precentor (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin praecentor a leader in singing, from Latin praecantare to sing before, from
prae before (see pre-) + canere to sing (see chant (v.)). For change of vowel, see biennial.


perennial (adj.)

1640s, evergreen, formed in English from Latin perennis lasting through the year (or years), from
per- through (see per) + annus year (see annual). Botanical sense of Remaining alive through a
number of years is attested from 1670s; figurative meaning of enduring, permanent is from 1750.
Related: Perennially. For vowel change, see biennial. The noun meaning a perennial plant is from
1763.


triennial (adj.)

1630s, lasting three years; 1640s, occurring every three years, with -al (1) + Latin triennium
three-year period, from tri- three (see tri-) + annus year (see annual). For vowel change, see
biennial. As a noun, 1630s. Related: Triennially.


precept (n.)

late 14c., from Old French percept, percet (12c.), from Latin praeceptum maxim, rule of conduct,
order, noun use of neuter past participle of praecipere give rules to, order, advise, literally take
beforehand, from prae before (see pre-) + capere (past participle captus) to take (see capable). For
change of vowel, see biennial.


millennium (n.)

1630s, from Modern Latin millennium, from Latin mille thousand (see million) + annus year (see
annual); formed on analogy of biennium, triennium, etc. For vowel change, see biennial. First in
English in sense of 1,000-year period of Christ's anticipated rule on Earth (Rev. xx:1-5). Sense of
any 1,000-year period first recorded 1711. Meaning the year 2000 attested from 1970.


