biologist (n.)

1813, from biology + -ist. Earliest use is in reference to human life. In modern scientific sense,
by 1874.


genetics (n.)

1872, laws of origination; see genetic + -ics. A coinage of English biologist William Bateson
(1861-1926). Meaning study of heredity is from 1891.


Mendelism (n.)

1903, in reference to the work of Gregor Johann Mendel (1822-1884), Austrian biologist who
enunciated the laws of heredity. Related: Mendelian.


conurbation (n.)

1915, from Latin com- with, together (see com-) + urbs city + -ation. Coined by Scottish biologist
and urban planner Patrick Geddes (1854-1932) in Cities in Evolution.


bionomics (n.)

science of organic evolution; ecology, 1888, coined by Scottish biologist Patrick Geddes (1854-1932)
from Greek bio- (see bio-) + nomos managing, from nemein manage (see numismatic).


phylogeny (n.)

genesis and evolution of a phylum, 1869, from German Phylogenie, coined 1866 by German biologist
Ernst Heinrich Haeckel (1834-1919) from Greek phylon race (see phylo-) + -geneia origin, from -genes
born (see genus). Related: Phylogenic.


biogenesis (n.)

also bio-genesis, 1870, theory that living organisms arise only from pre-existing living matter,
coined by English biologist T.H. Huxley (1825-1895) from Greek bios life (see bio-) + genesis
(q.v.). Related: Biogenetic; biogenetical.


arachnid (n.)

a spider, 1869, from French arachnide (1806) or Modern Latin Arachnida, introduced as name for this
class of arthropods 1815 by French biologist Jean Baptiste Pierre Antoine de Monet de Lamarck
(1744-1829), from Greek arakhne (fem.) spider; spider's web, which probably is cognate with Latin
aranea spider, spider's web (borrowed in Old English as renge spider), from aracsna. The Latin word
could be a Greek borrowing or both could be from a common root. An earlier noun form was arachnidian
(1828).


meme (n.)

1976, introduced by evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins in The Selfish Gene, coined by him from
Greek sources, such as mimeisthai to imitate (see mime), and intended to echo gene.    We need a
name for the new replicator, a noun that conveys the idea of a unit of cultural transmission, or a
unit of imitation. 'Mimeme' comes from a suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds
a bit like 'gene'. I hope my classicist friends will forgive me if I abbreviate mimeme to meme. If
it is any consolation, it could alternatively be thought of as being related to 'memory', or to the
French word m&#234;me. It should be pronounced to rhyme with 'cream'. [Richard Dawkins, The Selfish
Gene, 1976]


vampire (n.)

spectral being in a human body who maintains semblance of life by leaving the grave at night to suck
the warm blood of the living as they sleep, 1734, from French vampire (18c.) or German Vampir (1732,
in an account of Hungarian vampires), from Hungarian vampir, from Old Church Slavonic opiri
(cognates: Serbian vampir, Bulgarian vapir, Ukrainian uper), said by Slavic linguist Franc
Miklo&#353;i&#269; to be ultimtely from Kazan Tatar ubyr witch, but Max Vasmer, an expert in this
linguistic area, finds that phonetically doubtful. An Eastern European creature popularized in
English by late 19c. gothic novels, however there are scattered English accounts of night-walking,
blood-gorged, plague-spreading undead corpses from as far back as 1196. Figurative sense of person
who preys on others is from 1741. Applied 1774 by French biologist Buffon to a species of South
American blood-sucking bat. Related: Vampiric.


