biology (n.)

1819, from Greek bios life (see bio-) + -logy. Suggested 1802 by German naturalist Gottfried
Reinhold Treviranus (1776-1837), and introduced as a scientific term that year in French by Lamarck.


capsid (adj.)

1889 in biology, pertaining to capsidae, a type of insect, from Latin capsa box (see case (n.2)).


arrested (adj.)

1610s, past participle adjective from arrest (v.). Arrested development is first recorded 1859 in
evolutionary biology.


monotype (n.)

1881 in biology; 1882 in printers' arts; 1893 as a brand name of typesetting machine; see mono- +
type.


biologist (n.)

1813, from biology + -ist. Earliest use is in reference to human life. In modern scientific sense,
by 1874.


asexual (adj.)

1830, as a term in biology, a hybrid from a- (2) not + sexual. In general contexts, attested from
1896.


somatization (n.)

1909 in biology (Rignano); 1920 in psychology; from somato-  body + -ization.


reticulum (n.)

1650s, second stomach of a ruminant (so called from the folds of the membrane), from Latin reticulum
a little net (see reticulate (adj.)). The word was later given various uses in biology, cytology,
histology, etc., and made a southern constellation by La Caille (1763).


vestigial (adj.)

1850, like a mere trace of what has been, originally in biology, from vestige + -al (1).


proliferate (v.)

1857 as a term in biology; see proliferation. General sense from 1961. Related: Proliferated;
proliferating.


optimal (adj.)

most favorable, 1890, from Latin optimus (see optimum). Originally a word in biology. Related:
Optimally.


sociobiology (n.)

study of the biological basis of social behavior, 1946, from socio- + biology. Related:
Sociobiological.


morphogenesis (n.)

1863 in biology; 1958 in geology; from morpho- + genesis. Related: Morphogenetic.


microbiology (n.)

1880, coined in English from micro- + biology. Related: Microbiological.


mutualism (n.)

1849, in reference to the doctrine of French anarchist/socialist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809-1865),
from French mutuellisme. In biology, from 1876, from mutual + -ism.


biometrics (n.)

application of mathematics to biology, 1902, from biometric (also see -ics); slightly earlier in
this sense was biometry (1901), which was coined by Whewell and used by him and others with a sense
of calculation of life expectancy (1831).


cross-over (n.)

also crossover, 1795, as a noun, a term in textiles, from cross (v.) + over (adv.). From 1884 in
railroading; from 1912 in biology. As a general adjective from 1893; specifically of musicians and
genres from 1971.


synapsis (n.)

plural synapses, 1895 in cellular biology, Modern Latin, from Greek synapsis connection, junction
(see synapse).


morph

as a noun, in biology, 1955; as a verb, in cinematic special effects, c.1987, short for
metamorphosis. Related: Morphed; morphing. Earlier it was a slang shortening of morphine (1912).


devolution (n.)

1540s; see de- + evolution. Used in various legal and figurative senses; in biology, as the opposite
of evolution, it is attested from 1882.


systemic (adj.)

1803, irregularly formed from system + -ic; used in medicine and biology for differentiation of
meaning from systematic. Related: Systemically.


-aceous

word-forming element denoting belonging to, of the nature of, from Latin -aceus, enlarged form of
adjectival suffix -ax (genitive -acis); see -acea. Especially in biology, pertaining to X order of
plants or animals.


bioethics (n.)

also bio-ethics, coined 1970 by U.S. biochemist Van Rensselaer Potter II (1911-2001), who defined it
as Biology combined with diverse humanistic knowledge forging a science that sets a system of
medical and environmental priorities for acceptable survival. From bio- + ethics.


symbiotic (adj.)

1882, in biology, from stem of symbiosis + -ic. Of human activities from 1951. Related: Symbiotical;
symbiotically.


cirrous (adj.)

1650s in biology; 1815 in meteorology, from Latin cirrus (see cirrus) + -ous.


sematic (adj.)

significant, indicative, 1890, from Greek semat-, comb. form of sema  (genitive sematos) sign (see
semantic) + -ic. Used especially in biology, in reference to warning colors, etc.


biological (adj.)

1840, from biology + -ical. Biological clock attested from 1955; not especially of human
reproductive urges until c.1991. Related: Biologically.


syncytial (adj.)

1895, pertaining to a syncytium (1877), Modern Latin, from Greek syn together (see syn-) + kytos
receptacle, vessel, used in biology for cell (see cyto-).


-plasia

word-forming element in biology and medicine denoting formation, growth, development, from Modern
Latin -plasia, from Greek plasis molding, formation, from plassein to mold (see plasma).


astrobiology (n.)

1903, from French astrobiologie; see astro- + biology. Related: Astrobiological; astrobiologist.


suborder (n.)

also sub-order, 1807 in biology; 1834 in architecture, from sub- + order (n.). Related: Subordinal.


dyad (n.)

1670s, from Latin dyad-, stem of dyas, from Greek dyas the number two, a group of two, from duo two
(see two). Specific sense in chemistry (a bivalent element) is by 1865; also used in biology,
poetics, mathematics. Related: Dyadic.


molecular (adj.)

1823, from molecule + -ar or else from French mol&#233;culaire or Modern Latin molecularis.
Molecular biology first attested 1950.


optimum (n.)

1879, from Latin optimum, neuter singular of optimus best (used as a superlative of bonus good),
probably related to ops power, resources (in which case the evolution is from richest to the most
esteemed, thus from PIE root *op- to work) or to ob in front of, with superlative suffix *-tumos.
Originally in biology, in reference to conditions most favorable (for growth, etc.). As an adjective
from 1885.


morphology (n.)

1824 in biology (from German Morphologie, 1817); 1869 in philology; from morpho- + -logy. Related:
Morphological; morphologist. Related: Morphologist.


anencephalic (adj.)

having no brain (biology), 1839, from Greek anenkephalos, from privative prefix an- (see an- (1)) +
enkephalos brain (see encephalitis) + -ic.


cloaca (n.)

1650s, euphemism for underground sewer, from Latin cloaca public sewer, drain, from cluere to
cleanse, from PIE root *kleue- to wash, clean (cognates: Greek klyzein to dash over, wash off, rinse
out, klysma liquid used in a washing; Lithuanian &#353;luoju to sweep; Old English hlutor, Gothic
hlutrs, Old High German hlutar, German lauter pure, clear). Use in biology, in reference to
eliminatory systems of lower animals, is from 1834. Related: Cloacal (1650s); cloacinal (1857).


evolution (n.)

1620s, an opening of what was rolled up, from Latin evolutionem (nominative evolutio) unrolling (of
a book), noun of action from evolvere (see evolve).    Used in medicine, mathematics, and general
writing in various senses including growth to maturity and development of an individual living thing
(1660s). Modern use in biology, of species, first attested 1832 in works of Scottish geologist
Charles Lyell. Charles Darwin used the word only once, in the closing paragraph of The Origin of
Species (1859), and preferred descent with modification, in part because evolution already had been
used in the 18c. homunculus theory of embryological development (first proposed under this name by
Bonnet, 1762) and in part because it carried a sense of progress not found in Darwin's idea. But
Victorian belief in progress prevailed (along with brevity), and Herbert Spencer and other
biologists popularized evolution.


mass (n.1)

lump, quantity, size, late 14c., from Old French masse lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot,
bar (11c.), and directly from Latin massa kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like
dough, probably from Greek maza barley cake, lump, mass, ball, related to massein to knead, from PIE
root *mag- to knead (source of Lithuanian minkyti to knead, see macerate). Sense extended in English
1580s to a large quantity, amount, or number. Strict sense in physics is from 1704.    As an
adjective from 1733, first attested in mass meeting in American English. mass culture is from 1916
in sociology (earlier in biology); mass hysteria is from 1914; mass media is from 1923; mass
movement is from 1897; mass production is from 1920; mass grave is from 1918; mass murder from 1880.


cell (n.)

early 12c., small monastery, subordinate monastery (from Medieval Latin in this sense), later small
room for a monk or a nun in a monastic establishment; a hermit's dwelling (c.1300), from Latin cella
small room, store room, hut, related to Latin celare to hide, conceal.    The Latin word represents
PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (cognates: Sanskrit cala hut, house, hall; Greek kalia hut,
nest, kalyptein to cover, koleon sheath, kelyphos shell, husk; Latin clam secret; Old Irish cuile
cellar, celim hide, Middle Irish cul defense, shelter; Gothic hulistr covering, Old English heolstor
lurking-hole, cave, covering, Gothic huljan cover over, hulundi hole, hilms helmet, halja hell, Old
English hol cave, holu husk, pod).    Sense of monastic rooms extended to prison rooms (1722). Used
in 14c., figuratively, of brain compartments; used in biology by 17c. of various cavities (wood
structure, segments of fruit, bee combs), gradually focusing to the modern sense of basic structure
of living organisms (which OED dates to 1845).    Electric battery sense is from 1828, based on
original form. Meaning small group of people working within a larger organization is from 1925. Cell
body is from 1851; cell division from 1846; cell membrane from 1837 (but cellular membrane is 1732);
cell wall from 1842.


