blues (n.)

as a music form featuring flatted thirds and sevenths, possibly c.1895 (though officially 1912, in
W.C. Handy's Memphis Blues); meaning depression, low spirits goes back to 1741, from adjectival blue
low-spirited, late 14c.


bluesy (adj.)

1946, from blues + -y (2).


boogie (v.)

originally dance to boogie music, a late 1960s style of rock music based on blues chords, from
earlier boogie, a style of blues (1941, also as a verb), short for boogie-woogie (1928), a
reduplication of boogie (1917), which meant rent party in American English slang. A song title, That
Syncopated Boogie-boo, appears in a copyright listing from 1912.


mulligrubs (n.)

fit of the blues, also colic, 1590s, mulliegrums, fanciful formation.


coochie (n.)

vagina, slang, by 1991, perhaps from hoochie-coochie, especially in the blues song Hoochie Coochie
Man by Willie Dixon (1954), featuring a sexually suggestive phrase that traces at least to the 1893
World's Fair (see hoochy koochy).


rock (n.2)

action of rocking; a movement to and fro, 1823, from rock (v.1). As short for rock and roll, by
1957; but sense of musical rhythm characterized by a strong beat is from 1946, in blues slang. Rock
star attested by 1966.


jellyroll (n.)

also jelly-roll, cylindrical cake containing jelly or jam, 1873, from jelly + roll (n.). As slang
for vagina, sexual intercourse it dates from 1914 (St. Louis Blues).


blue laws

1781, severe Puritanical code said to have been enacted 18c. in New Haven, Connecticut; of uncertain
origin, perhaps from one of the ground senses behind blues, or from notion of coldness. Or perhaps
connected to bluestocking in the sense of puritanically plain or mean (see bluestocking, which is a
different application of the same term; the parliament of 1653 was derisively called the
bluestocking parliament). The common explanation that they were written on blue paper is not
considered valid; pale blue paper was used for many old U.S. legal documents and there would have
been nothing notable about its use in this case.


shag (v.1)

copulate with, 1788, probably from obsolete verb shag (late 14c.) to shake, waggle, which probably
is connected to shake (v.).   And &thorn;e boot, amydde &thorn;e water, was shaggid. [Wyclif]
Compare shake it in U.S. blues slang from 1920s, ostensibly with reference to dancing. But compare
shag (v.), used from 1610s in a sense to roughen or make shaggy. Also the name of a dance popular in
U.S. 1930s and '40s. Related: Shagged; shagging.


schvartze (n.)

also schvartzer, black person (somewhat derogatory), 1961, Yiddish, from schvarts black (see
swarthy). Perhaps originally a code word to refer to black servants when they were within earshot,
as German cognate Schwarze appears to have been used mid-19c.:    In Baltimore in the 80s of the
last century, the German-speaking householders, when they had occasion to speak of Negro servants in
their presence, called them die Blaue (blues). In the 70s die Schwartze (blacks) had been used, but
it was believed that the Negroes had fathomed it. [H.L. Mencken, The American Language, Supplement
I, 1945]


rhythm (n.)

1550s, rhymed verse, metrical movement, from Latin rhythmus movement in time, from Greek rhythmos
measured flow or movement, rhythm; proportion, symmetry; arrangement, order; form, shape, wise,
manner; soul, disposition, related to rhein to flow, from PIE root *sreu- to flow (see rheum).
Rhythm method of birth control attested from 1936. Rhythm and blues, U.S. music style, is from 1949
(first in Billboard).


rock (v.2)

to dance to popular music with a strong beat, 1948 (first attested in song title We're gonna rock),
from rock (v.1), in earlier blues slang sense of to cause to move with musical rhythm (1922); often
used at first with sexual overtones (as in 1922 song title My Man Rocks Me (with One Steady Roll)).
Sense developed early 1950s to play or dance to rock and roll music. Related: Rocked; rocking.
Rocksteady, Jamaican pop music style (precursor of reggae), is attested from 1969.


baby (n.)

late 14c., babi, diminutive of baban (see babe + -y (3)). Meaning childish adult person is from
c.1600. Meaning youngest of a group is from 1897. As a term of endearment for one's lover it is
attested perhaps as early as 1839, certainly by 1901; its popularity perhaps boosted by baby vamp a
popular girl, student slang from c.1922. As an adjective, by 1750.   Baby food is from 1833. Baby
blues for blue eyes recorded by 1892 (the phrase also was used for postpartum depression 1950s-60s).
To empty the baby out with the bath (water) is first recorded 1909 in G.B. Shaw (compare German das
Kind mit dem Bade aussch&uuml;tten). Baby's breath (noted for sweet smell, which also was supposed
to attract cats) as a type of flower is from 1897. French b&eacute;b&eacute; (19c.) is from English.


R

In a circle, meaning registered (trademark), first incorporated in U.S. statues 1946. R&R; rest and
relaxation, first recorded 1953, American English; R&B; rhythm and blues (type of popular music)
first attested 1949, American English.    If all our r's that are written are pronounced, the sound
is more common than any other in English utterance (over seven per cent.); the instances of
occurrence before a vowel, and so of universal pronunciation, are only half as frequent. There are
localities where the normal vibration of the tip of the tongue is replaced by one of the uvula,
making a guttural trill, which is still more entitled to the name of dog's letter than is the
ordinary r; such are considerable parts of France and Germany; the sound appears to occur only
sporadically in English pronunciation. [Century Dictionary]   <hr />   The moment we encounter the
added r's of purp or dorg in our reading we know that we have to do with humor, and so with school-
marm. The added consonants are supposed to be spoken, if the words are uttered, but, as a matter of
fact, they are less often uttered than seen. The words are, indeed, largely visual forms; the humor
is chiefly for the eye. [Louise Pound, The Humorous 'R,' American Mercury, October 1924]    She goes
on to note that in British humorous writing, -ar popularly indicates the sound of the vowel in
father and formations like larf (for laugh) are to be read with the broad vowel but no uttered r.
She also quotes Henry James on the characteristic prominence of the medial -r- sound (which tends to
be dropped in England and New England) in the speech of the U.S. Midwest, under some strange impulse
received toward consonantal recovery of balance, making it present even in words from which it is
absent, bringing it in everywhere as with the small vulgar effect of a sort of morose grinding of
the back teeth.


