blunder (n.)

mid-14c., apparently from blunder (v.), though of about the same age.


blundering

mid-14c. as a present participle adjective; mid-15c. as a verbal noun, from blunder (v.). Related:
Blunderingly.


blunderful (adj.)

1881, jocular blend of blunder and wonderful.


blunder (v.)

mid-14c., to stumble about blindly, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse blundra shut one's
eyes, from PIE root *bhlendh- (see blind). Meaning make a stupid mistake is first recorded 1711.
Related: Blundered; blundering.


blunderbuss (n.)

1650s, from Dutch donderbus, from donder thunder (Middle Dutch doner, donder, from Proto-Germanic
*thunaraz; see thunder (n.)) + bus gun (originally box, tube); altered by resemblance to blunder.


howler

1832, animal that howls, agent noun from howl (v.). Meaning glaring blunder, ridiculous mistake is
first recorded 1890.


blooper (n.)

blunder, 1943, apparently first in theater, from American English baseball slang meaning a fly ball
in a high arc missed by the fielder (1937) or else from the earlier sense radio receiver that
interferes with nearby sets when a careless operator throws it into oscillation (1926), in which
case it imitates the resulting sound.


blunt (adj.)

c.1200, dull, obtuse, perhaps from or related to Old Norse blundra (see blunder (v.)). Of tools or
weapons, late 14c. Meaning abrupt of speech or manner is from 1580s.


boner (n.)

blunder, 1912, baseball slang, probably from bonehead. Meaning erect penis is 1950s, from earlier
bone-on (1940s), probably a variation (with connecting notion of hardness) of hard-on (1893).


bumble (v.)

to flounder, blunder, 1530s, probably of imitative origin. Related: Bumbled; bumbler; bumbling.


contretemps (n.)

1680s, a blunder in fencing, from French contre-temps motion out of time, unfortunate accident, bad
times; from Latin contra + tempus (see temporal). As a ballet term, from 1706; as an unfortunate
accident, 1802; as a dispute, from 1961.


parapraxis (n.)

faulty action, blunder, 1904, from Modern Latin, from para- contrary (see para- (1)) + Greek praxis
a doing, transaction, business (see praxis). In psychology, a minor error held to reveal a
subconscious motive.


recovery (n.)

mid-14c., return to health, from Anglo-French recoverie (c.1300), Old French recovree remedy, cure,
recovery, from past participle stem of recovrer (see recover). Meaning a gaining possession by legal
action is from early 15c. That of act of righting oneself after a blunder, mishap, etc. is from
1520s.


club (v.)

to hit with a club, 1590s, from club (v.). Meaning gather in a club-like mass is from 1620s.
Related: Clubbed; clubbing.   <b>CLUB</b>, verb (military). -- In manoeuvring troops, so to blunder
the word of command that the soldiers get into a position from which they cannot extricate
themselves by ordinary tactics. [Farmer &amp; Henley]


slip (n.2)

in various senses from slip (v.). Meaning act of slipping is from 1590s. Meaning mistake, minor
fault, blunder is from 1610s. Sense of woman's sleeveless garment (1761) is from notion of something
easily slipped on or off (compare sleeve). To give (someone) the slip escape from is from 1560s.
Meaning landing place for ships is mid-15c.; more technical sense in ship-building is from 1769.
Slip of the tongue (1725) is from earlier slip of the pen (1650s), which makes more sense as an
image.


goof (n.)

1916, American English, stupid person, perhaps a variant of English dialect goff foolish clown
(1869), from 16c. goffe, probably from Middle French goffe awkward, stupid, of uncertain origin. Or
English goffe may be from Middle English goffen speak in a frivolous manner, possibly from Old
English gegaf buffoonery, and gaffetung scolding. Sense of a blunder is c.1954, probably influenced
by gaffe.


gaffe (n.)

blunder, 1909, perhaps from French gaffe clumsy remark, originally boat hook, from Middle French
gaffe (15c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al gaf, probably from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*gafa. Sense connection is obscure; the gaff was used to land big fish. Or it may derive from
British slang gaff to cheat, trick (1893); or gaff criticism (1896), from Scottish dialect sense of
loud, rude talk (see gaff (n.2)).


screw (v.)

to twist (something) like a screw, 1590s, from screw (n.). From 1610s as to attach with a screw.
Slang meaning to copulate dates from at least 1725, originally usually of the action of the male, on
the notion of driving a screw into something. Meaning defraud, cheat is from 1900. First recorded
1949 in exclamations as a euphemism. Related: Screwed; screwing. To screw up blunder is recorded
from 1942. Screwed up originally was figurative for tuned to a high or precise pitch (1907), an
image from the pegs of stringed instruments. Meaning confused, muddled attested from 1943.
Expression to have (one's) head screwed on the right (or wrong) way is from 1821.


