bounder (n.)

1560s, one who sets bounds, agent noun from bound (v.1); British English slang meaning person of
objectionable social behavior, would-be stylish person, is from 1882, perhaps from bound (v.2) on
notion of one trying to bound into high society, but earliest usage suggests one outside the bounds
of acceptable socializing, which would connect it with the noun.


bound (v.1)

to form the boundary of, also to set the boundaries of, late 14c., from bound (n.). Related:
Bounded; bounding.


bound (adj.2)

ready to go, c.1200, boun, from Old Norse buinn past participle of bua to prepare, also to dwell, to
live, from Proto-Germanic *bowan (cognates: Old High German buan to dwell, Old Danish both dwelling,
stall), from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, dwell (see be). Final -d is presumably through
association with bound (adj.1).


bound (adj.1)

fastened, mid-14c., in figurative sense of compelled, from bounden, past participle of bind (v.).
Meaning under obligation is from late 15c.; the literal sense made fast by tying is the latest
recorded (1550s).


boundary (n.)

1620s, from bound (n.) + -ary.


boundless (adj.)

1590s, from bound (n.) + -less. Related: Boundlessly; boundlessness.


bound (n.)

limit, c.1200, from Anglo-Latin bunda, from Old French bonde limit, boundary, boundary stone (12c.,
Modern French borne), variant of bodne, from Medieval Latin bodina, perhaps from Gaulish. Now
chiefly in out of bounds, which originally referred to limits imposed on students at schools.


bound (v.2)

to leap, 1580s, from French bondir to rebound, resound, echo, from Old French bondir to leap,
rebound; make a noise, beat (a drum), 13c., ultimately to echo back, from Vulgar Latin *bombitire to
buzz, hum (see bomb (n.)), perhaps on model of Old French tentir, from Vulgar Latin *tinnitire.


muscle-bound (adj.)

1879, from muscle (n.) + bound, past participle of bind (v.).


spellbound (adj.)

to be bound by or as if by a spell, 1742, from spell (n.1) + bound (adj.1) fastened, past participle
of bind (v.).


north-bound (adj.)

1903, from north + bound (adj.2).


rebound (v.)

late 14c., to spring, leap, also return to afflict (early 15c.), from Old French rebondir leap back,
resound; repulse, push back, from re- back (see re-) + bondir leap, bound (see bound (v.)). Sense of
to spring back from force of impact is recorded from late 14c. Sports use probably first in tennis;
basketball sense is attested from 1914. Related: Rebounded; rebounding.


skip (n.1)

a spring, a bound, early 15c., from skip (v.). Meaning a passing over or disregarding is from 1650s.


indentured (adj.)

bound by indenture, 1757, past participle adjective from indenture (v.).


pocket (adj.)

1610s, of or pertaining to or meant for a pocket, from pocket (n.). Pocket-knife is first recorded
1727; pocket-money is attested from 1630s. Often merely implying a small-sized version of something
(for example of of warships, from 1930; also compare Pocket Venus beautiful, small woman, attested
from 1808). Pocket veto attested from 1842, American English.    The pocket veto can operate only in
the case of bills sent to the President within ten days of Congressional adjournment. If he retain
such a bill (figuratively, in his pocket) neither giving it his sanction by signing it, nor
withholding his sanction in returning it to Congress, the bill is defeated. The President is not
bound to give reasons for defeating a bill by a pocket veto which he has not had at least ten days
to consider. In a regular veto he is bound to give such reasons. [James Albert Woodburn, The
American Republic and its Government, Putnam's, 1903]


binding (n.)

mid-13c., verbal noun from bind (v.). Meaning thing that binds is from c.1300; state of being bound
is from late 14c. Meaning covering of a book is recorded from 1640s.


umma (n.)

the Islamic community, founded by Muhammad and bound to one another by religious ties and
obligations, 1855, from Arabic 'umma people, community, nation.


stare decisis (n.)

the legal doctrine of being bound by precedents, Latin, literally to stand by things decided (see
stet + decisive).


obliged (adj.)

c.1600, past participle adjective from oblige. To be obliged be bound by ties of gratitude is from
1540s.


Ebionite

1640s, sect (1c.-2c.) that held Jesus was a mere man and Christians continued bound by Mosaic Law,
from Latin ebonita, from Hebrew ebyon poor.


hardback (n.)

type of book bound in stiff boards, 1954, from hard + back (n.).


obligee (n.)

person to whom another is bound by contract, 1570s, from oblige + -ee.


inbound (adj.)

1857, homeward, from in + bound (adj.2). Originally of ships.


southbound (adj.)

1872, originally in railroading, from south + bound (adj.2).


unbounded (adj.)

1590s, not limited in extent, from un- (1) not + past participle of bound (v.1). Sense of generous,
profuse, liberal is recorded from 1704. Related: Unboundedness.


spiral (n.)

1650s, from spiral (adj.). U.S. football sense is from 1896. Figurative sense of progressive
movement in one direction is by 1897. Of books, spiral-bound (adj.) is from 1937.


shinny (n.)

also shinney, primitive form of hockey, 1670s, perhaps from Gaelic sinteag a bound, a leap. OED
suggests origin from shin ye the cry used in the game.


levirate (n.)

custom by which the male next-of-kin of a dead man was bound to marry his widow, 1725, from Latin
levir brother-in-law (from PIE *daiwer- husband's brother) + -ate (2).


homebound (adj.)

1882, from home (n.) + bound (adj.2).


snowbound (adj.)

1814, from snow (n.) + bound (adj.1).


mitzvah (n.)

Jewish rabbinical commandment, 1640s, from Hebrew mitzwah commandment, precept, from base of tziwwah
he commanded, related to Arabic wasa he bound, united.


stiff (n.)

corpse, dead body, 1859, slang, from stiff (adj.) which had been associated with notion of rigor
mortis since c.1200. Meaning working man first recorded 1930, from earlier genitive sense of
contemptible person, but sometimes merely man, fellow (1882). Slang meaning something or someone
bound to lose is 1890 (originally of racehorses), from notion of corpse.


sutile (adj.)

done by stitching, 1680s, from Latin sutilis sewed or bound together, from sut-, past participle
stem of suere to sew (see sew).


songbook (n.)

Old English sangboc church service book; see song (n.) + book (n.). Meaning collection of songs
bound in a book is from late 15c.


straw man (n.)

1590s, doll or scarecrow made of bound straw, from straw (n.) + man (n.). Figuratively, in debates,
by 1896. Man of straw imaginary opponent is recorded from 1620s.


legato

1811, from Italian legato, literally bound, past participle of legare, from Latin ligare (see
ligament). Of music to be played smoothly, without intervals.


syndetic (adj.)

connecting, 1874, from -ic + Greek syndetos bound together, adjective of syndein (see asyndeton).


vinculum (n.)

plural vincula, a bond, tie, 1670s, from Latin vinculum that with which anything is bound, from stem
of vincire to bind (see wind (v.1)).


saltation (n.)

a leap, a bound, 1620s, from Latin saltationem (nominative saltatio) a dancing; dance, noun of
action from past participle stem of saltare to hop, dance, frequentative of salire to leap (see
salient (adj.)).


bourn (n.2)

destination, 1520s, from French borne, apparently a variant of bodne (see bound (n.)). Used by
Shakespeare in Hamlet's soliloquy (1602), from which it entered into English poetic speech. He meant
it probably in the correct sense of boundary, but it has been taken to mean goal (Wordsworth,
Matthew Arnold) or sometimes realm (Keats).The dread of something after death, The vndiscouered
Countrey; from whose Borne No Traueller returnes. [Hamlet III.i.79]


truss (n.)

c.1200, collection of things bound together, from Old French trousse, torse parcel, package, bundle,
of uncertain origin, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *torciare to twist, from Late Latin torquere (see
torque (n.)). Meaning surgical appliance to support a rupture, etc. first attested 1540s. Sense of
framework for supporting a roof or bridge is first recorded 1650s.


federate (v.)

1814 (implied in federated), back-formation from federation, or else from Latin foederatus having a
treaty, bound by treaty, past participle of foederare to establish by treaty, from foedus (see
federal). Related: Federating. As an adjective, by 1710.


Elizabeth

fem. proper name, Biblical name of the wife of Aaron, from Late Latin Elisabeth, from Greek
Eleisabeth, Eleisabet, from Hebrew Elishebha God is an oath, the second element said by Klein to be
related to shivah (fem. sheva) seven, and to nishba he swore, originally he bound himself by (the
sacred number) seven. Has never ranked lower than 26th in popularity among the names given to baby
girls in the U.S. in any year since 1880, the oldest for which a reliable list is available.


liable (adj.)

mid-15c., bound or obliged by law, probably from Anglo-French *liable, from Old French lier to bind,
tie up, fasten, tether; bind by obligation, from Latin ligare to bind, to tie (see ligament). With
-able. General sense of exposed to (something undesirable) is from 1590s. Incorrect use for likely
is attested by 1886.


bounce (v.)

early 13c., bounsen to thump, hit, perhaps from Dutch bonzen to beat, thump, or Low German bunsen,
or imitative; sense probably influenced by bound (v.). Sense of to bounce like a ball is from 1510s;
the rubber check sense is from 1927. Related: Bounced; bouncing.


Hun

Old English, person from a tribe from central Asia that overran Europe in the 4c. and 5c., from
Medieval Latin Hunni, apparently ultimately from Turkic Hun-y&uuml;, the name of a tribe (they were
known in China as Han or Hiong-nu). Figurative sense of reckless destroyer of beauty is from 1806.
Applied to the German in World War I by their enemies because of stories of atrocities, but the
nickname originally was urged on German soldiers bound for China by Kaiser Wilhelm II in 1900, which
caused a scandal.


Bauhaus (n.)

1923, from German Bauhaus, literally architecture-house; school of design founded in Weimar,
Germany, 1919 by Walter Gropius (1883-1969), later extended to the principles it embodied. First
element is bau building, construction, structure, from Old High German buan to dwell (see bound
(adj.2)). For second element, see house (n.).


bundle (n.)

early 14c., bound collection of things, from Middle Dutch bondel, diminutive of bond, from binden to
bind, or perhaps a merger of this word and Old English byndele binding, from Proto-Germanic
*bundilin (source also of German b&uuml;ndel to bundle), from PIE root *bhendh- tie (see bend (v.)).
Meaning a lot of money is from 1899. To be a bundle of nerves very anxious is from 1938.


fret (n.)

ornamental interlaced pattern, late 14c., from Old French frete interlaced work, trellis work,
probably from Frankish *fetur or another Germanic source (cognates: Old English fetor, Old High
German feggara fetter) perhaps from notion of decorative anklet, or of materials bound together. The
other noun, ridge on the fingerboard of a guitar, is c.1500 of unknown origin but possibly another
sense of Old French frete.


besom (n.)

Old English besma bundle of twigs (used as a broom or a flail), from West Germanic *besmon
(cognates: Old Frisian besma, Old Saxon besmo, Old High German besmo, German Besen, Dutch bezem), of
unknown origin. Perhaps something bound or twisted, from PIE *bheidh-.


