brand (v.)

c.1400, to brand, cauterize; stigmatize, originally of criminal marks or cauterized wounds, from
brand (n.). As a means of marking property, 1580s; figuratively from c.1600, often in a bad sense,
with the criminal marking in mind. Related: Branded; branding.


brand (n.)

Old English brand, brond fire, flame; firebrand, piece of burning wood, torch, and (poetic) sword,
from Proto-Germanic *brandaz (cognates: Old Norse brandr, Old High German brant, Old Frisian brond
firebrand, blade of a sword, German brand fire), from root *bran-/*bren- (see burn (v.)). Meaning
identifying mark made by a hot iron (1550s) broadened by 1827 to a particular make of goods. Brand
name is from 1922.


brand new (adj.)

also brand-new, 1570s, from brand (n.)  + new. Originally it must have meant fresh from the fire
(Shakespeare has fire-new).


brandish (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French brandiss-, present participle stem of brandir to flourish (a sword)
(12c.), from brant blade of a sword, prow of a ship, of Frankish origin (see brand (n.)). Related:
Brandished; brandishing.


Ked

proprietary name of a brand of canvas sneakers, 1917, registered by United States Rubber Co., N.Y.
Based on Latin ped-, stem of pes foot (see foot (n.))We wanted to call it Peds, but ... it came too
close to ... other brand names. So we batted it around for awhile and decided on the hardest-
sounding letter in the alphabet, K, and called it Keds, that was in 1916. [J.Healey, in R.L. Cohen,
Footwear Industry, x.93]


Smirnoff (n.)

proprietary name of a brand of vodka, said to have been in use since 1914.


Oxo

proper name of a brand of beef extract, 1899, British.


Day-Glo

1951, proprietary name (Dane &amp; Co. of London) for a brand of fluorescent paint.


Percocet

by 1991, a North American brand name for oxycodone/acetaminophen.


blunt (n.)

street slang for marijuana and tobacco cigar (easier to pass around, easier to disguise, and the
stimulant in the tobacco enhances the high from the pot) surfaced c.1993, but is said to have
originated among Jamaicans in New York City in the early 1980s; from Phillies Blunt brand cigars;
see blunt (adj.), which has been used of certain cigars since 19c.Users say that the Phillies Blunt
brand produces less harsh-tasting or sweeter smoke. The leaf wrapper of a Phillies Blunt is strong
enough to hold together through the manipulations of making a blunt. Other brands fall apart.
[http://nepenthes.lycaeum.org/Drugs/THC/Smoke/blunts.html]


lucky (adj.)

mid-15c., of persons; 1540s, of actions or objects, likely to bring luck; from luck + -y (2).
Meaning occurring by chance is 1590s. Related: Luckier; luckiest; luckiness. Lucky break is attested
from 1884 in billiards; 1872 as failure or break-down which turns out to be fortunate. Lucky Strike
as the name of a brand of cigarettes (originally chewing tobacco) popular mid-20c. is said to date
from 1871; popular from 1935 when the brandâ&euro;&trade;s maker picked up sponsorship of
â&euro;&oelig;Your Hit Paradeâ&euro;? on radio.


seven-up (n.)

children's game, 1830; with capital initials, as the proprietary name of a brand of carbonated
drink, it is attested from 1928.


La-Z-Boy

brand of recliner chair, named 1929, Floral City Furniture Co., Monroe, Michigan, U.S. According to
company lore, chosen from names submitted in a contest.


Zippo (n.)

proprietary name of a brand of cigarette lighter, patented 1934 by Zippo Manufacturing Co.,
Bradford, Pa.


Coke

soft drink, 1909, shortening of brand name Coca-Cola.


pog (n.)

disc used in playing a game said to have originated in Hawaii and popular in U.S. during the mid-
1990s; said to be from the name of a brand of juice, the bottle caps from it being used to play the
game originally.


Methedrine (n.)

1939, proprietary name of a brand of methamphetamine (by Wellcome Ltd.); slang abbreviation meth is
attested from 1967.


Speedo

trademark name of a brand of swimwear, 1928, originally made by McRae Hosiery Manufacturers,
Australia. From speed.


Bacardi

1921, name for a brand of West Indian rum produced by Compania Ron Bacardi, originally of Cuba.


Waring

brand name of a type of food blender, 1944, manufactured by Waring Products Corp., N.Y., U.S.


Olivetti

brand of typewriters manufactured by company founded in 1908 near Turin, Italy; named for founder,
Camillo Olivetti.


wrangler (n.)

1510s, one who takes part in quarrels, agent noun from wrangle (v.). Meaning person in charge of
horses or cattle, herder is from 1888; as a proprietary name for a brand of jeans, copyrighted 1947,
claiming use from 1929.


Pontiac

Ottawa tribal leader (c.1720-1769), his name is given in native (Algonquian) form as bwandiag. The
city in Michigan, U.S., settled in 1818, was named for him as he is said to be buried nearby. The
automobile brand was begun in 1926, discontinued 2010.


Kleenex (n.)

1925, proprietary name, registered by Cellucotton Products Company, Neenah, Wisconsin, U.S.; later
Kimberly-Clark Corp. An arbitrary alteration of clean + brand-name suffix -ex.


fridge (n.)

shortened and altered form of refrigerator, 1926, perhaps influenced by Frigidaire (1919), a popular
early brand name of the appliances. Frigerator as a colloquial shortening is attested by 1886.


monotype (n.)

1881 in biology; 1882 in printers' arts; 1893 as a brand name of typesetting machine; see mono- +
type.


Posturpedic (n.)

trademark name (Sealy, Inc., Chicago, U.S.A.) for a brand of mattress, filed in 1951; from posture
(n.) + second element from orthopedic.


OxyContin

brand name of an oxycodone compound marketed in U.S. from 1996. Second element from continuous (i.e.
time-released).


Soundex (n.)

phonetic coding system, 1959, from sound (n.1) + brand-name suffix -ex.


maverick (n.)

1867, calf or yearling found without an owner's brand, so called for Samuel A. Maverick (1803-1870),
Texas cattle owner who was negligent in branding his calves. Sense of individualist, unconventional
person is first recorded 1886, via notion of masterless.


firebrand (n.)

c.1200, piece of wood kindled at a fire, from fire (n.) + brand (n.). Figurative sense of one who
kindles mischief or passions is from late 14c.


Chevy (n.)

by 1938, popular form of Chevrolet, U.S. automobile brand, which was founded by Louis Chevrolet and
William Durant in 1911; acquired by General Motors in 1917.


Shinola (n.)

brand of shoe polish, by 1904, from shine + -ola.


wayfarer (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from way (n.) + fare (v.). Earlier was wayferer (late 14c.). The brand of
sunglasses (manufactured by Ray-Ban) dates to 1952.


Mack

proprietary name for a brand of heavy automobile trucks, named for brothers John M., Augustus F.,
and William C. Mack, who established Mack Brothers Company, N.Y., N.Y., in 1902. Their trucks
formally known as Mack Trucks from 1910.


humanoid

1912 (adj.), an anthropological hybrid from human + -oid. As a noun, from 1925. Earlier (1906) brand
name of a type of cow's milk altered to be closer to human milk intended as food for infants.


Hildebrand

masc. proper name, Old High German Hildibrand, literally battle-sword; for first element see Hilda;
for second element see brand.


podcast

2004, noun and verb, from pod-, from iPod, brand of portable media player, + second element
abstracted from broadcast. Related: Podcasting.


Kodak

brand of camera, arbitrary coinage by U.S. inventor George Eastman (1854-1932), U.S. trademark
registered Sept. 4, 1888. In 1890s, practically synonymous with camera and also used as a verb.
Kodachrome, registered trademark for a method of color photography, 1915; the product was
discontinued in 2006.


generic (adj.)

1670s, belonging to a large group of objects, formed in English from Latin gener-, stem of genus
kind (see genus) + -ic. Sense of not special, not brand-name; in plain, cheap packaging, of
groceries, etc., is from 1977.


Vespa (n.)

1950, proprietary name of an Italian make of motor scooter, first produced 1946, from Italian,
literally wasp, from Latin vespa (see wasp). Rival brand was Lambretta.


Sanka (n.)

brand of decaffeinated coffee, by 1913, abstracted from French sans caffeine (see sans + caffeine).


moxie (n.)

courage, 1930, from Moxie, brand name of a bitter, non-alcoholic drink, 1885, perhaps as far back as
1876 as the name of a patent medicine advertised to build up your nerve; despite legendary origin
stories put out by the company that made it, it is perhaps ultimately from a New England Indian word
(it figures in river and lake names in Maine, where it is apparently from Abenaki and means dark
water). Much-imitated in its day; in 1917 the Moxie Company won an infringement suit against a
competitor's beverage marketed as Proxie.


ripple (n.)

very small wave, 1798, from earlier meaning stretch of shallow, rippling water (1755), from ripple
(v.). Meaning mark or movement suggestive of a ripple is from 1843. Meaning ice cream streaked with
colored syrup first attested 1939, so called from its appearance. As the name of a brand of
inexpensive wine sold by E&J; Gallo Winery, from 1960 to 1984. Ripple effect is from 1950.


diehard

also die-hard, 1844 (n.), in reference to the 57th Regiment of Foot in the British Army; as an
adjective, attested from 1871; from die (v.) + hard (adv.). As a brand name of an automobile
battery, DieHard, introduced by Sears in 1967.


Gaul (n.)

1560s, from French Gaule, from Latin Gallia, from Gallus a Gaul. Also used somewhat facetiously for
a Frenchman. Gauloise, popular brand of French cigarettes, dates to 1910.


stigmatize (v.)

1580s, to brand or tattoo, from Medieval Latin stigmatizare, from Greek stigmatizein, from stigmat-,
stem of stigma (see stigma). Meaning to blemish is from 1610s (figurative), 1630s (literal).
Related: Stigmatized; stigmatizing.


Mercedes-Benz

motorcar brand first marketed 1926 after merger of two earlier companies. The firstg part of the
name, Mercedes, marketed as a car name from 1901, chosen by Austrian manufacturer Emil Jellinik for
his daughter, Mercedes. The Benz is from the other company, from name of Karl Benz, creator of the
Benz Patent Motorwagen (1886).


Bucephalus

Alexander the Great's favorite horse, from Greek Boukephalos, literally Ox-head, from bous ox (see
cow (n.)) + kephale head (see cephalo-).  Men called [him] Bucephalus ... of the marke or brand of a
buls head, which was imprinted vpon his shoulder. [Pliny, I.220, tr. Holland, 1601]


cauterize (v.)

c.1400, from Old French cauterisier, from Late Latin cauterizare to burn or brand with a hot iron,
from Greek kauteriazein, from kauter burning or branding iron, from kaiein to burn (see caustic).
Related: Cauterized; cauterizing.


