brim (v.)

to fill to the brim, 1610s, from brim (n.). Intransitive sense (be full to the brim) attested from
1818. Related: Brimmed; brimming.


brimming (adj.)

being full to the brim, 1660s, present participle adjective from brim (v.).


brim (n.)

c.1200, brymme edge of the sea, of obscure origin, perhaps akin to Old Norse barmr rim, brim,
probably related to German br&auml;me margin, border, fringe, from PIE *bhrem- point, spike, edge.
(Old English had brim in the sense sea, surf, but this probably was from the Germanic stem *brem- to
roar, rage.) Extended by 1520s to cups, basins, hats.


brimful (adj.)

1520s, from brim (n.) + -ful.


homburg (n.)

type of soft felt had with a curled brim and a dented crown, 1894, from Homburg, resort town in
Prussia, where it was first made. Introduced to England by Edward VII.


Bremen

city in Germany, from Old Saxon bremo edge (related to English brim (n.)), in reference to its site
on a river bank.


berm (n.)

narrow ledge, 1729, from French berme (17c.), from Old Dutch baerm edge of a dike, probably related
to brim (q.v.). In U.S., 19c., also the name for the bank of a canal opposite the tow path.


pileated (adj.)

1728, from Latin pileatus capped, from pileus felt cap without a brim, from Greek pilos. Applied in
natural history to certain birds and sea urchins.


Smokey Bear (n.)

state policeman, 1974, from truckers' slang, in reference to the wide-brim style of hat worn by
state troopers (the hats so called by 1969). Ultimately the reference is to a popular illustrated
character of that name, dressed in forest ranger gear (including a hat like those later worn by
state troopers). He was introduced in 1944 by the U.S. Forest Service and the Wartime Advertising
Council in a campaign to lower the number of forest fires in the West.


bumper (n.)

1670s, glass filled to the brim; perhaps from notion of bumping as large, or from a related sense of
booming (see bump (v.)). Meaning anything unusually large is from 1759, slang. Agent-noun meaning
buffer of a car is from 1839, American English, originally in reference to railway cars; 1901 of
automobiles (in phrase bumper-to-bumper, in reference to a hypothetical situation; of actual traffic
jams by 1908).


overflow (v.)

Old English oferfleow to flow across, flood, inundate, also to flow over (a brim or bank); see over-
+ flow (v.). Related: Overflowed; overflowing.


bump (v.)

1560s, to bulge out; 1610s, to strike heavily, perhaps from Scandinavian, probably echoic, original
sense was hitting then of swelling from being hit. Also has a long association with obsolete bum to
make a booming noise, which perhaps influenced surviving senses such as bumper crop, for something
full to the brim (see bumper). To bump into meet is from 1880s; to bump off kill is 1908 in
underworld slang. Related: Bumped; bumping. Bumpsy (adj.) was old slang for drunk (1610s).


hat (n.)

Old English h&aelig;t hat, head covering, from Proto-Germanic *hattuz hood, cowl (cognates: Frisian
hat, Old Norse hattr), from PIE root *kadh- cover, protect (cognates: Lithuanian kudas tuft or crest
of a bird, Latin cassis helmet). Now, head covering with a more or less horizontal brim. To throw
one's hat in the ring was originally (1847) to take up a challenge in prize-fighting. To eat one's
hat is said to have been originally To eat Old Rowley's [Charles II's] hat.


broad (adj.)

Old English brad broad, flat, open, extended, from Proto-Germanic *braithaz (cognates: Old Frisian
bred, Old Norse brei&eth;r, Dutch breed, German breit, Gothic brou&thorn;s), of unknown origin. Not
found outside Germanic languages. No clear distinction in sense from wide. Related: Broadly. Broad-
brim as a style of hat (1680s, broad-brimmed) in 18c.-19c. suggested Quaker male from their
characteristic attire.


snap (v.)

1520s, of animals, to make a quick bite, from snap (n.). Meaning to break suddenly or sharply is
first recorded c.1600; the mental sense is from 1970s. Meaning come into place with a snap is from
1793. Meaning take a photograph is from 1890. U.S. football sense first recorded 1887. Related:
Snapped; snapping. To snap the fingers is from 1670s. Phrase snap out of it recorded by 1907.
Snapping turtle is attested from 1784. Snap-brim (adj.) in reference to a type of hat is from 1928.


