brisk (adj.)

1550s, as Scottish bruisk, probably an alteration of French brusque (see brusque). Related: Briskly;
briskness.


whippet (n.)

small, fast type of dog, c.1600, probably from whip (v.) in the sense of move quickly + diminutive
suffix -et. Used earlier (1540s) in reference to a brisk, nimble woman.


congressman (n.)

1780, in reference to members of U.S. Congress, and it first appears in a piece of abuse (written by
a Loyalist):    Ye coxcomb Congressmen, declaimers keen,   Brisk puppets of the Philadelphia scene
...    Congresswoman attested from 1918 (Jeannette Rankin (1880-1973) was the first).


spruce (adj.)

neat, smart in dress and appearance, dapper, brisk, 1580s, from spruce leather (mid-15c.; see spruce
(n.)), a type of leather imported from Prussia in the 1400s and 1500s which was used in England to
make a popular style of jerkin that was considered smart-looking.


vivace (adv.)

1680s, from Italian vivace brisk, lively, from Latin vivac-, stem of vivax lively, vigorous; long-
lived, enduring (see vivacity).


Gaylord

masc. proper name, also a surname (from early 13c.), also Galliard, from Old French Gaillart, from
Proto-Germanic *Gailhard lofty-hard, or Old French gaillard lively, brisk, gay, high-spirited, from
PIE root *gal- (3) to be able, have power.


allegro

1680s as a musical term, from Italian allegro cheerful, gay, from Latin alacrem (nominative alacer)
lively, cheerful, brisk (see alacrity).


alacrity (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin alacritatem (nominative alacritas) liveliness, ardor, eagerness, from alacer
(genitive alacris) cheerful, brisk, lively; of uncertain origin, perhaps cognate with Gothic aljan
zeal, Old English ellen courage, zeal, strength, Old High German ellian.


spry (adj.)

1746, active, nimble, vigorous, lively, dialectal, perhaps a shortening and alteration of sprightly
[Barnhart], or from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse spr&aelig;kr, dialectal Swedish sprygg
brisk, active), from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, from PIE root *(s)preg- (2) to jerk, scatter (see
sparse).


crisp (adj.)

Old English crisp curly, from Latin crispus curled, wrinkled, having curly hair, from PIE root
*(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.)). It began to mean brittle 1520s, for obscure reasons,
perhaps based on what happens to flat things when they are cooked. Figurative sense of neat, brisk
is from 1814; perhaps a separate word. As a noun, from late 14c. Potato crisps (the British version
of U.S. potato chips) is from 1929.


strenuous (adj.)

characterized by great effort, mid-15c. (implied in strenuously), from Latin strenuus active, brisk,
quick, nimble, prompt, vigorous, keen. Probably cognate with Greek strenes, strenos keen, strong,
strenos arrogance, eager desire, Old English stierne hard, severe, keen (see stern (adj.)). Mocked
by Ben Jonson as a pedantic neologism in Poetaster (1601). Sense of requiring much energy is first
recorded 1670s. Related: Strenuousness; strenuosity.


pert (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in pertly), evident, unconcealed, shortened form of Middle English apert open,
frank, from Old French apert, from Latin apertus, past participle of aperire to open (see overt).
Sense of saucy, bold first recorded late 14c. Less pejorative meaning lively, brisk, in good spirits
(c.1500) survives in U.S. dialectal peart (with Middle English alternative spelling). Related:
Pertness.


sparse (adj.)

1727, from Latin sparsus scattered, past participle of spargere to scatter, spread, from PIE root
*(s)preg- (2) to jerk, scatter (cognates: Sanskrit parjanya- rain, rain god, Avestan fra-sparega
branch, twig, literally that which is jerked off a tree, Old Norse freknur freckles, Swedish
dialectal sprygg brisk, active, Lithuanian sprogti shoot, bud, Old Irish arg a drop). The word is
found earlier in English as a verb, to scatter abroad (16c.). Related: Sparsely; sparseness.


frisk (v.)

1510s, to dance, frolic, from Middle English frisk lively (mid-15c.), from Middle French frisque
lively, brisk, from Old French frisque fresh, new; merry, animated (13c.), possibly from a Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch vrisch fresh, Old High German frisc lively; see fresh (adj.1)). Sense
of pat down in a search first recorded 1781. Related: Frisked; frisking. As a noun from 1520s.


play (n.)

Old English plega (West Saxon), pl&aelig;ga (Anglian) quick motion; recreation, exercise, any brisk
activity (the latter sense preserved in swordplay, etc.), from or related to Old English plegan (see
play (v.)). Meaning dramatic performance is attested by early 14c., perhaps late Old English.
Meaning free or unimpeded movement of mechanisms, etc., is from c.1200. By early Middle English it
could mean variously, a game, a martial sport, activity of children, joke or jesting, revelry,
sexual indulgence. Sporting sense the playing of a game first attested mid-15c.; sense of specific
maneuver or attempt is from 1868. To be in play (of a hit ball, etc.) is from 1788. Play-by-play is
attested from 1927. Play on words is from 1798. Play-money is attested from 1705 as money won in
gambling, by 1920 as pretend money.


pretty (adj.)

Old English pr&aelig;ttig (West Saxon), pretti (Kentish), *prettig (Mercian) cunning, skillful,
artful, wily, astute, from pr&aelig;tt, *prett a trick, wile, craft, from Proto-Germanic *pratt-
(cognates: Old Norse prettr a trick, prettugr tricky; Frisian pret, Middle Dutch perte, Dutch pret
trick, joke, Dutch prettig sportive, funny, Flemish pertig brisk, clever), of unknown origin.
Connection between Old English and Middle English words is uncertain, but if they are the same,
meaning had shifted by c.1400 to manly, gallant, and later moved via attractive, skillfully made, to
fine, to beautiful in a slight way (mid-15c.). Ironical use from 1530s. For sense evolution, compare
nice, silly. Also used of bees (c.1400). After the OE. period the word is unknown till the 15th c.,
when it becomes all at once frequent in various senses, none identical with the OE., though
derivable from it [OED].     Meaning not a few, considerable is from late 15c. With a sense of
moderately, qualifying adjectives and adverbs, since 1560s. Pretty please as an emphatic plea is
attested from 1902. A pretty penny lot of money is first recorded 1768.


