broil (v.1)

to cook, late 14c. (earlier to burn, mid-14c.), from Old French bruller to broil, roast (Modern
French br&#251;ler), earlier brusler to burn (11c.), which, with Italian bruciare, is of uncertain
and much-disputed origin.    Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *brodum broth, borrowed from Germanic and
ultimately related to brew (v.). Gamillscheg proposes it to be from Latin ustulare to scorch, singe
(from ustus, past participle of urere to burn) and altered by influence of Germanic burn words
beginning in br-. Related: Broiled; broiling.


broiler (n.)

late 14c., grill or gridiron used in broiling, agent noun from broil (v.1). From c.1300 as a
surname, perhaps meaning cook who specializes in broiling. Meaning chicken for broiling is from
1876.


broil (v.2)

early 15c., to quarrel, brawl, also mix up, present in disorder, from Anglo-French broiller mix up,
confuse, Old French brooillier to mix, mingle, figuratively to have sexual intercourse (13c., Modern
French brouiller), perhaps from breu, bro stock, broth, brew, from Frankish or another Germanic
source (compare Old High German brod broth) akin to broth (see brew (v.)); also compare imbroglio.


grill (v.)

to broil on a grill, 1660s, from grill (n.); figurative sense from 1842, and the specific
(transitive) sense of to subject to intense questioning is first attested 1894. Related: Grilled;
grilling.


brulee (adj.)

from French br&#251;l&eacute;e burned, from br&#251;ler, from Old French brusler (11c.); see broil
(v.1). Cr&egrave;me br&#251;l&eacute;e was known in English by various names from early 18c.,
including a translated burnt cream.


embroil (v.)

c.1600, throw into disorder, from French embrouillier (cognate of Italian imbrogliare), from en- in
(see en- (1)) + brouiller confuse, from Old French brooillier (see broil (v.2)). Sense of involve in
a quarrel is first attested c.1610. Related: Embroiled; embroiling.


imbroglio (n.)

1750, from Italian imbroglio, from imbrogliare confuse, tangle, from assimilated form of in- into,
in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + brogliare embroil, probably from Middle French brouiller confuse (see
broil (v.2); also see embroil).


London

chief city and capital of England, Latin Londinium (c.115), often explained as place belonging to a
man named Londinos, a supposed Celtic personal name meaning the wild one, but this etymology is
rejected in an emphatic footnote in Jackson 1953 (p.308), and we have as yet nothing to put in its
place [Margaret Gelling, Signposts to the Past: Place-Names and the History of England, Chichester,
1978]. London Bridge the children's singing game is attested from 1827. London broil large flank
steak broiled then cut in thin slices attested by 1939, American English; London fog first attested
1830.


bratwurst (n.)

1911, from German Bratwurst, from wurst + Br&auml;t lean meat, finely chipped calf or swine meat,
from Old High German brato (12c.), from Proto-Germanic *bred-on- roast flesh (source also of Old
English br&aelig;de meat), from PIE *bhreue- (see brawn). German folk etymology derives it from
braten to roast, bake, broil, grill; more likely both are from the same ancient source.


