buffoonery (n.)

1620s; see buffoon + -ery.


buffoon (n.)

1540s, type of pantomime dance; 1580s, clown, from Middle French bouffon (16c.), from Italian
buffone jester, from buffa joke, jest, pleasantry, from buffare to puff out the cheeks, a comic
gesture, of echoic origin. Also see -oon.


mime (n.)

c.1600, a buffoon who practices gesticulations [Johnson], from French mime (16c.) and directly from
Latin mimus, from Greek mimos imitator, mimic, actor, mime, buffoon, of unknown origin. In reference
to a performance, 1640s in a classical context; 1932 as a pantomime.


scurrilous (adj.)

using such language as only the licence of a buffoon can warrant [Johnson], 1570s, from scurrile
coarsely joking (c.1500, implied in scurrility), from Latin scurrilis buffoonlike, from scurra
fashionable city idler, man-about-town, later buffoon. According to Klein, an Etruscan loan-word.
Related: Scurrilously; scurrilousness.


pierrot (n.)

stock character in French pantomime, in English, a buffoon, from French Pierrot, diminutive of
Pierre; considered a typical name of a French peasant.


merry-andrew (n.)

a buffoon; a zany; a jack-pudding [Johnson], originally mountebank's assistant, 1670s, from merry +
masc. proper name Andrew, but there is no certain identification with an individual.


jester (n.)

mid-14c., jestour (Anglo-Latin), late 14c., gestour a minstrel, professional reciter of romances,
agent noun from gesten recite a tale, which was a jester's original function (see jest). Sense of
buffoon in a prince's court is from c.1500.


tom-fool (n.)

also tom-fool, buffoon, clown, 1640s, from Middle English Thom Foole, personification of a mentally
deficient man (mid-14c.), see Tom + fool (n.).


juggler (n.)

c.1100, iugulere jester, buffoon, also wizard, sorcerer, from Old English geogelere magician,
conjurer, also from Anglo-French jogelour, Old French jogleor (accusative), from Latin ioculatorem
(nominative ioculator) joker, from ioculari to joke, to jest (see jocular). Connecting notion
between magician and juggler is dexterity.


truant (n.)

c.1200, beggar, vagabond, from Old French truant beggar, rogue (12c.), as an adjective, wretched,
miserable, of low caste, from Gaulish *trougant- (compare Breton *truan, later truant vagabond,
Welsh truan wretch, Gaelic truaghan wretched), of uncertain origin. Compare Spanish truhan buffoon,
from same source. Meaning one who wanders from an appointed place, especially a child who stays away
from school without leave is first attested mid-15c.


mask (n.)

1530s, from Middle French masque covering to hide or guard the face (16c.), from Italian maschera,
from Medieval Latin masca mask, specter, nightmare, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Arabic
maskharah buffoon, mockery, from sakhira be mocked, ridiculed. Or via Proven&ccedil;al mascarar,
Catalan mascarar, Old French mascurer to black (the face), perhaps from a Germanic source akin to
English mesh (q.v.). But compare Occitan mascara to blacken, darken, derived from mask- black, which
is held to be from a pre-Indo-European language, and Old Occitan masco witch, surviving in dialects;
in Beziers it means dark cloud before the rain comes. [See Walther von Wartburg, Franz&ouml;sisches
Etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch: Eine Darstellung galloromanischen sprachschatzes]. Figurative use by
1570s.


