bulge (v.)

to protrude, swell out, 1670s, from bulge (n.). Related: Bulged; bulging.


bulge (n.)

c.1200, wallet, leather bag, from Old French bouge, boulge wallet, pouch, leather bag, or directly
from Latin bulga leather sack (see budget (n.)). Sense of a swelling is first recorded 1620s. Bilge
(q.v.) might be a nautical variant.


bug (v.1)

to bulge, protrude, 1872, originally of eyes, perhaps from a humorous or dialect mispronunciation of
bulge (v.). Related: Bugged; bugging. As an adjective, bug-eyed recorded from 1872; so commonly used
of space creatures in mid-20c. science fiction that the initialism (acronym) BEM for bug-eyed
monster was current by 1953.


buckle (v.2)

distort, warp, bend out of shape 1520s, bokelen to arch the body, from Middle French boucler to
bulge, from Old French bocler to bulge, from bocle boss of a shield (see buckle (n.)). Meaning bend
under strong pressure is from 1590s (figurative from 1640s) . Related: Buckled; buckling.


torus (n.)

1560s, in architecture, large, rounded molding at the base of a column, from Latin torus a swelling,
bulge, knot; cushion, couch.


strut (v.)

walk in a vain, important manner, walk with affected dignity, 1590s, from Middle English strouten
display one's clothes proudly, vainly flaunt fine attire (late 14c.), earlier to stick out,
protrude, bulge, swell, from Old English strutian to stand out stiffly, swell or bulge out, from
Proto-Germanic *strut- (cognates: Danish strutte, German strotzen to be puffed up, be swelled,
German Strau&szlig; fight), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stereo-).
Originally of the air or the attitude; modern sense, focused on the walk, first recorded 1510s.
Related: Strutted; strutting. To strut (one's) stuff is first recorded 1926, from strut as the name
of a dance popular from c.1900. The noun meaning a vain and affectedly dignified manner of walking
is from c.1600.


bolster (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in bolstered), propped up, made to bulge (originally of a woman's breasts), from
bolster (n.). Figurative sense is from c.1500, on the notion of to support with a bolster, prop up.
Related: Bolstering.


bunch (v.)

to bulge out, late 14c., from bunch (n.). Meaning to gather up in a bunch (transitive) is from 1828;
sense of to crowd together (intransitive) is from 1873. Related: Bunched; bunching.


protuberant (adj.)

1640s, from French protub&#233;rant (16c.) and directly from Late Latin protuberantem (moninative
protuberans), present participle of protuberare to swell, bulge out (see protuberance). Related:
Protuberantly.


billow (n.)

1550s, perhaps older in dialectal use, from Old Norse bylgja a wave, a billow, from Proto-Germanic
*bulgjan (cognates: Middle High German bulge billow, bag), from PIE *bhelgh- to swell (see belly
(n.)).


muffin (n.)

light, small cake made with eggs, 1703, moofin, possibly from Low German muffen, plural of muffe
small cake; or somehow connected with Old French moflet soft, tender (said of bread). Muffin top in
reference to waistline bulge over tight, low jeans is attested by 2005, from resemblance to baked
muffins from a tin.


bilge (n.)

1510s, lowest internal part of a ship, also used of the foulness which collects there; variant of
bulge ship's hull, also leather bag, from Old North French boulge leather sack, from Late Latin
bulga leather sack, apparently from Gaulish bulga (see budget (n.)).


protuberance (n.)

1640s, from Late Latin protuberantem (nominative protuberans), present participle of protuberare to
swell, bulge, grow forth, from Latin pro- forward (see pro-) + tuber lump, swelling (see tuber).


protrude (v.)

1610s, to thrust forward or onward, to drive along; 1640s, to cause to stick out, from Latin
protrudere thrust forward; push out, from pro- forward (see pro-) + trudere to thrust (see
extrusion). Intransitive meaning jut out, bulge forth recorded from 1620s. Related: Protruded;
protruding.


bump (v.)

1560s, to bulge out; 1610s, to strike heavily, perhaps from Scandinavian, probably echoic, original
sense was hitting then of swelling from being hit. Also has a long association with obsolete bum to
make a booming noise, which perhaps influenced surviving senses such as bumper crop, for something
full to the brim (see bumper). To bump into meet is from 1880s; to bump off kill is 1908 in
underworld slang. Related: Bumped; bumping. Bumpsy (adj.) was old slang for drunk (1610s).


dossier (n.)

1880, from French dossier bundle of papers, from dos back (12c.), from Vulgar Latin dossum, variant
of Latin dorsum back (see dorsal). Supposedly so called because the bundle bore a label on the back,
or possibly from resemblance of the bulge in a mass of bundled papers to the curve of a back. Old
French dossiere meant back-strap, ridge strap (of a horse's harness).


