bulk (v.)

swell, become more massive, 1550s (usually with up), from bulk (n.). Related: Bulked; bulking.


bulky (adj.)

mid-15c., plump, stout, from bulk (n.) + -y (2). Related: Bulkiness.


bulkhead (n.)

late 15c., with head (n.); the first element perhaps from bulk framework projecting in the front of
a shop (1580s), which is perhaps from Old Norse bolkr beam, balk (see balk (n.)).


bulk (n.)

mid-15c., a heap, earlier ship's cargo (mid-14c.), from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse
bulki a heap; ship's cargo, thus goods loaded loose (perhaps literally rolled-up load), from Proto-
Germanic *bul-, from PIE root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).    Meaning extended by
confusion with obsolete bouk belly (from Old English buc body, belly, from Proto-Germanic *bukaz;
see bucket), which led to sense of size, first attested mid-15c.


onco-

word-forming element meaning bulk, mass, especially in medical use, tumor, from Latinized form of
Greek onko-, comb. form of onkos bulk, size, mass, body.


volume (n.)

late 14c., roll of parchment containing writing; a bound book, from Old French volume scroll, book;
work, volume; girth, size (13c.) and directly from Latin volumen (genitive voluminis) roll (of a
manuscript); coil, wreath, literally that which is rolled, from volvere to turn around, roll (see
volvox). Meaning book forming part of a set is 1520s in English, from that sense in French.
Generalized sense of bulk, mass, quantity (1620s) developed from that of bulk or size of a book
(1520s), again following the sense evolution in the French word.


kanji (n.)

Chinese ideographs that make up the bulk of Japanese writing, 1920, from Japanese kan Chinese + ji
letter, character.


magnitude (n.)

c.1400, greatness of size or character, from Latin magnitudo greatness, bulk, size, from magnus
great (see magnate) + -tudo, suffix forming abstract nouns from adjectives and participles (see
-tude). Meaning size, extent is from early 15c. Of stars, brightness, from 1640s.


implosion (n.)

a bursting inward, 1829, modeled on explosion, with assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see
in- (2)).    And to show how entire the neglect and confusion have been, they speak in the same
breath of all these explosions, and of the explosion of a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen, the result
of which, instead of being a gas or an enlargement of bulk, a positive quantity, is a negative one.
It is a vacuum, in a popular sense, because the produce is water. The result is an implosion (to
coin a word), not an explosion .... [Gas-light, Westminster Review, October 1829]    In early use
often in reference to effect of deep sea pressures, or in phonetics. Figurative sense is by 1960.


engross (v.)

c.1400, to buy up the whole stock of (in Anglo-French from c.1300), from Old French en gros in bulk,
in a large quantity, at wholesale, as opposed to en detail. See gross.    Figurative sense of absorb
the whole attention is first attested 1709. A parallel engross, meaning to write (something) in
large letters, is from Anglo-French engrosser, from Old French en gros in large (letters). Related:
Engrossed; engrossing.


trebuchet (n.)

medieval stone-throwing engine of war, c.1300 (in Anglo-Latin from early 13c.), from Old French
trebuchet (12c.) stone-throwing siege engine, from trabuchier to overturn, fall to the ground,
overthrow (11c.), from tra- (from Latin trans-, here expressing displacement) + Old French buc
trunk, bulk, from Frankish *buk- trunk of the body, from Proto-Germanic *bheu-, variant of *beu-,
used in forming words loosely associated with swelling (such as German bauch belly; see bull (n.2)).


space (n.)

c.1300, extent or area; room (to do something), a shortening of Old French espace period of time,
distance, interval (12c.), from Latin spatium room, area, distance, stretch of time, of unknown
origin (also source of Spanish espacio, Italian spazio).    From early 14c. as a place, also amount
or extent of time. From mid-14c. as distance, interval of space; from late 14c. as ground, land,
territory; extension in three dimensions; distance between two or more points. From early 15c. as
size, bulk, also an assigned position. Typographical sense is attested from 1670s (typewriter space-
bar is from 1876, earlier space-key, 1860).    Astronomical sense of stellar depths apparently is
first recorded 1667 in Paradise Lost, common from 1890s. Space age is attested from 1946. Many
compounds first appeared in science fiction and speculative writing, such as spaceship (1894, A
Journey in Other Worlds, John Jacob Astor); spacecraft (1928, Popular Science); space travel (1931);
space station (1936, Rockets Through Space); spaceman (1942, Thrilling Wonder Stories). Space race
attested from 1959. Space shuttle attested by 1970.    Space isn't remote at all. It's only an
hour's drive away if your car could go straight upwards. [Sir Fred Hoyle, London Observer, 1979]


