bump (n.)

1590s, protuberance caused by a blow; 1610s as a dull, solid blow; see bump (v.). The dancer's bump
and grind attested from 1940.


bump (v.)

1560s, to bulge out; 1610s, to strike heavily, perhaps from Scandinavian, probably echoic, original
sense was hitting then of swelling from being hit. Also has a long association with obsolete bum to
make a booming noise, which perhaps influenced surviving senses such as bumper crop, for something
full to the brim (see bumper). To bump into meet is from 1880s; to bump off kill is 1908 in
underworld slang. Related: Bumped; bumping. Bumpsy (adj.) was old slang for drunk (1610s).


bumptious (adj.)

assertive, 1803, probably a humorous coinage from bump on the pattern of fractious, etc. Related:
Bumptiously; bumptiousness.


bumpy (adj.)

1865, from bump + -y (2).    Fasten your seatbelts. It's going to be a bumpy night. [Bette Davis
(Margo Channing), All About Eve, 1950]    Related: Bumpiness.


bumper (n.)

1670s, glass filled to the brim; perhaps from notion of bumping as large, or from a related sense of
booming (see bump (v.)). Meaning anything unusually large is from 1759, slang. Agent-noun meaning
buffer of a car is from 1839, American English, originally in reference to railway cars; 1901 of
automobiles (in phrase bumper-to-bumper, in reference to a hypothetical situation; of actual traffic
jams by 1908).


Cher

U.S. pop performer, born Cherilyn Sarkisian (1946). As a given name for girls in U.S., it hit a bump
of popularity 1972-73 around the time she starred in a popular TV variety show.


squat (n.)

c.1400, bump, heavy fall, from squat (v.). Meaning posture of one who squats is from 1570s; that of
act of squatting is from 1580s. Slang noun sense of nothing at all first attested 1934, probably
suggestive of squatting to defecate. Weight-lifting sense is from 1954.


nub (n.)

knob, lump, bump, 1590s, variant of dialectal knub, probably a variant of knob. Figurative meaning
point, gist first recorded 1834.


self-esteem (n.)

1650s, from self- + esteem (n.). Popularized by phrenology, which assigned it a bump (Spurzheim,
1815).


bunion (n.)

1718, apparently from East Anglian dialectic bunny lump, swelling (16c.), which is probably from
Middle French buigne bump on the head, swelling from a blow (see bun).


bocce (n.)

from Italian bocce (wooden) balls, plural of boccia, which is related to French bosse bump, hump,
perhaps from a Germanic source.


Skee-Ball (n.)

1909, proprietary name (Skee-Ball Alley Company, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.), the first element said to
represent the old alternative spelling of ski (v.).    Skee ball bowling, in which the ball is
jumped or skeed into the pockets in the same manner as a skee-jumper rises from the bump in his
flight, is a new and unique hand-ball game that seems destined to great popularity. [Popular
Mechanics, July 1909]


tuber (n.)

thick underground stem, 1660s, from Latin tuber edible root, truffle; lump, bump, swelling, from PIE
*tubh-, from root *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh).


dap (n.)

fist-bump greeting, with various theories as to origin and name meaning. In U.S. popular black
culture by 1972 and controversial during the Vietnam War when used by U.S. soldiers, as it often was
regarded by whites as a ritual act of black solidarity. Probably imitative (dap was used in 19c. for
the bounce of a ball or the skip of a stone on water). Dap, meanwhile, is listed in the DAS as black
slang c.1950 for aware, up to date, also stylish, well-dressed, in the latter case at least a
shortening of dapper.


kowtow (n.)

also kow-tow, 1804, from Chinese k'o-t'ou custom of touching the ground with the forehead to show
respect or submission, literally knock the head, from k'o knock, bump + t'ou head. The verb in the
figurative sense of act in an obsequious manner is from 1826. Related: Kowtowed; kowtowing.


bunch (n.)

early 14c., protuberance on the body, swelling, perhaps echoic of the sound of hitting and connected
to bump (compare, possibly in similar relationship, hump/hunch).    The sense of cluster is mid-
15c.; connection with the earlier sense is obscure, and this may be a separate word, perhaps through
a nasalized form of Old French bouge (2), 15c., from Flemish boudje diminutive of boud bundle.
Meaning a lot, a group is from 1620s.


goosebumps (n.)

also goose bumps, 1919, from goose (n.) + bump (n.). Earlier in the same sense was goose flesh
(c.1810) and goose skin (1785).


samba (n.)

Brazilian dance of African origin, 1885, Zemba, from Portuguese samba, shortened form of zambacueca,
a type of dance, probably altered (by influence of zamacueco stupid) from zambapalo, the name of a
grotesque dance, itself an alteration of zampapalo stupid man, from zamparse to bump, crash. As a
verb from 1949.


beignet (n.)

fritter, 1835, from French beignet fritter, eggroll, doughnut (14c.), from Old French buigne bump,
lump, from a Germanic source (compare Middle High German bunge clod, lump), or from Gaulish *bunia
(compare Gaelic bonnach).


blister (n.)

c.1300, perhaps via Old French blestre blister, lump, bump, from a Scandinavian source (compare Old
Norse blastr a blowing, dative bl&aelig;stri swelling), or from Middle Dutch blyster swelling;
perhaps from PIE *bhlei- to blow, swell, extension of root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell; see
bole.


hump (n.)

1680s (in hump-backed), from Dutch homp lump, from Middle Low German hump bump, from Proto-Germanic
*hump-, from PIE *kemb- to bend, turn, change, exchange. Replaced, or perhaps influenced by, crump,
from Old English crump. A meaning attested from 1901 is mound in a railway yard over which cars must
be pushed, which may be behind the figurative sense of critical point of an undertaking (1914).
Humpback whale is from 1725.


jump (v.)

1520s, perhaps imitative (compare bump); another theory derives it from words in Gallo-Roman
dialects of southwestern France (compare jumba to rock, to balance, swing, yumpa to rock), picked up
during English occupation in Hundred Years War. Superseded native leap, bound, and spring in most
senses. Meaning to attack is from 1789; that of to do the sex act with is from 1630s. Related:
Jumped; jumping. To jump to a conclusion is from 1704. Jumping-rope is from 1805. Jump in a lake go
away and stop being a pest attested from 1912.


bun (n.)

late 14c., origin obscure, perhaps from Old French buignete a fritter, originally boil, swelling,
diminutive of buigne swelling from a blow, bump on the head, from a Germanic source (compare Middle
High German bunge clod, lump), or from Gaulish *bunia (compare Gaelic bonnach). Spanish bu&#241;elo
a fritter apparently is from the same source. Of hair coiled at the back of the head, first attested
1894. To have a bun in the oven be pregnant is from 1951.    The first record of buns in the sense
of male buttocks is from 1960s, perhaps from a perceived similarity; but bun also meant tail of a
hare (1530s) in Scottish and northern England dialect and was transferred to human beings (and
conveniently rhymed with nun in ribald ballads). This may be an entirely different word; OED points
to Gaelic bun stump, root.


hurt (v.)

c.1200, to injure, wound (the body, feelings, reputation, etc.), also to stumble (into), bump into;
charge against, rush, crash into; knock (things) together, from Old French hurter to ram, strike,
collide, perhaps from Frankish *hurt ram (cognates: Middle High German hurten run at, collide, Old
Norse hrutr ram). The English usage is as old as the French, and perhaps there was a native Old
English *hyrtan, but it has not been recorded. Meaning to be a source of pain (of a body part) is
from 1850. To hurt (one's) feelings attested by 1779. Sense of knock died out 17c., but compare
hurtle. Other Germanic languages tend to use their form of English scathe in this sense (Danish
skade, Swedish skada, German schaden, Dutch schaden).


speed (n.)

Old English sped success, a successful course; prosperity, riches, wealth; luck; opportunity,
advancement, from Proto-Germanic *spodiz (cognates: Old Saxon spod success, Dutch spoed haste,
speed, Old High German spuot success, Old Saxon spodian to cause to succeed, Middle Dutch spoeden,
Old High German spuoten to haste), from PIE *spo-ti-, from root *spe- (1) to thrive, prosper
(cognates: Sanskrit sphayate increases, Latin sperare to hope, Old Church Slavonic spechu endeavor,
Lithuanian speju to have leisure).    Meaning rapidity of movement, quickness, swiftness emerged in
late Old English (at first usually adverbially, in dative plural, as in spedum feran). Meaning rate
of motion or progress (whether fast or slow) is from c.1200. Meaning gear of a machine is attested
from 1866. Meaning methamphetamine, or a related drug, first attested 1967, from its effect on
users.   Speed limit is from 1879 (originally of locomotives); speed-trap is from 1908. Speed bump
is 1975; figurative sense is 1990s. Full speed is recorded from late 14c. Speed reading first
attested 1965. Speedball mix of cocaine and morphine or heroin is recorded from 1909.


