bus (n.)

1832, abbreviation of omnibus (q.v.). The modern English noun is nothing but a Latin dative plural
ending. To miss the bus, in the figurative sense of lose an opportunity, is from 1901, Australian
English (OED has a figurative miss the omnibus from 1886). Busman's holiday leisure time spent doing
what one does for a living (1893) is probably a reference to London bus drivers riding the buses on
their days off.


bus (v.)

1838, to travel by omnibus, from bus (n.). Transitive meaning transport students to integrate
schools is from 1961, American English. Meaning clear tables in a restaurant is first attested 1913,
probably from the four-wheeled cart used to carry dishes. Related: Bused; busing.


busboy (n.)

also bus-boy, 1913, from bus (v.) in the restaurant sense + boy.


busby (n.)

fur hat worn by hussars on parade, 1807, earlier a kind of bushy, tall wig (1764), of unknown
origin, though it is both a place name and a surname in England. Related: Busbied.


bush (n.)

many-stemmed woody plant, Old English bysc, from West Germanic *busk bush, thicket (cognates: Old
Saxon and Old High German busc, Dutch bosch, bos, German Busch). Influenced by or combined with
cognate words from Scandinavian (such as Old Norse buskr, Danish busk, but this might be from West
Germanic) and Old French (busche firewood, apparently of Frankish origin), and also perhaps Anglo-
Latin bosca firewood, from Medieval Latin busca (whence Italian bosco, Spanish bosque, French bois),
which apparently also was borrowed from West Germanic; compare Boise.    In British American
colonies, applied from 1650s to the uncleared districts, hence country, as opposed to town (1780);
probably originally from Dutch bosch in the same sense, because it seems to appear first in English
in former Dutch colonies. Meaning pubic hair (especially of a woman) is from 1745. To beat the
bushes (mid-15c.) is a way to rouse birds so that they fly into the net which others are holding,
which originally was the same thing as beating around the bush (see beat (v.)).


bush league (adj.)

mean, petty, unprofessional, 1906, from baseball slang for the small-town baseball clubs below the
minor league where talent was developed (by 1903), from bush (n.) in the slang sense of rural,
provincial, which originally was not a value judgment.


bushed (adj.)

tired, 1870, American English, perhaps from earlier sense of lost in the woods (1856), from bush
(n.).


bushel (n.)

early 14c., measure of capacity containing four pecks or eight gallons, from Old French boissel
bushel (13c., Modern French boisseau), probably from boisse, a grain measure based on Gallo-Roman
*bostia handful, from Gaulish *bosta palm of the hand (compare Irish bass, Breton boz the hollow of
the hand). The exact measure varied from place to place and according to commodity, and since late
14c. it has been used loosely to mean a large quantity or number.


bushido (n.)

1898, from Japanese, said to mean literally military-knight way.


bushing (n.)

metal sleeve fitted into a machine or hole, 1839, from gerundive of bush metal lining of the axle
hole of a wheel or touch hole of a gun (1560s), from Middle Dutch busse box (cognate with the second
element in blunderbuss).


Bushman (n.)

1785, from South African Dutch boschjesman, literally man of the bush, from boschje, from Dutch
bosje, diminutive of bosch, bos (see bush (n.)).


bushwa (n.)

also bushwah, 1920, U.S. slang, euphemistic for bullshit.


bushwhacker (n.)

also bush-whacker, 1809, American English, literally one who beats the bushes (to make his way
through), perhaps modeled on Dutch bosch-wachter forest keeper; see bush (n.) + whack (v.). In
American Civil War, irregular who took to the woods (1862), variously regarded as patriot guerillas
or as freebooters. Hence bushwhack (v.), 1837; bushwhacking (1826).


bushy (adj.)

late 14c., overgrown with bushes, from bush (n.) + -y (2). Of hair, etc., from 1610s. Related:
Bushiness.


busily (adv.)

c.1200, bisiliche; see busy (adj.) + -ly (2).


business (n.)

Old English bisignes (Northumbrian) care, anxiety, occupation, from bisig careful, anxious, busy,
occupied, diligent (see busy (adj.)) + -ness. Middle English sense of state of being much occupied
or engaged (mid-14c.) is obsolete, replaced by busyness.    Sense of a person's work, occupation is
first recorded late 14c. (in late Old English bisig (adj.) appears as a noun with the sense
occupation, state of employment). Meaning what one is about at the moment is from 1590s. Sense of
trade, commercial engagements is first attested 1727. In 17c. it also could mean sexual intercourse.
Modern two-syllable pronunciation is 17c.   Business card first attested 1840; business letter from
1766. Business end the practical or effective part (of something) is American English, by 1874.
Phrase business as usual attested from 1865. To mean business be intent on serious action is from
1856. To mind (one's) own business is from 1620s. Johnson's dictionary also has busiless At leisure;
without business; unemployed.


businessman (n.)

1826, from business + man (n.). Man of business is recorded from 1660s.


busk (n.)

strip of wood, whalebone, etc., used in corset-making, 1590s, probably from French busc (16c.), from
Italian bosco splinter, of Germanic origin (see bush (n.)).


busk (v.)

to prepare, to dress oneself, also to go, set out, c.1300, probably from Old Norse buask to prepare
oneself, reflexive of bua to prepare (see bound (adj.2)) + contraction of Old Norse reflexive
pronoun sik. Most common in northern Middle English and surviving chiefly in Scottish and northern
English dialect. Related boun had the same senses in northern and Scottish Middle English. Related:
Busked; busking.    The nautical term is attested from 1660s (in a general sense of to tack, to beat
to windward), apparently from obsolete French busquer to shift, filch, prowl, which is related to
Italian buscare to filch, prowl, Spanish buscar (from Old Spanish boscar), perhaps originally from
bosco wood (see bush (n.)), with a hunting notion of beating a wood to flush game.


busker (n.)

itinerant entertainer, 1857, from busk (v.) to offer goods for sale only in bars and taprooms, 1851
(in Mayhew), perhaps from busk to cruise as a pirate, which was used in a figurative sense by 1841,
in reference to people living shiftless and peripatetic lives. Busker has been mistakenly derived
from buskin in the stage sense.


buskin (n.)

half boot, c.1500, origin unknown. The word exists in different forms in most of the continental
languages, and the exact relationship of them all apparently has yet to be determined. The English
word is perhaps immediately from Old French broissequin buskin; a kind of cloth (14c., Modern French
brodequin by influence of broder to embroider), or from Middle Dutch brosekin small leather boot,
which is of uncertain origin. OED suggests a likely candidate in Spanish borcegui, earlier boszegui
Figurative senses in English relating to tragedy are from the word being used (since mid-16c.) to
translate Greek kothurnus, the high, thick-soled boot worn in Athenian tragedy; contrasted with
sock, the low shoe worn by comedians. Related: Buskined.


busking (n.)

1851, slang, described variously as selling articles or obscene ballads in public houses, playing
music on the streets, or performing as a sort of informal stand-up comedy act in pubs, perhaps from
an earlier word meaning to cruise as a pirate (see busker).


buss (n.)

a kiss, 1560s; probably of imitative origin, as are Welsh and Gaelic bus kiss, lip, French baiser
kiss (12c., from Latin basiare), Spanish buz, German dialectal Buss.


buss (v.)

1570s, from buss (n.). Related: Bussed; bussing.  Kissing and bussing differ both in this,We busse
our wantons, but our wives we kisse.[Robert Herrick, Hesperides, 1648]


bussing (n.)

kissing, 1888, verbal noun from buss (v.).


bust (n.1)

1690s, sculpture of upper torso and head, from French buste (16c.), from Italian busto upper body,
from Latin bustum funeral monument, tomb, originally funeral pyre, place where corpses are burned,
perhaps shortened from ambustum, neuter of ambustus burned around, past participle of amburere burn
around, scorch, from ambi- around + urere to burn. Or perhaps from Old Latin boro, the early form of
classical Latin uro to burn. Sense development in Italian is probably from Etruscan custom of
keeping dead person's ashes in an urn shaped like the person when alive. Meaning bosom is by 1884.


bust (n.2)

variant of burst (n.), 1764, American English. For loss of -r-, compare ass (n.2). Originally
frolic, spree; sense of sudden failure is from 1842. Meaning police raid or arrest is from 1938.
Phrase ______ or bust as an emphatic expression attested by 1851 in British depictions of Western
U.S. dialect. Probably from earlier expression bust (one's) boiler, by late 1840s, a reference to
steamboat boilers exploding when driven too hard.


bust (v.)

to burst, 1806, variant of burst (v.); for loss of -r-, compare ass (n.2). Meaning go bankrupt is
from 1834. Meaning break into is from 1859. The slang meaning demote (especially in a military
sense) is from 1918; that of place under arrest is from 1953 (earlier to raid from Prohibition). In
card games, to go over a score of 21, from 1939. Related: Busted; busting.


bustard (n.)

large crane-like bird, mid-15c. (late 14c. as a surname), from Old French bistarde, said to be from
Latin avis tarda, but the sense of this (slow bird) is the opposite of the bird's behavior.


busted (adj.)

broken, ruined, 1837, past participle adjective from bust (v.).


buster (n.)

1838, anything large; a man of great strength, American English slang (originally
Missouri/Arkansas), perhaps meaning something that takes one's breath away and an agent noun from
bust (v.). Around the same years, buster (as an extended form of bust (n.)) also meant a frolic, a
spree. Hence a roistering blade (OED; probably not the favored definition in old Missouri and
Arkansas), attested from 1850. As a generic or playful address to a male, from 1948, American
English. Meaning horse-breaker is from 1891, American English; hence back-formed verb bust (v.)
break a horse.


bustier (n.)

1979, from French bustier, from buste bust (see bust (n.1)).


bustle (v.)

be active, 1570s (bustling noisy or excited activity is from early 15c.), frequentative of Middle
English bresten to rush, break, from Old English bersten (see burst (v.)), influenced by Old Norse
buask to make oneself ready (see busk (v.)), or from busk (v.) via a frequentative form buskle.
Related: Bustled; bustling; bustler.


bustle (n.2)

padding in a skirt, 1788, of uncertain origin, perhaps from German Buschel bunch, pad, or it might
be a special use of bustle (n.1) with reference to rustling motion.    BUSTLE. A pad stuffed with
cotton, feathers, bran, &amp;c.;, worn by ladies for the double purpose of giving a greater
rotundity or prominence to the hips, and setting off the smallness of the waist. [Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


bustle (n.1)

activity, stir, fuss, commotion, 1630s, from bustle (v.).


bustling (adj.)

of a place, 1880, present participle adjective from bustle (v.).


busty (adj.)

having large breasts, 1944, from bust (n.1) in the bosom sense + -y (2). Related: Bustiness.


busy (adj.)

Old English bisig careful, anxious, later continually employed or occupied, cognate with Old Dutch
bezich, Low German besig; no known connection with any other Germanic or Indo-European language.
Still pronounced as in Middle English, but for some unclear reason the spelling shifted to -u- in
15c.    The notion of anxiousness has drained from the word since Middle English. Often in a bad
sense in early Modern English, prying, meddlesome (preserved in busybody). The word was a euphemism
for sexually active in 17c. Of telephone lines, 1893. Of display work, excessively detailed,
visually cluttered, 1903.


busy (v.)

late Old English bisgian, from busy (adj.). Related: Busied; busying.


busy-work (n.)

also busy work, 1910, from busy (adj.) + work (n.).


busybody (n.)

meddlesome person, 1520s, from busy (adj.) in the otherwise-obsolete sense prying, meddlesome + body
person.


busyness (n.)

1849, first attested in Thoreau, from busy (adj.) + -ness. A modern formation made necessary after
business evolved away from busy.


abuse (v.)

early 15c., to misuse, misapply, from Middle French abuser, from Vulgar Latin *abusare, from Latin
abusus an abusing, using up, past participle of abuti use up, also misuse, from ab- away (see ab-) +
uti use (see use). Of sexual situations from early 15c., but originally incest, homosexuality,
prostitution, etc.; meaning to misuse sexually, ravish is from 1550s. Specifically of drugs, from
1968. Related: Abused; abusing.


abuse (n.)

mid-15c., improper practice, from Old French abus (14c.), from Latin abusus (see abuse (v.)).
Earlier in Middle English was abusion wicked act or practice, shameful thing, violation of decency
(early 14c.), an insult (mid-14c.).


abuser (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from abuse (v.).


abusive (adj.)

1530s (implied in abusively), originally improper, from Middle French abusif, from Latin abusivus,
from abus-, past participle stem of abuti (see abuse (v.)). Meaning full of abuse is from 1580s.
Abuseful was used 17c., and Shakespeare has abusious (Taming of the Shrew, 1594). Related:
Abusiveness.


agribusiness (n.)

1955, compound formed from agriculture + business.


ambuscade (n.)

1580s, essentially a variant form of ambush (n.), representing a reborrowing of that French word
after it had been Italianized. Ambuscade is from French embuscade (16c.), Gallicized from Italian
imboscata, literally a hiding in the bush, compounded from the same elements as Old French
embuscher. Sometimes in English as ambuscado, with faux Spanish ending of the sort popular in 17c.


ambush (v.)

c.1300, from Old French embuscher (13c., Modern French emb&#251;cher) to lay an ambush, from en- in
+ busch wood, apparently from Frankish *busk bush, woods (see bush (n.)). Related: Ambushed;
ambushing.


ambush (n.)

late 15c., embushe, from the English verb or from Middle French embusche, from Old French embuscher
(see ambush (v.)). Earlier was ambushment (late 14c.). Figurative use by 1590s.


