bust (n.2)

variant of burst (n.), 1764, American English. For loss of -r-, compare ass (n.2). Originally
frolic, spree; sense of sudden failure is from 1842. Meaning police raid or arrest is from 1938.
Phrase ______ or bust as an emphatic expression attested by 1851 in British depictions of Western
U.S. dialect. Probably from earlier expression bust (one's) boiler, by late 1840s, a reference to
steamboat boilers exploding when driven too hard.


buster (n.)

1838, anything large; a man of great strength, American English slang (originally
Missouri/Arkansas), perhaps meaning something that takes one's breath away and an agent noun from
bust (v.). Around the same years, buster (as an extended form of bust (n.)) also meant a frolic, a
spree. Hence a roistering blade (OED; probably not the favored definition in old Missouri and
Arkansas), attested from 1850. As a generic or playful address to a male, from 1948, American
English. Meaning horse-breaker is from 1891, American English; hence back-formed verb bust (v.)
break a horse.


bustier (n.)

1979, from French bustier, from buste bust (see bust (n.1)).


busted (adj.)

broken, ruined, 1837, past participle adjective from bust (v.).


busty (adj.)

having large breasts, 1944, from bust (n.1) in the bosom sense + -y (2). Related: Bustiness.


bust (v.)

to burst, 1806, variant of burst (v.); for loss of -r-, compare ass (n.2). Meaning go bankrupt is
from 1834. Meaning break into is from 1859. The slang meaning demote (especially in a military
sense) is from 1918; that of place under arrest is from 1953 (earlier to raid from Prohibition). In
card games, to go over a score of 21, from 1939. Related: Busted; busting.


bust (n.1)

1690s, sculpture of upper torso and head, from French buste (16c.), from Italian busto upper body,
from Latin bustum funeral monument, tomb, originally funeral pyre, place where corpses are burned,
perhaps shortened from ambustum, neuter of ambustus burned around, past participle of amburere burn
around, scorch, from ambi- around + urere to burn. Or perhaps from Old Latin boro, the early form of
classical Latin uro to burn. Sense development in Italian is probably from Etruscan custom of
keeping dead person's ashes in an urn shaped like the person when alive. Meaning bosom is by 1884.


vital statistics (n.)

1837, with reference to birth, marriage, death, etc.; meaning a woman's bust, waist, and hip
measurements is from 1952. See vital.


sodbuster (n.)

pioneer farmer in a cattle-grazing region, originally in the U.S. West, 1897, from sod (n.1) + agent
noun from bust (v.).


urn (n.)

late 14c., large, rounded vase used to preserve the ashes of the dead, from Latin urna a jar, vessel
of baked clay, water-jar; vessel for the ashes of the dead (also used as a ballot box and for
drawing lots), probably from earlier *urc-na, akin to urceus pitcher, jug, and from the same source
as Greek hyrke earthen vessel. But another theory connects it to Latin urere to burn (compare bust
(n.1)).


ass (n.2)

slang for backside, first attested 1860 in nautical slang, in popular use from 1930; chiefly U.S.;
from dialectal variant pronunciation of arse (q.v.). The loss of -r- before -s- attested in several
other words (such as burst/bust, curse/cuss, horse/hoss, barse/bass). Indirect evidence of the
change from arse to ass can be traced to 1785 (in euphemistic avoidance of ass donkey by polite
speakers) and perhaps to Shakespeare, if Nick Bottom transformed into a donkey in A Midsummer
Night's Dream (1594) is the word-play some think it is. Meaning woman regarded as a sexual object is
from 1942. Colloquial (one's) ass one's self, one's person attested by 1958.


