buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


Mae West

type of inflatable life jacket, 1940, military slang, in reference to the screen name of the buxom
U.S. film star (1892-1980).


zaftig (adj.)

alluringly plump, curvaceous, buxom, 1937, from Yiddish zaftik, literally juicy, from zaft juice,
from Middle High German saft juice (see sap (n.1)).


crummy (adj.)

1560s, easily crumbled; 1570s, like bread, from crumb + -y (2). The second sense probably accounts
for 18c. (and later in dialects) use, of a woman, attractively plump, full-figured, buxom. Slang
meaning shoddy, filthy, inferior, poorly made in use by 1859, probably is from the first sense, but
influenced by crumb in its slang sense of louse.


tall (adj.)

high in stature, 1520s, probably from Middle English tal handsome, good-looking; valiant; lively in
speech; large, big; humble, meek, from Old English get&aelig;l prompt, active, from Germanic
*(ge)-tala- (cognates: Old High German gi-zal quick, Gothic un-tals indocile). Main modern sense
being of more than average height (and slim in proportion to height) probably evolved out of earlier
meanings brave, valiant, seemly, proper (c.1400), attractive, handsome (late 14c.).    Sense
evolution is remarkable [OED], but adjectives applied to persons can wander far in meaning (such as
pretty, buxom, German klein small, little, which in Middle High German meant the same as its English
cognate clean (adj.)). Meaning having a (defined) height, whether lofty or not is from 1580s.
Meaning exaggerated (as in tall tale) is American English colloquial attested by 1846. Phrase tall,
dark, and handsome is recorded from 1906. Related: Tallness.


