caprice (n.)

sudden change of mind, 1660s, from French caprice whim (16c.), from Italian capriccio whim,
originally a shivering, possibly from capro goat, with reference to frisking, from Latin capreolus
wild goat (see cab). But another theory connects the Italian word with capo head + riccio curl,
frizzled, literally hedgehog (from Latin ericius). The notion in this case would be of the hair
standing on end in horror, hence the person shivering in fear.


capriccio (n.)

1690s as a term in music for a kind of free composition, from Italian capriccio sudden start or
motion (see caprice). Earlier it meant prank, trick (1660s); caprice (c.1600).


whim (n.)

1640s, play on words, pun, shortened from whimwham fanciful object (q.v.). Meaning caprice, fancy,
sudden turn or inclination of the mind first recorded 1690s, probably a shortened form of whimsy.


capricious (adj.)

1590s, from French capricieux whimsical (16c.), from Italian capriccioso, from capriccio (see
caprice). Related: Capriciously; capriciousness.


tic (n.)

twitching of a facial muscle, 1822, often a shortening of tic douloureux severe facial neuralgia,
literally painful twitch (1798), from French tic a twitching disease of horses (17c.), of unknown
origin. Klein suggests an imitative origin; Diez compare it to Italian ticchio whim, caprice,
ridiculous habit, itself of unknown origin.


verve (n.)

1690s, special talent in writing, enthusiasm in what pertains to art and literature, from French
verve enthusiasm (especially pertaining to the arts), in Old French caprice, odd humor, proverb,
saying; messenger's report (12c.), probably from Gallo-Roman *verva, from Latin verba (whimsical)
words, plural of verbum word (see verb). Meaning mental vigor is first recorded 1803.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


