castrate (v.)

1610s (implied in castrated), back-formation from castration (q.v.), or from Latin castratus, past
participle of castrare. The figurative sense is attested earlier (1550s). Related: Castrating.


geld (v.)

to castrate, c.1300, from Old Norse gelda castrate from geldr barren, from Proto-Germanic *galdu-,
from PIE *ghel- (3) to cut. Related: Gelded. Compare Old Norse geldr yielding no milk, dry, Old High
German galt barren, said of a cow.


gelding (n.)

late 13c. (as a surname), from Old Norse geldingr, from gelda castrate (see geld (v.)).


emasculate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin emasculatus, past participle of emasculare castrate, from ex- out, away (see ex-)
+ masculus male, manly (see masculine). Originally and usually in a figurative sense. Related:
Emasculated; emasculating.


knacker (v.)

usually in past tense, knackered, to kill, castrate (1855), but most often used in weakened sense of
to tire out (1883); apparently from knacker (n.) worn-out or useless horse, 1812, of unknown origin;
possibly from a dialectal survival of a Scandinavian word represented by Old Norse hnakkur saddle,
hnakki back of the neck, and thus possibly related to neck (n.).


castration (n.)

early 15c., castracioun, from Latin castrationem (nominative castratio), noun of action from past
participle stem of castrare to castrate, emasculate, supposedly from a noun *castrum knife,
instrument that cuts, from PIE root *kes- to cut (see caste). Freud's castration complex is attested
from 1914 in English (translating German Kastrationsangst).


dismember (v.)

c.1300, from Old French desmembrer (11c.), from Medieval Latin dismembrare tear limb from limb;
castrate, from Latin de- take away + membrum limb (see member). Related: Dismembered; dismembering.


fix (v.)

late 14c., set (one's eyes or mind) on something, probably from Old French *fixer, from fixe fixed,
from Latin fixus fixed, fast, immovable, established, settled, past participle of figere to fix,
fasten, from PIE root *dhigw- to stick, to fix.    Sense of fasten, attach is c.1400; that of
settle, assign is pre-1500 and evolved into adjust, arrange (1660s), then repair (1737). Sense of
tamper with (a fight, a jury, etc.) is 1790. As euphemism for castrate a pet it dates from 1930.
Related: Fixed; fixedly (1590s); fixing.


hatchet (n.)

c.1300 small ax (mid-12c. in surnames), from Old French hachete, diminutive of hache ax, battle-axe,
pickaxe, possibly from Frankish *happja or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *hapjo-
(cognates: Old High German happa sickle, scythe), from PIE root *kop- to beat, strike (cognates:
Greek kopis knife; Lithuanian kaplys hatchet, kapoti cut small; Old Church Slavonic skopiti
castrate).    In Middle English, hatch itself was used in a sense battle-axe. In 14c., hang up
(one's) hatchet meant stop what one is doing. Phrase bury the hatchet (1794) is from a supposed
Native American peacemaking custom. Hatchet-man was originally California slang for hired Chinese
assassin (1880), later extended figuratively to journalists who attacked the reputation of a public
figure (1944).


