casualness (n.)

1730, from casual (adj.) + -ness.


casualty (n.)

early 15c., chance, accident; incidental charge, from casual (adj.) on model of royalty, penalty,
etc. Casuality had some currency 16c.-17c. but is now obsolete. Meaning losses in numbers from a
military or other troop is from late 15c. Meaning an individual killed,  wounded, or lost in battle
is from 1844.


casual (adj.)

late 14c., subject to or produced by chance, from Middle French casuel (15c.), from Late Latin
casualis by chance, from Latin casus chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, event (see case
(n.1)).    Of persons, in the sense of not to be depended on, unmethodical, it is attested from
1883; meaning showing lack of interest is from 1916. Of clothes, informal, from 1939. Related:
Casually.


wanna (v.)

representing the casual pronunciation of want to, by 1896.


betcha

representing casual pronunciation of bet you, attested by 1904.


kewl

1996 as a representation of a casual pronunciation of cool.


kinda

1890, representing a casual pronunciation of kind of.


gotta

attempt to represent the casual pronunciation of got to, attested from 1885.


nuff

1840, American English, representing a casual or colloquial pronunciation of enough.


shoulda

verbal phrase, 1902, representing casual (American) pronunciation of should have.


knockoff (n.)

cheap imitation, 1966, from the verbal phrase knock off do hastily; in reference to the casual way
the things are made.


wannabe (n.)

1981, originally American English surfer slang, from casual pronunciation of want to be; popularized
c.1984 in reference to female fans of pop singer Madonna.


guv

1890, shortening of guvner, casual British pronunciation of governor as a title of respect.


fella (n.)

attempt at phonetic spelling of a casual pronunciation of fellow, attested by 1864. Feller, along
the same lines, is recorded by 1825.


helluva (adj.)

1910, attempt to represent the casual pronunciation of expression hell of a _____, which is attested
from 1776 (see hell).


Mac

casual, generic term of address for a man, 1928, from Irish and Gaelic mac, a common element in
Scottish and Irish names (literally son of; see Mac-); hence used generally from early 19c. for a
Celtic Irishman.


top-sider (n.)

kind of casual shoe, 1937, from topside in nautical sense of upper deck of a ship, where the rubber
soles would provide good grip; from top (n.1) + side (n.).


grass widow (n.)

1520s, originally discarded mistress (compare German Strohwitwe, literally straw-widow), probably in
reference to casual bedding. Sense of married woman whose husband is absent is from 1846.[G]rasse
wydowes ... be yet as seuerall as a barbours chayre and neuer take but one at onys. [More, 1528]


gonna

attempt to represent the casual pronunciation of going to. In Scottish dialect, ganna, gaunna
recorded from 1806.


occasional (adj.)

late 14c., occurring now and then, from occasion (n.) + -al (1). Meaning casual is 1560s. Meaning
happening on or pertaining to a particular occasion is from 1630s. Of furniture, etc., from 1749.


i&#039;nt

also i'n't, 18c., contraction representing a casual pronunciation of isn't it.


incidental (adj.)

casual, occasional, 1610s, from Medieval Latin incidentalis, from incidens (see incident (n.)).
Incidentals (n.) 'occasional' expenses, etc., is attested by 1707.


tinker (n.)

mender of kettles, pots, pans, etc., late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), of uncertain origin. Some
connect the word with the sound made by light hammering on metal. Tinker's damn something slight and
worthless is from 1824, probably preserving tinkers' reputation for free and casual use of
profanity; the plain and simple etymology is not good enough for some writers, and since 1877 an
ingeniously elaborate but baseless derivation has been circulated claiming the second word is really
dam.


desultory (adj.)

1580s, skipping about, from Latin desultorius hasty, casual, superficial, adjective form of desultor
(n.) a rider in the circus who jumps from one horse to another while they are in gallop, from
desul-, stem of desilire jump down, from de- down (see de-) + salire to jump, leap (see salient
(adj.)). Sense of irregular, without aim or method is c.1740. Related: Desultorily; desultoriness.


fortuitous (adj.)

1650s, from Latin fortuitus happening by chance, casual, accidental, from forte by chance, ablative
of fors chance (related to fortuna; see fortune). It means accidental, undesigned not fortunate.
Earlier in this sense was fortuit (late 14c.), from French. Related: Fortuitously; fortuitousness.


hussy (n.)

1520s, mistress of a household, housewife, alteration of Middle English husewif (see housewife).
Gradually broadened to mean any woman or girl, and by 1650 was being applied to a woman or girl who
shows casual or improper behavior, and a general derogatory sense had overtaken the word by late
18c. It is common to use housewife in a good, and huswife or hussy in a bad sense [Johnson].


censure (v.)

1580s, from censure (n.) or else  from French censurer, from censure (n.). Related: Censured;
censuring.    Such men are so watchful to censure, that the have seldom much care to look for
favourable interpretations of ambiguities, to set the general tenor of life against single failures,
or to know how soon any slip of inadvertency has been expiated by sorrow and retractation; but let
fly their fulminations, without mercy or prudence, against slight offences or casual temerities,
against crimes never committed, or immediately repented. [Johnson, Life of Sir Thomas Browne, 1756]


drop (n.)

Old English dropa a drop of liquid, from Proto-Germanic *drupon (cognates: Old Saxon dropo, Old
Norse dropi, Dutch drop, Old High German tropfo, German Tropfen (n.)), from PIE *dhreu-.    Meaning
an act of dropping is from 1630s; of immaterial things (prices, temperatures, etc.) from mid-19c.
Meaning lozenge, hard candy is 1723. Meaning secret place where things can be left illicitly and
picked up later is from 1931.   Drop in the bucket (late 14c.) is from Isa. ix:15 [KJV]. At the drop
of a hat suddenly is from 1854; drop-in casual visit is 1819; drop-kick is 1857. To get the drop on
someone originally was Old West gunslinger slang (1869).


N

in nickname, newt, and British dialectal naunt, the -n- belongs to a preceding indefinite article an
or possessive pronoun mine.    Other examples of this from Middle English manuscripts include a
neilond (an island, early 13c.), a narawe (an arrow, c.1400), a nox (an ox, c.1400), a noke (an oak,
early 15c.), a nappyle (an apple, early 15c.), a negge (an egg, 15c.). In 16c., an idiot sometimes
became a nidiot, which, with still-common casual pronunciation, became nidget, which, alas, has not
survived.    The process also worked in surnames, from oblique cases of Old English at by, near, as
in Nock/Nokes/Noaks from atten Oke by the oak; Nye from atten ye near the lowland; and see
Nashville.    But it is more common for an English word to lose an -n- to a preceding a: apron,
auger, adder, umpire, humble pie, etc. The mathematical use of n for an indefinite number is first
recorded 1852, in to the nth power.


see (v.)

Old English seon to see, look, behold; observe, perceive, understand; experience, visit, inspect
(contracted class V strong verb; past tense seah, past participle sewen), from Proto-Germanic
*sekhwan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German sehan, Middle High German, German sehen, Old Frisian
sia, Middle Dutch sien, Old Norse sja, Gothic saihwan), from PIE root *sekw- (2) to see, which is
probably identical with *sekw- (1) to follow  (see sequel), a root which produced words for say in
Greek and Latin, and also words for follow (such as Latin sequor), but opinions differ in regard to
the semantic starting-point and sequences [Buck]. Thus see might originally mean follow with the
eyes.    Used in Middle English to mean behold in the imagination or in a dream (c.1200), to
recognize the force of (a demonstration), also c.1200. Sense of escort (as in to see (someone) home)
first recorded 1607 in Shakespeare. Meaning to receive as a visitor is attested from c.1500.
Gambling sense of equal a bet is from 1590s. See you as a casual farewell first attested 1891. Let
me see as a pausing statement is recorded from 1510s. To have seen everything as a hyperbolic
expression of astonishment is from 1957.  When you have seen one of their Pictures, you have seen
all. [Blake, c.1811]


