cede (v.)

1630s, from French c&#233;der or directly from Latin cedere to yield, give place; to give up some
right or property, originally to go from, proceed, leave, from Proto-Italic *kesd-o- to go away,
avoid, from PIE root *sed- (2) to go, yield (cognates: Sanskrit sedhati to drive; chase away;
Avestan apa-had- turn aside, step aside; Greek hodos way, hodites wanderer, wayfarer; Old Church
Slavonic chodu a walking, going, choditi to go). Related: Ceded; ceding. The sense evolution in
Latin is via the notion of to go away, withdraw, give ground.


odometer (n.)

1791, from French odom&egrave;tre (1724), from Greek hodos way (see cede) + -meter. First recorded
in writings of Thomas Jefferson.


diode (n.)

1886, from Greek di- twice + hodos way (see cede).


electrode (n.)

1834, coined by English physicist and chemist Michael Faraday (1791-1867) from electro- + Greek
hodos way (see cede) on same pattern as anode, cathode.


cession (n.)

late 14c., a relinquishing, from Old French cession cession; death (13c.), from Latin cessionem
(nominative cessio) a giving up, surrendering, noun of action from past participle stem of cedere to
go away, yield (see cede). Related: Cessionary.


precede (v.)

early 15c., lead the way; occur before, from Middle French preceder and directly from Latin
praecedere to go before, from prae before (see pre-) + cedere to go (see cede). Meaning to walk in
front of is late 15c.; that of to go before in rank or importance is attested from mid-15c. Related:
Preceded; preceding.


anode (n.)

1834, coined from Greek anodos way up, from ana up (see ana-) + hodos way (see cede). Proposed by
the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English polymath, and published by English chemist and
physicist Michael Faraday (1791-1867). So called from the path the electrical current was thought to
take. Related: Anodic.


abscess (n.)

1610s, from Latin abscessus an abscess (Celsus), literally a going away, from stem of abscedere
withdraw, from ab- away (see ab-) + cedere to go (see cede). The notion is that humors go from the
body through the pus in the swelling.


Exodus

late Old English, the second book of the Old Testament, from Latin exodus, from Greek exodos a
military expedition; a solemn procession; departure; death, literally a going out, from ex- out (see
ex-) + hodos way (see cede). General sense (with lower-case -e-) is from 1620s.


concede (v.)

1630s, from Middle French conc&eacute;der or directly from Latin concedere give way, yield, go away,
depart, retire, figuratively agree, consent, give precedence, from com-, intensive prefix (see
com-), + cedere to go, grant, give way (see cede). Related: Conceded; conceding.


recede (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French receder, from Latin recedere to go back, fall back; withdraw, depart,
retire, from re- back (see re-) + cedere to go (see cede). Related: Receded; receding.


necessary (adj.)

late 14c. needed, required, essential, indispensable, from Old French necessaire necessary, urgent,
compelling (13c.), and directly from Latin necessarius unavoidable, indispensable, necessary, from
necesse unavoidable, indispensable, originally no backing away, from ne- not + cedere to withdraw,
go away, yield (see cede). The root sense is of that from which there is no evasion, that which is
inevitable. Necessary house privy is from c.1600. Necessary evil is from 1540s (the original
reference was to woman).


method (n.)

early 15c., regular, systematic treatment of disease, from Latin methodus way of teaching or going,
from Greek methodos scientific inquiry, method of inquiry, investigation, originally pursuit, a
following after, from meta- after (see meta-) + hodos a traveling, way (see cede). Meaning way of
doing anything is from 1580s; that of orderliness, regularity is from 1610s. In reference to a
theory of acting associated with Russian director Konstantin Stanislavsky, it is attested from 1923.


intercede (v.)

1570s, a back-formation from intercession, or else from Latin intercedere intervene, come between,
be between, from inter- between (see inter-) + cedere go (see cede). Related: Interceded;
interceding.


cease (v.)

c.1300, cesen, from Old French cesser to come to an end, stop, cease; give up, desist, from Latin
cessare to cease, go slow, give over, leave off, be idle, frequentative of cedere (past participle
cessus) go away, withdraw, yield (see cede). Related: Ceased; ceasing. Old English in this sense had
geswican, blinnan.


synod (n.)

late 14c., ecclesiastical council, from Late Latin synodus, from Greek synodos assembly, meeting; a
coming together, conjunction of planets, from syn- together (see syn-) + hodos a going, a way (see
cede). Earlier in English as sinoth (early 12c.). Used by Presbyterians for assembly of ministers
and other elders from 1593 to c.1920, when replaced by General Council.


renounce (v.)

late 14c., from Old French renoncier give up, cede (12c., Modern French renoncer), from Latin
renuntiare bring back word; proclaim; protest against, renounce, from re- against (see re-) +
nuntiare to report, announce, from nuntius messenger (see nuncio). Related: Renounced; renouncing.


secession (n.)

1530s, from Latin secessionem (nominative secessio) a withdrawal, separation; political withdrawal,
insurrection, schism, noun of action from past participle stem of secedere secede, from se- apart
(see secret) + cedere to go (see cede). Originally in a Roman historical context, temporary
migration of plebeians from the city to compel patricians to address their grievances; modern use in
reference to religious or political unions dates from 1650s.


antecedent

late 14c. (n. and adj.), from Old French antecedent (14c.) or directly from Latin antecedentem
(nominative antecedens), present participle of antecedere go before, precede, from ante- before (see
ante) + cedere to yield (see cede). Used as a noun in Latin philosophical writings.


accede (v.)

early 15c., from Latin accedere approach, enter upon, from ad- to (see ad-) + cedere go, move (see
cede). Latin ad- usually became ac- before k sounds. Related: Acceded; acceding.


proceed (v.)

late 14c., to go on, also to emanate from, result from, from Old French proceder (13c., Modern
French proc&#233;der) and directly from Latin procedere (past participle processus) go before, go
forward, advance, make progress; come forward, from pro- forward (see pro-) + cedere to go (see
cede). Related: Proceeded; proceeding.


cathode (n.)

1834, from Latinized form of Greek kathodos a way down, from kata- down (see cata-) + hodos way (see
cede). Proposed by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English polymath, and published by English
chemist and physicist Michael Faraday (1791-1867). So called from the path the electric current was
supposed to take. Related: Cathodic; cathodal. Cathode ray first attested 1880, but the phenomenon
known from 1859; cathode ray tube is from 1905.


decease (n.)

death, early 14c., from Old French deces (12c., Modern French d&eacute;c&egrave;s) decease, death,
from Latin decessus death (euphemism for mors), also a retirement, a departure, from decess-, past
participle stem of decedere die, depart, withdraw, literally to go down, from de- away (see de-) +
cedere go (see cede). Still used with a tinge of euphemism.


succeed (v.)

late 14c., intransitive and transitive, come next after, follow after another; take the place of
another, be elected or chosen for a position, from Old French succeder to follow on (14c.) and
directly from Latin succedere come after, follow after; go near to; come under; take the place of,
also go from under, mount up, ascend, hence get on well, prosper, be victorious, from sub next to,
after (see sub-) + cedere go, move (see cede).    Meaning to continue, endure is from early 15c. The
sense of turn out well, have a favorable result in English is first recorded late 15c., with
ellipsis of adverb (succeed well). Of persons, to be successful, from c.1500. Related: Succeeded;
succeeding.


ancestor (n.)

c.1300, ancestre, antecessour, from Old French ancestre (12c., Modern French anc&ecirc;tre), from
Late Latin antecessor predecessor, literally foregoer, agent noun from past participle stem of Latin
antecedere to precede, from ante- before (see ante) + cedere to go (see cede). Current form from
early 15c. Feminine form ancestress recorded from 1570s.


exceed (v.)

late 14c., from Old French exceder (14c.) exceed, surpass, go too far, from Latin excedere depart,
go beyond, be in excess, surpass, from ex- out (see ex-) + cedere go, yield (see cede). Related:
Exceeded; exceeding. Exceedingly (late 15c.) means very greatly or very much; excessively (mid-15c.)
means too greatly or too much.


period (n.)

early 15c., course or extent of time, from Middle French periode (14c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin periodus recurring portion, cycle, from Latin periodus a complete sentence, also cycle of the
Greek games, from Greek periodos cycle, circuit, period of time, literally a going around, from
peri- around (see peri-) + hodos a going, way, journey (see cede).    Sense of repeated cycle of
events led to that of interval of time. Meaning dot marking end of a sentence first recorded c.1600,
from similar use in Medieval Latin (in late 16c. English it meant full pause at the end of a
sentence). Sense of menstruation dates from 1822. Educational sense of portion of time set apart for
a lesson is from 1876. Sporting sense attested from 1898. As an adjective from 1905; period piece
attested from 1911.


