cessation (n.)

mid-15c., cessacyoun interruption, abdication, from Latin cessationem (nominative cessatio) a
delaying, ceasing, tarrying, noun of action from past participle stem of cessare delay (see cease
(n.)).


cease (n.)

cessation, stopping, c.1300, from cease (n.) or else from Old French cesse cease, cessation, from
cesser.


slack (n.1)

early 14c., cessation (of pain, grief, etc.), from slack (adj.). Meaning a cessation of flow in a
current or tide is from 1756; that of still stretch of a river is from 1825. Meaning loose part or
end (of a rope, sail, etc.) is from 1794; hence figurative senses in take up the slack (1930
figuratively) and slang cut (someone) some slack (1968). Meaning quiet period, lull is from 1851.
Slacks loose trousers first recorded 1824, originally military.


let up (n.)

cessation, 1837, from verbal phrase let up cease, stop (1787). In Old English the phrase meant to
put ashore.


standstill (n.)

state of cessation of movement, 1702, from stand (v.) + still (adv.). Earlier the notion would have
been expressed simply by stand.


still (adv.)

even now, even then, yet (as in still standing there), 1530s, from still (adj.) in the sense without
change or cessation, continual (c.1300); the sense of even, yet (as in still more) is from 1730.


stop (n.)

late 14c., a plug; mid-15c., a cessation, from stop (v.). Of mechanisms of musical instruments from
c.1500, especially of organs, where opening them makes it produce more sound, hence figurative
phrase pull out the stops (1909). From 1660s in phonetics, 1831 in photography. Meaning a stopping
place is from 1889. To put a stop to some activity is from 1670s (earlier give a stop to, 1580s).


cease-fire (n.)

also ceasefire, a cessation of shooting, 1916, from verbal phrase cease fire, 1847 as a military
command (formerly also signaled by bugles), from cease (v.) + fire (n.) in the gunnery sense.
Generally two words until after mid-20c.


interruption (n.)

late 14c., a break of continuity, from Old French interrupcion and directly from Latin
interruptionem (nominative interruptio) a breaking off, interruption, interval, noun of action from
past participle stem of interrumpere (see interrupt). Meaning a breaking in upon some action is from
c.1400; that of a pause, a temporary cessation is early 15c.


pause (n.)

early 15c., from Old French pausee a pause, interruption (14c.) and directly from Latin pausa a
halt, stop, cessation, from Greek pausis stopping, ceasing, from pauein to stop, to cause to cease,
from PIE root *paus- to leave, desert, cease, stop.


menopause (n.)

1852 (from 1845 as a French word in English), from French m&eacute;nopause, from medical Latin
menopausis, from Greek men (genitive menos) month (see moon (n.)) + pausis a cessation, a pause,
from pauein to cause to cease (see pause (n.)). Earlier it was change of life.


withdrawal (n.)

1820s, act of taking back, also retraction of a statement, from withdraw + -al (2). Earlier words in
the same sense were withdrawment (1640s); withdraught (mid-14c.). Meaning removal of money from a
bank, etc. is from 1861; psychological sense is from 1916; meaning physical reaction to the
cessation of an addictive substance is from 1929 (with an isolated use from 1897; withdrawal symptom
is from 1910). As a synonym for coitus interruptus from 1889.


strike (n.)

1580s, act of striking, from strike (v.). Meaning concentrated cessation of work by a body of
employees is from 1810. Baseball sense is first recorded 1841, originally meaning any contact with
the ball; modern sense developed by 1890s, apparently from foul strike, which counted against the
batter, and as hit came to be used for contact with the ball this word was left for a swing and a
miss that counts against the batter; figurative sense of have two strikes against (of a possible
three) is from 1938. Bowling sense attested from 1859. Meaning sudden military attack is attested
from 1942.


suspense (n.)

c.1400, abeyance, temporary cessation; state of not being carried out (of legal matters), from
Anglo-French suspens (in en suspens in abeyance, c.1300), Old French sospense delay, deferment (of
judgement), act of suspending, from Latin suspensus, past participle of suspendere to hang up;
interrupt (see suspend). Meaning state of mental uncertainty with more or less anxiety (mid-15c.) is
from legal meaning, perhaps via notion of awaiting an expected decision, or from state of having the
mind or thoughts suspended. As a genre of novels, stories, etc., attested from 1951.


peace (n.)

mid-12c., freedom from civil disorder, from Anglo-French pes, Old French pais peace, reconciliation,
silence, permission (11c., Modern French paix), from Latin pacem (nominative pax) compact,
agreement, treaty of peace, tranquility, absence of war (source of Proven&ccedil;al patz, Spanish
paz, Italian pace), from PIE *pag-/*pak- fasten, related to pacisci to covenant or agree (see pact).
Replaced Old English fri&eth;, also sibb, which also meant happiness. Modern spelling is 1500s,
reflecting vowel shift. Sense in peace of mind is from c.1200. Used in various greetings from
c.1300, from Biblical Latin pax, Greek eirene, which were used by translators to render Hebrew
shalom, properly safety, welfare, prosperity.    Sense of quiet is attested by 1300; meaning absence
or cessation of war or hostility is attested from c.1300. As a type of hybrid tea rose (developed
1939 in France by Francois Meilland), so called from 1944. Native American peace pipe is first
recorded 1760. Peace-officer attested from 1714. Peace offering is from 1530s. Phrase peace with
honor first recorded 1607 (in Coriolanus). The U.S. Peace Corps was set up March 1, 1962. Peace
sign, both the hand gesture and the graphic, attested from 1968.


