championship (n.)

1812, position of a champion, from champion (n.) + -ship. Meaning competition to determine a
champion is recorded from 1893.


pennant (n.)

1610s, rope for hoisting, probably a blend of pendant in the nautical sense of suspended rope and
pennon. Use for flag on a warship first recorded 1690s; flag symbolizing a sports championship
(especially baseball) is from 1880; as a synonym for championship it was first used 1915.


Davis Cup

donated 1900 as a national tennis championship trophy by U.S. statesman Dwight Filley Davis
(1879-1945) while still an undergraduate at Harvard.


belt (n.)

Old English belt belt, girdle, from Proto-Germanic *baltjaz (cognates: Old High German balz, Old
Norse balti, Swedish b&auml;lte), an early Germanic borrowing from Latin balteus girdle, sword belt,
said by Varro to be an Etruscan word.    As a mark of rank or distinction, mid-14c.; references to
boxing championship belts date from 1812. Mechanical sense is from 1795. Transferred sense of broad
stripe encircling something is from 1660s. Below the belt unfair (1889) is from pugilism. To get
something under (one's) belt is to get it into one's stomach. To tighten (one's) belt endure
privation is from 1887.


title (n.)

c.1300, inscription, heading, from Old French title title or chapter of a book; position; legal
permit (12c., Modern French titre, by dissimilation), and in part from Old English titul, both from
Latin titulus inscription, label, ticket, placard, heading; honorable appellation, title of honor,
of unknown origin. Meaning name of a book, play, etc. first recorded mid-14c. The sense of name
showing a person's rank in English is first attested 1580s. Sports championship sense attested from
1913 (originally in lawn tennis), hence titlist (1913).


wave (n.)

moving billow of water, 1520s, alteration (by influence of wave (v.)) of Middle English waw, which
is from Old English wagian to move to and fro (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German wag, Old Frisian
weg, Old Norse vagr water in motion, wave, billow, Gothic wegs tempest; see wag (v.)). The usual Old
English word for moving billow of water was y&eth;.    The hand motion meaning is recorded from
1680s; meaning undulating line is recorded from 1660s. Of people in masses, first recorded 1852; in
physics, from 1832. Sense in heat wave is from 1843. The crowd stunt in stadiums is attested under
this name from 1984, the thing itself said to have been done first Oct. 15, 1981, at the Yankees-A's
AL championship series game in the Oakland Coliseum; soon picked up and popularized at University of
Washington. To make waves cause trouble is attested from 1962.


