championship (n.)

1812, position of a champion, from champion (n.) + -ship. Meaning competition to determine a
champion is recorded from 1893.


champion (v.)

to fight for, defend, protect, 1820 (Scott) in a literal sense, from champion (n.). Figurative use
by 1830. Earlier it meant to challenge (c.1600). Related: Championed; championing.


champion (n.)

early 13c., doughty fighting man, valorous combatant, also (c.1300) one who fights on behalf of
another or others, from Old French champion combatant, champion in single combat (12c.), from Late
Latin campionem (nominative campio) gladiator, fighter, combatant in the field, from Latin campus
field (of combat); see campus. Had been borrowed earlier by Old English as cempa. Sports sense in
reference to first-place performer in some field is recorded from 1730.


champ (n.)

1868, American English abbreviation of champion (n.).


white hope (n.)

1911, originally in U.S. sporting use in reference to the quest for a white man capable of beating
champion pugilist Jack Johnson.


Neil

surname and masc. proper name, from Gaelic/Old Irish Niall champion. Picked up by the Vikings in
Ireland (as Njall), brought by them to Iceland and Norway, thence to France, from which place it was
introduced in England at the Conquest. Incorrectly Latinized as Nigellus on mistaken association
with niger black, hence Nigel.


peewee (adj.)

1877, small, tiny, for children, a dialect word, possibly a varied reduplication of wee. Attested
earlier (1848) as a noun meaning a small marble. (Baseball Hall-of-Famer Harold Peewee Reese got his
nickname because he was a marbles champion before he became a Dodgers shortstop.) As a type of bird
(variously applied on different continents) it is attested from 1886, imitative of a bird cry.


advocate (n.)

mid-14c., one whose profession is to plead cases in a court of justice, a technical term from Roman
law, from Old French avocat barrister, advocate, spokesman, from Latin advocatus one called to aid;
a pleader, advocate, noun use of past participle of advocare to call (as witness or advisor) from
ad- to (see ad-) + vocare to call, related to vocem (see voice (n.)). Also in Middle English as one
who intercedes for another, and protector, champion, patron. Feminine forms advocatess, advocatrice
were in use in 15c.


superman (n.)

1903, coined by George Bernard Shaw to translate German &Uuml;bermensch, highly evolved human being
that transcends good and evil, from Thus Spake Zarathustra (1883-91), by Friedrich Nietzsche
(1844-1900). First used in German by Hermann Rab (1520s), and also used by Herder and Goethe.
Translated as overman (1895) and beyond-man (1896) before Shaw got it right in his play title Man
and Superman (1903). Application to comic strip hero is from 1938.    So was created ... Superman!
champion of the oppressed, the physical marvel who had sworn to devote his existence to helping
those in need! [Action Comics, June 1, 1938]


