chaotic (adj.)

1713, in a state of primordial chaos, irregularly formed in English from chaos + -ic, probably on
model of eros/erotic, demos/demotic, hypnos/hypnotic, etc. Transferred or figurative meaning
confused, disordered is from 1747.


zoo (n.)

c.1847, short for Zoological Gardens of the London Zoological Society, established 1828 in Regent's
Park to house the society's collection of wild animals. The first three letters taken as one
syllable. From a mere vulgarism, this corruption has passed into wide colloquial use [Century
Dictionary]. Slang meaning crowded and chaotic place first recorded 1935.


anarchic (adj.)

1755, chaotic, without order or rule, from Greek anarkhos without head or chief (see anarchy) + -ic.
Differentiated from anarchistic (1845) which tends to refer to the political philosophy of
anarchism. An older word in this sense was anarchical (1590s). Anarchial is from 1710; Landor used
anarchal (1824).


bulldoze (v.)

by 1880, from an earlier noun, bulldose a severe beating or lashing (1876), literally a dose fit for
a bull, a slang word referring to the intimidation beating of black voters (by either blacks or
whites) in the chaotic 1876 U.S. presidential election. See bull (n.1) + dose (n.). Related:
Bulldozed; bulldozing.


bathetic (adj.)

1834, from bathos on the model of pathetic, which, however, does not come directly from pathos (see
pathetic), so the formation is either erroneous or humorous. Bathotic (1863, perhaps on model of
chaotic) is not much better.


Chinese (adj.)

1570s, from China + -ese. As a noun from c.1600. Chinee (n.) is a vulgar back-formation from this
word on the mistaken notion that the word is a plural. As an adjective, Chinish also was used 16c.
Chinese fire-drill chaotic situation of many people rushing around futilely is attested by 1962,
U.S. military slang. The game Chinese checkers is attested from 1938.


circus (n.)

late 14c., in reference to ancient Rome, from Latin circus ring, circular line, which was applied by
Romans to circular arenas for performances and contests and oval courses for racing (especially the
Circus Maximus), from or cognate with Greek kirkos a circle, a ring, from PIE *kirk- from root
*(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.)).    In reference to modern large arenas for performances
from 1791; sense then extended to the performing company, hence traveling show (originally traveling
circus, 1838). Extended in World War I to squadrons of military aircraft. Meaning lively uproar,
chaotic hubbub is from 1869. Sense in Picadilly Circus and other place names is from early 18c.
sense buildings arranged in a ring, also circular road. The adjective form is circensian.


