check (v.1)

late 15c., in chess, to attack the king; to put (the opponent's king) in check; earlier (late 14c.),
to stop, arrest; block, barricade; see check (n.).    A player in chess limits his opponent's
ability to move when he places his opponent's king in check. All the other senses seem to have
developed from the chess sense: To arrest, stop; then to hold in restraint (1620s); and finally to
hold up or control (an assertion, a person, etc.) by comparison with some authority or record,
1690s.    Hence, to check off (1839); to check up (1889); to check in or out (in a hotel, of a
library book, etc., by 1918). To check out (something) to look at, investigate is from 1959.
Related: Checked; checking.


check (n.1)

c.1300, a call in chess noting one's move has placed his opponent's king (or another major piece) in
immediate peril, from Old French eschequier a check at chess (also chess board, chess set), from
eschec the game of chess; chessboard; check; checkmate, from Vulgar Latin *scaccus, from Arabic
shah, from Persian shah king, the principal piece in a chess game (see shah; also compare checkmate
(n.)). Also c.1300 in a generalized sense, harmful incident or event.    When the king is in check
that player's choices are severely limited. Hence, sudden stoppage (early 14c.), and by c.1700 to a
token of ownership used to check against, and prevent, loss or theft (surviving in hat check) and a
check against forgery or alteration, which gave the modern financial use of bank check, money draft
(first recorded 1798 and often spelled cheque), probably influenced by exchequer. Checking account
is attested from 1897, American English. Blank check in the figurative sense attested by 1849.
Checks and balances is from 1782, perhaps originally suggesting machinery.


checkup (n.)

also check-up, careful examination, 1921, American English, from check (v.) + up (adv.), on notion
of a checklist of things to be examined. The verbal phrase check up (on) is attested from 1889.


check (v.2)

mark like a chessboard, incise with a pattern of squares or checks, late 14c. (implied in checked),
from check (n.1). Related: Checking.


checklist (n.)

also check-list, 1853, American English, from check + list (n.). Two words until c.1880; hyphenated
until late 20c.


checked (adj.)

early 15c., ornamented with a checkered design, past participle adjective from check (v.2).


check (n.2)

pattern of squares, cross-like pattern, c.1400, short for checker (n.1).


checkout (n.)

1944, from check (v.) + out (adv.). Originally training given to a pilot for using a specific
aircraft; hotel sense is from 1958.


checkpoint (n.)

1940, from check (v.) + point (n.). Originally an aviator's term for landforms or structures of
known height against which the craft's altitude could be visually checked. The vehicle stop sense is
recorded from 1950.


checkmate (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French eschec mat (Modern French &eacute;chec et mat), which (with Spanish jaque
y mate, Italian scacco-matto) is from Arabic shah mat the king died (see check (n.1)), which
according to Barnhart is a misinterpretation of Persian mat be astonished as mata to die, mat he is
dead. Hence Persian shah mat, if it is the ultimate source of the word, would be literally the king
is left helpless, the king is stumped.


checker (n.1)

mid-13c., game of chess (or checkers); c.1300, a chessboard, board with 64 squares for playing chess
or similar games; a set of chessmen a shortening of Old French eschequier chessboard; a game of
chess, from Medieval Latin scaccarium (see check (n.)).    Meaning pattern of squares is late 14c.
Meaning a man or marker in the game of checkers is from 1864. British prefers chequer. From late
14c. as a checked design. The word had earlier senses of table covered with checked cloth for
counting (late 12c. in Anglo-Latin), a sense also in Old French (see checker (n.2)).


raincheck (n.)

also rain-check, rain check, 1884; see rain (n.) + check (n.1). Originally of tickets to rained-out
baseball games.


paycheck (n.)

also pay-check, 1894, from pay (n.) + check (n.).


rebuff (v.)

1580s, from obsolete French rebuffer to check, snub, from Italian ribuffare to check, chide, snide,
from ribuffo a snub, from ri- back (from Latin re-, see re-) + buffo a puff, of imitative origin
(compare buffet (v.)). Related: Rebuffed; rebuffing.


refrain (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French refraigner restrain, repress, keep in check (12c., Modern French
R&#233;fr&#233;ner), from Latin refrenare to bridle, hold in with a bit, check, curb, keep down,
control, from re- back (see re-) + frenare restrain, furnish with a bridle, from frenum a bridle.
Related: Refrained; refraining.


credit card

1952 in the modern sense; the phrase was used late 19c. to mean traveler's check.


double-check (v.)

1958, from double (adj.) + check (v.). Related: Double-checked; double-checking.


repress (v.)

late 14c., to check, restrain, from Latin repressus, past participle of reprimere hold back, curb,
figuratively check, confine, restrain, refrain, from re- back (see re-) + premere to push (see press
(v.1)).    Used of feelings or desires from late 14c.; in the purely psychological sense, it
represents German verdr&auml;ngen (Freud, 1893), first attested 1904 (implied in repressed). Meaning
to put down (a rebellion, etc.) is from late 15c. Related: Repressed; repressing.


cheque (n.)

see check.


reins (n.)

see rein (n.). Figurative sense means of controlling; control, check, restraint is from early 14c.


chess (n.)

13c., from Old French esches chessmen, plural of eschec game of chess, chessboard; checkmate (see
check (n.)), from the key move of the game. Modern French still distinguishes &eacute;chec check,
blow, rebuff, defeat, from plural &eacute;checs chess.    The original word for chess is Sanskrit
chaturanga four members of an army -- elephants, horses, chariots, foot soldiers. This is preserved
in Spanish ajedrez, from Arabic (al) shat-ranj, from Persian chatrang, from the Sanskrit word.The
chess pieces are the block alphabet which shapes thoughts; and these thoughts, although making a
visual design on the chessboard, express their beauty abstractly, like a poem. [Marcel Duchamp,
address to New York State Chess Association, Aug. 30, 1952]


contango

1853, a stockbroker's invention, perhaps somehow derived from continue, or from Spanish contengo I
contain, refrain, restrain, check. As a verb, from 1900.


tab (n.2)

account, bill, check, 1888, American English colloquial, probably a shortened form of tabulation or
of tablet in the sense a sheet for writing on. Figurative phrase keep a tab on is recorded from
1890.


unchecked (adj.)

late 15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of check (v.).


spell-check (v.)

to use a computer's spell checker application on a document, by 1985. The applications themselves
date to the late 1970s. Related: Spell-checked; spell-checking.


monitor (v.)

1818, to guide; 1924, to check for quality (originally especially of radio signals), from monitor
(n.). General sense from 1944. Related: Monitored; monitoring.


traveler (n.)

also traveller, late 14c., agent noun from travel (v.). Traveler's check is from 1891.


kite (v.)

write a fictitious check, 1839, American English, from 1805 phrase fly a kite raise money by issuing
commercial paper on nonexistent funds; see kite (n.). Related: Kited; kiting.


rein (v.)

c.1300, from rein (n.). Figurative extension put a check on first recorded 1580s. Related: Reined;
reining. To rein up halt (1550s) is from the way to make a horse stop by pulling up on the reins.


cash (v.)

to convert to cash (as a check, etc.), 1811, from cash (n.). Related: Cashed; cashing.


pick up (v.)

early 14c. as a verbal phrase, lift and take, from pick (v.) + up (adv.). Of persons, make
acquaintance or take along, especially for sexual purposes, 1690s. Meaning cause (someone) to revive
is from 1857. Sense of tidy up is from 1861; that of arrest is from 1871; meaning gain speed is from
1922; meaning to pay (a check, tab, etc.) is from 1945. Pick-me-up stimulating alcoholic drink is
attested from 1867.


setback (n.)

also set-back, 1670s, reversal, check to progress, from set (v.) + back (adv.). Sometimes backset
was used in the same sense. Meaning space between a building and a property line is from 1916. To
set (someone) back cost is from 1900.


reactionary (adj.)

1831, on model of French r&eacute;actionnaire (19c.), from r&eacute;action (see reaction). In
Marxist use, tending toward reversing existing tendencies, opposed to revolutionary and used
opprobriously in reference to opponents of communism, by 1858. As a noun, person considered
reactionary, especially in politics, one who seeks to check or undo political action, by 1855.


tattersall (n.)

fabric with small and even check pattern, 1891, so called because it was similar to the traditional
design of horse blankets, in reference to Tattersall's, a famous London horse market and gambler's
rendezvous, founded 1766 by Richard Tattersall (1724-1795). The surname is from the place in
Lincolnshire, which is said to represent Tathere's nook, probably in the sense 'nook of dry ground
in marsh'. [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]


bounce (v.)

early 13c., bounsen to thump, hit, perhaps from Dutch bonzen to beat, thump, or Low German bunsen,
or imitative; sense probably influenced by bound (v.). Sense of to bounce like a ball is from 1510s;
the rubber check sense is from 1927. Related: Bounced; bouncing.


curb (n.)

late 15c., strap passing under the jaw of a horse (used to restrain the animal), from Old French
courbe (12c.) curb on a horse, from Latin curvus, from curvare to bend (see curve (v.)). Meaning
enclosed framework is from 1510s, probably originally with a notion of curved; extended to margins
of garden beds 1731; to margin of stone between a sidewalk and road 1791 (sometimes spelled kerb).
Figurative sense of a check, a restraint is from 1610s.


confute (v.)

1520s, from Middle French confuter, from Latin confutare repress, check; disprove, restrain,
silence, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + *futare to beat, from PIE root *bhau- to strike,
beat (see batter (v.)). Related: Confuted; confuting.


inhibit (v.)

early 15c., to forbid, prohibit, back-formation from inhibition or else from Latin inhibitus, past
participle of inhibere to hold in, hold back, keep back (see inhibition). Psychological sense (1876)
is from earlier, softened meaning of restrain, check, hinder (1530s). Related: Inhibited;
inhibiting.


rampant (adj.)

late 14c., standing on the hind legs (as a heraldic lion often does), thus, also, fierce, ravenous
(late 14c.), from Old French rampant, present participle of ramper to climb, scale, mount (see
rampage (v.)). Sense of growing without check (in running rampant), first recorded 1610s, probably
is via the notion of fierce disposition or else preserves the older French sense.


cross-examination (n.)

also cross examination; 1827, an examination of a witness by the other side, to 'check' the effects
of previous questioning, from cross (adj.) + examination. Related: Cross-examine (1660s).


suppress (v.)

late 14c. (implied in suppressing) be burdensome; 1520s as put down by force or authority, from
Latin suppressus, past participle of supprimere press down, stop, hold back, check, stifle, from sub
down, under (see sub-) + premere push against (see press (v.1)). Sense of prevent or prohibit the
circulation of is from 1550s of publications; medical use from 1620s. Related: Suppressed;
suppressing.


snub (v.)

mid-14c., to check, reprove, rebuke, from Old Norse snubba to curse, chide, snub, scold, reprove.
The ground sense is perhaps to cut off, and the word probably is related to snip. Compare Swedish
snobba lop off, snuff (a candle), Old Norse snubbotr snubbed, nipped, with the tip cut off. Meaning
treat coldly appeared early 18c. Related: Snubbed; snubbing.


restrain (v.)

mid-14c., from stem of Old French restreindre press, push together; curb, bridle; bandage (12c.),
from Latin restringere draw back tightly, confine, check (see restriction). Related: Restrained;
restraining.    That which we restrain we keep within limits; that which we restrict we keep within
certain definite limits; that which we repress we try to put out of existence. [Century Dictionary,
1902]


stunt (v.)

check in growth, dwarf, 1650s, from verb uses of Middle English adjective stunnt foolish, from Old
English stunt short-witted, foolish (as in stuntspr&aelig;c foolish talk), from Proto-Germanic
*stuntaz (source of Old Norse stuttr short). Related: Stunted; stunting.


inhibition (n.)

late 14c., formal prohibition; interdiction of legal proceedings by authority; also, the document
setting forth such a prohibition, from Old French inibicion and directly from Latin inhibitionem
(nominative inhibitio) a restraining, from past participle stem of inhibere to hold in, hold back,
keep back, from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + habere to hold (see habit (n.)). Psychological sense of
involuntary check on an expression of an impulse is from 1876.


hinder (v.)

Old English hindrian to harm, injure, impair, check, repress, from Proto-Germanic *hinderojan
(cognates: Old Norse hindra, Dutch hinderen, Old High German hintaron, German hindern to keep back),
from a root meaning on that side of, behind (see hind (adj.)); thus the ground sense is to put or
keep back, though this sense in English is recorded only from late 14c. Related: Hindered;
hindering.


rein (n.)

c.1300, strap fastened to a bridle, from Old French rene, resne reins, bridle strap, laces (Modern
French r&#234;ne), probably from Vulgar Latin *retina a bond, check, back-formation from Latin
retinere hold back (see retain). To give something free rein is originally of horses.


exchequer (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French escheker a chessboard, from Old French eschequier, from Medieval Latin
scaccarium chess board (see check (n.1); also see checker (n.2)). Government financial sense began
under the Norman kings of England and refers to a cloth divided in squares that covered a table on
which accounts of revenue were reckoned with counters, and which apparently reminded people of a
chess board. Respelled with an -x- based on the mistaken belief that it originally was a Latin ex-
word.


strangle (v.)

late 13c., from Old French estrangler choke, suffocate, throttle (Modern French &#233;trangler),
from Latin strangulare to choke, stifle, check, constrain, from Greek strangalan to choke, twist,
from strangale a halter, cord, lace, related to strangos twisted, from PIE root *strenk- tight,
narrow; pull tight, twist (see string (n.)). Related: Strangled; strangling.


let (n.)

stoppage, obstruction (obsolete unless in legal contracts), late 12c., from archaic verb letten to
hinder, from Old English lettan hinder, delay, from Proto-Germanic *latjan (cognates: Old Saxon
lettian to hinder, Old Norse letja to hold back, Old High German lezzen to stop, check, Gothic
latjan to hinder, make late, Old English l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, late); see late.


