circuit (n.)

late 14c., a going around; a line going around, from Old French circuit (14c.) a circuit; a journey
(around something), from Latin circuitus a going around, from stem of circuire, circumire go around,
from circum round (see circum-) + ire to go (see ion). Electrical sense is from 1746. Of judicial
assignments, from 1570s; of venues for itinerant entertainers, from 1834. Circuit breaker is
recorded from 1874. Related: Circuital.


circuit (v.)

to go around, early 15c., from circuit (n.). Related: Circuited; circuiting.


circuitry (n.)

1946, from circuit (n.)+ -ry.


circuitous (adj.)

1660s, from Medieval Latin circuitous full of roundabout ways, from Latin circuitus a going round
(see circuit (n.)). Related: Circuitously; circuitousness.


short circuit (n.)

also short-circuit, 1854, in electricity, from short (adj.) + circuit (n.). As a verb, introduce a
shunt of low resistance, from 1867; intransitive sense from 1902; in the figurative sense is
recorded by 1899. Related: short-circuited; short-circuiting.


short (n.)

1580s, the short the result, the total, from short (adj.). Meaning electrical short circuit first
recorded 1906 (see short circuit). Meaning contraction of a name or phrase is from 1873 (as in for
short). Slang meaning car is attested from 1897; originally street car, so called because street
cars (or the rides taken in them) were shorter than railroad cars.


microchip (n.)

integrated circuit, 1975, from micro- + chip (n.1).


ambit (n.)

late 14c., space surrounding a building or town; precinct; 1590s, a circuit, from Latin ambitus a
going round, past participle of ambire to go round, to go about (see ambient).


microcircuit (n.)

1959, from micro- + circuit (n.). Related: Microcircuitry.


gyrus (n.)

convolution between grooves, 1842, from Latin gyrus circle, circuit, career, from Greek gyros ring,
circle (see gyre).


closed (adj.)

c.1200, past participle adjective from close (v.). Closed circuit is attested from 1827; closed shop
in union sense from 1904; closed system first recorded 1896 in William James.


bout (n.)

1540s, from Middle English bught, probably from an unrecorded Old English variant of byht a bend,
from Proto-Germanic *bukhta- (see bight (n.)). Sense evolved from a circuit of any kind (as of a
plow) to a round at any kind of exercise (1570s), a round at fighting (1590s), a fit of drinking
(1660s).


short (v.)

Old English sceortian to grow short, become short; run short, fail, from the source of short (adj.).
Transitive meaning make short is from late 12c. Meaning to short-circuit is by 1904. Related:
Shorted; shorting.


channel (n.)

early 14c., bed of running water, from Old French chanel bed of a waterway; tube, pipe, gutter, from
Latin canalis groove, channel, waterpipe (see canal). Given a broader, figurative sense 1530s (of
information, commerce, etc.); meaning circuit for telegraph communication (1848) probably led to
that of band of frequency for radio or TV signals (1928). The Channel Islands are the French
&#206;les Anglo-Normandes.


itinerant (adj.)

1560s (attested in Anglo-Latin from late 13c.), from Late Latin itinerantem (nominative itinerans),
present participle of itinerare to travel, from Latin iter (genitive itineris) journey, from ire go
(see ion). Originally in reference to circuit courts.


jumpstart (v.)

also jump-start, to start a car using battery booster cables, by 1970, from jumper wire used to cut
out part of a circuit or close a gap (1901 in telegraphy); see jump + start. Related: Jumpstarted;
jumpstarting. Figurative use by 1975.


round (v.)

late 14c., to make round, from round (adj.). Sense of make a circuit round is from 1590s. Sense of
bring to completeness is from c.1600; meaning to approximate (a number) is from 1934. Meaning turn
round and face, turn on and assault is from 1882. Round out fill up is from 1856. Related: Rounded;
rounding.


environ (v.)

late 14c. (implied in environing), to surround, from Old French environer to surround, enclose,
encircle, from environ round about, from en- in (see en- (1)) + viron circle, circuit, from virer to
turn (see veer). Related: Environed.


environs (n.)

outskirts, 1660s, from French environs, plural of Old French environ compass, circuit, from environ
(adv.) around, round about (see environ).


entourage (n.)

1832, surroundings, environment, picked up by De Quincey from French entourage, from Middle French
entourer to surround (16c.), from Old French entour that which surrounds (10c.), from en- in (see
en- (1)) + tour a circuit (see tour). Sense of attendant persons first recorded in English by 1860.


fuse (n.)

combustible cord or tube for lighting an explosive device, also fuze, 1640s, from Italian fuso
spindle (so called because the originals were long, thin tubes filled with gunpowder), from Latin
fusus spindle, of uncertain origin. Influenced by French fus&eacute;e spindleful of hemp fiber, and
obsolete English fusee musket fired by a fuse. Meaning device that breaks an electrical circuit
first recorded 1884, so named for its shape, but erroneously attributed to fuse (v.) because it
melts.


tour (n.)

c.1300, a turn, a shift on duty, from Old French tor, tourn, tourn a turn, trick, round, circuit,
circumference, from torner, tourner to turn (see turn (v.)). Sense of a continued ramble or
excursion is from 1640s. Tour de France as a bicycle race is recorded in English from 1916 (Tour de
France Cycliste), distinguished from a motorcar race of the same name. The Grand Tour, a journey
through France, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy formerly was the finishing touch in the education of
a gentleman.


ember days (n.)

Old English Ymbrendaeg, Ymbren, 12 days of the year (divided into four seasonal periods, hence Latin
name quatuor tempora) set aside by the Church for fasting and prayers, from Old English ymbren
recurring, corruption of ymbryne a circuit, revolution, course, anniversary, literally a running
around, from ymb round (cognate with Greek amphi, Latin ambo; see ambi-) + ryne course, running (see
run (n.)). Perhaps influenced by a corruption of the Latin name (compare German quatember).


button (n.)

c.1300 (surname Botouner button-maker attested from mid-13c.), from Old French boton a button,
originally a bud (12c., Modern French bouton), from bouter, boter to thrust, common Romanic (Spanish
boton, Italian bottone), ultimately from Germanic (see butt (v.)). Thus a button is, etymologically,
something that pushes up, or thrusts out.    Meaning point of the chin is pugilistic slang, by 1921.
A button as something you push to create an effect by closing an (electrical) circuit is attested
from 1840s. Button-pusher as deliberately annoying or provocative person is attested by 1990 (in
reference to Bill Gates, in InfoWorld magazine, Nov. 19). In the 1980s it meant photographer.


round (n.)

early 14c., a spherical body, from round (adj.) and Old French roond. Compare Dutch rond, Danish and
Swedish rund, German runde, all nouns from adjectives. Meaning large round piece of beef is recorded
from 1650s. Theatrical sense (in phrase in the round) is recorded from 1944. Sense of circuit
performed by a sentinel is from 1590s; that of recurring course of time is from 1710. Meaning song
sung by two or more, beginning at different times is from 1520s. Golfing sense attested from 1775.
Meaning quantity of liquor served to a company at one time is from 1630s; that of single bout in a
fight or boxing match is from 1812; single discharge of a firearm is from 1725. Sense of recurring
session of meetings or negotiations is from 1964.


period (n.)

early 15c., course or extent of time, from Middle French periode (14c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin periodus recurring portion, cycle, from Latin periodus a complete sentence, also cycle of the
Greek games, from Greek periodos cycle, circuit, period of time, literally a going around, from
peri- around (see peri-) + hodos a going, way, journey (see cede).    Sense of repeated cycle of
events led to that of interval of time. Meaning dot marking end of a sentence first recorded c.1600,
from similar use in Medieval Latin (in late 16c. English it meant full pause at the end of a
sentence). Sense of menstruation dates from 1822. Educational sense of portion of time set apart for
a lesson is from 1876. Sporting sense attested from 1898. As an adjective from 1905; period piece
attested from 1911.


