clinical (adj.)

1780, pertaining to hospital patients or hospital care, from clinic + -al (2). Meaning coldly
dispassionate (like a medical report) is recorded from 1928. Related: Clinically.


neurosis (n.)

1776, functional derangement arising from disorders of the nervous system, coined by Scottish
physician William Cullen (1710-1790) from Greek neuron nerve (see neuro-) + Modern Latin -osis
abnormal condition. Used in a general psychological sense since 1871; clinical use in psychiatry
dates from 1923.


hypomania (n.)

1843 (as a clinical word from 1882, from German hypomanie); see hypo- + mania. Related: Hypomaniac;
hypomanic.


case-work (n.)

1896, from case (n.1) in the clinical sense + work (n.). Related: Case-worker (1909).


manic (adj.)

pertaining to or affected with mania, 1902, from mania + -ic. The clinical term manic depressive
also is from 1902; manic depression is first attested 1903.


depression (n.)

late 14c. as a term in astronomy, from Old French depression (14c.) or directly from Latin
depressionem (nominative depressio), noun of action from past participle stem of deprimere to press
down, depress (see depress).    Attested from 1650s in the literal sense; meaning dejection,
depression of spirits is from early 15c. (as a clinical term in psychology, from 1905);
meteorological sense is from 1881 (in reference to barometric pressure); meaning a lowering or
reduction in economic activity was in use by 1826; given a specific application (with capital D-) by
1934 to the one that began worldwide in 1929. For melancholy, depression an Old English word was
grevoushede.


homosexual (adj.)

1892, in C.G. Chaddock's translation of Krafft-Ebing's Psychopathia Sexualis, from German
homosexual, homosexuale (by 1880, in Gustav J&auml;ger), from homo-, comb. form of Greek homos same
(see homo- (1)) + Latin-based sexual.Homosexual is a barbarously hybrid word, and I claim no
responsibility for it. It is, however, convenient, and now widely used. Homogenic has been suggested
as a substitute. [H. Havelock Ellis, Studies in Psychology, 1897] Sexual inversion (1883) was an
earlier clinical term for it in English. The noun is recorded by 1895. In technical use, either male
or female; but in non-technical use almost always male. Slang shortened form homo first attested
1929. See also uranian.


