clip (n.1)

something for attaching or holding, mid-14c., probably from clip (v.2). Meaning receptacle
containing several cartridges for a repeating firearm is from 1901. Meaning piece of jewelry
fastened by a clip is from 1937. This is also the source of paper clip (1854). Old English had clypp
an embrace.


clip (v.1)

to cut or sever with a sharp instrument, c.1200, from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse
klippa, Swedish klippa, Danish klippe clip, shear, cut) probably echoic. Related: Clipped; clipping.
Meaning to pronounce short is from 1520s. The verb has a long association with shady activities,
originally especially in reference to cutting or shaving metal from coins (c.1400), but later
extended to swindles from the sense to shear sheep, hence clip-joint place that overcharges
outrageously (1933, American English, a term from Prohibition). To clip (someone's) wings
figuratively (1590s) is from the method of preventing a captive bird from flying.


clip (n.2)

mid-15c., shears, from clip (v.1). Meaning act of clipping is from 1825, originally of sheep-
shearing, later of haircuts. Meaning rate of speed is 1867 (compare clipper). Meaning an extract
from a movie is from 1958.


clipboard (n.)

1904, from clip (n.1) + board (n.1). Portable board with a hinged clip at the top to hold papers.


clip-on (adj.)

1909, from clip (v.2) + on.


clip-clop

sound as of a horse's hooves, 1884, imitative.


clipping (n.2)

a cutting, early 14c., verbal noun from clip (v.1). Sense of a small piece cut off is from late 15c.
Meaning an article cut from a newspaper is from 1857.


clipper (n.)

late 14c., sheepshearer; early 15c., a barber; c.1300 as a surname; agent noun from Middle English
clippen shorten (see clip (v.1)). The type of fast sailing ship so called from 1823 (in Cooper's The
Pilot), probably from clip (v.1) in sense of to move or run rapidly, hence early 19c. sense person
or animal who looks capable of fast running. Perhaps originally simply fast ship, regardless of
type:    Well, you know, the Go-along-Gee was one o' your flash Irish cruisers -- the first o' your
fir-built frigates -- and a clipper she was! Give her a foot o' the sheet, and she'd go like a witch
--but somehow o'nother, she'd bag on a bowline to leeward. [Naval Sketch-Book, by An officer of
rank, London, 1826]    The early association of the ships was with Baltimore, Maryland. Perhaps
influenced by Middle Dutch klepper swift horse, echoic (Clipper appears as the name of an English
race horse in 1831). In late 18c., the word principally meant one who cuts off the edges of coins
for the precious metal.


clippers (n.)

shears-like cutting tool for hair, etc., 1876, agent noun from clip (v.1). Earlier they were
clipping shears (mid-15c.).


clipping (n.1)

early 13c., clasping, embracing, verbal noun from clip (v.2). As a U.S. football penalty (not in
OED), from 1920.   Clipping or Cutting Down from Behind. -- This is to be ruled under unnecessary
roughness, and penalized when it is practiced upon a man obviously out of the play. This clipping is
a tendency in the game that the committee is watching anxiously and with some fear. [Colliers, April
10, 1920]


clip (v.2)

fasten, hold together by pressure, also (mostly archaic) to embrace, from Old English clyppan to
embrace, clasp; surround; prize, honor, cherish; related to Old Frisian kleppa to embrace, love, Old
High German klaftra, German klafter fathom (on notion of outstretched arms). Also compare Lithuanian
glebys armful, globiu to embrace, support. Meaning to fasten, bind is early 14c. Meaning to fasten
with clips is from 1902. Related: Clipped; clipping. Original sense of the verb is preserved in U.S.
football clipping penalty.


snick (v.)

cut, clip, snip, c.1700, back-formation from snickersnee.


barb (v.)

late 15c., to clip, mow; see barb (n.). Meaning to fit or furnish with barbs is from 1610s. Related:
Barbed; barbing.


barrette (n.)

bar clip for women's hair, 1901, from French barrette, diminutive of barre bar (see bar (n.1)).


clasp (n.)

c.1300, claspe, metal catch or hook used to hold things together, perhaps a metathesis of clapse,
and thus from or related to Old English clyppan clasp (see clip (v.2)).


circumcision (n.)

late 12c., from Latin circumcisionem (nominative circumcisio), noun of action from past participle
stem of circumcidere to cut around; cut, clip, trim, from circum around (see circum-) + caedere to
cut (see -cide).


hasp (n.)

Old English h&aelig;pse fastening, clip, with later Old English metathesis of -p- and -s-. Related
to Old Norse hespa hasp, fastening, Middle Dutch, German haspe clamp, hinge, hook, of uncertain
origin.


retail (v.)

mid-14c. sell in small quantities or parcels, from Old French retaillier cut back, cut off, pare,
clip, reduce, circumcise, from re- back (see re-) + taillier to cut, trim (see tailor (n.)).
Sometimes also to deal out (information, etc.) in small quantities; hand down by report; recount,
tell over again (1590s). Related: Retailed; retailing.


tonsure (n.)

late 14c., shaving of the head or part of it, especially as a religious rite, from Anglo-French
tonsure (mid-14c.), Old French tonsure ecclesiastical tonsure; sheep-shearing (14c.), from Latin
tonsura a shearing, clipping, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear, shave, clip, crop,
from PIE *tend-, from root *tem- to cut (see tome). The verb is attested from 1706 (implied in
tonsured). Related: Tonsuring.


mince (v.)

late 14c., to chop in little pieces, from Old French mincier make into small pieces, from Vulgar
Latin *minutiare make small, from Late Latin minuti&aelig; small bits, from Latin minutus small (see
minute (adj.)). Of speech, to clip affectedly in imitation of elegance, 1540s; of words or language,
to restrain in the interest of decorum, 1590s. Meaning to walk with short or precise steps is from
1560s. Related: Minced; mincing.


clamp (n.)

device for fastening, c.1300, probably from clamb, perhaps originally past tense of climb (v.), or
from Middle Dutch clampe (Dutch klamp), from West Germanic *klamp- clamp, cleat; cognate with Middle
Low German klampe clasp, hook, Old High German klampfer clip, clamp; also probably related to Middle
Dutch klamme a clamp, hook, grapple, Danish klamme a clamp, cramp, Old English clamm fetter; see
clam (n.).


strigil (n.)

ancient tool for scraping the skin after a bath, 1580s, from Latin strigilis scraper, horse-comb,
from stringere (1) draw along a surface, graze, touch lightly; strip off, pluck off, cut away; clip,
prune; lay bare, unsheathe, figuratively waste, consume, reduce; touch, move, affect, cause pain,
from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Latin striga stroke, strike, furrow, stria
furrow, channel; Old Church Slavonic striga shear; Old English stracian to stroke; German streichen
to stroke, rub). Etymologists dispute over whether this is connected to Latin stringere (2), root of
strain (v.).


