cog (n.)

c.1300, cog wheel; late 14c., tooth on a wheel, probably a borrowing from a Scandinavian language
(compare Norwegian kugg cog) and cognate with Middle High German kugel ball.


cogency (n.)

1680s, from cogent + -cy.


cogenial (adj.)

1774, variant of congenial.


cogent (adj.)

1650s, from French cogent necessary, urgent (14c.), from Latin cogentem (nominative cogens), present
participle of cogere to curdle; to compel; to collect, literally to drive together, from com-
together (see co-) + agere to drive (see act (n.)).


cogitate (v.)

late 16c., from Latin cogitatus, past participle of cogitare to think (see cogitation). Related:
Cogitated; cogitating.


cogitation (n.)

c.1200, thought, idea, notion, from Old French cogitacion thought, consideration, reflection, from
Latin cogitationem (nominative cogitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of cogitare to
think, reflect, consider, turn over in the mind, apparently from co-agitare, from com- together (see
co-) + agitare, here in a sense of to turn over in the mind, literally to put in constant motion,
drive, impel, frequentative of agere to move, drive (see agitation).


cogitative (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French cogitatif (14c.), from Medieval Latin cogitativus, from Latin cogitare
(see cogitation).


cognac (n.)

1590s, Coniacke, wine produced in Cognac, the region in western France. The sense of brandy is 1755,
shortened from 17c. cognac brandy, which was distilled from cognac wine. The place name is from
Medieval Latin Comniacum, from the personal name Cominius and the Gallo-Roman suffix -acum.


cognate (adj.)

1640s, from Latin cognatus of common descent, from com- together (see co-) + gnatus, past participle
of gnasci, older form of nasci to be born (see genus). Words that are cognates are cousins, not
siblings. As a noun, from 1754.


cognisance (n.)

alternative spelling of cognizance (q.v.); also see -ize.


cognisant (adj.)

alternative spelling of cognizant (q.v.); also see -ize.


cognition (n.)

mid-15c., ability to comprehend, from Latin cognitionem (nominative cognitio) a getting to know,
acquaintance, knowledge, noun of action from past participle stem of cognoscere (see cognizance).


cognitive (adv.)

1580s, from Latin cognit-, past participle stem of cognoscere (see cognizance) + -ive. Taken over by
psychologists and sociologists after c.1940. Related: Cognitively.


cognitive dissonance (n.)

1957, developed and apparently coined by U.S. social psychologist Leon Festinger (1919-1989).


cognizable (adj.)

1670s, capable of being known, also liable to be tried in a given court or jurisdiction, from stem
of cognizance + -able.


cognizance (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French conysance recognition, later, knowledge, from Old French conoissance
acquaintance, recognition; knowledge, wisdom (Modern French connaissance), from past participle of
conoistre to know, from Latin cognoscere to get to know, recognize, from com- together (see co-) +
gnoscere to know (see notice (n.)). The -g- was restored in English spelling 15c. and has gradually
affected the pronunciation, which was always con-. The old pronunciation lingered longest in legal
use.


cognizant (adj.)

1820, back-formation from cognizance.


cognize (v.)

1650s, back-formation from cognizance. Related: Cognized; cognizing.


cognomen (n.)

1809, from Latin com- with (see co-) + (g)nomen name (see name (n.)). Third or family name of a
Roman citizen (Caius Julius C&aelig;sar).


cognoscence (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin cognoscere to know (see cognizance).


cognoscente (n.)

connoisseur, 1778, from Italian cognoscente, Latinized from conoscente connoisseur, literally
knowing man, from Latin cognoscentum (nominative cognoscens), present participle of cognoscere to
know (see cognizance).


cognoscenti (n.)

plural of cognoscente (q.v.).


discography (n.)

1933; see disc + -graphy.


glycogen (n.)

starch-like substance found in the liver and animal tissue, 1860, from French glycog&egrave;ne,
sugar-producer, from Greek glykys sweet (see glucose) + French -g&egrave;ne (see -gen). Coined in
1848 by French physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-1878).


glycogenic (adj.)

1859, from glycogen + -ic.


incogitable (adj.)

unthinkable, 1520s, from Late Latin incogitabilis, from in- not (see in- (1)) + cogitabilis, from
stem of cogitare (see cogitation).


incognito (adj./adv.)

1640s, from Italian incognito unknown, especially in connection with traveling, from Latin
incognitus unknown, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + cognitus, past participle of
cognoscere to get to know (see cognizance). Fem. form incognita was maintained through 19c. by those
scrupulous about Latin. Incog was a common 18c. colloquial abbreviation.


incognizant (adj.)

1837, from in- (1) not, opposite of + cognizant.


lexicographer (n.)

1650s, from French lexicographe lexicographer, from Greek lexikographos, from lexikon wordbook (see
lexicon) + -graphos writer, from graphein to write (see -graphy).


lexicography (n.)

1670s, from lexico- + -graphy. Related: Lexicographic; lexicographical.


oncogene (n.)

1969, from onco- + -gene, from root of Greek gignere (perf. genui) beget, from PIE *gen- produce
(see genus). Related: Oncogenesis (1832).


precognition (n.)

foreknowledge, mid-15c., from Late Latin praecognitionem (nom. praecognitio), noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin praecognoscere to foreknow, from prae before (see pre-) + cognoscere
to know (see cognizance).


recognise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of recognize; for spelling, see -ize. Related: Recognised;
recognising; recognisance.


recognition (n.)

mid-15c., knowledge of an event or incident; understanding, from Middle French recognition (15c.)
and directly from Latin recognitionem (nominative recognitio) a reviewing, investigation,
examination, noun of action from past participle stem of recognoscere to acknowledge, know again;
examine (see recognize).    Sense of formal avowal of knowledge and approval is from 1590s;
especially acknowledgement of the independence of a country by a state formerly exercising
sovereignty (1824). Meaning a knowing again is from 1798.


recognizance (n.)

early 14c., reconisaunce, a bond acknowledging some obligation binding one over to do some
particular act, from Old French reconissance acknowledgment, recognition (12c., Modern French
reconnaissance), from reconoiss-, present participle stem of reconoistre (see recognize). Related:
Recognizant.


recognization (n.)

act of recognizing, 1550s, from recognize + -ation.


recognize (v.)

early 15c., resume possession of land, back-formation from recognizance, or else from Old French
reconoiss-, stem of reconoistre to know again, identify, recognize, from Latin recognoscere
acknowledge, recall to mind, know again; examine; certify, from re- again (see re-) + cognoscere
know (see cognizance). Meaning know again, recall or recover the knowledge of, perceive an identity
with something formerly known or felt first recorded 1530s. Related: Recognized; recognizing.


terra incognita (n.)

unknown or unexplored region, 1610s, Latin, literally unknown land, from terra (see terrain) + fem.
of incognito.


unrecognizable (adj.)

1817, from un- (1) not + recognizable (see recognize (v.)). Related: Unrecognizably.


