combustible (adj.)

1520s, from Middle French combustible, or directly from Late Latin combustibilis, from Latin
combustus, past participle of combuere to burn up, consume (see combustion). Figurative sense is
from 1640s; as a noun, from 1680s. Related: Combustibility (late 15c.).


non-combustible (adj.)

also noncombustible, 1804, from non- + combustible.


incombustible (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French incombustible (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin incombustibilis; see
in- (1) + combustible.


caustic (adj.)

c.1400, burning, corrosive, from Latin causticus burning, caustic, from Greek kaustikos capable of
burning; corrosive, from kaustos combustible; burnt, verbal adjective from kaiein, the Greek word
for to burn (transitive and intransitive) in all periods, of uncertain origin with no certain
cognates outside Greek. Figurative sense of sarcastic is attested from 1771. As a noun, early 15c.,
from the adjective.


phlogiston (n.)

1730, hypothetical inflammatory principle, formerly believed to exist in all combustible matter,
from Modern Latin (1702), from Greek phlogiston (1610s in this sense), neuter of phlogistos burnt
up, inflammable, from phlogizein to set on fire, burn, from phlox (genitive phlogos) flame, blaze
(see bleach (v.)). Theory propounded by Stahl (1702), denied by Lavoisier (1775), defended by
Priestley but generally abandoned by 1800. Related: Phlogistic; phlogisticated.


fuse (n.)

combustible cord or tube for lighting an explosive device, also fuze, 1640s, from Italian fuso
spindle (so called because the originals were long, thin tubes filled with gunpowder), from Latin
fusus spindle, of uncertain origin. Influenced by French fus&eacute;e spindleful of hemp fiber, and
obsolete English fusee musket fired by a fuse. Meaning device that breaks an electrical circuit
first recorded 1884, so named for its shape, but erroneously attributed to fuse (v.) because it
melts.


gas (n.)

1650s, from Dutch gas, probably from Greek khaos empty space (see chaos). The sound of Dutch g is
roughly equivalent to that of Greek kh. First used by Flemish chemist J.B. van Helmont (1577-1644),
probably influenced by Paracelsus, who used khaos in an occult sense of proper elements of spirits
or ultra-rarified water, which was van Helmont's definition of gas.    Modern scientific sense began
1779, with later specialization to combustible mix of vapors (1794, originally coal gas); anesthetic
(1894, originally nitrous oxide); and poison gas (1900). Meaning intestinal vapors is from 1882. The
success of this artificial word is unique [Weekley]. Slang sense of empty talk is from 1847; slang
meaning something exciting or excellent first attested 1953, from earlier hepster slang gasser in
the same sense (1944). Gas also meant fun, a joke in Anglo-Irish and was used so by Joyce (1914). As
short for gasoline, it is American English, first recorded 1905.


