commonwealth (n.)

late 15c., public welfare, general good, from common (adj.) + wealth (n.); meaning the state is
attested from 1510s; applied specifically to the government of England in the period 1649-1660.


republican (n.)

one who favors a republic or republican principles (or, as Johnson puts it, One who thinks a
commonwealth without monarchy the best government), 1690s; see from republican (adj.). With capital
R-, in reference to a member of a specific U.S. political party (the Anti-Federalists) from 1782,
though this was not the ancestor of the modern U.S. Republican Party, which dates from 1854.


common (n.)

late 15c., land held in common, from common (adj.). Commons the third estate of the English people
as represented in Parliament, is from late 14c. Latin communis also served as a noun meaning common
property, state, commonwealth.


republic (n.)

c.1600, state in which supreme power rests in the people via elected representatives, from Middle
French r&eacute;publique (15c.), from Latin respublica (ablative republica) the common weal, a
commonwealth, state, republic, literally res publica public interest, the state, from res affair,
matter, thing + publica, fem. of publicus public (see public (adj.)). Republic of letters attested
from 1702.


empire (n.)

early 14c., from Old French empire rule, authority, kingdom, imperial rule, from Latin imperium
rule, command, from imperare to command, from im- in (see in- (2)) + parare to order, prepare (see
pare).    Not etymologically restricted to territory ruled by an emperor, but used that way. The
Empire, meaning the British Empire, first recorded 1772 (it officially devolved into The
Commonwealth in 1931); before that it meant the Holy Roman Empire (1670s). Empire style (especially
in reference to a style of dresses with high waistlines) is 1869, from the Second Empire rule of
Napoleon III of France (1852-70). New York has been called the Empire State since 1834.


public (adj.)

late 14c., open to general observation, from Old French public (c.1300) and directly from Latin
publicus of the people; of the state; done for the state, also common, general, public; ordinary,
vulgar, and as a noun, a commonwealth; public property, altered (probably by influence of Latin
pubes adult population, adult) from Old Latin poplicus pertaining to the people, from populus people
(see people (n.)).    Early 15c. as pertaining to the people. From late 15c. as pertaining to public
affairs; meaning open to all in the community is from 1540s in English. An Old English adjective in
this sense was folclic. Public relations first recorded 1913 (after an isolated use by Thomas
Jefferson in 1807).   Public office position held by a public official is from 1821; public service
is from 1570s; public interest from 1670s.   Public-spirited is from 1670s. Public enemy is attested
from 1756. Public sector attested from 1949.   Public school is from 1570s, originally, in Britain,
a grammar school endowed for the benefit of the public, but most have evolved into boarding-schools
for the well-to-do. The main modern meaning in U.S., school (usually free) provided at public
expense and run by local authorities, is attested from 1640s. For public house, see pub.


city (n.)

early 13c., in medieval usage a cathedral town, but originally any settlement, regardless of size
(distinction from town is 14c., though in English it always seems to have ranked above borough),
from Old French cite town, city (10c., Modern French cit&eacute;), from earlier citet, from Latin
civitatem (nominative civitas; in Late Latin sometimes citatem) originally citizenship, condition or
rights of a citizen, membership in the community, later community of citizens, state, commonwealth
(used, for instance of the Gaulish tribes), from civis townsman, from PIE root *kei- to lie; bed,
couch; homestead; beloved, dear (see cemetery).    The sense has been transferred from the
inhabitants to the place. The Latin word for city was urbs, but a resident was civis. Civitas seems
to have replaced urbs as Rome (the ultimate urbs) lost its prestige. Loss of Latin -v- is regular in
French in some situations (compare alleger from alleviare; neige from nivea; jeune from juvenis. A
different sound evolution from the Latin word yielded Italian citta, Catalan ciutat, Spanish ciudad,
Portuguese cidade.    Replaced Old English burh (see borough). London is the city from 1550s. As an
adjective from c.1300. City hall first recorded 1670s to fight city hall is 1913, American English;
city slicker first recorded 1916 (see slick); both American English. City limits is from 1825. The
newspaper city desk attested from 1878. Inner city first attested 1968. City state (also city-state)
is attested from 1877.


