computer (n.)

1640s, one who calculates, agent noun from compute (v.). Meaning calculating machine (of any type)
is from 1897; in modern use, programmable digital electronic computer (1945 under this name;
theoretical from 1937, as Turing machine). ENIAC (1946) usually is considered the first. Computer
literacy is recorded from 1970; an attempt to establish computerate (adjective, on model of
literate) in this sense in the early 1980s didn't catch on. Computerese the jargon of programmers is
from 1960, as are computerize and computerization.    WASHINGTON (AP) -- A New York Congressman says
the use of computers to record personal data on individuals, such as their credit background, is
just frightening to me. [news article, March 17, 1968]


BASIC

computer language, 1964, initialism (acronym) for Beginners' All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code;
invented by Hungarian-born U.S. computer scientist John G. Kemeny (1926-1992) and U.S. computer
scientist Thomas E. Kurtz (b.1928).


boot (v.2)

start up a computer, 1975, from bootstrap (v.), a 1958 derived verb from bootstrap (n.) in the
computer sense.


browser (n.)

1845, animal which browses, agent noun from browse (v.). In the computer sense by 1982.    The first
browser was invented at PARC by Larry Tesler, now a designer at Apple Computer. Tesler's first
Smalltalk browser was a tree-structured device. It enabled programmers to hunt quickly for items in
a Smalltalk dictionary. [InfoWorld magazine, vol. v., no. 4, Jan. 24, 1983]


Microsoft

computer software company, founded 1975.


Teletex (n.)

proprietary name for a computer data-sharing network, 1978.


PowerPoint (n.)

Microsoft computer slide show program, 1987.


hacker (n.)

a chopper, cutter, perhaps also one who makes hacking tools, early 13c. (as a surname), agent noun
from hack (v.1). Meaning one who gains unauthorized access to computer records is attested by 1983,
agent noun from hack (v.2). Said to be from slightly earlier tech slang sense of one who works like
a hack at writing and experimenting with software, one who enjoys computer programming for its own
sake, 1976, reputedly a usage that evolved at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (however an MIT
student from the late 1960s recalls hack (n.) being used then and there in the general sense of
creative prank, which clouds its sense connection with the writing for hire word, and there may be a
source or an influence here in hack (v.1)).


wysiwyg

1982, computer programmer's acronym from what you see is what you get.


login

in the computer sense, as one word, by 1983, from log in.


cgi

by 2004, initialism (acronym) for computer-generated imagery.


lol

by 1993, computer chat abbreviation of laughing out loud.


server (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from serve (v.). Computer sense by 1992.


scanner (n.)

1550s, person who examines critically, agent noun from scan (v.). From 1927 as a type of mechanical
device, in mid-20c. use especially of radar and medical devices; later of computer accessories.


Turing machine (n.)

1937, named for English mathematician and computer pioneer Alan M. Turing (1912-1954), who described
such a device in 1936.


ENIAC

acronym from electronic numeral integrator and computer, device built 1946 at University of
Pennsylvania by John W. Mauchly Jr., J. Presper Eckert Jr., and J.G. Brainerd. It cost $400,000,
used 18,000 radio tubes, and was housed in a 30-foot-by-50-foot room.


terminal (n.)

end point of a railway line, 1888, from terminal (adj.); sense of device for communicating with a
computer is first recorded 1954. Earlier final part of a word (1831).


PASCAL

high-level computer programming language, 1971, named for French scholar Blaise Pascal (1623-1662),
who invented a calculating machine c.1642.


bit (n.2)

computerese word, 1948 abbreviation coined by U.S. computer pioneer John W. Tukey (1915-2000) of
binary digit, probably chosen for its identity with bit (n.1).


prompt (n.)

early 15c., readiness, from Latin promptus (see prompt (v.)). Meaning hint, act of prompting is from
1590s. Computer sense attested by 1977.


liveware (n.)

people, 1966, computer-programmer jargon, from live (adj.) + ending abstracted from software, etc.


backslash (n.)

1982, new punctuation symbol introduced for computer purposes, from back (adj.) + slash (n.).


Fortran (n.)

computer programming language, 1956, from combination of elements from formula + translation.


mainframe (n.)

central processor of a computer system, 1964, from main (adj.) + frame (n.).


CD-ROM

1983, in computer jargon; also cd-rom; from compact disc read-only memory.


screenshot (n.)

by 1991, from (computer) screen (n.) + shot (n.) in the photograph sense.


ping (n.)

1835, imitative of the sound of a bullet striking something sharply. Meaning short, high-pitched
electronic pulse is attested from 1943. As a verb from 1855; in computer sense is from at least
1981. Related: Pinged; pinging.


Linux

computer operating system, named for Linux kernel,  written 1991 by Linus Torvalds of Finland (who
coined the word but did not choose it as the name).


bitmap (n.)

1973, in computer jargon, from bit (n.2) + map. Literally, a map of bits.


spyware (n.)

by 2000, from spy + ending from software in the computer sense.


emulator (n.)

1580s, from Latin aemulator, agent noun from aemulari (see emulation). Computer sense attested by
1965.


Internet (n.)

1985, the linked computer networks of the U.S. Defense Department, shortened from internetwork, from
inter- + network (n.).


logon

in computer sense, as one word, by 1975, from log (v.) + on.


spell-check (v.)

to use a computer's spell checker application on a document, by 1985. The applications themselves
date to the late 1970s. Related: Spell-checked; spell-checking.


hardware (n.)

mid-15c., small metal goods, from hard + ware (n.). In the sense of physical components of a
computer it dates from 1947. Hardware store attested by 1789.


latency (n.)

1630s, condition of being concealed, from latent + -cy. Meaning delay between stimulus and response
is from 1882; computer sense (latency time) is from 1954.


firewall (n.)

1851 as a physical wall meant to prevent the spread of fire in a structure, from fire (n.) + wall
(n.). Computer sense is by 1990.


P.C.

abbreviation for personal computer is from 1978; abbreviation for politically correct is by 1990.


brainiac (n.)

very smart person, 1982, U.S. slang, from brain (n.) + ending from ENIAC, etc. Brainiac also was the
name of a comic book villain in the Superman series and a do-it-yourself computer building kit, both
from the late 1950s, and the word may bear traces of either or both of these.


microcomputer (n.)

1971, from micro- + computer.


supercomputer (n.)

1966, from super- + computer.


scroll (v.)

to write down in a scroll, c.1600, from scroll (n.). Sense of show a few lines at a time (on a
computer or TV screen) first recorded 1981. Related: Scrolled; scrolling.


code (v.)

1815, from code (n.). Specifically in the computer sense from 1947. Related: Coded; coding.


megabyte (n.)

1972, from mega- + byte.    The Sussex team has run the Forrester/Meadows models more than 1000
times on the UK's most powerful computer (the giant two-megabyte IBM 370/165 at Harwell). [New
Scientist, May 4, 1972]


viral (adj.)

of the nature of, or caused by, a virus, 1948, see virus + -al. Sense of become suddenly widely
popular through Internet sharing is attested by 1999, originally in reference to marketing and based
on the similarity of the effect to the spread of a computer virus. Related: Virally.


software (n.)

1851, soft wares, woolen or cotton fabrics, also, relatively perishable consumer goods, from soft +
ware (n.). The computer sense is a separate coinage from 1960, based on hardware.


tab (n.3)

1961, shortened form of tablet (especially one of sugar containing LSD). As an abbreviation of
tabloid (newspaper) it is 1990s slang. As a short form of tabulator key of a typewriter (later
computer) it is recorded from 1916.


gamer (n.)

1620s, an athlete, agent noun from game (v.). Meaning one devoted to playing video or computer games
is attested from 1993. Gamester is attested from 1590s but meant prostitute (compare old slang the
first game ever played copulation), later a man fit and ready for anything, a player (mid-17c.).


toast (n.2)

piece of bread browned by fire or dry heat, early 15c., from toast (v.1); originally as something
added to wine, ale, etc. From 17c. in the modern sense as something eaten on its own with a spread.
Slang meaning a goner, person or thing already doomed or destroyed is recorded by 1987, perhaps from
notion of computer circuits being fried, and with unconscious echoes of earlier figurative phrase to
be had on toast (1886) to be served up for eating.


cursor (n.)

computer sense is 1967 extension of name for the sliding part of a slide rule or other instrument
(1590s), earlier a running messenger (c.1300), from Latin cursor runner, also errand-boy, from
curs-, past participle stem of currere to run (see current (adj.)).


