compartmental (adj.)

1831, from compartment + -al (1).


compartment (n.)

1560s, from Middle French compartiment part partitioned off (16c.), through Italian compartimento,
from Late Latin compartiri to divide, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + partis, genitive of
pars part (see part (n.)).


till (n.)

cashbox, mid-15c., from Anglo-French tylle compartment, Old French tille compartment, shelter on a
ship, probably from Old Norse &thorn;ilja plank, floorboard, from Proto-Germanic *theljon. The other
theory [Klein, Century Dictionary] is that the word is from Middle English tillen to draw, from Old
English -tyllan (see toll (v.)), with a sense evolution as in drawer (see draw (v.)).


cockpit (n.)

1580s, a pit for fighting cocks, from cock (n.1) + pit (n.1). Used in nautical sense (1706) for
midshipmen's compartment below decks; transferred to airplanes (1914) and to cars (1930s).


cubicle (n.)

mid-15c., bedroom, from Latin cubiculum bedroom, from cubare to lie down, originally bend oneself,
from PIE root *keu(b)- to bend, turn. With Latin -clom, suffix denoting place. Obsolete from 16c.
but revived 19c. for dormitory sleeping compartment, sense of any partitioned space (such as a
library carrel or, later, office work station) is first recorded 1926.


pigeon-hole (n.)

also pigeonhole, 1570s, a small recess for pigeons to nest in, from pigeon + hole (n.). Meaning a
compartment in a writing desk, etc. is from 1680s, based on resemblance. The verb is from 1840
literally; figurative sense of label mentally is from 1870.    [Y]ou will have an inspector after
you with note-book and ink-horn, and you will be booked and pigeon-holed for further use when
wanted. [Civilisation--The Census, Blackwood's Magazine, Oct. 1854]    Related: Pigeonholed.


trunk (n.1)

mid-15c., box, case, from Old French tronc alms box in a church, also trunk of a tree, trunk of the
human body, wooden block (12c.), from Latin truncus trunk of a tree, trunk of the body, of uncertain
origin, perhaps originally mutilated, cut off. The meaning box, case is likely to be from the notion
of the body as the case of the organs. English acquired the main stem of a tree and torso of the
body senses from Old French in late 15c. The sense of luggage compartment of a motor vehicle is from
1930. Railroad trunk line is attested from 1843; telephone version is from 1889.


parquet (n.)

1816, patterned wooden flooring, from French parquet wooden flooring; enclosed portion of a park,
from Old French parchet (14c.) small compartment, part of a park or theater, diminutive of parc (see
park (n.)).    Meaning part of a theater auditorium at the front of the ground floor is first
recorded 1848. The noun use in English has been influenced by the verb (attested from 1640s, from
French parqueter. Related: Parquetry


box (n.1.)

Old English box a wooden container, also the name of a type of shrub, from Late Latin buxis, from
Greek pyxis boxwood box, from pyxos box tree, of uncertain origin. See OED entry for discussion.
German B&uuml;chse also is a Latin loan word.    Meaning compartment at a theater is from c.1600.
Meaning pigeon-hole at a post office is from 1832. Meaning television is from 1950. Slang meaning
vulva is attested 17c., according to Dictionary of American Slang; modern use seems to date from
c.World War II, perhaps originally Australian, on notion of box of tricks. Box office is 1786; in
the figurative sense of financial element of a performance it is first recorded 1904. Box lunch (n.)
attested from 1899. The box set, multiple-album, CD or cassette issue of the work of an artist is
attested by 1955.


rummage (v.)

1540s, arrange (cargo) in a ship, from rummage (n.), 1520s, act of arranging cargo in a ship, a
shortening of Middle French arrumage arrangement of cargo, from arrumer to stow goods in the hold of
a ship, from a- to + rumer, probably from Germanic (compare Old Norse rum compartment in a ship, Old
High German rum space, Old English rum; see room (n.)). Or else from English room (n.) + -age.
Meaning to search closely (the hold of a ship), especially by moving things about first recorded
1610s. Related: Rummaged; rummaging. Rummage sale (1803) originally was a sale at docks of unclaimed
goods.


town (n.)

Old English tun enclosure, garden, field, yard; farm, manor; homestead, dwelling house, mansion;
later group of houses, village, farm, from Proto-Germanic *tunaz, *tunan fortified place (cognates:
Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian tun fence, hedge, Middle Dutch tuun fence, Dutch tuin garden, Old
High German zun, German Zaun fence, hedge), an early borrowing from Celtic *dunon hill, hill-fort
(cognates: Old Irish dun, Welsh din fortress, fortified place, camp, dinas city, Gaulish-Latin
-dunum in place names), from PIE *dhu-no- enclosed, fortified place, hill-fort, from root *dheue- to
close, finish, come full circle (see down (n.2)).    Meaning inhabited place larger than a village
(mid-12c.) arose after the Norman conquest from the use of this word to correspond to French ville.
The modern word is partially a generic term, applicable to cities of great size as well as places
intermediate between a city and a village; such use is unusual, the only parallel is perhaps Latin
oppidium, which occasionally was applied even to Rome or Athens (each of which was more properly an
urbs).    First record of town hall is from late 15c. Town ball, version of baseball, is recorded
from 1852. Town car (1907) originally was a motor car with an enclosed passenger compartment and
open driver's seat. On the town living the high life is from 1712. Go to town do (something)
energetically is first recorded 1933. Man about town one constantly seen at public and private
functions is attested from 1734.


pull (v.)

c.1300, to move forcibly by pulling, to drag, from Old English pullian to pluck off (wool), to draw
out, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Low German pulen remove the shell or husk, Frisian
p&#251;lje to shell, husk, Middle Dutch polen to peel, strip, Icelandic pula work hard.    Early
14c. as to pick, pull off, gather (fruit, flowers, berries, leaves, petals, etc.); mid-14c. as to
uproot, pull up (of teeth, weeds, etc.). Sense of to draw, attract (to oneself) is from c.1400;
sense of to pluck at with the fingers is from c.1400. Meaning tear to pieces is mid-15c. By late
16c. it had replaced draw in these senses. Related: Pulled; pulling.    Common in slang usages
19c.-20c.; Bartlett (1859) has to pull foot walk fast; run; pull it to run. To pull up check a
course of action is from 1808, figurative of the lifting of the reins in horse-riding. To pull
(someone's) chain in figurative sense is from 1974, perhaps on the notion of a captive animal; the
expression was also used for to contact (someone), on the notion of the chain that operates a
signaling mechanism.    To pull (someone's) leg is from 1882, perhaps on notion of playfully
tripping (compare pull the long bow exaggerate, 1830, and pulling someone's leg also sometimes was
described as a way to awaken a sleeping person in a railway compartment, ship's berth, etc.).
Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has pull (n.) a jest (to have a pull at (someone)), which it
identifies as local and illustrates with an example from the Massachusetts Spy of May 21, 1817,
which identifies it as a Georgian phrase. To pull (one's) punches is from 1920 in pugilism, from
1921 figuratively. To pull in arrive (1892) and pull out depart (1868) are from the railroads.    To
pull (something) off accomplish, succeed at is originally in sporting, to win the prize money
(1870). To pull (something) on (someone) is from 1916; to pull (something) out of one's ass is Army
slang from 1970s. To pull rank is from 1919; to pull the rug from under (someone) figuratively is
from 1946.


