compliant (adj.)

1640s, from comply + -ant.


according

c.1300, matching, similar, correponding, present participle adjective and adverb from accord (v.).
Meanings conforming (to), compliant, in agreement; consistent, harmonious; suitable, appropriate are
from late 14c. According to referring to, literally in a manner agreeing with is attested from mid-
15c.


pliant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ploiant bending, supple; compliant, fickle, as a noun, turncoat (13c.),
present participle of ploier to bend (see ply (n.)). Figurative sense of easily influenced is from
c.1400. Related: Pliancy.


wittol (n.)

compliant cuckold, late 15c., witewold, probably from witen to know (see wit (v.)) + ending from
noun cuckold (Middle English cokewold).


obsequious (adj.)

late 15c., prompt to serve, from Middle French obs&#233;quieux (15c.), from Latin obsequiosus
compliant, obedient, from obsequium compliance, dutiful service, from obsequi to accommodate oneself
to the will of another, from ob after (see ob-) + sequi to follow (see sequel). Pejorative sense of
fawning, sycophantic had emerged by 1590s. Related: Obsequiously; obsequiousness (mid-15c.).


buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


tame (adj.)

early Middle English tame in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior
(c.1200); of animals domesticated, reclaimed from wildness, also, of persons, meek, gentle-natured,
compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities (mid-13c.), from oblique forms of Old English
tom, tam domesticated, docile, from Proto-Germanic *tamaz (cognates: Old Norse tamr, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch tam, Old High German zam, German zahm tame, Gothic tamjan
to tame), from PIE *deme- to constrain, to force, to break (horses) (cognates: Sanskrit damayati
tames; Persian dam a tame animal; Greek daman to tame, subdue, dmetos tame; Latin domare to tame,
subdue; Old Irish damnaim I tie up, fasten, I tame, subdue).    A possible ulterior connection is
with PIE *dem- house, household (see domestic (adj.)). Meaning spiritless, weak, dull, uninspiring,
insipid is recorded from c.1600. Related: Tamely; tameness.


