conceit (n.)

late 14c., something formed in the mind, thought, notion, from conceiven (see conceive) based on
analogy of deceit and receipt. Sense evolved from something formed in the mind, to fanciful or witty
notion (1510s), to vanity (c.1600) through shortening of self-conceit (1580s).


conceited (adj.)

c.1600, having an overweening opinion of oneself (short for self-conceited, 1590s); earlier having
intelligence (1540s); past participle adjective from conceit (q.v.).


concept (n.)

1550s, from Medieval Latin conceptum draft, abstract, in classical Latin (a thing) conceived, from
concep-, past participle stem of concipere to take in (see conceive). In some 16c. cases a
refashioning of conceit (perhaps to avoid negative connotations).


ego (n.)

1714, as a term in metaphysics, from Latin ego I (cognate with Old English ic, see I).
Psychoanalytic sense is from 1894; sense of conceit is 1891. Ego trip first recorded 1969.    In the
book of Egoism it is written, Possession without obligation to the object possessed approaches
felicity. [George Meredith, The Egoist, 1879]


egotist (n.)

1714, first used by Joseph Addison; see ego + -ist. Addison credits the term to Port-Royalists who
used it in reference to obtrusive use of first person singular pronoun in writing, hence talking too
much about oneself. Meaning self-conceit, selfishness is 1800. The -t- is abnornmal, perhaps by
influence of dogmatism. Related: Egotistic; egotistical.


vanity (n.)

c.1200, that which is vain, futile, or worthless, from Old French vanite self-conceit; futility;
lack of resolve (12c.), from Latin vanitatem (nominative vanitas) emptiness, aimlessness; falsity,
figuratively vainglory, foolish pride, from vanus empty, vain, idle (see vain). Meaning self-
conceited in English is attested from mid-14c. Vanity table is attested from 1936. Vanity Fair is
from Pilgrim's Progress (1678).


elation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French elacion elation, conceit, arrogance, vanity, from Latin elationem
(nominative elatio), noun of action from elatus elevated, form used as past participle of efferre,
from ex- out + latus (see oblate (n.)), past participle of ferre carry (see infer). Metaphoric sense
of lifting spirits was in Latin and has always been the principal meaning in English.


big (adj.)

c.1300, northern England dialect, powerful, strong, of obscure origin, possibly from a Scandinavian
source (compare Norwegian dialectal bugge great man). Old English used micel in many of the same
senses. Meaning of great size is late 14c.; that of grown up is attested from 1550s. Sense of
important is from 1570s. Meaning generous is U.S. colloquial by 1913.   Big band as a musical style
is from 1926. Slang big head conceit is first recorded 1850. Big business large commercial firms
collectively is 1905; big house penitentiary is U.S. underworld slang first attested 1915 (in
London, a workhouse, 1851). In financial journalism, big ticket items so called from 1956. Big lie
is from Hitler's grosse L&uuml;ge.


rosary (n.)

rose garden, mid-15c., from Latin rosarium rose garden, in Medieval Latin also garland; string of
beads; series of prayers, from noun use of neuter of rosarius of roses, from rosa rose (see rose
(n.1)).    The sense of series of prayers is 1540s, from Middle French rosaire, a figurative use of
the word meaning rose garden, on the notion of a garden of prayers. This probably embodies the
medieval conceit of comparing collections to bouquets (compare anthology and Medieval Latin hortulus
animae prayerbook, literally little garden of the soul). Sense transferred 1590s to the strings of
beads used as a memory aid in reciting the rosary.


