conduit (n.)

c.1300, conduyt, from Old French conduit (12c.) escort, protection; pipe, channel, from Latin
conductus a leading, a pipe (see conduct). A doublet of conduct, differentiated in meaning from 15c.


shoot (n.1)

young branch of a tree or plant, mid-15c., from shoot (v.). Also heavy, sudden rush of water
(1610s); artificial channel for water running down (1707); conduit for coal, etc. (1844).


duct (n.)

1640s, course, direction, from Latin ductus a leading, past participle of ducere to lead (see duke
(n.)). Anatomical sense is from 1660s. Meaning conduit, channel is 1713; that of air tube in a
structure is from 1884.


vas (n.)

in anatomy, a tube, duct, or conduit for conveying blood, lymph, semen, etc., plural vasa, Latin,
literally vessel. Vas deferens (plural vasa defferentia) is from 1570s.


water-pipe (n.)

c.1400, conduit for water, from water (n.1) + pipe (n.1). The smoking sense is first attested 1824.


pump (n.1)

apparatus for forcing liquid or air, early 15c., of uncertain origin, possibly from Middle Dutch
pompe water conduit, pipe, or Middle Low German pumpe pump (Modern German Pumpe), both from some
North Sea sailors' word, possibly of imitative origin.


conduct (v.)

early 15c., to guide, from Latin conductus, past participle of conducere to lead or bring together
(see conduce). Sense of convey is from early 15c.; that of to direct, manage is from 1630s; to
behave in a certain way from c.1710; to convey from 1740. Related: Conducted; conducting. Earlier
verb in the same sense was condyten (c.1400), related to conduit. The noun is from mid-15c., guide
(in sauf conducte); sense of behavior is first recorded 1670s.


sewer (n.1)

c.1400, conduit, from Anglo-French sewere, Old North French sewiere sluice from a pond (13c.),
literally something that makes water flow, from shortened form of Gallo-Roman *exaquaria (source of
Middle French esseveur), from Latin ex- out (see ex-) + aquaria, fem. of aquarius pertaining to
water, from aqua water (see aqua-).    Specifically of underground channels for wastewater from
c.1600; figurative use of this is from 1640s.


safe (adj.)

c.1300, unscathed, unhurt, uninjured; free from danger or molestation, in safety, secure; saved
spiritually, redeemed, not damned; from Old French sauf protected, watched-over; assured of
salvation, from Latin salvus uninjured, in good health, safe, related to salus good health, saluber
healthful, all from PIE *solwos from root *sol- whole (cognates: Latin solidus solid, Sanskrit
sarvah uninjured, intact, whole, Avestan haurva- uninjured, intact, Old Persian haruva-, Greek holos
whole).    As a quasi-preposition from c.1300, on model of French and Latin cognates. From late 14c.
as rescued, delivered; protected; left alive, unkilled. Meaning not exposed to danger (of places) is
attested from late 14c.; of actions, etc., free from risk, first recorded 1580s. Meaning sure,
reliable, not a danger is from c.1600. Sense of conservative, cautious is from 1823. Paired
alliteratively with sound (adj.) from late 14c. The noun safe-conduct (late 13c.) is from Old French
sauf-conduit (13c.).


