confident (adj.)

1570s, self-reliant, sure of oneself, from Middle French confident, from Latin confidentem
(nominative confidens) firmly trusting, reliant, self-confident, bold, daring, present participle of
confidere (see confidence). Related: Confidently.


confidant (n.)

1610s, confident, (male) person trusted with private affairs, from French confident (16c.), from
Italian confidente a trusty friend, literally confident, trusty, from Latin confidentem (nominative
confidens), present participle of confidere to trust, confide (see confidence). The spelling with
-a- came to predominate 18c. and might reflect the French pronunciation.


over-confident (adj.)

1610s, from over- + confident. Related: Overconfidently.


self-confident (adj.)

1610s, from self- + confident. Related: self-confidently.


assured (adj.)

of persons, confident, self-assured, late 14c., past participle adjective from assure. Related:
Assuredly; assuredness.


uncertain (adj.)

c.1300, of indeterminate time or occurrence, from un- (1) not + certain (adj.). Meaning not fully
confident is recorded from late 14c. (implied in uncertainty). Related: Uncertainly.


confidante (n.)

1709, female confidant, from French confidente, fem. of confident (see confidant).


overweening (adj.)

mid-14c., from present participle of verb overwenen be conceited, presume, be presumptuous, be over-
confident, from Old English oferwenian to be proud, become insolent or presumptuous; see over- +
ween.


sanguine (adj.)

blood-red, late 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French sanguin (fem. sanguine), from Latin
sanguineus of blood, also bloody, bloodthirsty, from sanguis (genitive sanguinis) blood (see
sanguinary). Meaning cheerful, hopeful, confident first attested c.1500, because these qualities
were thought in medieval physiology to spring from an excess of blood as one of the four humors.
Also in Middle English as a noun, type of red cloth (early 14c.).


audacious (adj.)

1540s, confident, intrepid, from Middle French audacieux, from audace boldness, from Latin audacia
daring, boldness, courage, from audax brave, bold, daring, but more often bold in a bad sense,
audacious, rash, foolhardy, from audere to dare, be bold. Bad sense of shameless is attested from
1590s in English. Related: Audaciously.


trow (v.)

Old English treowan to trust in, believe, hope, be confident; persuade, suggest; make true; be
faithful (to), confederate with, from treow faith, belief, from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- (cognates:
Old Saxon truon, Old Frisian trouwa, Dutch vertrouwen trust, Old High German triuwen, German trauen
hope, believe, trust; see true (adj.)).


positive (adj.)

early 14c., originally a legal term meaning formally laid down, from Old French positif (13c.) and
directly from Latin positivus settled by agreement, positive (opposed to naturalis natural), from
positus, past participle of ponere put, place (see position (n.)).    Sense of absolute is from mid-
15c. Meaning in philosophy of dealing only with facts is from 1590s. Sense broadened to expressed
without qualification (1590s), then confident in opinion (1660s); mathematical use is from 1704; in
electricity, 1755. Psychological sense of concentrating on what is constructive and good is recorded
from 1916.


bold (adj.)

Old English beald (West Saxon), bald (Anglian) bold, brave, confident, strong, from Proto-Germanic
*balthaz (cognates: Old High German bald bold, swift, in names such as Archibald, Leopold, Theobald;
Gothic bal&thorn;ei boldness; Old Norse ballr frightful, dangerous), perhaps from PIE *bhol-to-
suffixed form of *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see bole).    Of flavors (coffee, etc.) from 1829. The
noun meaning those who are bold is from c.1300. Old French and Proven&ccedil;al baut bold, Italian
baldo bold, daring, fearless are Germanic loan-words.


sure (adj.)

early 13c., safe against attack, secure, later firm, reliable (c.1300); mentally certain, confident
(mid-14c.); firm, strong, resolute (c.1400), from Old French seur, sur safe, secure; undoubted,
dependable, trustworthy (12c.), from Latin securus free from care, untroubled, heedless, safe (see
secure (adj.)). Pronunciation development is that of sugar (n.).    As an affirmative meaning yes,
certainly it dates from 1803, from Middle English meanings firmly established; having no doubt, and
phrases like to be sure (1650s), sure enough (1540s), and for sure (1580s). The use as an adverb
meaning assuredly goes back to early 14c. Sure-footed is from 1630s, literal and figurative; sure
thing dates from 1836. In 16c.-17c., Suresby was an appellation for a person to be depended upon.


trust (n.)

c.1200, reliance on the veracity, integrity, or other virtues of someone or something; religious
faith, from Old Norse traust help, confidence, protection, support, from Proto-Germanic abstract
noun *traustam (cognates: Old Frisian trast, Dutch troost comfort, consolation, Old High German
trost trust, fidelity, German Trost comfort, consolation, Gothic trausti agreement, alliance), from
Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-, source of Old English treowian to believe, trust, and treowe faithful,
trusty (see true (adj.)).    from c.1300 as reliability, trustworthiness; trustiness, fidelity,
faithfulness; from late 14c. as confident expectation and that on which one relies. From early 15c.
in legal sense of confidence placed in a one who holds or enjoys the use of property entrusted to
him by its legal owner; mid-15c. as condition of being legally entrusted. Meaning businesses
organized to reduce competition is recorded from 1877. Trust-buster is recorded from 1903.


