confine (v.)

1520s, to border on, from Middle French confiner, from confins (n.); see confine (n.). Sense of
keeping within limits is from 1590s. Related: Confined; confining.


confine (n.)

c.1400, boundary, limit (usually as confines), from Old French confins boundaries, from Medieval
Latin confines, from Latin confinium (plural confinia) boundary, limit, from confine, neuter of
confinis bordering on, having the same boundaries, from com- with (see com-) + finis an end (see
finish (v.)).


confinement (n.)

1590s, from French confinement (16c.; the Old French word was confinacion), from confiner (see
confine). As a euphemism for childbed it dates from 1774 (the Middle English expression was Our
Lady's bands).


seclude (v.)

mid-15c., to shut up, enclose, confine, from Latin secludere shut off, confine, from se- apart (see
secret) + -cludere, variant of claudere to shut (see close (v.)). Meaning to remove or guard from
public view is recorded from 1620s. Related: Secluded; secluding.


intern (v.)

1866, to confine within set limits, from French interner send to the interior, confine, from Middle
French interne inner, internal, from Latin internus within, internal (see internal; also compare
intern (n.)).


unconfined (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of confine (v.).


hem (v.)

late 14c., to provide (something) with a border or fringe (surname Hemmer attested from c.1300),
from hem (n.). Related: Hemmed; hemming. The phrase hem in shut in, confine, first recorded 1530s.


narrow (v.)

Old English nearwian to force in, cramp, confine; become smaller, shrink; see narrow (adj.).
Related: Narrowed; narrowing.


tether (v.)

late 14c. (implied in tethering), confine by a tether, originally of grazing animals, from tether
(n.). Figurative use also from late 14c. Related: Tethered.


hamper (v.)

late 14c., hampren to surround, imprison, confine, also to pack in a container, of unknown origin,
possibly from hamper (n.1), or somehow connected to Middle English hamelian to maim. Related:
Hampered; hampering.


circumscribe (v.)

late 14c., from Latin circumscribere to make a circle around, encircle, draw a line around; limit,
restrain, confine, set the boundaries of, from circum- around (see circum-) + scribere write (see
script (n.)). Related: Circumscribed; circumscribing.


coerce (v.)

mid-15c., cohercen, from Middle French cohercer, from Latin coercere to control, restrain, shut up
together, from com- together (see co-) + arcere to enclose, confine, contain, ward off, from PIE
*ark- to hold, contain, guard (see arcane). Related: Coerced; coercing. No record of the word
between late 15c. and mid-17c.; its reappearance 1650s is perhaps a back-formation from coercion.


restrain (v.)

mid-14c., from stem of Old French restreindre press, push together; curb, bridle; bandage (12c.),
from Latin restringere draw back tightly, confine, check (see restriction). Related: Restrained;
restraining.    That which we restrain we keep within limits; that which we restrict we keep within
certain definite limits; that which we repress we try to put out of existence. [Century Dictionary,
1902]


repress (v.)

late 14c., to check, restrain, from Latin repressus, past participle of reprimere hold back, curb,
figuratively check, confine, restrain, refrain, from re- back (see re-) + premere to push (see press
(v.1)).    Used of feelings or desires from late 14c.; in the purely psychological sense, it
represents German verdr&auml;ngen (Freud, 1893), first attested 1904 (implied in repressed). Meaning
to put down (a rebellion, etc.) is from late 15c. Related: Repressed; repressing.


licence (n.)

mid-14c., liberty (to do something), leave, from Old French licence freedom, liberty, power,
possibility; permission, (12c.), from Latin licentia freedom, liberty, license, from licentem
(nominative licens). present participle of licere to be allowed, be lawful, from PIE root *leik- to
offer, bargain (cognates: Lettish likstu I come to terms). Meaning formal (usually written)
permission from authority to do something (marry, hunt, drive, etc.) is first attested early 15c.
Meaning excessive liberty, disregard of propriety is from mid-15c. No etymological justification for
the spelling with -s-; attempts to confine license to verbal use and licence to noun use (compare
advise/advice, devise/device) seem to have failed.


bend (v.)

Old English bendan to bend a bow; confine with a string, fetter, causative of bindan to bind, from
Proto-Germanic base *band- string, band (cognates: Old Norse benda to join, strain, strive, bend),
from PIE root *bhendh- to bind (cognates: Gothic bindan, Old High German bintan, Sanskrit badhnati
binds, Lithuanian bendras partner; Old Persian bandaka- subject).    Modern sense (early 14c.) is
via notion of bending a bow to string it. Cognate with band, bind, and bond. Related: Bended; bent;
bending.


close (v.)

c.1200, to shut, cover in, from Old French clos- (past participle stem of clore to shut, to cut off
from), 12c., from Latin clausus, past participle of claudere to shut, close; to block up, make
inaccessible; put an end to; shut in, enclose, confine (always -clusus, -cludere in compounds).
The Latin word might be from the possible PIE root *klau- hook, peg, crooked or forked branch (used
as a bar or bolt in primitive structures); cognates: Latin clavis key, clavus nail, claustrum bar,
bolt, barrier, claustra dam, wall, barricade, stronghold; Greek kleidos (genitive) bar, bolt, key,
klobos cage; Old Irish clo nail, Middle Irish clithar hedge, fence; Old Church Slavonic klju&#269;i
hook, key, klju&#269;iti shut; Lithuanian kliuti to catch, be caught on, kliaudziu check, hinder,
kliuvu clasp, hang; Old High German sliozan shut, German schlie&szlig;en to shut, Schl&uuml;ssel
key.    Also partly from Old English beclysan close in, shut up. Intransitive sense become shut is
from late 14c. Meaning draw near to is from 1520s. Intransitive meaning draw together, come together
is from 1550s, hence the idea in military verbal phrase close ranks (mid-17c.), later with
figurative extensions. Meaning bring to an end, finish is from c.1400; intransitive sense come to an
end is from 1826. Of stock prices, from 1860. Meaning bring together the parts of (a book, etc.) is
from 1560s. Related: Closed; closing.


