conglomerate (n.)

large business group, 1967, from conglomerate (adj.).


conglomerate (v.)

1590s, from Latin conglomeratus, past participle of conglomerare (see conglomerate (adj.)). Related:
Conglomerated; conglomerating.


conglomerate (adj.)

1570s, from Latin conglomeratus, past participle of conglomerare to roll together, from com-
together (see com-) + glomerare to gather into a ball, from glomus (genitive glomeris) a ball, from
PIE root *glem-.


conglomeration (n.)

1620s, from Latin conglomerationem (nominative conglomeratio), noun of action from past participle
stem of conglomerare (see conglomerate (adj.)).


clew (n.)

ball of thread or yarn, northern English and Scottish relic of Old English cliewen sphere, ball,
skein, ball of thread or yarn, probably from West Germanic *kleuwin (cognates: Old Saxon cleuwin,
Dutch kluwen), from Proto-Germanic *kliwjo-, from PIE *gleu- gather into a mass, conglomerate (see
clay).


be (v.)

Old English beon, beom, bion be, exist, come to be, become, happen, from Proto-Germanic *biju- I am,
I will be. This b-root is from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, grow, come into being, and in addition
to the words in English it yielded German present first and second person singular (bin, bist, from
Old High German bim I am, bist thou art), Latin perfective tenses of esse (fui I was, etc.), Old
Church Slavonic byti be, Greek phu- become, Old Irish bi'u I am, Lithuanian bu'ti to be, Russian
byt' to be, etc. It also is behind Sanskrit bhavah becoming, bhavati becomes, happens, bhumih earth,
world.     The modern verb to be in its entirety represents the merger of two once-distinct verbs,
the b-root represented by be and the am/was verb, which was itself a conglomerate. Roger Lass (Old
English) describes the verb as a collection of semantically related paradigm fragments, while
Weekley calls it an accidental conglomeration from the different Old English dial[ect]s. It is the
most irregular verb in Modern English and the most common. Collective in all Germanic languages, it
has eight different forms in Modern English:   BE (infinitive, subjunctive, imperative)  AM (present
1st person singular)  ARE (present 2nd person singular and all plural)  IS (present 3rd person
singular)  WAS (past 1st and 3rd persons singular)  WERE (past 2nd person singular, all plural;
subjunctive)  BEING (progressive &amp; present participle; gerund)  BEEN (perfect participle).
The paradigm in Old English was:<table width=400 bgcolor=#CCFFFF cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4
border=1><tr><td> </td><td>SING.</td><td>PL.</td></tr><tr><td>1st pres.</td><td>ic eomic
beo</td><td>we sind(on)we beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pres.</td><td>&thorn;u eart&thorn;u
bist</td><td>ge sind(on)ge beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pres.</td><td>he ishe bi&eth;</td><td>hie
sind(on)hie beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>1st pret.</td><td>ic w&aelig;s</td><td>we
w&aelig;ron</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pret.</td><td>&thorn;u w&aelig;re</td><td>ge
waeron</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pret.</td><td>heo w&aelig;s</td><td>hie w&aelig;ron</td></tr><tr><td>1st
pret. subj.</td><td>ic w&aelig;re</td><td>we w&aelig;ren</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pret.
subj.</td><td>&thorn;u w&aelig;re</td><td>ge w&aelig;ren</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pret.
subj.</td><td>Egcfer&eth; w&aelig;re</td><td>hie w&aelig;ren</td></tr></table>The b-root had no past
tense in Old English, but often served as future tense of am/was. In 13c. it took the place of the
infinitive, participle and imperative forms of am/was. Later its plural forms (we beth, ye ben, they
be) became standard in Middle English and it made inroads into the singular (I be, thou beest, he
beth), but forms of are claimed this turf in the 1500s and replaced be in the plural. For the origin
and evolution of the am/was branches of this tangle, see am and was.    That but this blow Might be
the be all, and the end all. [Macbeth I.vii.5]


