congeal (v.)

late 14c., from Old French congeler (14c.) to freeze, thicken, from Latin congelare to cause to
freeze, to freeze together, from com- together (see com-) + gelare to freeze, from gelu frost, ice
(see cold (adj.)). Related: Congealed; congealing.


jell (v.)

1830, American English, probably a back-formation of jelly (v.). Related: Jelled; jelling.
Figurative sense is first attested 1908. Middle English had gelen congeal, but it disappeared 15c.


-trophy

word-forming element meaning food, nourishment, from Greek -trophia, from trophe food, nourishment,
related to trephein make thrive, nourish, rear; to make solid, congeal, thicken.


jelly (n.)

late 14c., from Old French gelee a frost; jelly, noun use of fem. past participle of geler congeal,
from Latin gelare to freeze, from gelu frost (see cold (adj.)).


curdle (v.)

1630s (earlier crudle, 1580s), to thicken, cause to congeal, frequentative of curd (v.) to make into
curd (late 14c.; see curd). Of blood, in figurative sense to inspire horror from c.1600. Related:
Curdled (1590); curdling (c.1700, almost always with reference to blood, in the figurative sense).


cling (v.)

Old English clingan hold fast, adhere closely; congeal, shrivel (strong verb, past tense clang, past
participle clungen), from Proto-Germanic *klingg- (cognates: Danish klynge to cluster; Old High
German klinga narrow gorge; Old Norse klengjask press onward; Danish klinke, Dutch klinken to
clench; German Klinke latch).    The main sense shifted in Middle English to adhere to (something
else), stick together. Of persons in embrace, c.1600. Figuratively (to hopes, outmoded ideas, etc.),
from 1580s. Of clothes from 1792. Related: Clung; clinging.


strain (v.)

c.1300, tie, bind, fasten, gird, from present participle stem of Old French estreindre bind tightly,
clasp, squeeze, from Latin stringere (2) draw tight, bind tight, compress, press together, from PIE
root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Lithuanian stregti congeal, freeze, become stiff;
Greek strangein twist; Old High German strician mends nets; Old English streccian to stretch; German
stramm, Dutch stram stiff).    From late 14c. as tighten; make taut, also exert oneself; overexert
(a body part), Sense of press through a filter, put (a liquid) through a strainer is from early 14c.
(implied in strainer); that of to stress beyond measure, carry too far, make a forced interpretation
of is from mid-15c. Related: Strained; straining.


stand (v.)

Old English standan occupy a place; stand firm; congeal; stay, continue, abide; be valid, be, exist,
take place; oppose, resist attack; stand up, be on one's feet; consist, amount to (class VI strong
verb; past tense stod, past participle standen), from Proto-Germanic *sta-n-d- (cognates: Old Norse
standa, Old Saxon and Gothic standan, Old High German stantan, parallel with simpler forms, such as
Swedish st&#229;, Dutch staan, German stehen [see discussion in OED]), from PIE root *sta- to stand
(see stet).    Sense of to exist, be present is attested from c.1300. Meaning encounter without
flinching is from 1590s; weaker sense of put up with is from 1620s. Meaning to submit (to chances,
etc.) is from c.1700. Meaning to pay for as a treat is from 1821. Meaning become a candidate for
office is from 1550s. Nautical sense of hold a course at sea is from 1620s. Meaning to be so high
when standing is from 1831.   Stand back keep (one's) distance is from c.1400. Phrase stand pat is
from poker (1882), earlier simply stand (1824 in other card games). To stand down is from 1680s,
originally of witnesses in court; in the military sense of come off duty it is first recorded 1916.
To let (something) stand is from c.1200. To stand for is c.1300 as count for; early 14c. as be
considered in lieu of; late 14c. as represent by way of sign; sense of tolerate first recorded
1620s. Phrase stands to reason (1620) is from earlier stands (is constant) with reason.


