conjugal (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French conjugal (13c.), from Latin coniugalis relating to marriage, from coniunx
(genitive coniugis) spouse, related to coniugare to join together, from com- together (see com-) +
iugare to join, from iugum yoke (see jugular).


conjugation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin conjugationem (nominative conjugatio) a combining, connecting, noun of action
from conjugare to join together (see conjugal). Grammatical sense is 1520s.


conjunct (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin coniunctus, past participle of coniugare (see conjugal). A doublet of conjoint.


conjugate (v.)

1520s, in grammatical sense; 1560s in literal sense, from Latin coniugatus, past participle of
coniugare to yoke together (see conjugal). Earlier as an adjective (late 15c.). Related: Conjugated;
conjugating.


conjunction (n.)

late 14c., originally of planets, from Old French conjonction union, joining, sexual intercourse
(12c.), from Latin coniunctionem (nominative coniunctio), from past participle stem of coniugare
join together (see conjugal). Compare Italian congiunzione, Spanish conjunci&oacute;n. Grammatical
sense (late 14c.) was in Latin, a loan-translation of Greek syndesmos. The word also had the meaning
sexual union 17c.-18c.


service (n.1)

c.1100, celebration of public worship, from Old French servise act of homage; servitude; service at
table; Mass, church ceremony, from Latin servitium slavery, condition of a slave, servitude, also
slaves collectively, from servus slave (see serve (v.)).    Meaning act of serving, occupation of an
attendant servant is attested from c.1200, as is that of assistance, help; a helpful act. From
c.1300 as provision of food; sequence of dishes served in a meal; from late 14c. as service at
table, attendance during a meal. Meaning the furniture of the table (tea service, etc.) is from mid-
15c.    Meanings state of being bound to undertake tasks for someone or at someone's direction;
labor performed or undertaken for another are mid-13c. Sense of service or employment in a court or
administration is from c.1300, as is that of military service (especially by a knight); employment
as a soldier; hence the military as an occupation (1706).     Also in Middle English sexual
intercourse, conjugal relations (mid-15c.; service of Venus, or flesh's service). Service industry
(as distinct from production) attested from 1938. A service station originally was a gas stop that
also repaired cars.


social (adj.)

late 15c., devoted to or relating to home life; 1560s as living with others, from Middle French
social (14c.) and directly from Latin socialis of companionship, of allies; united, living with
others; of marriage, conjugal, from socius companion, ally, probably originally follower, from PIE
*sokw-yo-, suffixed form of root *sekw- (1) to follow, and thus related to sequi to follow (see
sequel). Compare Old English secg, Old Norse seggr companion, which seem to have been formed on the
same notion). Related: Socially.    Sense of characterized by friendliness or geniality is from
1660s. Meaning living or liking to live with others; companionable, disposed to friendly intercourse
is from 1720s. Meaning of or pertaining to society as a natural condition of human life first
attested 1695, in Locke. Sense of pertaining to fashionable society is from 1873.  Social climber is
from 1893; social work is 1890; social worker 1886. Social drinking first attested 1807. Social
studies as an inclusive term for history, geography, economics, etc., is attested from 1916. Social
security system of state support for needy citizens is attested from 1907 (the Social Security Act
was passed by U.S. Congress in 1935). Social butterfly is from 1867, in figurative reference to
flitting.   Social contract (1763) is from translations of Rousseau. Social Darwinism attested from
1887. Social engineering attested from 1899. Social science is from 1785.  In late 19c. newspapers,
social evil is prostitution. Social justice is attested by 1718; social network by 1971; social
networking by 1984; social media by 2008.


