console (n.)

1706, a cabinet; an ornamental base structure, from French console a bracket (16c.), of uncertain
origin, possibly from Middle French consolateur, literally one who consoles, word used for carved
human figures supporting cornices, shelves or rails in choir stalls. Another guess connects it to
Latin consolidare. Sense evolved to body of a musical organ (1881), radio cabinet (1925), then
cabinet for a TV, stereo, etc. (1944).


console (v.)

1690s, from French consoler to comfort, console, from Latin consolari offer solace, encourage,
comfort, cheer, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + solari to comfort (see solace). Or perhaps
a back-formation from consolation. The Latin word is glossed in Old English by frefran. Related:
Consoled; consoling.


solace (v.)

comfort, console in grief, late 13c.; also in Middle English entertain, amuse, please, from Old
French solacier comfort, console (often with a sexual connotation) and directly from Medieval Latin
solatiare give solace, console (source also of Spanish solazar, Italian sollazzare), from Latin
solacium (see solace (n.)). Related: Solaced; solacing.


consolate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin consolatus, past participle of consolari (see console (v.)); obsolete and
replaced by console (v.).


consol (n.)

alternative form of console (n.).


consolatory (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin consolatorius, from consolator, agent noun from consolari (see console (v.)).


cheer (v.)

late 14c., to cheer up, humor, console; c.1400 as entertain with food or drink, from cheer (n.).
Related: Cheered; cheering. Sense of to encourage by words or deeds is early 15c. Which had focused
to salute with shouts of applause by late 18c. Cheer up (intransitive) first attested 1670s.


disconsolate (adj.)

c.1400, from Medieval Latin disconsolatus comfortless, from Latin dis- away (see dis-) + consolatus,
past participle of consolari (see console (v.)). Related: Disconsolately.


paraclete (n.)

mid-15c., Paraclit, a title of the Holy Spirit, from Old French paraclet (13c.), from Medieval Latin
paracletus, from Greek parakletos advocate, intercessor, legal assistant, noun use of adjective
meaning called to one's aid, from parakalein to call to one's aid, in later use to comfort, to
console, from para (see para- (1)) + kalein to call (see claim (v.)).


consolation (n.)

late 14c., act of consoling, from Old French consolacion (11c., Modern French consolation) solace,
comfort; delight, pleasure, from Latin consolationem (nominative consolatio-) consoling, comforting,
noun of action from consolat-, past participle stem of consolari (see console (v.)). Consolation
prize is recorded from 1886.


inconsolable (adj.)

c.1500 (implied in inconsolably), from Latin inconsolabilis inconsolable, from in- not (see in- (1))
+ consolabilis consolable, from consolari (see console (v.)).


deport (v.1)

late 15c., to behave, from Old French deporter behave, deport (oneself) (12c.), also with a wide
range of meanings in Old French, such as be patient; take one's (sexual) pleasure with; amuse,
entertain; remain, delay, tarry; cheer, console, treat kindly; put aside, cast off, send away, from
de- from, off (see de-) + porter to carry, from Latin portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Related:
Deported; deporting.


solace (n.)

comfort in grief, consolation, late 13c., from Old French solaz pleasure, entertainment, enjoyment;
solace, comfort, from Latin solacium a soothing, assuaging; comfort, consolation, from solatus, past
participle of solari to console, soothe, from PIE *sol-a-, suffixed form of root *sele- of good
mood; to favor (cognates: Old English ges&aelig;lig happy; see silly). Adjectival form solacious is
attested 16c.-17c.


comfort (v.)

late 13c., conforten to cheer up, console, from Old French conforter to comfort, to solace; to help,
strengthen, from Late Latin confortare to strengthen much (used in Vulgate), from Latin com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + fortis strong (see fort). Change of -n- to -m- began in English 14c.
Related: Comforted; comforting.


