contextual (adj.)

c.1820, from context on model of textual, etc. In philosophy, contextual definition is recorded from
1934, along with contextualization, contextualize. Related: Contextualized.


context (n.)

early 15c., from Latin contextus a joining together, originally past participle of contexere to
weave together, from com- together (see com-) + texere to weave, to make (see texture (n.)).


Nina

fem. proper name; in a Russian context it is a shortening of Annina, diminutive of Greek Anna. In a
Spanish context, Ni&#241;a child, infant, a nursery word.


racist

1932 as a noun, 1938 as an adjective, from race (n.2); racism is first attested 1936 (from French
racisme, 1935), originally in the context of Nazi theories. But they replaced earlier words,
racialism (1871) and racialist (1917), both often used early 20c. in a British or South African
context. In the U.S., race hatred, race prejudice had been used, and, especially in 19c. political
contexts, negrophobia.


snit (n.)

state of agitation, fit of temper, 1939, American English, of unknown origin. First in Claire
Boothe's Kiss the Boys Good-bye, which gives it a U.S. Southern context.


reb (n.)

abbreviation of rebel (n.), 1862, in U.S. Civil War context.


G-man (n.)

FBI agent, 1930, shortening of government man; used earlier in an Irish context (1917), but the
abbreviation is perhaps the same one.


punji (n.)

sharpened and often poisoned bamboo stake set in a hole as a trap for animals or enemies, 1872, of
unknown origin, probably from a Tibeto-Burman language (first recorded in a Bengal context).


sapper (n.)

1620s, in a military context, soldier employed in building fortifications, agent noun from sap
(v.1).


contex (v.)

obsolete 16c.-17c. verb from Latin contexere to weave together (see context).


negrification (n.)

1929, in social context, from Negro on model of pacification, etc. Johnson (1755) has the word in
the literal sense act of making black.


Medicare

name for a state-run health insurance system, 1962, originally in a Canadian context, from medical +
care. U.S. use is from 1965.


bobcat (n.)

North American lynx, 1873, in a Maine context; so called for its short tail; see bob (n.2) + cat
(n.).


resettlement (n.)

1630s, from resettle + -ment. In a South African context from 1954.


Chinatown (n.)

1857 in California, from China + town. But from 1852 in a St. Helena context.


draftee (n.)

1864, in a military context, American English, from draft + -ee.


robotics (n.)

1941, from robot + -ics. Coined in a science fiction context by Russian-born U.S. author Isaac
Asimov (1920-1992), who proposed the Three Laws of Robotics in 1968.


overtime (n.)

time above the regular hours of work, 1846, from over- + time (n.). Sporting sense first attested
1921, in an ice hockey context.


mujahidin (n.)

also mujahideen, 1958, in a Pakistani context, from Persian and Arabic, plural of mujahid one who
fights in a jihad (q.v.); in modern use, Muslim guerilla insurgent.


jai alai (n.)

1902, American English, originally in a Cuban context, from Basque, from jai celebration + alai
merry.


peep (n.2)

short chirp, early 15c., from peep (v.2); meaning slightest sound or utterance (usually in a
negative context) is attested from 1903. Meaning young chicken is from 1680s. The marshmallow peeps
confection are said to date from 1950s.


primary (n.)

1861, American English, short for primary election (1792, with reference to France; in a U.S.
context from 1835); earlier primary caucus (1821).


salt river (n.)

a tidal river, 1650s; as a proper name, used early 19c. with reference to backwoods inhabitants of
the U.S., especially Kentucky. U.S. political slang phrase to row (someone) up Salt River send
(someone) to political defeat probably owes its origin to this, as the first attested use (1828) is
in a Kentucky context.


engineer (v.)

1843 (but see engineering), from engineer (n.). Figurative sense of arrange, contrive is attested
from 1864, originally in a political context. Related: Engineered.


root (v.2)

cheer, support, 1889, American English, originally in a baseball context, probably from root (v.1)
via intermediate sense of study, work hard (1856). Related: Rooted; rooting.


Kriss Kringle

1830, Christ-kinkle (in a Pennsylvania German context, and as a reminiscence of times past, so
probably at least a generation older in that setting), from German Christkindlein, Christkind'l
Christ child. Properly Baby Jesus, not Santa Claus.


mandate (v.)

1620s, to command, from mandate (n.). Meaning to delegate authority, permit to act on behalf of a
group is from 1958; used earlier in the context of the League of Nations, to authorize a power to
control a certain territory for some specified purpose (1919). Related: Mandated; mandating.


oodles (n.)

lots, 1869, American English (originally in a Texas context), perhaps from the caboodle in kit and
caboodle (see kit).


misplay (n.)

1889 in baseball context, from mis- (1) + play (n.). As a verb from 1824 (originally in music; 1842
in games). Related: Misplayed; misplaying.


quisling (n.)

1940, from Vidkun Quisling (1887-1945), Norwegian fascist politician who headed the puppet
government during the German occupation of Norway in World War II; shot for treason after German
defeat. First used in London Times of April 15, 1940, in a Swedish context.


multicultural (adj.)

also multi-cultural, 1941, from multi- + cultural. At first often in a Canadian context. Picked up
by U.S. education writers 1980s; widespread popular use from c.1990.


tan (n.)

bronze color imparted to skin by exposure to sun, 1749, see tan (v.). Earlier as substance made of
crushed bark used in making leather (c.1600). As a simple name for a brownish color, in any context,
it is recorded from 1888. The adjective meaning of the color of tanned leather is recorded from
1660s. Tan-line attested from 1979.


open (n.)

early 13c., an aperture or opening, from open (adj.). Meaning public knowledge (especially in out in
the open) is from 1942, but compare Middle English in open (late 14c.) manifestly, publicly. The
sense of an open competition is from 1926, originally in a golf context.


lugworm (n.)

c.1600, from lug, probably a Celtic word (the first recorded use is in a Cornwall context) unrelated
to lug (n.) or lug (v.) + worm. But OED suggests connection with lug (v.) on the notion of heavy,
clumsy.


secessionist (n.)

1860, first recorded in U.S. context, from secession + -ist (colloquial short form secesh, noun and
adjective, is attested from 1861); the earlier noun had been seceder, but this had religious
overtones, especially in reference to Scottish Church history.


integration (n.)

1610s, from French int&eacute;gration and directly from Latin integrationem (nominative integratio)
renewal, restoration, noun of action from past participle stem of integrare (see integrate). Anti-
discrimination sense is recorded from 1940 in a S.African context.


mime (n.)

c.1600, a buffoon who practices gesticulations [Johnson], from French mime (16c.) and directly from
Latin mimus, from Greek mimos imitator, mimic, actor, mime, buffoon, of unknown origin. In reference
to a performance, 1640s in a classical context; 1932 as a pantomime.


roughneck (n.)

also rough-neck, 1836, rugged individual, from rough (adj.) + neck (n.). Original context is the
Texas frontier, later adpoted to labor organization toughs. Specific sense of oil rig worker is
recorded from 1917. Compare redneck.


defeatist

1918, adjective and noun, in reference to pacifists and political opposition in Britain, from French
d&eacute;faitiste, which was used there in reference to the Russians who sought to end their war
with Germany; see defeat (n.) + -ist. Their opposition, in the original Russian context, were called
defensists.


Bantu

1862, applied to south African language group in the 1850s by German linguist Wilhelm Heinrich
Immanuel Bleek (1827-1875), from native Ba-ntu mankind, from ba-, plural prefix, + ntu a man,
person. Bantustan in a South African context is from 1949.


doctrinaire (n.)

1820, from French doctrinaire impractical person, originally adherent of doctrines (14c.), from
Latin doctrina (see doctrine).    At first used in the context of French politics, contemptuously
applied by rival factions to those who tried to reconcile liberty with royal authority after 1815.
Hence, anyone who applies doctrine without making allowance for practical considerations (1831). As
an adjective, from 1834.


canoe (n.)

1550s, originally in a West Indian context, from Spanish canoa, a term used by Columbus, from
Arawakan (Haiti) canaoua. Extended to rough-made or dugout boats generally. Early variants in
English included cano, canow, canoa, etc., before spelling settled down c.1600.


classic (n.)

a Greek or Roman writer or work, 1711, from classic (adj.). So, by mid-19c., any work in any context
held to have a similar quality or relationship. In classical Latin noun use of classicus meant a
Marine (miles classicus) from the military division sense of classis.


last-ditch (adj.)

on the last line of defense, 1715, attributed to William of Orange; if so, originally in a Dutch
context.    We have no space to enter into the detail of the heroic struggle maintained by the young
stadtholder and his faithful Dutchmen; how they laid their country under water, and successfully
kept the powerful invader at bay. Once the contest seemed utterly hopeless. William was advised to
compromise the matter, and yield up Holland as the conquest of Louis XIV. No, replied he; I mean to
die in the last ditch. A speech alone sufficient to render his memory immortal. [Agnes Strickland,
Lives of the Queens of England, London, 1847]


immigrant (n.)

one who immigrates, 1792, in an American context, from French immigrant, from Latin immigrantem
(nominative immigrans), present participle of immigrare (see immigrate). Emigrant is older. As an
adjective from 1805.


scarf (v.)

eat hastily, 1960, U.S. teen slang, originally a noun meaning food, meal (1932), perhaps imitative,
or from scoff (attested in a similar sense from 1846). Or perhaps from a dialectal survival of Old
English sceorfan to gnaw, bite (see scarf (n.2)); a similar word is found in a South African context
in the 1600s. Related: Scarfed; scarfing.


transpontine (adj.)

1844, in a London context in reference to the area south of the Thames, from Latin trans- (see
trans-) + pontine, from stem of pons bridge (see pons).


leprosy (n.)

1530s (earlier lepruse, mid-15c.), from leprous; see leper. First used in Coverdale Bible, where it
renders Hebrew cara'ath, which apparently was a comprehensive term for skin diseases. Because of
pejorative associations, the use of the word in medical context has been banned by the World Health
Organization and replaced by Hansen's disease, named for Norwegian physician Armauer Hansen
(1841-1912) who in 1871 discovered the bacillus that causes it.


doughface (n.)

contemptuous nickname in U.S. politics for Northern Democrats who worked in the interest of the
South before the Civil War; it was taken to mean man who allows himself to be moulded. The source is
an 1820 speech by John Randolph of Roanoke, in the wake of the Missouri Compromise.    Randolph,
mocking the northerners intimidated by the South, referred to a children's game in which the players
daubed their faces with dough and then looked in a mirror and scared themselves. [Daniel Walker
Howe, What Hath God Wrought, 2007]   Mask of dough is recorded from 1809, and the same image
Randolph used is attested in another context by 1833.


Maranatha

late 14c., a Bible word, from Greek maranatha, untranslated Semitic word in I Cor. xvi:22, where it
follows Greek anathema, and therefore has been taken as part of a phrase and used as a curse.
Usually assumed to be from Aramaic maran atha Our Lord has come, which would make the common usage
erroneous (see OED entry), but possibly it is a false transliteration of Hebrew mohoram atta you are
put under the ban, which would make more sense in the context. [Klein]


