convert (n.)

1560s, from convert (v.). Earlier was convers (early 14c.).


converter (n.)

1530s, agent noun from convert (v.). Of machinery, from 1867.


convertible (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French convertible (13c.), from Late Latin convertibilis changeable, from Latin
convertere (see convert (v.)). The noun is recorded from 1610s; meaning automobile with a fold-down
top is from 1916.


convert (v.)

c.1300, from Old French convertir, from Vulgar Latin *convertire, from Latin convertere turn around,
transform, from com- together (see com-) + vertere to turn (see versus). Originally in the religious
sense. The Latin word is glossed in Old English by gecyrren, from cierran to turn, return. Related:
Converted; converting.


metricize (v.)

convert to the metric system, 1873, from metric (adj.) + -ize. Related: Metricized; metricizing.
Earlier, to convert to poetic meter (1850; see metric (n.)).


neophyte (n.)

new convert, 1550s, from Ecclesiastical Latin neophytus, from Greek neophytos a new convert, noun
use of adjective meaning newly initiated, newly converted, literally newly planted, from neos new
(see new) + phytos grown; planted, verbal adjective of phyein cause to grow, beget, plant (see
physic). Church sense is from I Tim. iii:6. Rare before 19c. General sense of one who is new to any
subject is first recorded 1590s.


modem (n.)

device to convert digital signals to analog and vice versa, 1958, coined from first elements of
modulator + demodulator.


vert (v.)

to turn in some direction, 1570s, from Latin vertere (see versus). As a noun meaning one who has
left the Church of England from 1864, short for convert (v.).


automate (v.)

to convert to automatic operation, 1954, back-formation from automated (q.v.). Ancient Greek verb
automatizein meant to act of oneself, to act unadvisedly. Related: Automating.


unconverted (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of convert (v.).


converse (adj.)

exact opposite, 1560s, from Latin conversus turn around, past participle of convertere to turn about
(see convert). Originally mathematical. The noun is attested from 1550s in mathematics. Related:
Conversely.


catechumen (n.)

new convert, 15c., from French cat&eacute;chum&egrave;ne, from Church Latin catechumenus, from Greek
katekhoumenos one being instructed, passive present participle of katekhein (see catechesis).


blowback (n.)

also blow-back, 1883, in reference to flames in enclosed spaces (firearms, furnaces, etc.), from
blow (v.1) + back (adv.). Sense in reference to convert actions, etc., is from 1978.


cash (v.)

to convert to cash (as a check, etc.), 1811, from cash (n.). Related: Cashed; cashing.


capitalize (v.)

write or print in capital letters, 1764, from capital (n.1) + -ize. Meaning to convert (assets) to
capital is recorded from 1868. Related: Capitalized; capitalizing.


conversion (n.)

mid-14c., originally of religion, from French conversion, from Latin conversionem (nominative
conversatio), noun of action from past participle stem of convertere (see convert (v.)). General
sense of transformation is early 15c. Of buildings, from 1921. Conversion disorder hysteria
(attested from 1946 but said to have been coined by Freud) was in DSM-IV (1994).


malt (v.)

mid-15c., to convert grain to malt, from malt (n.). Meaning + to make with malt is from c.1600.
Related: Malted; malting. Malt liquor (which is fermented, not brewed) first attested 1690s. Malted
a drink with malted milk is from 1945.


vaporize (v.)

1630s, to smoke (tobacco), from vapor + -ize. Later convert into vapor, cause to become vapor
(1803), and spray with fine mist (1900). Intransitive sense become vaporous is from 1828. Related:
Vaporized; vaporizing. An earlier verb was simply vapor (c.1400, transitive and intransitive), from
Latin vaporare.


entail (v.)

mid-14c., convert (an estate) into 'fee tail' (feudum talliatum), from en- (1) make + taile legal
limitation, especially of inheritance, ruling who succeeds in ownership and preventing it from being
sold off, from Anglo-French taile, Old French taillie, past participle of taillier allot, cut to
shape, from Late Latin taliare. Sense of have consequences is 1829, from notion of inseparable
connection. Related: Entailed; entailling.


proselyte (n.)

late 14c., from Old French proselite (13c., Modern French pros&#233;lyte), from Late Latin
proselytus, from Greek proselytos convert (to Judaism), stranger, one who has come over, noun use of
adjective meaning having arrived, from second aorist stem of proserkhesthai to come or go;
surrender; associate with, from proti toward + root of eleusesthai to be going to come, from PIE
*elu-to-, from root *leudh- to go. Originally in English a Gentile converted to Judaism (late 14c.).


wend (v.)

to proceed on, Old English wendan to turn, direct, go; convert, translate, from Proto-Germanic
*wanjan (cognates: Old Saxon wendian, Old Norse venda, Swedish v&#228;nda, Old Frisian wenda, Dutch
wenden, German wenden, Gothic wandjan to turn), causative of PIE *wendh- to turn, wind, weave (see
wind (v.1)). Surviving only in to wend one's way, and in hijacked past tense form went. Originally
weak; strong past participle is from c.1200.


traduce (v.)

1530s, alter, change over, transport, from Latin traducere change over, convert, also lead in
parade, make a show of, dishonor, disgrace, originally lead along or across, bring through, transfer
(source also of French traduire, Spanish traducir, Italian tradurre), from trans- across (see
trans-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Sense of defame, slander in English is from 1580s, from
Latin traducere in the sense of scorn or disgrace, a figurative use from the notion of to lead along
as a spectacle. Related: Traduced; traducing.


reform (v.)

c.1300, to convert into another and better form, from Old French reformer rebuild, reconstruct,
recreate (12c.), from Latin reformare to form again, change, transform, alter, from re- again (see
re-) + formare to form (see form (n.)). Intransitive sense from 1580s.    Meaning to bring (a
person) away from an evil course of life is recorded from early 15c.; of governments, institutions,
etc., from early 15c. Related: Reformed; reforming. Reformed churches (1580s) usually are Calvinist
as opposed to Lutheran. Reformed Judaism (1843) is a movement initiated in Germany by Moses
Mendelssohn (1729-1786). Reform school is attested from 1859.


tan (v.)

late Old English tannian to convert hide into leather (by steeping it in tannin), from Medieval
Latin tannare tan, dye a tawny color (c.900), from tannum crushed oak bark, used in tanning leather,
probably from a Celtic source (such as Breton tann oak tree). The meaning make brown by exposure to
the sun (as tanning does to hides) first recorded 1520s; intransitive sense also from 1520s. Of
persons, not considered an attractive feature until 20c.; in Shakespeare, to deprive of the
freshness and beauty of youth (Sonnet CXV). As an adjective from 1620s. To tan (someone's) hide in
the figurative sense is from 1660s. Related: Tanned; tanning. German Tanne fir tree (as in
Tannenbaum) might be a transferred meaning from the same Celtic source.


versus (prep.)

mid-15c., in legal case names, denoting action of one party against another, from Latin versus
turned toward or against, from past participle of vertere (frequentative versare) to turn, turn
back, be turned, convert, transform, translate, be changed, from PIE *wert- to turn, wind, from root
*wer- (3) to turn, bend (cognates: Old English -weard toward, originally turned toward, weorthan to
befall, wyrd fate, destiny, literally what befalls one; Sanskrit vartate turns round, rolls; Avestan
varet- to turn; Old Church Slavonic vr&#365;teti to turn, roll, Russian vreteno spindle, distaff;
Lithuanian ver &#269;iu to turn; Greek rhatane stirrer, ladle; German werden, Old English
weor&eth;an to become (for sense, compare turn into); Welsh gwerthyd spindle, distaff; Old Irish
frith against).


tun (n.)

large cask, especially one for wine, ale, or beer, Old English tunne tun, cask, barrel, a general
North Sea Germanic word (compare Old Frisian tunne, Middle Dutch tonne, Old High German tunna,
German tonne), also found in Medieval Latin tunna (9c.) and Old French tonne (diminutive tonneau);
perhaps from a Celtic source (compare Middle Irish, Gaelic tunna, Old Irish toun hide, skin). Tun-
dish (late 14c.) was a funnel made to fit into the bung of a tun.    -- That? said Stephen. -- Is
that called a funnel? Is it not a tundish? --  -- What is a tundish? --  --That. The ... the funnel.
--  --Is that called a tundish in Ireland? --  asked the dean. -- I never heard the word in my life.
--  -- It is called a tundish in Lower Drumcondra -- said Stephen, laughing -- where they speak the
best English.--  -- A tundish -- said the dean reflectively. -- That is a most interesting word I
must look that word up. Upon my word I must. --  His courtesy of manner rang a little false, and
Stephen looked at the English convert with the same eyes as the elder brother in the parable may
have turned on the prodigal. [Joyce, Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man]


Turk (n.)

c.1300, from French Turc, from Medieval Latin Turcus, from Byzantine Greek Tourkos, Persian turk, a
national name, of unknown origin. Said to mean strength in Turkish. Compare Chinese tu-kin, recorded
from c.177 B.C.E. as the name of a people living south of the Altai Mountains (identified by some
with the Huns). In Persian, turk, in addition to the national name, also could mean a beautiful
youth, a barbarian, a robber.    In English, the Ottoman sultan was the Grand Turk (late 15c.), and
the Turk was used collectively for the Turkish people or for Ottoman power (late 15c.). From 14c.
and especially 16c.-18c. Turk could mean a Muslim, reflecting the Turkish political power's status
in the Western mind as the Muslim nation par excellence. Hence Turkery Islam (1580s); turn Turk
convert to Islam.    Meaning person of Irish descent is first recorded 1914 in U.S., apparently
originating among Irish-Americans; of unknown origin (Irish torc boar, hog has been suggested).
Young Turk (1908) was a member of an early 20c. political group in the Ottoman Empire that sought
rejuvenation of the Turkish nation. Turkish bath is attested from 1640s; Turkish delight from 1877.


