credo (n.)

late 12c., from Latin, literally I believe, first word of the Apostles' and Nicene Creeds, first
person singular present indicative of credere to believe, perhaps from PIE compound *kerd-dhe- to
believe, literally to put one's heart (cognates: Old Irish cretim, Irish creidim, Welsh credu I
believe, Sanskrit &#347;rad-dh&#257;- faith). The nativized form is creed. General sense of formula
or statement of belief is from 1580s.


creed (n.)

Old English creda article or statement of Christian belief, from Latin credo I believe (see credo).
Broadening 17c. to mean any statement of belief.


credible (adj.)

believable, late 14c., from Latin credibilis worthy to be believed, from credere (see credo).
Related: Credibly.


credulous (adj.)

1570s, from Latin credulus that easily believes, trustful, from credere to believe (see credo).
Related: Credulously; credulousness.


experto crede

Latin (Aeneid, xi.283), take it from one who knows; from dative singular of expertus (see expert
(adj.)) + imperative singular of credere (see credo).


credence (n.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin credentia belief, from Latin credentum (nominative credens), past
participle of credere believe, trust (see credo).


grant (n.)

c.1200, allowance, consent, permission, from Anglo-French graunter, from Old French granter,
collateral variant of creanter to promise, guarantee, confirm, authorize, from Latin credentem
(nominative credens), present participle of credere to believe, to trust (see credo).


miscreant (adj.)

c.1300, non-Christian, pagan, infidel; early 15c., heretical, unbelieving, from Old French mescreant
disbelieving (Modern French m&#233;cr&#233;ant), from mes- wrongly (see mis- (2)) + creant, present
participle of creire believe, from Latin credere (see credo). Meaning villainous is from 1590s.


incroyable

1796, from French incroyable, literally incredible (15c.), from in- not, opposite of, without (see
in- (1)) + croire to believe, from Latin credere (see credo). Name for the French fop or dandy of
the period of the Directory (1795-99). Said to be so called from their extravagant dress and from a
favorite expression among them (C'est vraiment incroyable).


creditor (n.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French creditour, Old French creditour (early 14c.), from Latin creditor
truster, lender, from creditus, past participle of credere (see credo).


credit (n.)

1520s, from Middle French cr&eacute;dit (15c.) belief, trust, from Italian credito, from Latin
creditum a loan, thing entrusted to another, from past participle of credere to trust, entrust,
believe (see credo). The commercial sense was the original one in English (creditor is mid-15c.).
Meaning honor, acknowledgment of merit, is from c.1600. Academic sense of point for completing a
course of study is 1904. Movie/broadcasting sense is 1914. Credit rating is from 1958; credit union
is 1881, American English.


recreant (adj.)

c.1300, confessing oneself to be overcome or vanquished, from Old French recreant defeated,
vanquished, yielding, giving; weak, exhausted; cowardly, present participle adjective from recroire
to yield in a trial by combat, surrender allegiance, literally believe again; perhaps on notion of
take back one's pledge, yield one's cause, from re- again, back (see re-) + croire entrust, believe,
from Latin credere (see credo).Non sufficit ... nisi dicat illud verbum odiosum, quod recreantus
sit. [Bracton, c.1260]Meaning cowardly in English is from late 14c. Meaning unfaithful to duty is
from 1640s.


