cultural (adj.)

1868, in reference to the raising of plants or animals, from Latin cultura tillage (see culture) +
-al (1). In reference to the cultivation of the mind, from 1875; hence, relating to civilization or
a civilization. A fertile starter-word among anthropologists and sociologists, for example cultural
diffusion, in use by 1912; cultural diversity by 1935; cultural imperialism by 1937; cultural
pluralism by 1932; cultural relativism by 1948.


Cultural Revolution

1966, from Chinese, translation of Wuchan Jieji Wenhua Da Geming Proletarian Cultural Great
Revolution.


culturalization (n.)

by 1929; see cultural + -ization.


culturally (adv.)

1889, from cultural + -ly (2).


multicultural (adj.)

also multi-cultural, 1941, from multi- + cultural. At first often in a Canadian context. Picked up
by U.S. education writers 1980s; widespread popular use from c.1990.


UNESCO

acronym from United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which was created in
1945.


Gang of Four

1976, translating Chinese sirenbang, the nickname given to the four leaders of the Cultural
Revolution who took the fall in Communist China after the death of Mao.


Raza (n.)

in La Raza, literally the race, 1964, from American Spanish (see race (n.2)), designating the strong
sense of racial and cultural identity held by Mexican-Americans [OED].




1888, characteristic Aryan principles, from Aryan + -ism. As a belief in cultural or racial
superiority of Aryans, from 1905.


ethnic (adj.)

late 15c. (earlier ethnical, early 15c.) pagan, heathen, from Late Latin ethnicus, from Greek
ethnikos adopted to the genius or customs of a people, peculiar to a people, from ethnos band of
people living together, nation, people, properly people of one's own kind, from PIE *swedh-no-,
suffixed form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom). Earlier in English as a noun, a heathen, pagan, one who
is not a Christian or Jew (c.1400).     In Septuagint, Greek ta ethne translates Hebrew goyim,
plural of goy nation, especially of non-Israelites, hence Gentile nation, foreign nation not
worshipping the true God (see goy), and ethnikos is used as savoring of the nature of pagans, alien
to the worship of the true God, and as a noun the pagan, the Gentile. The classical sense of
peculiar to a race or nation in English is attested from 1851, a return to the word's original
meaning; that of different cultural groups is 1935; and that of racial, cultural or national
minority group is American English 1945. Ethnic cleansing is attested from 1991.    Although the
term 'ethnic cleansing' has come into English usage only recently, its verbal correlates in Czech,
French, German, and Polish go back much further. [Jerry Z. Muller, Us and Them: The Enduring Power
of Ethnic Nationalism, Foreign Affairs, March/April 2008]


Baedeker

travel guide, 1863, from German printer and bookseller Karl Baedeker (1801-1859) whose popular
travel guides began the custom of rating places with one to four stars. The Baedeker raids by the
Luftwaffe in April and May 1942 targeted British cultural and historical sites.


patina (n.)

greenish film on old bronze, 1748, from French patine (18c.), from Italian patina, perhaps from
Latin patina dish, pan (see pan (n.)), on the notion of encrustation on ancient bronze dishes. Sense
of refinement, cultural sophistication first recorded 1933.


Japan

1570s, via Portuguese Japao, Dutch Japan, acquired in Malacca from Malay Japang, from Chinese jih
pun sunrise (equivalent of Japanese Nippon), from jih sun + pun origin. Earliest form in Europe was
Marco Polo's Chipangu. Cultural contact led to japaning coat with lacquer or varnish (1680s),
japonaiserie (1896, from French), etc.


educrat (n.)

1968, usually pejorative; first element from education, second from bureaucrat. Said to have been
coined by Claude R. Kirk Jr. (b.1926), governor of Florida.    While political leaders and corporate
CEOs, focusing as usual on the quarterly return, call for workers for the new economy, their
educational reforms are producing just that: students with a grab-bag of minor skills and
competencies and minds that are sadly uneventful, incapable of genuine intellectual achievement and
lacking any sense of continuity with the historical and cultural traditions of our society. Their
world is small, bleak, and limited; their world will become ours. [David Solway, The Turtle
Hypodermic of Sickenpods, Quebec, 2000]


Appalachia

cultural and geographical region of inland Eastern U.S., 1880s, from the Appalachian Mountains,
which are its core. Earlier Appalachia was proposed as a better name for United States of America by
Washington Irving in 1839 (though he preferred Alleghenia) and this may have been the coinage of the
word.    It is a thousand pities that the puny witticisms of a few professional objectors should
have the power to prevent, even for a year, the adoption of a name for our country. At present we
have, clearly, none. There should be no hesitation about Appalachia. In the first place, it is
distinctive. America is not, and can never be made so. We may legislate as much as we please, and
assume for our country whatever name we think right Ã¢&euro;&rdquo; but to use it will be no name,
to any purpose for which a name is needed, unless we can take it away from the regions which employ
it at present. South America is America, and will insist upon remaining so. [Edgar Allan Poe, 1846]


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


meme (n.)

1976, introduced by evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins in The Selfish Gene, coined by him from
Greek sources, such as mimeisthai to imitate (see mime), and intended to echo gene.    We need a
name for the new replicator, a noun that conveys the idea of a unit of cultural transmission, or a
unit of imitation. 'Mimeme' comes from a suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds
a bit like 'gene'. I hope my classicist friends will forgive me if I abbreviate mimeme to meme. If
it is any consolation, it could alternatively be thought of as being related to 'memory', or to the
French word m&#234;me. It should be pronounced to rhyme with 'cream'. [Richard Dawkins, The Selfish
Gene, 1976]


Peoria

small city in Illinois, U.S., originally the name of a subdivision of the Miami/Illinois people
(1673), from native /peewaareewa/. Their own name is said to mean carriers. The place name also is
found in Oklahoma and Iowa, but it is the Illinois city that has been proverbially regarded as the
typical measure of U.S. cultural and intellectual standards at least since Ambrose Bierce (c.1890).
Also the butt of baseball player jokes (c.1920-40, when it was part of the St. Louis Cardinals farm
system) and popularized in the catchphrase It'll play in Peoria (often negative), meaning the
average American will approve, which was popular in the Nixon White House (1969-74) but seems to
have had a vaudeville origin. Personification in little old lady in Peoria is said to be from Harold
Ross of the New Yorker. Peoria's rivals as embodiment of U.S. small city values and standards
include Dubuque, Iowa; Hoboken and Hackensack, N.J.; Oakland (Gertrude Stein: When you get there,
there isn't any there there) and Burbank, Calif., and the entire state of North Dakota.


suburb (n.)

early 14c., area outside a town or city, whether agricultural or residential but most frequently
residential, from Old French suburbe suburb of a town, from Latin suburbium an outlying part of a
city (especially Rome), from sub below, near (see sub-) + urbs (genitive urbis) city (see urban).
Glossed in Old English as underburg. Just beyond the reach of municipal jurisdiction, suburbs had a
bad reputation in 17c. England, especially those of London, and suburban had a sense of inferior,
debased, licentious (as in suburban sinner, slang for loose woman, prostitute). By 1817, the tinge
had shifted to of inferior manners and narrow views. Compare also French equivalent faubourg.
[T]he growth of the metropolis throws vast numbers of people into distant dormitories where ... life
is carried on without the discipline of rural occupations and without the cultural resources that
the Central District of the city still retains. [Lewis Mumford, 1922]


beatnik (n.)

coined 1958 by San Francisco newspaper columnist Herb Caen during the heyday of -nik suffixes in the
wake of Sputnik. From Beat generation (1952), associated with beat (n.) in its meaning rhythm
(especially in jazz) as well as beat (past participle adjective) worn out, exhausted, but originator
Jack Kerouac (1922-1969) in 1958 connected it with beatitude.The origins of the word beat are
obscure, but the meaning is only too clear to most Americans. More than the feeling of weariness, it
implies the feeling of having been used, of being raw. It involves a sort of nakedness of the mind.
[New York Times Magazine, Oct. 2, 1952] <hr />   Beat is old carny slang. According to Beat Movement
legend (and it is a movement with a deep inventory of legend), Ginsberg and Kerouac picked it up
from a character named Herbert Huncke, a gay street hustler and drug addict from Chicago who began
hanging around Times Square in 1939 (and who introduced William Burroughs to heroin, an important
cultural moment). The term has nothing to do with music; it names the condition of being beaten
down, poor, exhausted, at the bottom of the world. [Louis Menand, New Yorker, Oct. 1, 2007]


