dainty (adj.)

c.1300, deinte, delightful, pleasing, from dainty (n.). Meaning evolved in Middle English to choice,
excellent (late 14c.) to delicately pretty. Related: Daintiness.


dainty (n.)

c.1300, excellence, elegance; a luxury, from Old French deintie (12c.) price, value, also delicacy,
pleasure, from Latin dignitatem (nominative dignitas) greatness, rank, worthiness, worth, beauty,
from dignus worthy (see dignity).


minion (n.)

c.1500, a favorite; a darling; a low dependant; one who pleases rather than benefits [Johnson], from
Middle French mignon a favorite, darling (n.), also a term of (probably homosexual) abuse; as an
adjective, dainty, pleasing, favorite, from Old French mignot pretty, attractive, dainty, gracious,
affectionate, perhaps of Celtic origin (compare Old Irish min tender, soft), or from Old High German
minnja, minna love, memory (see mind (n.)). Used  16c.-17c. without disparaging overtones.


delicacies (n.)

things dainty and gratifying to the palate, mid-15c., from plural of delicacy.


dinky (adj.)

1788 neat, trim, dainty, small, from Scottish dialectal dink finely dressed, trim (c.1500), of
unknown origin. Modern sense is 1850s.


mincing (adj.)

affectedly dainty, 1520s, probably originally in reference to speech, when words were clipped to
affect elegance; or in reference to walking with short steps; present participle adjective from
mince (v.).


poppet (n.)

small human figure used in witchcraft and sorcery, c.1300, early form of puppet (n.). Meaning small
or dainty person is recorded from late 14c.; later a term of endearment but also in other cases one
of contempt.


daintily (adv.)

c.1300, sumptuously; late 14c., elegantly, from dainty (adj.) + -ly (2).


twee (adj.)

tiny, dainty, miniature, 1905, from childish pronunciation of sweet (adj.). Compare tummy from
stomach.


delicacy (n.)

late 14c., delightfulness; fastidiousness; quality of being addicted to sensuous pleasure, from
delicate + -cy. Meaning fineness, softness, tender loveliness is from 1580s; that of weakness of
constitution is from 1630s. Meaning fine food, a dainty viand is from early 15c.


gingerly (adv.)

1510s, elegantly, daintily, perhaps from Old French gensor, comp. of gent dainty, delicate, from
Latin gentius (well)-born (see gentle). Meaning extremely cautiously is from c.1600.


delicate (adj.)

late 14c., self-indulgent, loving ease; delightful; sensitive, easily hurt; feeble, from Latin
delicatus alluring, delightful, dainty, also addicted to pleasure, luxurious, effeminate; of
uncertain origin; related by folk etymology (and perhaps genuinely) to deliciae a pet, and delicere
to allure, entice (see delicious). Meaning easily broken is recorded from 1560s.


elegant (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French &eacute;l&eacute;gant (15c.), from Latin elegantem (nominative
elegans) choice, fine, tasteful, collateral form of present participle of eligere select with care,
choose. Elegans was originally a term of reproach, dainty, fastidious; the notion of tastefully
refined emerged in classical Latin. Related: Elegantly.


finicky (adj.)

1825, dainty, mincing, from finical too particular (1590s), perhaps from fine (adj.) + -ical as in
cynical, ironical. The -k- between the final -c- and a suffix beginning in -i, -y, or -e is an
orthographic rule to mark the pronunciation of -c- as k (compare picnicking, trafficking, panicky,
shellacked).


kid (n.)

c.1200, the young of a goat, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse ki&eth; young goat, from
Proto-Germanic *ki&eth;jom (cognates: Old High German kizzi, German kitze, Danish and Swedish kid).
Extended meaning of child first recorded as slang 1590s, established in informal usage by 1840s.
Applied to skillful young thieves and pugilists since at least 1812. Kid stuff something easy is
from 1913 (The phrase was in use about that time in reference to vaudeville acts or advertisements
featuring children, and to children-oriented features in newspapers). Kid glove a glove made of
kidskin leather is from 1680s; sense of characterized by wearing kid gloves, therefore dainty,
delicate is from 1856.


nice (adj.)

late 13c., foolish, stupid, senseless, from Old French nice (12c.) careless, clumsy; weak; poor,
needy; simple, stupid, silly, foolish, from Latin nescius ignorant, unaware, literally not-knowing,
from ne- not (see un-) + stem of scire to know (see science). The sense development has been
extraordinary, even for an adj. [Weekley] -- from timid (pre-1300); to fussy, fastidious (late
14c.); to dainty, delicate (c.1400); to precise, careful (1500s, preserved in such terms as a nice
distinction and nice and early); to agreeable, delightful (1769); to kind, thoughtful (1830).    In
many examples from the 16th and 17th centuries it is difficult to say in what particular sense the
writer intended it to be taken. [OED]    By 1926, it was pronounced too great a favorite with the
ladies, who have charmed out of it all its individuality and converted it into a mere diffuser of
vague and mild agreeableness. [Fowler]I am sure, cried Catherine, I did not mean to say anything
wrong; but it is a nice book, and why should I not call it so?  Very true, said Henry, and this is a
very nice day, and we are taking a very nice walk; and you are two very nice young ladies. Oh! It is
a very nice word indeed! It does for everything. [Jane Austen, Northanger Abbey, 1803]


clean (adj.)

Old English cl&aelig;ne free from dirt or filth; pure, chaste, innocent; open, in the open, of
beasts, ritually safe to eat, from West Germanic *klainoz clear, pure (cognates: Old Saxon kleni
dainty, delicate, Old Frisian klene small, Old High German kleini delicate, fine, small, German
klein small; English preserves the original Germanic sense), from PIE root *gel- bright, gleaming
(cognates: Greek glene eyeball, Old Irish gel bright).    Largely replaced by clear, pure in the
higher senses [Weekley], but as a verb (mid-15c.) it has largely usurped what once belonged to
cleanse. Meaning whole, entire is from c.1300 (clean sweep in the figurative sense is from 1821).
Sense of innocent is from c.1300; that of not lewd is from 1867; that of not carrying anything
forbidden is from 1938; that of free of drug addiction is from 1950s. To come clean confess is from
1919, American English.


