deceive (v.)

c.1300, from Old French decevoir to deceive (12c., Modern French d&eacute;cevoir), from Latin
decipere to ensnare, take in, beguile, cheat, from de- from or pejorative + capere to take (see
capable). Related: Deceived; deceiver; deceiving.


calumny (n.)

False &amp; malicious misrepresentation of the words or actions of others, calculated to injure
their reputation [Fowler], mid-15c., from Middle French calomnie (15c.), from Latin calumnia
trickery, subterfuge, misrepresentation, malicious charge, from calvi to trick, deceive, from PIE
root *kel- (6) to deceive, confuse (cognates: Greek kelein to bewitch, seduce, beguile, Gothic holon
to deceive, Old Norse hol praise, flattery, Old English hol slander, holian to slander).


betray (v.)

late 13c., bitrayen mislead, deceive, betray, from be- + obsolete Middle English tray, from Old
French traine betrayal, deception, deceit, from trair (Modern French trahir) betray, deceive, from
Latin tradere hand over, from trans- across (see trans-) + dare to give (see date (n.1)). Related:
Betrayed; betraying.


lout (n.)

1540s, awkward fellow, clown, bumpkin, perhaps from a dialectal survival of Middle English louten
(v.) bow down (c.1300), from Old English lutan bow low, from Proto-Germanic *lut- to bow, bend,
stoop (cognates: Old Norse lutr stooping, which might also be the source of the modern English
word), from PIE *leud- to lurk (cognates: Gothic luton to deceive, Old English lot deceit), also to
be small (see little). Non-Germanic cognates probably include Lithuanian liudeti to mourn; Old
Church Slavonic luditi to deceive, ludu foolish. Sense of cad is first attested 1857 in British
schoolboy slang.


fraud (n.)

mid-14c., criminal deception (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin); from Old French fraude deception, fraud
(13c.), from Latin fraudem (nominative fraus) a cheating, deceit, of persons a cheater, deceiver.
Not in Watkins; perhaps ultimately from PIE *dhreugh- to deceive (cognates: Sanskrit dhruti-
deception; error). Meaning a fraudulent production, something intended to deceive is from 1650s. The
meaning impostor, deceiver, pretender; humbug is attested from 1850. Pious fraud (1560s) is properly
deception practiced for the sake of what is deemed a good purpose; colloquially used as person who
talks piously but is not pious at heart.


trump (v.2)

fabricate, devise, 1690s, from trump deceive, cheat (1510s), from Middle English trumpen (late
14c.), from Old French tromper to deceive, of uncertain origin. Apparently from se tromper de to
mock, from Old French tromper to blow a trumpet. Brachet explains this as to play the horn, alluding
to quacks and mountebanks, who attracted the public by blowing a horn, and then cheated them into
buying .... The Hindley Old French dictionary has baillier la trompe blow the trumpet as act the
fool, and Donkin connects it rather to trombe waterspout, on the notion of turning (someone) around.
Connection with triumph also has been proposed. Related: Trumped; trumping. Trumped up false,
concocted first recorded 1728.


flam (n.)

1630s, sham story, fabrication, also as a verb, to deceive by flattery; see flim-flam.


disguise (n.)

c.1400, strange style of dress (especially one meant to deceive), from disguise (v.).


fickle (adj.)

c.1200, false, treacherous, deceptive, deceitful, crafty (obsolete), probably from Old English ficol
deceitful, cunning, tricky, related to befician deceive, and to facen deceit, treachery; blemish,
fault. Common Germanic (compare Old Saxon fekan deceit, Old High German feihhan deceit, fraud,
treachery), from PIE *peig- (2) evil-minded, treacherous, hostile (see foe).    Sense of changeable,
inconstant, unstable is from c.1300 (especially of Fortune and women). Related: Fickleness. Fickly
(c.1300) is rare or obsolete. Also with a verb form in Middle English, fikelen to deceive, flatter,
later to puzzle, perplex, which survived long enough in Northern dialects to get into Scott's
novels. Fikel-tonge (late 14c.) was an allegorical or character name for one who speaks falsehoods.


trick (n.)

early 15c., a cheat, a mean ruse, from Old North French trique trick, deceit, treachery, cheating,
from trikier to deceive, to cheat, variant of Old French trichier to cheat, trick, deceive, of
uncertain origin, probably from Vulgar Latin *triccare, from Latin tricari be evasive, shuffle, from
tric&aelig; trifles, nonsense, a tangle of difficulties, of unknown origin.    Meaning a roguish
prank is recorded from 1580s; sense of the art of doing something is first attested 1610s. Meaning
prostitute's client is first attested 1915; earlier it was U.S. slang for a robbery (1865). To do
the trick accomplish one's purpose is from 1812; to miss a trick fail to take advantage of
opportunity is from 1889; from 1872 in reference to playing the card-game of whist, which might be
the original literal sense. Trick-or-treat is recorded from 1942. Trick question is from 1907.


trompe l&#039;oeil

1889, French, literally deceives the eye, from tromper to deceive, a verb of uncertain origin and
the subject of many theories (see trump (v.2)).


falsely (adv.)

c.1200, with intent to deceive, deceitfully, from false + -ly (2). From c.1300 as wrongly;
untruthfully; early 14c. as incorrectly.


undeceived (adj.)

c.1400, reliable, accurate, certain, from un- (1) not + past participle of deceive (v.).


undeceive (v.)

to free from deception, 1590s, from un- (2) opposite of + deceive (v.).


two-time (v.)

to deceive, cheat, betray, 1924, perhaps from notion of to have two at a time. An earlier reference
(1922) in a Kentucky criminal case involves a double-cross or betrayal without a romance angle.
Related: two-timing (adj.); two-timer.


trumpery (n.)

mid-15c., deceit, trickery, from Middle French tromperie (14c.), from tromper to deceive, of
uncertain origin (see trump (v.2), which has influenced the spelling in English). Meaning showy but
worthless finery is first recorded c.1600.


fallible (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin fallibilis liable to err, deceitful, literally that can be deceived,
from Latin fallere deceive (see fail (v.)).


trick (v.)

deceive by trickery, 1590s, from trick (n.). Related: Tricked; tricking. The sense of to dress,
adorn (c.1500) is perhaps a different word entirely.


jilt (v.)

to deceive (especially after holding out hopes), cheat, trick, 1660s, from the same source as jilt
(n.). Related: Jilted; jilting.


spoof (v.)

1889, to hoax, deceive, trick; from 1914 as to parody or satirize; see spoof (n.). Related: Spoofed;
spoofing.


treachery (n.)

treasonable or perfidious conduct, c.1200, from Old French trecherie, tricherie deceit, cheating,
trickery, lies (12c.), from trechier to cheat, deceive (see trick (n.)).


hoodwink (v.)

1560s, to blindfold, from hood (n.1) + wink; figurative sense of mislead, deceive is c.1600.
Related: Hoodwinked; hoodwinking.


blende (n.)

an ore of zinc, 1680s, from German Blende, a back-formation from blenden to blind, deceive (see
blind (adj.)). So called because it resembles lead but does not yield any.


shuffle (n.)

1620s, an evasion, trick; 1640s, a wavering or undecided course of behavior meant to deceive; from
shuffle (v.). Meaning a slow, heavy, irregular manner of moving is from 1847; that of a dance in
which the feet are shuffled is from 1640s. Meaning a change in the order of playing-cards is from
1650s. Phrase lost in the shuffle is from 1930.


lollygag (v.)

dawdle, dally, 1862, lallygag, American English, perhaps from dialectal lolly tongue + gag deceive,
trick. Related: Lollygagged; lollygagging.


gag (n.2)

a joke, 1863, especially a practical joke, probably related to theatrical sense of matter
interpolated in a written piece by the actor (1847); or from the sense made-up story (1805); or from
slang verbal sense of to deceive, take in with talk (1777), all of which perhaps are from gag (v.)
on the notion of to stuff, fill (see gag (v.)). Gagster comedian is by 1932.


sucker (v.)

to deceive, to make a dupe of, 1939, from sucker (n.) in the related sense. Related: Suckered;
suckering.


engineer (v.)

1818, act as an engineer, from engineer (n.). Figurative sense of arrange, contrive, guide or manage
(via ingenuity or tact) is attested from 1864, originally in a political context. Related:
Engineered. Middle English had a verb engine contrive, construct (late 14c.), also seduce, trick,
deceive (c.1300) and put to torture.


barter (v.)

mid-15c., apparently from Old French barater to barter, cheat, deceive, haggle (also, to have sexual
intercourse), 12c., which is of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Celtic language (compare Irish
brath treachery). Connection between trading and cheating exists in several languages. Related:
Bartered; bartering. The noun is first recorded 1590s, from the verb.


wile (v.)

late 14c., to deceive, from wile (n.). Related: Wiled; wiling. Sense of cause (time, etc.) to pass
pleasantly, divert attention pleasantly is by 1796, from confusion with while (v.).


sodomize (v.)

1859, to demoralize; see sodomy + -ize. By 1895 in a specific sexual sense (translating Greek
paiderastein). Related: Sodomized; sodomizing. In Dutch slang, besodemieteren means to deceive, and
evidently is built from the traditional notion of corruption in Sodom.


blench (v.)

Old English blencan deceive, cheat, from Proto-Germanic *blenk- to shine, dazzle, blind, from PIE
root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Sense of move suddenly, wince, dodge is
from c.1300. Related: Blenched; blenching.


deception (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;ception (13c., decepcion) or directly from Late Latin
deceptionem (nominative deceptio) a deceiving, from Latin decept-, past participle stem of decipere
(see deceive).


malign (v.)

to slander, mid-15c., from earlier more literal sense of to plot, to contrive (early 15c.), from Old
French malignier to plot, deceive, pervert, from Late Latin malignare to do maliciously, from
malignus (see malign (adj.)). Related: Maligned; maligning.


mumps (n.)

type of contagious disease, c.1600, from plural of mump a grimace (1590s), originally a verb, to
whine like a beggar (1580s), from Dutch mompen to cheat, deceive, originally probably to mumble,
whine, of imitative origin. The infectious disease probably so called in reference to swelling of
the salivary glands of the face and/or to painful difficulty swallowing. Mumps also was used from
17c. to mean a fit of melancholy.


belie (v.)

Old English beleogan to deceive by lies, from be- + lie (v.1) to lie, tell lies. Current sense of to
contradict as a lie is first recorded 1640s. The other verb lie once also had a formation like this,
from Old English belicgan, which meant to encompass, beleaguer, and in Middle English was a
euphemism for to have sex with (i.e. to lie with carnally).


jive (v.1)

1928, to deceive playfully, also empty, misleading talk (n.) and a style of fast, lively jazz and
dance music, American English, from Black English, probably of African origin (compare Wolof jev,
jeu talk about someone absent, especially in a disparaging manner). Related: Jived; jiving. Used
from 1938 for New York City African-American slang.


delude (v.)

c.1400, from Latin deludere to play false; to mock, deceive, from de- down, to one's detriment (see
de-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Related: Deluded; deluding.


frustrate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin frustratus, past participle of frustrari to deceive, disappoint, make vain,
from frustra (adv.) in vain, in error, related to fraus injury, harm (see fraud). Related:
Frustrated; frustrating.


blind (v.)

deprive of sight, early 13c., from Old English blendan to blind, deprive of sight; deceive, from
Proto-Germanic *blandjan (see blind (adj.)); form influenced in Middle English by the adjective.
Related: Blinded; blinding.


fallacy (n.)

late 15c., deception, false statement, from Latin fallacia deception, deceit, trick, artifice, noun
of quality from fallax (genitive fallacis) deceptive, from fallere deceive (see fail (v.)). Specific
sense in logic, false syllogism, invalid argumentation, dates from 1550s. An earlier form was
fallace (c.1300), from Old French fallace.


intrigue (v.)

1610s, to trick, deceive, cheat (earlier entriken, late 14c.), from French intriguer (16c.), from
Italian intrigare to plot, meddle, from Latin intricare entangle (see intricate). Meaning to plot or
scheme first recorded 1714; that of to excite curiosity is from 1894. Related: Intrigued; intriguing
(1680s, plotting, scheming; meaning exciting curiosity is from 1909).


dream (n.)

mid-13c. in the sense sequence of sensations passing through a sleeping person's mind (also as a
verb), probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish dr&oslash;m, Swedish dr&ouml;m, Old Saxon drom
merriment, noise, Old Frisian dram dream, Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German traum dream,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *draugmas deception, illusion, phantasm (cognates: Old Saxon bidriogan,
Old High German triogan, German tr&uuml;gen to deceive, delude, Old Norse draugr ghost, apparition).
Possible cognates outside Germanic are Sanskrit druh- seek to harm, injure, Avestan druz- lie,
deceive.    But Old English dream meant only joy, mirth, noisy merriment, also music. And much study
has failed to prove that Old English dream is the root of the modern word for sleeping vision,
despite being identical in spelling. Either the meaning of the word changed dramatically or vision
was an unrecorded secondary Old English meaning of dream, or there are two separate words here. OED
offers this theory: It seems as if the presence of dream 'joy, mirth, music,' had caused dream
'dream' to be avoided, at least in literature, and swefn, lit. 'sleep,' to be substituted ....
Words for sleeping vision in Old English were m&aelig;ting and swefn. Old English swefn originally
meant sleep, as did a great many Indo-European dream nouns, such as Lithuanian sapnas, Old Church
Slavonic sunu, and the Romanic words (French songe, Spanish sue&#241;o, Italian sogno all from Latin
somnium (from PIE *swep-no-; cognate with Greek hypnos; see somnolence; Old English swefn is from
the same root). Dream in the sense of ideal or aspiration is from 1931, from earlier sense of
something of dream-like beauty or charm (1888).


subdue (v.)

late 14c., to conquer and reduce to subjection, from Old French souduire, but this meant deceive,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, lead away, carry off; withdraw (see subduce). The primary
sense in English seems to have been taken in Anglo-French from Latin subdere and attached to this
word. Related: Subdued; subduing. As an associated noun, subdual is attested from 1670s (subduction
having acquired other senses).


elicit (v.)

1640s, from Latin elicitus, past participle of elicere draw out, draw forth, from ex- out (see ex-)
+ -licere, comb. form of lacere to entice, lure, deceive (related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace
(n.)). Related: Elicited; eliciting; elicits; elicitation.


deceptive (adj.)

1610s, from French deceptif (late 14c.), from Medieval Latin deceptivus, from decept-, past
participle stem of Latin decipere (see deceive). Earlier in this sense was deceptious (c.1600), from
French deceptieux, from Medieval Latin deceptiosus, from deceptionem. Related: Deceptively;
deceptiveness.


hallucinate (v.)

c.1600, deceive, from Latin alucinatus, later hallucinatus, past participle of alucinari wander (in
the mind), dream; talk unreasonably, ramble in thought, probably from Greek alyein, Attic halyein be
distraught, probably related to alaomai wander about [Barnhart, Klein]. The Latin ending probably
was influenced by vaticinari to prophecy, also to rave. Sense of to have illusions is from 1650s.
Occasionally used 19c. in transitive senses, to cause hallucination. Related: Hallucinated;
hallucinating.


default (n.)

early 13c., offense, crime, sin, later (late 13c.) failure, failure to act, from Old French defaute
(12c.) fault, defect, failure, culpability, lack, privation, from Vulgar Latin *defallita a
deficiency or failure, past participle of *defallere, from Latin de- away (see de-) + fallere to
deceive, to cheat; to put wrong, to lead astray, cause to be mistaken; to escape notice of, be
concealed from (see fail (v.)). The financial sense is first recorded 1858; the computing sense is
from 1966.


amuse (v.)

late 15c., to divert the attention, beguile, delude, from Middle French amuser divert, cause to
muse, from a at, to (but here probably a causal prefix) + muser ponder, stare fixedly (see muse
(v.)). Sense of divert from serious business, tickle the fancy of is recorded from 1630s, but
through 18c. the primary meaning was deceive, cheat by first occupying the attention. Bemuse retains
more of the original meaning. Related: Amused; amusing.


lie (v.1)

speak falsely, tell an untruth, late 12c., from Old English legan, ligan, earlier leogan deceive,
belie, betray (class II strong verb; past tense leag, past participle logen), from Proto-Germanic
*leugan (cognates: Old Norse ljuga, Danish lyve, Old Frisian liaga, Old Saxon and Old High German
liogan, German l&uuml;gen, Gothic liugan), from PIE root *leugh- to tell a lie.


