decoy (v.)

1650s, from decoy (n.). Related: Decoyed; decoying.


decoy (n.)

1610s, perhaps from Dutch kooi cage, used of a pond surrounded by nets, into which wildfowl were
lured for capture, from West Germanic *kaiwa, from Latin cavea cage. The first element is possibly
the Dutch definite article de, mistaken in English as part of the word. But decoy, of unknown
origin, was the name of a card game popular c.1550-1650, and this may have influenced the form of
the word.


stall (n.2)

pretense or evasive story to avoid doing something, 1812, from earlier sense thief's assistant
(1590s, also staller), from a variant of stale bird used as a decoy to lure other birds (mid-15c.),
from Anglo-French estale decoy, pigeon used to lure a hawk (13c., compare stool pigeon), literally
standstill, from Old French estal place, stand, stall, from Frankish *stal- position, ultimately
from Germanic and cognate with Old English steall (see stall (n.1)). Compare Old English
st&aelig;lhran decoy reindeer, German stellvogel decoy bird. Figurative sense of deception, means of
allurement is first recorded 1520s. Also see stall (v.2).    The stallers up are gratified with such
part of the gains acquired as the liberality of the knuckling gentlemen may prompt them to bestow.
[J.H. Vaux, Flash Dictionary, 1812]


stool pigeon (n.)

police informer, 1859, American English; earlier one who betrays the unwary (or is used to betray
them), 1821, originally a decoy bird (1812); said to be from decoys being fastened to stools to lure
other pigeons. But perhaps related to stall decoy bird (c.1500), especially a pigeon used to entice
a hawk into the net (see stall (n.2)). Also see pigeon.


deke (n.)

1960, ice hockey slang for a quick feinting move, short for decoy. The verb is attested from 1961.


shill (n.)

one who acts as a decoy for a gambler, auctioneer, etc., 1916, probably originally circus or
carnival argot, probably a shortened form of shillaber (1913) with the same meaning, origin unknown.
The verb is attested from 1914. Related: Shilled; shilling.


stall (v.2)

1590s, distract a victim and thus screen a pickpocket from observation, from stall (n.2) decoy.
Meaning to precaricate, be evasive, play for time is attested from 1903. Related: Stalled; stalling.
Compare old slang stalling ken house for receiving stolen goods (1560s).


toll (v.)

to sound with slow single strokes (intransitive), mid-15c., probably a special use of tollen to
draw, lure, early 13c. variant of Old English -tyllan in betyllan to lure, decoy, and fortyllan draw
away, seduce, of obscure origin. The notion is perhaps of luring people to church with the sound of
the bells, or of drawing on the bell rope. Transitive sense from late 15c. Related: Tolled; tolling.
The noun meaning a stroke of a bell is from mid-15c.


