defer (v.1)

to delay, late 14c., differren, deferren, from Old French differer (14c.), from Latin differre carry
apart, scatter, disperse; also be different, differ; also defer, put off, postpone, (see differ).
Etymologically identical with differ; the spelling and pronunciation differentiated from 15c.,
perhaps partly by association of this word with delay.


deferred (adj.)

delayed, 1660s, past participle adjective from defer (v.1).


deferment (n.)

1610s, from defer (v.1) + -ment. As a word for conditional exemption from a military draft it dates
to 1918, American English.


deferral (n.)

1895, from defer (v.1) + -al (2).


deferent (adj.)

1620s, from French d&eacute;f&eacute;rent (16c.), from Latin deferentem (nominative deferens),
present participle of deferre to carry down or away (see defer (v.2)). Earlier in Middle English as
a word in astronomy (early 15c.).


deference (n.)

1640s, from French d&eacute;f&eacute;rence (16c.), from d&eacute;f&eacute;rer (see defer (v.2)).


defer (v.2)

yield, mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;f&eacute;rer (14c.) to yield, comply, from Latin
deferre carry away, transfer, grant, from de- down, away (see de-) + ferre carry (see infer). Main
modern sense is from meaning refer (a matter) to someone, which also was in Latin.


supersede (v.)

mid-15c., Scottish, postpone, defer, from Middle French superceder desist, delay, defer, from Latin
supersedere literally sit on top of; also, with ablative, stay clear of, abstain from, forbear,
refrain from, from super above (see super-) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). Meaning displace,
replace first recorded 1640s. Related: Superseded; superseding.


off (v.)

to kill, 1930, from off (adv.). Earlier verbal senses were to defer (1640s), to move off (1882).
Related: Offed.


dilatory (adj.)

late 15c., from Late Latin dilatorius, from dilator procrastinator, from dilatus, serving as past
participle of differe delay (see defer).


procrastinate (v.)

1580s, a back formation from procrastination or else from Latin procrastinatus, past participle of
procrastinare to put off till tomorrow; defer, delay (see procrastination). Related: Procrastinated;
procrastinating. Earlier verb was procrastine (1540s), from French.


procrastination (n.)

1540s, from Middle French procrastination and directly from Latin procrastinationem (nominative
procrastinatio) a putting off from day to day, noun of action from past participle stem of
procrastinare put off till tomorrow, defer, delay, from pro- forward (see pro-) + crastinus
belonging to tomorrow, from cras tomorrow, of unknown origin.


expect (v.)

1550s, wait, defer action, from Latin expectare/exspectare await, look out for, desire, hope, from
ex- thoroughly (see ex-) + spectare to look, frequentative of specere to look at (see scope (n.1)).
Figurative sense of anticipate, look forward to developed in Latin, attested in English from c.1600.
Used since 1817 as a euphemism for be pregnant. Related: Expected; expecting.


differ (v.)

late 14c., from Old French differer (14c.) and directly from Latin differre to set apart, differ,
from dis- away from (see dis-) + ferre carry (see infer).    Two senses that were present in Latin
have gone separate ways in English since c.1500 with defer (transitive) and differ (intransitive).
Related: Differed; differing.


