degenerate (v.)

1540s, from Latin degeneratus, past participle of degenerare fall from ancestral quality (see
degenerate (adj.)). Figurative sense of to fall off, decline was in Latin. Related: Degenerated;
degenerating.


degenerate (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin degeneratus, past participle of degenerare to be inferior to one's ancestors,
to become unlike one's race or kind, fall from ancestral quality, used of physical as well as moral
qualities, from phrase de genere, from de + genus (genitive generis) birth, descent (see genus). The
noun is from 1550s.


misborn (adj.)

abortive, premature, mis-shapen from birth, late Old English misboren abortive, degenerate, from
mis- (1) + born. From 1580s as born of an unlawful union.


degeneracy (n.)

1660s, from degenerate + -cy.


degenerative (adj.)

1846; see degenerate + -ive.


degeneration (n.)

c.1600, from French d&eacute;g&eacute;neration (15c.) or directly from Late Latin degenerationem
(nominative degeneratio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin degenerare (see
degenerate (adj.)).


bastardize (v.)

1610s, to identify as a bastard, from bastard (q.v.) + -ize. The figurative sense, to make
degenerate, debase is earlier (1580s), probably because bastard also was serving as a verb meaning
to declare illegitimate (1540s). Related: Bastardized; bastardizing; bastardization.


decline (v.)

late 14c., to turn aside, deviate, from Old French decliner to sink, decline, degenerate, turn
aside, from Latin declinare to lower, avoid, deviate, to bend from, inflect, from de- from (see de-)
+ clinare to bend, from PIE *klei-n-, suffixed form of *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)). Sense has
been altered since c.1400 by interpretation of de- as downward. Meaning not to consent, politely
refuse, is from 1630s. Related: Declined; declining.


perverse (adj.)

mid-14c., wicked, from Old French pervers unnatural, degenerate; perverse, contrary (12c.) and
directly from Latin perversus turned away, contrary, askew, figuratively, turned away from what is
right, wrong, malicious, spiteful, past participle of pervertere to corrupt (see pervert (v.)). The
Latin word is glossed in Old English by forcerred, from past participle of forcyrran to avoid, from
cierran to turn, return. Meaning wrong, not in accord with what is accepted is from 1560s; sense of
obstinate, stubborn is from 1570s. It keeps the non-sexual senses of pervert (v.) and allows the
psychological ones to go with perverted. Related: Perversely; perverseness.


