deluge (v.)

1590s; see deluge (n.). Related: Deluged; deluging.


deluge (n.)

late 14c., from Old French deluge (12c.), earlier deluve, from Latin diluvium flood, inundation,
from diluere wash away, from dis- away (see dis-) + -luere, comb. form of lavere to wash (see lave).


cataclysm (n.)

1630s, from French cataclysme (16c.), from Latin cataclysmos or directly from Greek kataklysmos
deluge, flood, inundation, from kataklyzein to deluge, from kata down (see cata-) + klyzein to wash,
from PIE *kleue- to wash, clean (see cloaca).


antediluvian (adj.)

before Noah's flood, 1640s, formed from Latin ante- before (see ante) + diluvium a flood (see deluge
(n.)). Coined by English physician Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682). As a noun meaning person who lived
before the Flood, from 1680s.


diluvial (adj.)

pertaining to a flood (or The Flood), 1650s, from Late Latin diluvialis, from Latin diluvium flood,
inundation (see deluge (n.)). Related: Diluvian.


lavish (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lavasse (n.) torrent of rain, deluge, from Old French lavache, from
laver to wash, from Latin lavare to wash (see lave). Related: Lavishly.


abridge (v.)

c.1300, abreggen, to make shorter, to condense, from Old French abregier abridge, diminish, shorten,
from Late Latin abbreviare make short (see abbreviate). The sound development from Latin -vi- to
French -dg- is paralleled in assuage (from assuavidare) and deluge (from diluvium). Related:
Abridged; abridging.


assuage (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French assuager, Old French assoagier soften, moderate, alleviate, calm, soothe,
pacify, from Vulgar Latin *adsuaviare, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + suavis sweet, agreeable (see
sweet (adj.)). For sound development in French, compare deluge from Latin diluvium, abridge from
abbreviare. Related: Assuaged; assuaging.


flood (n.)

Old English flod a flowing of water, flood, an overflowing of land by water, Noah's Flood; mass of
water, river, sea, wave, from Proto-Germanic *floduz flowing water, deluge (cognates: Old Frisian
flod, Old Norse flo&eth;, Middle Dutch vloet, Dutch vloed, German Flut, Gothic flodus), from PIE
verbal stem *pleu- flow, float (see pluvial). Figurative use by mid-14c.


flow (v.)

Old English flowan to flow, stream, issue; become liquid, melt; abound, overflow (class VII strong
verb; past tense fleow, past participle flowen), from Proto-Germanic *flo- (cognates: Middle Dutch
vloyen, Dutch vloeien to flow, Old Norse floa to deluge, Old High German flouwen to rinse, wash),
probably from PIE *pleu- flow, float (see pluvial). The weak form predominated from 14c., but strong
past participle flown is occasionally attested through 18c. Related: Flowed; flowing.


bent (n.2)

stiff grass, Old English beonet, from West Germanic *binut- rush, marsh grass (cognates: Old Saxon
binet, Old High German binuz, German Binse rush, reed), of unknown origin. An obsolete word, but
surviving in place names (such as Bentley, from Old English Beonet-leah; Bentham).    The verdure of
the plain lies buried deep  Beneath the dazzling deluge; and the bents,  And coarser grass,
upspearing o'er the rest,  Of late unsightly and unseen, now shine  Conspicuous, and, in bright
apparel clad  And fledg'd with icy feathers, nod superb.    [Cowper, The Winter-Morning Walk, from
The Task]


