depiction (n.)

1680s, from French depiction, from Late Latin depictionem (nominative depictio) painting,
description, noun of action from Latin depictus (see depict).


depict (v.)

early 15c., from Latin depictus, past participle of depingere to portray, paint, sketch; describe,
imagine, from de- down (see de-) + pingere to paint (see paint (v.)). Related: Depicted; depicting.


blazon (v.)

1560s, to depict or paint (armorial bearings), from blazon (n.) or else from French blasonner.
Earlier as to set forth decriptively (1510s); especially to vaunt or boast (1530s), in this use
probably from or influenced by blaze (v.2).


portrait (n.)

1560s, a figure, drawn or painted, a back formation from portraiture or directly from Middle French
portrait, from Old French portret (13c.), noun use of past participle of portraire to paint, depict
(see portray). Especially of the head and face of a person.


limn (v.)

early 15c., to illuminate (manuscripts), altered from Middle English luminen, to illuminate
manuscripts (late 14c.), from Old French luminer light up, illuminate, from Latin luminare
illuminate, burnish, from lumen (genitive luminis) radiant energy, light, related to lucere to shine
(see light (n.)). Sense of portray, depict first recorded 1590s. Related: Limned.


skew (v.)

late 15c., to turn aside (intransitive), from Old North French eskiuer shy away from, avoid, Old
French eschiver (see eschew). Transitive sense of turn (something) aside is from 1570s. Meaning
depict unfairly first recorded 1872, on notion of being give oblique direction to, hence to distort,
to make slant. Statistical sense dates from 1929. Related: Skewed; skewing. The adjectival meaning
slanting, turned to one side is recorded from c.1600, from the verb; noun meaning slant, deviation
first attested 1680s.


portray (v.)

mid-13c., to draw, paint (something), from Anglo-French purtraire, Old French portraire to draw, to
paint, portray (12c.), literally trace, draw forth, from por- forth (from Latin pro-; see pro-) +
traire trace, draw, from Latin trahere to drag, draw (see tract (n.1)). Meaning depict in words,
describe is from late 14c. Related: Portrayed; portraying.


render (v.)

late 14c., repeat, say again, from Old French rendre give back, present, yield (10c.), from Vulgar
Latin *rendere (formed by dissimilation or on analogy of its antonym, prendre to take), from Latin
reddere give back, return, restore, from red- back (see re-) + comb. form of dare to give (see date
(n.1)).    Meaning hand over, deliver is recorded from late 14c.; to return (thanks, a verdict,
etc.) is attested from late 15c.; meaning represent, depict is first attested 1590s. Irregular
retention of -er in a French verb in English is perhaps to avoid confusion with native rend (v.) or
by influence of a Middle English legalese noun render a payment of rent, from French noun use of the
infinitive. Related: Rendered; rendering.


