desolate (v.)

late 14c., from desolate (adj.). Related: Desolated; desolating.


desolate (adj.)

mid-14c., without companions, also uninhabited, from Latin desolatus, past participle of desolare
leave alone, desert, from de- completely (see de-) + solare make lonely, from solus alone (see sole
(adj.)). Sense of joyless is 15c.


unappeasable (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + appeasable. Related: Unappeasably.    Desolate winds that cry over the
wandering sea;  Desolate winds that hover in the flaming West;  Desolate winds that beat the doors
of Heaven, and beat  The doors of Hell and blow there many a whimpering ghost;  O heart the winds
have shaken, the unappeasable host  Is comelier than candles at Mother Mary's feet.    [W.B. Yeats,
The Unappeasable Host, 1899]


wild (n.)

uncultivated or desolate region, 1590s, in the wilds. From wild (adj.). Earlier it meant wild animal
(c.1200).


desolation (n.)

late 14c., action of laying waste, also sorrow, grief, from Old French desolacion (12c.) desolation,
devastation, hopelessness, despair, from Church Latin desolationem (nominative desolatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of desolare (see desolate (adj.)). Meaning condition of being
ruined or wasted is from early 15c.


waste (adj.)

c.1300, of land, desolate, uncultivated, from Anglo-French and Old North French waste (Old French
gaste), from Latin vastus (see waste (v.)). From c.1400 as superfluous, excess; 1670s as unfit for
use. Waste-paper attested from 1580s.


vast (adj.)

1570s, being of great extent or size, from Middle French vaste, from Latin vastus immense,
extensive, huge, also desolate, unoccupied, empty. The two meanings probably originally attached to
two separate words, one with a long -a- one with a short -a-, that merged in early Latin (see waste
(v.)). Meaning very great in quantity or number is from 1630s; that of very great in degree is from
1670s. Very popular early 18c. as an intensifier. Related: Vastly; vastness; vasty.


devastation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;vastation, from Late Latin devastationem (nominative
devastatio), from past participle stem of Latin devastare lay waste completely, from de- completely
(see de-) + vastare lay waste, from vastus empty, desolate (see waste (v.)).


maroon (v.)

put ashore on a desolate island or coast, 1724 (implied in marooning), earlier to be lost in the
wild (1690s); from maron (n.) fugitive black slave in the jungles of W.Indies and Dutch Guyana
(1660s), earlier symeron (1620s), from French marron, said to be a corruption of Spanish cimmaron
wild, untamed, from Old Spanish cimarra thicket, probably from cima summit, top (from Latin cyma
sprout), with a notion of living wild in the mountains. Related: Marooned.


hermit (n.)

early 12c., religious recluse, from Old French (h)eremite, from Late Latin ermita, from Greek
eremites, literally person of the desert, from eremia desert, solitude, from eremos uninhabited,
empty, desolate, bereft, from PIE *ere- (2) to separate (cognates: Latin rete net, Lithuanian retis
sieve). Transferred sense of person living in solitude is from 1799. The hermit crab (1735) was so
called for its solitary habits.


waste (n.)

c.1200, desolate regions, from Anglo-French and Old North French wast waste, damage, destruction;
wasteland, moor (Old French gast), from Latin vastum, neuter of vastus waste (see waste (v.)).
Replaced or merged with Old English westen, woesten a desert, wilderness, from the Latin word.
Meanings consumption, depletion, also useless expenditure are from c.1300; sense of refuse matter is
attested from c.1400. Waste basket first recorded 1850.


-ate (1)

word-forming element used in forming nouns from Latin words ending in -atus, -atum (such as estate,
primate, senate). Those that came to English via Old and Middle French often arrived with -at, but
an -e was added after c.1400 to indicate the long vowel.    The suffix also can mark adjectives,
formed from Latin past participals in -atus, -ata (such as desolate, moderate, separate), again,
they often were adopted in Middle English as -at, with an -e appended after c.1400.


waste (v.)

c.1200, devastate, ravage, ruin, from Anglo-French and Old North French waster to waste, squander,
spoil, ruin (Old French gaster; Modern French g&#226;ter), altered (by influence of Frankish
*wostjan) from Latin vastare lay waste, from vastus empty, desolate, waste (see vain). Related:
wasted; wasting.    The Germanic word also existed in Old English as westan to lay waste, ravage.
Spanish gastar, Italian guastare also are from Germanic. Meaning to lose strength or health; pine;
weaken is attested from c.1300; the sense of squander, spend or consume uselessly is first recorded
mid-14c.; meaning to kill is from 1964. Waste not, want not attested from 1778.


