detainer (n.)

one who detains, 1530s, agent noun from detain. As a legal term, a detaining in one's possession,
from 1610s, from Anglo-French detener, from Old French detenir (noun use of infinitive).


detainee (n.)

1928, from detain + -ee.


detain (v.)

early 15c., deteynen, from Old French detenir to hold off, keep back (12c.), from Latin detinere
hold off, keep back, from de- from, away (see de-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Modern spelling is
17c., from influence of contain, retain, etc. Related: Detained; detaining.


button-hole (n.)

1560s, from button (n.) + hole (n.). The verb, also buttonhole, meaning to detain (someone) in
conversation against his will (1862) was earlier button-hold (1834), from button-holder (1806, in
this sense). The image is of holding someone by the coat-button so as to detain him.


belated (adj.)

1610s, overtaken by night, past participle adjective from belate to make late, detain, from be- +
late. Sense of coming past due, behind date is from 1660s. Related: Belatedly.


detention (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;tention (13c.), from Late Latin detentionem (nominative
detentio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin detinere (see detain). Sense of
confinement used by 1570s (in reference to Mary Queen of Scots). In reference to school punishment,
recorded from 1882.


impede (v.)

c.1600, back-formation from impediment, or else from Latin impedire impede, be in the way, hinder,
detain, literally to shackle the feet (see impediment). Related: Impeded; impedes; impeding.


district (n.)

1610s, territory under the jurisdiction of a lord or officer, from French district (16c.), from
Medieval Latin districtus restraining of offenders, jurisdiction, then under the feudal system area
of jurisdiction, noun use of past participle of Latin distringere hinder, detain (see distress).
Used vaguely of any tract of land from 1712. District attorney attested by 1789, American English.


reprieve (v.)

1570s, reprive, take back to prison, alteration (perhaps by influence of reprove) of Middle English
repryen to remand, detain (late 15c.), probably from Middle French repris, past participle of
reprendre take back (see reprise). Meaning to suspend an impending execution is recorded from 1590s;
this sense evolved because being sent back to prison was the alternative to being executed. Spelling
with -ie- is from 1640s, perhaps by analogy of achieve, etc. Related: Reprieved; reprieving.


arrest (v.)

to cause to stop, also to detain legally, late 14c., from Old French arester to stay, stop (Modern
French arr&ecirc;ter), from Vulgar Latin *arrestare (source of Italian arrestare, Spanish and
Portuguese arrestar), from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + restare to stop, remain behind, stay back (see
rest (n.2)). Figurative sense of to catch and hold (the attention, etc.) is from 1814.


retain (v.)

late 14c., hold back, restrain; c.1400, continue keeping, keep possession of, from Old French
retenir keep, retain; take into feudal service; hold back; remember (12c.), from Latin retinere hold
back, keep back, detain, restrain, from re- back (see re-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning
keep (another) attached to one's person, keep in service is from mid-15c.; specifically of lawyers
from 1540s. Meaning keep in the mind is from c.1500. Related: Retained; retaining.


stay (v.1)

mid-15c., cease going forward, come to a halt, also (transitive) detain, hold back, from Old French
estai-, stem of estare to stay or stand, from Latin stare to stand, stand still, remain standing; be
upright, be erect; stand firm, stand in battle; abide; be unmovable; be motionless; remain, tarry,
linger; take a side, (source also of Italian stare, Spanish estar to stand, to be), from PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of remain is first recorded 1570s; that of reside as a guest for a
short period is from 1550s. Related: Stayed; staying.    Of things, remain in place, 1590s. Stay put
is first recorded 1843, American English. To stay put is to keep still, remain in order. A vulgar
expression [Bartlett]. Phrase stay the course is originally (1885) in reference to horses holding
out till the end of a race. Stay-stomach was (1800) a snack.


