devotee (n.)

1640s, from devote, with a French suffix, perhaps on model of assignee. Earlier in this sense was
devote (1620s).


Deadhead (n.)

by 1974 in sense of devotee of the rock music band the Grateful Dead; earlier (with lower-case) one
who rides for free on the railroads (1866), and non-paying spectator (1841).


fedayeen (n.)

partisans or irregulars in the Middle East, from Arabic plural of fedai devotee, zealot, one who
risks life for a cause, from Persian fidai.


headbanger (n.)

devotee of heavy metal music, 1984, from head (n.) + agent noun from bang (v.).


folkie (n.)

devotee of (modern) folk music, attested by 1966, with -ie.


votary (n.)

1540s, one consecrated by a vow, from Latin votum a promise to a god; that which is promised (see
vow (n.)) + -ary. Originally a monk or nun, general sense of ardent devotee of some aim or pursuit
is from 1591 (in Shakespeare, originally in reference to love). Related: Votaress.


Marxist (n.)

1886, devotee of the teachings of Marx, from French marxiste, from Karl Marx (1818-1883), German
political theorist. The adjective is attested from 1884. The adjectival form Marxian (1940)
sometimes is used (by Groucho, among others) to distinguish the U.S. vaudeville team from the German
communist.


sun-worship (n.)

1670s, from sun (n.) + worship (n.). Related: Sun-worshipper (1670s in the religious sense; 1941 as
devotee of sun-tanning).


longhair (n.)

also long-hair, cat with long hair, 1893, from long (adj.) + hair. As intellectual, especially in
musical tastes, devotee of classical music, 1920. Sense of hippie attested from 1969.


fan (n.2)

devotee, 1889, American English, originally of baseball enthusiasts, probably a shortening of
fanatic, but may be influenced by the fancy, a collective term for followers of a certain hobby or
sport (especially boxing); see fancy. There is an isolated use from 1682, but the modern word is
likely a late 19c. formation. Fan club attested by 1930.


karate (n.)

1955, Japanese, literally empty hand, bare hand, from kara empty + te hand. A devotee is a karateka.


alligator (n.)

1560s, lagarto (modern form attested from 1620s, with excrescent -r as in tater, feller, etc.), a
corruption of Spanish el lagarto (de Indias) the lizard (of the Indies), from Latin lacertus (see
lizard). Alligarter was an early variant. The slang meaning non-playing devotee of swing music is
attested from 1936; the phrase see you later, alligator is from a 1956 song title.


aficionado (n.)

1845, from Spanish aficionado amateur, specifically devotee of bullfighting, literally fond of, from
afici&oacute;n affection, from Latin affectionem (see affection). Most sources derive this word from
the Spanish verb aficionar but the verb does not appear in Spanish before 1555, and the word
aficionado is recorded in the 1400's [Barnhart]. In English, originally of devotees of bullfighting;
in general use by 1882.


fiend (n.)

Old English feond enemy, foe, originally present participle of feogan to hate, from Proto-Germanic
*fijand- hating, hostile (cognates: Old Frisian fiand enemy, Old Saxon fiond, Middle Dutch viant,
Dutch vijand enemy, Old Norse fjandi, Old High German fiant, Gothic fijands), from suffixed form of
PIE root *pe(i)- to hurt (source also of Gothic faian to blame; see passion).    As spelling
suggests, it was originally the opposite of friend, but the word began to be used in Old English for
Satan (as the enemy of mankind), which shifted its sense to diabolical person (early 13c.). The old
sense of the word devolved to foe, then to the imported word enemy. For spelling with -ie- see
field. Meaning devotee (of whatever is indicated), as in dope fiend, is from 1865.


