die (v.)

mid-12c., possibly from Old Danish d&oslash;ja or Old Norse deyja to die, pass away, both from
Proto-Germanic *dawjan (cognates: Old Frisian deja to kill, Old Saxon doian, Old High German touwen,
Gothic diwans mortal), from PIE root *dheu- (3) to pass away, die, become senseless (cognates: Old
Irish dith end, death, Old Church Slavonic daviti, Russian davit' to choke, suffer).    It has been
speculated that Old English had *diegan, from the same source, but it is not in any of the surviving
texts and the preferred words were steorfan (see starve), sweltan (see swelter), wesan dead, also
for&eth;gan and other euphemisms.    Languages usually don't borrow words from abroad for central
life experiences, but die words are an exception, because they are often hidden or changed
euphemistically out of superstitious dread. A Dutch euphemism translates as to give the pipe to
Maarten. Regularly spelled dege through 15c., and still pronounced dee by some in Lancashire and
Scotland. Used figuratively (of sounds, etc.) from 1580s. Related: Died; dies.


die (n.)

early 14c. (as a plural, late 14c. as a singular), from Old French de die, dice, of uncertain
origin. Common Romanic (cognates: Spanish, Portuguese, Italian dado, Proven&ccedil;al dat, Catalan
dau), perhaps from Latin datum given, past participle of dare (see date (n.1)), which, in addition
to give, had a secondary sense of to play (as a chess piece); or else from what is given (by chance
or Fortune). Sense of stamping block or tool first recorded 1690s.


diehard

also die-hard, 1844 (n.), in reference to the 57th Regiment of Foot in the British Army; as an
adjective, attested from 1871; from die (v.) + hard (adv.). As a brand name of an automobile
battery, DieHard, introduced by Sears in 1967.


dieresis (n.)

also diaeresis, 1610s, sign marking the division of a diphthong into two simple sounds, from Late
Latin diaeresis, from Greek diairesis division, noun of action from diairein to divide, separate,
from dia- apart (see dia-) + hairein to take (see heresy). In classical prosody, the slight break in
the forward motion of a line that is felt when the end of a foot coincides with the end of a word
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry].


Dies Irae

literally day of wrath, first words of Latin hymn of Last Judgment, attributed to Thomas of Celano
(c.1250). See diurnal + ire.


diesel (adj.)

1894, named for Rudolf Diesel (1858-1913), German mechanical engineer who designed this type of
engine.


diet (n.1)

regular food, early 13c., from Old French diete (13c.) diet, pittance, fare, from Medieval Latin
dieta parliamentary assembly, also a day's work, diet, daily food allowance, from Latin diaeta
prescribed way of life, from Greek diaita, originally way of life, regimen, dwelling, related to
diaitasthai lead one's life, and from diaitan, originally separate, select (food and drink),
frequentative of *diainysthai take apart, from dia- apart + ainysthai take, from PIE root *ai- to
give, allot. Often with a sense of restriction since 14c.; hence put (someone) on a diet (mid-15c.).


diet (n.2)

assembly, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin dieta, variant of diaeta daily office (of the Church), daily
duty, assembly, meeting of counselors, from Greek diaita (see diet (n.1)), but associated with Latin
dies day (see diurnal).


diet (v.)

late 14c., to regulate one's diet for the sake of health, from Old French dieter, from diete (see
diet (n.1)); meaning to regulate oneself as to food (especially against fatness) is from 1650s.
Related: Dieted; dieting. An obsolete word for this is banting. The adjective in this sense (Diet
Coke, etc.) is from 1963, originally American English.


dietary (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin dietarius, from Latin diaetarius, from diaeta (see diet (n.1)).


dietetic (adj.)

1570s, from Latin diaeteticus, from Greek diaitetikos of or pertaining to diet, from diaita (see
diet (1)). As a noun from 1759.


dietetics (n.)

1540s, see dietetic + -ics.


dietician (n.)

1845, from diet (n.1) on model of physician. Earlier was dietist (c.1600).


dietitian (n.)

see dietician.


able-bodied (adj.)

1620s; see able + body.


adieu

late 14c., adewe, from French adieu, from phrase a dieu (vous) commant I commend (you) to God, from
a to (see ad) + dieu God, from Latin deum, accusative of deus god, from PIE *deiwos (see Zeus).
Originally said to the party left; farewell was to the party setting forth.


ante meridiem

1560s, Latin, literally before noon, from ante (see ante) + accusative of meridies midday, noon (see
meridian).


audience (n.)

late 14c., the action of hearing, from Old French audience, from Latin audentia a hearing,
listening, from audientum (nominative audiens), present participle of audire to hear, from PIE
compound *au-dh- to perceive physically, grasp, from root *au- to perceive (cognates: Greek
aisthanesthai to feel; Sanskrit avih, Avestan avish openly, evidently; Old Church Slavonic javiti to
reveal). Meaning formal hearing or reception is from late 14c.; that of persons within hearing
range, assembly of listeners is from early 15c. (French audience retains only the older senses).
Sense transferred 1855 to readers of a book. Audience-participation (adj.) first recorded 1940.


biodiesel (n.)

also bio-diesel, 1992, from bio- + diesel.


birdie (n.)

little bird, 1792, from bird (n.1) + -ie. As golf slang for a hole played one under par, by 1908,
perhaps from bird (n.) in American English slang sense of exceptionally clever or accomplished
person or thing (1839).


bombardier (n.)

1550s, soldier with a bombard, from French bombardier, from bombard (see bombard (n.)). In 17c.-18c.
of soldiers who manned artillery (especially mortars and howitzers); meaning one who aims the bombs
in an aircraft is attested 1932, American English.


boulevardier (n.)

1856, French, one who frequents the boulevard; i.e.: man-about-town, one fond of urban living and
society.


brigadier (n.)

1670s, officer in command of a brigade, from French brigadier, from brigade (see brigade).


caddie (n.)

1630s, Scottish form of French cadet (see cadet). Originally person who runs errands; meaning of
golfer's assistant is 1851. A letter from Edinburgh c.1730 describes the city's extensive and semi-
organized Cawdys, a very useful Black-Guard, who attend ... publick Places to go at Errands; and
though they are Wretches, that in Rags lye upon the Stairs and in the Streets at Night, yet are they
often considerably trusted .... This Corps has a kind of Captain ... presiding over them, whom they
call the Constable of the Cawdys.


candied (adj.)

c.1600, past participle adjective from candy (v.).


carpe diem

1786, Latin, enjoy the day, literally pluck the day (while it is ripe), an aphorism from Horace
(Odes I.xi), from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)).


civil disobedience (n.)

coined 1866 by Thoreau as title of an essay originally published (1849) as Resistance to Civil
Government.


clairaudience (n.)

1864, from French clair (see clear (adj.)) + audience; on model of clairvoyance.


comedienne (n.)

1860, from French com&eacute;dienne, fem. of com&eacute;dien (see comedian).


disembodied (adj.)

1742, past participle adjective from disembody (1714), from dis- not + embody. Related:
Disembodiment.


disobedience (n.)

c.1400, from Old French desobedience, from Vulgar Latin *disobedientia (replacing Latin
inobedientia) from Latin dis- (see dis-) + obedientia (see obedience). The English word replaced
earlier desobeissance in this sense, and inobedience (c.1200).


disobedient (adj.)

early 15c., dysobedyent, from Old French desobedient, from Vulgar Latin *disobedientem (replacing
Latin inobedientem) from Latin dis- (see dis-) + obedientem (see obedient). Related: Disobediently.
Earlier in the same sense was disobeissant (late 14c.), from Old French desobeissant, and inobedient
(early 14c.).


expedience (n.)

mid-15c., advantage, benefit, from Old French expedience, from Late Latin expedientia, from
expedientem (see expedient). Related: Expediency (1610s).


expedient (adj.)

late 14c., advantageous, fit, proper, from Old French expedient (14c.) or directly from Latin
expedientem (nominative expediens) beneficial, present participle of expedire make fit or ready,
prepare (see expedite). The noun meaning a device adopted in an exigency, a resource is from 1650s.
Related: Expediential; expedientially (both 19c.)


expediently (adv.)

late 14c., from expedient (adj.) + -ly (2).


foodie (n.)

gourmet, 1982, from food + -ie.


frauendienst (n.)

excessive chivalry toward women, from the title of a work by Ulrich von Lichtenstein (13c.), from
German frauen, plural of frau + dienst service.


Freddie Mac

by 1992, vaguely from Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.


Geordie

Scottish and northern dialectal diminutive of masc. proper name George.


gradient (n.)

steep slope of a road or railroad, 1835, principally in American English, from grade (n.) by analogy
of quotient, etc. It was used 17c. as an adjective, of animals, characterized by walking; in that
case probably from Latin gradientem, present participle of gradi to walk.


grenadier (n.)

1670s, originally a word for soldiers who were dexterous in flinging hand-granados [Evelyn], from
French grenadier (15c.), from Middle French grenade grenade (see grenade); later the tallest and
finest men in the regiment [OED].


hoodie (n.)

also hoody, slang shortening of hooded sweatshirt, attested by 1991. Earlier it was a familiar term
for the hooded crow (1789).


indie (n.)

independent record company, 1945, shortening of independent (among the earliest mentioned were
Continental, Majestic, and Signature); used of film production companies since 1920s, of theaters
from 1942; extended by 1984 to a type of pop music issued by such labels.


Indies

1550s, plural of Indie, Indy, from Middle English Ynde (early 13c.) India, from the Old French form
of Latin India (see India). Commonly applied to Asia and the East, later applied to the Caribbean
basin, in a time of geographical confusion, which was distinguished from Asia proper by being called
the West Indies.


inexpedient (adj.)

c.1600, from in- (1) not, opposite of + expedient. Related: Inexpedience; inexpediently.


ingredient (n.)

early 15c., from Latin ingredientem (nominative ingrediens) that which enters into (a compound,
recipe, etc.), present participle of ingredi go in, enter, from in- in (see in- (2)) + gradi to
step, go (see grade (n.)).


ladies (n.)

plural of lady (q.v.).


medieval (adj.)

1827, pertaining to or suggestive of the Middle Ages, coined in English from Latin medium the middle
(see medium (n.)) + aevum age (see eon).


medievalism (n.)

1846, from medieval + -ism.


medievalist (n.)

1847, proponent of medieval styles, from medieval + -ist. From 1882 as one versed in the history of
the Middle Ages.


