din (n.)

Old English dyne (n.), dynian (v.), from Proto-Germanic *duniz (cognates: Old Norse dynr, Danish
don, Middle Low German don noise), from PIE root *dwen- to make noise (cognates: Sanskrit dhuni
roaring, a torrent).


Dinah

fem. proper name, in the Old Testament, Jacob's daughter by Leah, from Hebrew Dinah, literally
judgment, from din to judge.


dinar (n.)

Middle Eastern unit of currency, 1630s, from Arabic dinar, from late Greek denarion, from Latin
denarius (see denarius).


Dinaric (adj.)

from Dinara, ancient name of a mountain in Dalmatia.


dine (v.)

late 13c., from Old French disner (Modern French d&icirc;ner) to dine, eat, have a meal, originally
take the first meal of the day, from stem of Gallo-Roman *desjunare to break one's fast, from Vulgar
Latin *disjejunare, from dis- undo (see dis-) + Late Latin jejunare to fast, from Latin iejunus
fasting, hungry (see jejune).


diner (n.)

one who dines, 1815, agent noun from dine. Meaning railway car for eating is 1890, American English;
of restaurants built to resemble dining cars (or in some cases actual converted dining cars) from
1935. The Diner's Club credit card system dates from 1952.


dinette (n.)

1930, from dine + diminutive (or false French) suffix -ette.


ding (v.)

1819, to sound as metal when struck, possibly abstracted from ding-dong, of imitative origin. The
meaning to deal heavy blows is c.1300, probably from Old Norse dengja to hammer, perhaps also
imitative. Meaning dent is 1960s. Related: Dinged; dinging.


ding dong

imitative of the sound of a bell, c.1560.


ding-a-ling (n.)

one who is crazy, 1935, from notion of hearing bells in the head (see ding (v.)).


dingbat (n.)

1838, American English, some kind of alcoholic drink, of unknown origin. One of that class of words
(such as dingus, doohickey, gadget, gizmo, thingumabob) which are conjured up to supply names for
items whose proper names are unknown or not recollected. Used at various periods for money, a
professional tramp, a muffin, a typographical ornament, male genitalia, a Chinese, an Italian, a
woman who is neither your sister nor your mother, and a foolish person in authority. Popularized in
sense of foolish person by U.S. TV show All in the Family (1971-79), though this usage dates from
1905.


dinger (n.)

something superlative, 1809, American English, agent noun from ding (v.).


dinghy (n.)

1810, from Hindi dingi small boat, perhaps from Sanskrit drona-m wooden trough, related to dru-s
wood, tree (see tree (n.)). The spelling with -h- is to indicate a hard -g-.


dingle (n.)

deep dell or hollow, usually wooded, mid-13c., of unknown origin; a dialectal word until it entered
literary use 17c.


dingleberry (n.)

by 1973, perhaps with suggestions of dangle and berry. Attested from late 19c. through 1930s as a
humorous-sounding surname in comedic writing.


dingo (n.)

1789, Native Australian name, from Dharruk (language formerly spoken in the area of Sydney) /din-go/
tame dog, though the English used it to describe wild Australian dogs. Bushmen continue to call the
animal by the Dharruk term /warrigal/ wild dog.


dingus (n.)

any unspecified or unspecifiable object; something one does not know the name of or does not wish to
name, 1876, U.S. slang, from Dutch dinges, literally thing (see thing).


dingy (adj.)

1736, Kentish dialect, dirty, of uncertain origin, but perhaps related to dung. The noun dinge
(1816) is a back-formation.


dining (n.)

c.1400, verbal noun from dine (v.). Dining room is attested from c.1600.


dink (n.)

derogatory for Vietnamese, 1969, U.S. military slang, of uncertain origin.


DINK

acronym for double income, no kids, popular from 1987.


dinkum (n.)

1888, hard work, Australian slang, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to Lincolnshire dialect.
Meaning honest, genuine is attested from 1894.


dinky (adj.)

1788 neat, trim, dainty, small, from Scottish dialectal dink finely dressed, trim (c.1500), of
unknown origin. Modern sense is 1850s.


dinner (n.)

c.1300, from Old French disner (11c.), originally breakfast, later lunch, noun use of infinitive
disner (see dine). Always used in English for the main meal of the day; shift from midday to evening
began with the fashionable classes. Childish reduplication din-din is attested from 1905.


dinosaur (n.)

1841, coined in Modern Latin by Sir Richard Owen, from comb. form of Greek deinos terrible (see
dire) + sauros lizard (see -saurus). Figurative sense of person or institution not adapting to
change is from 1952.


dint (n.)

Old English dynt blow dealt in fighting (especially by a sword), from Proto-Germanic *duntiz
(cognates: Old Norse dyntr blow, kick). Phrase by dint of ... by force of, by means of, is early
14c.


abiding (adj.)

late 14c., enduring, present participle adjective from abide (v.).


abounding (adj.)

1630s, present participle adjective from abound; originally affluent; sense of overflowing is
recorded by 1680s.


according

c.1300, matching, similar, correponding, present participle adjective and adverb from accord (v.).
Meanings conforming (to), compliant, in agreement; consistent, harmonious; suitable, appropriate are
from late 14c. According to referring to, literally in a manner agreeing with is attested from mid-
15c.


accordingly (adv.)

mid-14c., in agreement with, from according + -ly (2). From mid-15c. as properly; adequately;
meaning in agreement with logic or expectation is recorded 1680s.


after-dinner (adj.)

1730, from after + dinner.


Aladdin

name of a hero in stories from the Arabian Nights, from Arabic Ala' al Din, literally nobility of
faith.


Aldine (n.)

type font, 1837, from Aldus Manutius (1450-1515), Venetian printer who used it in his popular
editions of Greek and Roman classics. His name is a Latinized form of Italian Aldo Manuzio, the
first name short for Teobaldo (see Theobald), and, like so many Italian masc. given names, of
Germanic origin. The device characteristic of Aldine books is a figure of a dolphin on an anchor.


attitudinal (adj.)

1831, from Italian attitudine (see attitude) + -al (1).


attitudinize (v.)

1784, from attitudinal + -ize. Related: Attitudinized; attitudinizing.


badinage (n.)

light railery, 1650s, from French badinage playfulness, jesting, from badiner (v.) to jest, joke,
from badin silly, jesting, from Old Proven&ccedil;al badar to yawn, gape, from Late Latin badare to
gape, from *bat-, the root of abash.


bedding (n.)

later Old English beddinge bedding, bed covering, from bed. Meaning bottom layer of anything is from
c.1400.


binding (n.)

mid-13c., verbal noun from bind (v.). Meaning thing that binds is from c.1300; state of being bound
is from late 14c. Meaning covering of a book is recorded from 1640s.


bleeding (n.)

late 14c., a flowing out of blood; mid-15c. as a drawing out of blood; verbal noun formed after
earlier present participle adjective (early 13c.) of bleed. Figurative use is from 1796. As a
euphemism for bloody, from 1858. In U.S. history, Bleeding Kansas, in reference to the slavery
disputes in that territory 1854-60, is attested from 1856, said to have been first used by the New
York Tribune.


bleeding heart (n.)

type of flowering plant, so called from 1690s. In the sense of person excessively sympathetic
(especially toward those the speaker deems not to deserve it) is attested by 1951, but said by many
to have been popularized with reference to liberals (especially Eleanor Roosevelt) in 1930s by
newspaper columnist Westbrook Pegler (1894-1969), though quotations are wanting; bleeding in a
figurative sense of generous is from late 16c., and the notion of one's heart bleeding as a figure
of emotional anguish is from late 14c., but the exact image here may be the bleeding heart of Jesus.


blinding (adj.)

1784, past participle adjective from blind (v.). Related: Blindingly.


bloodiness (n.)

1590s, from bloody (adj.) + -ness.


boarding (n.)

1530s, supplying of meals, food and lodging, from board (n.1) in its extended sense of food (via
notion of table). Boarding-school is from 1670s; boarding house attested from 1728.


breeding (n.)

late 14c., hatching, incubation; also formation, development, growth, verbal noun from breed (v.).
Meaning good manners is from 1590s.


Brobdingnag

(not *brobdignag), 1727, Swift's name in Gulliver's Travels for imaginary country where everything
was on a gigantic scale.


brobdingnagian (adj.)

huge, immense, gigantic, 1728, from Brobdingnag + -ian.


brooding (adj.)

1640s, hovering, overhanging (as a mother bird does her nest), from present participle of brood
(v.); meaning that dwells moodily first attested 1818 (in Frankenstein).


brooding (n.)

action of incubating, c.1400, verbal noun from brood (v.). Figuratively (of weather, etc.) from
1805; of mental fixations by 1873. Related: Broodingly.


building (n.)

a structure, c.1300, verbal noun from build (v.).


cardinal (n.)

early 12c., one of the ecclesiastical princes who constitute the sacred college (short for
cardinalis ecclesiae Romanae or episcopus cardinalis), from Latin cardinalis principal, chief,
essential (see cardinal (adj.)).    Ecclesiastical use began for the presbyters of the chief
(cardinal) churches of Rome. The North American songbird (Cardinalis virginianus) is attested from
1670s, so named for its resemblance to the cardinals in their red robes.


