discredit (v.)

1550s, from dis- opposite of + credit (v.). Related: Discredited; discrediting; discreditable;
discreditably.


bork (v.)

1987, to discredit a candidate for some position by savaging his or her career and beliefs, from
name of U.S. jurist Robert H. Bork (1927-2012), whose Supreme Court nomination in 1987 was rejected
after an intense counter-campaign.


smirch (v.)

late 15c., to discolor, to make dirty, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French esmorcher to
torture, perhaps also befoul, stain, from es- out (see ex-) + morcher to bite, from Latin morsus,
past participle of mordere to bite (see mordant). Sense perhaps influenced by smear. Sense of
dishonor, disgrace, discredit first attested 1820.


scandal (n.)

1580s, discredit caused by irreligious conduct, from Middle French scandale (12c.), from Late Latin
scandalum cause for offense, stumbling block, temptation, from Greek skandalon a trap or snare laid
for an enemy, in New Testament, metaphorically as a stumbling block, offense; originally trap with a
springing device, from PIE *skand- to leap, climb (see scan (v.); also see slander (n.), which is
another form of the same word).    Attested from early 13c., but the modern word likely is a
reborrowing. Meaning malicious gossip, also shameful action or event is from 1590s; sense of person
whose conduct is a disgrace is from 1630s. Scandal sheet sensational newspaper is from 1939.
Scandal-monger is from 1702.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


fundamentalist (adj.)

1920 in the religious sense (as is fundamentalism), from fundamental + -ist. Coined in American
English to name a movement among Protestants c.1920-25 based on scriptural inerrancy, etc., and
associated with William Jennings Bryan, among others.   Fundamentalist is said (by George McCready
Price) to have been first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws (1868-1946), editor of The Watchman
Examiner, a Baptist newspaper. The movement may have roots in the Presbyterian General Assembly of
1910, which drew up a list of five defining qualities of true believers which other evangelicals
published in a mass-circulation series of books called The Fundamentals. A World's Christian
Fundamentals Association was founded in 1918. The words reached widespread use in the wake of the
contentious Northern Baptist Convention of 1922 in Indianapolis.    Fundamentalism is a protest
against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity which seeks to discredit supernaturalism.
This rationalism, when full grown, scorns the miracles of the Old Testament, sets aside the virgin
birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the
New Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the fact that death did not end his
existence, and sweeps away the promises of his second coming as an idle dream. It matters not by
what name these modernists are known. The simple fact is that, in robbing Christianity of its
supernatural content, they are undermining the very foundations of our holy religion. They boast
that they are strengthening the foundations and making Christianity more rational and more
acceptable to thoughtful people. Christianity is rooted and grounded in supernaturalism, and when
robbed of supernaturalism it ceases to be a religion and becomes an exalted system of ethics. [Laws,
Herald &amp; Presbyter, July 19, 1922]    The original opposition to fundamentalist (within the
denominations) was modernist.    A new word has been coined into our vocabulary -- two new words --
'Fundamentalist' and 'Fundamentalism.' They are not in the dictionaries as yet -- unless in the very
latest editions. But they are on everyone's tongue. [Address Delivered at the Opening of the
Seminary, Sept. 20, 1922, by Professor Harry Lathrop Reed, Auburn Seminary Record]    Applied to
other religions, especially Islam, since 1957.


