disdain (n.)

mid-14c., desdegne scorn, contempt, earlier dedeyne offended dignity (c.1300), from Old French
desdeigne, from desdeignier (see disdain (v.)). Sometimes in early Modern English shortened to
sdain, sdainful. Related: disdainful; disdainfully.


disdain (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desdeignier disdain, scorn, refuse, repudiate, from des- do the opposite
of (see dis-) + deignier treat as worthy (see deign). Related: Disdained; disdaining.


humph

as a grunting sound of disdain, etc., from 1815.


despicable (adj.)

1550s, from Late Latin despicabilis, from Latin despicari despise, disdain, look down on, from de-
down (see de-) + spicare, variant of specere to look (see scope (n.1)).


repudiate (v.)

1540s, to cast off by divorce,     from Latin repudiatus, past participle of repudiare to cast off,
put away, divorce, reject, scorn, disdain, from repudium divorce, rejection, a putting away,
dissolution of marriage, from re- back, away (see re-) + pudium, probably related to pes-/ped- foot
[Barnhart]. If this is so, the original notion may be of kicking something away, but folk etymology
commonly connects it with pudere cause shame to. Of opinions, conduct, etc., to refuse to
acknowledge, attested from 1824. Earliest in English as an adjective meaning divorced, rejected,
condemned (mid-15c.). Related: Repudiated; repudiating.


nose (n.)

Old English nosu, from Proto-Germanic *nusus (cognates: Old Norse n&ouml;s, Old Frisian nose, Dutch
neus, Old High German nasa, German Nase), from PIE *nas- nose (cognates: Sanskrit nasa, Old Persian
naham, Old Church Slavonic nasu, Lithuanian nosis, Latin nasus nose). Used of any prominent or
projecting part from 1530s. (nose cone in the space rocket sense is from 1949). Used to indicate
something obvious from 1590s. Meaning odor, scent is from 1894.  Kiv, It could bee no other then his
owne manne, that had thrust his nose so farre out of ioynte. [Barnabe Riche His Farewell to Military
Profession, 1581] Pay through the nose (1670s) seems to suggest bleed. Many extended meanings are
from the horse-racing sense of length of a horse's nose, as a measure of distance between two
finishers (1908). To turn up one's nose show disdain is from 1818 (earlier hold up one's nose,
1570s); similar notion in look down one's nose (1921). To say something is under (one's) nose in
plain view is from 1540s.


