dismissive (adj.)

1640s, characterized by or appropriate to dismissal; from dismiss + -ive. Meaning contemptuous,
rejecting is recorded by 1922. Related: Dismissively.


dismissal (n.)

1806, formed on model of refusal, etc., from dismiss + -al (2); replacing earlier dismission
(1540s).


dismiss (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dimissus, past participle of dimittere send away, send different ways; break
up, discharge; renounce, abandon, from dis- apart, away (see dis-) + mittere send, let go (see
mission). Prefix altered by analogy with many dis- verbs. Dismit, in the same sense, is attested
from late 14c. Related: Dismissed; dismissing.


fire (v.)

c.1200, furen, figurative, arouse, excite; literal sense of set fire to is from late 14c., from fire
(n.). The Old English verb fyrian to supply with fire apparently did not survive into Middle
English.    The sense of sack, dismiss is first recorded 1885 in American English (earlier throw
(someone) out of some place, 1871), probably from a play on the two meanings of discharge: to
dismiss from a position, and to fire a gun, fire in the second sense being from set fire to
gunpowder, attested from 1520s. Of bricks, pottery, etc., from 1660s. Related: Fired; firing. Fired
up angry is from 1824. Firing squad is attested from 1904.


pooh-pooh (v.)

to dismiss lightly and contemptuously, 1827, a slang reduplication of dismissive expression pooh.
Among the many 19th century theories of the origin of language was the Pooh-pooh theory (1860),
which held that language grew from natural expressions of surprise, joy, pain, or grief.


sack (v.3)

dismiss from work, 1841, from sack (n.2). Related: Sacked; sacking.


shelve (v.1)

1590s, to overhang, also to provide with shelves, probably a back-formation from shelves, plural of
shelf (n.1). Meaning put on a shelf first recorded 1650s; metaphoric sense of lay aside, dismiss is
from 1812. Related: Shelved; shelving.


terminate (v.)

early 15c., bring to an end, from Latin terminatus, past participle of terminare to limit, set
bounds, end (see terminus). Intransitive sense of to come to an end is recorded from 1640s; meaning
dismiss from a job is recorded from 1973; that of to assassinate is from 1975. Related: Terminated;
terminating.


shrug (v.)

c.1400, schurgyng, of uncertain origin. Perhaps connected to Danish skrugge to stoop, crouch.
Related: Shrugged; shrugging. To shrug (something) off dismiss is recorded from 1909.


layoff (n.)

also lay-off, lay off; 1889, rest, respite; from lay (v.) + off. Via seasonal labor with periodic
down time, it came to have a sense of temporary release from employment, and by 1960s was being used
somewhat euphemistically for permanent releases of masses of workers by employers. The verbal phrase
lay off is attested from 1868 as dismiss (an employee); meaning stop disturbing is from 1908.


dis (v.)

also diss, slang, by 1980, shortening of disrespect or dismiss, originally in U.S. Black English,
popularized by hip hop. Related: Dissed; dissing. Earlier it was short for disconnected in the
telephone sense and used figuratively in slang to mean weak in the head (1925).


brush (v.1)

late 15c., to clean or rub (clothing) with a brush, also (mid-15c.) to beat with a brush, from brush
(n.1). Related: Brushed; brushing. To brush off someone or something, rebuff, dismiss, is from 1941.


cashier (v.)

dismiss, 1590s, from Middle Dutch casseren, kaseeren to cast off, discharge, from French casser to
discharge, annul, from Late Latin cassare annul, from Latin cassus void, empty (see caste (n.)).
Related: Cashiered; cashiering.


relegate (v.)

1590s to banish, send into exile, from Latin relegatus, past participle of relegare remove, dismiss,
banish, send away, schedule, put aside, from re- back (see re-) + legare send with a commission (see
legate). Meaning place in a position of inferiority is recorded from 1790. Related: Relegated;
relegating; relegable.


salmon (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French samoun, Old French salmun (Modern French saumon), from Latin salmonem
(nominative salmo) a salmon, probably originally leaper, from salire to leap (see salient (adj.)),
though some dismiss this as folk etymology. Another theory traces it to Celtic. Replaced Old English
l&aelig;x, from PIE *lax, the more usual word for the fish (see lox). In reference to a color, from
1786.


demise (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French demise, fem. past participle of d&eacute;mettre dismiss, put away, from
des- away (from Latin dis-) + Middle French mettre put, from Latin mittere let go, send (see
mission). Originally transfer of estate by will, meaning extended 1754 to death because that's when
this happens.


remove (v.)

early 14c., move, take away, dismiss, from Old French removoir move, stir; leave, depart; take away,
from Latin removere move back or away, take away, put out of view, subtract, from re- back, away
(see re-) + movere to move (see move (v.)). Related: Removed; removing.


solve (v.)

late 14c., to disperse, dissipate, loosen, from Latin solvere to loosen, dissolve; untie, release,
detach; depart; unlock; scatter; dismiss; accomplish, fulfill; explain; remove, from PIE *se-lu-,
from reflexive pronoun *s(w)e- (see idiom) + root *leu- to loosen, divide, cut apart (see lose). The
meaning explain, answer is attested from 1530s; for sense evolution, see solution. Mathematical use
is attested from 1737. Related: Solved; solving.


pipe (v.)

Old English pipian to play on a pipe, from Latin pipare to peep, chirp  (see pipe (n.1)). Compare
Dutch pijpen, German pfeifen. Meaning convey through pipes is first recorded 1887. Related: Piped;
piping. Piping hot is in Chaucer, a reference to hissing of food in a frying pan; to pipe up (early
15c.) originally meant to begin to play (on a musical instrument); sense of to speak out is from
1856. Pipe down be quiet is from 1900; earlier in nautical jargon it meant use a boatswain's whistle
to dismiss the men from duty (1833).


release (v.)

c.1300, to withdraw, revoke (a decree, etc.), cancel, lift; remit, from Old French relaissier,
relesser to relinquish, quit, let go, leave behind, abandon, acquit, variant of relacher release,
relax, from Latin relaxare loosen, stretch out (see relax), source also of Spanish relajar, Italian
relassare.    Meaning alleviate, ease is mid-14c., as is sense of free from (duty, etc.); exonerate.
From late 14c. as grant remission, forgive; set free from imprisonment, military service, etc. Also
give up, relinquish, surrender. In law, c.1400, to grant a release of property. Of press reports,
attested from 1904; of motion pictures, from 1912; of music recordings, from 1962. As a euphemism
for to dismiss, fire from a job it is attested in American English since 1904. Related: Released;
releasing.


air (n.1)

c.1300, invisible gases that make up the atmosphere, from Old French air atmosphere, breeze, weather
(12c.), from Latin aerem (nominative aer) air, lower atmosphere, sky, from Greek aer (genitive
aeros) air (related to aenai to blow, breathe), of unknown origin, possibly from a base *awer- and
thus related to aeirein to raise and arteria windpipe, artery (see aorta) on notion of lifting, that
which rises. In Homer mostly thick air, mist; later air as one of the four elements.    Words for
air in Indo-European languages tend to be associated with wind, brightness, sky. In English, air
replaced native lyft, luft (see loft (n.)). To be in the air in general awareness is from 1875; up
in the air uncertain, doubtful is from 1752. To build castles in the air is from 1590s (in 17c.
English had airmonger one preoccupied with visionary projects). Broadcasting sense (as in on the
air) first recorded 1927. To give (someone) the air dismiss is from 1900. Air pollution is attested
by 1870.


