distinction (n.)

c.1200, one of the parts into which something is divided; mid-14c. as action of distinguishing, from
Old French distinction and directly from Latin distinctionem (nominative distinctio) separation,
distinction, discrimination, noun of action from past participle stem of distinguere (see
distinguish). Meaning distinctive nature or character is late 14c. Meaning excellence or eminence
(what distinguishes from others) is first recorded 1690s.


only (adj.)

Old English &aelig;nlic, anlic only, unique, solitary, literally one-like, from an one (see one) +
-lic -like (see -ly (1)). Use as an adverb and conjunction developed in Middle English. Distinction
of only and alone (now usually in reference to emotional states) is unusual; in many languages the
same word serves for both. German also has a distinction in allein/einzig. Phrase only-begotten
(mid-15c.) is biblical, translating Latin unigenitus, Greek monogenes. The Old English form was
ancenned.


cordon (n.)

mid-15c., cord or ribbon worn as an ornament, from Middle French cordon ribbon, diminutive of Old
French corde cord (see cord). Sense of a line of people or things guarding something is 1758.
Original sense preserved in cordon bleu (1727) the highest distinction, literally blue ribbon, for
the sky-blue ribbon worn by the Knights-grand-cross of the Holy Ghost (highest order of chivalry);
extended figuratively to other persons of distinction, especially, jocularly, to a first-rate cook.
Cordon sanitaire (1857), from French, a guarded line between infected and uninfected districts.


English (n.1)

people of England; the speech of England, Old English Englisc (contrasted to Denisc, Frencisce,
etc.), from Engle (plural) the Angles, the name of one of the Germanic groups that overran the
island 5c., supposedly so-called because Angul, the land they inhabited on the Jutland coast, was
shaped like a fish hook (see angle (n.)).    The term was used from earliest times without
distinction for all the Germanic invaders -- Angles, Saxon, Jutes (Bede's gens Anglorum) -- and
applied to their group of related languages by Alfred the Great. After 1066, of the population of
England (as distinguished from Normans and French), a distinction which lasted only about a
generation.    In pronunciation, En- has become In-, but the older spelling has remained. Meaning
English language or literature as a subject at school is from 1889. As an adjective, of or belonging
to England, from late 13c. Old English is from early 13c.


distinguished (adj.)

c.1600, separate, past participle adjective from distinguish. Sense of famous, celebrated, recorded
from 1714; meaning having an air of distinction is from 1748.


prominence (n.)

1590s, projection, from obsolete French prominence (16c.), from Latin prominentia a jutting out (see
prominent). Meaning distinction, conspicuousness is attested by 1827. As a type of solar phenomenon,
from 1862.


contradistinction (n.)

1640s, from contra- + distinction.


sett (n.)

see set (n.1).    The extra t is an arbitrary addition in various technical senses, from a lawn-
tennis to a granite set. Each class of persons has doubtless added it to distinguish the special
sense that means most to it from all others ; but so many are the special senses that the
distinction is now no more distinctive than an Esq. after a man's name, &amp; all would do well to
discard it. [Fowler]


ice-skate (v.)

1690s, from ice (n.) + skate (n.2). The verb usually was simply skate until the advent of roller-
skating mid-18c. made distinction necessary.


distingue (adj.)

having an air of distinction, 1813 (in Byron), from French distingu&eacute;, literally
distinguished, past participle of distinguer (see distinguish).    The girls I knew had sad and
sullen gray faces   With distingu&eacute; traces   That used to be there -- You could see where
they'd been washed away   By too many through the day   Twelve o'clock tales.  [Lush Life, Billy
Strayhorn, age 17]


acronym (n.)

word formed from the first letters of a series of words, 1943, American English coinage from acro- +
-onym name (abstracted from homonym; see name (n.)). But for cabalistic esoterica and acrostic
poetry, the practice was practically <b>non-existent before 20c.</b> For distinction of usage, see
initialism.


Fabian

socialist, from Fabian Society, founded in Britain 1884, named for Quintus Fabius Maximus (surnamed
Cunctator the Delayer), the cautious tactician who opposed Hannibal in the Second Punic War. The
Fabians sought to draw a distinction between their slow-going tactics and those of anarchists and
communists. The Latin gens name is possibly from faba a bean.


coquet (n.)

amorous, flirtatious person, 1690s, originally of both sexes (as it was in French), from French
coquet (17c.), diminutive of coq cock (see cock (n.1)). A figurative reference to its strut or its
lust. The distinction of fem. coquette began c.1700, and use in reference to males has faded out
since.


nominal (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to nouns, from Latin nominalis pertaining to a name or names, from nomen
(genitive nominis) name, cognate with Old English nama (see name (n.)). Meaning of the nature of
names (in distinction to things) is from 1610s. Meaning being so in name only first recorded 1620s.


partition (n.)

early 15c., division into shares, distinction, from Old French particion (12c.), from Latin
partitionem (nominative partitio) a sharing, division, partition, distribution; method of dividing,
from past participle stem of partire to part (see part (v.)). Sense of that which separates first
recorded late 15c.


brigand (n.)

c.1400, lightly armed foot soldier, from Old French brigand (14c.), from Italian brigante trooper,
skirmisher, foot soldier, from brigare (see brigade). Sense of one who lives by pillaging is from
early 15c., reflecting the lack of distinction between professional mercenary armies and armed,
organized criminals.


nauseous (adj.)

c.1600, inclined to nausea, easily made queasy (obsolete), from nausea + -ous. Sense of causing
nausea or squeamishness is attested from 1610s. For distinction from nauseated see nauseate.
Related: Nauseously; nauseousness.


classism (n.)

distinction of class, 1842, from class (n.) + -ism.


notable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French notable well-known, notable, remarkable (13c.) and directly from Latin
notabilis noteworthy, extraordinary, from notare to note (see note (v.)). The noun meaning a person
of distinction is first recorded 1815. Related: Notably; notableness.


personage (n.)

mid-15c., body of a person (with regard to appearance), from Old French personage size, stature,
also a dignitary (13c.), from Medieval Latin personaticum (11c.), from persona (see person). Meaning
a person of high rank or distinction is attested from c.1500 in English; as a longer way to say
person, the word was in use from 1550s (but often slyly ironical, with suggestion that the subject
is overly self-important).


difference (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French difference (12c.) difference, distinction; argument, dispute, from Latin
differentia diversity, difference, from differentem (nominative differens), present participle of
differre to set apart (see differ). Sense of a quarrel first attested late 14c. Colloquial phrase
what's the diff? first recorded 1896.


born

Old English boren, alternative past participle of beran (see bear (v.)). Distinction between born
and borne is 17c.


chyme (n.)

early 15c., bodily fluid; c.1600 in specific sense of mass of semi-liquid food in the stomach, from
Latin chymus, from Greek khymos, nearly identical to khylos (see chyle) and meaning essentially the
same thing. Differentiated by Galen, who used khymos for juice in its natural or raw state, and
khylos for juice produced by digestion, hence the modern distinction.


agathist (n.)

1816, from Greek agathos good (see Agatha) + -ist.    Doctor Kearney, who formerly, with so much
reputation, delivered lectures in this place on the history of Rome, observed to me once, that he
was not an optimist, but an agathist; that he believed that every thing tended to good, but did not
think himself competent to determine what was absolutely the best. The distinction is important, and
seems to be fatal to the system of Optimism. [George Miller, Lectures on the Philosophy of Modern
History, Dublin, 1816]


tapster (n.)

person employed to tap liquors, Old English t&aelig;ppestre female tavern-keeper, hostess at an inn,
woman employed to tap liquors, fem of t&aelig;ppere, from t&aelig;ppa tap (see tap (n.1)) + fem.
ending -ster. The distinction of gender in the word was lost by 15c., and by 1630s re-feminized
tapstress is attested.


discriminate (v.)

1620s, from Latin discriminatus, past participle of discriminare to divide, separate, from discrimen
(genitive discriminis) interval, distinction, difference, derived noun from discernere (see
discern). The adverse (usually racial) sense is first recorded 1866, American English. Positive
sense remains in discriminating. Related: Discriminated. Also used 17c. and after as an adjective
meaning distinct.


evidence (n.)

c.1300, appearance from which inferences may be drawn, from Old French evidence, from Late Latin
evidentia proof, originally distinction, clearness, from Latin evidentem (see evident).    Meaning
ground for belief is from late 14c., that of obviousness is 1660s. Legal senses are from c.1500,
when it began to oust witness. As a verb, from c.1600. Related: Evidenced; evidencing.


as (adv.)

c.1200, worn-down form of Old English alswa quite so (see also), fully established by c.1400.
Equivalent to so; any distinction in use is purely idiomatic. Related to German als as, than, from
Middle High German also. Phrase as well just as much is recorded from late 15c.; the phrase also can
imply as well as not, as well as anything else. Interjection of incredulity as if! (i.e. as if that
really could happen) is attested from 1995, an exact duplication of Latin quasi.


forwards (adv.)

Middle English, from forward + adverbial genitive -s. British English until mid-20c. preserved the
distinction between forward and forwards, the latter expressing a definite direction viewed in
contrast with other directions. In American English, however, forward prevails in all senses since
Webster (1832) damned forwards as a corruption.


promiscuous (adj.)

c.1600, people or things, mingled confusedly, grouped together without order, consisting of a
disorderly mix; indiscriminate, from Latin promiscuus mixed, indiscriminate, in common, without
distinction, from pro- forward (see pro-) + miscere to mix (see mix (v.)). Meaning indiscriminate in
sexual relations recorded by 1857, from promiscuity. The Latin adjective was used with conubia (such
as between patricians and plebeians). Related: Promiscuously.


genteel (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French gentil stylish, fashionable, elegant; nice, graceful, pleasing, from Old
French gentil high-born, noble (11c.); a reborrowing of the French word that had early come into
English as gentle (q.v.), with French pronunciation and stress preserved to emphasize the
distinction. See also jaunty; gentile. OED 2nd ed. reports genteel is now used, except by the
ignorant, only in mockery (a development it dates from the 1840s).


pre-eminence (n.)

also pre-eminence, c.1200, from Late Latin praeeminentia distinction, superiority, from Latin
praeeminentem (nominative praeeminens), present participle of praeeminere transcend, excel,
literally project forward, rise above, from prae before (see pre-) + eminere stand out, project (see
eminent).


laurel (n.)

c.1300, lorrer, from Old French laurier (12c.), from Latin laurus laurel tree, probably related to
Greek daphne laurel (for change of d- to l- see lachrymose), probably from a pre-IE Mediterranean
language. The change of second -r- to -l- after mid-14c. is by dissimilation. An emblem of victory
or of distinction, hence the phrase to rest (originally repose) on one's laurels, first attested
1831.


Scilly

isles off Cornwall, of unknown origin. Pliny has Silumnus, Silimnis. Perhaps connected with the
Roman god Sulis (compare Aquae sulis Bath). The -y might be Old Norse ey island The -c- added
16c.-17c. [A]bout the only certain thing that can be said is that the c of the modern spelling is
not original but was added for distinction from ModE silly as this word developed in meaning from
'happy, blissful' to 'foolish.' [Victor Watts, Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names, 2004].


wizard (n.)

early 15c., philosopher, sage, from Middle English wys wise (see wise (adj.)) + -ard. Compare
Lithuanian zynyste magic, zynys sorcerer, zyne witch, all from zinoti to know. The ground sense is
perhaps to know the future. The meaning one with magical power, one proficient in the occult
sciences did not emerge distinctly until c.1550, the distinction between philosophy and magic being
blurred in the Middle Ages. As a slang word meaning excellent it is recorded from 1922.


pasha

Turkish honorary title formerly given to officers of high rank, 1640s, from Turkish pasha, earlier
basha, from bash head, chief (no clear distinction between -b- and -p- in Turkish), from Old Persian
pati- master, from PIE *poti- (see potent) + root of shah. Earlier in English as bashaw (1530s).


intestine (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French intestin (14c.) or directly from Latin intestinum a gut, in plural,
intestines, bowels, noun use of neuter of adjective intestinus â&euro;&oelig;inward,
internalâ&euro;? (see intestines). Distinction of large and small intestines in Middle English was
made under the terms gross and subtle. The word also was used as an adjective in English from 1530s
with a sense of â&euro;&oelig;internal, domestic, civil.â&euro;?


imply (v.)

late 14c., to enfold, enwrap, entangle (the classical Latin sense), from Old French emplier, from
Latin implicare involve (see implication). Meaning to involve something unstated as a logical
consequence first recorded c.1400; that of to hint at from 1580s. Related: Implied; implying. The
distinction between imply and infer is in What do you imply by that remark? But, What am I to infer
from that remark?


laureate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin laureatus crowned with laurels, from laurea laurel crown (emblematic of
victory or distinction in poetry), from fem. of laureus of laurel, from laurus laurel. Laureat poete
first found in Canterbury Tales (form with the noun before the adjective, in imitation of Latin word
order, is from c.1400 in English); the first official one was probably Ben Jonson (1638), though the
first recorded one was Dryden (1668). Extended to Nobel prize winners, 1947. As a noun, 1520s, from
the adjective. Related: Laureateship.


broad (adj.)

Old English brad broad, flat, open, extended, from Proto-Germanic *braithaz (cognates: Old Frisian
bred, Old Norse brei&eth;r, Dutch breed, German breit, Gothic brou&thorn;s), of unknown origin. Not
found outside Germanic languages. No clear distinction in sense from wide. Related: Broadly. Broad-
brim as a style of hat (1680s, broad-brimmed) in 18c.-19c. suggested Quaker male from their
characteristic attire.


speciality (n.)

early 15c., a special quality or thing; mid-15c. as quality of being special, from Old French
specialte, especialte nature, special quality, particularity; special point, distinction, and
directly from Latin specialitatem (nominative specialitas) peculiarity, particularity from specialis
individual, particular (see special (adj.)). French form sp&eacute;cialit&eacute; (especially in
reference to restaurant dishes) is recorded in English from 1839.


repent (v.)

c.1300, to feel such regret for sins or crimes as produces amendment of life, from Old French
repentir (11c.), from re-, here probably an intensive prefix (see re-), + Vulgar Latin *penitire to
regret, from Latin poenitire make sorry, from poena (see penal). The distinction between regret
(q.v.) and repent is made in many modern languages, but the differentiation is not present in older
periods. Related: Repented; repenting.


jetsam (n.)

1560s, jottsome act of throwing goods overboard to lighten a ship, alteration and contraction of
Middle English jetteson, from Anglo-French getteson, Old French getaison a throwing (see jettison).
Intermediate forms were jetson, jetsome; the form perhaps was deformed by influence of flotsam. From
1590s as goods thrown overboard; figurative use by 1861. For distinction of meaning, see flotsam.


initialism (n.)

word formed from the first letters of other words or a phrase, 1957, from initial (n.) + -ism. The
distinction from acronym is not universally agreed-upon; in general, words such as NATO, where the
letters form a word, are regarded as acronyms, those such as FBI, where the letters sound as
letters, are initialisms. The use of acronym in entries in this dictionary that are technically
initialisms is a deliberate error, because many people only know to search for all such words under
acronym.


discretion (n.)

c.1300, dyscrecyun, moral discernment, from Old French discrecion or directly from Late Latin
discretionem (nominative discretio) discernment, power to make distinctions, in classical Latin
separation, distinction, noun of state from past participle stem of discernere to separate,
distinguish (see discern). Phrase at (one's) discretion attested from 1570s, from sense of power to
decide or judge (late 14c.); the age of discretion (late 14c.) in English law was 14.


worship (n.)

Old English wor&eth;scip, wur&eth;scip (Anglian), weor&eth;scipe (West Saxon) condition of being
worthy, dignity, glory, distinction, honor, renown, from weor&eth; worthy (see worth) + -scipe (see
-ship). Sense of reverence paid to a supernatural or divine being is first recorded c.1300. The
original sense is preserved in the title worshipful honorable (c.1300).


dye (v.)

Old English deagian to dye, from the source of dye (n.). Spelling distinction between dye and die
was not firm till 19c. Johnson in his Dictionary, spelled them both die, while Addison, his near
contemporary, spelled both dye [Barnhart]. Related: dyed. For dyed in the wool (or grain) see wool
(n.).


higher

comparative of high (adj.), Old English. Higher education is attested by 1839.    The French
distinguish l'instruction secondaire, which includes what we term a liberal education, from
l'instruction sup&eacute;rieure, which denotes professional education; but I do not think the
corresponding English phrases are used with this distinction. [William Whewell, Of a Liberal
Education in General, 1850]   Higher-up (n.) one in a superior post is from 1905, American English.


grille (n.)

ornamental grating, 1660s, from French grille (fem.) grating, from Old French greille gridiron, from
Latin craticula gridiron (see grill). The distinction in French between grille and grill ... appears
to date from about the 16th c. [OED].


skill (n.)

late 12c., power of discernment, from Old Norse skil distinction, ability to make out, discernment,
adjustment, related to skilja (v.) to separate; discern, understand, from Proto-Germanic *skaljo-
divide, separate (cognates: Swedish sk&#228;l reason, Danish skjel a separation, boundary, limit,
Middle Low German schillen to differ, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch schele separation,
discrimination; see shell (n.)). Sense of ability, cleverness first recorded early 13c.


