distinctive (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French distinctif and directly from Medieval Latin distinctivus, from Latin
distinct-, past participle of distinguere (see distinguish). Meaning markedly individual is from
1580s. Related: Distinctively; distinctiveness.


rig (n.)

distinctive arrangement of sails, masts, etc. on a ship, 1822, from rig (v.). Extended to costume,
clothing outfit (1843); horse-drawn vehicle (1831), which led to sense of truck, bus, etc. (1851);
and apparatus for well-sinking (1875).


Pokemon (n.)

video and trading card franchise, released in Japan in 1996, said to be from a contracted
Romanization of Japanese Poketto Monsuta pocket monsters, both elements ultimately from European
languages. Apparently it is a collective word with no distinctive plural form.


uniform (n.)

distinctive clothes worn by one group, 1748, from French uniforme, from the adjective (see uniform
(adj.)).


mannerism (n.)

excessive use of distinctive methods in art or literature, 1803, from manner + -ism. Meaning an
instance of mannerism, habitual peculiarity is from 1819. Related: Mannerisms.


sett (n.)

see set (n.1).    The extra t is an arbitrary addition in various technical senses, from a lawn-
tennis to a granite set. Each class of persons has doubtless added it to distinguish the special
sense that means most to it from all others ; but so many are the special senses that the
distinction is now no more distinctive than an Esq. after a man's name, &amp; all would do well to
discard it. [Fowler]


specialty (n.)

c.1300, particular affection; special attachment or favor, partiality, from Old French especialte,
more vernacular form of specialite (see speciality). Compare personalty/personality; realty/reality.
From early 15c. as unusual, or extraordinary thing; specialized branch of learning; peculiar
quality, distinctive characteristic.


characteristic

adjective and noun both first attested 1660s, from character + -istic on model of Greek
kharakteristikos. Earlier in the adjectival sense was characteristical (1620s). Related:
Characteristically (1640s). Characteristics distinctive traits also attested from 1660s.


lineament (n.)

early 15c., distinctive feature of the body, outline, from Middle French lineament, from Latin
lineamentum contour, outline, literally a line, stroke, mark, from lineare to reduce to a straight
line, from linea (see line (n.)). Figurative sense of a characteristic is attested from 1630s.


watermark (n.)

also water-mark, 1708, distinctive mark on paper, from water (n.1) + mark (n.1). Similar formation
in German wassermarke. Not produced by water, but probably so called because it looks like a wet
spot. The verb is recorded from 1866. Related: Watermarked.


slogan (n.)

1670s, earlier slogorne (1510s), battle cry, from Gaelic sluagh-ghairm battle cry used by Scottish
Highland or Irish clans, from sluagh army, host, slew, from Celtic and Balto-Slavic *slough- help,
service. Second element is gairm a cry (see garrulous). Metaphoric sense of distinctive word or
phrase used by a political or other group is first attested 1704.


distinction (n.)

c.1200, one of the parts into which something is divided; mid-14c. as action of distinguishing, from
Old French distinction and directly from Latin distinctionem (nominative distinctio) separation,
distinction, discrimination, noun of action from past participle stem of distinguere (see
distinguish). Meaning distinctive nature or character is late 14c. Meaning excellence or eminence
(what distinguishes from others) is first recorded 1690s.


gaggle (n.)

late 15c., gagyll, with reference to both geese and women. Barnhart says possibly from Old Norse
gagl small goose, gosling, bird; OED calls it one of the many artificial terms invented in the 15th
c. as distinctive collectives referring to particular animals or classes of persons. Possibly of
imitative origin (compare Dutch gagelen to chatter; Middle English gaggle to cackle, used of geese,
attested from late 14c.).


phoneme (n.)

distinctive sound or group of sounds, 1889, from French phon&#232;me, from Greek phonema a sound
made, voice, from phonein to sound or speak, from phone sound, voice, from PIE root *bha- (2) speak
(see fame (n.)).


singular (adj.)

mid-14c., alone, apart; being a unit; special, unsurpassed, from Old French singuler personal
particular; distinctive; singular in number (12c., Modern French singulier) or directly from Latin
singularis single, solitary, one by one, one at a time; peculiar, remarkable, from singulus (see
single (adj.)). Meaning remarkably good, unusual, rare, separated from others (by excellence),
uncommon is from c.1400 in English; this also was a common meaning of Latin singularis.


feature (n.)

early 14c., make, form, fashion, from Anglo-French feture, from Old French faiture deed, action;
fashion, shape, form; countenance, from Latin factura a formation, a working, from past participle
stem of facere make, do, perform (see factitious). Sense of facial characteristic is mid-14c.; that
of any distinctive part first recorded 1690s. Entertainment sense is from 1801; in journalism by
1855. Meaning a feature film is from 1913.


sans-culotte (n.)

also sansculotte, lower-class republican of the French Revolution, 1790, from French, literally
without breeches; see sans + cullotes. Usually explained as referring to the class whose distinctive
costume was pantalons (long trousers) as opposed to the upper classes, which wore culottes (knee-
breeches), but this is not certain. Related: Sans-culottes; sans-culotterie.


livery (n.)

c.1300, household allowance of any kind (food, provisions, clothing) to retainers or servants, from
Anglo-French livere (late 13c.), Old French livr&eacute;e, allowance, ration, pay, originally
(clothes) delivered by a master to his retinue, from fem. past participle of livrer to dispense,
deliver, hand over, from Latin liberare (see liberate). The sense later was reduced to servants'
rations and provender for horses (mid-15c.). The former led to the meaning distinctive clothing
given to servants (early 14c.); the latter now is obsolete except in livery stable (1705). Related:
Liveried.


couch (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French couche (12c.) a bed, lair, from coucher to lie down, from Latin collocare
(see couch (v.)). Traditionally, a couch has the head end only raised, and only half a back; a sofa
has both ends raised and a full back; a settee is like a sofa but may be without arms; an ottoman
has neither back nor arms, nor has a divan, the distinctive feature of which is that it goes against
a wall. Couch potato first recorded 1979.


Appalachia

cultural and geographical region of inland Eastern U.S., 1880s, from the Appalachian Mountains,
which are its core. Earlier Appalachia was proposed as a better name for United States of America by
Washington Irving in 1839 (though he preferred Alleghenia) and this may have been the coinage of the
word.    It is a thousand pities that the puny witticisms of a few professional objectors should
have the power to prevent, even for a year, the adoption of a name for our country. At present we
have, clearly, none. There should be no hesitation about Appalachia. In the first place, it is
distinctive. America is not, and can never be made so. We may legislate as much as we please, and
assume for our country whatever name we think right Ã¢&euro;&rdquo; but to use it will be no name,
to any purpose for which a name is needed, unless we can take it away from the regions which employ
it at present. South America is America, and will insist upon remaining so. [Edgar Allan Poe, 1846]


personality (n.)

late 14c., quality or fact of being a person, from Medieval Latin personalitatem (nominative
personalitas), from Late Latin personalis (see personal). Sense of a distinctive character is first
recorded 1795, from French personnalit&eacute;.Personality is the supreme realization of the innate
idiosyncrasy of a living being. It is an act of courage flung in the face of life, the absolute
affirmation of all that constitutes the individual, the most successful adaptation to the universal
conditions of existence, coupled with the greatest possible freedom of self-determination. [C.G.
Jung, 1875-1961]Meaning person whose character stands out from that of others is from 1889.
Personality cult is attested from 1956.


tartan (n.)

kind of woolen fabric, mid-15c., perhaps from Middle French tiretaine strong, coarse fabric (mid-
13c.), from Old French tiret kind of cloth, from tire silk cloth, from Medieval Latin tyrius cloth
from Tyre (see Tyrian).    If this is the source, spelling likely influenced in Middle English by
tartaryn rich silk cloth (mid-14c.), from Old French tartarin Tartar cloth, from Tartare Tartar, the
Central Asian people (see Tartar). Specific meaning woolen or worsted cloth woven with crossing
stripes of colors is from c.1500, formerly a part of the distinctive dress of Scottish Highlanders,
each clan having its particular pattern.


sect (n.)

mid-14c., distinctive system of beliefs or observances; party or school within a religion, from Old
French secte, sete sect, religious community, or directly from Late Latin secta religious group,
sect in philosophy or religion, from Latin secta manner, mode, following, school of thought,
literally a way, road, beaten path, from fem. of sectus, variant past participle of sequi follow,
from PIE *sekw- (1) to follow (see sequel). Confused in this sense with Latin secta, fem. past
participle of secare to cut (see section (n.)). Meaning separately organized religious body is
recorded from 1570s.


proper (adj.)

c.1300, adapted to some purpose, fit, apt; commendable, excellent (sometimes ironic), from Old
French propre own, particular; exact, neat, fitting, appropriate (11c.), from Latin proprius one's
own, particular to itself, from pro privo for the individual, in particular, from ablative of privus
one's own, individual (see private (adj.)) + pro for (see pro-). Related: Properly.    From early
14c. as belonging or pertaining to oneself; individual; intrinsic; from mid-14c. as pertaining to a
person or thing in particular, special, specific; distinctive, characteristic; also what is by the
rules, correct, appropriate, acceptable. From early 15c. as separate, distinct; itself. Meaning
socially appropriate, decent, respectable is first recorded 1704. Proper name name belonging to or
relating to the person or thing in question, is from late 13c., a sense also preserved in
astronomical proper motion (c.1300). Proper noun is from c.1500.


photosynthesis (n.)

1898, loan-translation of German Photosynthese, from photo- light (see photo-) + synthese synthesis
(see synthesis). Another early word for it was photosyntax.    [T]he body of the work has been
rendered into English with fidelity, the only change of moment being the substitution of the word
photosynthesis for that of assimilation. This change follows from a suggestion by Dr. Barnes, made a
year ago before the American Association at Madison, who clearly pointed out the need of a
distinctive term for the synthetical process in plants, brought about by protoplasm in the presence
of chlorophyll and light. He proposed the word photosyntax, which met with favor. In the discussion
Professor MacMillan suggested the word photosynthesis, as etymologically more satisfactory and
accurate, a claim which Dr. Barnes showed could not be maintained. The suggestion of Dr. Barnes not
only received tacit acceptance by the botanists of the association, but was practically approved by
the Madison Congress in the course of a discussion upon this point. [The Botanical Gazette, vol.
XIX, 1894]


sacred (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from obsolete verb sacren to make holy (c.1200), from Old
French sacrer consecrate, anoint, dedicate (12c.) or directly from Latin sacrare to make sacred,
consecrate; hold sacred; immortalize; set apart, dedicate, from sacer (genitive sacri) sacred,
dedicated, holy, accursed, from Old Latin saceres, from PIE root *sak- to sanctify. Buck groups it
with Oscan sakrim, Umbrian sacra and calls it a distinctive Italic group, without any clear outside
connections. Related: Sacredness.    Nasalized form is sancire make sacred, confirm, ratify, ordain.
Sacred cow object of Hindu veneration, is from 1891; figurative sense of one who must not be
criticized is first recorded 1910, reflecting Western views of Hinduism. Sacred Heart the heart of
Jesus as an object of religious veneration is from 1765.


private (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining or belonging to oneself, not shared, individual; not open to the public; of a
religious rule, not shared by Christians generally, distinctive; from Latin privatus set apart,
belonging to oneself (not to the state), peculiar, personal, used in contrast to publicus, communis;
past participle of privare to separate, deprive, from privus one's own, individual, from PIE *prei-
wo-, from PIE *prai-, *prei-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).    Old English in this
sense had syndrig. Private grew popular 17c. as an alternative to common (adj.), which had overtones
of condescention. Of persons, not holding public office, recorded from early 15c. In private privily
is from 1580s. Related: Privately. Private school is from 1650s. Private parts the pudenda is from
1785. Private enterprise first recorded 1797; private property by 1680s; private sector is from
1948. Private eye private detective is recorded from 1938, American English.


spur (n.)

Old English spura, spora metal implement worn on the heel to goad a horse (related to spurnan to
kick), from Proto-Germanic *spuron (cognates: Old Norse spori, Middle Dutch spore, Dutch spoor, Old
High German sporo, German Sporn spur), from PIE *spere- ankle (see spurn). Related to Dutch spoor,
Old English spor track, footprint, trace.    Generalized sense of anything that urges on, stimulus,
is from late 14c. As a sharp projection on the leg of a cock, from 1540s. Meaning a ridge projecting
off a mountain mass is recorded from 1650s. Of railway lines from 1837. Widely extended senses ...
are characteristic of a horsey race [Weekley]. Expression on the spur of the moment (1801) preserves
archaic phrase on the spur in great haste (1520s). To win one's spurs is to gain knighthood by some
valorous act, gilded spurs being the distinctive mark of a knight.


jealous (adj.)

c.1200, gelus, later jelus (early 14c.), possessive and suspicious, originally in the context of
sexuality or romance; in general use late 14c.; also in a more positive sense, fond, amorous,
ardent, from c.1300, from Old French jalos keen, zealous; avaricious; jealous (12c., Modern French
jaloux), from Late Latin zelosus, from zelus zeal, from Greek zelos, sometimes jealousy, but more
often in a good sense (emulation, rivalry, zeal). See zeal. In biblical language (early 13c.)
tolerating no unfaithfulness.    Most of the words for 'envy' ... had from the outset a hostile
force, based on 'look at' (with malice), 'not love,' etc. Conversely, most of those which became
distinctive terms for 'jealousy' were originally used also in a good sense, 'zeal, emulation.'
[Buck, pp.1138-9]    Among the ways to express this in other tongues are Swedish svartsjuka,
literally black-sick, from phrase bara svarta strumpor wear black stockings, also be jealous. Danish
skinsyg jealous, literally skin-sick, is from skind hide, skin said to be explained by Swedish
dialectal expression fa skinn receive a refusal in courtship.


slang (n.)

1756, special vocabulary of tramps or thieves, later jargon of a particular profession (1801), of
uncertain origin, the usual guess being that it is from a Scandinavian source, such as Norwegian
slengenamn nickname, slengja kjeften to abuse with words, literally to sling the jaw, related to Old
Norse slyngva to sling. But OED, while admitting some approximation in sense, discounts this
connection based on date and early associations. Liberman also denies it, as well as any connection
with French langue (or language or lingo). Rather, he derives it elaborately from an old slang word
meaning narrow piece of land, itself of obscure origin. Century Dictionary says there is no evidence
to establish a Gipsy origin. Sense of very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty
first recorded 1818.    [S]lang is a conscious offence against some conventional standard of
propriety. A mere vulgarism is not slang, except when it is purposely adopted, and acquires an
artificial currency, among some class of persons to whom it is not native. The other distinctive
feature of slang is that it is neither part of the ordinary language, nor an attempt to supply its
deficiencies. The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the
characters of a cipher are substitutes for the letters of the alphabet, or as a nickname is a
substitute for a personal name. [Henry Bradley, from Slang, in Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed.]
A word that ought to have survived is slangwhanger (1807, American English) noisy or abusive talker
or writer.


wife (n.)

Old English wif (neuter) woman, female, lady, also, but not especially, wife, from Proto-Germanic
*wiban (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian wif, Old Norse vif, Danish and Swedish viv, Middle Dutch,
Dutch wijf, Old High German wib, German Weib), of uncertain origin, not found in Gothic.
Apparently felt as inadequate in its basic sense, leading to the more distinctive formation wifman
(source of woman). Dutch wijf now means, in slang, girl, babe, having softened somewhat from earlier
sense of bitch. German cognate Weib also tends to be slighting or derogatory and has been displaced
by Frau.    The more usual Indo-European word is represented in English by queen/quean. Words for
woman also double for wife in some languages. Some proposed PIE roots for wife include *weip- to
twist, turn, wrap, perhaps with sense of veiled person (see vibrate); and more recently  *ghwibh-, a
proposed root meaning shame, also pudenda, but the only examples of it would be the Germanic words
and Tocharian (a lost IE language of central Asia) kwipe, kip female pudenda.    The modern sense of
female spouse began as a specialized sense in Old English; the general sense of woman is preserved
in midwife, old wives' tale, etc. Middle English sense of mistress of a household survives in
housewife; and the later restricted sense of tradeswoman of humble rank in fishwife. By 1883 as
passive partner in a homosexual couple. Wife-swapping is attested from 1954.


blue (1)

c.1300, bleu, blwe, etc., from Old French blo pale, pallid, wan, light-colored; blond; discolored;
blue, blue-gray, from Frankish *blao or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old English blaw, Old Saxon and Old High German blao, Danish blaa, Swedish
bl&#229;, Old Frisian blau, Middle Dutch bla, Dutch blauw, German blau blue), from PIE *bhle-was
light-colored, blue, blond, yellow, from PIE root bhel- (1) to shine, flash (see bleach (v.)).
The same PIE root yielded Latin flavus yellow, Old Spanish blavo yellowish-gray, Greek phalos white,
Welsh blawr gray, Old Norse bla livid (the meaning in black and blue), showing the usual slippery
definition of color words in Indo-European The present spelling is since 16c., from French influence
(Modern French bleu).    The exact color to which the Gmc. term applies varies in the older
dialects; M.H.G. bla is also 'yellow,' whereas the Scandinavian words may refer esp. to a deep,
swarthy black, e.g. O.N. blama&eth;r, N.Icel. blama&eth;ur 'Negro' [Buck]   <hr />   Few words enter
more largely into the composition of slang, and colloquialisms bordering on slang, than does the
word BLUE. Expressive alike of the utmost contempt, as of all that men hold dearest and love best,
its manifold combinations, in ever varying shades of meaning, greet the philologist at every turn.
[John S. Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890, p.252]    The color of constancy
since Chaucer at least, but apparently for no deeper reason than the rhyme in true blue (c.1500).
From early times blue was the distinctive color of the dress of servants, which may be the reason
police uniforms are blue, a tradition Farmer dates to Elizabethan times. For blue ribbon see cordon
bleu under cordon. Blue whale attested from 1851, so called for its color. The flower name blue bell
is recorded by 1570s. Blue streak, of something resembling a bolt of lightning (for quickness,
intensity, etc.) is from 1830, U.S. Western slang.    Many Indo-European languages seem to have had
a word to describe the color of the sea, encompasing blue and green and gray; such as Irish glass
(see Chloe); Old English h&aelig;wen blue, gray, related to har (see hoar); Serbo-Croatian sinji
gray-blue, sea-green; Lithuanian &#353;yvas, Russian sivyj gray.


