divulge (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin divulgare publish, make common, from dis- apart (see dis-) + vulgare make
common property, from vulgus common people (see vulgar). Related: Divulged; divulging.


undivulged (adj.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + past participle of divulge (v.).


enunciate (v.)

1620s, declare, express, from Latin enuntiatus, past participle of enuntiare speak out, say,
express, assert; divulge, disclose, reveal, betray, from ex- out (see ex-) + nuntiare to announce
(see nuncio). Or perhaps a back-formation from enunciation. Meaning to articulate, pronounce is from
1759. Related: Enunciated; enunciating.


discover (v.)

c.1300, divulge, reveal, disclose, from Old French descovrir uncover, unroof, unveil, reveal,
betray, from Late Latin discooperire, from Latin dis- opposite of (see dis-) + cooperire to cover up
(see cover). At first with a sense of betrayal or malicious exposure (discoverer originally meant
informant); the meaning to obtain knowledge or sight of what was not known is from 1550s. Related:
Discovered; discovering.


vent (v.)

late 14c., emit from a confined space, probably a shortening of aventer expose oneself to the air
(c.1300), from Old French eventer let out, expose to air, from Vulgar Latin *exventare, from Latin
ex- out + ventus wind (see wind (n.1)). Sense of express freely first recorded 1590s. Sense of
divulge, publish (1590s) is behind phrase vent one's spleen (see spleen). Related: Vented; venting.


publish (v.)

mid-14c., make publicly known, reveal, divulge, announce; alteration of publicen (early 14c.) by
influence of banish, finish, etc.; from extended stem of Old French publier make public, spread
abroad, communicate, from Latin publicare make public, from publicus public (see public). Meaning
issue (a book, etc.) to the public is from late 14c., also to disgrace, put to shame; denounce
publicly. Related: Published; publishing. In Middle English the verb also meant to people, populate;
to multiply, breed (late 14c.), for example ben published of be descended from.


let (v.)

Old English l&aelig;tan to allow to remain; let go, leave, depart from; leave undone; to allow;
bequeath, also to rent (class VII strong verb; past tense let, past participle l&aelig;ten), from
Proto-Germanic *letan (cognates: Old Saxon latan, Old Frisian leta, Dutch laten, German lassen,
Gothic letan to leave, let), from PIE *le- (2) to let go, slacken (cognates: Latin lassus faint,
weary, Lithuanian leisti to let, to let loose; see lenient). If that derivation is correct, the
primary sense would be let go through weariness, neglect.    Of blood, from late Old English. To let
(something) slip originally (1520s) was a reference to hounds on a leash; figurative use from 1540s.
To let (someone) off allow to go unpunished is from 1814. To let on reveal, divulge is from 1725; to
let up cease, stop is from 1787. Let alone not to mention is from 1812.


