docile (adj.)

late 15c., easily taught, from Italian or French docile, from Latin docilis easily taught, from
docere teach (see doctor). Sense of obedient, submissive first recorded 1774.


debonair (adj.)

c.1200, mild, gentle, kind courteous, from Old French debonaire, from de bon' aire of good race,
originally used of hawks, hence, thoroughbred (opposite of French demalaire). Used in Middle English
to mean docile, courteous, it became obsolete and was revived with an altered sense of pleasant,
affable (1680s).


docility (n.)

1550s, from French docilit&eacute; (15c.), from Latin docilitatem (nominative docilitas), from
docilis (see docile).


tame (adj.)

early Middle English tame in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior
(c.1200); of animals domesticated, reclaimed from wildness, also, of persons, meek, gentle-natured,
compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities (mid-13c.), from oblique forms of Old English
tom, tam domesticated, docile, from Proto-Germanic *tamaz (cognates: Old Norse tamr, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch tam, Old High German zam, German zahm tame, Gothic tamjan
to tame), from PIE *deme- to constrain, to force, to break (horses) (cognates: Sanskrit damayati
tames; Persian dam a tame animal; Greek daman to tame, subdue, dmetos tame; Latin domare to tame,
subdue; Old Irish damnaim I tie up, fasten, I tame, subdue).    A possible ulterior connection is
with PIE *dem- house, household (see domestic (adj.)). Meaning spiritless, weak, dull, uninspiring,
insipid is recorded from c.1600. Related: Tamely; tameness.


soft (adj.)

Old English softe, earlier sefte, gentle, mild-natured; easeful, comfortable, calm, undisturbed;
luxurious, from West Germanic *samfti, from Proto-Germanic *samftijaz level, even, smooth, gentle,
soft (cognates: Old Saxon safti, Old High German semfti, German sanft; and from a variant form with
-ch- for -f-, Middle Dutch sachte, Dutch zacht, German sacht), from root *som- fitting, agreeable.
From c.1200 of material things, not stiff, not coarse, fine; yielding to weight. From late 14c. of
wind, rain, etc. Of sounds, quiet, not loud, from early 13c. Of words, mild, restrained; courteous
mid-14c. From late 14c. as indulgent, also physically feeble; easily overcome, lacking manly
courage. From 1755 of water (relatively free from mineral salts), from 1789 of coal. Meaning
foolish, simple, silly is attested from 1620s; earlier easily moved or swayed; soft-hearted,
sympathetic; docile (early 13c.). In reference to drinks, non-alcoholic from 1880. As an adverb, Old
English softe gently; late 13c. as quietly. As an interjection from 1540s.   Soft landing is from
1958 and the U.S. space program. Adjective soft-core (in reference to pornography) is from 1966 (see
hardcore). Soft rock as a music style is attested from 1969. Soft sell is from 1955. Soft-shoe as a
dancing style is attested from 1927. Soft-boiled is from 1757 of eggs; of persons, ideas, etc., 1930
(compare half-baked). Soft-focus (adj.) of camera shots is from 1917. The softer sex women
collectively is from 1640s.


