dose (v.)

1650s, from dose (n.). Related: Dosed; dosing.


dose (n.)

early 15c., the giving of medicine (in a specified amount or at a stated time), from Middle French
dose (15c.) or directly from Late Latin dosis, from Greek dosis a portion prescribed, literally a
giving, used by Galen and other Greek physicians to mean an amount of medicine, from stem of didonai
to give (see date (n.1)). Slang meaning venereal disease is from 1914.


overdose (n.)

1700, an excessive dose, from over- + dose (n.).


overdose (v.)

1727, to administer medicine in too large a dose (transitive); from 1968 as to take an overdose of
drugs; see over- + dose (v.). Related: Overdosed; overdosing.


bulldoze (v.)

by 1880, from an earlier noun, bulldose a severe beating or lashing (1876), literally a dose fit for
a bull, a slang word referring to the intimidation beating of black voters (by either blacks or
whites) in the chaotic 1876 U.S. presidential election. See bull (n.1) + dose (n.). Related:
Bulldozed; bulldozing.


hit (n.)

late 15c., a rebuke; 1590s as a blow, from hit (v.). Meaning successful play, song, person, etc.,
1811, is from the verbal sense of to hit the mark, succeed (c.1400). Underworld slang meaning a
killing is from 1970. Meaning dose of narcotic is 1951, from phrases such as hit the bottle.


fix (n.)

position from which it is difficult to move, 1809, American English, from fix (v.). Meaning dose of
narcotic is from 1934, shortened from fix-up (1867, originally in reference to liquor). Meaning
reliable indication of the position of a ship, plane, etc. (by reference to fixed positions) is from
1902.


pill (v.)

1736, to dose on pills, from pill (n.). From 1882 as to form into pills. Related: Pilled; pilling.


dosage (n.)

1867; see dose + -age, perhaps on model of French dosage (1812).


ampul (n.)

sealed container holding a dose of medicine, 1907, from French ampul (1886), from Latin ampulla (see
ampoule). A modern borrowing of the word represented by Middle English ampoule.


rad

x-ray dose unit, 1918, shortened form of radiation (q.v.). As shortened form of radical (n.), it is
attested in political slang from 1820. Teen slang sense of extraordinary, wonderful is from late
1970s (see radical (adj.)).


physic (n.)

c.1300, fysike, art of healing, medical science, also natural science (c.1300), from Old French
fisike natural science, art of healing (12c.) and directly from Latin physica (fem. singular of
physicus) study of nature, from Greek physike (episteme) (knowledge) of nature, from fem. of
physikos pertaining to nature, from physis nature, from phyein to bring forth, produce, make to grow
(related to phyton growth, plant, phyle tribe, race, phyma a growth, tumor) from PIE root *bheue- to
be exist, grow (see be). Spelling with ph- attested from late 14c. (see ph). As a noun, medicine
that acts as a laxative, 1610s. The verb meaning to dose with medicine is attested from late 14c.


tabloid (n.)

1884, Tabloid, small tablet of medicine, trademark name (by Burroughs, Wellcome and Co.) for
compressed or concentrated chemicals and drugs, a hybrid formed from tablet + Greek-derived suffix
-oid. By 1898, it was being used figuratively to mean a compressed form or dose of anything, hence
tabloid journalism (1901), and newspapers that typified it (1917), so called for having short,
condensed news articles and/or for being small in size. Associated originally with Alfred C.
Harmsworth, editor and proprietor of the London Daily Mail.    Mr. Harmsworth entered a printing
office twenty years ago as office-boy, and today owns thirty periodicals besides The Mail. Upon a
friendly challenge from Mr. Pulitzer of The New York World, the English journalist issued the first
number of The World for the new century in the ideal form. The size of the page was reduced to four
columns and the general make-up was similar in appearance to that of one of the weekly magazines.
Current news was presented in condensed and tabulated form, of which the editor says: The world
enters today upon the twentieth or time-saving century. I claim that by my system of condensed or
tabloid journalism hundreds of working hours can be saved each year. [The Twentieth Century
Newspaper, in The Social Gospel, February 1901]


poison (n.)

c.1200, a deadly potion or substance, also figuratively, from Old French poison, puison (12c.,
Modern French poison) a drink, especially a medical drink, later a (magic) potion, poisonous drink
(14c.), from Latin potionem (nominative potio) a drinking, a drink, also poisonous drink (Cicero),
from potare to drink (see potion).    For form evolution from Latin to French, compare raison from
rationem. The Latin word also is the source of Old Spanish pozon, Italian pozione, Spanish pocion.
The more usual Indo-European word for this is represented in English by virus. The Old English word
was ator (see attercop) or lybb. Slang sense of alcoholic drink first attested 1805, American
English.    For sense evolution, compare Old French enerber, enherber to kill with poisonous plants.
In many Germanic languages poison is named by a word equivalent to English gift (such as Old High
German gift, German Gift, Danish and Swedish gift; Dutch gift, vergift). This shift might have been
partly euphemistic, partly by influence of Greek dosis a portion prescribed, literally a giving,
used by Galen and other Greek physicians to mean an amount of medicine (see dose (n.)).
Figuratively from late 15c.; of persons by 1910. As an adjective from 1520s; with plant names from
18c. Poison ivy first recorded 1784; poison oak is from 1743. Poison gas first recorded 1915.
Poison-pen (letter) popularized 1913 by a notorious criminal case in Pennsylvania, U.S.; the phrase
dates to 1898.


