downcast (adj.)

c.1600, from past participle of obsolete verb downcast (c.1300), from down (adv.) + cast (v.).
Literal at first; figurative sense is 1630s.


slouch (v.)

walk with a slouch, 1754; have a downcast or stooped aspect, 1755; from slouch (n.). Related:
Slouched; slouching (1610s as a past participle adjective; 1660s of persons, 1690s of hats).


abject (adj.)

early 15c., cast off, rejected, from Latin abiectus, past participle of abicere to throw away, cast
off; degrade, humble, lower, from ab- away, off (see ab-) + iacere to throw (past participle iactus;
see jet (v.)). Figurative sense of downcast, brought low first attested 1510s. Related: Abjectly;
abjectness.


confused (adj.)

early 14c., discomfited, routed, defeated (of groups), serving at first as an alternative past
participle of confound, as Latin confusus was the past participle of confundere to pour together,
mix, mingle; to join together; hence, figuratively, to throw into disorder; to trouble, disturb,
upset. The Latin past participle also was used as an adjective, with reference to mental states,
troubled, embarrassed, and this passed into Old French as confus dejected, downcast, undone,
defeated, discomfited in mind or feeling, which passed to Middle English as confus (14c.; for
example Chaucer's I am so confus, that I may not seye), which then was assimilated to the English
past participle pattern by addition of -ed. Of individuals, discomfited in mind, perplexed, from
mid-14c.; of ideas, speech, thought, etc., from 1610s. By mid-16c., the word seems to have been felt
as a pure adj., and it evolved a back-formed verb in confuse. Few English etymologies are more
confused.


simple (adj.)

c.1200, free from duplicity, upright, guileless; blameless, innocently harmless, also ignorant,
uneducated; unsophisticated; simple-minded, foolish, from Old French simple (12c.) plain, decent;
friendly, sweet; naive, foolish, stupid, hence wretched, miserable, from Latin simplus, variant of
simplex simple, uncompounded, literally onefold (see simplex). Sense of free from pride, humble,
meek is mid-13c. As consisting of only one substance or ingredient (opposite of composite or
compounded) it dates from late 14c.; as easily done (opposite of complicated) it dates from late
15c.    From mid-14c. as unqualified; mere; sheer; also clear, straightforward; easily understood.
From late 14c. as single, individual; whole. From late 14c. of clothing, etc., modest, plain,
unadorned, and of food, plain, not sumptuous. In medicine, of fractures, etc., lacking
complications, late 14c. As a law term, lacking additional legal stipulations, unlimited, from mid-
14c.    In Middle English with wider senses than recently, such as inadequate, insufficient; weak,
feeble; mere; few; sad, downcast; mournful; of little value; low in price; impoverished, destitute;
of hair, straight, not curly. As noun, an innocent or a guileless person; a humble or modest person
(late 14c.), also an uncompounded substance. From c.1500 as ignorant people.


