droopy (adj.)

dejected, sad, gloomy, early 13c., drupie, perhaps from droop, perhaps from Old Norse drupr drooping
spirits, faintness.


droop (v.)

early 13c., from Old Norse drupa to drop, sink, hang (the head), from Proto-Germanic *drup-, from
PIE *dhreu-, related to Old English dropian to drop (see drip). Related: Drooped; drooping. As a
noun, from 1640s.


fag (v.)

to droop, decline, tire, 1520s, apparently an alteration of flag (v.) in its sense of droop.
Transitive sense of to make (someone or something) fatigued is first attested 1826. Related: Fagged;
fagging.


marcescent (adj.)

withering, 1727, from Latin marcescentem (nominative marcescens), present participle of marcescere
to wither, languish, droop, decay, pine away, inchoative of marcere to wither, droop, be faint, from
PIE root *merk- to decay.


wilt (v.)

1690s, to fade, droop, wither, probably an alteration of welk to wilt, probably from Middle Dutch or
Middle Low German welken to wither, cognate with Old High German irwelhen become soft, from Proto-
Germanic *welk-, from PIE root *welg- wet (see welkin). Transitive sense of cause to fade or droop
is from 1809. Related: Wilted; wilting.


lop (v.2)

droop, hang loosely, 1570s, probably a variant of lob or of lap (v.); compare lopsided (1711),
originally lapsided, first used of ships. Lop-eared attested from 1680s. Related: Lopped; lopping.


flag (v.)

1540s, flap about loosely, perhaps a variant of Middle English flakken, flacken to flap, flutter
(late 14c.), probably from Old Norse flakka to flicker, flutter, perhaps imitative of something
flapping lazily in the wind.    Sense of go limp, droop is first recorded 1610s. Meaning to
designate as someone who will not be served more liquor is from 1980s, probably from use of flags to
signal trains, etc., to halt, which led to the verb in this sense (1856, American English). Related:
Flagged; flagging.


drip (v.)

c.1300, perhaps from Middle Danish drippe, from Proto-Germanic *drup- (cognates: Dutch druipen,
German triefen), from PIE root *dhreu-. Related to droop and drop. Old English had cognate drypan to
let drop, dropian fall in drops, and dreopan to drop. Related: Dripped; dripping.


dreary (adj.)

Old English dreorig sad, sorrowful, originally cruel, bloody, blood-stained, from dreor gore, blood,
from (ge)dreosan (past participle droren) fall, decline, fail, from Proto-Germanic *dreuzas
(cognates: Old Norse dreyrigr gory, bloody, and more remotely, German traurig sad, sorrowful), from
PIE root *dhreu- to fall, flow, drip, droop (see drip (v.)).    The word has lost its original sense
of dripping blood. Sense of dismal, gloomy first recorded 1667 in Paradise Lost, but Old English had
a related verb drysmian become gloomy.


