dull (adj.)

c.1200, stupid; early 13c., blunt, not sharp; rare before mid-14c., apparently from Old English dol
dull-witted, foolish, or an unrecorded parallel word, or from Middle Low German dul slow-witted,
both from Proto-Germanic *dulaz (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon dol foolish, Old High German
tol, German toll mad, wild, Gothic dwals foolish), from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, vapor, smoke (and
related notions of defective perception or wits). Of color from early 15c.; of pain or other
sensations from 1725. Sense of boring first recorded 1580s.    dull. (8) Not exhilarating; not
delightful; as to make dictionaries is dull work. [Johnson]   Dullsville, slang for town where
nothing happens, attested from 1960.


dull (v.)

c.1200, to grow weary, tire; of pointed or edged things from c.1400; of the senses from 1550s; from
dull (adj.). Related: Dulled; dulling.


dullard (n.)

mid-15c. (but early 13c. as a surname), from dull (adj.) + -ard.


dolt (n.)

1540s, perhaps a variant of dold dull, foolish, influenced by dulte, dolte, past participle forms of
Middle English dullen to dull, make or become dazed or stupid (see dull (adj.)). Related: Doltish;
doltishly; doltishness.


slow (adj.)

Old English slaw inactive, sluggish, torpid, lazy, also not clever, from Proto-Germanic
*sl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old Saxon sleu blunt, dull, Middle Dutch slee, Dutch sleeuw sour, tart,
blunt, Old High German sleo blunt, dull, Old Norse sljor, Danish sl&oslash;v, Swedish sl&ouml;
blunt, dull). Meaning taking a long time is attested from early 13c. Meaning dull, tedious is from
1841. As an adverb c.1500. The slows imaginary disease to account for lethargy is from 1843.


mat (adj.)

1640s, lusterless, dull (of a color or surface), from French mat dull, dead surface, from Old French
mat beaten down, withered, afflicted, dejected; dull, which is perhaps from Latin mattus maudlin
with drink, from madere to be wet or sodden, be drunk, from PIE root *mad- to be wet, drip (see mast
(n.2)). Or the French word might represent a transferred use from chess of mater to checkmate,
defeat, from Arabic (see mate (v.2)).


obtuse (adj.)

early 15c., dull, blunted, from Middle French obtus (fem. obtuse), from Latin obtusus blunted, dull,
also used figuratively, past participle of obtundere to beat against, make dull, from ob against
(see ob-) + tundere to beat, from PIE *(s)tud-e- to beat, strike, push, thrust, from root *(s)teu-
to push, stick, knock, beat (cognates: Latin tudes hammer, Sanskrit tudati he thrusts). Sense of
stupid is first found c.1500. Related: Obtusely; obtuseness.


obtund (v.)

c.1400, (transitive) to render dead, make dull, used occasionally in English, especially in medical
jargon; from Latin obtundere to blunt, make dull, weaken, exhaust, literally to beat against (see
obtuse). Related: Obtundation; obtunded.


logy (adj.)

dull and heavy, 1848, American English, perhaps from Dutch log heavy, dull + -y (2); compare Middle
Low German luggich sleepy, sluggish. Or perhaps a variant of loggy.


stupid (adj.)

1540s, mentally slow, lacking ordinary activity of mind, dull, inane, from Middle French stupide
(16c.) and directly from Latin stupidus amazed, confounded; dull, foolish, literally struck
senseless, from stupere be stunned, amazed, confounded, from PIE *stupe- hit, from root *(s)teu- (1)
to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). Related: Stupidly; stupidness.    Native words for
this idea include negative compounds with words for wise (Old English unwis, unsnotor, ungleaw),
also dol (see dull (adj.)), and dysig (see dizzy (adj.)). Stupid retained its association with
stupor and its overtones of stunned by surprise, grief, etc. into mid-18c. The difference between
stupid and the less opprobrious foolish roughly parallels that of German t&ouml;richt vs. dumm but
does not exist in most European languages.


Boeotian (adj.)

1590s, ignorant, dull, from Boeotia, district around Thebes in ancient Greece (said to have been so
called for its cattle pastures; Greek bous = ox), whose inhabitants were characterized as
proverbially dull and countrified by their neighbors, the Athenians. The Boeotians presumably held
reciprocal opinions, but their great writers, Plutarch and Pindar, though patriots, are full of
praise for Athenian deeds and institutions.    Though his aim was to vindicate Boeotia, [Pindar] has
probably done her a disservice, in that he has helped to immortalise the scurrilous proverb
&#914;&#959;&#953;&#969;&#964;&#943;&#945; &#973;&#962;, which he wished to confute. ... If left to
itself, the slander might have passed into oblivion long ago. [W. Rhys Roberts, The Ancient
Boeotians, 1895]


tarnish (v.)

mid-15c. (transitive), from present participle stem of Middle French ternir dull the luster or
brightness of, make dim (15c.), probably from Old French terne (adj.) dull, dark, which according to
Diez is from a Germanic source cognate with Old High German tarnjan to conceal, hide, Old English
dyrnan to hide, darken, from Proto-Germanic *darnjaz (see dern), but there are difficulties of form,
sense, and date. Intransitive sense from 1670s. Figurative sense is from 1690s. Related: Tarnished;
tarnishing.


gun-metal

commonly an alloy of copper and zinc; used attributively of a dull blue-gray color since 1905.


plodding (adj.)

diligent and dull, 1580s, present participle adjective from plod (v.).


Midas

king of Phrygia whose touched turned everything to gold (including his food), 1560s. Some usages
refer to the unrelated story of the ass's ears given him by Apollo for being dull to the charms of
his lyre. The name is of Phrygian origin.


jejune (adj.)

1610s, dull in the mind, flat, insipid, from Latin ieiunus empty, dry, barren, literally fasting,
hungry, of obscure origin.


thump (n.)

1550s, dull, heavy sound, from thump (v.). As a hard blow from 1620s.


crossroads (n.)

1795, in figurative sense of a turning point, a moment of decision; from crossroad. In U.S., used
for a crossroads and little more; small, dull town by 1845.


stodgy (adj.)

1823, thick, semi-solid, from stodge to stuff, satiate (1670s), of unknown origin, perhaps somehow
imitative. Meaning dull, heavy developed by 1874 from use in reference to food (1841).


muzzy (adj.)

confused, dazed, 1720s, perhaps from mossy, or from dialectal mosey (adj.) moldy, hazy; stupefied
with drink, dull, stupid.


drip (n.)

mid-15c., from drip (v.). The slang meaning stupid, feeble, or dull person is first recorded 1932,
perhaps from earlier American English slang sense nonsense (1919).


dead (adj.)

Old English dead dead, also torpid, dull; of water, still, standing, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon dod, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Old Frisian dad, Middle Dutch doot,
Dutch dood, Old High German tot, German tot, Old Norse dau&eth;r, Gothic dau&thorn;s dead), from PIE
*dhou-toz-, from root *dheu- (3) to die (see die (v.)).    Meaning insensible is first attested
early 13c. Of places, inactive, dull, from 1580s. Used from 16c. in adjectival sense of utter,
absolute, quite (as in dead drunk, first attested 1590s; dead heat, 1796). As an adverb, from late
14c. Dead on is 1889, from marksmanship. Dead duck is from 1844. Dead letter is from 1703, used of
laws lacking force as well as uncollected mail. Phrase in the dead of the night first recorded
1540s. Dead soldier emptied liquor bottle is from 1913 in that form; the image is older.  For but
ich haue bote of mi bale I am ded as dorenail (c.1350).


blunt (adj.)

c.1200, dull, obtuse, perhaps from or related to Old Norse blundra (see blunder (v.)). Of tools or
weapons, late 14c. Meaning abrupt of speech or manner is from 1580s.


dastardly (adj.)

1560s, showing despicable cowardice, originally dull, from Middle English dastard + -ly (1).


unreadable (adj.)

1787, of written material, dull, distasteful, from un- (1) not + readable (adj.). Meaning illegible
is from 1830.


prose (n.)

c.1300, story, narration, from Old French prose (13c.), from Latin prosa oratio straightforward or
direct speech (without the ornaments of verse), from prosa, fem. of prosus, earlier prorsus
straightforward, direct, from Old Latin provorsus (moving) straight ahead, from pro- forward (see
pro-) + vorsus turned, past participle of vertere to turn (see verse).    Good prose, to say nothing
of the original thoughts it conveys, may be infinitely varied in modulation. It is only an extension
of metres, an amplification of harmonies, of which even the best and most varied poetry admits but
few. [Walter Savage Landor, Imaginary Conversations]    Meaning prose writing; non-poetry is from
mid-14c. The sense of dull or commonplace expression is from 1680s, out of earlier sense plain
expression (1560s). Those who lament the want of an English agent noun to correspond to poet might
try prosaist (1776), proser (1620s), or Frenchified prosateur (1880), though the first two in their
day also acquired in English the secondary sense dull writer.


blah (n.)

idle, meaningless talk, 1918, probably echoic; the adjective meaning bland, dull is from 1919,
perhaps influenced by French blas&eacute; bored, indifferent. The blahs depression is attested by
1966.


poop (n.2)

excrement, 1744, a children's euphemism, probably of imitative origin. The verb in this sense is
from 1903. The same word in the sense to break wind softly is attested from 1721; earlier to make a
short blast on a horn (late 14c.). Meaning stupid or dull person is from 1915. Pooper-scooper
attested from 1970.


bump (n.)

1590s, protuberance caused by a blow; 1610s as a dull, solid blow; see bump (v.). The dancer's bump
and grind attested from 1940.


buffer (n.)

1835, agent noun from obsolete verb buff make a dull sound when struck (mid-16c.), from Old French
bufe a blow, slap, punch (see buffet (n.2)); hence also something that absorbs a blow.


flatly (adv.)

early 15c., in a literal sense, from flat (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning in a plain manner is from 1560s;
sense of in a dull manner is from 1640s.


pinguid (adj.)

1630s, from Latin pinguis fat (adj.), juicy, figuratively dull, gross, heavy; comfortable, from stem
of pinguere, from PIE *pei- fat, sap, juice (see pine (n.)).


backwater (n.)

late 14c., water behind a dam, from back (adj.) + water (n.1). Hence flat water without a current
near a flowing river, as in a mill race (1820); figurative use of this for any flat, dull place is
from 1899.


jade (v.)

to weary, tire out, make dull, c.1600, from jade (n.2). Related: Jaded; jading.


mat (n.2)

sheet of backing material, 1845, from French mat dull surface or finish (15c.), noun use of Old
French mat (adj.); see mat (adj.).


dampen (v.)

1630s, to dull or deaden (of force, enthusiasm, ardor, etc.), from damp (adj.) + -en (1). Meaning to
moisten is recorded from 1827. Related: Dampened; dampening.


wasteland (n.)

1825 as one word, from waste (adj.) + land (n.). Figurative sense is attested from 1868. Eliot's
poem is from 1922.    April is the cruellest month, breeding     Lilacs out of the dead land, mixing
Memory and desire, stirring        Dull roots with spring rain.


fogey (n.)

also fogy, an old, dull fellow, 1780, Scottish foggie, originally army pensioner or veteran, perhaps
connected to fogram (1775) old-fashioned person; or from fog in obsolete senses of moss or bloated
fat (1580s).


stock (n.1)

Old English stocc stump, post, stake, tree trunk, log, also pillory (usually plural, stocks), from
Proto-Germanic *stukkaz tree trunk (cognates: Old Norse stokkr block of wood, trunk of a tree, Old
Saxon, Old Frisian stok, Middle Dutch stoc tree trunk, stump, Dutch stok stick, cane, Old High
German stoc tree trunk, stick, German Stock stick, cane; also Dutch stuk, German St&uuml;ck piece),
from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Meaning ancestry, family
(late 14c.) is a figurative use of the tree trunk sense (as in family tree). This is also the root
of the meaning heavy part of a tool, and part of a rifle held against the shoulder (1540s). Meaning
person as dull and senseless as a block or log is from c.1300; hence a dull recipient of action or
notice (1540s).    Meaning framework on which a boat was constructed (early 15c.) led to figurative
phrase on stocks planned and commenced (1660s). Taking stock making an inventory is attested from
1736. Stock, lock, and barrel the whole of a thing is recorded from 1817. Stock-still (late 15c.) is
literally as still as a tree trunk.


thud (v.)

Old English &thorn;yddan to strike, stab, thrust, press, of imitative origin. Sense of hit with a
dull sound first recorded 1796. Related: Thudded; thudding. The noun is attested from 1510s as blast
of wind; 1530s as loud sound.


doldrums (n.)

1811, from dulled, past participle of dullen, from Old English dol foolish, dull, ending perhaps
patterned on tantrum.


dastard (n.)

mid-15c., one who is lazy or dull; an English formation on a French model, probably from *dast,
dazed, past participle of dasen to daze (see daze (v.)) + deprecatory suffix -ard. Meaning one who
shirks from danger is late 15c.


stupidity (n.)

1540s, want of intelligence, from Latin stupiditatem (nominative stupiditas) dullness, stupidity,
senselessness, from stupidus confounded, amazed; dull, foolish (see stupid). It also at various
times meant lack of feeling or emotion (1560s); stupor, numbness (c.1600).


bromide (n.)

compound of bromine and another metal or radical, 1836, from bromine, the pungent, poisonous
element, + -ide. Used as a sedative; figurative sense of dull, conventional person or trite saying
popularized by U.S. humorist Frank Gelett Burgess (1866-1951) in his book Are You a Bromide? (1906).
Related: Bromidic.


hebetude (n.)

1620s, from Latin hebetudo, noun of quality from hebes blunt, dull, of unknown origin. Related:
Hebetate (v.); hebetation; hebetudinous.


tedium (n.)

tediousness, 1660s, from Latin taedium weariness, irksomeness, disgust, related to taedet it is
wearisome, it excites loathing, and to taedere to weary, of uncertain origin. Possible cognates are
Old Church Slavonic te&#382;o, Lithuanian tingiu to be dull, be listless.


hard-headed (adj.)

also hardheaded, 1580s, stubborn, from hardhead dull person (1510s), from hard + head (n.). Meaning
practical is attested from 1779.


grub (n.)

larva, early 15c., perhaps from grub (v.) on the notion of digging insect, or from the possibly
unrelated Middle English grub dwarfish fellow (c.1400). Meaning dull drudge is 1650s. The slang
sense of food is first recorded 1650s, said to be from birds eating grubs, but also often linked
with bub drink.


donkey (n.)

1785, originally slang, perhaps a diminutive from dun dull gray-brown, the form perhaps influenced
by monkey. Or possibly from a familiar form of Duncan (compare dobbin). The older English word was
ass (n.1).


mosey (v.)

1829, American English slang, of unknown origin, perhaps related to British dialectal mose about go
around in a dull, stupid way. Or perhaps from Spanish vamos (see vamoose). Related: Moseyed;
moseying.


