dupe (n.)

1680s, from French dupe deceived person, from Middle French duppe (early 15c.), thieves' jargon,
perhaps from phrase de huppe of the hoopoe, an extravagantly crested and reputedly stupid bird.


dupe (v.)

1704, from dupe (n.). Related: Duped; duping.


gull (n.2)

cant term for dupe, sucker, credulous person, 1590s, of uncertain origin. Perhaps from verb meaning
to dupe, cheat (1540s), earlier to swallow (1520s), ultimately from gull throat, gullet (early
15c.); see gullet. Or it is perhaps from (or influenced by) the bird (see gull (n.1)); in either
case with a sense of someone who will swallow anything thrown at him. Another possibility is Middle
English dialectal gull newly hatched bird (late 14c.), which is perhaps from Old Norse golr yellow,
from the hue of its down.


cull (n.)

dupe, saphead, rogues' slang from late 16c., perhaps a shortening of cullion base fellow, originally
testicle (from French couillon, from Old French coillon testicle; worthless fellow, dolt, from Latin
coleus, literally strainer bag; see cojones), though another theory traces it to Romany (Gypsy)
chulai man. Also sometimes cully, though some authorities assert cully was the canting term for dupe
and cull was generic man, fellow, without implication of gullibility. Compare also gullible.


muggins (n.)

fool, simpleton, 1855, apparently from the surname, perhaps influenced by slang mug dupe, fool
(1859; see mug (n.2)).


gullibility (n.)

1793, earlier cullibility (1728), probably from gull (n.2) dupe, sucker + -ability.


mug (v.1)

to beat up, 1818, originally to strike the face (in pugilism), from mug (n.2). The general meaning
attack is first attested 1846, and attack to rob is from 1864. Perhaps influenced by thieves' slang
mug dupe, fool, sucker (1851). Related: Mugged; mugging.


sucker (v.)

to deceive, to make a dupe of, 1939, from sucker (n.) in the related sense. Related: Suckered;
suckering.


suckerpunch (n.)

also sucker-punch, 1926, from sucker in the dupe sense + punch (n.3). Figurative use by 1929. As a
verb by 1942. Related: Sucker-punched.


fail (v.)

early 13c., from Old French falir (11c., Modern French faillir) be lacking, miss, not succeed, from
Vulgar Latin *fallire, from Latin fallere to trip, cause to fall; figuratively to deceive, trick,
dupe, cheat, elude; fail, be lacking or defective. Related: Failed; failing. Replaced Old English
abreo&eth;an.


geek (n.)

sideshow freak, 1916, U.S. carnival and circus slang, perhaps a variant of geck a fool, dupe,
simpleton (1510s), apparently from Low German geck, from an imitative verb found in North Sea
Germanic and Scandinavian meaning to croak, cackle, and also to mock, cheat. The modern form and the
popular use with reference to circus sideshow wild men is from 1946, in William Lindsay Gresham's
novel Nightmare Alley (made into a film in 1947 starring Tyrone Power).    An ordinary geek doesn't
actually eat snakes, just bites off chunks of 'em, chicken heads and rats. [Arthur H. Lewis,
Carnival, 1970]    By c.1983, used in teenager slang in reference to peers who lacked social graces
but were obsessed with new technology and computers (such as the Anthony Michael Hall character in
1984's Sixteen Candles).   <b>geek out</b> vi. To temporarily enter techno-nerd mode while in a non-
hackish context, for example at parties held near computer equipment. [Eric S. Raymond, The New
Hacker's Dictionary, 1996]


