earthy (adj.)

1550s, from earth + -y (2). Figurative sense of coarse, unrefined is from 1590s. Related:
Earthiness.


geode (n.)

rounded stone with a hollow center lined with crystals, 1670s, from French g&eacute;ode, from Latin
geodes, from Greek geodes earthy, earth-like, from ge earth (Homeric gaia; see Gaia) + -oides,
adjective suffix, characterized by. Perhaps so called in reference to the earthy minerals inside.


red-hot (adj.)

late 14c., heated till it glows red (of metal, etc.); of persons, lively, passionate, it is recorded
from c.1600. Red-hot mama is 1926, jazz slang, earthy female singer, also girlfriend, lover.


gut-bucket (adj.)

in reference to jazz, earthy, by 1929, supposedly originally a reference to the buckets which caught
the drippings, or gutterings, from barrels. Which would connect it to gutter (v.).


grotty (n.)

slang shortening of grotesque, it had a brief vogue 1964 as part of the argot popularized by The
Beatles in A Hard Day's Night. It unconsciously echoes Middle English groti muddy, slimy, from Old
English grotig earthy, from grot particle.


racy (adj.)

1650s, having a characteristic taste (of wines, fruits, etc.), from race (n.2) in its older sense of
flavor or in the sense class of wines + -y (2); meaning having a quality of vigor (1660s) led to
that of improper, risqu&eacute;, first recorded 1901, probably reinforced by phrase racy of the soil
earthy (1870). Related: Racily; raciness.


funky (adj.)

1784, old, musty, in reference to cheeses, then repulsive, from funk (n.2) + -y (2). It began to
develop an approving sense in jazz slang c.1900, probably on the notion of earthy, strong, deeply
felt. Funky also was used early 20c. by white writers in reference to body odor allegedly peculiar
to blacks. The word reached wider popularity c.1954 (it was defined in Time magazine, Nov. 8, 1954)
and in the 1960s acquired a broad slang sense of fine, stylish, excellent.


aqueous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin aqua water (see aqua-) on analogy of French aqueux watery (16c., which, however,
is from Late Latin aquosus abounding in water). Or by analogy of Latin terreus earthy, from terra
earth. Aqueous humor is the original use in English.


umber (n.)

brown earthy pigment, 1560s, from Middle French ombre (in terre d'ombre), or Italian ombra (in terra
di ombra), both from Latin umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage) or else from Umbra, fem. of Umber
belonging to Umbria, region in central Italy from which the coloring matter first came (compare
Sienna). Burnt umber, specially prepared and redder in color, is attested from c.1650, distinguished
from raw umber.


terrace (n.)

1510s, gallery, portico, balcony, later flat, raised place for walking (1570s), from Middle French
terrace (Modern French terasse), from Old French terrasse (12c.) platform (built on or supported by
a mound of earth), from Vulgar Latin *terracea, fem. of *terraceus earthen, earthy, from Latin terra
earth, land (see terrain). As a natural formation in geology, attested from 1670s. In street names,
originally in reference to a row of houses along the top of a slope, but lately applied arbitrarily
as a fancy name for an ordinary road. As a verb from 1610s, to form into a terrace. Related:
Terraced.


