eclipse (n.)

late 13c., from Old French eclipse eclipse, darkness (12c.), from Latin eclipsis, from Greek
ekleipsis an abandonment, an eclipse, from ekleipein to forsake a usual place, fail to appear, be
eclipsed, from ek out (see ex-) + leipein to leave (cognate with Latin linquere; see relinquish).


eclipse (v.)

late 14c. (intransitive, a sense now obsolete), from eclipse (n.). Transitive use from late 15c.;
figurative use from 1580s. Related: Eclipsed; eclipsing.


ecliptic (n.)

late 14c., the circle in the sky followed by the Sun, from Medieval Latin ecliptica, from Late Latin
(linea) ecliptica, from Greek ekliptikos of an eclipse (see eclipse (n.)). So called because
eclipses happen only when the Moon is near the line. Related: Ecliptical.


helium (n.)

1868, coined from Greek helios sun (see sol), because the element was detected in the solar spectrum
during the eclipse of Aug. 18, 1868, by English astronomer Sir Joseph N. Lockyer (1836-1920) and
English chemist Sir Edward Frankland (1825-1899). It was not actually obtained until 1895; it was
assumed before that to be an alkali metal, hence the ending in -ium.


totality (n.)

1590s, from total (adj.) + -ity, or from or based on Middle French totalit&#233;, Medieval Latin
totalitas. In the eclipse sense, time of total obscuration, from 1842.


umbra (n.)

1590s, phantom, ghost, a figurative use from Latin umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage). Astronomical
sense of shadow cast by the earth or moon during an eclipse is first recorded 1670s. Meaning an
uninvited guest accompanying an invited one is from 1690s in English, from a secondary sense among
the Romans. Related: Umbral.


penumbra (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin penumbra partial shadow outside the complete shadow of an eclipse, coined
1604 by Kepler from Latin p&aelig;ne almost + umbra shadow (see umbrage). Related: Penumbral.


annular (adj.)

ring-shaped, 1570s, from French annulaire (16c.) or directly from Latin annularis pertaining to a
ring, from annulus, diminutive of anus ring (see anus). An annular eclipse (1727) is one in which
the dark body of the moon is smaller than the disk of the sun, so that at the height of it the sun
appears as a ring of light. Related: Annularity.


murk (n)

c.1300, myrke, from Old Norse myrkr darkness, from Proto-Germanic *merkwjo- (cognates: Old English
mirce murky, black, dark; murkiness, darkness, Danish m&#511;rk darkness, Old Saxon mirki dark);
cognate with Old Church Slavonic mraku, Serbo-Croatian mrak, Russian mrak darkness; Lithuanian
merkti shut the eyes, blink, from PIE *mer- to flicker (see morn). Murk Monday was long the name in
Scotland for the great solar eclipse of March 29, 1652 (April 8, New Style).


