ecology (n.)

1873, branch of science dealing with the relationship of living things to their environments, coined
by German zoologist Ernst Haeckel (1834-1919) as Okologie, from Greek oikos house, dwelling place,
habitation (see villa) + -logia study of (see -logy). In use with reference to anti-pollution
activities from 1960s.


eco-

word-forming element referring to the environment and man's relation to it, abstracted from ecology,
ecological; attested from 1969.


ecological (adj.)

1899, see ecology + -ical. Related: Ecologically.


mesic (adj.)

1926, in ecology sense, from Greek mesos middle (see meso-) + -ic. From 1939 in physics (from
meson).


hydric (adj.)

1796 as a term in chemistry, of or containing hydrogen; 1918 in ecology; see hydro- + -ic.


environment (n.)

c.1600, state of being environed (see environ + -ment); sense of nature, conditions in which a
person or thing lives first recorded 1827 (used by Carlyle to render German Umgebung); specialized
ecology sense first recorded 1956.


ecologist (n.)

1893, see ecology + -ist.


bionomics (n.)

science of organic evolution; ecology, 1888, coined by Scottish biologist Patrick Geddes (1854-1932)
from Greek bio- (see bio-) + nomos managing, from nemein manage (see numismatic).


sustainability (n.)

1907, in reference to a legal objection, from sustainable + -ity. General sense (in economics,
agriculture, ecology) by 1972.    Sustainability is defined as a requirement of our generation to
manage the resource base such that the average quality of life that we ensure ourselves can
potentially be shared by all future generations. ... Development is sustainable if it involves a
non-decreasing average quality of life. [Geir B. Asheim, Sustainability, The World Bank, 1994]


greens (n.)

freshly cut branches used for decoration, 1690s; vegetables, 1725, from green. Greens ecology
political party, first recorded 1978, from German die Gr&uuml;nen (West Germany), an outgrowth of
Gr&uuml;ne Aktion Zukunft Green Campaign for the Future, a mainly anti-nuclear power movement,
and/or gr&uuml;ne Listen green lists (of environmental candidates). Green (adj.) in the sense of
environmental is attested from 1972; Greenpeace, the international conservation and environmental
protection group, is from 1971.


freak (n.)

1560s, sudden turn of mind, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Old English frician to dance (not
recorded in Middle English, but the word may have survived in dialect) [OED, Barnhart], or perhaps
from Middle English frek bold, quickly, from Old English frec greedy, gluttonous (compare German
frech bold, impudent).    Sense of capricious notion (1560s) and unusual thing, fancy (1784)
preceded that of strange or abnormal individual (first in freak of nature, 1847; compare Latin lusus
natur&#230;, which was used in English from 1660s). The sense in health freak, ecology freak, etc.
is attested from 1908 (originally Kodak freak, a camera buff). Freak show attested from 1887.


