economics (n.)

1580s, art of managing a household, perhaps from French &eacute;conomique (see economic); also see
-ics. Meaning science of wealth is from 1792.


economical (adj.)

1570s, pertaining to household management; from economic + -al (1). Meaning pertaining to political
economy is from 1781; that of thrifty is from 1780. Related: Economically.


economic (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to management of a household, perhaps shortened from economical or from French
&eacute;conomique or directly from Latin oeconomicus of domestic economy, from Greek oikonomikos
practiced in the management of a household or family, hence, frugal, thrifty, from oikonomia (see
economy (n.)). Meaning relating to the science of economics is from 1835 and now is the main sense,
economical retaining the older one of characterized by thrift.


stagflation (n.)

1965, apparently coined by U.K. politician Iain Macleod (1913-1970), from stag(nation) +
(in)flation.    Attacking the Government's economic policy last night in the House of Commons, Mr.
Iain Macleod (West Enfield - Con.) the Opposition spokesman on Treasury and economic affairs,
described the present situation in Britain as stagflation -- stagnation and inflation together.
[Glasgow Herald, Nov. 18, 1965]


macroeconomic (adj.)

also macro-economic, 1938, from macro- + economic.


socio-economic (adj.)

also socioeconomic, 1875; see socio- + economic.


offshoring (n.)

in the economic sense, as a form of outsourcing, attested by 1988, from offshore.


globalization (n.)

1961, from globalize, which is attested at least from 1953 in various senses; the main modern one,
with reference to global economic systems, emerged 1959.


diversification (n.)

c.1600, noun of action from Medieval Latin diversificare (see diversify). Economic sense is from
1939.


hyperinflation (n.)

1930 in the economic sense, from hyper- + inflation. Earlier as a medical term in treatment of lung
diseases.


deflation (n.)

1891, release of air, from deflate + -ion. In reference to currency or economic situations, from
1920.


capitalism (n.)

1854, condition of having capital; from capital (n.1) + -ism. Meaning political/economic system
which encourages capitalists is recorded from 1872.


Reaganomics (n.)

by Feb. 1981, in reference to economic police of U.S. President Ronald Reagan, from Reagan +
economics.


downturn (n.)

1926 in the economic sense, from down (adv.) + turn (n.).


consumerism (n.)

1944, protection of the consumer's interest, from consumer + -ism. Also, encouraging consumption as
an economic policy (1960). Related: Consumerist (1965, n.; 1969, adj.).


productivity (n.)

1809, quality of being productive, from productive + -ity. An earlier word for this was
productiveness (1727). Economic sense of rate of output per unit is from 1899.


coexist (v.)

1670s, from co- + exist. Of political/economic systems (especially with reference to communism and
the West) from 1931. Related: Coexisted; coexisting.


rollover (n.)

also roll-over an overturning, 1945, from verbal phrase; see roll (v.) + over (adv.). Economic
verbal sense of reinvest is from 1957.


development (n.)

1756, an unfolding; see develop + -ment. Of property, with the sense bringing out the latent
possibilities, from 1885 (Pickering's glossary of Americanisms, 1816, has betterments The
improvements made on new lands, by cultivation, and the erection of buildings, &amp;c.;). Meaning
state of economic advancement is from 1902. Meaning advancement through progressive stages is 1836.


technophobe (n.)

by 1952, perhaps by 1946, from techno- + -phobe.    If the reader will consult such a book as Recent
Economic Changes, by David A. Wells, published in 1889, he will find passages that, except for the
dates and absolute amounts involved, might have been written by our technophobes (if I may coin a
needed word) of today. [Henry Hazlitt, Economics in One Lesson, 1952 edition]


plutonomic (adj.)

of or pertaining to the science or study of wealth or riches, 1853, from comb. form of Greek ploutos
wealth (see Pluto) + ending from economic. Fell from currency 1870s, revived 1990s. Related:
Plutonomics (1991); plutonomist (1869).


antitrust (adj.)

also anti-trust, 1890, U.S., from anti- + trust (n.) in the economic monopoly sense.


diversify (v.)

late 15c., from Old French diversifier (13c.) to make diverse, from Medieval Latin diversificare,
from Latin diversus (see diverse). Economic sense is from 1939. Related: Diversified; diversifying.


tranche (n.)

c.1500, from French tranche a cutting, from trancher, trencher to cut, Old French trenchier (see
trench). Economic sense is from 1930.


trickle (v.)

late 14c., intransitive, of uncertain origin, possibly a shortened variant of stricklen to trickle,
a frequentative form of striken to flow, move (see strike (v.)). Transitive sense from c.1600.
Related: Trickled; trickling. Trickle-down as an adjectival phrase in an economic sense first
recorded 1944; the image had been in use at least since Teddy Roosevelt.


Third World (n.)

1963, from French tiers monde, formulated 1952 by French economic historian Alfred Sauvy (1898-1990)
on model of the third estate (French tiers &eacute;tat) of Revolutionary France; his first world
(The West) and second world (the Soviet bloc) never caught on.


consumer (n.)

early 15c., one who squanders or wastes, agent noun from consume. In economic sense, one who uses up
goods or articles (opposite of producer) from 1745. Consumer goods is attested from 1890. In U.S.,
consumer price index calculated since 1919, tracking changes in the prices paid by urban consumers
for a representative basket of goods and services [Bureau of Labor Statistics]; abbreviation CPI is
attested by 1971.


slump (v.)

1670s, fall or sink into a muddy place, probably from a Scandinavian source such as Norwegian and
Danish slumpe fall upon, Swedish slumpa; perhaps ultimately of imitative origin. Related: Slumped;
slumping.    The word slump, or slumped, has too coarse a sound to be used by a lady. [Eliza Leslie,
Miss Leslie's Behaviour Book, Philadelphia, 1839]    Economic sense from 1888.


Douglas

family name (late 12c.), later masc. personal name, from Gaelic Dubh glas the dark water, name of a
place in Lanarkshire. As a given name, in the top 40 for boys born in U.S. from 1942 to 1971.
Douglas fir named for David Douglas (1798-1834), Scottish botanist who first recorded it in Pacific
Northwest, 1825. Douglas scheme, Douglas plan, Douglassite, etc. refer to social credit economic
model put forth by British engineer Maj. Clifford Hugh Douglas (1879-1952).


supply (n.)

early 15c., assistance, relief, act of supplying, from supply (v.). Meaning that which is provided,
quantity or amount of something provided is attested from c.1600. Meaning person who temporarily
takes the place of another (especially a minister or preacher) is from 1580s. In the political
economy sense (corollary of demand (n.)) it dates from 1776; supply-side (adj.) in reference to
economic policy is attested from 1976; as a noun by 1922. Supplies necessary provisions held for
distribution and use is from c.1650.


depress (v.)

early 14c., put down by force, from Old French depresser, from Late Latin depressare, frequentative
of Latin deprimere press down, from de- down (see de-) + premere to press (see press (v.1)). Meaning
push down physically is from early 15c.; that of deject, make gloomy is from 1620s; economic sense
of lower in value is from 1878. Related: Depressed; depressing.


divest (v.)

1560s, devest (modern spelling is c.1600), from Middle French devester strip of possessions, from
Old French desvestir, from des- away (see dis-) + vestir to clothe (see vest (v.)).    The
figurative sense of strip of possessions is earliest in English; reflexive sense of to strip oneself
of is from c.1600. Economic sense (implied in divestment) is from 1955. Related: Divested;
divesting.


spiv (n.)

petty crook who will turn his hand to anything so long as it does not involve honest work, 1934,
British slang, probably dating back to late 19c. and connected with spiff (see spiffy) in one of its
various senses. Being a flashy dresser was a spiv characteristic.    The spiv reached his apotheosis
during World War II and the succeeding years, when the disrupted economic conditions allowed ample
scope for unofficial trading (a pair of nylons here, a few packets of cigarettes there) and other
petty crime. He became a stock figure in the English social comedy, represented on screen by such
stereotypes as 'Flash Harry' (played by George Cole) in the St. Trinian's films and Pte. Walker in
Dad's Army. [Ayto, 20th Century Words]


depression (n.)

late 14c. as a term in astronomy, from Old French depression (14c.) or directly from Latin
depressionem (nominative depressio), noun of action from past participle stem of deprimere to press
down, depress (see depress).    Attested from 1650s in the literal sense; meaning dejection,
depression of spirits is from early 15c. (as a clinical term in psychology, from 1905);
meteorological sense is from 1881 (in reference to barometric pressure); meaning a lowering or
reduction in economic activity was in use by 1826; given a specific application (with capital D-) by
1934 to the one that began worldwide in 1929. For melancholy, depression an Old English word was
grevoushede.


recession (n.)

1640s, act of receding, a going back, from French r&#233;cession a going backward, a withdrawing,
and directly from Latin  recessionem (nominative recessio) a going back, noun of action from past
participle stem of recedere (see recede).    Sense of temporary decline in economic activity, 1929,
noun of action from recess (q.v.): The material prosperity of the United States is too firmly based,
in our opinion, for a revival in industrial activity -- even if  we have to face an immediate
recession of some magnitude -- to be long delayed. [Economist, Nov. 2, 1929]Ayto notes, There was
more than a hint of euphemism in the coining of this term.


index (n.)

late 14c., the forefinger, from Latin index (genitive indicis) forefinger, pointer, sign, list,
literally anything which points out, from indicare point out (see indication). Meaning list of a
book's contents is first attested 1570s, from Latin phrases such as Index Nominum Index of Names,
index expurgatorius specification of passages to be deleted from works otherwise permitted.
Scientific sense (refractive index, etc.) is from 1829; economic sense (cost-of-living index, etc.)
is from 1870, from the scientific usage, from sense an indicator. The Church sense of forbidden
books is from index librorum prohibitorum, first published 1564 by authority of Pius IV.


protection (n.)

mid-14c., shelter, defense; keeping, guardianship; late 14c. as that which protects, from Old French
proteccion protection, shield (12c.) and directly from Late Latin protectionem (nominative
protectio) a covering over, noun of action from past participle stem of protegere protect, cover in
front, from pro- in front + tegere to cover (see stegosaurus).    A common Old English word for
protect was beorgan. International economic sense is from 1789. In gangster sense, freedom from
molestation in exchange for money, it is attested from 1860. Ecological sense of attempted
preservation by laws is from 1880 (originally of wild birds in Britain). Also in medieval England,
the protection or maintenance of a lord or patron; sponsorship. To put (someone) out of protection
meant to deprive him or her of the security of the protection of the kingdom's laws.


oe

found in Greek borrowings into Latin, representing Greek -oi-. Words with -oe- that came early into
English from Old French or Medieval Latin usually already had been levelled to -e- (economic, penal,
cemetery), but later borrowings directly from Latin or Greek tended to retain it at first (oestrus,
diarrhoea, amoeba) as did proper names (Oedipus, Phoebe, Phoenix) and purely technical terms.
British English tends to be more conservative with it than American, which has done away with it in
all but a few instances.    It also occurred in some native Latin words (foedus treaty, league,
foetere to stink, hence occasionally in English foetid, foederal, which was the form in the original
publications of the Federalist papers). In these it represents an ancient -oi- in Old Latin (for
example Old Latin oino, Classical Latin unus), which apparently passed through an -oe- form before
being leveled out but was preserved into Classical Latin in certain words, especially those
belonging to the realms of law (such as foedus) and religion, which, along with the vocabulary of
sailors, are the most conservative branches of any language in any time, through a need for
precision, immediate comprehension, demonstration of learning, or superstition. But in foetus it was
an unetymological spelling in Latin that was picked up in English and formed the predominant
spelling of fetus into the early 20c.


