elaboration (n.)

1570s, in a physiological sense relating to tissue development, from Late Latin elaborationem
(nominative elaboratio), noun of action from past participle stem of elaborare work out, produce by
labor, from ex- out (see ex-) + laborare to labor (see labor (v.)).


Wobbly (n.)

1914, member of Industrial Workers of the World (I.W.W.). Probably some sort of elaboration of the W
aspect of the acronym.


conversate (v.)

by 1994, apparently a back-formation from conversation or an elaboration of converse. According to
some, from U.S. black English.


icky (adj.)

1935, American English, probably from icky-boo (c.1920) sickly, nauseated, probably baby talk
elaboration of sick. Originally a swing lover's term for more sentimental jazz music; in general use
from 1938.


elaborate (adj.)

1590s, produced by labor, from Latin elaboratus, past participle of elaborare to exert oneself (see
elaboration). Meaning very detailed is from 1620s.


piccalilli (n.)

pickle of chopped vegetables, 1769, piccalillo, perhaps a fanciful elaboration of pickle. Spelling
with an -i attested from 1845.


rapscallion (n.)

1690s, alteration of rascallion (1640s), a fanciful elaboration of rascal (q.v.). It had a parallel
in now-extinct rampallion (1590s), from Middle English ramp (n.2) ill-behaved woman.


elaborate (v.)

c.1600, to build up from simple elements, from Latin elaboratus, past participle of elaborare (see
elaboration). Meaning to work out in detail is attested from 1610s. Related: Elaborated;
elaborating.


Potemkin

in reference to Grigory Aleksandrovich Potemkin (1739-1791), favorite of Catherine II of Russia,
especially in reference to the sham villages supposedly erected under his orders for the
empress√¢&euro;&trade; tour of Crimea (1787) to create an impression of prosperity and progress. The
silent film Battleship Potemkin dates from 1925, depicting (with elaboration) events of 1905 and the
mutiny of a Russian battleship named for the Tsarist minister.


hambone (n.)

1855, bone of a ham, from ham (n.1) + bone (n.). Meaning inferior actor or performer is from 1893,
an elaboration of ham (n.2).


primo

1740, in music terms, from Italian primo first, chief, from Latin primus (see prime (adj.)). As
slang for excellent, first-class, perhaps an elaboration of prime. Of drugs, by 1990s, street slang.


lucubration (n.)

1590s, literary work showing signs of too-careful elaboration, from Latin lucubrationem (nominative
lucubratio) nocturnal study, night work, noun of action from past participle stem of lucubrare,
literally to work by artificial light, from stem of lucere to shine (see light (n.)).


gallivant (v.)

1809, of uncertain origin, perhaps a playful elaboration of gallant in an obsolete verbal sense of
play the gallant, flirt, gad about. Related: Gallivanted; gallivanting.    Young Lobski said to his
ugly wife,  I'm off till to-morrow to fish, my life;  Says Mrs. Lobski, I'm sure you a'nt,  But you
brute you are going to gallivant.    What Mrs. Lobski said was right, Gay Mr. Lobski was out all
night.  He ne'er went to fish, 'tis known very well  But where he went I shall not tell.  [Songs
from the Exile, in Literary Panorama, London, 1809]


splendiferous (adj.)

considered a playful elaboration since its re-birth in 1843, but in 15c. it was good English, from
Medieval Latin splendorifer, from splendor (see splendor) + ferre to bear (see infer). Compare 15c.
splendidious, also splendacious (1843). Bartlett (1859) offers this, allegedly from An itinerant
gospeller ... holding forth to a Kentuckian audience on the kingdom of heaven:    Heaven, my beloved
hearers, said he, is a glorious, a beautiful, a splendiferous, an angeliferous place. Eye hath not
seen, ear hath not heard, it has not entered into the imagination of any Cracker in these here
diggings what carryings on the just made perfect have up thar.


wheel (n.)

Old English hweol, hweogol wheel, from Proto-Germanic *hwewlaz- (cognates: Old Norse hvel, Old
Swedish hiughl, Old Frisian hwel, Middle Dutch weel), from PIE *kw(e)-kwl-o- wheel, circle,
suffixed, reduplicated form of root *kwel- (1) (see cycle (n.)).    The root wegh-, to convey,
especially by wheeled vehicle, is found in virtually every branch of Indo-European, including now
Anatolian. The root, as well as other widely represented roots such as aks- and nobh-, attests to
the presence of the wheel -- and vehicles using it -- at the time Proto-Indo-European was spoken.
[Watkins, p. 96]    Figurative sense is early 14c. Wheel of fortune attested from early 15c. Slang
wheels a car is recorded from 1959. Wheeler-dealer is from 1954, a rhyming elaboration of dealer.


