elasticity (n.)

1660s; see elastic + -ity.


elastic (adj.)

1650s, coined in French (1650s) as a scientific term to describe gases, from Modern Latin elasticus,
from Greek elastos ductile, flexible, related to elaunein to strike, beat out, of uncertain origin.
Applied to solids from 1670s. Figurative use by 1859. The noun, cord or string woven with rubber, is
1847, American English.


Lycra

elastic polyurethane fiber, 1955, proprietary name (registered by E.I. DuPont de Nemours and
Company, Wilmington, Delaware, U.S.) of an elastic polyurethane fiber.


stockinet (n.)

elastic, machine-made fabric used for undergarments, 1824, from stocking + diminutive ending.


spring (n.3)

act of springing or leaping, late 14c., from spring (v.). The elastic wire coil that returns to its
shape when stretched is so called from early 15c., originally in clocks and watches. As a device in
carriages, coaches, etc., it is attested from 1660s.


inelastic (adj.)

1748, from in- (1) not, opposite of + elastic. Figurative use attested by 1867.


spongy (adj.)

soft, elastic, 1530s, from sponge (n.) + -y (2). Of hard material (especially bone) open, porous,
1590s. Related: Sponginess.


springy (adj.)

elastic, 1650s, from spring (v.) + -y (2). Related: Springiness.


shirr (v.)

to gather (cloth) on parallel threads, 1860 (implied in shirring), back-formation from shirred
(1847), from shirr (n.) elastic webbing, of unknown origin.


bungee (n.)

1930, elastic rope; used in late 19c. British schoolboy slang for rubber eraser; probably from
notions of bouncy and spongy; first record of bungee jumping is from 1979.


elasmosaurus (n.)

giant sea reptile from the Mezozoic, 1879, from Modern Latin (coined 1868 by E.D. Cope), from Greek
elasmos metal plate (from elan to strike; see elastic) + -saurus.


temper (v.)

late Old English temprian to moderate, bring to a proper or suitable state, to modify some excessive
quality, to restrain within due limits, from Latin temperare observe proper measure, be moderate,
restrain oneself, also transitive, mix correctly, mix in due proportion; regulate, rule, govern,
manage, usually described as from tempus time, season (see temporal), with a sense of proper time or
season. Meaning to make (steel) hard and elastic is from late 14c. Sense of to tune the pitch of a
musical instrument is recorded from c.1300. Related: Tempered; tempering.


girdle (n.)

Old English gyrdel belt, sash, cord about the waist, common Germanic. (cognates: Old Norse
gyr&eth;ill, Swedish g&ouml;rdel, Old Frisian gerdel, Dutch gordel, Old High German gurtil, German
G&uuml;rtel belt), related to Old English gyrdan to gird (see gird). Modern euphemistic sense of
elastic corset first recorded 1925. The verb meaning encircle with a girdle is attested from 1580s.
Meaning to cut off a belt of bark around a trunk to kill a tree is from 1660s. Related: Girdled;
girdling.


rod (n.)

Old English rodd a rod, pole, which is probably cognate with Old Norse rudda club, from Proto-
Germanic *rudd- stick, club, from PIE *reudh- to clear land.    As a long, tapering elastic pole for
fishing, from mid-15c. Figurative sense of offshoot (mid-15c.) led to Biblical meaning scion, tribe.
As an instrument of punishment, attested from mid-12c.; also used figuratively for any sort of
correction or punishment, but the basic notion is of beating someone with a stick.    As a unit of
measure (5&#189; yards or 16&#189; feet, also called perch or pole) first attested mid-15c., from
the stick used to measure it off. As a measure of area, a square perch, from late 15c., the usual
measure in brickwork. Meaning light-sensitive cell in a retina is from 1866, so-called for its
shape. Slang meaning penis is recorded from 1902; that of gun, revolver is from 1903.


rubber (n.)

thing that rubs (a brush, cloth, etc.), 1530s, agent noun from rub (v.). The meaning elastic
substance from tropical plants (short for India rubber) first recorded 1788, introduced to Europe
1744 by Charles Marie de la Condamine, so called because it originally was used as an eraser.Very
useful for erasing the strokes of black lead pencils, and is popularly called rubber, and lead-
eater. [entry for Caoutchouc in Howard, New Royal Encyclopedia, 1788]Meaning overshoe made of rubber
is 1842, American English; slang sense of condom is by 1930s. Sense of deciding match in a game or
contest is 1590s, of unknown signification, and perhaps an entirely separate word. Rubber stamp (n.)
is from 1881; figurative sense of institution whose power is formal but not real is from 1919; the
verb in this sense is from 1934. Rubber cement is attested from 1856 (from 1823 as India-rubber
cement). Rubber check (one that bounces) is from 1927.


