electricity (n.)

1640s (Browne, from Gilbert's Modern Latin), from electric (q.v.) + -ity. Originally in reference to
friction.    Electricity seems destined to play a most important part in the arts and industries.
The question of its economical application to some purposes is still unsettled, but experiment has
already proved that it will propel a street car better than a gas jet and give more light than a
horse. [Ambrose Bierce, The Cynic's Word Book, 1906]


electrical (adj.)

1630s, giving off electricity when rubbed, from electric + -al (1). Meaning relating to electricity,
run by electricity is from 1746. Related: Electrically.


galvanize (v.)

1801, stimulate by galvanic electricity, from French galvaniser, from galvanisme (see galvanism).
Figurative sense of excite, stimulate (as if by electricity) first recorded 1853 (galvanic was in
figurative use in 1807). Meaning to coat with metal by means of galvanic electricity (especially to
plate iron with tin, but now typically to plate it with zinc) is from 1839.He'll swear that in her
dancing she cuts all others out,Though like a Gal that's galvanized, she throws her legs
about.[Thomas Hood, Love has not Eyes, 1845]  Related: Galvanized; galvanizing.


electrify (v.)

1745, to charge with electricity, cause electricity to pass through; see electric + -fy. Figurative
sense recorded by 1752. Meaning convert a factory, industry, etc., to electrical power is by 1902.
Related: Electrified; electrifying.


electrocution (n.)

execution by electricity, 1889, American English; noun of action from electrocute. Meaning any death
by electricity is from 1897.    Electrocution, unless better performed than in the first instance,
is a retrograde step rather than the contrary. The preliminary arrangements: the shaving of the
head, the cutting of the clothing, the strapping in a chair, add much to the horror of the occasion.
It is safe to say that electrocution is not the coming method of execution. [The Medical Era, vol.
vii, no. 9, Sept. 1890]


electrification (n.)

1748, state of being charged with electricity, noun of action from electrify.


capacitor (n.)

device which stores electricity, 1926, from capacity with Latinate agent-noun ending.


resistor (n.)

late 14c., one who resists; 1580s, that which resists; agent noun in Latin form from resist.
Specifically in electricity from 1905; resister was used in this sense from 1759.


voltaic (adj.)

1813, designating electricity produced by chemical action, formed in recognition of Italian
physicist Alessandro Volta (1745-1827), who perfected a chemical process used in electrical
batteries, + -ic.


electrician (n.)

1751, scientist concerned with electricity; 1869 as technician concerned with electrical systems and
appliances; see electric + -ian.


unipolar (adj.)

1812, originally in electricity, from uni- + polar. Related: Unipolarity.


galvanism (n.)

electricity produced by chemical action, 1797, from French galvanisme or Italian galvanismo, from
Luigi Galvani (1737-1798), professor of anatomy at Bologna, who discovered it c.1792 while running
currents through the legs of dead frogs.


coulomb (n.)

1881, named for French chemist Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (1736-1806), who devised a method of
measuring electrical quantity. It is the quantity of electricity conveyed in 1 second by a current
of 1 ampere. The name is a French form of Columbus.


Leyden jar (n.)

1755, phial used for accumulating and storing static electricity, from Leyden (modern Leiden), city
in Holland; so called because it was first described (in 1746) by physicist Pieter van Musschenbroek
of Leyden (1692-1761). The place name is said to be from Germanic *leitha- canal.


disruptive (adj.)

1862 (in electricity sense from 1842); see disrupt + -ive. Related: Disruptively; disruptiveness.


insulate (v.)

1530s, make into an island, from Latin insulatus, from insula (see insular). Sense of cause a person
or thing to be detached from surroundings is from 1785. Electrical/chemical sense of block from
electricity or heat is from 1742. Related: Insulated; insulating.


ohm (n.)

unit of electrical resistance, 1867, in recognition of German physicist Georg S. Ohm (1789-1854),
who determined the law of the flow of electricity. Originally proposed as ohma (1861) as a unit of
voltage. Related: ohmage; ohmic; ohmeter.


magneto-electric (adj.)

also magnetoelectric, characterized by electricity produced by magnets, 1831, from magneto- +
electric.


pyrogen (n.)

1858, as a proposed word for electricity, from pyro- + -gen. Meaning fever-producer is from 1896.
Related: Pyrogenic; pyrogenetic. Greek pyrogenes meant born in fire, wrought by fire.


electro-

before vowels electr-, word-forming element meaning electrical, electricity, Latinized form of Greek
elektro-, comb. form of elektron amber (see electric). As a stand-alone, formerly often short for
electrotype, electroplate.


switch (v.)

1610s, to strike with a switch, from switch (n.). Related: Switched; switching. The meaning turn
(off or on) with a switch device is first recorded 1853 of trains on tracks, 1881 of electricity,
1932 of radio or (later) television. Sense of shift, divert is from 1860. Meaning to change one
thing for another is recorded from 1919. Switch-hitter is 1945 in baseball slang; 1956 in the sense
of bisexual person.


static (adj.)

1630s, pertaining to the science of weight and its mechanical effects, from Modern Latin statica,
from Greek statikos causing to stand, skilled in weighing, from stem of histanai to make to stand,
set; to place in the balance, weigh, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Earlier statical
(1560s). The sense of having to do with bodies at rest or with forces that balance each other is
first recorded 1802. Applied to frictional electricity from 1839.


electrocute (v.)

execute by electricity, 1889, American English, from electro- + back half of execute. The method
first was used Aug. 6, 1890, in New York state, on William Kemmler, convicted of the murder of his
common-law wife. In reference to accidental death by 1909. Electric chair is also first recorded
1889, the year the one used on Kemmler was introduced in New York as a humane alternative to
hanging. Related: Electrocuted; electrocuting.


short circuit (n.)

also short-circuit, 1854, in electricity, from short (adj.) + circuit (n.). As a verb, introduce a
shunt of low resistance, from 1867; intransitive sense from 1902; in the figurative sense is
recorded by 1899. Related: short-circuited; short-circuiting.


juice (n.)

c. 1300, liquid extract obtained by boiling herbs, from Old French jus juice, sap, liquid (13c.),
from Latin ius broth, sauce, juice, from PIE root *yeue- to blend, mix food (cognates: Sanskrit yus-
broth, Greek zyme a leaven, Old Church Slavonic jucha broth, soup, Lithuanian juse fish soup).
Meaning liquor is from 1828; that of electricity is first recorded 1896.


positive (adj.)

early 14c., originally a legal term meaning formally laid down, from Old French positif (13c.) and
directly from Latin positivus settled by agreement, positive (opposed to naturalis natural), from
positus, past participle of ponere put, place (see position (n.)).    Sense of absolute is from mid-
15c. Meaning in philosophy of dealing only with facts is from 1590s. Sense broadened to expressed
without qualification (1590s), then confident in opinion (1660s); mathematical use is from 1704; in
electricity, 1755. Psychological sense of concentrating on what is constructive and good is recorded
from 1916.


negative (adj.)

c. 1400, expressing denial, from Old French negatif (13c.) and directly from Latin negativus that
which denies, from negat-, past participle stem of negare deny, say no (see deny). Meaning
expressing negation is from c. 1500; that of characterized by absence is from 1560s. Algebraic sense
is from 1670s. The electricity sense is from 1755.  Negative Capability, that is when a man is
capable of being in uncertainties, Mysteries, doubts without any irritable reaching after fact and
reason. [John Keats, letter, Dec. 21, 1817]  Related: Negatively.


conductor (n.)

1520s, one who leads or guides, from Middle French conductour (14c., Old French conduitor), from
Latin conductor one who hires, contractor, in Late Latin a carrier, from conductus, past participle
of conducere (see conduce).    Earlier in same sense was conduitour (early 15c., from Old French
conduitor). Meaning leader of an orchestra or chorus is from 1784; meaning one who has charge of
passengers and collects fares on a railroad is 1832, American English. Physics sense of object or
device that passes heat is from 1745; of electricity from 1737.


charge (v.)

early 13c., to load, fill, from Old French chargier to load, burden, weigh down, from Late Latin
carricare to load a wagon or cart, from Latin carrus wagon (see car). Senses of entrust, command,
accuse all emerged in Middle English and were found in Old French. Sense of rush in to attack is
1560s, perhaps through earlier meaning load a weapon (1540s). Meaning impose a burden of expense is
from mid-14c. Meaning fill with electricity is from 1748. Related: Charged; charging. Charg&eacute;
d'affaires was borrowed from French, 1767, literally (one) charged with affairs.


battery (n.)

1530s, action of battering, from Middle French batterie, from Old French baterie (12c.) beating,
thrashing, assault, from batre beat, from Latin battuere beat (see batter (v.)).    Meaning shifted
in Middle French from bombardment (heavy blows upon city walls or fortresses) to unit of artillery
(a sense recorded in English from 1550s). Extension to electrical cell (1748, first used by Ben
Franklin) is perhaps from the artillery sense via notion of discharges of electricity. In Middle
English, bateri meant only forged metal ware. In obsolete baseball jargon battery was the word for
pitcher and catcher considered as a unit (1867, originally only the pitcher).


cross (v.)

c. 1200, make the sign of a cross, from cross (n.) and in part from French croiser. Sense of to go
across, pass from side to side of, pass over is from c. 1400; that of to cancel by drawing crossed
lines over is from mid-15c.    From late 14c. as lie across; intersect; also place (two things)
crosswise of each other; lay one thing across another. From early 15c. as mark a cross on. Also in
Middle English in now-archaic sense crucify (mid-14c.), hence, figuratively, crossed carrying a
cross of affliction or penance. Meaning thwart, obstruct, hinder, oppose is from 1550s; that of
cause to interbreed is from 1754. In telegraphy, electricity, etc., in reference to accidental
contact of two wires on different circuits or different parts of a circuit that allows part of the
current to flow from one to the other, from 1884. Meaning to cheat is by 1823.   Cross my heart as a
vow is from 1898. To cross over as euphemistic for to die is from 1930. To cross (someone's) path is
from 1818. Of ideas, etc., to cross (someone's) mind is from 1768; the notion is of something
entering the mind as if passing athwart it. Related: Crossed; crossing.


electric (adj.)

1640s, first used in English by physician Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682), apparently coined as Modern
Latin electricus (literally resembling amber) by English physicist William Gilbert (1540-1603) in
treatise De Magnete (1600), from Latin electrum amber, from Greek elektron amber (Homer, Hesiod,
Herodotus), also pale gold (a compound of 1 part silver to 4 of gold); which is of unknown origin.
Vim illam electricam nobis placet appellare [Gilbert]    Originally the word described substances
which, like amber, attract other substances when rubbed. Meaning charged with electricity is from
1670s; the physical force so called because it first was generated by rubbing amber. In many modern
instances, the word is short for electrical. Figurative sense is attested by 1793. Electric light is
from 1767. Electric toothbrush first recorded 1936; electric blanket in 1930. Electric typewriter is
from 1958. Electric guitar is from 1938; electric organ coined as the name of a hypothetical future
instrument in 1885.


