encore (interj.)

1712, from French encore still, yet, again, also, furthermore (12c.), generally explained as being
from Vulgar Latin phrase *hinc ad horam from then to this hour, or (in) hanc horam (to) this hour
(Italian ancora again, still, yet is said to be a French loan-word).Whenever any Gentlemen are
particularly pleased with a Song, at their crying out Encore ... the Performer is so obliging as to
sing it over again. [Steele, Spectator No. 314, 1712] <hr />   There appears to be no evidence that
either the Fr. or It. word was ever similarly used in its native country. The corresponding word
both in Fr. and It. is bis; in It. da capo was formerly used. [OED]    As a noun, from 1763; as a
verb, from 1748. Related: Encored.


optimism (n.)

1759 (in translations of Voltaire), from French optimisme (1737), from Modern Latin optimum, used by
Gottfried Leibniz (in Th&eacute;odic&eacute;e, 1710) to mean the greatest good, from Latin optimus
the best (see optimum). The doctrine holds that the actual world is the best of all possible worlds,
in which the creator accomplishes the most good at the cost of the least evil.En termes de l'art, il
l'appelle la raison du meilleur ou plus savamment encore, et Theologiquement autant que
G&eacute;om&eacute;triquement, le syst&ecirc;me de l'Optimum, ou l'Optimisme. [M&eacute;moires de
Tr&eacute;voux, Feb. 1737]Launched out of philosophical jargon and into currency by Voltaire's
satire on it in Candide. General sense of belief that good ultimately will prevail in the world
first attested 1841 in Emerson; meaning tendency to take a hopeful view of things first recorded
1819 in Shelley.


polka (n.)

1844, from French polka, German Polka, probably from Czech polka, the dance, literally Polish woman
(Polish Polka), fem. of Polak a Pole. The word might also be an alteration of Czech pulka half, for
the half-steps of Bohemian peasant dances. Or it could be a merger of the two. The dance was in
vogue first in Prague, 1835; it reached London by the spring of 1842.   Vous n'en &#234;tes encore
qu'au galop, vieil arri&#233;r&#233;, et nous en sommes &#224; la polka! Oui, c'est la polka que
nous avons dans&#233;e &#224; ce fameux bal Valenlino. Vous demandez ce que c'est que la polka,
homme de l ann&#233;e derni&#232;re! La contredanse a v&#233;cu; le galop, rococo; la valse &#224;
deux temps, dans le troisi&#232;me dessous; il n'y a plus que la polka, la sublime, l'enivrante
polka, dont les salons raffolent, que les femmes de la haute, les banqui&#233;res les plus cossues
et les comtesses les plus choenosophoses &#233;tudient jour et nuit. [La France Dramatique, Paris,
1841]    As a verb by 1846 (polk also was tried).


