endearment (n.)

act of endearing, 1610s, from endear + -ment. Meaning obligation of gratitude is from 1620s; that of
action expressive of love is from 1702.


caress (n.)

1640s, show of endearment, display of regard, from French caresse (16c.), back-formation from
caresser or else from Italian carezza endearment, from caro dear, from Latin carus dear, costly,
beloved (see whore (n.)). Meaning affectionate stroke attested in English from 1650s.


jo

Scottish form of joy, attested from 1520s as a term of endearment.


poppet (n.)

small human figure used in witchcraft and sorcery, c.1300, early form of puppet (n.). Meaning small
or dainty person is recorded from late 14c.; later a term of endearment but also in other cases one
of contempt.


ducky (adj.)

excellent, slang from 1897 (often ironical),perhaps from duckie as a term of endearment (early
19c.). Probably not related to much earlier slang noun meaning a woman's breast [...whose pritty
duckys I trust shortly to kysse, Henry VIII, c.1536 letter to Anne Boleyn, who, contrary to rumor,
did not have three of them].


pussy (n.1)

cat, 1726, diminutive of puss (n.1), also used of a rabbit (1715). As a term of endearment for a
girl or woman, from 1580s (also used of effeminate men). To play pussy was World War II RAF slang
for to take advantage of cloud cover, jumping from cloud to cloud to shadow a potential victim or
avoid recognition.


pug (n.)

1560s, general term of endearment (also puggy), probably related to puck (n.2); one of the earliest
senses is sprite, imp (1610s). The sense of miniature dog is from 1749 (pug-dog); that of monkey is
1660s. The word at various times meant a bargeman (1590s), a harlot (c.1600), and an upper servant
in a great house (1847).


snookums (n.)

trivial term of endearment, 1919, from Snooks, proper name used in Britain for a hypothetical person
(1860), compare Joe Blow in U.S. As an actual proper name, Snooks dates back to the Domesday Book
and may be from Old English *snoc a projecting point of land (perhaps here with sense of a big
nose).


turtle (n.2)

turtledove, Old English turtle, dissimilation of Latin turtur turtledove, a reduplicated form
imitative of the bird's coo. Graceful, harmonious and affectionate to its mate, hence a term of
endearment in Middle English. Turtle-dove is attested from c.1300.


caress (v.)

1650s, from French caresser, from Italian carezzare to cherish, from carezza endearment (see caress
(n.)). Related: Caressed; caressing.


bunny (n.)

1680s, diminutive of Scottish dialectal bun, pet name for rabbit, previously (1580s) for squirrel,
and also a term of endearment for a young attractive woman or child (c.1600). Ultimately it could be
from Scottish bun tail of a hare (1530s), or from French bon, or from a Scandinavian source. The
Playboy Club hostess sense is from 1960. The Bunny Hug (1912), along with the foxtrot and the Wilson
glide, were among the popular/scandalous dances of the ragtime era.


cinnamon (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cinnamone (13c.), from Latin cinnamum, cinnamomum cinnamon (also used as
a term of endearment), from Greek kinnamomon, from a Phoenician word akin to Hebrew qinnamon.
Stripped from the bark of a tree in the avocado family. Ceylon cinnamon, the true cinnamon, is used
in Britain, but American cinnamon is almost always from the related cassia tree of Southeast Asia
and is stronger and sweeter.


schatzi (n.)

German girlfriend, from German Schatzi, diminutive of Schatz, a term of endearment for a woman,
literally treasure, from Proto-Germanic *skatta- (cognates: Dutch schat treasure, Gothic skatts
piece of money, money), originally cattle.


tart (n.2)

1887, prostitute, immoral woman, from earlier use as a term of endearment to a girl or woman (1864),
sometimes said to be a shortening of sweetheart. But another theory traces it to jam-tart (see tart
(n.1)), which was British slang early 19c. for attractive woman. Diminutive tartlet attested from
1890. To tart (something) up is from 1938. Related: Tarted.


pet (n.1)

tamed animal, originally in Scottish and northern England dialect (and exclusively so until mid-
18c.), of unknown origin. Sense of indulged child (c.1500) is recorded slightly earlier than that of
animal kept as a favorite (1530s), but the latter may be the primary meaning. Probably associated
with or influenced by petty. As a term of endearment by 1849. Teacher's pet is attested from 1890.
Pet-shop from 1928.    Know nature's children all divide her care;  The fur that warms a monarch
warm'd a bear.  While man exclaims, 'See all things for my use!'  'See man for mine!' replies a
pamper'd goose:     [Alexander Pope, Essay on Man]


marmoset (n.)

small monkey, late 14c., from Old French marmoset grotesque figurine; fool, jester (late 13c.),
perhaps a variant of marmote long-tailed monkey, ape, then, as a term of endearment, little child;
said to be from marmonner, marmotter to mutter, mumble, probably of imitative origin. Some French
authorities suggest a derivation of marmoset from marmor marble, as if little marble figurine.


chick (n.)

mid-14c. shortening of chicken (n.). Extended to human offspring (often in alliterative pairing
chick and child) and thence used as a term of endearment. As slang for young woman it is first
recorded 1927 (in Elmer Gantry), supposedly from U.S. black slang. In British use in this sense by
c.1940; popularized by Beatniks late 1950s. Chicken in this sense is from 1711. Sometimes
c.1600-1900 chicken was taken as a plural, chick as a singular (compare child/children) for the
domestic fowl.


honey (n.)

Old English hunig, from Proto-Germanic *hunagam- (cognates: Old Norse hunang, Swedish honung, Old
Saxon huneg, Old Frisian hunig, Middle Dutch honich, Dutch honig, Old High German honang, German
Honig honey); perhaps from PIE *k(e)neko- yellow, golden (cognates: Sanskrit kancanum, Welsh canecon
gold). The more common Indo-European word is represented by Gothic mili&thorn; (from PIE *melith
honey; see Melissa). A term of endearment from at least mid-14c. Meaning anything good of its kind
is 1888, American English.


lad (n.)

c.1300, ladde foot soldier, also young male servant (attested as a surname from late 12c.), possibly
from a Scandinavian language (compare Norwegian -ladd, in compounds for young man), but of obscure
origin in any case. OED hazards a guess on Middle English ladde, plural of the past participle of
lead (v.), thus one who is led (by a lord). Liberman derives it from Old Norse ladd hose; woolen
stocking. The development must have been from 'stocking,' 'foolish youth' to 'youngster of inferior
status' and (with an ameliorated meaning) to 'young fellow.' He adds, Words for socks, stockings,
and shoes seem to have been current as terms of abuse for and nicknames of fools. Meaning boy,
youth, young man is from mid-15c. Scottish form laddie, a term of endearment, attested from 1540s.


pussy (n.2)

slang for female pudenda, 1879, but probably older; perhaps from Old Norse puss pocket, pouch
(compare Low German puse vulva), but perhaps instead from the cat word (see pussy (n.1)) on notion
of soft, warm, furry thing; compare French le chat, which also has a double meaning, feline and
genital. Earlier uses are difficult to distinguish from pussy (n.1), as in:The word pussie is now
used of a woman [Philip Stubbes, The Anatomie of Abuses, 1583]But the absence of pussy in Grose and
other early slang works argues against the vaginal sense being generally known before late 19c., as
does its frequent use as a term of endearment in mainstream literature, as in:What do you think,
pussy? said her father to Eva. [Harriet Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom's Cabin, 1852]Pussy-whipped first
attested 1956.


duck (n.1)

waterfowl, Old English duce (found only in genitive ducan) a duck, literally a ducker, presumed to
be from Old English *ducan to duck, dive (see duck (v.)). Replaced Old English ened as the name for
the bird, this being from PIE *aneti-, the root of the duck noun in most Indo-European languages.
In the domestic state the females greatly exceed in number, hence duck serves at once as the name of
the female and of the race, drake being a specific term of sex. [OED]    As a term of endearment,
attested from 1580s. duck-walk is 1930s; duck soup anything easily done is by 1899. Duck's ass
haircut is from 1951. Ducks-and-drakes, skipping flat stones on water, is from 1580s; the figurative
sense of throwing something away recklessly is c.1600.


baby (n.)

late 14c., babi, diminutive of baban (see babe + -y (3)). Meaning childish adult person is from
c.1600. Meaning youngest of a group is from 1897. As a term of endearment for one's lover it is
attested perhaps as early as 1839, certainly by 1901; its popularity perhaps boosted by baby vamp a
popular girl, student slang from c.1922. As an adjective, by 1750.   Baby food is from 1833. Baby
blues for blue eyes recorded by 1892 (the phrase also was used for postpartum depression 1950s-60s).
To empty the baby out with the bath (water) is first recorded 1909 in G.B. Shaw (compare German das
Kind mit dem Bade aussch&uuml;tten). Baby's breath (noted for sweet smell, which also was supposed
to attract cats) as a type of flower is from 1897. French b&eacute;b&eacute; (19c.) is from English.


prick (n.)

Middle English prikke, from Old English prica (n.) point, puncture; particle, small portion of space
or time, common Proto-Germanic (compare Low German prik point, Middle Dutch prick, Dutch prik,
Swedish prick point, dot). Meaning pointed weapon, dagger is first attested 1550s.    Earliest
recorded use for penis is 1590s (Shakespeare puns upon it). My prick was used 16c.-17c. as a term of
endearment by immodest maids for their boyfriends. As a term of abuse, it is attested by 1929.
Prick-teaser attested from 1958. The use in kick against the pricks (Acts ix:5, first in the
translation of 1382) probably is from sense of a goad for oxen (mid-14c.), which made it a plausible
translation of Latin stimulus; advorsum stimulum calces was proverbial in Latin.


sugar (n.)

late 13c., sugre, from Old French sucre sugar (12c.), from Medieval Latin succarum, from Arabic
sukkar, from Persian shakar, from Sanskrit sharkara ground or candied sugar, originally grit, gravel
(cognate with Greek kroke pebble). The Arabic word also was borrowed in Italian (zucchero), Spanish
(azucar, with the Arabic article), and German (Old High German zucura, German Zucker), and its forms
are represented in most European languages (such as Serbian cukar, Polish cukier, Russian sakhar).
Its Old World home was India (Alexander the Great's companions marveled at the honey without bees)
and it remained exotic in Europe until the Arabs began to cultivate it in Sicily and Spain; not
until after the Crusades did it begin to rival honey as the West's sweetener. The Spaniards in the
West Indies began raising sugar cane in 1506; first grown in Cuba 1523; first cultivated in Brazil
1532. The reason for the -g- in the English word is obscure (OED compares flagon, from French
flacon). The pronunciation shift from s- to sh- is probably from the initial long vowel sound syu-
(as in sure).    As a type of chemical compound from 1826. Slang euphemistic substitute for an
imprecation [OED] is attested from 1891. As a term of endearment, first recorded 1930. Sugar-cane is
from 1560s. Sugar-maple is from 1731. Sugar loaf was originally a moulded conical mass of refined
sugar (early 15c.); now obsolete, but sense extended 17c. to hills, hats, etc. of that shape.


