epochal (adj.)

1680s, from epoch + -al (1).


epoch (n.)

1610s, epocha, point marking the start of a new period in time (such as the founding of Rome, the
birth of Christ, the Hegira), from Late Latin epocha, from Greek epokhe stoppage, fixed point of
time, from epekhein to pause, take up a position, from epi on (see epi-) + ekhein to hold (see
scheme (n.)). Transferred sense of a period of time is 1620s; geological usage (not a precise
measurement) is from 1802.


era (n.)

1716, earlier aera (1610s), from Late Latin aera, era an era or epoch from which time is reckoned,
probably identical with Latin aera counters used for calculation, plural of aes (genitive aeris)
brass, copper, money (see ore, also compare copper).    The Latin word's use in chronology said to
have begun in 5c. Spain (where, for some reason unknown to historians, the local era, aera
Hispanica, began 38 B.C.E.; some say it was because of a tax levied that year). Like epoch, in
English it originally meant the starting point of an age; meaning system of chronological notation
is c.1640s; that of historical period is from 1741, as in the U.S. Era of Good Feeling (which was
anything but) in reference to the Monroe Administration (1817-24), attested from 1817.


Permian

1841, pertaining to the uppermost strata of the Paleozoic era, named by British geologist Sir
Roderick Impey Murchison (1792-1871) for the region of Perm in northwestern Russia, where rocks from
this epoch are found.


Paleocene (adj.)

in reference to the geological epoch preceding the Eocene, 1877, from French pal&eacute;oc&egrave;ne
(Schimpter, 1874), coined from paleo- + Greek kainos new (see recent). It is, thus, the old new age.


Holocene (adj.)

in reference to the epoch that began 10,000 years ago and continues today, 1897, from French
holoc&egrave;ne (1867), from Greek holo-, comb. form of holos whole (see safe (adj.)) + -cene.


Eocene (adj.)

in reference to the second epoch of the Tertiary Period, coined in English 1831, from eo- + Greek
kainos new (see recent); along with Miocene and Pliocene, by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866),
English polymath.


quaternary (adj.)

early 15c., consisting of four parts, from Latin quaternarius of four each, containing four, from
quaterni four each, by fours, from quater four times, related to quattuor four (see four). Also as a
noun, the number four (mid-15c.), from Latin quaternarius.    In geological sense, attested from
1843 in English, proposed 1829 by French geologist Jules Pierre Fran&ccedil;ois Stanislas Desnoyers
(1800-1887) as name for the fourth great epoch of geological time, but because it comprises only the
age of man, and the other epochs are many hundred times longer, not all accepted it.


Aquarius

faint constellation and 11th zodiac sign, late Old English, from Latin aquarius, literally water
carrier, properly an adjective, pertaining to water (see aquarium); a loan-translation of Greek
Hydrokhoos the water-pourer, old Greek name of this constellation.   Aquarians were a former
Christian sect that used water instead of wine at the Lord's Supper. Age of Aquarius (1940) is an
astrological epoch supposed to have begun in the 1960s, embodying the traits of this sign and
characterized by world peace and human brotherhood. The term and the concept probably got a boost in
popular use when An Aquarian Exposition was used as the sub-name of the Woodstock Music &amp; Art
Fair (1969).


flora (n.)

1777, the plant life of a region or epoch, from Latin Flora, Roman goddess of flowers, from flos
(genitive floris) flower, from *flo-s-, Italic suffixed form of PIE *bhle- to blossom, flourish
(cognates: Middle Irish blath, Welsh blawd blossom, flower, Old English blowan to flower, bloom),
extended form of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom, possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Used as the title of descriptive plant catalogues since 1640s, but popularized by Linnaeus in
his 1745 study of Swedish plants, Flora Suecica.


