euphemism (n.)

1650s, from Greek euphemismos use of a favorable word in place of an inauspicious one, from
euphemizein speak with fair words, use words of good omen, from eu- good (see eu-) + pheme speaking,
from phanai speak (see fame (n.)).    In ancient Greece, the superstitious avoidance of words of
ill-omen during religious ceremonies, or substitutions such as Eumenides the Gracious Ones for the
Furies (see also Euxine). In English, a rhetorical term at first; broader sense of choosing a less
distasteful word or phrase than the one meant is first attested 1793. Related: Euphemistic;
euphemistically.


bathroom (n.)

1780, from bath + room (n.). Originally a room with apparatus for bathing, used 20c. in U.S. as a
euphemism for a lavatory and often noted as a word that confused British travelers. To  go to the
bathroom, euphemism for relieve oneself; urinate, defecate, from 1920 (in a book for children), but
typically used without regard for whether an actual bathroom is involved.


Sam Hill

euphemism for Hell, 1839, American English, of unknown origin.


decease (n.)

death, early 14c., from Old French deces (12c., Modern French d&eacute;c&egrave;s) decease, death,
from Latin decessus death (euphemism for mors), also a retirement, a departure, from decess-, past
participle stem of decedere die, depart, withdraw, literally to go down, from de- away (see de-) +
cedere go (see cede). Still used with a tinge of euphemism.


blazes (n.)

euphemism for Hell, 1818, plural of blaze (n.1).


Eumenides

Greek, literally the well-minded ones, a euphemism of the Erinys.


bally (adj.)

1885, British English, slang euphemism for bloody.


doing (n.)

early 13c., verbal noun from do (v.). From c.1600-1800 it also was a euphemism for copulation.


obituary (n.)

1706, register of deaths, from Medieval Latin obituarius a record of the death of a person,
literally pertaining to death, from Latin obitus departure, a going to meet, encounter (a euphemism
for death), from stem of obire go toward, go to meet (as in mortem obire meet death), from ob to,
toward (see ob-) + ire to go (see ion). Meaning record or announcement of a death, especially in a
newspaper, and including a brief biographical sketch is from 1738. As an adjective from 1828. A
similar euphemism is in Old English cognate for&eth;faran to die, literally to go forth; utsi&eth;
death, literally going out, departure.


challenged (adj.)

as a euphemism for disabled, 1985, past participle adjective from challenge (v.).


dang (interj.)

1781 (in Sophia Lee's comedy A Chapter of Accidents, which was acted first in 1780), euphemism for
damn.


fertilizer (n.)

1660s, a person who fertilizes, agent noun from fertilize. As a euphemism for manure, from 1846.


collateral damage (n.)

by 1873 in legal cases; in modern use, generally a euphemism for the coincidental killing of
civilians, U.S. coinage, c.1968, at first generally with reference to nuclear weapons.


golly

euphemism for God, first recorded 1775, in a source that refers to it as a sort of jolly kind of
oath, or asseveration much in use among our carters, &amp; the lowest people.


deprived (adj.)

1550s, dispossessed, past participle adjective from deprive. As a euphemism for the condition of
children who lack a stable home life, by 1945.


all-fired (adj.)

1837, U.S. slang euphemism for hell-fired.


eff

1943, euphemism for fuck, representing the sound of its first letter. Related: Effing.


hell-fired (adj.)

a euphemism for damned attested from 1756. See hellfire.


caramba

exclamation of dismay or surprise, 1835, from Spanish, said to be a euphemism for carajo penis, from
Vulgar Latin *caraculum little arrow.


blooming (adj.)

late 14c., present participle adjective from bloom (v.). Meaning full-blown (often a euphemism for
bloody) is attested from 1882.


skulduggery (n.)

1856, apparently an alteration of Scottish sculdudrie adultery (1713), sculduddery bawdry, obscenity
(1821), a euphemism of uncertain origin.


overseas (adj.)

1580s, from over + sea. Popularized during World War I as a British euphemism for colonial.


intimacy (n.)

1640s, from intimate + -cy. As a euphemism for sexual intercourse, from 1670s.


fricking (adj.)

euphemism for fucking, by 1913. Related: Frick (v.).


cohabit (v.)

euphemism since 1530s to describe a couple living together without benefit of marriage; back-
formation from cohabitation. Related: Cohabited; cohabiting.


frig (v.)

to move about restlessly, mid-15c., perhaps a variant of frisk (q.v.). As a euphemism for to fuck it
dates from 1680s, earlier as to masturbate (1670s). Related: Frigged; frigging.


poop (n.2)

excrement, 1744, a children's euphemism, probably of imitative origin. The verb in this sense is
from 1903. The same word in the sense to break wind softly is attested from 1721; earlier to make a
short blast on a horn (late 14c.). Meaning stupid or dull person is from 1915. Pooper-scooper
attested from 1970.


manipulate (v.)

1827, to handle skillfully by hand, a back-formation from manipulation. Of mental influence, from
1864. Financial sense is from 1870. In mid-20c., it served as a euphemism for masturbation. Related:
Manipulated; manipulating.


jumble (v.)

1520s, originally to move confusedly, perhaps coined on model of stumble, tumble, etc. In 17c., it
was yet another euphemism for have sex with (a sense first attested 1580s). Meaning mix or confuse
is from 1540s. Related: Jumbled; jumbling.


woodshed (n.)

shed for keeping wood as fuel, 1799, from wood (n.) + shed (n.). Sometimes a euphemism for outhouse.
Figuratively, as the place for private punishment, by 1907, American English colloquial.


hothouse (n.)

mid-15c., bath house, from hot + house (n.). In 17c. a euphemism for brothel (similar to massage
parlor); the meaning glass-roofed structure for raising plants is from 1749. Figurative use by 1802.


sanitation (n.)

1848, irregularly formed from sanitary. Figurative use from 1934. As a euphemism for garbage (as in
sanitation engineer) first recorded 1939.


good-neighbor (adj.)

also (chiefly British English) good-neighbour, adjectival phrase, in reference to U.S. foreign
policy, especially in Latin America, 1928, originally in Herbert Hoover. The good neighbours is
Scottish euphemism for the fairies (1580s).


tarnation (n.)

1784, American English alteration of darnation (itself a euphemism for damnation), influenced by
tarnal (1790), a mild profanity, clipped from phrase by the Eternal (God).


underarm (adj.)

1816, underhand (in reference to a style of throwing), from under + arm (n.1). First attested 1908
in dressmaking sense of seams on the lower half of the arm-hole; as a euphemism for armpit, it is
attested from 1930s, popularized by advertisers.


shift (n.2)

body garment, underclothing, 1590s, originally used alike of men's and women's pieces, probably from
shift (n.1), which was commonly used in reference to a change of clothes. In 17c., it began to be
used as a euphemism for smock, and was itself displaced, for similar reasons of delicacy, in 19c. by
chemise.


biblioklept (n.)

1881, from biblio- + Greek kleptes thief (see kleptomania). Walsh calls it a modern euphemism which
softens the ugly word book-thief by shrouding it in the mystery of the Greek language.


adult (adj.)

1530s (but not common until mid-17c.), from Latin adultus grown up, mature, adult, ripe, past
participle of adolescere grow up, mature (see adolescent). As a euphemism for pornographic, it dates
to 1958 and does no honor to the word.


unutterable (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + utterable (see utter (v.)). As a noun, from 1788; unutterables as a
euphemism for trousers is recorded by 1843.


criminy (interj.)

also crimine, 1680s; it looks like Italian crimine crime but likely is simply another euphemism for
Christ as a swear-word.


restricted (adj.)

limited, 1830, past participle adjective from restrict; of documents, etc., secret, not for public
release it is recorded from 1944. In U.S., restricted was a euphemism for off-limits to Jews
(1947).Manager: I'm sorry, Mr. Marx, but we can't let you use the pool; this country club is
restricted.Groucho: Well, my daughter's only half-Jewish; could she go in up to her knees? [there
are many versions and variations of this story, dating back to 1970s]


pre-empt (v.)

also preempt, 1830, secure by pre-emtion, back-formation from pre-emption, originally American
English. In the broascasting sense, it is attested from 1965, American English, a euphemism for
cancel. Related: pre-empted; preempted.


landfill (n.)

1916, from land (n.) + fill (n.). A euphemism for dump.


bleeding (n.)

late 14c., a flowing out of blood; mid-15c. as a drawing out of blood; verbal noun formed after
earlier present participle adjective (early 13c.) of bleed. Figurative use is from 1796. As a
euphemism for bloody, from 1858. In U.S. history, Bleeding Kansas, in reference to the slavery
disputes in that territory 1854-60, is attested from 1856, said to have been first used by the New
York Tribune.


dip (n.)

stupid person, eccentric person, 1920s slang, perhaps a back-formation from dippy. Dipshit is an
emphatic form of dip (2); dipstick may be a euphemism or may reflect putative dipstick 'penis'
[DAS].


lovemaking (n.)

courtship, mid-15c., from love (n.) + make. Phrase make love is attested from 1570s in the sense pay
amorous attention to; as a euphemism for have sex, it is attested from c.1950.


defective (adj.)

mid-14c., from Middle French d&eacute;fectif (14c.) and directly from Late Latin defectivus, from
defect-, past participle stem of deficere (see deficient). A euphemism for mentally ill from 1898 to
c.1935. Related: Defectively; defectiveness.


lavatory (n.)

late 14c., washbasin, from Latin lavatorium place for washing, noun use of neuter of adjective
lavatorius pertaining to washing, from lavatus, past participle of lavare to wash (see lave). Sense
of washroom is first attested 1650s; as a euphemism for toilet, W.C., it is attested by 1864.


confinement (n.)

1590s, from French confinement (16c.; the Old French word was confinacion), from confiner (see
confine). As a euphemism for childbed it dates from 1774 (the Middle English expression was Our
Lady's bands).


rock and roll (n.)

also rock 'n' roll, 1954 in reference to a specific style of popular music, from rock (v.2) + roll
(v.). The verbal phrase had been a Black English euphemism for sexual intercourse, used in popular
dance music lyrics and song titles since at least the 1930s.


