euphoric (adj.)

1888, with reference to hashish, from euphoria + -ic. The noun meaning a drug which causes euphoria
is from 1934.


heroin (n.)

1898, from German Heroin, coined 1898 as trademark registered by Friedrich Bayer &amp; Co. for their
morphine substitute, traditionally from Greek heros (see hero (n.1)) because of the euphoric feeling
the drug provides, but no evidence for this seems to have been found so far.    A new hypnotic, to
which the name of heroin has been given, has been tried in the medical clinic of Professor Gerhardt
in Berlin. [The Lancet, Dec. 3, 1898]


high (adj.)

Old English heh (Anglian), heah (West Saxon) of great height, lofty, tall, exalted, high-class, from
Proto-Germanic *haukhaz (cognates: Old Saxon hoh, Old Norse har, Danish h&oslash;i, Swedish
h&ouml;g, Old Frisian hach, Dutch hoog, Old High German hoh, German hoch, Gothic hauhs high; also
German H&uuml;gel hill, Old Norse haugr mound), perhaps related to Lithuanian kaukara hill. Spelling
with -gh represents a final guttural sound in the original word, lost since 14c.    Of sound pitch,
late 14c. Of roads, most frequented or important, c.1200. Meaning euphoric or exhilarated from
alcohol is first attested 1620s, of drugs, 1932. Sense of proud, haughty, arrogant, supercilious
(c.1200) is reflected in high hand (late 14c.) and high horse. High seas first attested late 14c.,
with sense (also found in the Latin cognate) of deep as well as tall (cognates: Old English heahflod
deep water, also Old Persian bar&#353;an height, depth). Of an evil or a punishment, grave, serious,
severe (as in high treason), c.1200 (Old English had heahsynn deadly sin, crime).   High pressure
(adj.) is from 1824, of engines, 1891, of weather systems, 1933, of sales pitches. A child's high
chair is from 1848. High school school for advanced studies attested from late 15c. in Scotland; by
1824 in U.S. High time fully time, the fullness of time, is from late 14c. High noon is from early
14c.; the sense is full, total, complete. High and mighty is c.1200 (heh i mahhte). High finance
(1905) is that concerned with large sums. High and dry of beached things (especially ships) is from
1783. High-water mark is what is left by a flood or highest tide (1550s); figurative use by 1814.


