ewe (n.)

Old English eowu, fem. of eow sheep, from Proto-Germanic *awi, genitive *awjoz (cognates: Old Saxon
ewi, Old Frisian ei, Middle Dutch ooge, Dutch ooi, Old High German ouwi sheep, Gothic awe&thorn;i
flock of sheep), from PIE *owi- (cognates: Sanskrit avih, Greek ois, Latin ovis, Lithuanian avis
sheep, Old Church Slavonic ovica ewe, Old Irish oi sheep, Welsh ewig hind).


Ewen

see Owen.


ewer (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French *ewiere, Old French eviere water pitcher, parallel form of aiguiere
(Modern French aigui&egrave;re), from fem. of Latin aquarius of or for water, from aqua water (see
aqua-).


bejewel (v.)

1550s, from be- + jewel. Related: Bejeweled.


beweep (v.)

Old English bewepan, cognate with Old Frisian biwepa, Old Saxon biwopian; see be- + weep. Related:
Bewept.


brewery (n.)

1650s (but perhaps from c.1200 as a surname element), from brew (v.) + -ery. Old English had
breawern in this sense (from aern house; see barn), and brewhouse was the more common word through
18c.


bridewell (n.)

prison, 1550s, from Bridewell, house of correction in London, originally a royal lodging (given by
Edward VI for a hospital, later converted to a prison) near Bride's Well, short for St. Bridget's
Well.


crewel (n.)

embroidery, 1590s, of unknown origin. Earliest usage is late 15c., as a name for a kind of thin,
worsted yarn originally used in crewel work.


Dewey Decimal system

proposed 1876 by Melvil Dewey (1851-1931) while acting librarian of Amherst College. He also
crusaded for simplified spelling and the metric system.


farewell (interj.)

late 14c., from Middle English faren wel, verbal phrase attested by c.1200 (see fare (v.) + well
(adv.)); usually said to the departing person, who replied with good-bye. As a noun, by early 15c.


hewer (n.)

cutter (of stone or wood), mid-12c. as a surname, agent noun from hew (v.). Hwers of wood and
drawers of water as the lowliest sort of physical laborers is from Joshua ix:12.


interviewee (n.)

1884, from interview (v.) + -ee.


interviewer (n.)

1869, agent noun from interview (v.).


jewel (n.)

late 13c., article of value used for adornment, from Anglo-French juel, Old French jouel ornament,
jewel (12c.), perhaps from Medieval Latin jocale, from Latin jocus pastime, sport, in Vulgar Latin
that which causes joy (see joke (n.)). Another theory traces it to Latin gaudium, also with a notion
of rejoice (see joy).    Sense of precious stone developed early 14c. Meaning beloved person,
admired woman is late 14c. Colloquial family jewels testicles is from 1920s, but jewel as testicle
dates to late 15c.


jeweler (n.)

also jeweller, late 14c. (mid-14c. as a surname, Alice la Jueler), from Anglo-French jueler, from
Old French juelier (Modern French joaillier), from joel (see jewel).


jewellery (n.)

see jewelry.


jewelry (n.)

late 14c., juelrye precious ornaments, jewel work, from Old French juelerye, from jouel (see jewel).
In modern use it can be analyzed as jewel + -ery or jeweler + -y (1). Also jewellery.    The longer
is the commercial &amp; popular form, the shorter the rhetorical &amp; poetic. [Fowler]


Jewess (n.)

late 14c. (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French j&uuml;iesse, fem. of j&uuml;if (see Jew).


Llewelyn

male proper name, from Welsh Llywelin, often explained as lion-like, but probably from llyw leader.


makeweight (n.)

also make-weight, 1690s, small quantity of something added to make the total reach a certain weight,
from make (v.) + weight.    MAKE WEIGHT. A small candle: a term applied to a little slender man.
[Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]


middleweight (n.)

also middle weight, 1842, from middle + weight.


newel (n.)

mid-14c., pillar from which steps of a winding staircase radiate, from Old French noel, novel knob,
newel, kernel, stone (Modern French noyau), from Vulgar Latin *nodellus little knot, diminutive of
Latin nodulus, diminutive of nodus knot (see net (n.)). Klein's sources suggest the French word may
be from Gallo-Roman *nucale, from Latin nux nut. The meaning post at the top or bottom of a
staircase is from 1833.


peewee (adj.)

1877, small, tiny, for children, a dialect word, possibly a varied reduplication of wee. Attested
earlier (1848) as a noun meaning a small marble. (Baseball Hall-of-Famer Harold Peewee Reese got his
nickname because he was a marbles champion before he became a Dodgers shortstop.) As a type of bird
(variously applied on different continents) it is attested from 1886, imitative of a bird cry.


pewee (n.)

flycatcher, lapwing, 1810, variant of pewit (q.v.). See also peewee.


reviewer (n.)

1610s, one who reviews (in any sense), agent noun from review (v.). Specifically, one who critically
examines and passes judgment on new publications or productions; a writer of reviews is from 1650s.


sewer (n.1)

c.1400, conduit, from Anglo-French sewere, Old North French sewiere sluice from a pond (13c.),
literally something that makes water flow, from shortened form of Gallo-Roman *exaquaria (source of
Middle French esseveur), from Latin ex- out (see ex-) + aquaria, fem. of aquarius pertaining to
water, from aqua water (see aqua-).    Specifically of underground channels for wastewater from
c.1600; figurative use of this is from 1640s.


sewer (n.2)

one who sews, late 14c., agent noun from sew (v.).


sewerage (n.)

1832, from sewer (n.1) + -age.


shewel (n.)

something hung up to keep wild animals away, mid-13c., perhaps in Old English, from the same source
as shy (adj.); a derivative of the verb which in German became scheuen to scare.


skewer (n.)

1670s, variant of dialectal skiver (1660s), perhaps from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
skifa a cut, slice (of bread, etc.), Swedish skifer a slate, which are related to shiver (n.1) small
piece.


skewer (v.)

1701, from the noun. Related: Skewered; skewering.


tumbleweed (n.)

also tumble-weed, 1881, from tumble (v.) + weed (n.).


viewer (n.)

early 15c., civic official responsible for surveying property, agent noun from view (v.). Meaning
watcher of television first recorded 1935, in place of earlier suggestion looker-in (1927).


