executive (adj.)

mid-15c., performed, carried out; 1640s, of the branch of government that carries out the laws, from
Middle French executif, from Latin executivus, from past participle stem of exequi (see execution).
The noun in this sense is from 1776, as a branch of government. Meaning businessman is 1902 in
American English. Executive privilege is attested by 1805, American English.


CEO (n.)

by 1984; abbreviation of chief executive officer.


radio (n.)

wireless transmission of voice signals with radio waves, 1907, abstracted from earlier combinations
such as radio-receiver (1903), radiophone (1881), radio-telegraphy (1898), from radio- as a comb.
form of Latin radius beam. Use for radio receiver is first attested 1913; sense of sound
broadcasting as a medium is from 1913.    It is not a dream, but a probability that the radio will
demolish blocs, cut the strings of red tape, actuate the voice back home, dismantle politics and
entrench the nation's executive in a position of power unlike that within the grasp of any executive
in the world's history. [The Reading Eagle, Reading, Pa., U.S.A., March 16, 1924]   Wireless
remained more widespread until World War II, when military preference for radio turned the tables.
As an adjective by 1912, by radio transmission; meaning controlled by radio from 1974. Radio _______
radio station or service from _______ is recorded from 1920. A radio shack (1946) was a small
building housing radio equipment.


admiralty (n.)

naval branch of the English executive, early 15c., admiralte, from Old French amiralte, from amirail
(see admiral).


flack (n.)

publicity or press agent, 1945, also as a verb by that year, said to have been coined in show biz
magazine Variety (but this is not the first attested use), supposedly from name of Gene Flack, a
movie agent, but influenced by flak. There was a Gene Flack who was an advertising executive in the
U.S. during the 1940s, but he seems to have sold principally biscuits, not movies.


pin-stripe (adj.)

1882, from pin (n.) + stripe (n.). Figurative of executive by 1958.


president (n.)

late 14c., appointed governor of a province; chosen leader of a body of persons, from Old French
president and directly from Latin praesidentum (nominative praesidens) president, governor, noun use
of present participle of praesidere to act as head or chief (see preside).    In Middle English of
heads of religious houses, hospitals, colleges and universities. First use for chief executive
officer of a republic is in U.S. Constitution (1787), from earlier American use for officer in
charge of the Continental Congress (1774), a sense derived from that of chosen head of a meeting or
group of persons, which is from Middle English. It had been used of chief officers of banks from
1781, of individual colonies since 1608 (originally Virginia) and heads of colleges since mid-15c.
Slang shortening prez is recorded from 1883. Fem. form presidentess is attested from 1763.


secretary (n.)

late 14c., person entrusted with secrets, from Medieval Latin secretarius clerk, notary,
confidential officer, confidant, a title applied to various confidential officers, noun use of
adjective meaning private, secret, pertaining to private or secret matters (compare Latin
secretarium a council-chamber, conclave, consistory), from Latin secretum a secret, a hidden thing
(see secret (n.)).    Meaning person who keeps records, write letters, etc., originally for a king,
first recorded c.1400. As title of ministers presiding over executive departments of state, it is
from 1590s. The word also is used in both French and English to mean a private desk, sometimes in
French form secretaire. The South African secretary bird so called (1786) in reference to its crest,
which, when smooth, resembles a pen stuck over the ear. Compare Late Latin silentiarius privy
councilor, 'silentiary, from Latin silentium a being silent.


Whig

British political party, 1657, in part perhaps a disparaging use of whigg a country bumpkin (1640s);
but mainly a shortened form of Whiggamore (1649) one of the adherents of the Presbyterian cause in
western Scotland who marched on Edinburgh in 1648 to oppose Charles I. Perhaps originally a horse
drover, from dialectal verb whig to urge forward + mare. In 1689 the name was first used in
reference to members of the British political party that opposed the Tories. American Revolution
sense of colonist who opposes Crown policies is from 1768. Later it was applied to opponents of
Andrew Jackson (as early as 1825), and taken as the name of a political party (1834) that merged
into the Republican Party in 1854-56.    [I]n the spring of 1834 Jackson's opponents adopted the
name Whig, traditional term for critics of executive usurpations. James Watson Webb, editor of the
New York Courier and Enquirer, encouraged use of the name. [Henry] Clay gave it national currency in
a speech on April 14, 1834, likening the whigs of the present day to those who had resisted George
III, and by summer it was official. [Daniel Walker Howe, What Hath God Wrought, 2007, p.390]   Whig
historian is recorded from 1924. Whig history is the tendency in many historians ... to emphasise
certain principles of progress in the past and to produce a story which is the ratification if not
the glorification of the present. [Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History, 1931]


