exonerate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin exoneratus, past participle of exonerare remove a burden, discharge, unload,
from ex- off (see ex-) + onerare to unload; overload, oppress, from onus (genitive oneris) burden
(see onus). Related: Exonerated; exonerating.


exoneration (n.)

1630s, from Latin exonerationem (nominative exoneratio) an unloading, lightening, noun of action
from past participle stem of exonerare (see exonerate).


discharge (v.)

early 14c., to exempt, exonerate, release, from Old French deschargier (12c., Modern French
d&eacute;charger) to unload, discharge, from Late Latin discarricare, from dis- do the opposite of
(see dis-) + carricare load (see charge (v.)).    Meaning to unload, to free from is late 14c. Of
weapons, from 1550s. The electrical sense is first attested 1748. Meaning to fulfill, to perform
one's duties is from c.1400. Related: Discharged; discharging.


excuse (v.)

early 13c., attempt to clear (someone) from blame, from Old French escuser (12c., Modern French
excuser) apologize, make excuses; pardon, exonerate, from Latin excusare excuse, make an excuse for,
release from a charge, from ex- out, away (see ex-) + causa accusation, legal action (see cause).
Meaning to obtain exemption or release is from mid-15c.; that of to accept another's plea of excuse
is from early 14c. Related: Excused; excusing. Excuse me as a mild apology or statement of polite
disagreement is from c.1600.


release (v.)

c.1300, to withdraw, revoke (a decree, etc.), cancel, lift; remit, from Old French relaissier,
relesser to relinquish, quit, let go, leave behind, abandon, acquit, variant of relacher release,
relax, from Latin relaxare loosen, stretch out (see relax), source also of Spanish relajar, Italian
relassare.    Meaning alleviate, ease is mid-14c., as is sense of free from (duty, etc.); exonerate.
From late 14c. as grant remission, forgive; set free from imprisonment, military service, etc. Also
give up, relinquish, surrender. In law, c.1400, to grant a release of property. Of press reports,
attested from 1904; of motion pictures, from 1912; of music recordings, from 1962. As a euphemism
for to dismiss, fire from a job it is attested in American English since 1904. Related: Released;
releasing.


