expenditure (n.)

1769, from Medieval Latin expenditus, irregular past participle of expendere (see expend) + -ure.
Related: Expenditures.


expensive (adj.)

1620s, given to profuse expenditure, from expense (n.) + -ive. Meaning costly is from 1630s. Earlier
was expenseful (c.1600). Expenseless was in use mid-17c.-18c., but there seems now nothing notable
to which it applies, and the dictionaries label it obsolete.


overrun (v.)

Old English oferyrnan; see over- + run (v.). The noun meaning excess expenditure over budget is from
1956. Related: Overran; overrunning.


waste (n.)

c.1200, desolate regions, from Anglo-French and Old North French wast waste, damage, destruction;
wasteland, moor (Old French gast), from Latin vastum, neuter of vastus waste (see waste (v.)).
Replaced or merged with Old English westen, woesten a desert, wilderness, from the Latin word.
Meanings consumption, depletion, also useless expenditure are from c.1300; sense of refuse matter is
attested from c.1400. Waste basket first recorded 1850.


magnificence (n.)

mid-14c., great-mindedness, courage, from Old French magnificence splendor, nobility, grandeur, from
Latin magnificentia splendor, munificence, from stem of magnificus great, elevated, noble, eminent,
also splendid, rich, fine, costly, literally doing great deeds, from magnus great (see magnate) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Meaning greatness, grandeur, glory in English is from late
14c. That of beauty, splendor, wealth is 15c. As one of the Aristotelian and scholastic virtues, it
translates Greek megaloprepeia liberality of expenditure combined with good taste.


cost (n.)

c.1200, from Old French cost (12c., Modern French co&#251;t) cost, outlay, expenditure; hardship,
trouble, from Vulgar Latin *costare, from Latin constare, literally to stand at (or with), with a
wide range of figurative senses including to cost. The idiom is the same one used in Modern English
when someone says something stands at X dollars to mean it sells for X dollars. The Latin word is
from com- with (see com-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).


stint (v.)

to be sparing or frugal, 1722, earlier to limit, restrain (1510s), cause to cease, put an end to
(mid-14c.), cease, desist (intransitive), c.1200, from Old English styntan to blunt, make dull,
probably originally make short, from Proto-Germanic *stuntijanan (cognates: Old Norse stuttr short,
scant, Middle High German stunz blunt, short, German stutzen to cut short, curtail, stop, hesitate),
from PIE root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). The English word perhaps
was influenced by its Scandinavian cognates. Sense of be careful in expenditure is from 1848.
Related: Stinted; stinting. The noun is attested from c.1300.


