exploit (v.)

c.1400 espleiten, esploiten to accomplish, achieve, fulfill, from Old French esploitier, espleiter,
from esploit (see exploit (n.)). The sense of use selfishly first recorded 1838, from French,
perhaps extended from use of the word with reference to mines, etc. (compare exploitation). Related:
Exploited; exploiting. As an adjective form, exploitative (1882) is from French; exploitive (by
1859) appears to be a native formation.


exploit (n.)

late 14c., outcome of an action, from Old French esploit (12c.), a very common word, used in senses
of action, deed, profit, achievement, from Latin explicitum a thing settled, ended, or displayed,
noun use of neuter of explicitus, past participle of explicare unfold, unroll, disentangle (see
explicit).    Meaning feat, achievement is c.1400. Sense evolution is from unfolding to bringing out
to having advantage to achievement. Related: Exploits.


exploitation (n.)

1803, productive working of something, a positive word among those who used it first, though
regarded as a Gallicism, from French exploitation, noun of action from exploiter (see exploit (v.)).
Bad sense developed 1830s-50s, in part from influence of French socialist writings (especially Saint
Simon), also perhaps influenced by U.S. anti-slavery writing; and the insulting word was hurled at
activities it once had crowned as praise.    It follows from this science [conceived by Saint
Simon] that the tendency of the human race is from a state of antagonism to that of an universal
peaceful association -- from the dominating influence of the military spirit to that of the
industriel one; from what they call l'exploitation de l'homme par l'homme to the exploitation of the
globe by industry. [Quarterly Review, April &amp; July 1831]


gest (n.)

famous deed, exploit; story, romance, c.1300, from Old French geste action, exploit, romance,
history (of celebrated people or actions), from Latin gesta actions, exploits, deeds, achievements,
neuter plural of gestus, past participle of gerere to carry on, wage, perform, of unknown origin.
See jest.


parlay (n.)

1701, parloi, term in the card game faro, from French paroli, from Italian parole (Neapolitan
paroli) words, promises, plural of parolo (see parole). Meaning exploit to advantage is from 1942.


jest (n.)

early 13c., geste, narrative of exploits, from Old French geste action, exploit, from Latin gesta
deeds, neuter plural of gestus, past participle of gerere to carry, behave, act, perform (see gest).
Sense descended through idle tale (late 15c.) to mocking speech, raillery (1540s) to joke (1550s).


milk (v.)

Old English melcan, milcian, meolcian to milk, give milk, suckle, from Proto-Germanic *melk- to milk
(cognates: Dutch melken, Old High German melchan, German melken), from PIE root *melg- (see milk
(n.)). Figurative sense of exploit for profit is first found 1520s. Related: Milked; milking.


