exposure (n.)

c.1600, public exhibition, from expose (v.) + -ure. Sense of situation with regard to sun or weather
is from 1660s. Photographic sense is from 1839. Indecent exposure attested by 1825.


cold (n.)

c.1300, coldness, from cold (adj.). Sense in common cold is 1530s, from symptoms resembling those of
exposure to cold; compare earlier senses indisposition caused by exposure to cold (early 14c.);
discomfort caused by cold (c.1300).


airing (n.)

action of exposing to air, c.1600, from present participle of air (v.). Meaning display, public
exposure is from 1870.


cultured (adj.)

1743 in the literal sense of cultivated, of land, etc., past participle adjective from culture;
meaning developed under controlled natural conditions is from 1906, originally of pearls. Meaning
improved by exposure to intellectual culture is from 1777.


outcrop (n.)

1805, in geology, exposure of rocks at the surface, from out + crop (n.) in its sense of sprout,
head.


flashing (n.)

indecent exposure, 1896, verbal noun from flash (v.). The meaning strip of metal used in roofing,
etc. is from 1782, earlier simply flash (1570s), but it is of unknown origin and might be an
unrelated word.


show up (v.)

1826, to disgrace through exposure, see show (v.) + up (adv.). Meaning to put in an appearance, be
present is from 1888.


detection (n.)

early 15c., exposure, accusation, from Latin detectionem (nominative detectio) an uncovering, noun
of action from past participle stem of detegere (see detect).


roentgen

1896, in Roentgen rays X-rays, in recognition of German physicist Wilhem Conrad R&ouml;ntgen
(1845-1923), who discovered X-rays in 1895. As a unit of exposure to radiation, it is attested from
1922, proposed in French in 1921.


tan (n.)

bronze color imparted to skin by exposure to sun, 1749, see tan (v.). Earlier as substance made of
crushed bark used in making leather (c.1600). As a simple name for a brownish color, in any context,
it is recorded from 1888. The adjective meaning of the color of tanned leather is recorded from
1660s. Tan-line attested from 1979.


sunspot (n.)

also sun-spot, 1849, in astronomy, from sun (n.) + spot (n.). Earlier a spot on the skin caused by
exposure to the sun (1818).


weather (v.)

come through safely, 1650s, from weather (n.). The notion is of a ship riding out a storm. Sense of
wear away by exposure is from 1757. Related: Weathered; weathering. Old English verb wederian meant
exhibit a change of weather.


cucking stool (n.)

early 13c., from cuck to void excrement, from Old Norse kuka feces (the chair was sometimes in the
form of a close-stool). Also known as trebucket and castigatory, it was used on disorderly women and
fraudulent tradesmen, either in the form of public exposure to ridicule or for ducking in a pond.


publicity (n.)

1791, condition of being public, from French publicit&eacute; (1690s), from Medieval Latin
publicitatem (nominative publicitas), from Latin publicus (see public (adj.)). Sense of a making
(something) known, an exposure to the public is from 1826, shading by c.1900 into advertising,
business of promotion. Publicity stunt first recorded 1908.


multiple (adj.)

1640s, involving many parts, from French multiple (14c.), from Late Latin multiplus manifold, from
Latin multi- many, much (see multi-) + -plus -fold (see -plus). The noun is from 1680s, in
mathematics, from the adjective. Multiple choice as a type of question attested from 1828. Multiple
exposure first recorded 1923.


discover (v.)

c.1300, divulge, reveal, disclose, from Old French descovrir uncover, unroof, unveil, reveal,
betray, from Late Latin discooperire, from Latin dis- opposite of (see dis-) + cooperire to cover up
(see cover). At first with a sense of betrayal or malicious exposure (discoverer originally meant
informant); the meaning to obtain knowledge or sight of what was not known is from 1550s. Related:
Discovered; discovering.


craps (n.)

1843, American English, unrelated to the term for excrement, instead it is from Louisiana French
craps the game of hazard, from an 18c. continental French corruption of English crabs, which was
18c. slang for a throw of two or three (the lowest throw), which perhaps is from crab (n.2), the
sense in crab apple. The 1843 citation (in an anti-gambling publication, An Exposure of the Arts and
Miseries of Gambling) calls it a game lately introduced into New Orleans.


fumigation (n.)

late 14c., make aromatic smoke as part of a ceremony, from Old French fumigation, from Latin
fumigationem (nominative fumigatio) a smoking, noun of action from past participle stem of fumigare
to smoke, from fumus smoke, fume (see fume) + root of agere to drive (see act (n.)). Sense of
exposure (of someone or something) to aromatic fumes is c.1400, originally as a medicinal or
therapeutic treatment.


smoke (v.)

Old English smocian to produce smoke, emit smoke, especially as a result of burning, from smoke
(n.1). Meaning to drive out or away or into the open by means of smoke is attested from 1590s.
Meaning to apply smoke to, to cure (bacon, fish, etc.) by exposure to smoke is first attested 1590s.
In connection with tobacco, draw fumes from burning into the mouth, first recorded 1604 in James I's
Counterblast to Tobacco. Related: Smoked; smoking. Smoking gun in figurative sense of incontestable
evidence is from 1974.


stale (adj.)

early 13c., freed from dregs or lees (of ale, wine, etc.), probably literally having stood long
enough to clear, ultimately from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet); probably via Old French estal
placed, fixed position, from Frankish *stal- position (see stall (n.1)). Cognate with Middle Dutch
stel stale (of beer and old urine). Originally a desirable quality (in beer and wine); the meaning
not fresh is first recorded late 15c. Figurative sense (of immaterial things) old and trite,
hackneyed is recorded from 1560s. As a noun, that which has become tasteless by exposure, hence a
prostitute (in Shakespeare, etc.). Related: Staleness.


scream (v.)

late 12c., scr&aelig;men, of uncertain origin, similar to words in Scandinavian, Dutch, German, and
Flemish (such as Old Norse skr&aelig;ma to terrify, scare, Swedish scrana to scream, Dutch schreijen
cry aloud, shriek, Old High German scrian, German schreien to cry). Related: Screamed; screaming.
Screaming meemies is World War I army slang, originally a soldiers' name for a type of German
artillery shell that made a loud noise in flight (from French woman's name Mimi), extended to the
battle fatigue caused by long exposure to enemy fire.


tan (v.)

late Old English tannian to convert hide into leather (by steeping it in tannin), from Medieval
Latin tannare tan, dye a tawny color (c.900), from tannum crushed oak bark, used in tanning leather,
probably from a Celtic source (such as Breton tann oak tree). The meaning make brown by exposure to
the sun (as tanning does to hides) first recorded 1520s; intransitive sense also from 1520s. Of
persons, not considered an attractive feature until 20c.; in Shakespeare, to deprive of the
freshness and beauty of youth (Sonnet CXV). As an adjective from 1620s. To tan (someone's) hide in
the figurative sense is from 1660s. Related: Tanned; tanning. German Tanne fir tree (as in
Tannenbaum) might be a transferred meaning from the same Celtic source.


mad (adj.)

late 13c., from Old English gem&aelig;dde (plural) out of one's mind (usually implying also violent
excitement), also foolish, extremely stupid, earlier gem&aelig;ded rendered insane, past participle
of a lost verb *gem&aelig;dan to make insane or foolish, from Proto-Germanic *ga-maid-jan,
demonstrative form of *ga-maid-az changed (for the worse), abnormal (cognates: Old Saxon gimed
foolish, Old High German gimeit foolish, vain, boastful, Gothic gamai&thorn;s crippled, wounded, Old
Norse mei&eth;a to hurt, maim), from intensive prefix *ga- + PIE *moito-, past participle of root
*mei- (1) to change (cognates: Latin mutare to change, mutuus done in exchange, migrare to change
one's place of residence; see mutable).    Emerged in Middle English to replace the more usual Old
English word, wod (see wood (adj.)). Sense of beside oneself with excitement or enthusiasm is from
early 14c. Meaning beside oneself with anger is attested from early 14c., but deplored by Rev. John
Witherspoon (1781) as an Americanism. It now competes in American English with angry for this sense.
Of animals, affected with rabies, from late 13c. Phrase mad as a March hare is attested from 1520s,
via notion of breeding season; mad as a hatter is from 1829 as demented, 1837 as enraged, according
to a modern theory supposedly from erratic behavior caused by prolonged exposure to poison mercuric
nitrate, used in making felt hats. For mad as a wet hen see hen. Mad money is attested from 1922;
mad scientist is from 1891.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


