fashionista (n.)

by 1996, from fashion + -ista (see -ist). In the same sense were fashionist (1610s, alive as late as
1850); fashion-monger (1590s); fashion-fly (1868).


fashion (n.)

c.1300, shape, manner, mode, from Old French fa&ccedil;on (12c.) face, appearance; construction,
pattern, design; thing done; beauty; manner, characteristic feature, from Latin factionem
(nominative factio) group of people acting together, literally a making or doing, from facere to
make (see factitious).    Sense of prevailing custom is from late 15c.; that of style of attire is
from 1520s.  To call a fashion wearable is the kiss of death. No new fashion worth its salt is
wearable. [Eugenia Sheppard, New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 13, 1960] Fashion plate (1851) originally
was full-page picture in a popular magazine showing the prevailing or latest style of dress, in
reference to the typographic plate from which it was printed. Transfered sense of well-dressed
person had emerged by 1920s.


fashion (v.)

early 15c.; see fashion (n.). Related: Fashioned; fashioning.


fashionable (adj.)

stylish, c.1600, capable of being fashioned, also conformable to prevailing tastes, from fashion +
-able. Related: Fashionably.


vogue (n.)

1570s, the vogue, height of popularity or accepted fashion, from Middle French vogue fashion,
success; also drift, swaying motion (of a boat) literally a rowing, from Old French voguer to row,
sway, set sail (15c.), probably from a Germanic source. Compare Old High German wagon to float,
fluctuate, literally to balance oneself; German Wege wave, billow, wogen fluctuate, float (see
weigh).    Perhaps the notion is of being borne along on the waves of fashion. Italian voga a
rowing, Spanish boga rowing, but colloquially fashion, reputation also probably are from the same
Germanic source. Phrase in vogue having a prominent place in popular fashion first recorded 1643.
The fashion magazine began publication in 1892.


Chanel

Paris fashion house, founded by Gabrielle 'Coco' Chanel (1883-1971), French fashion designer and
perfumier, who opened her first shop in 1909. The perfume Chanel No. 5 debuted in 1921.


mode (n.2)

current fashion, 1640s, from French mode manner, fashion, style (15c.), from Latin modus manner (see
mode (n.1)).


guise (n.)

late 13c., style or fashion of attire, from Old French guise manner, fashion, way, from Frankish
*wisa or some similar Germanic source (cognate with Old High German wisa manner, wise; see wise
(n.)). Sense of assumed appearance is from 1660s, from earlier meaning mask, disguise (c.1500).


fabricate (v.)

mid-15c., to fashion, make, build, from Latin fabricatus, past participle of fabricare make,
construct, fashion, build, from fabrica (see fabric). In bad sense of to tell a lie, etc., it is
recorded by 1779. Related: Fabricated; fabricating.


model (v.)

1660s, fashion in clay or wax, from model (n.). Earlier was modelize (c.1600). From 1915 in the
sense to act as a fashion model, to display (clothes). Related: Modeled; modeling; modelled;
modelling.


chine (adj.)

in Chinese fashion, French Chin&#233;, past participle of chiner to color in Chinese fashion, from
Chine China (see China).


feature (n.)

early 14c., make, form, fashion, from Anglo-French feture, from Old French faiture deed, action;
fashion, shape, form; countenance, from Latin factura a formation, a working, from past participle
stem of facere make, do, perform (see factitious). Sense of facial characteristic is mid-14c.; that
of any distinctive part first recorded 1690s. Entertainment sense is from 1801; in journalism by
1855. Meaning a feature film is from 1913.


novelty (n.)

late 14c., quality of being new, also a new manner or fashion, an innovation; something new or
unusual, from Old French novelet&eacute; newness, innovation, change; news, new fashion (Modern
French nouveaut&eacute;), from novel new (see novel (adj.)). Meaning newness is attested from late
14c.; sense of useless but amusing object is attested from 1901 (as in novelty shop, 1973).


gallant (n.)

man of fashion and pleasure, mid-15c., earlier dissolute man, rake (early 15c.); from gallant
(adj.).


grunge (n.)

sloppiness, also untidy person, 1965, American English teen slang, probably a back-formation from
grungy. The music and fashion style that originated in Seattle is attested from the early 1990s.


a la

from French &agrave; la, in the manner of; used in English in French terms from fashion or cookery
since late 16c.; used in native formations with English words or names from c.1800 (first attested
in Jane Austen).


trend (n.)

the way something bends (coastline, mountain range, etc.), 1777, earlier round bend of a stream
(1620s), from trend (v.); sense of general course or direction is from 1884. Sense of a prevailing
new tendency in popular fashion or culture is from c.1950.


nicely (adv.)

early 14c., foolishly, from nice + -ly (2). From c.1600 as scrupulously; 1714 as in an agreeable
fashion.


pigtail (n.)

1680s, tobacco in a twisted roll, from pig (n.) + tail (n.). So called from resemblance. Meaning
braid of hair is from 1753, when it was a fashion among soldiers and sailors. Applied variously to
other objects or parts thought to resemble this in appearance.


catwalk (n.)

1885, long, narrow footway, from cat (n.) + walk (n.); in reference to such narrowness of passage
one has to cross carefully, as a cat walks. Originally of ships and theatrical back-stages.
Application to fashion show runways is by 1942.


tony (adj.)

of a high tone, affecting social elegance, 1877, American English slang, from tone (n.) + -y (2). It
was the name of a reddish-brown fashion color in the 1920s.


unfashionable (adj.)

1560s, incapable of being shaped, from un- (1) not + fashionable. Meaning not in accordance with
prevailing fashion is attested from 1640s. Related: Unfashionably.


outmoded (adj.)

no longer in fashion, out of date, 1894, from out + mode (q.v.); perhaps formed on model of French
d&eacute;moder.


Nehru

of a type of long, narrow jacket with a standing collar (popular in Western fashion late 1960s),
1967, a reference to Jawaharlal Nehru (1889-1964), first prime minister of independent India
(1947-1964), who often wore such a jacket in public appearances.


modist (n.)

follower of fashion, 1837, from mode (n.2) + -ist.


fad (n.)

1834, hobby, pet project; 1881 as fashion, craze, perhaps shortened from fiddle-faddle. Or perhaps
from French fadaise trifle, nonsense, ultimately from Latin fatuus stupid.


modeling (n.)

also modelling, 1650s, action of bringing into desired condition, verbal noun from model (v.).
Meaning action of making models (in clay, wax, etc.) is from 1799. Meaning work of a fashion model
is from 1941.


Levis (n.)

1926, American English, originally Levi's, from Levi Strauss and Company, original manufacturer.
Strauss' innovation was the copper rivets at strain points. A cowboy's accessory, adopted as a
fashion c.1940s.


designer (n.)

1640s, one who schemes; agent noun from design (v.). Meaning one who makes an artistic design or a
construction plan is from 1660s. In fashion, as an adjective, bearing the label of a famous clothing
designer (thus presumed to be expensive or prestigious), from 1966. Designer drug attested from
1983.


Nubia

ultimately from a local word, said to be related to Coptic noubti to weave, or from Nubian nub gold.
In the fashion sense woman's light scarf it is from French, from Latin nubes cloud (see nuance).


coiffure (n.)

style or fashion of wearing the hair, 1630s, from French coiffure, from coiffer (see coiffeur).


a la mode

1640s, from French &agrave; la mode (15c.), literally in the fashion (see mode (n.2)). In 17c.,
sometimes nativized as all-a-mode. Cookery sense of a dessert served with ice cream is 1903,
American English.


courturier (n.)

1899, male dressmaker or fashion designer, from French couture sewing, dressmaking (see couture).
Couturi&egrave;re dressmaker is from 1818.


shocking (adj.)

1690s, offensive, present participle adjective from shock (v.1). From 1704 as causing a jolt of
indignation, horror, etc.; from 1798 as so bad as to be shocking. Related: Shockingly. Shocking pink
introduced February 1937 by Italian-born fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli.


kick (n.)

1520s, from kick (v.). Meaning recoil (of a gun) when fired is from 1826. Meaning surge or fit of
pleasure (often as kicks) is from 1941; originally literally, stimulation from liquor or drugs
(1844). The kick the fashion is c.1700.


Edith

fem. proper name, Old English Eadgy&eth;, from ead wealth, prosperity, happiness + gu&eth; war. A
fairly common name; it survived through the Middle Ages, probably on the popularity of St.
Eadgy&eth; of Wilton (962-84, abbess, daughter of King Edgar of England), fell from favor 16c., was
revived in fashion 19c.


crop (v.)

cut off the top of a plant, c.1200, from crop (n.). The general meaning of to cut off is mid-15c.
Related: Cropped; cropping. Women's fashion crop top is attested from 1984.


stylish (adj.)

conformable to approved fashion or taste, 1795, from style (n.) + -ish. Good is understood. Related:
Stylishly; stylishness.


shipshape (adj.)

also ship-shape, properly arranged, 1640s, originally according to the fashion of a (sailing) ship,
where neatness is a priority and the rigging must be serviceable and stowed properly; from ship (n.)
+ shape (n.).


refashion (v.)

1788 (implied in refashioned), from re- + fashion (v.). Related: Refashioning.


urbanity (n.)

1530s, from Middle French urbanit&eacute; (14c.) and directly from Latin urbanitatem (nominative
urbanitas) city life; life in Rome; refinement, city fashion or manners, elegance, courtesy, also
wit, raillery, trickery, from urbanus (see urban).


old-fashioned (adj.)

1590s, in an outdated style, from old + past participle of fashion (v.). As a type of cocktail,
attested from 1901, American English.   <b>Old Fashioned Tom Gin Cocktail</b> Mix same as Holland
Gin Old Fashioned Cocktail using Old Tom gin in place of Holland [George J. Kappeler, Modern
American Drinks, Akron, Ohio, 1900]


newfangled (adj.)

late 15c., addicted to novelty, literally ready to grasp at all new things, from adj. newefangel
fond of novelty (late 14c.), from new + -fangel inclined to take, from root of Old English fon to
capture (see fang). Sense of lately come into fashion first recorded 1530s.


tabagie (n.)

1819, from French tabagie (17c.), from tabac tobacco (see tobacco) + -age. A group of smokers who
meet in club fashion; a tobacco-parliament.


mode (n.1)

manner, late 14c., kind of musical scale, from Latin modus measure, extent, quantity; proper
measure, rhythm, song; a way, manner, fashion, style (in Late Latin also mood in grammar and logic),
from PIE root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take appropriate measures (see medical).
Meaning manner in which a thing is done first recorded 1660s.


garb (n.)

1590s, elegance, stylishness, from Middle French garbe graceful outline (Modern French galbe), from
Italian garbo grace, elegance, perhaps from Germanic (compare Old High German gar(a)wi dress,
equipment, preparation; see gear). Sense of fashion of dress is first attested 1620s.


miniskirt (n.)

also mini-skirt, 1965, from mini- + skirt (n.); reputedly the invention of French fashion designer
Andr&eacute; Courr&egrave;ges (b.1923).The miniskirt enables young ladies to run faster, and because
of it, they may have to. [John V. Lindsay, New York Times, Jan. 13, 1967]Related: Miniskirted.


revive (v.)

early 15c., return to consciousness; restore to health, from Middle French revivre (10c.), from
Latin revivere to live again, from re- again (see re-) + vivere to live (see vital). Meaning bring
back to notice or fashion is from mid-15c. Related: Revived; reviving.


Morpheus

name for the god of dreams in Ovid, son of Sleep, literally the maker of shapes, from Greek morphe
form, shape, figure, especially a fine figure, a beautiful form; beauty, fashion, outward
appearance, perhaps from PIE *merph-, a possible Greek root meaning form. Related: Morphean. Morpho
was an epithet of Aphrodite, literally shapely.


sweater (n.)

woolen vest or jersey, originally worn in rowing, 1882, from earlier sweaters clothing worn to
produce sweating and reduce weight (1828), plural agent noun from sweat (v.). As a fashion garment,
attested from 1925. Earlier it meant one who works hard (1520s). Sweater girl is attested from 1940;
Lana Turner (1920-1995) was the first, from her appearance in the film They Won't Forget (1937).


