fathom (v.)

Old English f&aelig;&eth;mian to embrace, surround, envelop; see fathom (n.). The meaning take
soundings is from c.1600; its figurative sense of get to the bottom of, understand is 1620s.
Related: Fathomed; fathoming.


fathomable (adj.)

1630s, figurative; 1690s, literal; from fathom (v.) + -able.


fathomless (adj.)

1630s, literal; 1640s, figurative; from fathom + -less.


fathom (n.)

Old English f&aelig;&eth;m length of the outstretched arm (a measure of about six feet), also arms,
grasp, and, figuratively power, from Proto-Germanic *fathmaz embrace (cognates: Old Norse fa&eth;mr
embrace, bosom, Old Saxon fathmos the outstretched arms, Dutch vadem a measure of six feet), from
PIE *pot(e)-mo-, from root *pete- to spread, stretch out (see pace (n.)). There are apparent
cognates in Old Frisian fethem, German faden thread, which OED explains by reference to spreading
out.


unfathomed (adj.)

1620s, from un- (1) not + past participle of fathom (v.).


plummet (v.)

1620s, to fathom, take soundings, from plummet (n.). Meaning to fall rapidly first recorded 1933,
perhaps originally among aviators. Related: Plummeted; plummeting.


sound (v.2)

fathom, probe, measure the depth of, mid-14c. (implied in sounding), from Old French sonder, from
sonde sounding line, perhaps from the same Germanic source that yielded Old English sund water, sea
(see sound (n.2)). Barnhart dismisses the old theory that it is from Latin subundare. Figurative use
from 1570s.


brace (n.)

early 14c., piece of armor for the arms, also thong, strap for fastening, from Old French brace,
braz arms, also length measured by two arms (12c., Modern French bras arm, power; brasse fathom,
armful, breaststroke), from Latin bracchia, plural of bracchium an arm, a forearm, from Greek
brakhion an arm (see brachio-). Applied to various devices for fastening and tightening on notion of
clasping arms. Of dogs, a couple, a pair from c.1400.


clip (v.2)

fasten, hold together by pressure, also (mostly archaic) to embrace, from Old English clyppan to
embrace, clasp; surround; prize, honor, cherish; related to Old Frisian kleppa to embrace, love, Old
High German klaftra, German klafter fathom (on notion of outstretched arms). Also compare Lithuanian
glebys armful, globiu to embrace, support. Meaning to fasten, bind is early 14c. Meaning to fasten
with clips is from 1902. Related: Clipped; clipping. Original sense of the verb is preserved in U.S.
football clipping penalty.


pace (n.)

late 13c., a step in walking; rate of motion, from Old French pas a step, pace, trace, and directly
from Latin passus, passum a step, pace, stride, noun use of past participle of pandere to stretch
(the leg), spread out, probably from PIE *pat-no-, a nasalized variant of root *pete- to spread
(cognates: Greek petannynai to spread out, petalon a leaf, patane plate, dish; Old Norse fa&eth;mr
embrace, bosom, Old English f&aelig;&eth;m embrace, bosom, fathom, Old Saxon fathmos the
outstretched arms). Also, a measure of five feet [Johnson]. Pace-setter in fashion is from 1895.


