feign (v.)

c.1300, from Old French feign-, present participle stem of feindre pretend, represent, imitate,
shirk (12c.), from Latin fingere to touch, handle; devise; fabricate, alter, change (see fiction).
Related: Feigned; feigning.


faineant (adj.)

1610s (n.), from French fain&eacute;ant (16c.) do-nothing, from fait, third person singular present
tense of faire (see factitious) + n&eacute;ant nothing (compare dolce far niente).    A French folk
etymology of Old French faignant (14c.), present participle of faindre to feign (see feign). As an
adjective, from 1855.


unfeigned (adj.)

late 14c., sincere, genuine, true, real, from un- (1) not + past participle of feign (v.).


simulate (v.)

1620s, feign, pretend, assume falsely (implied in simulated), back-formation from simulation or else
from Latin simulatus, past participle of simulare to make like, imitate, copy. Meaning to use a
model to imitate certain conditions for purposes of study or training is from 1947. Related:
Simulating.


faint (adj.)

c.1300, wanting in courage, now mostly in faint-hearted (mid-15c.), from Old French feint soft,
weak, sluggish, past participle of feindre hesitate, falter, be indolent, show weakness, avoid one's
duty by pretending (see feign). Sense of weak, feeble is early 14c. Meaning producing a feeble
impression upon the senses is from 1650s.


feint (n.)

1670s, a false show, a pretended blow, from French feinte a feint, sham, abstract noun from Old
French feint (13c.) false, deceitful, originally fem. past participle of feindre (see feign).
Borrowed late 13c. as adjective, but now obsolete in that sense. Also as a noun in Middle English
with sense false-heartedness (early 14c.), also bodily weakness (c.1400).


fiction (n.)

late 14c., something invented, from Old French ficcion (13c.) dissimulation, ruse; invention, and
directly from Latin fictionem (nominative fictio) a fashioning or feigning, noun of action from past
participle stem of fingere to shape, form, devise, feign, originally to knead, form out of clay,
from PIE *dheigh- to build, form, knead (source also of Old English dag dough; see dough). As a
branch of literature, 1590s.


assemble (v.)

earlly 14c., transitive and intransitive, from Old French assembler come together, join, unite;
gather (11c.), from Latin assimulare to make like, liken, compare; copy, imitate; feign, pretend,
later to gather together, from ad- to (see ad-) + simulare to make like (see simulation). In Middle
English and in Old French it also was a euphemism for to couple sexually. Meaning to put parts
together in manufacturing is from 1852. Related: Assembled; assembling. Assemble together is
redundant.


pretend (v.)

late 14c., to profess, assert, maintain (a claim, etc.), to direct (one's) efforts, from Old French
pretendre to lay claim, from Latin praetendere stretch in front, put forward, allege, from prae
before (see pre-) + tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- to stretch (see tend).    Main modern
sense of feign, put forward a false claim is recorded from c.1400; the older sense of simply to
claim is behind the string of royal pretenders (1690s) in English history. Meaning to play, make
believe is recorded from 1865. In 17c. pretend also could mean make a suit of marriage for, from a
sense in French. Related: Pretended; pretending.


braid (v.)

to plait, knit, weave, twist together, c.1200, breidan, from Old English bregdan to move quickly,
pull, shake, swing, throw (in wrestling), draw (a sword); bend, weave, knit, join together; change
color, vary; scheme, feign, pretend (class III strong verb, past tense br&aelig;gd, past participle
brogden), from Proto-Germanic *bregthan make sudden jerky movements from side to side (compare Old
Norse breg&eth;a to brandish, turn about, braid; Old Saxon bregdan to weave; Dutch breien to knit;
Old High German brettan to draw, weave, braid), from PIE root *bherek- to gleam, flash (compare
Sanskrit bhrasate flames, blazes, shines). In English the verb survives only in the narrow
definition of plait hair. Related: Braided; braiding.


poetry (n.)

late 14c., poetry; a poem; ancient literature; poetical works, fables, or tales, from Old French
poetrie (13c.), and perhaps directly from Medieval Latin poetria (c.650), from Latin poeta (see
poet). In classical Latin, poetria meant poetess.    ... I decided not to tell lies in verse. Not to
feign any emotion that I did not feel; not to pretend to believe in optimism or pessimism, or
unreversible progress; not to say anything because it was popular, or generally accepted, or
fashionable in intellectual circles, unless I myself believed it; and not to believe easily.
[Robinson Jeffers (1887-1962), forward to Selected Poems]    Figurative use from 1660s. Old English
had metergeweorc verse, metercr&#230;ft art of versification. Modern English lacks a true verb form
in this group of words, though poeticize (1804), poetize (1580s, from French po&eacute;tiser), and
poetrize (c.1600) have been tried. Poetry in motion (1826) perhaps is from poetry of motion (1813)
dance (also poetry of the foot, 1660s).


