fell (adj.)

cruel, late 13c., from Old French fel cruel, fierce, vicious, from Medieval Latin fello villain (see
felon). Phrase at one fell swoop is from Macbeth.


fell (n.2)

skin or hide of an animal, Old English fel, from Proto-Germanic *felnam- (cognates: Old Frisian fel,
Old Saxon fel, Dutch vel, Old High German fel, German fell, Old Norse fiall, Gothic fill), from PIE
*pel-no-, suffixed form of root *pel- (4) skin, hide (see film (n.)).


fell (v.2)

Old English feoll; past tense of fall (v.).


fell (n.1)

rocky hill, c.1300, from Old Norse fiall   mountain, from Proto-Germanic *felzam- rock (cognates:
German Fels stone, rock), from PIE root *pel(i)s- rock, cliff.


fell (v.1)

Old English f&aelig;llan (Mercian), fyllan (West Saxon) make fall, cause to fall, also strike down,
demolish, kill, from Proto-Germanic *falljan strike down, cause to fall (cognates: Old Frisian
falla, Old Saxon fellian, Dutch fellen, Old High German fellen, German f&auml;llen, Old Norse fella,
Danish f&aelig;lde), causative of *fallan (source of Old English feallan, see fall (v.)), showing
i-mutation. Related: Felled; feller; felling.


blindfold (v.)

1520s, alteration, by similarity to fold, of blindfelled (early 14c.), past participle of
blindfellan blindfold, cover the eyes (with a bandage, etc.), also to strike blind (c.1200), from
Old English (ge)blindfellian to strike blind, from blind (adj.) + Anglian gefeollan to strike down,
as in to fell a tree (see fell (v.)). Related: Blindfolded; blindfolding.


swoop (n.)

1540s, a blow, stroke, from swoop (v.). Meaning the sudden pouncing of a rapacious bird on its prey
is 1605, from Shakespeare:    Oh, Hell-Kite! All? What, All my pretty Chickens, and their Damme, At
one fell swoope? [Macbeth, IV.iii.219]


Skylab (n.)

name of a U.S. space program, first attested 1970, launched 1973, fell to earth 1979. From sky (n.)
+ lab (n.).


log (v.1)

to fell a tree, 1717; earlier to strip a tree (1690s), from log (n.1). Related: Logged; logging.


Edith

fem. proper name, Old English Eadgy&eth;, from ead wealth, prosperity, happiness + gu&eth; war. A
fairly common name; it survived through the Middle Ages, probably on the popularity of St.
Eadgy&eth; of Wilton (962-84, abbess, daughter of King Edgar of England), fell from favor 16c., was
revived in fashion 19c.


plutonomic (adj.)

of or pertaining to the science or study of wealth or riches, 1853, from comb. form of Greek ploutos
wealth (see Pluto) + ending from economic. Fell from currency 1870s, revived 1990s. Related:
Plutonomics (1991); plutonomist (1869).


trousseau (n.)

a bride's clothing, etc., brought from her former home, 1817, from French trousseau, originally a
bundle, diminutive of Old French trousse bundle (see truss (n.)). Italicized as foreign at first,
nativized by 1833. The Old French word was borrowed into Middle English early 13c. as a bundle of
keys, but it fell from use.


newsletter (n.)

also news-letter , 1670s, from news (n.) + letter (n.). It fell from use until it was revived 20c.


gyromancy (n.)

1550s, method of divination by walking in a circle till the person falls down from dizziness, the
inference being drawn from the place in the circle at which he fell, from Medieval Latin gyromantia,
from Greek gyyros circle (see gyre) + manteia divination, oracle (see -mancy).


thee (pron.)

Old English &thorn;e (accusative and dative singular of &thorn;u thou), from Proto-Germanic *theke
(cognates: Old Frisian thi, Middle Dutch di, Old High German dih, German dich, Old Norse &thorn;ik,
Norwegian deg, Gothic &thorn;uk), from PIE *tege-, accusative of root *tu-, second person singular
pronoun (see thou). The verb meaning to use the pronoun 'thee' to someone is recorded from 1662, in
connection with the rise of Quakerism.    In Middle English, people began to use plural forms in all
cases, at first as a sign of respect to superiors, then as a courtesy to equals. By the 1600s, the
singular forms had come to represent familiarity and lack of status, and fell from use except in the
case of a few dialects, notably in the north of England. People in Lancashire north of the
Rossendale Forest and Yorkshire formerly were noted for use of the singular second person pronouns
tha (nom.) and thee (acc.). For religious reasons (Christian equality of persons, but also justified
as grammatically correct), the Quakers also retained the familiar forms.    Thou and Thee was a sore
cut to proud flesh and them that sought self-honour, who, though they would say it to God and
Christ, could not endure to have it said to themselves. So that we were often beaten and abused, and
sometimes in danger of our lives, for using those words to some proud men, who would say, What! you
ill-bred clown, do you Thou me? as though Christian breeding consisted in saying You to one; which
is contrary to all their grammar and teaching books, by which they instructed their youth. [George
Fox's journal, 1661]   <hr />   While the Quakers originally adopted thee and thou on account of
their grammatical correctness, they soon fell into the careless habit of using thee, the objective,
instead of thou, the nominative. Common illustrations are: How does thee do? or Will thee, etc.
[George Fox Tucker, A Quaker Home, Boston, 1891]


gloaming (n.)

Old English glomung twilight, formed (probably on model of &aelig;fning evening) from glom twilight,
related to glowan to glow (hence glow of sunrise or sunset), from Proto-Germanic *glo- (see glow
(v.)). Fell from currency except in Yorkshire dialect, but preserved in Scotland and reintroduced by
Burns and other Scottish writers after 1785.


cement (n.)

c.1300, from Old French ciment cement, mortar, pitch, from Latin c&aelig;menta stone chips used for
making mortar (singular caementum), from caedere to cut down, chop, beat, hew, fell, slay (see
-cide). The sense evolution from small broken stones to powdered stones used in construction took
place before the word reached English.


sandbag (v.)

1860, furnish with sandbags, from sandbag (n.). Meaning pretend weakness, 1970s perhaps is extended
from poker-playing sense of refrain from raising at the first opportunity in hopes of raising more
steeply later (1940), which perhaps is from sandbagger in the sense of bully or ruffian who uses a
sandbag as a weapon to knock his intended victim unconscious (1882). Hence to fell or stun with a
blow from a sandbag (1887). Related: Sandbagged; sandbagging.


witchcraft (n.)

Old English wiccecr&aelig;ft witchcraft, magic, from wicce (see witch) + cr&aelig;ft power, skill
(see craft). Witchcraft was declared a crime in English law in 1542; trials there peaked in 1580s
and 1640s but fell sharply after 1660. The last, in 1717, ended in acquittal. The Witchcraft Act was
repealed 1736.


herdsman (n.)

Old English heordman, but the word was not common until herd (Old English hierde) in sense  keeper
of domestic animals which go in herds fell from use (see shepherd). See herd (n.) + man (n.).
Intrusive -s- appeared early 15c., on model of craftsman, etc.


abate (v.)

put an end to (c.1300); to grow less, diminish in power or influence (early 14c.), from Old French
abattre beat down, cast down, from Vulgar Latin *abbatere, from Latin ad to (see ad-) + battuere to
beat (see batter (v.)). Secondary sense of to fell, slaughter is in abatis and abattoir. Related:
Abated; abating.


robust (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French robuste (14c.) and directly from Latin robustus strong and hardy,
literally as strong as oak, originally oaken, from robur, robus hard timber, strength, also a
special kind of oak, named for its reddish heartwood, from Latin ruber red (related to robigo rust),
from PIE *reudh- (see red (adj.1)). Related: Robustly; robustness. Robustious (1540s) was a common
form in 17c. (see Hamlet iii.2); it fell from use by mid-18c., but was somewhat revived by mid-19c.
antiquarian writers.


narcissism (n.)

1905, from German Narzissismus, coined 1899 (in Die sexuellen Perversit&auml;ten), by German
psychiatrist Paul N&auml;cke (1851-1913), on a comparison suggested 1898 by Havelock Ellis, from
Greek Narkissos, name of a beautiful youth in mythology (Ovid, Metamorphoses, iii.370) who fell in
love with his own reflection in a spring and was turned to the flower narcissus (q.v.). Coleridge
used the word in a letter from 1822.    But already Krishna, enamoured of himself, had resolved to
experience lust for his own self; he manifested his own Nature in the cow-herd girls and enjoyed
them. [Karapatri, Lingopasana-rahasya, Siddhanta, II, 1941-2]    Sometimes erroneously as narcism.


smolder (v.)

c.1300 (implied in smoldering), to smother, suffocate, related to Middle Dutch smolen, Low German
smelen, Flemish smoel hot, from Proto-Germanic *smel-, *smul-. The intransitive meaning burn and
smoke without flame is first recorded 1520s, fell from use 17c. (though smoldering persisted in
poetry) and was revived 19c. Figurative sense exist in a suppressed state; burn inwardly is from
1810. Related: Smouldered; smolderingly. Middle English also had a noun smolder meaning smoky vapor,
a stifling smoke.


calendar (n.)

c.1200, system of division of the year; mid-14c. as table showing divisions of the year; from Old
French calendier list, register, from Latin calendarium account book, from calendae/kalendae calends
the first day of the Roman month -- when debts fell due and accounts were reckoned -- from calare to
announce solemnly, call out, as the priests did in proclaiming the new moon that marked the calends,
from PIE root kele- (2) to call, shout (see claim (v.)).    Taken by the early Church for its
register list of saints and their feast days. The -ar spelling in English is 17c. to differentiate
it from the now obscure calender cloth-presser.


film (n.)

Old English filmen membrane, thin skin, from West Germanic *filminjan (cognates: Old Frisian filmene
skin, Old English fell hide), extended from Proto-Germanic *fello(m) animal hide, from PIE *pel- (4)
skin, hide (cognates: Greek pella, Latin pellis skin).    Sense of a thin coat of something is
1570s, extended by 1845 to the coating of chemical gel on photographic plates. By 1895 this also
meant the coating plus the paper or celluloid. First used of motion pictures in 1905.


rather (adv.)

Old English hra&thorn;or more quickly, earlier, sooner, also more readily, comparative of
hra&thorn;e, hr&aelig;&thorn;e quickly, hastily, promptly, readily, immediately, which is related to
hr&aelig;&eth; quick, nimble, prompt, ready, from Proto-Germanic *khratha- (cognates: Old Norse
hra&eth;r, Old High German hrad), from PIE *kret- to shake. The base form rathe was obsolete by 18c.
except in poetry (Tennyson); superlative rathest fell from use by 17c. Meaning more willingly is
recorded from c.1300; sense of more truly is attested from late 14c.    The rather lambes bene
starved with cold  [Spenser, The Shepheardes Calender (Februarie), 1579]


-cide

word-forming element meaning killer, from French -cide, from Latin -cida cutter, killer, slayer,
from -cidere, comb. form of caedere to strike down, chop, beat, hew, fell, slay, from PIE *kae-id-,
from root *(s)k(h)ai- to strike (Pokorny, not in Watkins; cognates: Sanskrit skhidati beats, tears,
Lithuanian kaisti shave, German heien beat). For Latin vowel change, see acquisition. The element
also can represent killing, from French -cide, from Latin -cidium a cutting, a killing.


credenza (n.)

1883, an Italian sideboard, from Italian credenza, literally belief, credit, from Medieval Latin
credentia (see credence).    The same evolution that produced this sense in Italian also worked on
the English word credence, which in Middle English also meant act or process of testing the nature
or character of food before serving it as a precaution against poison, a former practice in some
royal or noble households. Because of that, in medieval times it also meant a side-table or side-
board on which the food was placed to be tasted before serving; hence, in later use, a cupboard or
cabinet for the display of plate, etc. These senses fell away in English, and the modern furniture
piece, which begins to be mentioned in domestic interiors from c.1920, took its name from Italian,
perhaps as a more elegant word than homely sideboard.


winter (n.)

Old English winter (plural wintru), the fourth and coldest season of the year, winter, from Proto-
Germanic *wintruz winter (cognates: Old Frisian, Dutch winter, Old Saxon, Old High German wintar,
German winter, Danish and Swedish vinter, Gothic wintrus, Old Norse vetr winter), probably literally
the wet season, from PIE *wend-, from root *wed- (1) water, wet (see water (n.1)). On another old
guess, cognate with Gaulish vindo-, Old Irish find white.    As an adjective in Old English. The
Anglo-Saxons counted years in winters, as in Old English &aelig;netre one-year-old; and
wintercearig, which might mean either winter-sad or sad with years. Old Norse Vetrardag, first day
of winter, was the Saturday that fell between Oct. 10 and 16.


Three Rs (n.)

1824; said to have been given as a toast by Sir William Curtis (1752-1829), a beloved lord mayor of
London in the 1820s, who seems to have been a figure of fun to whom many mangled phrases were
attributed. Among the toasts he is alleged to have given at public dinners were The Female Ladies of
London; The three C's--Cox, King, and Curtis; and The three R's--Reading, Writing, and Rithmetic.
It has been very much the fashion amongst a class of persons to attribute to Sir W. C. ... a
vulgarity and ignorance of speech which are by no means consistent with his character and conduct.
The worthy and hospitable baronet has a rapid mode of speech, but it is always correct ; and
although some eccentricities are mixed up in his composition, he is highly honourable, and has been
a very useful member of society, particularly to his London constituents. [The Mirror, Jan. 29,
1825]    After listing some examples, the article continues:    It is, however, very certain, that
at a city festival some years ago, having indulged very freely, he fell asleep, when some wag,
choosing to consider him dead, wrote his epitaph, which was found next morning pinned to the
baronet's dress coat:--  Here lies the great Curtis,  Of London, Lord May'r:  He's left this here
world,  And gone to that there.


tongue-in-cheek (adv.)

1856, from phrase to speak with one's tongue in one's cheek to speak insincerely (1748), suggestive
of sly irony or humorous insincerity, perhaps a stage trick to convey irony to the audience.    Hem!
Pray, Sir, said he to the Bard, after thrusting his Tongue into a Corner of his Cheek, and rolling
his Eyes at Miss Willis, (Tricks which he had caught by endeavouring to take off a celebrated
Comedian) were these fine Tragedies of yours ever acted? [anonymous, Emily, or the History of a
Natural Daughter, 1761]   <hr />   This arietta, however, she no sooner began to perform, than he
and the justice fell asleep ; but the moment she ceased playing, the knight waked snorting, and
exclaimed,--'O cara! what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk any more of your Pargolesi and your
Corelli ?'--At the same time, he thrust his tongue in one cheek, and leered with one eye at the
doctor and me, who sat on his left hand--He concluded the pantomime with a loud laugh, which he
could command at all times extempore. [Smollett, The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker, 1771]


Veronica

fem. proper name, French Veronique, a variant of Greek Berenike (see Berenice). The popular Saint
Veronica (not in the Roman Martyrology) traditionally was a pious woman who wiped the face of Christ
when he fell carrying the cross to Calvary. The image of his face remained on the cloth, and the
veil of Veronica has been preserved in Rome from the 8c. Her popularity rose with the propagation of
the Stations of the Cross, and this connection led to the folk-etymology derivation of the name from
Latin vera true + Greek eikon image. Some also identified her with the woman with the issue of
blood, cured by Christ, as in the East this woman was identified from an early date by the name
Berenike. Hence vernicle (mid-14c.) picture of the face of Christ, from Old French veronicle,
variant of veronique St. Veronica's cloth.


summer (n.1)

hot season of the year, Old English sumor summer, from Proto-Germanic *sumur- (cognates: Old Saxon,
Old Norse, Old High German sumar, Old Frisian sumur, Middle Dutch somer, Dutch zomer, German
Sommer), from PIE root *sem- (2) summer (cognates: Sanskrit sama season, half-year, Avestan hama in
summer, Armenian amarn summer, Old Irish sam, Old Welsh ham, Welsh haf summer).    As an adjective
from c.1300. Summer camp as an institution for youth is attested from 1886; summer resort is from
1823; summer school first recorded 1810; theatrical summer stock is attested from 1941 (see stock
(n.2)). Old Norse sumarsdag, first day of summer, was the Thursday that fell between April 9 and 15.


sambo (n.2)

stereotypical name for male black person (now only derogatory), 1818, American English, probably a
different word from sambo (n.1); like many such words (Cuffy, Rastus, etc.) a common personal name
among U.S. blacks in the slavery days (first attested 1704 in Boston), probably from an African
source, such as Foulah sambo uncle, or a similar Hausa word meaning second son.    It could be used
without conscious racism or contempt until circa World War II. When the word fell from polite usage,
collateral casualties included the enormously popular children's book The Story of Little Black
Sambo (by Helen Bannerman), which is about an East Indian child, and the Sambo's Restaurant chain, a
U.S. pancake-specialty joint originally opened in Santa Barbara, Calif., in 1957 (the name
supposedly from a merging of the names of the founders, Sam Battistone and Newell Bo Bohnett, but
the chain's decor and advertising leaned heavily on the book), which once counted 1,200 units coast-
to-coast. Civil rights agitation against it began in 1970s and the chain collapsed, though the
original restaurant still is open. Many of the defunct restaurants were taken over by rival Denny's.


am (v.)

Old English eom to be, to remain, (Mercian eam, Northumbrian am), from PIE *esmi- (cognates: Old
Norse emi, Gothic im, Hittite esmi, Old Church Slavonic jesmi, Lithuanian esmi), from root *es-, the
S-ROOT, which also yielded Greek esti-, Latin est, Sanskrit as-, and German ist.    In Old English
it existed only in present tense, all other forms being expressed in the W-BASE (see were, was).
This cooperative verb is sometimes referred to by linguists as *es-*wes-. Until the distinction
broke down 13c., *es-*wes- tended to express existence, with beon meaning something closer to come
to be (see be).    Old English am had two plural forms: 1. sind/sindon, sie and 2. earon/aron The s-
form (also used in the subjunctive) fell from use in English in the early 13c. (though it continues
in German sind, the 3rd person plural of to be) and was replaced by forms of be, but aron (aren,
arn, are, from Proto-Germanic *ar-, probably a variant of PIE root *es-) continued, and as am and be
merged it encroached on some uses that previously had belonged to be. By the early 1500s it had
established its place in standard English. Art became archaic in the 1800s.


lot (n.)

Old English hlot object (anything from dice to straw, but often a chip of wood with a name inscribed
on it) used to determine someone's share, also what falls to a person by lot, from Proto-Germanic
*khlutom (cognates: Old Norse hlutr lot, share, Old Frisian hlot lot, Old Saxon hlot, Middle Dutch,
Dutch lot, Old High German hluz share of land, German Los; Old English hleotan to cast lots, to
foretell), of unknown origin. The object was placed with others in a receptacle, which was shaken,
the winner being the one that fell out first. Hence, to cast lots. In some cases the lots were drawn
by hand. The word was adopted from Germanic into the Romanic languages (compare lottery, lotto).
Meaning choice resulting from the casting of lots first attested c.1200.    Sense of plot of land is
first recorded 1630s (distribution of the best property in new settlements often determined by
casting lots), that of group, collection is 1725, from notion of auction lots. The generalized sense
of great many is first attested in 1812. To cast (one's) lot with another is to agree to share
winnings.


this (pron.)

Old English &thorn;is, neuter demonstrative pronoun and adjective (masc. &thorn;es, fem.
&thorn;eos), probably from a North Sea Germanic pronoun *tha-si-, formed by combining the base
*&thorn;a- (see that) with -s, which is probably identical with Old English se the (representing
here a specific thing), or with Old English seo, imperative of see (v.) to behold. Compare Old Saxon
these, Old Frisian this, Old Norse &thorn;essi, Middle Dutch dese, Dutch deze, Old High German
deser, German dieser.    Once fully inflected, with 10 distinct forms (see table below); the oblique
cases and other genders gradually fell away by 15c. The Old English plural was &thorn;&aelig;s
(nominative and accusative), which in Northern Middle English became thas, and in Midlands and
Southern England became thos. The Southern form began to be used late 13c. as the plural of that
(replacing Middle English tho, from Old English &thorn;a) and acquired an -e (apparently from the
influence of Middle English adjective plurals in -e; compare alle from all, summe from sum some),
emerging early 14c. as modern those.    About 1175 thes (probably a variant of Old English
&thorn;&aelig;s) began to be used as the plural of this, and by 1200 it had taken the form these,
the final -e acquired via the same mechanism that gave one to those.  <table width=90%
bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1><tr><td></td><td>Masc.</td><td>Fem
.</td><td>Neut.</td><td>Plural</td></tr><tr><td>Nom.</td><td>&thorn;es</td><td>&thorn;eos</td><td>&t
horn;is</td><td>&thorn;as</td></tr><tr><td>Acc.</td><td>&thorn;isne</td><td>&thorn;as</td><td>&thorn
;is</td><td>&thorn;as</td></tr><tr><td>Gen.</td><td>&thorn;isses</td><td>&thorn;isse</td><td>&thorn;
isses</td><td>&thorn;issa</td></tr><tr><td>Dat.</td><td>&thorn;issum</td><td>&thorn;isse</td><td>&th
orn;issum</td><td>&thorn;issum</td></tr><tr><td>Inst.</td><td>&thorn;ys</td><td>&thorn;isse</td><td>
&thorn;ys</td><td>&thorn;issum</td></tr></table>


Aryan

c.1600, as a term in classical history, from Latin Arianus, Ariana, from Greek Aria, Areia, names
applied in classical times to the eastern part of ancient Persia and to its inhabitants. Ancient
Persians used the name in reference to themselves (Old Persian ariya-), hence Iran. Ultimately from
Sanskrit arya- compatriot; in later language noble, of good family.    Also the name Sanskrit-
speaking invaders of India gave themselves in the ancient texts, from which early 19c. European
philologists (Friedrich Schlegel, 1819, who linked the word with German Ehre honor) applied it to
the ancient people we now call Indo-Europeans (suspecting that this is what they called themselves);
this use is attested in English from 1851. The term fell into the hands of racists, and in German
from 1845 it was specifically contrasted to Semitic (Lassen).    German philologist Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900) popularized the term in his writings on comparative linguistics, recommending it as the
name (replacing Indo-European, Indo-Germanic, Caucasian, Jshortened) for the group of related,
inflected languages connected with these peoples, mostly found in Europe but also including Sanskrit
and Persian. Arian was used in this sense from 1839 (and is more philologically correct), but this
spelling caused confusion with Arian, the term in ecclesiastical history.    Gradually replaced in
comparative linguistics c.1900 by Indo-European, except when used to distinguish Indo-European
languages of India from non-Indo-European ones. Used in Nazi ideology to mean member of a Caucasian
Gentile race of Nordic type. As an ethnic designation, however, it is properly limited to Indo-
Iranians (most justly to the latter) and has fallen from general academic use since the Nazi era.


kermes (n.)

shield louse, c.1600 of the insect preparation used as a dye, etc.; 1590s of the species of oak on
which the insects live, from Medieval Latin cremesinus (also source of French kerm&egrave;s, Italian
chermes, Spanish carmes), from Arabic qirmiz kermes, from Sanskrit krmi-ja a compound meaning (red
dye) produced by a worm.    The Sanskrit compound is krmih worm (from PIE root *kwrmi- worm and
cognate with Lithuanian kirmis, Old Irish cruim, Albanian krimp worm) + -ja- produced (from PIE
*gene-; see genus). The insect lives in the Levant and southern Europe on a species of oak (kermes
oak). They were esteemed from ancient times as a source of red and scarlet dye. The dye is harvested
from pregnant females, which in that state resemble small roundish grains about the size of peas and
cling immobile to the tree on which they live.    From this fact kermes dye was, for a long time,
mistaken in Europe as being from a seed or excrescence of the tree, and the word for it in Greek was
kokkos, literally a grain, seed (see cocco-). This was passed to Latin as coccum, coccus berry [sic]
yielding scarlet dye, in late use scarlet color, scarlet garment.   So important was kermes (coccus)
as a commercial source of scarlet dye that derivatives of the name for it have displaced the
original word for red in many languages, such as Welsh coch (from Latin), Modern Greek kokkinos.
Compare also crimson (n.).  Kermes dyes have been found in burial wrappings in Anglo-Scandinavian
York, but the use of kermes dyes seems to have been lost in Europe from the Dark Ages until early
15c. It fell out of use again with the introduction of cochineal (the word for which might itself be
from coccus) from the New World.    Cloths dyed with kermes are of a deep red colour; and though
much inferior in brilliancy to the scarlet cloths dyed with real Mexican cochineal, they retain the
colour better and are less liable to stain. The tapestries of Brussels and other parts of Flanders,
which have scarcely lost any thing of their original brilliancy, even after a lapse of 200 years,
were all dyed with kermes. [W.T. Brande, Dictionary of Science, Literature, &amp; Art, London, 1842]


