fickle (adj.)

c.1200, probably from Old English ficol deceitful, cunning, tricky, related to befician deceive, and
to facen deceit, treachery. Common Germanic (compare Old Saxon fekan deceit, Old High German feihhan
deceit, fraud, treachery), from PIE *peig- (2) evil-minded, treacherous, hostile (see foe). Sense of
changeable is first recorded late 13c. Related: Fickleness.


variable (adj.)

late 14c., of persons, apt to change, fickle, from Old French variable various, changeable, fickle,
from Late Latin variabilis changeable, from variare to change (see vary). Of weather, seasons, etc.,
attested from late 15c.; of stars, from 1788.


inconstant (adj.)

c.1400, fickle, not steadfast, from Middle French inconstant (late 14c.), from Latin inconstantem
(nominative inconstans) changeable, fickle, capricious, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in-
(1)) + constantem (see constant). Related: Inconstantly.


wench (n.)

late 13c., wenche  girl, young woman, especially if unmarried, also female infant, shortened from
wenchel child, also in Middle English girl, maiden, from Old English wencel, probably related to
wancol unsteady, fickle, weak, from Proto-Germanic *wankila- (cognates: Old Norse vakr child, weak
person, Old High German wanchal fickle), from PIE *weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).    The
wenche is nat dead, but slepith. [Wyclif, Matt. ix:24, c.1380]    In Middle English occasionally
with disparaging suggestion, and secondary sense of concubine, strumpet is attested by mid-14c. Also
serving-maid, bondwoman, young woman of a humble class (late 14c.). It retained this in the 19c.
U.S. South in reference to slave women of any age.


mob (n.)

1680s, disorderly part of the population, rabble, slang shortening of mobile, mobility common
people, populace, rabble (1670s, probably with a conscious play on nobility), from Latin mobile
vulgus fickle common people (the phrase attested c.1600 in English), from mobile, neuter of mobilis
fickle, movable, mobile (see mobile (adj.)). In Australia and New Zealand, used without
disparagement for a crowd. Meaning gang of criminals working together is from 1839, originally of
thieves or pick-pockets; American English sense of organized crime in general is from 1927.    The
Mob was not a synonym for the Mafia. It was an alliance of Jews, Italians, and a few Irishmen, some
of them brilliant, who organized the supply, and often the production, of liquor during the thirteen
years, ten months, and nineteen days of Prohibition. ... Their alliance -- sometimes called the
Combination but never the Mafia -- was part of the urgent process of Americanizing crime. [Pete
Hamill, Why Sinatra Matters, 1998]   Mob scene crowded place first recorded 1922.


whirligig (n.)

mid-15c., a child's toy, from whirl (v.) + gig (see gig (n.1)). Meaning anything in constant motion
is from 1580s; fickle, flighty person is from c.1600; as a type of water beetle, from 1713.


flighty (adj.)

1550s, swift, later (1768) fickle or frivolous, originally of skittish horses; from flight (n.1) +
-y (2). Related: Flightiness.


fleeting (adj.)

early 13c., fickle, shifting, unstable, from Old English fleotende floating, drifting, later flying,
moving swiftly, from present participle of fleotan (see fleet (v.)). Meaning existing only briefly
is from 1560s.


pliant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ploiant bending, supple; compliant, fickle, as a noun, turncoat (13c.),
present participle of ploier to bend (see ply (n.)). Figurative sense of easily influenced is from
c.1400. Related: Pliancy.


wangle (v.)

obtain something by trickery, 1888, originally British printer's slang for fake by manipulation;
perhaps an alteration of waggle, or of wankle (now dialectal) unsteady, fickle, from Old English
wancol (see wench (n.)). Brought into wider use by World War I soldiers.


unstable (adj.)

early 13c., apt to move, from un- (1) not + stable (adj.). Similar formation in Middle High German
unstabel. Meaning liable to fall is recorded from c.1300; sense of fickle is attested from late 13c.
An Old English word for this was feallendlic, which might have become *fally.


mobile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French mobile (14c.), from Latin mobilis movable, easy to move; loose, not
firm, figuratively, pliable, flexible, susceptible, nimble, quick; changeable, inconstant, fickle,
contraction of *movibilis, from movere to move (see move (v.)). Sociology sense from 1927. Mobile
home first recorded 1940.


volatile (adj.)

1590s fine or light, also evaporating rapidly (c.1600), from Middle French volatile, from Latin
volatilis fleeting, transitory; swift, rapid; flying, winged, from past participle stem of volare to
fly (see volant). Sense of readily changing, flighty, fickle is first recorded 1640s. Volatiles in
Middle English meant birds, butterflies, and other winged creatures (c.1300).


