figurative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French figuratif metaphorical, from Late Latin figurativus, from figurat-, past
participle stem of figurare to form, shape, from figura a shape, form, figure (see figure (n.)). Of
speech, language, etc., involving figures of speech, from 1845. Related: Figuratively.


pluck (n.)

c.1400, act of plucking, from pluck (v.). Meaning courage, boldness (1785), originally in pugilism
slang, is a figurative use from earlier meaning heart, viscera (1610s) as that which is plucked from
slaughtered livestock. Perhaps influenced by figurative use of the verb in pluck up (one's courage,
etc.), attested from c.1300.


stab (n.)

wound produced by stabbing, mid-15c., from stab (v.). Meaning act of stabbing is from 1520s. Meaning
a try first recorded 1895, American English. Stab in the back in the figurative sense treacherous
deed is first attested 1881; the verbal phrase in the figurative sense is from 1888.


flesh (v.)

1520s, to render (a hunting animal) eager for prey by rewarding it with flesh from a kill, with
figurative extensions, from flesh (n.). Meaning to clothe or embody with flesh, with figurative
extensions, is from 1660s. Related: Fleshed; fleshing.


trenchant (adj.)

early 14c., cutting, sharp, from Old French trenchant cutting, sharp (literal and figurative),
present participle of trenchier to cut (see trench). Figurative sense in English is from c.1600.


steam (n.)

Old English steam vapor, fume, water in a gaseous state, from Proto-Germanic *staumaz (cognates:
Dutch stoom steam), of unknown origin. Meaning vapor of boiling water used to drive an engine is
from 1690s, hence steam age (1828) and many figurative uses, such as let off steam (1831, literal),
blow off steam (1857, figurative), full-steam (1878), get up steam (1887, figurative). Steam heat is
from 1820s in thermodynamics; as a method of temperature control from 1904.    We have given her six
months to consider the matter, and in this steam age of the world, no woman ought to require a
longer time to make up her mind. [Sarah Josepha Hale, Sketches of American Character, 1828]


broadcast

1767, adjective, in reference to the spreading of seed, from broad (adj.) + past participle of cast
(v.). Figurative use is recorded from 1785. Modern media use began with radio (1922, adjective and
noun). As a verb, recorded from 1813 in an agricultural sense, 1829 in a figurative sense, 1921 in
reference to radio.


sappy (adj.)

full of sap, Late Old English s&aelig;pig, from s&aelig;p (see sap (n.1)). Figurative sense of
foolishly sentimental (1660s) may have developed from an intermediate sense of wet, sodden (late
15c.). Earlier, now obsolete, figurative senses were full of vitality (1550s) and immature (1620s).


eviscerate (v.)

c.1600 (figurative); 1620s (literal), from Latin evisceratus, past participle of eviscerare to
disembowel, from ex- out (see ex-) + viscera internal organs. Sometimes used 17c. in figurative
sense of to bring out the deepest secrets of. Related: Eviscerated; eviscerating.


yo-yo (n.)

1915, apparently from a language of the Philippines. Registered as a trademark in Vancouver, Canada,
in 1932, the year the first craze for them began (subsequent fads 1950s, 1970s, 1998). The toy
itself is much older and was earlier known as bandalore (1802), a word of obscure origin, but it was
from American contact in the Philippines that the first commercial development was established
[Century Dictionary]. Figurative sense of any up-and-down movement is first recorded 1932. Meaning
stupid person is recorded from 1970. The verb in the figurative sense is attested from 1967.


enucleation (n.)

1640s, from verb enucleate (1540s), from Latin enucleatus pure, clean, past participle of enucleare
to lay open, explain in detail, literally to remove the kernel of (see ex- + nucleus). Mostly
figurative in Latin (the notion is of getting at the core of some matter); until mid-19c. advances
in science and medicine, usually figurative in English.


kingpin (n.)

also king-pin, 1801 as the name of the large pin in the game of kayles (similar to bowls except a
club or stick was thrown instead of a ball; see Games, Gaming and Gamesters' Laws, Frederick Brandt,
London, 1871), from king with a sense of chief + pin (n.). The modern use is mainly figurative and
is perhaps from the word's use as another name for the king-bolt (itself from 1825) in a machinery,
though the figurative use is attested earlier (1867) than the literal.


devious (adj.)

1590s, out of the way, from Latin devius out of the way, remote, off the main road, from de via (see
deviate). Originally in the Latin literal sense; figurative sense of deceitful is first recorded
1630s. Related: Deviously; deviousness. Figurative senses of the Latin word were retired,
sequestered, wandering in the byways, foolish, inconsistent.


bus (n.)

1832, abbreviation of omnibus (q.v.). The modern English noun is nothing but a Latin dative plural
ending. To miss the bus, in the figurative sense of lose an opportunity, is from 1901, Australian
English (OED has a figurative miss the omnibus from 1886). Busman's holiday leisure time spent doing
what one does for a living (1893) is probably a reference to London bus drivers riding the buses on
their days off.


backstabber (n.)

also back-stabber, in the figurative sense, 1839, from back (n.) + agent noun from stab (v.). The
verb backstab in the figurative sense is from 1925.


seamy (adj.)

c.1600, least pleasant, worst, in figurative phrase seamy side, from seam + -y (2); the seamy side
of a sewn garment being the less attractive, and thus typically turned in. The popularity of the
figurative sense likely is due to its use by Shakespeare in Othello IV.ii.146: Some such Squire he
was That turn'd your wits the seamy-side without, And made you to suspect me with the Moore.


tee (n.)

in golf, 1721, back-formation from teaz (1673), taken as a plural; a Scottish word of uncertain
origin. The original form was a little heap of sand. The verb meaning place a ball on a golf tee is
recorded from 1670s; figurative sense of to make ready (usually with up) is recorded from 1938. Teed
off in the figurative sense of angry, annoyed is first recorded 1953, probably as a euphemism for
p(iss)ed off.


curdle (v.)

1630s (earlier crudle, 1580s), to thicken, cause to congeal, frequentative of curd (v.) to make into
curd (late 14c.; see curd). Of blood, in figurative sense to inspire horror from c.1600. Related:
Curdled (1590); curdling (c.1700, almost always with reference to blood, in the figurative sense).


chalk (v.)

1570s, to mix with chalk; 1590s as to mark with chalk, from chalk (n.). Related: Chalked; chalking.
Old English had cealcian to whiten. Certain chalk marks on shipped objects meant admitted or shipped
free, hence some figurative senses. Chalk boards also were commonly used in keeping credit, score,
etc., hence figurative use of chalk it up (1903).


whitewash (v.)

1590s, to wash a building surface with white liquid, from white (adj.) + wash (v.). Figurative sense
of to cover up, conceal, give a false appearance of cleanness to is attested from 1762. Related:
Whitewashed; whitewashing. The noun is recorded from 1690s; in the figurative sense from 1851. The
earlier verb was whitelime (c.1300).


visceral (adj.)

1570s, affecting inward feelings, from Middle French visc&eacute;ral and directly from Medieval
Latin visceralis internal, from Latin viscera, plural of viscus internal organ, inner parts of the
body, of unknown origin. The bowels were regarded as the seat of emotion. The figurative sense
vanished after 1640 and the literal sense is first recorded in 1794. The figurative sense was
revived 1940s in arts criticism.


ceiling (n.)

mid-14c., celynge, act of paneling a room, noun formed (with -ing) from Middle English verb ceil put
a cover or ceiling over, later cover (walls) with wainscoting, panels, etc. (early 15c.); probably
from Middle French celer to conceal, also cover with paneling (12c.), from Latin celare (see cell).
Probably influenced by Latin caelum heaven, sky (see celestial).    Extended to the paneling itself
from late 14c. The meaning top surface of a room is attested by 1530s. Figurative sense upper limit
is from 1934. Colloquial figurative phrase hit the ceiling lose one's temper, get explosively angry
attested by 1908; earlier it meant to fail (by 1900, originally U.S. college slang). Glass ceiling
in the figurative sense of invisible barrier that prevents women from advancing in management, etc.,
is attested from 1988.


prone (adj.)

c.1400, naturally inclined to something, apt, liable, from Latin pronus bent forward, leaning
forward, bent over, figuratively inclined to, disposed, perhaps from adverbial form of pro- before,
for, instead of (see pro-) + ending as in infernus, externus. Meaning lying face-down is first
recorded 1570s. Literal and figurative senses both were in Latin; figurative is older in English.
Related: Proneness.


pillage (n.)

late 14c., act of plundering (especially in war), from Old French pilage (14c.) plunder, from
pillier to plunder, loot, ill-treat, possibly from Vulgar Latin *piliare to plunder, probably from a
figurative use of Latin pilare to strip of hair, perhaps also meaning to skin (compare figurative
extension of verbs pluck, fleece), from pilus a hair (see pile (n.3)).


unbridled (adj.)

late 14c., originally in figurative sense of unrestrained, ungoverned, from un- (1) not + bridled
(see bridle (v.)). Similar formation in Middle Dutch ongebreidelt. Literal sense of not fitted with
a bridle (of horses) is not recorded before 1550s. The verb unbridle (see un- (2)) is attested from
c.1400 in the literal sense; mid-15c. in the figurative sense.


toothsome (adj.)

pleasant to the taste, 1560s, from -some (1) + tooth in a figurative sense of appetite, taste,
liking attested from late 14c. (compare sweet tooth, also figurative use of palate). The extended
sense of attractive (1550s) is attested earlier. Related: Toothsomely; toothsomeness.


cast (n.)

mid-13c., a throw, an act of throwing, from cast (v.). In early use especially of dice, hence
figurative uses relating to fortune or fate. Meaning that which is cast is from c.1550s. Meaning
dash or shade of color is from c.1600. The sense of a throw carried an idea of the form the thing
takes after it has been thrown, which led to widespread and varied meanings, such as group of actors
in a play (1630s). OED finds 42 distinct noun meaning and 83 verbal ones, with many sub-definitions.
Many of the figurative senses converged in a general meaning sort, kind, style (mid-17c.). A cast in
the eye (early 14c.) preserves the older verbal sense of warp, turn.


hot water (n.)

c.1400, literal; 1530s in figurative sense of trouble.


asperity (n.)

c.1200, asprete hardship, harshness of feelings, a figurative use, from Old French asperit&eacute;
difficulty, painful situation, harsh treatment (12c., Modern French &acirc;pret&eacute;), from Latin
asperitatem (nominative asperitas) roughness, from asper rough, harsh, of unknown origin; in Latin
used also of sour wine, bad weather, and hard times. Figurative meaning harshness of feeling in
English is attested from early 15c.


keystone (n.)

stone in the middle of an arch, which holds up the others, 1630s, from key (n.1) in figurative sense
of that which holds together other parts + stone. Figurative sense is from 1640s. Pennsylvania was
called the Keystone State because of its position (geographical and political) in the original
American confederation, between northern states and southern ones. Keystone cops were the bumbling
police in the slapstick silent movies produced by Keystone Company, formed by Canadian-born U.S.
film director Mack Sennett (1884-1960) in 1912.


stalemate (n.)

1765, in chess, from stale stalemate (early 15c.) + mate (n.2) checkmate. Middle English stale is
probably from Anglo-French estale standstill (see stall (n.2)). A misnomer, because a stale is not a
mate. In England from the 17th c. to the beginning of the 19th c. the player who received stalemate
won the game [OED]. Figurative sense is recorded from 1885. As a verb from 1765; figurative from
1861.


profound (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by intellectual depth, from Old French profund (12c., Modern French profond),
from Latin profundus deep, bottomless, vast, also obscure; profound; immoderate, from pro- forth
(see pro-) + fundus bottom (see fund (n.)). The literal and figurative senses both were in Latin,
but English, having already deep, employed this word primarily in its figurative sense. Related:
Profoundly.


clamp-down (n.)

also clampdown, 1940 in the figurative sense, from verbal phrase clamp down use pressure to keep
down (1924). The verbal phrase in the figurative sense is recorded from 1941. See clamp (v.) + down
(adv.).


jaundice (n.)

c.1300, jaunis, from Old French jaunice, earlier jalnice, yellowness (12c.), from jaune yellow, from
Latin galbinus greenish yellow, probably from PIE *ghel- yellow, green (see Chloe).    With
intrusive -d- (compare gender, astound, thunder). Figurative meaning feeling in which views are
colored or distorted first recorded 1620s, from yellow's association with bitterness and envy (see
yellow). As a verb, from 1791, but usually in figurative use. Related: Jaundiced.


tune (v.)

bring into a state of proper pitch, c.1500, from tune (n.). Non-musical meaning to adjust an organ
or receiver, put into a state proper for some purpose is recorded from 1887. Verbal phrase tune in
in reference to radio (later also TV) is recorded from 1913; figurative sense of become aware is
recorded from 1926. Tune out eliminate radio reception is recorded from 1908; figurative sense of
disregard, stop heeding is from 1928. Related: Tuned; tuning.


patrimony (n.)

mid-14c., property of the Church, also spiritual legacy of Christ, from Old French patremoine
heritage, patrimony (12c.) and directly from Latin patrimonium a paternal estate, inheritance from a
father, also figurative, from pater (genitive patris) father (see father (n.)) + -monium, suffix
signifying action, state, condition. Meaning property inherited from a father or ancestors is
attested from late 14c. Figurative sense of immaterial things handed down from the past is from
1580s. A curious sense contrast to matrimony.


goal (n.)

1530s, end point of a race, of uncertain origin. The noun gol appears once before this, in a poem
from early 14c. and with an apparent sense of boundary, limit. Perhaps from Old English *gal
obstacle, barrier, a word implied by g&aelig;lan to hinder and also found in compounds (singal,
widgal); and compare Old Norse geil a narrow glen, a passage. Or from Old French gaule a pole, from
Germanic; or a figurative use of Middle English gale a way, course (mid-14c.) Sports sense of place
where the ball is put to score is attested from 1540s. Figurative sense of object of an effort is
from 1540s.


road kill (n.)

animal killed by vehicular traffic, 1972; the figurative sense is from 1992.


born-again (adj.)

of Protestant Christians, by 1920, based on John iii:3. Used in figurative (non-religious) sense by
1977.


unbind (v.)

Old English unbindan, to free from binding, from un- (2) opposite of, reverse + bind (v.). Similar
formation in Old Frisian unbinda, German entbinden, Dutch ontbinden. Literal and figurative senses
both present in Old English.  Su&aelig; hu&aelig;t &eth;u unbindes ofer eor&eth;u bi&eth; unbunden
in heofnum. [Lindisfarne Gospels, Matt. xvi:19]   Unbound is from Old English unbunden, in literal
sense. Figurative sense first attested late 14c.; of books from 1540s.


idol (n.)

mid-13c., image of a deity as an object of (pagan) worship, from Old French idole idol, graven
image, pagan god, from Late Latin idolum image (mental or physical), form, used in Church Latin for
false god, from Greek eidolon appearance, reflection in water or a mirror, later mental image,
apparition, phantom, also material image, statue, from eidos form (see -oid). Figurative sense of
something idolized is first recorded 1560s (in Middle English the figurative sense was someone who
is false or untrustworthy). Meaning a person so adored is from 1590s.


muster (v.)

c.1300, to display, reveal, appear, from Old French mostrer appear, show, reveal, also in a military
sense (10c., Modern French montrer), from Latin monstrare to show, from monstrum omen, sign (see
monster). Meaning to collect, assemble is early 15c.; figurative use (of qualities, etc.) is from
1580s. To muster out gather to be discharged from military service is 1834, American English. To
muster up in the figurative and transferred sense of gather, summon, marshal is from 1620s. Related:
Mustered; mustering.


spark (n.)

Old English spearca glowing or fiery particle thrown off, from Proto-Germanic *spark- (cognates:
Middle Low German sparke, Middle Dutch spranke, not found in other Germanic languages). Electrical
sense dates from 1748. Old French esparque is from Germanic.    Slang sense of a gallant, a showy
beau, a roisterer (c.1600) is perhaps a figurative use, but also perhaps from cognate Old Norse
sparkr lively. Spark plug first recorded 1902 (sparking plug is from 1899); figurative sense of one
who initiates or is a driving force in some activity is from 1941.


knee-jerk (n.)

patellar reflex, neurological phenomenon discovered and named 1876; the figurative use appeared soon
after the phrase was coined.


scratch (n.)

1580s, slight skin tear produced by a sharp thing, from scratch (v.). Meaning mark or slight furrow
in metal, etc. is from 1660s. American English slang sense of money is from 1914, of uncertain
signification. Many figurative senses (such as up to scratch, originally ready to meet one's
opponent) are from sporting use for line or mark drawn as a starting place, attested from 1778 (but
the earliest use is figurative); meaning nothing (as in from scratch) is 1918, generalized from
specific 19c. sporting sense of starting point of a competitor who receives no odds in a handicap
match. Sense in billiards is from 1850. Scratch-pad is attested from 1883.


high hat (n.)

1889, tall hat; also used synechdochically for men who wear such hats; figurative meaning swelled
head is from 1923. Drum set sense is from 1934.


fat (n.)

mid-14c.; see fat (v.). Figurative sense of best or most rewarding part is from 1560s.


gag (n.2)

act of gagging, 1550s, from gag (v.); figurative use from 1620s.


punch (n.3)

a quick blow with the fist, by 1570s, probably from punch (v.). In early use also of blows with the
foot or jabs with a staff or club. Originally especially of blows that sink in to some degree (...
whom he unmercifully bruises and batters from head to foot: here a slap in the chaps, there a black
eye, now a punch in the stomach, and then a kick on the breech, Monthly Review, 1763). Figurative
sense of forceful, vigorous quality is recorded from 1911. To beat (someone) to the punch in the
figurative sense is from 1915, a metaphor from boxing (attested by 1913). Punch line (also punch-
line) is from 1915 (originally in popular-song writing); punch-drunk is from 1915 (alternative form
slug-nutty is from 1933).


blind spot (n.)

1864, spot within one's range of vision where yet one cannot see. Of flaws in the eye, from 1872;
figurative sense in use by 1907.


