fit (n.1)

1823, the fitting of one thing to another, later (1831) the way something fits. Originally an
adversary of equal power (mid-13c.), obscure, possibly from Old English fitt a conflict, a struggle
(see fit (n.2)).


fit (v.)

be suitable, probably from early 15c.; to be the right shape, 1580s, from fit (adj.). Related:
Fitted; fitting. Fitted sheets is attested from 1963.


fit (n.2)

paroxysm, sudden attack (as of anger), 1540s, probably via Middle English sense of painful, exciting
experience (early 14c.), from Old English fitt conflict, struggle, of uncertain origin, with no
clear cognates outside English. Perhaps ultimately cognate with fit (n.1) on notion of to meet.
Phrase by fits and starts first attested 1610s.


fit (adj.)

suited to the circumstances, proper, mid-15c., of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English noun
fit an adversary of equal power (mid-13c.), which is perhaps connected to fit (n.1). Related:
Fitter; fittest. Survival of the fittest (1867) coined by H. Spencer.


fit (n.3)

part of a poem, Old English fitt, of unknown origin.


fitful (adj.)

used once by Shakespeare (Macbeth, 1605) in sense of characterized by fits, then revived by Scott
(1810) with a sense of shifting, changing. From fit (n.2) + -ful. Related: Fitfully; fitfulness.


fitness (n.)

1570s, from fit (adj.) + -ness.


fitter (n.)

1650s, agent noun from fit (v.).


fitting

1530s (adj.); c.1600 (n.), from present participle of fit (v.).


fitz

Anglo-French fitz, from Old French fils, from Latin filius son of (see filial); used regularly in
official rolls and hence the first element of many modern surnames; in later times used of
illegitimate issue of royalty.


befit (v.)

mid-15c., from be- + fit (v.). Related: Befitted; befitting.


befitting (adj.)

1560s, present participle adjective from befit (q.v.). Related: Befittingly.


benefit (n.)

late 14c., good or noble deed, also advantage, profit, from Anglo-French benfet well-done, from
Latin benefactum good deed, from bene facere (see benefactor). Meaning performance or entertainment
to raise money for some charitable cause is from 1680s.


benefit (v.)

late 15c., from benefit (n.). Related: Benefited; benefiting.


benefits (n.)

financial support (especially for medical expenses) to which one is entitled through employment or
membership, 1895, plural of benefit (n.).


comfit (n.)

early 14c., sugarplum, from Old French confit preserved fruit, from Latin confectum, from
confectionem (see confection).


confit

obsolete form of comfit.


discomfit (v.)

c.1200, as an adjective, from Old French desconfit vanquished, defeated, past participle of
desconfire to defeat, destroy, from des- not (see dis-) + confire make, prepare, accomplish, from
Latin conficere (see confection).    Used as a verb in English from c.1300. Weaker sense of
disconcert is first recorded 1520s in English, probably by confusion with discomfort. Related:
Discomfited; discomfiting.


discomfiture (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French desconfiture rout, defeat (12c.; Modern French d&eacute;confiture), from
desconfit (see discomfit).


graffiti (n.)

1851, for ancient wall inscriptions found in the ruins of Pompeii, from Italian graffiti, plural of
graffito a scribbling, a diminutive formation from graffio a scratch or scribble, from graffiare to
scribble, ultimately from Greek graphein to scratch, draw, write (see -graphy). Sense extended 1877
to recently made crude drawings and scribbling.


graffito (n.)

singular of graffiti (q.v.).


Griffith

masc. proper name, from Welsh Gruffydd, probably from Latin Rufus, from rufus red.


misfit (n.)

1823, garment which does not fit the person for whom it was intended; see mis- (1) + fit (n.1).
Meaning person who does not fit his environment is attested from 1880.


non-profit (adj.)

also nonprofit, 1922, from non- + profit (n.).


outfit (v.)

1840, from outfit (n.). Related: Outfitted; outfitting; outfitter.


outfit (n.)

1769, act of fitting out (a ship, etc.) for an expedition, from out + fit (v.). Sense of articles
and equipment required for an expedition first attested 1787, American English; meaning a person's
clothes is first recorded 1852; sense of group of people is from 1883.


profit (v.)

early 14c., to advance, benefit, gain, from profit (n.) and from Old French prufiter, porfiter to
benefit, from prufit (see profit (n.)). Related: Profited; profiting.


profit (n.)

mid-13c., income; c.1300, benefit, advantage;from Old French prufit, porfit profit, gain (mid-12c.),
from Latin profectus profit, advance, increase, success, progress, noun use of past participle of
proficere (see proficiency). As the opposite of loss, it replaced Old English gewinn. Profit margin
attested from 1853.


profitability (n.)

mid-14c., from profitable + -ity.


profitable (adj.)

c.1300, yielding benefit, useful, from profit (v.) + -able or from Old French profitable,
porfitable. Specific sense of money-making is attested from 1758. Related: Profitably.


profiteer (v.)

1797, but dormant in English until it was revived in World War I, from profit + -eer. From 1912 as a
noun. Related: Profiteering (1814).    Or is it simply hysteria which produces what is to-day termed
the profiteer? It is probable that the modern profiteer is the same person whom we formerly called
the grafter, the extortioner, the robber, the gouger. [Legal Aid Review, April 1920]


profitless (adj.)

1590s, from profit (n.) + -less.


refit (v.)

1660s, from re- again + fit (v.). Originally nautical. Related: Refitted; refitting.


retrofit (v.)

1954, from retro- + fit (v.). Related: Retrofitted; retrofitting. As a noun, 1956, from the verb.


soffit (n.)

architectural term referring to under-faces, 1610s, from Italian soffita, fem. of soffitto ceiling,
noun use of adjective meaning fixed beneath, from Vulgar Latin *suffictus fastened below, from Latin
suffixus (see suffix (n.)).


sulfite (n.)

salt of sulfurous acid, 1790, from sulfur + -ite (2).


unbefitting (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + befitting.


unfit (adj.)

1540s, not suitable (in reference to things), from un- (1) not + fit (adj.). Related: Unfitness. In
reference to persons or human qualities, attested from 1550s.


unfit (v.)

to render unfit, 1610s, from unfit (adj.), or else from un- (2) reverse of + fit (v.). Related:
Unfitted; unfitting.


unprofitable (adj.)

early 14c., from un- (1) not + profitable (adj.). Related: Unprofitably.


