fleet (n.)

Old English fleot ship, raft, floating vessel, from fleotan to float (see fleet (v.)). Sense of
naval force is pre-1200. The Old English word also meant creek, inlet, flow of water, especially one
into the Thames near Ludgate Hill, which lent its name to Fleet Street (home of newspaper and
magazine houses, standing for the English press since 1882), Fleet prison, etc.


fleet (adj.)

swift, 1520s, but probably older than the record; apparently from or cognate with Old Norse fliotr
swift, and from the root of fleet (v.)). Related: Fleetness.


fleeting (adj.)

early 13c., fickle, shifting, unstable, from Old English fleotende floating, drifting, later flying,
moving swiftly, from present participle of fleotan (see fleet (v.)). Meaning existing only briefly
is from 1560s.


fleet (v.)

Old English fleotan to float, drift, flow, swim, sail, later (c.1200) to flow, from Proto-Germanic
*fleut- (cognates: Old Frisian fliata, Old Saxon fliotan to flow, Old High German fliozzan to float,
flow, German flieszen to flow, Old Norse fliota to float, flow), from PIE root *pleu- to flow, run,
swim (see pluvial).    Meaning to glide away like a stream, vanish imperceptibly is from c.1200;
hence to fade, to vanish (1570s). Related: Fleeted; fleeting.


navy (n.)

early 14c., fleet of ships, especially for purposes of war, from Old French navie fleet, ship, from
Latin navigia, plural of navigium vessel, boat, from navis ship (see naval). Meaning a nation's
collective, organized sea power is from 1530s. The Old English words were sciphere (usually of
Viking invaders) and scipfierd (usually of the home defenses). Navy blue was the color of the
British naval uniform. Navy bean attested from 1856, so called because they were grown to be used by
the Navy.


squadron (n.)

1560s, from Italian squadrone, augmentative of squadra battalion, literally square (see squad). As a
division of a fleet, from 1580s, of an air force, 1912.


armada (n.)

fleet of warships, 1530s (erroneously, as armado), from Spanish armada an armed force, from Medieval
Latin armata (see army). Especially of the Invincible Armada of Philip II of Spain (1588). Current
form of the word is from 1590s.


flotilla (n.)

1711, a small fleet, from Spanish flotilla, diminutive of flota float, from flotar to float, of
Germanic origin (see float (v.)).


snell (adj.)

Old English snel quick, active, cognate with Old Saxon, Dutch, Old High German snel, German schnell
swift, quick, Old Danish snel swift, fleet, Old Norse snjallr eloquent, able, bold. It survived as a
surname and in Scottish and northern English; used by Burns and Scott. Italian snello is from
Germanic.


mayonnaise (n.)

sauce made from egg yolks, oil, and vinegar, 1815, from French sauce mayonnaise (1806), said by
French sources to be corrupted from mahonnaise and to have been named in recognition of Mahon,
seaport capital of island of Minorca, captured by France 1756 after the defeat of the British
defending fleet in the Seven Years' War; the sauce having been introduced either in commemoration of
the victory, which was led by Armand de Vignerot du Plessis, duc de Richelieu
(1696Ã¢&euro;&ldquo;1788), or because it was brought to France from there by him. But unless there
is a gap in the record, the late date of appearance of the word make this seem doubtful.


black eye (n.)

discoloration around the eye from injury c.1600, from black (adj.) + eye (n.). Figurative sense of
injury to pride, rebuff is by 1744; that of bad reputation is from 1880s. In reference to dark eyes,
often as a mark of beauty, from 1660s. Black-eyed, of peas, attested from 1728. The black-eyed Susan
as a flower (various species) so called from 1881, for its appearance. It also was the title of a
poem by John Gay (1685-1732), which led to a popular British stage play of the same name in the mid-
19c.    All in the Downs the fleet was moored,  The streamers waving in the wind,  When black-eyed
Susan came aboard,    Oh! where shall I my true love find?  Tell me, ye jovial sailors, tell me
true,    If my sweet William sails among the crew?


rear (n.)

hindmost part, c.1600, abstracted from rerewarde rear guard, hindmost part of an army or fleet (mid-
14c.), from Anglo-French rerewarde, Old French rieregarde, from Old French adverb riere behind (from
Latin retro back, behind; see retro-) + Old French garde (see guard (n.)). Or the word may be a
shortened form of arrear (see arrears).    As a euphemism for buttocks it is attested from 1796.
Rear admiral is first attested 1580s, apparently so called from ranking behind an admiral proper.
Rear-view (mirror) is recorded from 1926.


class (n.)

c.1600, group of students, from French classe (14c.), from Latin classis a class, a division; army,
fleet, especially any one of the six orders into which Servius Tullius divided the Roman people for
the purpose of taxation; traditionally originally the people of Rome under arms (a sense attested in
English from 1650s), and thus akin to calare to call (to arms), from PIE root *kele- (2) to shout
(see claim (v.)). In early use in English also in Latin form classis.    School and university sense
of course, lecture (1650s) is from the notion of a form or lecture reserved to scholars who had
attained a certain level. Natural history sense is from 1753. Meaning a division of society
according to status (upper, lower, etc.) is from 1772. Meaning high quality is from 1847. Class-
consciousness (1903) is from German klassenbewusst.


kamikaze (n.)

suicide flier, 1945, Japanese, literally divine wind, from kami god, providence, divine (see kami) +
kaze wind. Originally the name given in folklore to a typhoon which saved Japan from Mongol invasion
by wrecking Kublai Khan's fleet (August 1281). The attacks began in October 1944 off the
Philippines.    As an aside, at war's end, the Japanese had, by actual count, a total of 16,397
aircraft still available for service, including 6,374 operational fighters and bombers, and if they
had used only the fighters and bombers for kamikaze missions, they might have realized,
additionally, 900 ships sunk or damaged and 22,000 sailors killed or injured. In fact, however, the
Japanese had outfitted many aircraft, including trainers, as potential suicide attackers. As
intelligence estimates indicated, the Japanese believed they could inflict at least 50,000
casualties to an invasion force by kamikaze attacks alone. [Richard P. Hallion, Military Technology
and the Pacific War, 1995]    As an adjective by 1946.


store (n.)

c.1300, supplies or provisions for a household, camp, etc., from store (v.) or else from Old French
estore provisions; a fleet, navy, army, from estorer or from Medieval Latin staurum, instaurum
store. General sense of sufficient supply is attested from late 15c. The meaning place where goods
are kept for sale is first recorded 1721 in American English (British English prefers shop (n.)),
from the sense place where supplies and provisions are kept (1660s).    The word store is of larger
signification than the word shop. It not only comprehends all that is embraced in the word shop,
when that word is used to designate a place in which goods or merchandise are sold, but more, a
place of deposit, a store house. In common parlance the two words have a distinct meaning. We speak
of shops as places in which mechanics pursue their trades, as a carpenter's shop a blacksmith's shop
a shoemaker's shop. While, if we refer to a place where oods and merchandise are bought and sold,
whether by wholesale or retail, we speak of it as a store. [C.J. Brickell, opinion in Sparrenberger
v. The State of Alabama, December term, 1875]   Stores articles and equipment for an army is from
1630s. In store laid up for future use (also of events, etc.) is recorded from late 14c. Store-
bought is attested from 1912, American English; earlier store-boughten (1872).


