flighty (adj.)

1550s, swift, later (1768) fickle or frivolous, originally of skittish horses; from flight (n.1) +
-y (2). Related: Flightiness.


flibbertigibbet (n.)

1540s, chattering gossip, flighty woman, probably a nonsense word meant to sound like fast talking;
as the name of a devil or fiend it dates from c.1600.


whirligig (n.)

mid-15c., a child's toy, from whirl (v.) + gig (see gig (n.1)). Meaning anything in constant motion
is from 1580s; fickle, flighty person is from c.1600; as a type of water beetle, from 1713.


barmy (adj.)

1530s, frothing, covered with barm; see barm + -y (2). Figurative sense of excited, flighty,
bubbling with excitement is from c.1600. Meaning foolish (1892) is probably an alteration of balmy.


hare-brained (adj.)

also harebrained, 1550s, from hare-brain giddy or reckless person (1540s), probably from hare, on
notion of flighty, skittish.


hoity-toity

also hoity toity, 1660s, riotous behavior, from earlier highty tighty frolicsome, flighty, perhaps
an alteration and reduplication of dialectal hoyting acting the hoyden, romping (1590s), see hoyden.
Sense of haughty first recorded late 1800s, probably on similarity of sound.


volatile (adj.)

1590s fine or light, also evaporating rapidly (c.1600), from Middle French volatile, from Latin
volatilis fleeting, transitory; swift, rapid; flying, winged, from past participle stem of volare to
fly (see volant). Sense of readily changing, flighty, fickle is first recorded 1640s. Volatiles in
Middle English meant birds, butterflies, and other winged creatures (c.1300).


flapper (n.)

forward young woman, 1921 slang, from flap (v.), but the exact connection is disputed. Perhaps from
flapper young wild-duck or partridge (1747), with reference to flapping wings while learning to fly,
of which many late 19c. examples are listed in Wright's English Dialect Dictionary (1900), including
one that defines it as A young partridge unable to fly. Applied in joke to a girl of the bread-and-
butter age.    But other suggested sources are late 19c. northern English dialectal use for teen-age
girl (on notion of one with the hair not yet put up), or an earlier meaning prostitute (1889), which
is perhaps from dialectal flap young woman of loose character (1610s). Any or all of these might
have converged in the 1920s sense. Wright also has flappy, of persons, wild, unsteady, flighty, with
the note that it was also Applied to a person's character, as 'a flappy lass,' and further on he
lists flappy sket (n.) an immoral woman.    In Britain the word took on political tones in reference
to the debate over voting rights.Flapper is the popular press catch-word for an adult woman worker,
aged twenty-one to thirty, when it is a question of giving her the vote under the same conditions as
men of the same age. [Punch, Nov. 30, 1927]


flirt (v.)

1550s, originally to turn up one's nose, sneer at, then to rap or flick, as with the fingers
(1560s). The noun is first attested 1540s, from the verb, with the meaning stroke of wit. It's
possible that the original word was imitative, along the lines of flip (v.), but there seems to be
some influence from flit, such as in the flirt sense of to move in short, quick flights, attested
from 1580s.    Meanwhile flirt (n.) had come to mean a pert young hussey [Johnson] by 1560s, and
Shakespeare has flirt-gill (i.e. Jill) a woman of light or loose behavior, while flirtgig was a 17c.
Yorkshire dialect word for a giddy, flighty girl. All or any of these could have fed into the main
modern verbal sense of play at courtship (1777), which also could have grown naturally from the
earlier meaning to flit inconstantly from object to object (1570s), perhaps influenced by Old French
fleureter talk sweet nonsense, also to touch a thing in passing, diminutive of fleur flower and
metaphoric of bees skimming from flower to flower.    The noun meaning person who flirts is from
1732. The English word also is possibly related to East Frisian flirt a flick or light blow, and
flirtje a giddy girl. French flirter to flirt is a 19c. borrowing from English. Related: Flirted;
flirting.


