flint (n.)

Old English flint flint, rock, common Germanic (cognates Middle Dutch vlint, Old High German flins,
Danish flint), from PIE *splind- to split, cleave, from root *(s)plei- to splice, split (cognates:
Greek plinthos brick, tile, Old Irish slind brick), perhaps a variant of *spel- (1) to split, break
off. Transferred senses were in Old English.


flinty (adj.)

hard-hearted, 1530s, from flint + -y (2). Literal sense of resembling flint is from 1640s. Related:
Flintily; flintiness.


flintlock (n.)

1680s as a type of musket-firing mechanism, from flint + lock (n.1).


flintstone (n.)

early 14c., from flint + stone (n.).


skinflint (n.)

miser, one who makes use of contemptible economy to keep money, 1700, slang; literally kind of
person who would skin a flint to save or gain something, from skin (v.) + flint. Flay-flint in same
sense is from 1670s.


plinth (n.)

1610s, from French plinthe (16c.) and directly from Latin plinthus, from Greek plinthos brick,
squared stone, cognate with Old English flint (see flint).


chert (n.)

flint-like quartz, 1670s, of unknown origin. Apparently a local term, which has been taken into
geological use [OED].


flinders (n.)

mid-15c., Scottish flendris, probably related to Norwegian flindra chip, splinter, or Dutch flenter
fragment; ultimately from the same PIE root that produced flint.


tinderbox (n.)

also tinder-box, box in which tinder and flint are kept, 1520s, from tinder + box (n.); figurative
sense of  'inflammable' person or thing is attested from 1590s.


silica (n.)

hard silicon dioxide, 1801, Modern Latin, from Latin silex (genitive silicis) flint, pebble, on
model of alumina, soda.


splice (v.)

1520s, originally a sailors' word, from Middle Dutch splissen to splice (Dutch splitsen), from
Proto-Germanic *spli-, from PIE root *(s)plei- to split, splice (see flint). The Dutch word was
borrowed in French as &eacute;pisser. Used of motion picture film from 1912; of DNA from 1975.
Related: Spliced; splicing; splicer.


pyrite (n.)

metallic iron disulfide, fool's gold, 1550s, from Old French pyrite (12c.), from Latin pyrites, from
Greek pyrites lithos stone of fire, flint (so called because it glitters), from pyrites of or in
fire, from pyr (genitive pyros) fire (see fire (n.)). Related: Pyritic.


splint (n.)

c.1300, overlapping plate or strip in armor (made of metal splints), probably from Middle Low German
splinte, splente thin piece of iron, related to Middle Dutch splinte splint, probably literally thin
piece cut off, and from a Germanic offshoot of PIE *(s)plei- to split, splice (see flint). Cognate
with Danish splint splinter, Swedish splint wooden peg, wedge. Meaning slender, flexible slip of
wood is recorded from early 14c.; specific surgical sense is attested from c.1400.


split (v.)

1580s (transitive and intransitive), not found in Middle English, probably from a Low German source
such as Middle Dutch splitten, from Proto-Germanic *spl(e)it- (cognates: Danish and Frisian splitte,
Old Frisian splita, German splei&szlig;en to split), from PIE *(s)plei- to split, splice (see
flint).    U.S. slang meaning leave, depart first recorded 1954. Of couples, to separate, to divorce
from 1942. To split the difference is suggested from 1715; to split (one's) ticket in the U.S.
political sense is attested from 1842. To split hairs make too-nice distinctions is from 1670s
(split a hair). Splitting image exact likeness is from 1880. To split the atom is from 1909.


