flip (v.)

1590s (1520s in flip-flop), imitative or else a contraction of fillip (q.v.), which also is held to
be imitative. Sense of get excited is first recorded 1950; flip one's lid lose one's head, go wild
is from 1950. For flip (adj.) glib, see flippant. Meaning to flip a coin (to decide something) is by
1879. As a noun by 1690s. Related: Flipped. Flipping (adj.) as euphemism for fucking is British
slang first recorded 1911 in D.H. Lawrence. Flip side (of a gramophone record) is by 1949.


flip-flop (n.)

also flip flop, thong sandal, by 1972, imitative of the sound of walking in them (flip-flap had been
used in various echoic senses, mostly echoic, since 1520s); sense of complete reversal of direction
dates from 1900.   Flip-flaps, a peculiar rollicking dance indulged in by costermongers, better
described as the double shuffle; originally a kind of somersault. [Hotten's Slang Dictionary, 1864]


flip (n.)

sailors' hot drink usually containing beer, brandy and sugar, 1690s, from flip (v.); so called from
notion of it being whipped up or beaten.


flippant (adj.)

c.1600, talkative; 1670s, displaying unbecoming levity, apparently an extended form of flip (v.).
Shortened form flip is attested from 1847. Related: Flippantly.


flipper (n.)

limb used to swim with, 1822, agent noun from flip (v.). Sense of rubber fin for underwater swimming
is from 1945. Slang meaning the hand dates from 1836. Related: Flippers.


fillip (v.)

mid-15c., philippen to flip something with the fingers, snap the fingers, possibly of imitative
origin. As a noun, from 1520s, fyllippe.


wig (v.)

1826, supply with a wig, from wig (n.). The meaning to behave hysterically (usually with out) is
attested from 1955, perhaps from notion in flip one's wig. Compare dash my wig!, a former mild
imprecation (1797), also wigs on the green (1856), Irish colloquial for a fight or rumble (because
wigs are likely to get detached from owners in such an event). The verb also had a colloquial sense
of scold severely, attested by 1829, perhaps related to these. Related: Wigged; wigging.


bop (n.)

1948, shortening of bebop or rebop; as a verb, play bop music, play (a song) in a bop style, from
1948. It soon came to mean do any sort of dance to pop music (1956). Related: Bopped; bopping.
The musical movement had its own lingo, which was in vogue in U.S. early 1950s. Life magazine [Sept.
29, 1952] listed examples of bop talk: crazy new, wonderful, wildly exciting; gone (adj.) the tops--
superlative of crazy; cool (adj.) tasty, pretty; goof to blow a wrong note or make a mistake;
hipster modern version of hepcat; dig to understand, appreciate the subtleties of; stoned drunk,
captivated, ecstatic, sent out of this world; flip (v.) to react enthusiastically. [Life Sept. 29,
1952]


mixed (adj.)

mid-15c., from past participle of mix (v.). Mixed blessing from 1933. Mixed marriage is from 1690s
(originally in a religious context; racial sense was in use by 1942 in U.S., though mixed breed in
reference to mulattoes is found by 1775). Mixed bag heterogeneous collection is from 1936. Mixed up
is from 1884 as confused, from 1862 as involved.   Mixed drink in the modern liquor sense is
recorded by 1868; the thing itself is older; Bartlett (1859) lists sixty names given to the various
compounds or mixtures of spirituous liquors and wines served up in fashionable bar rooms in the
United States, all from a single advertisement. The list includes Tippe na Pecco, Moral suasion, Vox
populi, Jewett's fancy, Ne plus ultra, Shambro, Virginia fancy, Stone wall, Smasher, Slingflip, Pig
and whistle, Cocktail, Phlegm-cutter, Switchel flip, Tip and Ty, Ching-ching, Fiscal agent, Slip
ticket, Epicure's punch.


flirt (v.)

1550s, originally to turn up one's nose, sneer at, then to rap or flick, as with the fingers
(1560s). The noun is first attested 1540s, from the verb, with the meaning stroke of wit. It's
possible that the original word was imitative, along the lines of flip (v.), but there seems to be
some influence from flit, such as in the flirt sense of to move in short, quick flights, attested
from 1580s.    Meanwhile flirt (n.) had come to mean a pert young hussey [Johnson] by 1560s, and
Shakespeare has flirt-gill (i.e. Jill) a woman of light or loose behavior, while flirtgig was a 17c.
Yorkshire dialect word for a giddy, flighty girl. All or any of these could have fed into the main
modern verbal sense of play at courtship (1777), which also could have grown naturally from the
earlier meaning to flit inconstantly from object to object (1570s), perhaps influenced by Old French
fleureter talk sweet nonsense, also to touch a thing in passing, diminutive of fleur flower and
metaphoric of bees skimming from flower to flower.    The noun meaning person who flirts is from
1732. The English word also is possibly related to East Frisian flirt a flick or light blow, and
flirtje a giddy girl. French flirter to flirt is a 19c. borrowing from English. Related: Flirted;
flirting.


