flutter (v.)

Old English floterian to flutter, fly, flicker, float to and fro, be tossed by waves, frequentative
of flotian to float (see float (v.)). Related: Fluttered; fluttering. As a noun from 1640s; meaning
state of excitement is 1740s.


bate (v.2)

c.1300, to contend with blows or arguments, from Old French batre to hit, beat, strike, from Late
Latin battere, from Latin batuere to beat, knock (see batter (v.)). In falconry, to beat the wings
impatiently and flutter away from the perch. Figurative sense of to flutter downward attested from
1580s.


flag (v.)

1540s, flap about loosely, perhaps a variant of Middle English flakken, flacken to flap, flutter
(late 14c.), probably from Old Norse flakka to flicker, flutter, perhaps imitative of something
flapping lazily in the wind.    Sense of go limp, droop is first recorded 1610s. Meaning to
designate as someone who will not be served more liquor is from 1980s, probably from use of flags to
signal trains, etc., to halt, which led to the verb in this sense (1856, American English). Related:
Flagged; flagging.


whiffle (v.)

flicker or flutter as if blown by the wind, 1660s; see whiff. The noun meaning something light or
insignificant (1670s) is preserved in whiffle-ball (1931).


bat (v.1)

to move the eyelids, 1847, American English, from earlier sense of flutter as a hawk (1610s), a
variant of bate (v.2) on the notion of fluttering wings. Related: Batted; batting.


flicker (v.)

Old English flicorian to flutter, flap quickly and lightly, originally of birds. Onomatopoeic and
suggestive of quick motion. Sense of shine with a wavering light is c.1600, but not common till 19c.
Related: Flickered; flickering.


whimwham (n.)

whimsical device, trifle, 1520s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Old Norse
hvima to let the eyes wander, Norwegian kvima to flutter), or else an arbitrary native formation
(compare flim-flam).


aflutter (adj.)

1830, from a- (1) + flutter (v.).


palpitate (v.)

1620s, from Latin palpitatus, past participle of palpitare to throb, flutter (see palpitation).
Related: Palpitated; palpitating.


palpitation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French palpitation, from Latin palpitationem (nominative palpitatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of palpitare to throb, to flutter, to tremble, to quiver,
frequentative of palpare touch gently, stroke; wheedle, coax (see feel (v.)).


flitter (v.)

1540s, from flit with frequentative suffix. Flitter-mouse (1540s) is occasionally used in English,
in imitation of German fledermaus bat, from Old High German fledaron to flutter. Related: Flittered;
flittering. As a noun, from 1892.


pucker (v.)

1590s, prob. earlier in colloquial use [OED], possibly a frequentative form of pock, dialectal
variant of poke bag, sack (see poke (n.1)), which would give it the same notion as in purse (v.).
Verbs of this type often shorten or obscure the original vowel; compare clutter, flutter, putter,
etc. [Barnhart]. Related: Puckered; puckering.


