founder (n.2)

one who casts metal, c.1400, agent noun from found (v.2).


founder (n.1)

one who establishes, one who sets up or institutes something, mid-14c., from Anglo-French fundur,
Old French fondeor, from Latin fundator, agent noun from fundare (see found (v.1)).


founder (v.)

early 14c., from Old French fondrer collapse; submerge, sink, fall to the bottom, from fond bottom,
from Latin fundus bottom, foundation (see fund (n.)). Related: Foundered; foundering.


Gupta

4c.-6c. North Indian dynasty, from Chandragupta, name of the founder.


Byzantium

said to be named for its 7c. B.C.E. Greek founder, Byzas of Megara.


Piggly-Wiggly

chain of self-service grocery stores, started 1916 in Memphis. According to founder's reminiscence
from 1921 arbitrary coinage, simply something different from anything used before [Current Opinion].


Braun

German manufacturing company, named for founder Max Braun, mechanical engineer in Frankfurt am Main
(1921).


Krakow

city in southern Poland, said to have been named for a supposed founder, Krak.


Bratislava

capital of Slovakia, a Slavic settlement named for its founder or chief; the name is the same
element in the first half of the German name for the city, Pressburg (9c.).


Lawrencium (n.)

1961, Modern Latin, from the name of Ernest O. Lawrence (1901-1958), U.S. physicist, cyclotron
pioneer and founder of the lab where it was discovered.


Remy Martin (n.)

from French R&eacute;my Martin, proprietary name of a type of cognac, from the name of the founder
(1724).


Lord&#039;s

cricket grounds in London, named for founder Thomas Lord (1757-1832).


Olivetti

brand of typewriters manufactured by company founded in 1908 near Turin, Italy; named for founder,
Camillo Olivetti.


Lego

1954, proprietary name (in use since 1934, according to the company), from Danish phrase leg godt
play well. The founder, Ole Kirk Christiansen, didn't realize until later that the word meant I
study or I put together in Latin.


Bic (n.)

popular type of plastic ball-point pen, designed c.1950 in France, named 1953 as a shortened form of
company co-founder Marcel Bich (1914-1994).


Reuters (n.)

news service begun in London 1851 by Baron Paul Julius von Reuter (1816-1899), founder of a
telegraph office and pigeon post bureau in Aachen in 1849.


Lacoste

Paris-based high-end apparel company, founded 1933, named for Ren&eacute; Lacoste (1904-1996),
company co-founder.


Grateful Dead

San Francisco rock band, 1965, the name taken, according to founder Jerry Garcia, from a dictionary
entry he saw about the folk tale motif of a wanderer who gives his last penny to pay for a corpse's
burial, then is magically aided by the spirit of the dead person. A different version of the concept
is found in the Egyptian Book of the Dead.


Nielsen

in reference to popularity ratings of TV and radio programs, 1951, named for U.S. market researcher
Arthur Clarke Nielsen (1897-1980), founder of A.C. Nielsen Co., which evaluates viewership based on
samplings of receiving sets.


beginner (n.)

early 14c., founder, agent noun from begin. Meaning novice is from late 15c. Beginner's luck is from
1897.


A.A.

also AA, abbreviation of Alcoholics Anonymous, attested by 1941, American English. The group name
was the title of a book published in 1938 by the founder, Bill W.


Oman

coastal nation in Arabia, supposedly named for its founder. Recorded from Roman times (Omana, in
Pliny). Related: Omani.


Toyota

Japanese automaker, begun 1930s as a division of Toyoda Automatic Loom Works, named for the family
name of the founder. There seems to be no one accepted explanation for the change from -d- to -t-.


Maronite

1510s, from Late Latin Maronita, from Maron, name of the founder. A sect of Syrian Christians (4c.),
originally Monothelites, subsequently (1216) united with the Catholic Church.


Laos

Southeast Asian land, from the name of legendary founder Lao. Related: Laotian.


Dan (2)

name of one of the 12 tribes of ancient Israel or its territory, named for its founder; literally he
who judges, related to Hebrew din to judge. In the Old Testament, it occupied the northernmost part
of Israel, hence its use proverbially for utmost extremity, as in in from Dan to Beersheba (the
southernmost region), 1738.


Zenonian (adj.)

1843, pertaining to one of two Greek thinkers: Zeno of Elea (Zeno of the Paradoxes, 5c. B.C.E.), who
disproved the possibility of motion; and Zeno of Citium (c. 300 B.C.E.), founder of stoicism.


Shafi&#039;i (n.)

member of one of the four principal schools of Sunni Muslims, 1704, from Arabic, from ash-Shafi'i,
cognomen of founder Abu Abdallah Muhammad ibn Idris (767-819). Related: Shafi'ite.


Mennonite (n.)

member of an Anabaptist sect, 1560s, from name of Menno Simons (1492-1559), founder of the sect in
Friesland, + -ite (1). As an adjective by 1727. Alternative form Mennonist (n.) attested from 1640s.


Wesleyan (adj.)

pertaining to Wesley, 1771, in reference to John Wesley (1703-1791), founder of Methodism. The
surname is from various places in England named West Leigh (or some variant). Related: Wesleyanism.


Baha&#039;i

1889, mystical, tolerant Iranian religion founded by a Mirza Ali Mohammed ibn Radhik, Shiraz
merchant executed for heresy in 1850, and named for his leading disciple, Baha Allah (Persian
splendor of God; ultimately from Arabic). It also is sometimes called Babism, after the name taken
by the founder, Bab-ed-Din, gate of the faith.


flounder (v.)

1590s, perhaps an alteration of founder (q.v.), influenced by Dutch flodderen to flop about, or
native verbs in fl- expressing clumsy motion. Figurative use is from 1680s. Related: Floundered;
floundering. As a noun derived from this sense, from 1867.


Arcadian

ideally rustic or rural; an idealized rustic, 1580s, from Greek Arkadia, district in the
Peloponnesus, taken by poets as an ideal region of rural felicity, traditionally from Arkas
(genitive Arkadas), son of Zeus, name of the founder and first ruler of Arcadia.


Erechtheus

legendary first king and founder of Athens, from Latin Erechtheus, from Greek Erekhtheos, literally
render, shaker (of the earth), from erekhthein to rend, break, shatter, shake. Hence, Erechtheum,
the name of a temple on the Athenian acropolis.


Swabian

1785; see from Swabia + -an. The Swabian emperors (1138-1254) were so called because the founder of
the line was duke of Swabia.


Rosicrucian (n.)

1620s, from Modern Latin rosa crucis (DuCange) or crux, Latinization of German Rosenkreuz, French
rosecroix, from the secret society's reputed founder Christian Rosenkreuz, said to date from 1484,
but not mentioned before 1614. As an adjective from 1660s.


Druse

member of a Muslim sect centered in Lebanon, 1786, from Arabic duruz, plural of darazi, from name of
the sect founder, Ismail ad-Darazi (11c.), literally Ismail the Tailor.


Iliad

from Latin Ilias (genitive Iliadis), from Greek Ilias poiesis poem of Ilion (Troy), literally city
of Ilius, the mythical founder.


Dominican (1)

Black friar, 1630s, from Latin form of the name of Domingo de Guzman (Santo Domingo), founder of the
order of preaching friars. His name, like Italian form Dominic, is from Latin dominicus pertaining
to a lord.


Cadmean victory (n.)

c.1600, victory involving one's own ruin, translating Greek Kadmeia nike, from Cadmus (Greek
Kadmos), legendary founder of Thebes in Boeotia and bringer of the alphabet to Greece. Probably a
reference to the story of Cadmus and the Sown-Men, who fought each other till only a handful were
left alive. Compare Pyrrhic (adj.1).


Osmanli

an Ottoman Turk, 1813, from Turkish Osmanli of or pertaining to Osman, founder of the Ottoman
dynasty (he reigned 1259-1326); his name is the Turkish pronunciation of Arabic Uthman. This is the
native word where English generally uses Ottoman.


Mormon (n.)

1830, coined by religion founder Joseph Smith (1805-1844) in Seneca County, N.Y., from Mormon,
supposed prophet and author of The Book of Mormon, explained by Smith as meaning more mon, from
English more + Egyptian mon good. As an adjective by 1842. Related: Mormonism.


Baskerville

typeface style, 1802 (the type was created in the 1750s), named for John Baskerville (1706-1775),
British type-founder and printer.    The initial version were cut by John Handy under Baskerville's
watchful eye. The result is the epitome of Neoclassicism and eighteenth-century rationalism in type
-- a face far more popular in Republican France and the American colonies than in eighteenth-century
England, where it was made. [Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style, 1992]


cadmium (n.)

bluish-white metal, 1822, discovered 1817 by German scientist Friedrich Strohmeyer, coined in Modern
Latin from cadmia, a word used by ancient naturalists for various earths and oxides (especially zinc
carbonate), from Greek kadmeia (ge) Cadmean (earth), from Kadmos Cadmus, legendary founder of
Boeotian Thebes. So called because the earth was first found in the vicinity of Thebes (Kadmeioi was
an alternative name for Thebans since the time of Homer).


humanism (n.)

along with humanist used in a variety of philosophical and theological senses 16c.-18c., especially
ones imitating Latin humanitas education befitting a cultivated man. See human + -ism. Main modern
sense in reference to revival of interest in the Classics traces to c.1860; as a pragmatic system of
thought, defined 1907 by co-founder F.C.S. Schiller as: The perception that the philosophical
problem concerns human beings striving to comprehend a world of human experience by the resources of
human minds.


progenitor (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French progenitour (mid-14c.), Old French progeniteur (14c.) and directly from
Latin progenitor ancestor, the founder of a family, agent noun from progenitus, past participle of
progignere (see progeny). Related: Progenitive; progenital; progenitrix (c.1600).


telescope (n.)

1640s, from Italian telescopio (Galileo, 1611), and Modern Latin telescopium (Kepler, 1613), both
from Greek teleskopos far-seeing, from tele- far (see tele-) + -skopos watcher (see scope (n.1)).
Said to have been coined by Prince Cesi, founder and head of the Roman Academy of the Lincei
(Galileo was a member). Used in English in Latin form from 1619.


Guelph

one of the two great parties in medieval Italian politics, characterized by support of the popes
against the emperors (opposed to the Ghibellines), 1570s, from Italian Guelfo, from Old High German
Welf, name of a princely family that became the ducal house of Brunswick, literally whelp,
originally the name of the founder. The family are the ancestors of the present dynasty of Great
Britain. The name is said to have been used as a war-cry at the Battle of Weinsberg (1140) by
partisans of Henry the Lion, duke of Bavaria, who was of the family, against Emperor Conrad III;
hence it was adopted in Italy as the name of the anti-imperial party.


found (v.1)

establish, late 13c., from Old French founder (12c., Modern French fonder), from Latin fundare to
lay the bottom or foundation of something, from fundus bottom, foundation (see fund (n.)). Related:
Founded; founding. Phrase founding fathers with reference to the creators of the American republic
is attested from 1916.


Comstockery (n.)

1905, from Anthony Comstock (1844-1915), founder of New York Society for the Suppression of Vice
(1873) and self-appointed crusader against immorality, + -ery. Coined by George Bernard Shaw after
Comstock objected to Mrs. Warren's Profession. Comstockery is the world's standing joke at the
expense of the United States [Shaw, New York Times, Sept. 26, 1905]. The Comstock lode, silver vein
in Nevada, was discovered 1859 and first worked by U.S. prospector H.T.P. Comstock (1820-1870).


