frivolous (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin frivolus silly, empty, trifling, worthless, brittle, diminutive of *frivos
broken, crumbled, from friare break, rub away, crumble. Related: Frivolously; frivolousness.


fizgig (n.)

light, frivolous woman, 1520s, first element of uncertain origin, second element is Middle English
gig frivolous person (see gig (n.1)).


frivolity (n.)

1796, from French frivolit&eacute;, from Old French frivole frivolous, from Latin frivolus (see
frivolous).


jape (n.)

early 14c., trick, deceit, later a joke, a jest (late 14c.); see jape (v.). By mid-14c. it meant
frivolous pastime, by 1400, bawdiness.


daliance (n.)

mid-14c., confab, chat, from dally + -ance. Probably formed in Anglo-French, but not attested there.
Meaning amorous play, flirtation is from late 14c.; that of idle or frivolous activity is from
1540s.


flighty (adj.)

1550s, swift, later (1768) fickle or frivolous, originally of skittish horses; from flight (n.1) +
-y (2). Related: Flightiness.


skit (n.)

piece of light satire or caricature, 1820, from earlier sense a satirical remark or reflection
(1727), originally (1570s) a vain, frivolous, or wanton girl (originally Scottish, now archaic),
related to verb meaning to shy or be skittish, caper, frolic (1610s), perhaps from Old Norse skjuta
to shoot, move quickly (see skittish).


skittish (adj.)

early 15c., very lively, frivolous, perhaps from Scandinavian base *skyt- (stem of Old Norse skjota
to shoot, launch, move quickly), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see
shoot (v.)). Sense of shy, nervous, apt to run first recorded c.1500, of horses. Related:
Skittishly; skittishness.


chat (n.)

1520s, chatter, frivolous talk; see chat (v.). Meaning familiar conversation is from 1570s. Chat
show, for what in U.S. is a talk show, attested from 1969.  Chat room in the online sense is
attested by 1994, from the days when AOL ruled the Web.


fink (n.)

1902, of uncertain origin, possibly from German Fink a frivolous or dissolute person, originally
finch; the German word also had a sense of informer (compare stool pigeon). The other theory traces
it to Pinks, short for Pinkerton agents, the private police force hired to break up the 1892
Homestead strike. As a verb, 1925 in American English slang. Related: Finked; finking.


goof (n.)

1916, American English, stupid person, perhaps a variant of English dialect goff foolish clown
(1869), from 16c. goffe, probably from Middle French goffe awkward, stupid, of uncertain origin. Or
English goffe may be from Middle English goffen speak in a frivolous manner, possibly from Old
English gegaf buffoonery, and gaffetung scolding. Sense of a blunder is c.1954, probably influenced
by gaffe.


