frolicsome (adj.)

1690s, from frolic + -some (1).


frolic

1530s, as an adjective, joyous, merry, from Middle Dutch vrolyc (adj.) happy, from vro- merry, glad
+ lyc like (see like (adj.)). Cognate with German fr&ouml;hlich happy. The stem is cognate with Old
Norse frar swift, Middle English frow hasty, from PIE *preu- (see frog (n.1)), giving the whole an
etymological sense akin to jumping for joy. The verb is first attested 1580s. Related: Frolicked;
frolicking. As a noun, from 1610s.


big time (n.)

upper reaches of a profession or pursuit, c.1910 from vaudeville slang; the phrase was common in
colloquial use late 19c.-early 20c. in a broad range of senses: party, shindig, fun, frolic.


spree (n.)

a frolic, drinking bout, 1804, slang, earliest use in Scottish dialect works, of uncertain origin.
Perhaps [Barnhart] an alteration of French esprit lively wit (see esprit). According to Klein, Irish
spre seems to be a loan-word from Old Norse sprakr. Watkins proposes a possible origin as an
alteration of Scots spreath cattle raid, from Gaelic spr&#233;dh, spr&#233;, cattle; wealth, from
Middle Irish preit, preid, booty, ultimately from Latin praeda plunder, booty (see prey (n.)).
The splore is a frolic, a merry meeting. In the slang language of the inhabitants of St Giles's, in
London, it is called a spree or a go. [Note in Select Scottish Songs, Ancient and Modern, vol. II,
London, 1810]    In Foote's comedy The Maid of Bath (1794) the word appears as a Scottish dialect
pronunciation of spry:  'When I intermarried with Sir Launcelot Coldstream, I was en siek a spree
lass as yoursel; and the baronet bordering upon his grand climacteric;'  etc.


rollicking (adj.)

1811, present participle adjective from rollick be jovial in behavior (though this does not appear
in print until 1826), which perhaps is a blend of roll (v.) and frolic (v.).


pissant (n.)

1660s, an ant, from first element of pismire (q.v.) + ant. Meaning contemptible, insignificant
person is from 1903.    [B]y sun-down [the gals] come pourin out of the woods like pissants out of
an old log when tother end's afire. [Dick Harlan's Tennessee Frolic, in collection A Quarter Race in
Kentucky, Philadelphia, 1846]


wanton (v.)

to revel, frolic unrestrainedly, 1580s, from wanton (adj.). Related: Wantoned; wantoning.


skit (n.)

piece of light satire or caricature, 1820, from earlier sense a satirical remark or reflection
(1727), originally (1570s) a vain, frivolous, or wanton girl (originally Scottish, now archaic),
related to verb meaning to shy or be skittish, caper, frolic (1610s), perhaps from Old Norse skjuta
to shoot, move quickly (see skittish).


gambol (n.)

frolic, merrymaking, 1590s, originally gambolde a leap or spring (c.1500), from Middle French
gambade (15c.), from Late Latin gamba horse's hock or leg, from Greek kampe a bending (on notion of
a joint), from PIE *kamp- to bend (see campus).


romp (v.)

1709, to play, sport, frolic; 1734, piece of lively play; perhaps a variant of ramp (v.); but also
see romp (n.). Meaning to win (a contest) with great ease first attested 1888. Related: Romped;
romping.


skylark (v.)

to frolic or play, 1809, originally nautical, in reference to wanton play about the rigging, and
tops, probably from skylark (n.), influenced by (or from) lark (n.2). Related: Skylarked;
skylarking.


bust (n.2)

variant of burst (n.), 1764, American English. For loss of -r-, compare ass (n.2). Originally
frolic, spree; sense of sudden failure is from 1842. Meaning police raid or arrest is from 1938.
Phrase ______ or bust as an emphatic expression attested by 1851 in British depictions of Western
U.S. dialect. Probably from earlier expression bust (one's) boiler, by late 1840s, a reference to
steamboat boilers exploding when driven too hard.


reverie (n.)

mid-14c., reuerye, wild conduct, frolic, from Old French reverie, resverie revelry, raving, delirium
(Modern French r&#234;verie), from resver to dream, wander, rave (12c., Modern French r&#234;ver),
of uncertain origin (also the root of rave). Meaning daydream is first attested 1650s, a reborrowing
from French. As a type of musical composition, it is attested from 1880. Related: Reverist.


rant (v.)

c.1600, to be jovial and boisterous, also to talk bombastically, from Dutch randten (earlier ranten)
talk foolishly, rave, of unknown origin (compare German rantzen to frolic, spring about). Related:
Ranted; ranting. Ranters antinomian sect which arose in England c.1645 is attested from 1651;
applied 1823 to early Methodists. A 1700 slang dictionary has rantipole a rude wild Boy or Girl
(also as a verb and adjective); to ride rantipole meant The woman uppermost in the amorous congress
[Grose].


frisk (v.)

1510s, to dance, frolic, from Middle English frisk lively (mid-15c.), from Middle French frisque
lively, brisk, from Old French frisque fresh, new; merry, animated (13c.), possibly from a Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch vrisch fresh, Old High German frisc lively; see fresh (adj.1)). Sense
of pat down in a search first recorded 1781. Related: Frisked; frisking. As a noun from 1520s.


buster (n.)

1838, anything large; a man of great strength, American English slang (originally
Missouri/Arkansas), perhaps meaning something that takes one's breath away and an agent noun from
bust (v.). Around the same years, buster (as an extended form of bust (n.)) also meant a frolic, a
spree. Hence a roistering blade (OED; probably not the favored definition in old Missouri and
Arkansas), attested from 1850. As a generic or playful address to a male, from 1948, American
English. Meaning horse-breaker is from 1891, American English; hence back-formed verb bust (v.)
break a horse.


lark (n.2)

spree, frolic, 1811, possibly shortening of skylark (1809), sailors' slang play rough in the rigging
of a ship (larks were proverbial for high-flying), or from English dialectal lake/laik to play
(c.1300, from Old Norse leika to play, from PIE *leig- to leap) with intrusive -r- common in
southern British dialect. The verb lake, considered characteristic of Northern English vocabulary,
is the opposite of work but lacks the other meanings of play. As a verb, from 1813. Related: Larked;
larking.


schadenfreude (n.)

malicious joy in the misfortunes of others, 1922, German Schadenfreude, literally damage-joy, from
schaden damage, harm, injury (see scathe) + freude, from Old High German frewida joy, from fro
happy, literally hopping for joy, from Proto-Germanic *frawa- (see frolic).What a fearful thing is
it that any language should have a word expressive of the pleasure which men feel at the calamities
of others; for the existence of the word bears testimony to the existence of the thing. And yet in
more than one such a word is found. ... In the Greek epikhairekakia, in the German, 'Schadenfreude.'
[Richard C. Trench, On the Study of Words, 1852]


play (v.)

Old English plegan, plegian move rapidly, occupy or busy oneself, exercise; frolic; make sport of,
mock; perform music, from West Germanic *plegan occupy oneself about  (cognates: Old Saxon plegan
vouch for, take charge of, Old Frisian plega tend to, Middle Dutch pleyen to rejoice, be glad,
German pflegen take care of, cultivate), from PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself, forming words in
Celtic, Germanic, Slavic, and possibly Latin.    Meaning to take part in a game is from c.1200.
Opposed to work (v.) since late 14c. Related: Played; playing. To play up emphasize is from 1909; to
play down minimize is from 1930; to play along cooperate is from 1929. To play with oneself
masturbate is from 1896; play for keeps is from 1861, originally of marbles or other children's
games with tokens. To play second fiddle in the figurative sense is from 1809 (Gil Blas). To play
into the hands (of someone) is from 1705. To play the _______ card is attested from 1886; to play
fair is from mid-15c. To play (something) safe is from 1911; to play favorites is attested from
1902. For play the field see field (n.).


