frost (n.)

Old English forst, frost a freezing, becoming frozen, extreme cold, from Proto-Germanic *frusta-
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German frost, Middle Dutch and Dutch vorst), related to
freosan to freeze, from PIE *preus- to freeze; burn (see freeze (v.)). Both forms of the word were
common in English till late 15c.; the triumph of frost may be due to its similarity to the forms in
other Germanic languages.


frost (v.)

1630s, from frost (n.). Related: Frosted; frosting.


frostbitten (adj.)

also frost-bitten, 1550s, from frost (n.) + bitten.


frostbite (n.)

also frost-bite, 1813, from frost (n.) + bite (n.).


frosting (n.)

1610s as an action; 1756 as a substance; meaning cake icing is from 1858; verbal noun from frost
(v.).


frosted (adj.)

1640s of whitening hair; 1680s of glass; 1734 of sugar or icing, past participle adjective from
frost.


frosty (adj.)

Old English forstig, fyrstig (cognates: Dutch vorstig, German frostig); see frost (n.) + -y (2).
Figurative use from late 14c. Related: Frostily; frostiness.


jelly (n.)

late 14c., from Old French gelee a frost; jelly, noun use of fem. past participle of geler congeal,
from Latin gelare to freeze, from gelu frost (see cold (adj.)).


ice (n.)

Old English is ice (also the name of the rune for -i-), from Proto-Germanic *isa- (cognates: Old
Norse iss, Old Frisian is, Dutch ijs, German Eis), with no certain cognates beyond Germanic, though
possible relatives are Avestan aexa- frost, ice, isu- frosty, icy; Afghan asai frost. Slang meaning
diamonds is attested from 1906.   Ice cube attested from 1904. Ice age attested from 1832. To break
the ice to make the first opening to any attempt is from 1580s, metaphoric of making passages for
boats by breaking up river ice though in modern use usually with implications of cold reserve.


hoar (adj.)

Old English har hoary, gray, venerable, old, the connecting notion being gray hair, from Proto-
Germanic *haira (cognates: Old Norse harr gray-haired, old, Old Saxon, Old High German her
distinguished, noble, glorious, German hehr), from PIE *kei-, source of color adjectives (see hue
(n.1)). German also uses the word as a title of respect, in Herr. Of frost, it is recorded in Old
English, perhaps expressing the resemblance of the white feathers of frost to an old man's beard.
Used as an attribute of boundary stones in Anglo-Saxon, perhaps in reference to being gray with
lichens, hence its appearance in place-names.


permafrost (n.)

1943, coined in English by Russian-born U.S. geologist Siemon W. Muller (1900-1970) from perm(anent)
frost.


freeze (v.)

Old English freosan turn to ice (class II strong verb; past tense freas, past participle froren),
from Proto-Germanic *freusan to freeze (cognates: Old Norse frjosa, Old High German friosan, German
frieren to freeze, Gothic frius frost), from Proto-Germanic *freus-, equivalent to PIE root *preus-
to freeze, also to burn (cognates: Sanskrit prusva, Latin pruina hoarfrost, Welsh rhew frost,
Sanskrit prustah burnt, Albanian prus burning coals, Latin pruna a live coal).    Transitive sense
first recorded 14c., figurative sense c.1400. Meaning become rigid or motionless attested by 1720.
Sense of fix at a certain level, make non-transactable is 1922. Freeze frame is from 1960,
originally a briefly Frozen Shot after the Jingle to allow ample time for Change over at the end of
a T.V. 'Commercial.'  [ABC of Film &amp; TV, 1960].


acquainted (adj.)

early 13c., personally known; past participle adjective from acquaint (v.). Of skills, situations,
etc., from late 15c.    I have been one acquainted with the night.  I have walked out in rain
Ã¢&euro;&rdquo;- and back in rain.  I have outwalked the furthest city light.  [Robert Frost, from
Acquainted with the Night]


hoarfrost (n.)

c.1300, hore-forst; see hoar + frost (n.).


gelid (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin gelidus icy cold, from gelum frost, intense cold (see cold (adj.)).


underdog (n.)

the beaten dog in a fight, 1887, from under + dog (n.). Compare top dog dominant person in a
situation or hierarchy (see top (adj.)).    I'm a poor underdog  But tonight I will bark  With the
great Overdog  That romps through the dark.   [from Canis Major, Robert Frost, 1928]


defrost (v.)

1895, from de- + frost. Related: Defrosted; defrosting.


chill (n.)

Old English ciele, cele cold, coolness, chill, frost, from Proto-Germanic *kal- to be cold, from PIE
root *gel- cold (see cold). According to OED, the word seems to have been obsolete after c.1400
(displaced by cold) and the modern use is a back-formation since c.1600 from the verb.


frigid (adj.)

1620s, from Latin frigidus cold, chill, cool, figuratively indifferent, from stem of frigere be
cold; related to frigus cold, coldness, frost, from PIE root *srig- cold.    The meaning wanting in
sexual heat is attested from 1650s. Frigidaire as the proprietary name of a brand of self-contained
automatically operated iceless refrigerator dates from 1919 (Frigidaire Corporation, Detroit,
Michigan, U.S.).


glacial (adj.)

1650s, cold, icy, from French glacial, from Latin glacialis icy, frozen, full of ice, from glacies
ice, probably from PIE root *gel- cold (cognates: Latin gelu frost; see cold (adj.)). Geological
sense apparently coined in 1846 by British naturalist Edward Forbes (1815-1854). Related: Glacially.


nationality (n.)

1690s, national quality, from national + -ity (in some usages perhaps from French nationalit&#233;.
As fact of belonging to or being a citizen of a particular state, from 1828, gradually shading into
race, ethnicity. Meaning separate existence as a nation is recorded from 1832. Related:
Nationalities.    But I do love a country that loves itself. I love a country that insists on its
own nationality which is the same thing as a person's insisting on his own personality. [Robert
Frost, letter, April 21, 1919]


weatherman (n.)

one who observes the weather, 1869, from weather (n.) + man (n.). Weather-prophet is from 1784 as
barometer; 1827 as person who predicts the weather.    Clerk of the Weather, I deplore  That all thy
greatness is no more,  As should a gentle bard;  That Nature, or that Nature's law  When you
politely called for thaw,  Gave frost was rather hard.  [from Consolatory Address to Mr. Murphy, the
Weather Prophet, Colburn's New Monthly Magazine, 1838]


congeal (v.)

late 14c., from Old French congeler (14c.) to freeze, thicken, from Latin congelare to cause to
freeze, to freeze together, from com- together (see com-) + gelare to freeze, from gelu frost, ice
(see cold (adj.)). Related: Congealed; congealing.


cosmology (n.)

1650s, from Modern Latin cosmologia, from Greek kosmos (see cosmos) + -logia discourse (see -logy).
Related: Cosmological; cosmologist.    They cannot scare me with their empty spaces  Between stars--
on stars where no human race is.  I have it in me so much nearer home  To scare myself with my own
desert places.    [Robert Frost, from Desert Places, 1936]


Indian summer (n.)

spell of warm weather after the first frost,  first recorded 1778, American English, perhaps so
called because it was first noted in regions inhabited by Indians, or because the Indians first
described it to the Europeans. No evidence connects it with the color of fall leaves or a season of
Indian attacks on settlements. It is the American version of British All-Hallows summer, French
&eacute;t&eacute; de la Saint-Martin (feast day Nov. 11), etc. Also colloquial was St. Luke's summer
(or little summer), period of warm weather occurring about St. Luke's day (Oct. 18).


queer (v.)

to spoil, ruin, 1812, from queer (adj.). Related: Queered; queering. Earlier it meant to puzzle,
ridicule, cheat (1790). To queer the pitch (1846) is in reference to the patter of an itinerant
tradesman or showman (see pitch (n.1)).    These wanderers, and those who are still seen
occasionally in the back streets of the metropolis, are said to 'go a-pitching ;' the spot they
select for their performance is their 'pitch,' and any interruption of their feats, such as an
accident, or the interference of a policeman, is said to 'queer the pitch,'--in other words, to
spoil it. [Thomas Frost, Circus Life and Circus Celebrities, London, 1875]


crystal (n.)

Old English cristal clear ice, clear mineral, from Old French cristal (12c., Modern French crystal),
from Latin crystallus crystal, ice, from Greek krystallos, from kryos frost, from PIE root *kru(s)-
hard, hard outer surface (see crust). Spelling adopted the Latin form 15c.-17c. The mineral has been
so-called since Old English; it was regarded by the ancients as a sort of fossilized ice. As a
shortened form of crystal-glass it dates from 1590s. As an adjective, from late 14c.


crust (n.)

early 14c., hard outer part of bread, from Old French crouste (13c., Modern French cro&#251;te) and
directly from Latin crusta rind, crust, shell, bark, from PIE *krus-to- that which has been
hardened, from root *kreus- to begin to freeze, form a crust (cognates: Sanskrit krud- make hard,
thicken; Avestan xruzdra- hard; Greek krystallos ice, crystal, kryos icy cold, frost; Lettish
kruwesis frozen mud; Old High German hrosa ice, crust; Old English hruse earth; Old Norse hro&eth;r
scurf). Meaning outer shell of the earth is from 1550s.


jack (n.)

late 14c., jakke a mechanical device, from the masc. name Jack. The proper name was used in Middle
English for any common fellow (mid-14c.), and thereafter extended to various appliances replacing
servants (1570s). Used generically of men (jack-of-all-trades, 1610s), male animals (1620s, see
jackass, jackdaw, etc.), and male personifications (1520s, such as Jack Frost, 1826).    As the name
of a device for pulling off boots, from 1670s. The jack in a pack of playing cards (1670s) is in
German Bauer peasant. Jack shit nothing at all is attested by 1968, U.S. slang. The plant jack-in-
the-pulpit is attested by 1837. Jack the Ripper was active in London 1888. The jack of Union Jack is
a nautical term for small flag at the bow of a ship (1630s).


cold (adj.)

Old English cald (Anglian), ceald (West Saxon) cold, cool (adj.), coldness, from Proto-Germanic
*kaldaz (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon kald, Old High German and German kalt, Old Norse kaldr,
Gothic kalds cold), possibly a past participle adjective of *kal-/*kol-, from PIE root *gel-/*gol-
cold (cognates: Latin gelare to freeze, gelu frost, glacies ice).    Meaning not strong (in
reference to scent) is 1590s, from hunting. Cold front in weather is from 1921. Cold-call in the
sales pitch sense first recorded 1972. Japanese has two words for cold: samui for coldness in the
atmosphere or environment; tsumetai for things which are cold to touch, and also in the figurative
sense, with reference to personalities, behaviors, etc.


shit (n.)

Old English scitte purging, diarrhea, from source of shit (v.). Sense of excrement dates from 1580s
(Old English had scytel, Middle English shitel for dung, excrement; the usual 14c. noun seems to
have been turd). Use for obnoxious person is since at least 1508; meaning misfortune, trouble is
attested from 1937. Shit-faced drunk is 1960s student slang; shit list is from 1942. Up shit creek
in trouble is from 1937 (compare salt river). To not give a shit not care is from 1922. Pessimistic
expression Same shit different day attested from 1997. Shitticism is Robert Frost's word for
scatological writing.    The expression [the shit hits the fan] is related to, and may well derive
from, an old joke. A man in a crowded bar needed to defecate but couldn't find a bathroom, so he
went upstairs and used a hole in the floor. Returning, he found everyone had gone except the
bartender, who was cowering behind the bar. When the man asked what had happened, the bartender
replied, 'Where were you when the shit hit the fan?' [Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989]


