fruitful (adj.)

c.1300, of trees, from fruit + -ful. Related: Fruitfully; fruitfulness. Of animals or persons from
early 16c.; of immaterial things from 1530s.


fecund (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French fecond, from Latin fecundus fruitful, fertile, productive, from *fe-
kwondo-, suffixed form of Latin root *fe-, corresponding to PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, also
produce, yield (cognates: Sanskrit dhayati sucks, dhayah nourishing; Greek thele mother's breast,
nipple, thelys female, fruitful; Old Church Slavonic dojiti to suckle, dojilica nurse, deti child;
Lithuanian dele leech; Old Prussian dadan milk; Gothic daddjan to suckle; Old Swedish dia suckle;
Old High German tila female breast; Old Irish denaim I suck, dinu lamb).    Also from the same Latin
root come felare to suck; femina woman (*fe-mna-, literally she who suckles); felix happy,
auspicious, fruitful; fetus offspring, pregnancy; fenum hay (probably literally produce); and
probably filia/filius daughter/son, assimilated from *felios, originally a suckling.


Ephraim

masc. personal name, in Old Testament, younger son of Joseph; also the tribe descended from him,
sometimes used figuratively for Kingdom of Israel; Greek form of Hebrew Ephrayim, a derivative of
parah was fruitful (related to Aramaic pera fruit).


seedy (adj.)

mid-15c., fruitful, abundant, from seed (n.) + -y (2). From 1570s as abounding in seeds. Meaning
shabby is from 1739, probably in reference to the appearance of a flowering plant that has run to
seed. Related: Seediness.


procreant (adj.)

fruitful, 1580s, from Latin procreantem (nominative procreans), present participle of procreare to
beget (see procreation). As a noun from c.1600.


unfruitful (adj.)

late 14c., barren, from un- (1) not + fruitful. Originally literal; figurative sense is attested
from c.1400. Related: Unfruitfully; unfruitfulness.


fertile (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French fertil and directly from Latin fertilis bearing in abundance, fruitful,
productive, from ferre to bear (see infer). Fertile Crescent (1914) was coined by U.S. archaeologist
James H. Breasted (1865-1935).


felicity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French felicite (14c.) happiness, from Latin felicitatem (nominative felicitas)
happiness, fertility, from felix (genitive felicis) happy, fortunate, fruitful, fertile, from Latin
root *fe-, equivalent of PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, produce, yield (see fecund).


exuberant (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French exub&eacute;rant and directly from Latin exuberantem (nominative
exuberans) overabundance, present participle of exuberare be abundant, grow luxuriously, from ex-
thoroughly + uberare be fruitful, related to uber udder, from PIE root *eue-dh-r- (see udder).
Related: Exuberantly; exuberate; exuberating.


Eustace

masc. proper name, from Old French Eustace (Modern French Eustache), from Latin Eustachius, probably
from Greek eustakhos fruitful, from eu well (see eu-) + stakhys ear (of grain); see spike (n.1).


