fussy (adj.)

1831, from fuss (n.) + -y (2). Related: Fussily; fussiness.


meticulous (adj.)

1530s, fearful, timid, from Latin meticulosus fearful, timid, literally full of fear, from metus
fear, dread, apprehension, anxiety, of unknown origin. Sense of fussy about details is first
recorded in English 1827, from French m&eacute;ticuleux timorously fussy. Related: Meticulosity.


Bumble

self-important petty official, 1856, from the name of the fussy, pompous, stupid beadle in Dickens'
Oliver Twist.


frou-frou

1870, a rustling, from French (19c.), possibly imitative of the rustling of a dress. Meaning fussy
details is from 1876.


gingerbread (n.)

late 13c., gingerbrar, from Old French ginginbrat ginger preserve, from Medieval Latin gingimbratus
gingered, from gingiber (see ginger). The ending changed by folk etymology to -brede bread, a
formation attested by mid-14c. Originally preserved ginger, the meaning a kind of spiced cake is
from 15c. Figurative use, showy, insubstantial is from c.1600. Sense of fussy decoration on a house
is first recorded 1757; gingerbread-work (1748) was a sailor's term for carved decoration on a ship.


nice (adj.)

late 13c., foolish, stupid, senseless, from Old French nice (12c.) careless, clumsy; weak; poor,
needy; simple, stupid, silly, foolish, from Latin nescius ignorant, unaware, literally not-knowing,
from ne- not (see un-) + stem of scire to know (see science). The sense development has been
extraordinary, even for an adj. [Weekley] -- from timid (pre-1300); to fussy, fastidious (late
14c.); to dainty, delicate (c.1400); to precise, careful (1500s, preserved in such terms as a nice
distinction and nice and early); to agreeable, delightful (1769); to kind, thoughtful (1830).    In
many examples from the 16th and 17th centuries it is difficult to say in what particular sense the
writer intended it to be taken. [OED]    By 1926, it was pronounced too great a favorite with the
ladies, who have charmed out of it all its individuality and converted it into a mere diffuser of
vague and mild agreeableness. [Fowler]I am sure, cried Catherine, I did not mean to say anything
wrong; but it is a nice book, and why should I not call it so?  Very true, said Henry, and this is a
very nice day, and we are taking a very nice walk; and you are two very nice young ladies. Oh! It is
a very nice word indeed! It does for everything. [Jane Austen, Northanger Abbey, 1803]


