gambol (v.)

1580s; earlier gambade (c.1500), from Middle French gambader, from gambade (see gambol (n.)).
Related: Gamboled; gamboling; gambolling.


gambol (n.)

frolic, merrymaking, 1590s, originally gambolde a leap or spring (c.1500), from Middle French
gambade (15c.), from Late Latin gamba horse's hock or leg, from Greek kampe a bending (on notion of
a joint), from PIE *kamp- to bend (see campus).


game (adj.1)

lame, 1787, from north Midlands dialect, of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of gammy (tramps'
slang) bad, or from Old North French gambe leg (see gambol (n.)).


jamb (n.)

side-piece of a door, window, etc., early 14c., from Old French jambe pier, side post of a door,
originally a leg, shank (12c.), from Late Latin gamba leg, (horse's) hock (see gambol).


gammon (n.)

early 15c., ham or haunch of a swine, from Old North French gambon ham (French jambon), from gambe
leg, from Late Latin gamba leg of an animal (see gambol (n.)).


gambrel (n.)

hipped roof, 1851, short for gambrel roof, so called for its shape, from gambrel horse's hind leg
(c.1600), earlier wooden bar to hang carcasses (1540s), perhaps from Old North French gamberel, from
gambe leg, from Late Latin gamba (see gambol).


vault (v.1)

jump or leap over, especially by aid of the hands or a pole, 1530s, transitive (implied in
vaulting); 1560s, intransitive, from Middle French volter to gambol, leap, from Italian voltare to
turn, from Vulgar Latin *volvitare to turn, leap, frequentative of Latin volvere to turn, turn
around, roll (see volvox). Related: Vaulted; vaulting.


gamble (v.)

1726 (implied in gambling), from a dialectal survival of Middle English gammlen, variant of gamenen
to play, jest, be merry, from Old English gamenian to play, joke, pun, from gamen (see game). Or
possibly gamble is from a derivative of gamel to play games (1590s), itself likely a frequentative
from game. Originally regarded as a slang word. The intrusive -b- may be from confusion with gambol.
Related: Gambled; gambling.


gambit (n.)

chess opening in which a pawn is risked for advantage later, 1650s, gambett, from Italian gambetto,
literally a tripping up (as a trick in wrestling), from gamba leg, from Late Latin gamba (see
gambol). Applied to chess openings in Spanish in 1561 by Ruy Lopez, who traced it to the Italian
word, but the form in Spanish generally was gambito, which led to French gambit, which has
influenced the English spelling of the word. Broader sense of opening move meant to gain advantage
in English is recorded from 1855.


