gape (v.)

early 13c., from an unrecorded Old English word or else from Old Norse gapa to open the mouth, gape,
common Proto-Germanic (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch gapen, German gaffen to gape, stare, Swedish
gapa, Danish gabe), from PIE *ghai- (see gap). Related: Gaped; gaping. As a noun, from 1530s.


gaper (n.)

1630s, agent noun from gape (v.). Gaper delay in traffic control parlance attested by 1995.


yawn (v.)

c.1300, yenen, yonen, from Old English ginian, gionian open the mouth wide, yawn, gape, from Proto-
Germanic *gin- (cognates: Old Norse gina to yawn, Dutch geeuwen, Old High German ginen, German
g&auml;hnen to yawn), from PIE *ghai- to yawn, gape (cognates: Old Church Slavonic zijajo to gape,
Lithuanian &#382;ioju, Czech zivati to yawn, Greek khainein, Latin hiare to yawn, gape, Sanskrit
vijihite to gape, be ajar). Modern spelling is from 16c. Related: Yawned; yawning.


abash (v.)

perplex, embarrass, early 15c., earlier lose one's composure, be upset (late 14c.), from Old French
esbaiss-, present stem of esbaer gape with astonishment, from es out (see ex-) + ba(y)er to be open,
gape, from Latin *batare to yawn, gape, from root *bat, possibly imitative of yawning. Related:
Abashed; abashing. Bashful is a 16c. derivative.


gawp (n.)

fool, simpleton, 1825, perhaps from the verb meaning to yawn, gape (as in astonishment), which is
attested from 1680s, a dialectal survival of galp (c.1300), which is related to yelp or gape.


bay (n.2)

opening in a wall, late 14c. (especially bay window, early 15c.), from Old French baee opening,
hole, gulf, noun use of fem. past participle of bayer to gape, yawn, from Medieval Latin batare
gape, perhaps of imitative origin. It is the bay in sick-bay.


gap (n.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. in place names), from Old Norse gap chasm, related to gapa to gape, from PIE
*ghai- to yawn, gape (see yawn (v.)). Originally hole in a wall or hedge; broader sense is 16c. In
U.S., common in place names in reference to a break or pass in a long mountain chain (especially one
that water flows through). As a verb from 1847.


badinage (n.)

light railery, 1650s, from French badinage playfulness, jesting, from badiner (v.) to jest, joke,
from badin silly, jesting, from Old Proven&ccedil;al badar to yawn, gape, from Late Latin badare to
gape, from *bat-, the root of abash.


bevel (adj.)

1560s, possibly from Old French *baivel (Modern French b&eacute;veau, biveau), possibly from bayer
to gape, yawn, from Latin *batare to yawn, gape, from Latin root *bat-, possibly imitative of
yawning. If so, the time gap is puzzling. The verb is first recorded 1670s. The noun is 1670s, from
the adjective.


abeyance (n.)

1520s, from Anglo-French abeiance suspension, also expectation (especially in a lawsuit), from Old
French abeance aspiration, desire, noun of condition of abeer aspire after, gape from &agrave; at
(see ad-) + ba(y)er be open, from Latin *batare to yawn, gape (see abash).    Originally in French a
legal term, condition of a person in expectation or hope of receiving property; it turned around in
English law to mean condition of property temporarily without an owner (1650s). Root baer is also
the source of English bay (n.2) recessed space, as in bay window.


gaping

1570s (implied in gapingly), present participle adj. from gape (v.).


hiatus (n.)

1560s, break or opening in a material object, from Latin hiatus opening, aperture, rupture, gap,
from past participle stem of hiare to gape, stand open (see yawn (v.)). Sense of gap or interruption
in events, etc. is first recorded 1610s.


agape (adv.)

1660s, from a- (1) + gape (v.).


oscitant (adj.)

yawning, from Latin oscitans listless, sluggish, lazy, present participle of oscitare to gape, yawn,
from os citare to move the mouth (see oral and cite).


gaze (v.)

late 14c., probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Norwegian, Swedish dialectal gasa to gape),
perhaps related somehow to Old Norse ga heed (see gawk). Related: Gazed; gazing.


gloat (v.)

1570s, to look at furtively, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse glotta to grin, smile
scornfully, show the teeth, Swedish dialectal glotta to peep; or from Middle High German glotzen to
stare, gape. Sense of to look at with malicious satisfaction first recorded 1748. Related: Gloated;
gloating. As a noun, from 1640s with sense of side-glance; 1899 as act of gloating.


dehiscence (n.)

1828, from Modern Latin dehiscentia, from dehiscentem (nominative dehiscens), present participle of
dehiscere to gape, open, split down (of the earth, etc.), from de- (see de-) + hiscere, inchoative
of hiare to yawn (see yawn (v.)).


gasp (v.)

late 14c., gaspen, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse geispa to yawn, or its Danish
derivative gispe gasp, which probably are related to Old Norse gapa (see gape). Related: Gasped;
gasping.


chink (n.1)

a split, crack, 1530s, with parasitic -k + Middle English chine (and replacing this word) fissure,
narrow valley, from Old English cinu, cine fissure, related to cinan to crack, split, gape, common
Germanic (compare Old Saxon and Old High German kinan, Gothic uskeinan, German keimen to germinate;
Middle Dutch kene, Old Saxon kin, German Keim germ; ), from PIE root *geie- to sprout, split open.
The connection being in the notion of bursting open.


chaos (n.)

late 14c., gaping void, from Old French chaos (14c.) or directly from Latin chaos, from Greek khaos
abyss, that which gapes wide open, is vast and empty, from *khnwos, from PIE root *gheu- to gape,
yawn (cognates: Greek khaino I yawn, Old English ginian, Old Norse ginnunga-gap; see yawn (v.)).
Meaning utter confusion (c.1600) is extended from theological use of chaos for the void at the
beginning of creation in Vulgate version of Genesis (1530s in English). The Greek for disorder was
tarakhe, however the use of chaos here was rooted in Hesiod (Theogony), who describes khaos as the
primeval emptiness of the Universe, begetter of Erebus and Nyx (Night), and in Ovid (Metamorphoses),
who opposes Khaos to Kosmos, the ordered Universe. Meaning orderless confusion in human affairs is
from c.1600. Chaos theory in the modern mathematical sense is attested from c.1977.


