genus (n.)

(plural genera), 1550s as a term of logic, kind or class of things (biological sense dates from
c.1600), from Latin genus (genitive generis) race, stock, kind; family, birth, descent, origin,
cognate with Greek genos race, kind, and gonos birth, offspring, stock, from PIE root *gene-
produce, give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to family and tribal groups (cognates:
Sanskrit janati begets, bears, janah race, janman- birth, origin, jatah born; Avestan zizanenti they
bear; Greek gignesthai to become, happen; Latin gignere to beget, gnasci to be born, genius
procreative divinity, inborn tutelary spirit, innate quality, ingenium inborn character, germen
shoot, bud, embryo, germ; Lithuanian gentis kinsmen; Gothic kuni race; Old English cennan beget,
create; Old High German kind child; Old Irish ro-genar I was born; Welsh geni to be born; Armenian
chanim I bear, I am born).


generic (adj.)

1670s, belonging to a large group of objects, formed in English from Latin gener-, stem of genus
kind (see genus) + -ic. Sense of not special, not brand-name; in plain, cheap packaging, of
groceries, etc., is from 1977.


genotype (n.)

genetic constitution of an individual, 1910, from German Genotypus (Wilhelm Johannsen, 1909); see
gene + type. Earlier the same word was used with a sense of type species of a genus (1897); in this
case, the first element is from genus.


miscegenation (n.)

interbreeding of races, 1864, coined irregularly in American English from Latin miscere to mix (see
mix (v.)) + genus race (see genus).


degenerate (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin degeneratus, past participle of degenerare to be inferior to one's ancestors,
to become unlike one's race or kind, fall from ancestral quality, used of physical as well as moral
qualities, from phrase de genere, from de + genus (genitive generis) birth, descent (see genus). The
noun is from 1550s.


general (adj.)

c.1200, comprehensive, inclusive, full, from Latin generalis relating to all, of a whole class
(contrasted with specialis), from genus (genitive generis) stock, kind (see genus). General store
attested by 1810, American English; a general hospital (1737) is one not restricted to one class of
persons or type of disease.


citrus (adj.)

1825, from Modern Latin genus name, from Latin citrus citron tree, name of an African tree with
aromatic wood and lemon-like fruit, the first citrus fruit to become available in the West. The
name, like the tree, is probably of Asiatic origin [OED]. But Klein traces it to Greek kedros cedar,
and writes that the change of dr into tr shows that the word came from Greek into Latin through the
medium of the Etruscans. As a noun, tree of the genus Citrus, from 1885.


congener (n.)

1730s, from French cong&eacute;n&egrave;re (16c.), from Latin congener of the same race or kind,
from com- together (see com-) + gener-, stem of genus kind (see genus).


generous (adj.)

1580s, of noble birth, from Middle French g&eacute;n&eacute;reux, from Latin generosus of noble
birth, figuratively magnanimous, generous, from genus (genitive generis) race, stock (see genus).
Secondary senses of unselfish (1690s) and plentiful (1610s) were present in French and in Latin.
Related: Generously; generousness.


benign (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French benigne (12c., kind, benign, merciful, gracious; Modern French
b&eacute;nin, fem. b&eacute;nigne), from Latin benignus kindly, kindhearted, friendly, generous,
literally well born, from bene well (see bene-) + gignere to bear, beget, from genus birth (see
genus). For similar sense evolution, compare gentle, kind (adj.), generous. Related: Benignly.


Pongo (n.)

ape genus, 1620s, from Kongo mpongi.


genera (n.)

plural of genus.


Vanessa

fem. proper name, also the name of a butterfly genus. As a name, not much used in U.S. before 1950.
It appears to have been coined by Swift c.1711 as a pseudonym for Esther Vanhomrigh, who was
romantically attached to him, and composed of elements of her name. He used it in private
correspondence and published it in the poem Cadenus and Vanessa (1713).    The name Cadenus is an
anagram of Decanus; that of Vanessa is formed much in the same way, by placing the first syllable of
her sir-name before her christian-name, Hessy. [William Monck Mason, History and Antiquities of the
Collegiate and Cathedral Church of St. Patrick, Near Dublin, 1820]    As the name of a genus of
butterflies that includes the Red Admiral and the Painted Lady, it dates to 1808, chosen by Danish
entomologist Johan Christian Fabricius (1745-1808) for unknown reasons. He has no obvious connection
to Swift, and the theory that it was intended for *Phanessa, from Greek phanes a mystical divinity
in the Orphic system does no honor to his classical learning.


Weigela (n.)

shrub genus, 1846, from the name of German physician and botanist C.E. Weigel (1748-1831).


gender (n.)

c.1300, kind, sort, class, from Old French gendre (12c., Modern French genre), from stem of Latin
genus (genitive generis) race, stock, family; kind, rank, order; species, also (male or female) sex
(see genus) and used to translate Aristotle's Greek grammatical term genos.    The grammatical sense
is attested in English from late 14c.; the male-or-female sense from early 15c. As sex took on
erotic qualities in 20c., gender came to be the common word used for sex of a human being, often in
feminist writing with reference to social attributes as much as biological qualities; this sense
first attested 1963. Gender-bender is first attested 1980, with reference to pop star David Bowie.


poinsettia (n.)

from the genus name (1836), Modern Latin, in recognition of Joel R. Poinsett (1779-1851), U.S.
ambassador to Mexico, who is said to have brought the plant to the attention of botanists.


hosta (n.)

1828, plant genus of the lily family, coined 1812 in Modern Latin for Austrian physician and
botanist Nicolaus Thomas Host (1761-1834).


viburnum (n.)

genus of shrubs widespread in Eurasia and North America, the wayfaring-tree, 1731, from Latin
viburnum, which is said to be probably an Etruscan word.


zinnia (n.)

genus of herbs of the aster family, 1767, from Modern Latin (Linn&aelig;us, 1763), named for German
botanist Johann Gottfried Zinn (1729-1759).


Salmonella (n.)

1913, the genus name, coined 1900 in Modern Latin by J. Ligni&egrave;res in reference to U.S.
veterinary surgeon Daniel E. Salmon (1850-1914), who isolated a type of the bacteria in 1885.


arnica (n.)

plant genus of the borage family, 1753, Modern Latin, of unknown origin. Klein suggests Arabic
arnabiyah, a name of a type of plant, as the ultimate source.


icterus (n.)

1706, medical Latin, from Greek ikteros jaundice, also the name of a yellowish bird the sight of
which was supposed, by sympathetic magic, to cure jaundice. As a zoological genus, from 1713.


Morus (n.)

genus of mulberry trees, from Latin morus mulberry tree.


silphium

plant genus, 1771, from Latin, from Greek Silphion, name of a North  African Mediterranean plant
whose identity has been lost, the gum or juice of which was prized by the ancients as a condiment
and a medicine. Probably of African origin.


rhea (n.)

South American ostrich, 1801, Modern Latin genus name, for unknown reasons from Greek Rhea, name of
a titaness, mother of Zeus, a name of unknown origin. As a moon of Saturn, discovered 1672.


Capsicum (n.)

genus of pepper plants, 1660s, of unknown origin, a word said to have been chosen by French botanist
Joseph Pitton de Tournefort (1656-1708); perhaps irregularly formed from Latin capsa box (see case
(n.2)).


neritic (adj.)

1891, from German neritisch (Haeckel, 1890), perhaps from Nerita, a genus of molluscs.


magnolia (n.)

plant genus, 1748, from Magnolius, Latinized name of Pierre Magnol (1638-1715), French physician and
botanist, professor of botany at Montpellier. As the name of a color, by 1931.


Rafflesia (n.)

genus of Malaysian plants, 1820, named for Sir T. Stamford Raffles (1781-1826), British governor of
Sumatra, who introduced it to the West. He reports the native name was petimum sikinlili Devil's
betel-box.


forsythia (n.)

1814, coined 1805 in Modern Latin as a genus name in honor of William Forsyth (1737-1804), Scottish
horticulturalist who brought the shrub from China. The family name is from Gaelic Fearsithe man of
peace.


polygenous (adj.)

composed of many kinds, 1797; see poly- + genus.


Sylvia

fem. proper name, literally inhabiting woods, from Latin silva wood, forest (see sylvan). Also the
genus name of warblers, hence adjective Sylvian.


coccus (n.)

1763 as an insect genus (including the cochineal bug); 1883 as a type of bacterium, from Greek
kokkos grain, seed, berry (see cocco-).


Compsognathus (n.)

genus of small dinosaurs, Modern Latin, from Greek kompsos refined, elegant + gnathos jaw (see
gnathic).


Macaca

monkey genus, Modern Latin, from Portuguese macaca, fem. of macaco, a name from an African language
of the Congo.


curcumin (n.)

coloring matter, 1850, from Curcuma, genus name for plants of the ginger family, from which the
chemical was drawn, Medieval Latin, from Arabic kurkum saffron, tumeric. Compare crocus.


persea (n.)

sacred fruit-bearing tree of Egypt and Persia, c.1600, from Latin persea, from Greek persea. Used
from early 19c. of a genus of trees and shrubs in the West Indies.


aster (n.)

flower genus, 1706, from Latin aster star (see star (n.)); so called for the radiate heads of the
flowers. Originally used in English in the Latin sense (c.1600) but this is obsolete.


Cereus (n.)

cactus genus, 1730, from Latin cereus waxen, waxy, from cera wax (see cere (n.)). So called from its
shape, which suggests a candle.


biogenic (adj.)

1904, with reference to Haeckel's recapitulation theory; 1913 as produced by living organisms, from
bio- + genic produced by (see genus).


rhesus

1827, from Modern Latin genus name of a type of East Indian monkey (1799), given by French
naturalist Jean-Baptiste Audebert (1759-1800), said to be an arbitrary use of Latin Rhesus, name of
a legendary prince of Thrace, from Greek Rhesos.


-geny

word-forming element meaning genesis, origin, production, from French -g&eacute;nie, from Greek
-geneia, from genes born, produced (see genus).


macaque (n.)

East Indian monkey, 1757, from French macaque, from Portuguese macaco monkey, a Bantu word brought
from Africa to Brazil (where it was applied 17c. to a type of monkey there). Introduced as a genus
name 1840.


grackle (n.)

1772, gracule, from genus name Gracula, Modern Latin fem. from Latin graculus jackdaw, European
crow, perhaps of imitative origin. The anglicized form of the word is attested from 1782.


axolotl (n.)

1786, genus of Mexican salamanders, from Spanish, from Nahuatl, literally servant of water, from atl
water + xolotl slippery or wrinkled one, servant, slave [see Frances Karttunen, An Analytical
Dictionary of Nahuatl].


Wisteria (n.)

genus of woody vines, 1819, formed by Thomas Nuttall, English botanist, in recognition of American
anatomist Caspar Wistar (1761-1818) of Philadelphia. The -e- apparently is a misprint. The Wistar
Institute was founded in 1892 by his great-nephew and named for him.


harrier (n.)

1540s, from Middle English hayrer small hunting dog (c.1400), possibly from Middle French errier
wanderer [Barnhart], or associated with hare, which they would have hunted. The hawk genus (1550s)
is from harry (v.), which also is a candidate for the source of the dog name.


genital (adj.)

late 14c., in membres genytal the genitals, from Latin genitalis pertaining to generation or birth
(also a by-name of the goddess Diana), from genitus, past participle of gignere to beget (see
genus). As a noun meaning sex organ from mid-15c.


genetic (adj.)

pertaining to origins, coined 1831 by Carlyle from Greek genetikos genitive, from genesis origin
(see genus). Biological sense first recorded in Darwin, 1859. Related: Genetically. Genetical is
attested from 1650s.


chiton (n.)

mollusc genus, 1816, from Latinized form of Greek khiton frock (worn by both sexes), tunic, mail
coat (see chitin). Used in English in literal sense of ancient Greek tunic from 1850. The molluscs
also are known as coat-of-mail shells for their mail-like covering.


