geology (n.)

1735, from Modern Latin geologia the study of the earth, from geo- earth + logia (see -logy). In
Medieval Latin, geologia (14c.) meant study of earthly things, i.e. law, as distinguished from arts
and sciences, which concern the works of God. Darwin used geologize as a verb.


p wave (n.)

1908 in geology, the p representing primary (adj.).


uniformitarian (n.)

1840 in geology, from uniformity + -arian.


outcrop (n.)

1805, in geology, exposure of rocks at the surface, from out + crop (n.) in its sense of sprout,
head.


anamorphic (adj.)

1904, in geology; see anamorphosis + -ic. Cinematographic use dates from 1954.


mesolithic (adj.)

1866 in archaeology (somewhat earlier in geology); see meso- + lithic.


hydrothermal (adj.)

1852, from hydro- + thermal (adj.); 1855 in geology.


-cene

word-forming element in geology, introduced by Sir Charles Lyell (1797-1875), from Greek kainos new,
cognate with Latin recens (see recent).


morphogenesis (n.)

1863 in biology; 1958 in geology; from morpho- + genesis. Related: Morphogenetic.


acidic (adj.)

1877, originally in geology; see acid (n.) + -ic.


geological (adj.)

1795, from geology + -ical. Related: Geologically.


conformism (n.)

1890, tendency or need to conform to some group standard, from conform + -ism. In religion, from
c.1902. In geology from c.1912. Modern, general sociological sense (social conformism) popularized
from c.1948.


denudation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;nudation, from Latin denudationem (nominative denudatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of denudare (see denude). Figurative use is from 1590s. In
geology, from 1811.


geologist (n.)

1795, from geology + -ist.


geologic (adj.)

1799, from geology + -ic. Geologic time is recorded from 1861.


-ology

word-forming element indicating branch of knowledge, science, now the usual form of -logy.
Originally used c.1800 in nonce formations (commonsensology, etc.), it gained legitimacy by
influence of the proper formation in geology, mythology, etc., where the -o- is a stem vowel in the
previous element.


clastic (adj.)

consisting of broken pieces, 1875, in geology, from Latinized form of Greek klastos broken in
pieces, from klan, klaein to break, from PIE *kla-, variant of root *kel- (1) to strike (see holt).


upheaval (n.)

1838, in geology, from verb upheave (c.1300, from up (adv.) + heave (v.)) + -al (2). Figurative
sense, with reference to convulsions of society, etc., recorded from 1850. Similarly formed verbs
are Old Frisian upheva, Old High German ufhevan, German aufheben.


catastrophism (n.)

as a geological or biological theory, 1869, coined by Huxley from catastrophe + -ism.    By
CATASTROPHISM I mean any form of geological speculation which, in order to account for the phenomena
of geology, supposes the operation of forces different in their nature, or immeasurably different in
power, from those which we at present see in action in the universe. [T.H. Huxley, Address to the
Geological Society of London, Feb. 19, 1869]    Related: Catastrophist.


wacke (n.)

rock resembling sandstone, 1803, from German Wacke, from Middle High German wacke large stone, rock
projecting from the surface of the ground, from Old High German wacko, waggo gravel, pebble,
probably from Old High German wegan to move. A miner's word, brought into geology by German
geologist Abraham Gottlob Werner (1750-1817).


cleavage (n.)

1816, in geology, action of splitting (rocks or gems) along natural fissures, from cleave (v.1) +
-age. General meaning action or state of cleaving or being cleft is from 1867.    The sense of cleft
between a woman's breasts in low-cut clothing is first recorded 1946, defined in a Time magazine
article [Aug. 5] as the Johnston Office trade term for the shadowed depression dividing an actress'
bosom into two distinct sections; traditionally first used in this sense by U.S. publicist Joseph I.
Breen (1888-1965), head of the Production Code Administration (replaced 1945 by Eric Johnston),
enforcers of Hollywood self-censorship, in reference to Jane Russell's costumes and poses in The
Outlaw.


terrace (n.)

1510s, gallery, portico, balcony, later flat, raised place for walking (1570s), from Middle French
terrace (Modern French terasse), from Old French terrasse (12c.) platform (built on or supported by
a mound of earth), from Vulgar Latin *terracea, fem. of *terraceus earthen, earthy, from Latin terra
earth, land (see terrain). As a natural formation in geology, attested from 1670s. In street names,
originally in reference to a row of houses along the top of a slope, but lately applied arbitrarily
as a fancy name for an ordinary road. As a verb from 1610s, to form into a terrace. Related:
Terraced.


continental (adj.)

1818 as a purely geographical term, from continent + -al (1). In reference to the European mainland
(as opposed to Great Britain), recorded from 1760. Continental breakfast (the kind eaten on the
continent as opposed to the kind eaten in Britain) is attested by 1855. In reference to the British
American colonies from 1774; the Continental Congress is attested from 1775; continental divide in
use by 1865; continental rise in geology from 1959; continental slope from 1907. Continental shelf
first attested 1888.


hill (n.)

Old English hyll hill, from Proto-Germanic *hulni- (cognates: Middle Dutch hille, Low German hull
hill, Old Norse hallr stone, Gothic hallus rock, Old Norse holmr islet in a bay, Old English holm
rising land, island), from PIE root *kel- (4) to rise, be elevated, be prominent; hill (cognates:
Sanskrit kutam top, skull; Latin collis hill, columna projecting object, culmen top, summit, cellere
raise, celsus high; Greek kolonos hill, kolophon summit; Lithuanian kalnas mountain, kalnelis hill,
kelti raise). Formerly including mountains, now usually confined to heights under 2,000 feet. In
Great Britain heights under 2,000 feet are generally called hills; 'mountain' being confined to the
greater elevations of the Lake District, of North Wales, and of the Scottish Highlands; but, in
India, ranges of 5,000 and even 10,000 feet are commonly called 'hills,' in contrast with the
Himalaya Mountains, many peaks of which rise beyond 20,000 feet. [OED]   <hr />   The term mountain
is very loosely used. It commonly means any unusual elevation. In New England and central New York,
elevations of from one to two thousand feet are called hills, but on the plains of Texas, a hill of
a few hundred feet is called a mountain. [Ralph S. Tarr, Elementary Geology, Macmillan, 1903]   <hr
/>   Despite the differences in defining mountain systems, Penck (1896), Supan (1911) and Obst
(1914) agreed that the distinction between hills, mountains, and mountain systems according to areal
extent or height is not a suitable classification. [Geographic Information Science and Mountain
Geomorphology, 2004]    Phrase over the hill past one's prime is first recorded 1950.


