geologist (n.)

1795, from geology + -ist.


permafrost (n.)

1943, coined in English by Russian-born U.S. geologist Siemon W. Muller (1900-1970) from perm(anent)
frost.


dolomite (n.)

1794, named for French geologist D&eacute;odat De Gratet De Dolomieu (1750-1801) who described the
rock in his study of the Alps (1791).


guyot (n.)

flat-topped submarine mountain, 1946, named for Swiss geographer/geologist Arnold Guyot (1807-1884).


Permian

1841, pertaining to the uppermost strata of the Paleozoic era, named by British geologist Sir
Roderick Impey Murchison (1792-1871) for the region of Perm in northwestern Russia, where rocks from
this epoch are found.


Tethys

name for the sea that anciently lay between Eurasia and Africa-Arabia, coined 1893 by German
geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914), from Tethys, name of a Greek sea goddess, sister and consort of
Oceanus.


biosphere (n.)

1899, on model of German Biosph&auml;re (1875), coined by German geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914);
see bio- + sphere.


thulium (n.)

1879, Modern Latin, from thulia (thulite), name of an earth found in Scandinavia, from which the
element was identified in 1879 by Swedish geologist Per Tedor Cleve (1840-1905), from Thule, which
sometimes was identified as Scandinavia.


kerosene (n.)

1852, coined irregularly by Canadian geologist Abraham Gesner (1797-1864), who discovered how to
distill it c.1846, from Greek keros wax  (see cere) + chemical suffix -ene. So called because it
contains paraffin (hence the British English name, paraffin oil).


Mesozoic (adj.)

1840, from Greek mesos middle (see meso-) + zoe life (see zoo) + -ic. Name coined by British
geologist John Phillips for the fossil era between the Paleozoic and the Cenozoic.


batholith (n.)

1903, from German batholith (1892), coined by German geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914) from Greek
bathos depth (see benthos) + -lith stone.


Triassic (adj.)

1841, from German, coined 1841 by German geologist Friedrich August von Alberti (1795-1878), from
Trias period preceding the Jurassic, from Greek trias triad, the number three (see triad). So called
because it is divisible (in Germany) into three groups.


Mercalli

in reference to Mercalli scale, 1900, named for Italian geologist Giuseppe Mercalli (1850-1914), who
invented it (I Terremoti della Liguria e del Piemonte, Naples, 1897). It was a modification of the
Rossi-Forel scale (1883).


tertiary (adj.)

1650s, of the third order, rank, degree, etc., from Latin tertiarius of or pertaining to a third,
from tertius third, a third, from root of tres three (see three). The geological sense (with capital
T-) of era after the Mesozoic (which formerly was called the Secondary) is attested from 1794, after
Italian terziari, used in this sense 1760 by Italian geologist Giovanni Arduino (1714-1795).


limnology (n.)

study of lakes and fresh water, 1892, with -logy + limno-, comb. form of Greek limne pool of
standing water, tidal pool, marsh, lake, from PIE root *(s)lei- slime (see slime (n.)). The science
founded and the name probably coined by Swiss geologist Fran&#231;ois-Alphonse Forel (1841-1912).
Related: Limnological; limnologist.


Ordovician (adj.)

geological period following the Cambrian and preceding the Silurian, 1879, coined by English
geologist Charles Lapworth (1842-1920) from Latin Ordovices, name of an ancient British tribe in
North Wales. The period so called because rocks from it first were studied extensively in the region
around Bala in North Wales. The tribe's name is Celtic, literally those who fight with hammers, from
Celtic base *ordo hammer + PIE *wik- to fight, conquer (see victor).


wacke (n.)

rock resembling sandstone, 1803, from German Wacke, from Middle High German wacke large stone, rock
projecting from the surface of the ground, from Old High German wacko, waggo gravel, pebble,
probably from Old High German wegan to move. A miner's word, brought into geology by German
geologist Abraham Gottlob Werner (1750-1817).


quaternary (adj.)

early 15c., consisting of four parts, from Latin quaternarius of four each, containing four, from
quaterni four each, by fours, from quater four times, related to quattuor four (see four). Also as a
noun, the number four (mid-15c.), from Latin quaternarius.    In geological sense, attested from
1843 in English, proposed 1829 by French geologist Jules Pierre Fran&ccedil;ois Stanislas Desnoyers
(1800-1887) as name for the fourth great epoch of geological time, but because it comprises only the
age of man, and the other epochs are many hundred times longer, not all accepted it.


Gondwana

name of a region in north central India, from Sanskrit gondavana, from vana forest + Gonda, name of
a Dravidian people, literally fleshy navel, outie belly-button. The name was extended by geologists
to a series of sedimentary rocks found there (1873), then to identical rocks in other places; the
fossils found in this series were used by geologists to reconstruct the ancient southern
supercontinent, which therefore was called Gondwanaland (1896), from German, where it was coined by
German geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914) in 1885.


evolution (n.)

1620s, an opening of what was rolled up, from Latin evolutionem (nominative evolutio) unrolling (of
a book), noun of action from evolvere (see evolve).    Used in medicine, mathematics, and general
writing in various senses including growth to maturity and development of an individual living thing
(1660s). Modern use in biology, of species, first attested 1832 in works of Scottish geologist
Charles Lyell. Charles Darwin used the word only once, in the closing paragraph of The Origin of
Species (1859), and preferred descent with modification, in part because evolution already had been
used in the 18c. homunculus theory of embryological development (first proposed under this name by
Bonnet, 1762) and in part because it carried a sense of progress not found in Darwin's idea. But
Victorian belief in progress prevailed (along with brevity), and Herbert Spencer and other
biologists popularized evolution.


