graze (v.2)

to touch, c.1600, perhaps a transferred sense from graze (v.1) via a notion of cropping grass right
down to the ground (compare German grasen to feed on grass, used in military sense in reference to
cannonballs that rebound off the ground). Related: Grazed; grazing. As a noun from 1690s.


graze (v.1)

to feed, Old English grasian to feed on grass, from gr&aelig;s grass (see grass). Compare Middle
Dutch, Middle High German grasen, Dutch grazen, German grasen. Figurative use by 1570s. Related:
Grazed; grazing.


grazier (n.)

late 13c. as a surname, agent noun from graze (v.1).


overgrazed (adj.)

of grassland, 1929, from over- + past participle of graze (v.).


glance (v.)

mid-15c., of weapons, from glacen to graze, strike a glancing blow (c.1300), from Old French glacier
to slip, make slippery, from glace ice (see glacial). Sense of look quickly (first recorded 1580s)
probably was influenced in form and meaning by Middle English glenten look askance (see glint).
Related: Glanced; glancing.


pasture (v.)

late 14c., of animals, to graze; early 15c., of humans, to lead to pasture, to feed by putting in a
pasture, from Old French pasturer (12c., Modern French p&#226;turer, from pasture (see pasture
(n.)). Related: Pastured; pasturing.


rifle (v.1)

to plunder, early 14c. (implied in rifling), from Old French rifler strip, filch, plunder, peel off
(skin or bark), fleece, literally to graze, scratch (12c.), probably from a Germanic source (compare
Old English geriflian to wrinkle, Old High German riffilon to tear by rubbing, Old Norse rifa to
tear, break). Related: Rifled; rifling.


proboscis (n.)

c.1600, elephant's trunk, from Latin proboscis (Pliny), from Greek proboskis elephant's trunk,
literally means for taking food, from pro forward (see pro-) + boskein to nourish, feed, from
boskesthai graze, be fed, from stem *bot- (source of botane grass, fodder; see botanic).


repast (n.)

late 14c., from Old French repast (Modern Frech repas) a meal, food, from Late Latin repastus meal
(also source of Spanish repasto, noun use of past participle of repascere to feed again, from Latin
re- repeatedly (see re-) + pascere to graze (see pastor). The verb (intransitive) is from late 15c.


pasture (n.)

c.1300, grass eaten by cattle, from Old French pasture fodder, grass eaten by cattle (12c., Modern
French p&#226;ture), from Late Latin pastura a feeding, grazing, from Latin pastus, past participle
of pascere to feed, graze (see pastor). Meaning land covered with vegetation suitable for grazing is
from early 14c. To be out to pasture retired is from 1945, from what was done (ideally) to horses
after the active working life.


gain (v.)

1520s, from Middle French gagner, from Old French gaaignier to earn, gain; trade; capture, win, also
work in the fields, cultivate land, from Frankish *waidanjan hunt, forage, also graze, pasture, from
Proto-Germanic *wartho hunting ground (cognates: Old English wa&thorn; hunting, German Weide
pasture, pasturage, Old Norse vei&eth;r hunting, catch of fish), from PIE *weie- to strive after,
pursue with vigor, desire (see venison). Related: Gained; gaining; gainer. To gain on advance nearer
is from 1719. To gain ground (1620s) was originally military.


strigil (n.)

ancient tool for scraping the skin after a bath, 1580s, from Latin strigilis scraper, horse-comb,
from stringere (1) draw along a surface, graze, touch lightly; strip off, pluck off, cut away; clip,
prune; lay bare, unsheathe, figuratively waste, consume, reduce; touch, move, affect, cause pain,
from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Latin striga stroke, strike, furrow, stria
furrow, channel; Old Church Slavonic striga shear; Old English stracian to stroke; German streichen
to stroke, rub). Etymologists dispute over whether this is connected to Latin stringere (2), root of
strain (v.).


food (n.)

Old English foda food, nourishment; fuel, also figurative, from Proto-Germanic *fodon (cognates:
Gothic fodeins), from Germanic root *fod-, equivalent of PIE *pa- to tend, keep, pasture, to
protect, to guard, to feed (cognates: Greek pateisthai to feed; Latin pabulum food, fodder, panis
bread, pasci to feed, pascare to graze, pasture, feed, pastor shepherd, literally feeder; Avestan
pitu- food; Old Church Slavonic pasti feed cattle, pasture; Russian pishcha food).   Food chain is
from 1917. Food poisoning attested by 1864; food processor in the kitchen appliance sense from 1973.


