groove (v.)

1680s, make a groove, from groove (n.). Slang sense is from late 1930s. Related: Grooved; grooving.


groove (n.)

c.1400, cave, mine, pit (late 13c. in place names), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
grod pit, or from Middle Dutch groeve furrow, ditch, both from Proto-Germanic *grobo (cognates: Old
Norse grof brook, river bed, Old High German gruoba ditch, Gothic groba pit, cave, Old English
gr&aelig;f ditch), related to grave (n.). Sense of long, narrow channel or furrow is 1650s. Meaning
spiral cut in a phonograph record is from 1902. Figurative sense of routine is from 1842, often
deprecatory at first, a rut.


groovy (adj.)

1853 in literal sense of pertaining to a groove, from groove (n.) + -y (2). Slang sense of first-
rate, excellent is 1937, American English, from jazz slang phrase in the groove (1932) performing
well (without grandstanding). As teen slang for wonderful, it dates from c.1941; popularized 1960s,
out of currency by 1980. Related: Grooviness.


chill (v.)

late 14c., intransitive, to feel cold, grow cold; c.1400, transitive, to make cold, from chill (n.).
Related: Chilled; chilling; chillingly. Figurative use from late 14c. Meaning hang out first
recorded 1985; from earlier chill out relax (1979).   <b>Sheila E.</b> sizzles in the new flick,
Krush Groove, but some New York critics couldn't groove with it because many of the terms are
unfamiliar to them. Examples: breakin' out (slang for leaving), chill (for cool down) and death (for
something that's really good). [Jet, Nov. 11, 1985]


router (n.)

cutter that removes wood from a groove, 1818, from rout poke about, rummage (1540s), originally of
swine digging with the snout; a variant of root (v.1).


spline (n.)

long, thin piece of wood or metal, 1756, from East Anglian dialect, of uncertain origin. Perhaps
from older Danish splind or North Frisian splinj. Especially one fitted into a groove on a wheel and
a shaft to keep them revolving together (1864).


stria (n.)

plural striae, narrow stripe, groove, 1560s, from Latin stria a furrow, flute of a column (see
striate).


mortise (n.)

c.1400, hole or groove in which something is fitted to form a joint, from Old French mortaise
(13c.), possibly from Arabic murtazz fastened, past participle of razza cut a mortise in. Compare
Spanish mortaja.


rabbet (n.)

rectangular groove cut out of the edge of a piece of wood or stone so that it may join by lapping
with others, late 14c., from Old French rabat a recess in a wall, a lower section, literally a
beating down, a back-formation from rabattre to beat down, beat back (see rebate (v.)). The verb is
attested from mid-15c. (implied in rabetynge).


rill (n.)

small brook, rivulet, 1530s, from or related to Dutch and Frisian ril, Low German rille groove,
furrow, running stream, probably from Proto-Germanic *ril- (cognates: Old English ri&eth;,
ri&thorn;e brook, stream, which survives only in dialects), a diminutive form from PIE root *reie-
to run, flow (see Rhine).


glyph (n.)

1727, ornamental groove in architecture, from French glyphe (1701), from Greek glyphe a carving,
from glyphein to hollow out, cut out with a knife, engrave, carve, from PIE root *gleubh- to cut,
slice (cognates: Latin glubere to peel, shell, strip, Old English cleofan to cleave). Meaning
sculpted mark or symbol (as in hieroglyph) is from 1825.


channel (n.)

early 14c., bed of running water, from Old French chanel bed of a waterway; tube, pipe, gutter, from
Latin canalis groove, channel, waterpipe (see canal). Given a broader, figurative sense 1530s (of
information, commerce, etc.); meaning circuit for telegraph communication (1848) probably led to
that of band of frequency for radio or TV signals (1928). The Channel Islands are the French
&#206;les Anglo-Normandes.


canal (n.)

early 15c., from French canal, chanel water channel, tube, pipe, gutter (12c.), from Latin canalis
water pipe, groove, channel, noun use of adjective from canna reed (see cane (n.)). Originally in
English a pipe for liquid, its sense transferred by 1670s to artificial waterway.


rifle (v.2)

to cut spiral grooves in (a gun barrel), 1630s, probably from French rifler, from Old French rifler
to scratch or groove (see rifle (v.1)). Related: Rifled; rifling.


striate (v.)

1670s, from special modern use of Latin striatus, past participle of striare to groove, to flute,
from Latin stria furrow, channel, flute of a column (in Modern Latin strip, streak), from PIE root
*streig-  to stroke, rub, press (see strigil). Related: Striated (1640s); striating.


embrasure (n.)

1702, from French embrasure (16c.), from Old French embraser to cut at a slant, make a groove or
furrow in a door or window, from en- in (see en- (1)) + braser to cut at a slant.


chamfer (n.)

c.1600, small groove cut in wood or stone, from Middle French chanfraindre (15c., Modern French
chanfreiner), past participle of chanfraint. The second element seems to be from Latin frangere to
break (see fraction); perhaps the whole word is cantum frangere to break the edge. Meaning bevelled
surface of a square edge or corner is attested from c.1840, of uncertain connection to the other
sense.


nick (n.)

notch, groove, slit, late 15c., nyke, of unknown origin, possibly influenced by Middle French niche
(see niche), or from it. Nick of time is first attested 1640s (nick of opportunity is 1610s),
possibly from an old custom of recording time as it passed by making notches on a tally stick,
though nick in the general sense of critical moment is older (1570s, Hanmer, who adds as commonly we
say) than the phrase.


bezel (n.)

1610s, sloping edge, also groove in which a stone is set, from Old French *besel (13c.; Modern
French biseau), cognate with Spanish bisel; of uncertain origin, perhaps literally a stone with two
angles, from Vulgar Latin *bis-alus, from bis- twice (see bis-) + ala wing, side (see alar). Meaning
oblique face of a gem is from c.1840. The verb meaning grind (a tool) down to an edge is from 1670s.


scotch (v.)

stamp out, crush, 1825, earlier make harmless for a time (1798; a sense that derives from an
uncertain reading of Macbeth III.ii.13), from scocchen to cut, score, gash, make an incision (early
15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps [Barnhart] from Anglo-French escocher, Old French cocher to notch,
nick, from coche a notch, groove, perhaps from Latin coccum berry of the scarlet oak, which appears
notched, from Greek kokkos. Related: Scotched; scotching.


screw (n.)

cylinder of wood or metal with a spiral ridge round it; hole in which a screw turns, c.1400, from
Middle French escroue nut, cylindrical socket, screwhole, of uncertain etymology; not found in other
Romanic languages. Perhaps via Gallo-Roman *scroba or West Germanic *scruva from Vulgar Latin
scrobis screw-head groove, in classical Latin ditch, trench, also vagina (Diez, though OED finds
this phonologically impossible).    Kluge, Watkins and others trace it to Latin scrofa breeding sow,
perhaps based on the shape of a pig's penis (compare Portuguese porca, Spanish perca a female screw,
from Latin porca sow). Latin scrofa is literally digger, rooter, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut
(see shear (v.)). A group of apparently cognate Germanic words (Middle Low German, Middle Dutch
schruve, Dutch schroef, German Schraube, Swedish skrufva screw) are said to be French loan-words.
Sense of means of pressure or coercion is from 1640s, probably in reference to instruments of
torture (such as thumbscrews). Meaning prison guard, warden is 1812 in underworld slang, originally
in reference to the key they carried (screw as slang for key attested from 1795). Slang meaning an
act of copulation is recorded from 1929 (meaning a prostitute is attested from 1725). To have a
screw loose have a dangerous (usually mental) weakness is recorded from 1810.


