grumble (n.)

1620s, from grumble (v.).


grumble (v.)

1580s, from Middle French grommeler mutter between the teeth or directly from Middle Dutch grommelen
murmur, mutter, grunt, from grommen to rumble, growl. Imitative, or perhaps akin to grim. Related:
Grumbled; grumbling.


natter (v.)

grumble, chatter aimlessly, nag, 1829, northern England dialect variant of gnatter to chatter,
grumble, earlier (18c.) to nibble away, probably of echoic origin. Related: Nattered; nattering. As
a noun, 1866, from the verb.


grouse (v.)

complain, 1885 (implied in grouser), British Army slang, of uncertain origin but perhaps from Norman
French dialectal groucer, from Old French groucier to murmur, grumble, of imitative origin (compare
Greek gru a grunt, gruzein to grumble). Related: Groused; grousing. As a noun from 1918, from the
verb.


disgruntle (v.)

1680s, from dis- entirely, very + obsolete gruntle to grumble (Middle English gruntelen, early
15c.), frequentative of grunt (v.).


maunder (v.)

to wander about aimlessly, c.1746, earlier to mumble, grumble (1620s), both senses perhaps from
frequentative of maund to beg (1560s), which is possibly from French mendier to beg, from Latin
mendicare (see mendicant). Related: Maundered; maundering.


misspeak (v.)

late 14c., to say amiss, also to speak insultingly, from mis- (1) + speak (v.). Related:
Misspeaking; misspoken. Old English missprecan meant to grumble, murmur.


mope (v.)

1560s, to move and act unconsciously; 1580s, to be listless and apathetic, the sound of the word
perhaps somehow suggestive of low feelings (compare Low German mopen to sulk, Dutch moppen to
grumble, to grouse, Danish maabe, dialectal Swedish mopa to mope). Related: Moped; moping; mopey;
mopish.


murmur (v.)

late 14c., from Old French murmurer murmur, grouse, grumble (12c.), from murmur rumbling noise (see
murmur (n.)). Related: Murmured; murmuring.


grutch (v.)

c.1200, grucchen, to murmur, complain, from Old French grouchier to murmur, to grumble, of unknown
origin, probably ultimately imitative. Meaning to begrudge is c.1400. Compare gruccild (early 13c.)
woman who complains, from grutch + suffix of unknown origin. Related: Grutched; grutching. As a noun
from c.1400.


grump (n.)

ill-humor, 1727, in humps and grumps surly remarks, later the grumps a fit of ill-humor (1844), then
a person in ill humor (1900); perhaps an extended sense of grum morose, surly, which probably is
related to Danish grum cruel; or perhaps suggested by grumble, grunt, etc.


mock (v.)

early 15c., to deceive; mid-15c. make fun of, from Old French mocquer deride, jeer, of unknown
origin, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *muccare to blow the nose (as a derisive gesture), from Latin
mucus; or possibly from Middle Dutch mocken to mumble or Middle Low German mucken grumble. Or
perhaps simply imitative of such speech. Related: Mocked; mocking; mockingly. Replaced Old English
bysmerian. Sense of imitating, as in mockingbird and mock turtle (1763), is from notion of derisive
imitation.


