guile (n.)

mid-12c., from Old French guile deceit, wile, fraud, ruse, trickery, from Frankish *wigila trick,
ruse or a related Germanic source (cognates: Old Frisian wigila sorcery, witchcraft, Old English wil
trick; see wile).


guileful (adj.)

c.1300, from guile + -ful. Nowadays only in poems and dictionaries. Related: Guilefully;
guilefulness.


guileless (adj.)

1727, from guile + -less. Related: Guilelessly; guilelessness.


sedulous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin sedulus attentive, painstaking, diligent, busy, zealous, probably from sedulo
(adv.) sincerely, diligently, from sedolo without deception or guile, from se- without, apart (see
secret) + dolo, ablative of dolus deception, guile, cognate with Greek dolos ruse, snare. Related:
Sedulously; sedulousness.


innocence (n.)

mid-14c., freedom from guilt, from Old French inocence innocence, purity, chastity (12c.), from
Latin innocentia, from innocens harmless, blameless (see innocent). Meaning lacking in guile or
artifice is from late 14c.


beguile (v.)

early 13c., from be- + guile (v.). Related: Beguiled; beguiling.


wile (n.)

late Old English, wil stratagem, trick, sly artifice, perhaps from Old North French *wile (Old
French guile), or directly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse vel trick, craft, fraud,
vela defraud). Perhaps ultimately related to Old English wicca wizard (see Wicca). Lighter sense of
amorous or playful trick is from c.1600.


subtlety (n.)

c.1300, sotilte, skill, ingenuity, from Old French sotilte skillfulness, cunning (Modern French
subtilit&#233;), from Latin subtilitatem (nominative subtilitas) fineness; simplicity, slenderness,
noun of quality from subtilis fine, thin, delicate (see subtle). From late 14c. as cleverness,
shrewdness; trickery, guile, craftiness, also thinness, slenderness, smallness; rarity. The -b-
begins to appear late 14c. in English, in imitation of Latin.


barratry (n.)

early 15c., sale of ecclesiastical or state offices, from Old French baraterie deceit, guile,
trickery, from barat malpractice, fraud, deceit, trickery, of unknown origin, perhaps from Celtic.
In marine law, wrongful conduct by a ship's crew or officer, resulting in loss to owners, from
1620s. Meaning offense of habitually starting legal suits is from 1640s. Sense somewhat confused
with that of Middle English baratri combat, fighting (c.1400), from Old Norse baratta fight, contest
strife. This was an active word in Middle English, with forms such as baraten to disturb the peace
(mid-15c.); baratour inciter to riot, bully (late 14c., mid-13c. as a surname). Barataria Bay,
Louisiana, U.S., is from Spanish baratear to cheat, deceive, cognate of the French word; the bay so
called in reference to the difficulty of its entry passages.


