gush (v.)

12c., gosshien make noises in the stomach, later (c.1400) rush out suddenly, pour out, probably
formed imitativeally in English under influence of Old Norse gusa to gush, spurt, related to geyser.
Metaphoric sense of speak in an effusive manner first recorded 1873. Related: Gushed; gushing. The
noun is 1680s, from the verb.


gusher (n.)

oil well that flows without pumping, 1886, agent noun from gush. Earlier in a sense of overly
effusive person (1864).


gushy (adj.)

1845, from gush in the metaphoric sense + -y (2). Related: Gushily; gushiness.


gulch (n.)

deep ravine, 1832, American English, perhaps from obsolete or dialectal verb gulsh sink in (of
land), gush out (of water), from Middle English gulchen to gush forth; to drink greedily (c.1200).
Compare gulche-cuppe a greedy drinker (mid-13c.).


squall (n.)

sudden, violent gust of wind, 1719, originally nautical, probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare Norwegian skval sudden rush of water, Swedish skvala to gush, pour down), probably
ultimately a derivative of squall (v.).


geyser (n.)

1780, from Icelandic Geysir, name of a hot spring in the valley of Haukadal, literally the gusher,
from Old Norse geysa to gush, from Proto-Germanic *gausjan, from PIE *gheus-, from root *gheu- to
pour (see found (v.2)).


scoot (v.)

1758, run, fly, make off, perhaps originally nautical slang; 1805, flow or gush out with force
(Scottish), of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skjota to
shoot, related to shoot (v.). Related: Scooted; scooting. As a noun from 1864.


gulp (v.)

late 14c., a native coinage or else from Flemish gulpe or Dutch gulpen to gush, pour forth, guzzle,
swallow, in any case possibly of imitative origin (compare Swedish dialectal glapa to gulp down).
Related: Gulped; gulping.


spurt (v.)

to gush out, squirt, 1560s, variant of spirt, perhaps cognate with Middle High German sp&uuml;rzen
to spit, and spr&uuml;tzen to squirt (see sprout (v.)). Related: Spurted; spurting. The noun in this
sense is attested from 1775.


chyle (n.)

1540s, from Late Latin chylus, from Greek khylos juice (of plants, animals, etc.), from stem of
khein to pour, gush forth, from PIE *ghus-mo-, from root *gheu- to pour, pour a libation (see found
(v.2)). Compare also chyme.


gust (n.)

1580s, possibly a dialectal survival from Old Norse gustr a cold blast of wind (related to gusa to
gush, spurt) or Old High German gussa flood, both from Proto-Germanic *gustiz, from PIE *gheus-,
from root *gheu- to pour (see found (2)). Probably originally in English as a nautical term. As a
verb, from 1813. Related: Gusted; gusting.


ray (n.1)

beam of light, c.1300, from Old French rai (nominative rais) ray (of the sun), spoke (of a wheel);
gush, spurt, from Latin radius ray, spoke, staff, rod (see radius). Not common before 17c. [OED]; of
the sun, usually in reference to heat (beam being preferred for light). Science fiction ray-gun is
first recorded 1931 (but the Martians had a Heat ray weapon in H.G. Wells' War of the Worlds, 1898).


bleed (v.)

Old English bledan to let blood, in Middle English and after, to let blood from surgically; also to
emit blood, from Proto-Germanic *blodjan emit blood (cognates: Old Norse bl&aelig;&eth;a, German
bluten), from *bhlo-to- swell, gush, spurt (see blood (n.)). Meaning extort money from is from
1670s. Of dyes or paints, from 1862. Related: Bled; bleeding.


boil (v.)

early 13c., from Old French bolir boil, bubble up, ferment, gush (12c., Modern French bouillir),
from Latin bullire to bubble, seethe, from PIE base *beu- to swell (see bull (n.2)). The native word
is seethe. Figurative sense of to agitate the feelings is from 1640s.I am impatient, and my blood
boyls high. [Thomas Otway, Alcibiades, 1675]  Related: Boiled; boiling. Boiling point is recorded
from 1773.


well (v.)

to spring, rise, gush, Old English wiellan (Anglian w&aelig;llan), causative of weallan to boil,
bubble up, rise (in reference to a river) (class VII strong verb; past tense weoll, past participle
weallen), from Proto-Germanic *wall- roll (cognates: Old Saxon wallan, Old Norse vella, Old Frisian
walla, Old High German wallan, German wallen, Gothic wulan to bubble, boil), from PIE root *wel- (3)
to turn, roll (see volvox), on notion of roiling or bubbling water.


henchman (n.)

mid-14c., hengestman, later henshman (mid-15c.) high-ranking servant (usually of gentle birth),
attendant upon a king, nobleman, etc., originally groom, probably from man (n.) + Old English
hengest horse, stallion, gelding, from Proto-Germanic *hangistas (cognates: Old Frisian hengst,
Dutch hengest, German Hengst stallion), perhaps literally best at springing, from PIE *kenku-
(cognates: Greek kekiein to gush forth; Lithuanian sokti to jump, dance; Breton kazek a mare,
literally that which belongs to a stallion).    Perhaps modeled on Old Norse compound hesta-ma&eth;r
horse-boy, groom. The word became obsolete in England but was retained in Scottish as personal
attendant of a Highland chief, in which sense Scott revived it in literary English from 1810. Sense
of obedient or unscrupulous follower is first recorded 1839, probably based on a misunderstanding of
the word as used by Scott.


fat (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;tt fat, fatted, plump, obese, originally a contracted past participle of
f&aelig;ttian to cram, stuff, from Proto-Germanic *faitaz fat (cognates: Old Frisian fatt, Old Norse
feitr, Dutch vet, German feist), from PIE *poid- to abound in water, milk, fat, etc. (source also of
Greek piduein to gush forth), from root *peie- to be fat, swell (cognates: Sanskrit payate swells,
exuberates, pituh juice, sap, resin; Lithuanian pienas milk; Greek pion fat, wealthy; Latin pinguis
fat).    Teen slang meaning attractive, up to date (also later phat) is attested from 1951. Fat cat
privileged and rich person is from 1928; fat chance no chance at all attested from 1905, perhaps
ironic (the expression is found earlier in the sense good opportunity). Fathead is from 1842; fat-
witted is from 1590s; fatso is first recorded 1943. Expression the fat is in the fire originally
meant the plan has failed (1560s).


blood (n.)

Old English blod blood, from Proto-Germanic *blodam blood (cognates: Old Frisian blod, Old Saxon
bl&#244;d, Old Norse blo&eth;, Middle Dutch bloet, Dutch bloed, Old High German bluot, German Blut,
Gothic blo&thorn;), from PIE *bhlo-to-, perhaps meaning to swell, gush, spurt, or that which bursts
out (compare Gothic blo&thorn; blood, bloma flower), in which case it would be from suffixed form of
*bhle-, extended form of *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).    There seems to have been
an avoidance in Germanic, perhaps from taboo, of other PIE words for blood, such as *esen- (source
of poetic Greek ear, Old Latin aser, Sanskrit asrk, Hittite eshar); also *krew-, which seems to have
had a sense of blood outside the body, gore from a wound (source of Latin cruour blood from a wound,
Greek kreas meat), which came to mean simply blood in the Balto-Slavic group and some other
languages.    Inheritance and relationship senses (also found in Latin sanguis, Greek haima) emerged
in English by mid-13c. Meaning person of one's family, race, kindred is late 14c. As the seat of
passions, it is recorded from c.1300. Slang meaning hot spark, a man of fire [Johnson] is from
1560s. Blood pressure attested from 1862. Blood money is from 1530s; originally money paid for
causing the death of another.   Blood type is from 1928. That there were different types of human
blood was discovered c.1900 during early experiments in transfusion. To get blood from a stone do
the impossible is from 1660s. Expression blood is thicker than water attested by 1803, in reference
to family ties of those separated by distance. New (or fresh) blood, in reference to members of an
organization or group is from 1880.


