gusto (n.)

1620s, from Italian gusto taste, from Latin gustus a tasting, related to gustare to taste, take a
little of, from PIE root *geus- to taste, choose (cognates: Sanskrit jus- enjoy, be pleased, Avestan
zaosa- pleasure, Old Persian dau&#353;- enjoy), a root that forms words for taste in Greek and
Latin, but mostly meaning try or choose in Germanic and Celtic (such as Old English cosan, cesan to
choose, Gothic kausjan to test, to taste of, Old High German koston try, German kosten taste of).
The semantic development could have been in either direction. In English, guste organ of taste,
sense of taste, is mid-15c., from French.


gustation (n.)

act of tasting, 1590s, from Latin gustationem (nominative gustatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of gustare to taste (see gusto).


gustatory (adj.)

1680s, from Latin gustatus sense of taste; a taste, noun use of past participle of gustare to taste
(see gusto) + -ory.


degustation (n.)

1650s, from Latin degustationem (nominative degustatio) a tasting, noun of action from past
participle stem of degustare to take a taste from, sample, from de- (see de-) + gustare to taste
(see gusto).


Fergus

masc. proper name, from Gaelic Fearghus or Old Irish Fergus man-ability, first element cognate with
Latin vir man, second from Old Irish gus ability, excellence, strength, inclination, from Celtic
root *gustu- choice, from PIE root *geus- to taste (see gusto).


ragout (n.)

highly seasoned meat and vegetable stew, 1650s, from French rago&#251;t (mid-17c.), from Middle
French rago&#251;ter awaken the appetite, from Old French re- back (see re-) + &agrave; to +
go&#251;t taste, from Latin gustum (nominative gustus); see gusto.


disgust (n.)

1590s, from Middle French desgoust strong dislike, repugnance, literally distaste (16c., Modern
French d&eacute;go&#251;t), from desgouster have a distaste for, from des- opposite of (see dis-) +
gouster taste, from Latin gustare to taste (see gusto).


Valkyrie (n.)

1768, one of 12 war-maidens who escorted the brave dead to Valhalla, from Old Norse valkyrja,
literally chooser of the slain, from valr those slain in battle (see Valhalla) + kyrja chooser, from
ablaut root of kjosa to choose, from Proto-Germanic *keusan, from PIE *geus- to taste, choose (see
gusto). Old English form was W&aelig;lcyrie, but they seem not to have figured as largely in Anglo-
Saxon tales as in Scandinavian. German Walk&uuml;re (Wagner) is from Norse. Related: Valkyrian.


choose (v.)

Old English ceosan choose, seek out, select; decide, test, taste, try; accept, approve (class II
strong verb; past tense ceas, past participle coren), from Proto-Germanic *keus- (cognates: Old
Frisian kiasa, Old Saxon kiosan, Dutch kiezen, Old High German kiosan, German kiesen, Old Norse
kjosa, Gothic kiusan choose, Gothic kausjan to taste, test), from PIE root *geus- to taste, relish
(see gusto). Only remotely related to choice. Variant spelling chuse is Middle English, very
frequent 16c.-18c. The irregular past participle leveled out to chosen by 1200.


taste (v.)

c.1300, to touch, to handle, from Old French taster to taste, sample by mouth; enjoy (13c.), earlier
to feel, touch, pat, stroke (12c., Modern French t&#226;ter), from Vulgar Latin *tastare, apparently
an alteration (perhaps by influence of gustare) of taxtare, a frequentative form of Latin taxare
evaluate, handle (see tax (v.)). Meaning to take a little food or drink is from c.1300; that of to
perceive by sense of taste is recorded from mid-14c. Of substances, to have a certain taste or
flavor, it is attested from 1550s (replaced native smack (v.3) in this sense). For another PIE root
in this sense, see gusto.    The Hindus recognized six principal varieties of taste with sixty-three
possible mixtures ... the Greeks eight .... These included the four that are now regarded as
fundamental, namely 'sweet,' 'bitter,' 'acid,' 'salt.' ... The others were 'pungent' (Gk. drimys,
Skt. katuka-), 'astringent' (Gk. stryphnos, Skt. kasaya-), and, for the Greeks, 'rough, harsh'
(austeros), 'oily, greasy' (liparos), with the occasional addition of 'winy' (oinodes). [Buck]
Sense of to know by experience is from 1520s. Related: Tasted; tasting. Taste buds is from 1879;
also taste goblets.


