happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


happy-go-lucky

also happy go lucky, 1670s as an adverb, haphazard; the adjective, of persons, recorded from 1856.


happy hour

early evening period of discount drinks and free hors-d'oeuvres at a bar, first recorded 1961.


Beatrice

fem. proper name, from French B&eacute;atrice, from Latin beatrix, fem. of beatricem who makes
happy, from beatus happy, blessed, past participle of beare make happy, bless (see beatitude).


beatify (v.)

1530s, to make very happy, from Middle French b&eacute;atifer, from Late Latin beatificare make
happy, make blessed, from Latin beatus supremely happy, blessed (past participle of beare make
happy, bless) + -ficare, from stem of facere to make, do (see factitious). The Roman Catholic Church
sense of to pronounce as being in heavenly bliss (1620s) is the first step toward canonization.
Related: Beatified; beatifying.


felicitate (v.)

1620s, to render happy; 1630s, to reckon happy; from Latin felicitatus, past participle of
felicitare to make happy, from felicitas fruitfulness, happiness, from felix (see felicity). Meaning
congratulate is from 1630s. Related: Felicitated; felicitating.


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


beatific (adj.)

1630s, from French b&eacute;atifique or directly from Late Latin beatificus, from Latin beatus
blessed, happy, past participle of beare make happy, bless (see beatitude). Related: Beatifical (c.
1600); beatifically.


frolic

1530s, as an adjective, joyous, merry, from Middle Dutch vrolyc (adj.) happy, from vro- merry, glad
+ lyc like (see like (adj.)). Cognate with German fr&ouml;hlich happy. The stem is cognate with Old
Norse frar swift, Middle English frow hasty, from PIE *preu- (see frog (n.1)), giving the whole an
etymological sense akin to jumping for joy. The verb is first attested 1580s. Related: Frolicked;
frolicking. As a noun, from 1610s.


Asher

masc. proper name, biblical son of Jacob (also the name of a tribe descended from him), from Hebrew,
literally happy.


Yemen

southwestern region of Arabia, from Arabic Yemen, literally the country of the south, from yaman
right side (i.e., south side, if one is facing east). The right side regarded as auspicious, hence
Arabic yamana he was happy, literally he went to the right, and hence the Latin name for the region
in Roman times, Arabia Felix, lit, Happy Arabia. Related: Yemeni.


blithe (adj.)

Old English bli&thorn;e joyous, kind, cheerful, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *blithiz gentle, kind
(cognates: Old Saxon bli&eth;i bright, happy, Middle Dutch blide, Dutch blijde, Old Norse bli&eth;r
mild, gentle, Old High German blidi gay, friendly, Gothic blei&thorn;s kind, friendly, merciful).
Rare since 16c. No cognates outside Germanic. The earlier application was to the outward expression
of kindly feeling, sympathy, affection to others, as in Gothic and ON.; but in OE. the word had come
more usually to be applied to the external manifestation of one's own pleased or happy frame of
mind, and hence even to the state itself. [OED]


cushy (adj.)

easy, 1915, Anglo-Indian slang, from Hindi khush pleasant, healthy, happy + -y (2).


tickled (adj.)

pleased, happy, 1580s, past participle adjective from tickle (v.). To be tickled pink is from 1909.


Puritanism (n.)

1570s, from Puritan + -ism. Originally in reference to specific doctrines; from 1590s of excessive
moral strictness generally. In this sense, famously defined by H.L. Mencken (1920) as the haunting
fear that someone, somewhere may be happy.


Felix

masc. proper name, from Latin felix happy (see felicity).


up (adj.)

c.1300, dwelling inland or upland, from up (adv.). Meaning going up is from 1784. From 1815 as
excited, exhilarated, happy, hence enthusiastic, optimistic. Up-and-coming promising is from 1848.
Musical up-tempo (adj.) is recorded from 1948.


blessed (adj.)

late 12c., supremely happy, also consecrated (c.1200), past participle adjective from bless (v.).
Reversed or ironic sense of cursed, damned is recorded from 1806. Related: Blessedly; blessedness.


Felicia

fem. proper name, from Latin felix (genitive felicis) happy (see felicity).


festival (n.)

1580s, from earlier adjective (14c.), from Old French festival suitable for a feast, solemn,
magnificent, joyful, happy, and directly from Medieval Latin festivalis of a church holiday (see
festivity).


happily (adv.)

mid-14c., by chance or accident, from happy + -ly (2). Meaning fortunate, lucky is late 14c.; that
of appropriately is from 1570s. Happily ever after recorded by 1853.


unhappy (adj.)

c.1300, causing misfortune or trouble (to oneself or others), from un- (1) not + happy. Meaning
unfortunate, unlucky is recorded from late 14c.; sense of miserable, wretched is recorded from late
14c. (originally via misfortune or mishap).


happiness (n.)

1520s, good fortune, from happy + -ness. Meaning pleasant and contented mental state is from 1590s.
Phrase greatest happiness for the greatest number was in Hutcheson (1725).


camper (n.)

1630s, soldier, agent noun from camp (v.). Meaning attendee at a camp meeting is from 1806; meaning
one who sleeps in temporary quarters outdoors is from 1856; that of motor vehicle with sleeping
quarters is from 1960. Extended use of happy camper is from c.1987.


happify (v.)

1610s, from happy + -ify. Related: Happified.


wealthy (adj.)

late 14c., happy, prosperous, from wealth + -y (2). Meaning rich, opulent is from early 15c. Noun
meaning wealthy persons collectively is from late 14c.


slap (n.)

mid-15c., probably of imitative origin, similar to Low German slappe, German Schlappe. Figurative
meaning insult, reprimand is attested from 1736. Slap-happy (1936) originally meant punch-drunk.
Slap on the wrist very mild punishment dates from 1914.


in-law (n.)

1894, anyone of a relationship not natural, abstracted from father-in-law, etc.The position of the
'in-laws' (a happy phrase which is attributed ... to her Majesty, than whom no one can be better
acquainted with the article) is often not very apt to promote happiness. [Blackwood's Magazine,
1894]The earliest recorded use of the phrase is in brother-in-law (13c.); the law is Canon Law,
which defines degrees of relationship within which marriage is prohibited.


chuff

pleased, happy, c.1860, British dialect, from obsolete chuff swollen with fat (1520s). A second
British dialectal chuff has an opposite meaning, displeased, gruff (1832), from chuff rude fellow,
or, as Johnson has it, a coarse, fat-headed, blunt clown (mid-15c.), of unknown origin. Related:
Chuffed.


beatitude (n.)

early 15c., supreme happiness, from Middle French b&eacute;atitude (15c.) and directly from Latin
beatitudinem (nominative beatitudo) state of blessedness, from past participle stem of beare make
happy (see bene-). As a declaration of blessedness (usually plural, beatitudes, especially in
reference to the Sermon on the Mount) it is attested from 1520s.


euthanasia (n.)

c.1600, from Greek euthanasia an easy or happy death, from eu- good (see eu-) + thanatos death (see
thanatology). Sense of legally sanctioned mercy killing is first recorded in English 1869.


trigger (n.)

device by means of which a catch or spring is released and a mechanism set in action, 1650s, earlier
tricker (1620s), from Dutch trekker trigger, from trekken to pull (see trek). Tricker was the usual
form in English until c.1750. Trigger-happy is attested from 1943.


fain (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;gen, fagen glad, cheerful, happy, joyful, rejoicing, from a common Germanic root
(cognates: Old Saxon fagan, Old Norse feginn glad, Old High German faginon, Gothic faginon to
rejoice), perhaps from PIE *pek- (1) to make pretty. As an adverb, from c.1200.


fortunate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin fortunatus prospered, prosperous; lucky, happy, past participle of fortunare
to make prosperous, from fortuna (see fortune). Fortunate Islands mythical abode of the blessed
dead, in the Western Ocean, early 15c., translates Latin Fortunatae Insulae.


sunshine (n.)

mid-13c., from sun (n.) + shine (n.). Old English had sunnanscima sunshine; while sunscin meant a
mirror, speculum. Meaning happy person who brightens the lives of others is from 1942. Sunshine law
in reference to U.S. open-meeting legislation is recorded from 1972, from the notion of shining the
light of public access on deliberations formerly held behind closed doors. Related: Sunshiny.


felicity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French felicite (14c.) happiness, from Latin felicitatem (nominative felicitas)
happiness, fertility, from felix (genitive felicis) happy, fortunate, fruitful, fertile, from Latin
root *fe-, equivalent of PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, produce, yield (see fecund).


Murphy

Gaelic Murchadh sea-warrior. The Celtic sea element is also in names Muriel (q.v.), Murdoch (Old
Irish Muireadhach, Old Welsh Mordoc mariner), etc. Murphy bed (1925) is named for U.S. inventor
William Lawrence Murphy (1876-1959). By happy coincidence, Murphy was an illiterate 18c.-19c.
perversion of Morpheus, god of sleep.


calligraphy (n.)

1610s, from Greek kaligraphia, from kallos beauty (see Callisto) + graphein to write (see -graphy).
Related: Calligraphic. The usual comb. form in Greek was kalli- beautiful, fine, happy, favorable;
kalo- was a later, rarer alternative form.


godsend (n.)

1814, a shipwreck (from the perspective of people living along the coast), from Middle English Godes
sonde (c.1200) God's messenger; what God sends, gift from God, happening caused by God, from god +
Middle English sonde that which is sent, message, from Old English sand, from sendan (see send
(v.)). Sense of happy chance is from 1831.


medium (n.)

1580s, a middle ground, quality, or degree, from Latin medium the middle, midst, center; interval,
noun use of neuter of adjective medius (see medial (adj.)). Meaning intermediate agency, channel of
communication is from c.1600. That of person who conveys spiritual messages first recorded 1853,
from notion of substance through which something is conveyed. Artistic sense (oil, watercolors,
etc.) is from 1854. Happy medium is the golden mean, Horace's aurea mediocritas.


joyous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French joyous, Old French joios happy, cheerful, merry, glad (12c., Modern French
joyeux), from joie (see joy). Related: Joyously; joyousness.


prosper (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French prosperer (14c.) and directly from Latin prosperare cause to succeed,
render happy, from prosperus favorable, fortunate, prosperous, perhaps literally agreeable to one's
wishes, traditionally regarded as from Old Latin pro spere according to expectation, according to
one's hope, from pro for + ablative of spes hope, from PIE root *spe- to flourish, succeed, thrive,
prosper (see speed (n.)).


upbeat (adj.)

with a positive mood, 1947, apparently from on the upbeat improving, getting better, attested from
1934 and a favorite of Billboard headline-writers in the early 1940s, from the musical noun upbeat
(1869), referring to the beat of a bar at which the conductor's baton is in a raised position; from
up (adv.) + beat (n.). The optimistic sense apparently for no other reason than that it sounds like
a happy word (the musical upbeat is no more inherently positive than any other beat).


Scilly

isles off Cornwall, of unknown origin. Pliny has Silumnus, Silimnis. Perhaps connected with the
Roman god Sulis (compare Aquae sulis Bath). The -y might be Old Norse ey island The -c- added
16c.-17c. [A]bout the only certain thing that can be said is that the c of the modern spelling is
not original but was added for distinction from ModE silly as this word developed in meaning from
'happy, blissful' to 'foolish.' [Victor Watts, Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names, 2004].


return (n.)

late 14c., act of coming back, also official report of election results, from Anglo-French retorn,
Old French retorne, verbal noun from retorner (see return (v.)). In ball games from 1833;
specifically in tennis from 1886. Meaning a yield, a profit is recorded from 1620s. Meaning a thing
sent back is from 1875. Many happy returns of the day was used by Addison (1716). Mailing return
address attested from 1884.


hunt (v.)

Old English huntian chase game, related to hentan to seize, from Proto-Germanic *huntojan (cognates:
Gothic hin&thorn;an to seize, capture, Old High German hunda booty), from PIE *kend-.    General
sense of search diligently (for anything) is first recorded c.1200. Related: Hunted; hunting. Happy
hunting-grounds Native American afterlife paradise is from Last of the Mohicans (1826).


solace (n.)

comfort in grief, consolation, late 13c., from Old French solaz pleasure, entertainment, enjoyment;
solace, comfort, from Latin solacium a soothing, assuaging; comfort, consolation, from solatus, past
participle of solari to console, soothe, from PIE *sol-a-, suffixed form of root *sele- of good
mood; to favor (cognates: Old English ges&aelig;lig happy; see silly). Adjectival form solacious is
attested 16c.-17c.


holiday (n.)

1500s, earlier haliday (c.1200), from Old English haligd&aelig;g holy day; Sabbath, from halig holy
(see holy) + d&aelig;g day (see day); in 14c. meaning both religious festival and day of recreation,
but pronunciation and sense diverged 16c. As a verb meaning to pass the holidays by 1869. Happy
holidays is from mid-19c., in British English, with reference to summer vacation from school. As a
Christmastime greeting, by 1937, American English, in Camel cigarette ads.


quiet (n.)

c.1300, freedom from disturbance or conflict; calm, stillness, from Old French quiete rest, repose,
tranquility and directly from Latin quies (genitive quietis) a lying still, rest, repose, peace,
from PIE root *kweie- (2) to rest, be quiet (cognates: Old Persian shiyati-, Avestan shaiti- well-
being; Avestan shyata- happy; Gothic hveila, Old English hwil space of time; see while (n.)). Late
14c. as inactivity, rest, repose.


melodrama (n.)

1784 (1782 as melo drame), a stage-play in which songs were interspersed and music accompanied the
action, from French m&eacute;lodrame (18c.), from Greek melos song (see melody) + French drame drama
(see drama). Meaning a romantic and sensational dramatic piece with a happy ending is from 1883,
because this was often the form of the original melodramas. Also from French are Spanish melodrama,
Italian melodramma, German melodram. Related: Melodramatize.


