heedless (adj.)

without regard, 1570s, from heed + -less. Related: Heedlessly; heedlessness.


unthinking (adj.)

1670s, unreflecting; 1680s, heedless, from un- (1) not + present participle of think (v.).


thoughtless (adj.)

1610s, heedless, imprudent, from thought + -less. Meaning inconsiderate of others is from 1794.
Related: Thoughtlessly; thoughtlessness.


temerarious (adj.)

rash, reckless, 1530s, from Latin temerarius rash, heedless, thoughtless, indiscreet, from temere
blindly, rashly, by chance (see temerity). Related: Temerariously; temerariousness.


mindless (adj.)

c.1400, unmindful, heedless, negligent, from mind (n.) + -less. Related: Mindlessly; mindlessness.
Old English had myndleas foolish, senseless.


incurious (adj.)

1560s, negligent, heedless, from Latin incuriosus careless, negligent, unconcerned, from in- not,
opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + curiosus (see curious). Meaning uninquisitive is from 1610s.
Objective sense of unworthy of attention is from 1747.


negligent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French negligent careless, negligent (13c.) or directly from Latin negligentem
heedless, careless, unconcerned (see negligence). Related: Negligently.


insouciant (adj.)

1829, from French insouciant careless, thoughtless, heedless, from in- not (see in- (1)) + souciant
caring, present participle of soucier to care, from Latin sollicitare to agitate (see solicit).
Related: Insouciantly.


imprudent (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin imprudentem (nominative imprudens) not foreseeing, unaware, inconsiderate,
heedless, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + prudens, contraction of
providens, present participle of providere to provide, literally to see before (one) (see provide).
Related: Imprudently.


negligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French negligence negligence, sloth; injury, injustice (12c.), and directly from
Latin neclegentia, neglegentia carelessness, heedlessness, neglect, from neglegentem (nominative
neglegens) heedless, careless, unconcerned, present participle of neglegere to neglect (see neglect
(v.)).


reckless (adj.)

Old English receleas careless, thoughtless, heedless, earlier reccileas, from *rece, recce care,
heed, from reccan to care (see reck (v.)) + -less. The same affixed form is in German ruchlos, Dutch
roekeloos wicked. Root verb reck (Old English reccan) is passing into obscurity.


rash (adj.)

late 14c., nimble, quick, vigorous (early 14c. as a surname), a Scottish and northern word, perhaps
from Old English -r&aelig;sc (as in ligr&aelig;sc flash of lightning) or one of its Germanic
cognates, from Proto-Germanic *raskuz (cognates: Middle Low German rasch, Middle Dutch rasc quick,
swift, German rasch quick, fast). Related to Old English horsc quick-witted. Sense of reckless,
impetuous, heedless of consequences is attested from c.1500. Related: Rashly; rashness.


sure (adj.)

early 13c., safe against attack, secure, later firm, reliable (c.1300); mentally certain, confident
(mid-14c.); firm, strong, resolute (c.1400), from Old French seur, sur safe, secure; undoubted,
dependable, trustworthy (12c.), from Latin securus free from care, untroubled, heedless, safe (see
secure (adj.)). Pronunciation development is that of sugar (n.).    As an affirmative meaning yes,
certainly it dates from 1803, from Middle English meanings firmly established; having no doubt, and
phrases like to be sure (1650s), sure enough (1540s), and for sure (1580s). The use as an adverb
meaning assuredly goes back to early 14c. Sure-footed is from 1630s, literal and figurative; sure
thing dates from 1836. In 16c.-17c., Suresby was an appellation for a person to be depended upon.


