heyday (n.)

late 16c., alteration of heyda (1520s), exclamation of playfulness or surprise, something like
Modern English hurrah, apparently an extended form of Middle English interjection hey or hei (see
hey). Modern sense of stage of greatest vigor first recorded 1751, which altered the spelling on
model of day, with which this word apparently has no etymological connection.


swing (n.)

Old English swinge stroke, blow; chastisement, from swing (v.). Meaning suspended seat on ropes is
from 1680s. Meaning shift of public opinion is from 1899. The meaning variety of big dance-band
music with a swinging rhythm is first recorded 1933, though the sense has been traced back to 1888;
its heyday was from mid-30s to mid-40s. Phrase in full swing in total effect or operation (1560s)
perhaps is from bell-ringing. The backyard or playground swing-set is from 1951.


flower (n.)

c.1200, from Old French flor flower, blossom; heyday, prime; fine flour; elite; innocence, virginity
(Modern French fleur), from Latin florem (nominative flos) flower (source of Italian fiore, Spanish
flor; see flora).    Modern spelling is 14c. Ousted Old English cognate blostm (see blossom (n.)).
Also used from 13c. in sense of finest part or product of anything and from c.1300 in the sense of
virginity. Flower children gentle hippies is from 1967.


beatnik (n.)

coined 1958 by San Francisco newspaper columnist Herb Caen during the heyday of -nik suffixes in the
wake of Sputnik. From Beat generation (1952), associated with beat (n.) in its meaning rhythm
(especially in jazz) as well as beat (past participle adjective) worn out, exhausted, but originator
Jack Kerouac (1922-1969) in 1958 connected it with beatitude.The origins of the word beat are
obscure, but the meaning is only too clear to most Americans. More than the feeling of weariness, it
implies the feeling of having been used, of being raw. It involves a sort of nakedness of the mind.
[New York Times Magazine, Oct. 2, 1952] <hr />   Beat is old carny slang. According to Beat Movement
legend (and it is a movement with a deep inventory of legend), Ginsberg and Kerouac picked it up
from a character named Herbert Huncke, a gay street hustler and drug addict from Chicago who began
hanging around Times Square in 1939 (and who introduced William Burroughs to heroin, an important
cultural moment). The term has nothing to do with music; it names the condition of being beaten
down, poor, exhausted, at the bottom of the world. [Louis Menand, New Yorker, Oct. 1, 2007]


