hoe (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French houe (12c.), from Frankish *hauwa, from Proto-Germanic *hawwan (cognates:
Old High German houwa hoe, mattock, pick-axe, German Haue), from PIE *kau- to hew, strike (see hew).
The verb is first recorded early 15c. Related: Hoed; hoeing.


hoe-cake (n.)

1745, American English, said to be so called because it originally was baked on the broad thin blade
of a cotton-field hoe (n.).


hoedown (n.)

noisy dance, 1841, apparently originally the name of a specific dance, perhaps from perceived
parallel of dance motions to those of farm chores, hence from hoe (n.).    The step of every negro
dance that was ever known, was called into requisition and admirably executed. They performed the
double shuffle, the Virginny break-down, the Kentucky heeltap, the pigeon wing, the back balance
lick, the Arkansas hoe down, with unbounded applause and irresistible effect. [Scouting Expeditions
of McCulloch's Texas Rangers, 1848]    Hoe corn, hill tobacco is noted as a line in the chorus of a
slave song in 1838, and Washington Irving writes of a dance called hoe corn and dig potatoes in
1807.    The same precedence is repeated until all the merchandise is disposed of, the table is then
banished the room, and the whole party hoe it down in straight fours and set dances, till the hour
when ghosts wandering here and there, troop home to church-yards. This is what we kintra folk call a
strauss. [Der Teufelskerl. A Tale of German Pennsylvania, in Burton's Gentleman's Magazine, January
1840]


hoer (n.)

1740s, agent noun from hoe (v.).


backhoe (n.)

by 1928, from back (n. or adj.) + hoe (n.).


diarrhoea

variant spelling of diarrhea (q.v.); see also oe.


gumshoe (n.)

plainclothes detective, 1906, from the rubber-soled shoes they wore (allowing stealthy movement),
which were so called from 1863 (gums rubber shoes is attested by 1859); from gum (n.1) + shoe (n.).


horseshoe (n.)

late 14c. (early 13c. as a proper name), from horse (n.) + shoe (n.). Horseshoes as another name for
the game of quoits, attested by 1822.    HORSE-SHOES, the game of coits, or quoits--because
sometimes actually played with horse-shoes. [John Trotter Brockett, A Glossary of North Country
Words, 1829]    The belief that finding a horseshoe by chance is lucky is attested from late 14c.,
and the practice of nailing one above a doorway to prevent a witch entering therein was common in
London down to c. 1800. Of a type of bend in a river, 1770, American English. As a type of crab,
from 1775.


overshoe (n.)

1829, from over- + shoe (n.). Related: Overshoes.


pahoehoe (n.)

ropy lava, 1859, from Hawaiian.


phoebe (n.)

small North American flycatcher, pewit, 1700, phebe, so called in imitation of its cry; spelling
altered (1839) by influence of the woman's proper name Phoebe.


Phoebe

fem. proper name, late 14c., originally a name of Artemis as the goddess of the moon, from Latin
Phoebe, from Greek phoibos bright, pure, of unknown origin. The fem. form of Phoebus, an epithet of
Apollo as sun-god.


Phoebus

epithet of Apollo as sun-god, late 14c., from Latin Phoebus, from Greek Phoibos, literally bright,
shining, radiant, of unknown origin. Related: Phoeban.


Phoenician (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French phenicien, from Latin Phoenice, from Greek Phoinike Phoenicia
(including Carthage), perhaps literally land of the purple (i.e., source of purple dye, the earliest
use of which was ascribed to the Phoenicians by the Greeks). Identical with phoenix (q.v.), but the
relationship is obscure. In reference to a language from 1836; as an adjective from c. 1600.


phoenix (n.)

Old English and Old French fenix, from Medieval Latin phenix, from Latin phoenix, from Greek
phoinix, mythical bird of Arabia which flew to Egypt every 500 years to be reborn, also the date
(fruit and tree), also Phoenician, literally purple-red, perhaps a foreign word (Egyptian has been
suggested), or from phoinos blood-red. Exact relation and order of the senses in Greek is
unclear.&ETH;one wudu wearda&thorn; wundrum f&aelig;gerfugel fe&thorn;rum se is fenix hatan[Phoenix,
c.900]Spelling assimilated to Greek 16c. (see ph). Figurative sense of that which rises from the
ashes of what was destroyed is attested from 1590s. The city in Arizona, U.S., so called because it
was founded in 1867 on the site of an ancient Native American settlement.


shoe (n.)

Old English scoh shoe, from Proto-Germanic *skokhaz (cognates: Old Norse skor, Danish and Swedish
sko, Old Frisian skoch, Old Saxon skoh, Middle Dutch scoe, Dutch schoen, Old High German scuoh,
German Schuh, Gothic skoh). No known cognates outside Germanic, unless it somehow is connected with
PIE root *skeu- cover (cognates: second element in Latin ob-scurus).    Old plural form shoon lasted
until 16c. Meaning metal plate to protect a horse's hoof is attested from late 14c. Distinction
between shoe and boot (n.) is attested from c. 1400. To stand in someone's shoes see things from his
or her point of view is attested from 1767. Old shoe as a type of something worthless is attested
from late 14c.    Shoes tied to the fender of a newlywed couple's car preserves the old custom
(mentioned from 1540s) of throwing an old shoe at or after someone to wish them luck. Perhaps the
association is with dirtiness, on the muck is luck theory.


shoe (v.)

Old English scogan to shoe, from the root of shoe (n.). In reference to horses from c. 1200.
Related: Shoed; shoeing.


shoe-shine (adj.)

1911, from shoe (n.) + shine (n.). One who shines shoes for money was a shoeblacker (1755).


shoe-string (n.)

1610s, from shoe (n.) + string (n.). As figurative for a small amount it is recorded from 1882; as a
type of necktie, from 1903; as a style of cooked potatoes from 1906.


shoebox (n.)

1860, from shoe (n.) + box (n.). In reference to a type of building from 1968.


shoehorn (v.)

in the figurative sense of to put or thrust (something somewhere) by means of a 'tool,'  1859, from
shoehorn (n.). Earlier it meant to cuckold (mid-17c.), with a play on horn (n.). Related:
Shoehorned.


shoehorn (n.)

1580s, from shoe (n.) + horn (n.); earlier shoeing-horn (mid-15c.).


shoelace (n.)

1640s, from shoe (n.) + lace (n.).


shoeless (adj.)

1620s, from shoe (n.) + -less. Related: Shoelessly; shoelessness.


shoemaker (n.)

late 14c. (mid-14c. as a surname), from shoe (n.) + maker.


snow-shoe (n.)

also snowshoe, 1670s, from snow (n.) + shoe (n.). Related: Snowshoes.


Tahoe

Lake on the Nevada-California border, from Washo /da'aw/ lake.


tuckahoe (n.)

edible plant root of eastern U.S., 1610s, American English, from Powhatan (Algonquian) tockawhouge
(compare Mohegan tquogh, Shawnee tukwhah), perhaps related to Cree (Algonquian) pitikwaw made round.
From early 19c. a name applied in Virginia to those east of the Blue Ridge Mountains by the settlers
west of them, who called themselves Cohees.


whoever (pron.)

late Old English hwa efre; see who + ever.


