homily (n.)

late 14c., omelye, from Old French omelie (12c., Modern French hom&eacute;lie), from Church Latin
homilia a homily, sermon, from Greek homilia conversation, discourse, used in New Testament Greek
for sermon, from homilos an assembled crowd, from homou together (from PIE *somo-, from root *sem-
(1) one, as one, together with; see same) + ile troop (cognate with Sanskrit melah assembly, Latin
miles soldier). Latinate form restored in English 16c.


homiletic (adj.)

1640s, of or having to do with sermons, from Late Latin homileticus, from Greek homiletikos of
conversation, affable, from homelein associate with, from homilos (see homily).


homilist (n.)

1610s, from homily + -ist.


proverb (n.)

c.1300, in boke of Prouerbyys, the Old Testament work, from Old French proverbe (12c.) and directly
from Latin proverbium a common saying, old adage, maxim, literally words put forward, from pro-
forth (see pro-) + verbum word (see verb). Used generally from late 14c. The Book of Proverbs in Old
English was cwidboc, from cwide speech, saying, proverb, homily, related to cwiddian to talk, speak,
say, discuss; cwiddung speech, saying, report.


folklore (n.)

1846, coined by antiquarian William J. Thoms (1803-1885) as an Anglo-Saxonism (replacing popular
antiquities) and first published in the Athenaeum of Aug. 22, 1846, from folk + lore. Old English
folclar meant homily.    This word revived folk in a modern sense of of the common people, whose
culture is handed down orally, and opened up a flood of compound formations, as in folk art (1892),
folk-hero (1874), folk-medicine (1877), folk-tale/folk tale (1850; Old English folctalu meant
genealogy), folk-song (1847), folk singer (1876), folk-dance (1877).


sermon (n.)

c.1200, sarmun, a discourse upon a text of scripture; what is preached, from Anglo-French sermun,
Old French sermon speech, words, discourse; church sermon, homily (10c.), from Latin sermonem
(nominative sermo) continued speech, conversation; common talk, rumor; learned talk, discourse;
manner of speaking, literary style, originally a stringing together of words, from PIE *ser-mo-,
suffixed form of root *ser- (3) to line up, join (see series).    Main modern sense in English and
French is elliptical for Latin sermo religiosus. In transferred (non-religious) use from 1590s. The
Sermon on the Mount is in 5,6,7 Matt. and 6 Luke. Related: Sermonic; sermonical; sermonish.


study (v.)

early 12c., to strive toward, devote oneself to, cultivate (translating Latin occupatur), from Old
French estudiier to study, apply oneself, show zeal for; examine (13c., Modern French
&eacute;tudier), from Medieval Latin studiare, from Latin studium study, application, originally
eagerness, from studere to be diligent (to be pressing forward), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push,
stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Martha swanc and becarcade to gefor&eth;igene &thorn;an
H&aelig;lende and his &thorn;eowen &thorn;a lichamlice behef&eth;en. Seo studdede emb &thorn;a
uterlice &thorn;ing. [Homily for the Feast of the Virgin Mary, c.1125]    From c.1300 as apply
oneself to the acquisition of learning, pursue a formal course of study, also read a book or
writings intently or meditatively. From mid-14c. as reflect, muse, think, ponder. Meaning regard
attentively is from 1660s. Related: Studied; studying.


