humorous (adj.)

early 15c., relating to the body humors, a native formation from humor, or else from Middle French
humoreux damp, from Old French humor (see humor (n.)). The meaning funny dates from 1705 in English.
Related: Humorously; humorousness.


humoral (adj.)

pertaining to the humors of the body, 1520s, from Middle French humoral (14c.), from Latin humor
(see humor (n.)).


humor (v.)

1580s; see humor (n.). Related: Humored; humoring.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


humorist (n.)

1590s, from humor (n.) + -ist. Perhaps on model of Middle French humoriste.


grump (n.)

ill-humor, 1727, in humps and grumps surly remarks, later the grumps a fit of ill-humor (1844), then
a person in ill humor (1900); perhaps an extended sense of grum morose, surly, which probably is
related to Danish grum cruel; or perhaps suggested by grumble, grunt, etc.


phlegm (n.)

late 14c., fleem viscid mucus (the stuff itself and also regarded as a bodily humor), from Old
French fleume (13c., Modern French flegme), from Late Latin phlegma, one of the four humors of the
body, from Greek phlegma humor caused by heat, lit inflammation, heat, from phlegein to burn,
related to phlox (genitive phlogos) flame, blaze, from PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, from root *bhel-
(1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Modern form is attested from c.1660. The cold, moist
humor of the body, in medieval physiology, it was believed to cause apathy.


Pythonesque (adj.)

1975, in reference to the style of humor popularized by British TV series Monty Python's Flying
Circus.


miff (n.)

1620s, fit of ill humor, perhaps imitative of an exclamation of disgust (compare German muffen to
sulk).


Rabelaisian (adj.)

1817, from French author Fran&ccedil;ois Rabelais (c.1490-1553), whose writings are distinguished by
exuberance of imagination and language combined with extravagance and coarseness of humor and
satire. [OED]


conundrum (n.)

1590s, Oxford University slang for pedant, also whim, etc., later (1790) riddle, puzzle. Also
spelled quonundrum. The sort of ponderous pseudo-Latin word that was once the height of humor in
learned circles.


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


kef (n.)

1808, from Arabic kaif well-being, good-humor. Specifically, state of dreaming intoxication produced
by smoking cannabis; dolce far niente. In Morocco and Algeria, it was the name for Indian hemp.


calcitrant (adj.)

1866, as if from Latin calcitrantem (nominative calcitrans) kicking (see recalcitrant). Pedantic
humor; probably a back-formation.


agog (adj., adv.)

in a state of desire; in a state of imagination; heated with the notion of some enjoyment; longing
[Johnson], c.1400, perhaps from Old French en gogues in jest, good humor, joyfulness, from gogue
fun, of unknown origin.


thusly (adv.)

1865 (in an Artemus Ward dialect humor piece), from thus + -ly (2). A double adverb. Perhaps
originally a humorous or mocking over-correction of thus; it has gained some currency but earns
frowns for the user.


scrumptious (adj.)

1833, in countrified humor writing of Major Jack Downing of Maine (Seba Smith); probably a
colloquial alteration of sumptuous. Originally stylish, splendid; sense of delicious is by 1881.
Related: Scrumptiously; scrumptiousness.


funk (n.1)

depression, ill-humor, 1743, probably originally Scottish and northern English; earlier as a verb,
panic, fail through panic, (1737), said to be 17c. Oxford University slang, perhaps from Flemish
fonck perturbation, agitation, distress, possibly related to Old French funicle wild, mad.


pleasantry (n.)

sprightly humor in conversation, 1650s, from French plaisanterie joke, jest; joking, jesting, from
plaisant (see pleasant). Related: Pleasantries.


miff (v.)

1797, to take offense at; 1811, to put out of humor, from miff (n.). Related: miffed; miffing.


plaguey (adj.)

1570s, pertaining to a plague, from plague (n.) + -y (2). Figurative meaning vexatious, troublesome
is from 1610s. As an adverb (properly it would be plaguily) it is attested from 1580s, often with
deliberate attempt at humor. Johnson also has woundy excessive.


cynicism (n.)

1670s, philosophy of the Cynics, from cynic + -ism. Meaning cynical character is from 1847. For
nuances of usage of cynicism, see humor.


humour

chiefly British English spelling of humor; see -or. Related: Humourous; humourist.


jocose (adj.)

1670s, from Latin iocosus full of jesting, joking, from iocus pastime, sport; a jest, joke (see joke
(n.)). Implies ponderous humor. Related: Jocosely; jocoseness.


vitreous (adj.)

early 15c., glasslike, from Latin vitreus of glass, glassy, from vitrum glass, which perhaps was so
called for its color (compare vitrium woad). Vitreous humor attested from 1660s.


pettish (adj.)

1550s, impetuous, evidently from pet (n.2) in its ill humor sense + -ish. Meaning peevish, easily
annoyed is from 1590s.    It has naturally been assoc. with PET sb.1, as being a characteristic
habit of a pet or indulged and spoiled child; but the connexion of sense is not very clear or simple
.... [OED]  Related: Pettishly; pettishness.


cheer (v.)

late 14c., to cheer up, humor, console; c.1400 as entertain with food or drink, from cheer (n.).
Related: Cheered; cheering. Sense of to encourage by words or deeds is early 15c. Which had focused
to salute with shouts of applause by late 18c. Cheer up (intransitive) first attested 1670s.


R

In a circle, meaning registered (trademark), first incorporated in U.S. statues 1946. R&R; rest and
relaxation, first recorded 1953, American English; R&B; rhythm and blues (type of popular music)
first attested 1949, American English.    If all our r's that are written are pronounced, the sound
is more common than any other in English utterance (over seven per cent.); the instances of
occurrence before a vowel, and so of universal pronunciation, are only half as frequent. There are
localities where the normal vibration of the tip of the tongue is replaced by one of the uvula,
making a guttural trill, which is still more entitled to the name of dog's letter than is the
ordinary r; such are considerable parts of France and Germany; the sound appears to occur only
sporadically in English pronunciation. [Century Dictionary]   <hr />   The moment we encounter the
added r's of purp or dorg in our reading we know that we have to do with humor, and so with school-
marm. The added consonants are supposed to be spoken, if the words are uttered, but, as a matter of
fact, they are less often uttered than seen. The words are, indeed, largely visual forms; the humor
is chiefly for the eye. [Louise Pound, The Humorous 'R,' American Mercury, October 1924]    She goes
on to note that in British humorous writing, -ar popularly indicates the sound of the vowel in
father and formations like larf (for laugh) are to be read with the broad vowel but no uttered r.
She also quotes Henry James on the characteristic prominence of the medial -r- sound (which tends to
be dropped in England and New England) in the speech of the U.S. Midwest, under some strange impulse
received toward consonantal recovery of balance, making it present even in words from which it is
absent, bringing it in everywhere as with the small vulgar effect of a sort of morose grinding of
the back teeth.


tonsorial (adj.)

pertaining to barbers, 1765, from -al (1) + Latin tonsorius of or pertaining to shearing or shaving,
from tonsor a shaver, barber, shearer, clipper, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear,
shave (see tonsure). Generally used in an attempt at humor. Tonsorious in the same sense is attested
from 1650s.


hebdomadally (adv.)

weekly, 1816, pedantic humor, from Latin hebdomas, from Greek hebdomas the number seven; a period of
seven (days), from hepta seven (from PIE *septm; see seven) + -mos, suffix used to form ordinal
numbers, cognate with Latin -mus.


irony (n.)

c.1500, from Latin ironia, from Greek eironeia dissimulation, assumed ignorance, from eiron
dissembler, perhaps related to eirein to speak (see verb). Used in Greek of affected ignorance,
especially that of Socrates. For nuances of usage, see humor. Figurative use for condition opposite
to what might be expected; contradictory circumstances is from 1640s.


canicular (adj.)

late 14c., in reference to the dog days, from Latin canicularis pertaining to the dog days, from
canicula little dog, also the Dog Star, diminutive of canis (see canine). Also see heliacal; Sirius.
In literal use (pertaining to a dog) historically only as attempt at humor.


verve (n.)

1690s, special talent in writing, enthusiasm in what pertains to art and literature, from French
verve enthusiasm (especially pertaining to the arts), in Old French caprice, odd humor, proverb,
saying; messenger's report (12c.), probably from Gallo-Roman *verva, from Latin verba (whimsical)
words, plural of verbum word (see verb). Meaning mental vigor is first recorded 1803.


schoolmarm (n.)

also school-marm, female school teacher, 1834, American English colloquial, in countrified humor
writing of Major Jack Downing of Maine (Seba Smith); variant of school-ma'am (1828), American
English, from school (n.1) + ma'am. See R. Used figuratively from 1887 in reference to patronizing
and priggish instruction.


invective (n.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin invectiva abusive speech, from Late Latin invectivus abusive, from Latin
invectus, past participle of invehi to attack with words (see inveigh). For nuances of usage, see
humor. The earlier noun form was inveccion (mid-15c.).


vein (n.)

c.1300, from Old French veine vein, artery, pulse (12c.), from Latin vena a blood vessel, also a
water course, a vein of metal, a person's natural ability or interest, of unknown origin. The mining
sense is attested in English from late 14c. (Greek phleps vein had the same secondary sense).
Figurative sense of strain or intermixture (of some quality) is recorded from 1560s; that of a humor
or mood, natural tendency is first recorded 1570s.


slapstick (n.)

also slap-stick, originally (1896) a device consisting of two sticks fastened together so as to slap
loudly when a clown or actor hits somebody with it, or to make a sound-effect offstage; from slap
and stick (n.). As an adjective by 1906. Meaning farcical physical comedy, horseplay (1916) is short
for slapstick comedy or humor.


annoyance (n.)

late 14c., act of annoying, from Old French enoiance ill-humor, irritation, from anuiant, present
participle of anuier to be troublesome, annoy, harass (see annoy). Meaning state of being annoyed is
from c.1500. Earlier, annoying was used in the sense of act of offending (c.1300), and a noun annoy
(c.1200) in a sense feeling of irritation, displeasure, distaste.


Archibald

masc. proper name, from Old High German Erchanbald, literally genuine bold, from erchan genuine +
bald (see bold). Archie, British World War I military slang for German anti-aircraft fire (1915)
supposedly is from black humor of airmen dodging hostile fire and thinking of the refrain of a
popular music hall song, Archibald, certainly not!


sullen (adj.)

1570s, alteration of Middle English soleyn unique, singular, from Anglo-French *solein, formed on
the pattern of Old French solain lonely, from soul single, from Latin solus by oneself, alone (see
sole (adj.)). The sense shift in Middle English from solitary to morose (i.e. remaining alone
through ill-humor) occurred late 14c. Related: Sullenly; sullenness.


sarcasm (n.)

1570s, sarcasmus, from Late Latin sarcasmus, from late Greek sarkasmos a sneer, jest, taunt,
mockery, from sarkazein to speak bitterly, sneer, literally to strip off the flesh, from sarx
(genitive sarkos) flesh, properly piece of meat, from PIE root *twerk- to cut (cognates: Avestan
thwares to cut). Current form of the English word is from 1610s. For nuances of usage, see humor.


aqueous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin aqua water (see aqua-) on analogy of French aqueux watery (16c., which, however,
is from Late Latin aquosus abounding in water). Or by analogy of Latin terreus earthy, from terra
earth. Aqueous humor is the original use in English.


phlegmatic (adj.)

cool, calm, self-possessed, and in a more pejorative sense, cold, dull, apathetic, 1570s, from
literal sense abounding in phlegm (as a bodily humor) (mid-14c., fleumatik), from Old French
fleumatique (13c., Modern French flegmatique), from Late Latin phlegmaticus, from Greek phlegmatikos
abounding in phlegm (see phlegm).A verry flewmatike man is in the body lustles, heuy and slow. [John
of Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


blurb (n.)

used by U.S. scholar Brander Matthews (1852-1929) in 1906 in American Character; popularized 1907 by
U.S. humorist Frank Gelett Burgess (1866-1951). Originally mocking excessive praise printed on book
jackets.    Gelett Burgess, whose recent little book, Are You a Bromide? has been referred to above,
then entertained the guests with some characteristic flashes of Burgessian humor. Referring to the
word blurb on the wrapper of his book he said: To 'blurb' is to make a sound like a publisher. The
blurb was invented by Frank A. Munsey when he wrote on the front of his magazine in red ink 'I
consider this number of Munsey's the hottest pie that ever came out of my bakery.' ... A blurb is a
check drawn on Fame, and it is seldom honored.[] [Publishers' Weekly, May 18, 1907]


spleen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French esplen, from Latin splen, from Greek splen the milt, spleen, from PIE
*spelgh- spleen, milt (cognates: Sanskrit plihan-, Avestan sperezan, Armenian p'aicaln, Latin lien,
Old Church Slavonic slezena, Lithuanian blu&#382;nis, Old Prussian blusne, Old Irish selg spleen).
Regarded in medieval physiology as the seat of morose feelings and bad temper. Hence figurative
sense of violent ill-temper (1580s, implied in spleenful); and thence spleenless free from anger,
ill-humor, malice, or spite (1610s).


dry (adj.)

Old English dryge, from Proto-Germanic *draugiz (cognates: Middle Low German dr&ouml;ge, Middle
Dutch druge, Dutch droog, Old High German trucchon, German trocken, Old Norse draugr), from Germanic
root *dreug- dry.    Meaning barren is mid-14c. Of humor or jests, early 15c. (implied in dryly); as
uninteresting, tedious from 1620s. Of places prohibiting alcoholic drink, 1870 (but dry feast, one
at which no liquor is served, is from late 15c.; colloquial dry (n.) prohibitionist is 1888,
American English). Dry goods (1708) were those measured out in dry, not liquid, measure. Dry land
(that not under the sea) is from early 13c. Dry run is from 1940s.


indulgence (n.)

mid-14c., freeing from temporal punishment for sin, from Old French indulgence or directly from
Latin indulgentia complaisance, fondness, remission, from indulgentem (nominative indulgens)
indulgent, kind, tender, fond, present participle of indulgere be kind, yield, of unknown origin;
perhaps from in- in + derivative of PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself.    Sense of gratification of
another's desire or humor is attested from late 14c. That of yielding to one's inclinations
(technically self-indulgence) is from 1640s. In British history, Indulgence also refers to grants of
certain liberties to Nonconformists under Charles II and James II, as special favors rather than
legal rights; specifically the Declarations of Indulgence of 1672, 1687, and 1688 in England and
1669, 1672, and 1687 in Scotland.


sardonic (adj.)

apparently but not really proceeding from gaiety, 1630s, from French sardonique (16c.), from Latin
sardonius (but as if from Latin *sardonicus) in Sardonius risus, loan-translation of Greek sardonios
(gelos) of bitter or scornful (laughter), altered from Homeric sardanios (of uncertain origin) by
influence of Sardonios Sardinian, because the Greeks believed that eating a certain plant they
called sardonion (literally plant from Sardinia, see Sardinia) caused facial convulsions resembling
those of sardonic laughter, usually followed by death. For nuances of usage, see humor. Earlier in
same sense sardonian (1580s), from Latin sardonius. Related: Sardonically.


tease (v.)

formerly also teaze, Old English t&aelig;san pluck, pull, tear; pull apart, comb (fibers of wool,
flax, etc.), from Proto-Germanic *taisijan (cognates: Danish t&aelig;se, Middle Dutch tesen, Dutch
tezen to draw, pull, scratch, Old High German zeisan to tease, pick wool).    The original sense is
of running thorns through wool or flax to separate, shred, or card the fibers. The figurative sense
of vex, worry, annoy (sometimes done in good humor) emerged 1610s. For similar sense development,
compare heckle. Hairdressing sense is recorded from 1957. Related: Teased; teasing; teasingly.


wit (n.)

mental capacity, Old English wit, witt, more commonly gewit understanding, intellect, sense;
knowledge, consciousness, conscience, from Proto-Germanic *wit- (cognates: Old Saxon wit, Old Norse
vit, Danish vid, Swedish vett, Old Frisian wit, Old High German wizzi knowledge, understanding,
intelligence, mind, German Witz wit, witticism, joke, Gothic unwiti ignorance), from PIE *weid- to
see, metaphorically to know (see vision). Related to Old English witan to know (source of wit (v.)).
Meaning ability to connect ideas and express them in an amusing way is first recorded 1540s; that of
person of wit or learning is from late 15c. For nuances of usage, see humor.    A witty saying
proves nothing. [Voltaire, Diner du Comte de Boulainvilliers]   <hr />   Wit ought to be five or six
degrees above the ideas that form the intelligence of an audience. [Stendhal, Life of Henry Brulard]
Witjar was old slang (18c.) for head, skull. Witling (1690s) was a pretender to wit.


