humus (n.)

1796, from Latin humus earth, soil, probably from humi on the ground, from PIE *dhghem- earth
(source also of Latin humilis low; see chthonic). Related: Humous (adj.).


inhume (v.)

c.1600 (implied in inhumed), from Latin inhumare to bury, literally to put into the ground, from in-
in (see in- (2)) + humus earth, soil (see humus).


hummus (n.)

1955, from Turkish humus mashed chick peas.


humid (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French humide or directly from Latin humidus moist, wet, variant (probably by
influence of humus earth) of umidus, from umere be moist, from PIE *wegw- wet.


Semele

daughter of Cadmus and mother of Dionysus, from Latin, from Greek Semele, a Thraco-Phrygian earth
goddess, from Phrygian Zemele mother of the earth, probably cognate with Old Church Slavonic zemlja
earth, Latin humus earth, ground, soil (see chthonic).


exhume (v.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin exhumare to unearth (13c.), from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) + humare
bury, from humus earth (see chthonic). An alternative form was exhumate (1540s), taken directly from
Medieval Latin. Related: Exhumed; exhuming.


Adam

masc. proper name, Biblical name of the first man, progenitor of the human race, from Hebrew adam
man, literally (the one formed from the) ground (Hebrew adamah ground); compare Latin homo man,
humanus human, humus earth, ground, soil. To not know (someone) from Adam not know him at all is
first recorded 1784.


chthonic (adj.)

1882, with suffix -ic, from Greek khthonios of the earth, in the earth, from khthon the earth, solid
surface of the earth (mostly poetic) from PIE root *dhghem- (cognates: Greek khamai on the ground,
first element in chameleon; also Latin humus earth, soil, humilis low; Lithuanian &#382;eme, Old
Church Slavonic zemlja earth; Sanskrit ksam- earth (opposed to sky); Old Irish du, genitive don
place, earlier earth).


humble (adj.)

mid-13c., from Old French humble, earlier humele, from Latin humilis lowly, humble, literally on the
ground, from humus earth. Senses of not self-asserting and of low birth or rank were both in Middle
English Related: Humbly; humbleness.Don't be so humble; you're not that great. [Golda Meir]To eat
humble pie (1830) is from umble pie (1640s), pie made from umbles edible inner parts of an animal
(especially deer), considered a low-class food. The similar sense of similar-sounding words (the h
of humble was not pronounced then) converged in the pun. Umbles, meanwhile, is Middle English
numbles offal (with loss of n- through assimilation into preceding article).


human (adj.)

mid-15c., humain, humaigne, from Old French humain, umain (adj.) of or belonging to man (12c.), from
Latin humanus of man, human, also humane, philanthropic, kind, gentle, polite; learned, refined,
civilized, probably related to homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus) and to humus earth, on
notion of earthly beings, as opposed to the gods (compare Hebrew adam man, from adamah ground).
Cognate with Old Lithuanian zmuo (accusative zmuni) man, male person.    As a noun, from 1530s. Its
Old English cognate guma (from Proto-Germanic *guman-) survives only in disguise in bridegroom.
Related: Humanness. Human rights attested by 1680s; human being by 1690s. Human relations is from
1916; human resources attested by 1907, American English, apparently originally among social
Christians and drawn from natural resources.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


