hut (n.)

1650s, from French hutte cottage (16c.), from Middle High German h&uuml;tte cottage, hut, probably
from Proto-Germanic *hudjon-, related to the root of Old English hydan to hide, from PIE *keudh-,
from root (s)keu- (see hide (n.1)). Apparently first in English as a military word. Old Saxon hutta,
Danish hytte, Swedish hytta, Frisian and Middle Dutch hutte, Dutch hut are from High German.


hutch (n.)

c.1200, storage chest (also applied to the biblical ark of God), from Old French huche, from
Medieval Latin hutica chest, of uncertain origin. Sense of cupboard for food or dishes first
recorded 1670s; that of box-like pen for an animal is from c.1600.


Hutterite

1640s, in reference to Moravian Anabaptist sect established by Jacob Hutter (d.1536) + -ite (1).


chute (n.1)

1725, American English, fall of water (earlier shoot, 1610s), from French chute fall, from Old
French cheoite a fall, fem. past participle of cheoir to fall, from Latin cadere (see case (n.1)).
Meaning inclined tube, trough is from 1804; that of narrow passage for cattle, etc. first recorded
1881. In North America, absorbing some senses of similar-sounding shoot (n.1).


chute (n.2)

short for parachute (n.), attested from 1920.


chutney (n.)

1813, from Hindi chatni.


chutzpah (n.)

also hutzpah, 1892, from Yiddish khutspe impudence, gall. from Hebrew hutspah. The classic
definition is that given by Leo Rosten: that quality enshrined in a man who, having killed his
mother and father, throws himself on the mercy of the court because he is an orphan.


parachute (n.)

1784 (the year the use of one first was attempted, in Paris), from French parachute, literally that
which protects against a fall, hybrid coined by French aeronaut Fran&ccedil;ois Blanchard
(1753-1809) from para- defense against (see para- (2)) + chute a fall (see chute).    PARACHUTE, a
kind of large and strong umbrella, contrived to break a person's fall from an airballoon, should any
accident happen to the balloon at a high elevation. [Supplement to the Encyclopaedia or Dictionary
of Arts and Sciences, Philadelphia, 1803]


parachute (v.)

1807, from parachute (n.). Related: Parachuted; parachuting.


Quonset hut

1942, from Quonset Point Naval Air Station, Rhode Island, where this type of structure was first
built, 1941. The place name is from a southern New England Algonquian language and perhaps means
small, long place.


Schutzstaffel

internal security force of Nazi Germany, 1930, German, literally defense squadron. Better known by
its initials, S.S.


shut (v.)

Old English scyttan to put (a bolt) in place so as to fasten a door or gate, bolt, shut to;
discharge, pay off, from West Germanic *skutjan (cognates: Old Frisian schetta, Middle Dutch
schutten to shut, shut up, obstruct), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot (v.)).
Related: Shutting.    Meaning to close by folding or bringing together is from mid-14c. Meaning
prevent ingress and egress is from mid-14c. Sense of to set (someone) free (from) (c.1500) is
obsolete except in dialectal phrases such as to get shut of. To shut (one's) mouth desist from
speaking is recorded from mid-14c.


shut up (v.)

c.1400, keep from view or use, from shut (v.) + up (adv.). Meaning cause to stop talking is from
1814; intransitive meaning cease from speaking is from 1840.


shut-eye (n.)

colloquial for sleep, 1899, from shut (v.) + eye (n.). Hans Christian Andersen's Ole Shut-eye, about
a being who makes children sleepy, came out 1842; The Shut-Eye Train popular children's poem by
Eugene Field, is from 1896.


shut-in (n.)

person confined from normal social intercourse, 1904, from the verbal phrase, from shut (v.) + in
(adv.).


shutdown (n.)

also shut-down, 1884, of factories, etc.; 1911 of machines; from shut (v.) + down (adv.).


shute (n.)

1790, channel, trough, dialectal combination of chute and shoot (n.1).


shutout (n.)

also shut-out, 1889 in baseball sense, from verbal phrase shut out exclude from a situation (late
14c.; from 1881 in the sports score sense), from shut (v.) + out (adv.). Middle English had a verb
outshut to shut out, exclude, mid-15c.


shutter (v.)

1826, from shutter (n.). Related: Shuttered; shuttering.


shutter (n.)

1540s, one who shuts (see shut (v.)); meaning movable wooden or iron screen for a window is from
1680s. Photographic sense of device for opening and closing the aperture of a lens is from 1862.


shutter-bug (n.)

enthusiastic amateur photographer, 1940, from shutter (n.) + bug (n.) in the enthusiast sense.


shuttle (n.)

Old English scytel a dart, arrow, from Proto-Germanic *skutilaz (cognates: Old Norse skutill
harpoon), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see shoot (v.)). The original
sense in English is obsolete; the weaving instrument so called (mid-14c.) from being shot across the
threads. Sense of train that runs back and forth is first recorded 1895, from image of the weaver's
instrument's back-and-forth movement over the warp; extended to aircraft 1942, to spacecraft 1969.
In some other languages, the weaving instrument takes its name from its resemblance to a boat (Latin
navicula, French navette, German weberschiff).


shuttle (v.)

1550s, move rapidly to and fro, from shuttle (n.); sense of transport via a shuttle service is
recorded from 1930. Related: Shuttled; shuttling.


shuttlecock (n.)

1570s, from shuttle (v.) + cock (n.2).


