hybrid (n.)

c.1600, from Latin hybrida, variant of ibrida mongrel, specifically offspring of a tame sow and a
wild boar, of unknown origin but probably from Greek and somehow related to hubris. A rare word
before c.1850. The adjective is attested from 1716.


hybridity (n.)

1837, from hybrid + -ity.


hybridization (n.)

1824, from hybridize (1802, from hybrid + -ize) + -ation.


malpractice (n.)

1670s, hybrid coined from mal- + practice (n.). Also used in law for illegal action by which a
person seeks a benefit for himself while in a position of trust (1758).


monoplane (n.)

1907, a hybrid coined from mono- + second element of aeroplane. In old planes the wings formed a
single surface running across the fuselage.


automotive (adj.)

1865, in reference to some sort of helicopter-like device, a hybrid from auto- self, from Greek, +
motive (adj.), from Latin. Meaning pertaining to automobiles is from 1898.


asexual (adj.)

1830, as a term in biology, a hybrid from a- (2) not + sexual. In general contexts, attested from
1896.


interferometer (n.)

instrument for measuring the interference of light waves, 1897, a hybrid from interfere + meter (3).


oddity (n.)

1713, odd characteristic or trait, a hybrid from odd + -ity. Meaning odd person is first recorded
1748.


pesticide (n.)

1939, a hybrid coined from English pest + Latinate -cide.


antacid

1732, adjective and noun, medical hybrid from anti- + acid.


tangelo (n.)

hybrid of a tangerine and a pomelo, 1904, the word formed like the fruit.


kitchenette (n.)

1905, American English, a hybrid from kitchen + -ette.


shogunate (n.)

1871, a hybrid, from Japanese shogun + Latinate suffix -ate (1).


forefront (n.)

late 15c., a Germanic-Latin hybrid, from fore- + front (n.). Originally of buildings; the main
modern sense is from military meaning front rank of an army (1510s).


monorail (n.)

1897, a hybrid coined from mono- + rail (n.1).


calorimeter (n.)

1794, from calorie + -meter. A hybrid word.


disbelief (n.)

1670s; see dis- + belief. A Latin-Germanic hybrid.


papilloma (n.)

1866, a modern Latin hybrid from papilla + -oma.


oscilloscope (n.)

instrument for visually recording an electrical wave, 1915, a hybrid formed from Latin oscillare to
swing (see oscillation) + -scope.


highboy (n.)

tall chest of drawers, 1891, American English (see tallboy); a hybrid, the second element is from
French bois wood (see bush).


novelist (n.)

writer of novels, 1728, hybrid from novel (n.) + -ist. Influenced by Italian novellista. Earlier in
English, it meant an innovator (1580s).


undergraduate (n.)

1620s, a hybrid formed from under + graduate (n.). British used fem. form undergraduette in 1920s-
30s. As an adjective, in the school sense, from 1680s.


potentiometer (n.)

1868, a hybrid formed from comb. form of Latin potentia power (see potential) + Greek-derived
-meter.


machinist (n.)

1706, engineer, mechanical inventor, a hybrid from machine (n.) + -ist. Meaning machine operator is
attested from 1879.


nonagon (n.)

plane figure with nine sides, 1680s, a hybrid from Latin nonus ninth (see nones) + ending from
pentagon, etc.


matronymic (n.)

1794, a hybrid from Latin mater (see mother (n.1)) + Greek-based ending from patronymic. As an
adjective from 1874.


guidance (n.)

1530s, the process of directing conduct, hybrid from guide + -ance; replacing 15c. guying. In
reference to direction in school, career, marriage, etc., from 1927.


oddments (n.)

1780, a hybrid with a Latin suffix on a Germanic word, from odd (q.v.), on model of fragments.
Related: Oddment.


lowboy (n.)

chest of drawers on short legs, 1891, a hybrid from low (adj.) + French bois wood (see bush).


Iguanodon (n.)

dinosaur name, 1825, hybrid from iguana + stem of Greek odonys tooth (on model of mastodon). So
called because the fossil teeth and bones were thought to resemble those of the lizard.


hindrance (n.)

mid-15c., a hybrid from hindren, from same root as hinder (v.), on model of French-derived words in
-ance.


negroid (adj.)

1844, a hybrid, from Negro and Greek suffix -oeides like, resembling (see -oid). As a noun from
1859.


bicephalous (adj.)

1803, a hybrid from bi- + Latinized adjectival form of Greek kephale head (see cephalo-).


heirloom (n.)

early 15c., ayre lome, a hybrid from heir + loom in its original but now otherwise obsolete sense of
implement, tool. Technically, some piece of property that by will or custom passes down with the
real estate.


kinship (n.)

by 1764, from kin + -ship. A more pure word than relationship, which covers the same sense but is a
hybrid.


appendectomy (n.)

1891, a hybrid from appendix + -ectomy.


vibraphone (n.)

1926, a hybrid from vibrato + -phone.


workplace (n.)

1828, a hybrid from work (n.) + place (n.).


freightage (n.)

1690s, a hybrid word, from freight + -age.


silicosis (n.)

1881, a hybrid from silicon + -osis.


undercurrent (n.)

1660s, stream of water or air flowing beneath the surface or beneath another current, a hybrid
formed from under + current (n.). The figurative sense of suppressed or underlying character is
attested from 1817.


humanoid

1912 (adj.), an anthropological hybrid from human + -oid. As a noun, from 1925. Earlier (1906) brand
name of a type of cow's milk altered to be closer to human milk intended as food for infants.


semicolon (n.)

punctuation-mark, 1640s, a hybrid coined from Latin-derived semi- + Greek-based colon (n.1). The
mark itself was in Greek the point of interrogation.


hypersensitive (adj.)

1827, a hybrid from hyper- + sensitive. Related: Hypersensitivity.


tonsillectomy (n.)

1899, from comb. form of tonsil + -ectomy. A hybrid with a Latin front end and a Greek ending. A
correct formation all from Greek would be amygdalectomy.


travelogue (n.)

a talk on travel, 1903, a hybrid word coined by U.S. traveler Burton Holmes (1870-1958) from travel
+ Greek-derived -logue, abstracted from monologue.


midwifery (n.)

late 15c.; a hybrid from midwife + -ery.


wastage (n.)

1673, a hybrid from waste (v.) + -age.


harpist (n.)

1610s, a hybrid from harp (n.) + -ist.


