hysteria (n.)

1801, coined in medical Latin as an abstract noun from hysteric (see hysterical).


clitoridectomy (n.)

1866, from Greek klitorid- (see clitoris) + -ectomy. Originally in reference to a proposed cure for
hysteria.


profiteer (v.)

1797, but dormant in English until it was revived in World War I, from profit + -eer. From 1912 as a
noun. Related: Profiteering (1814).    Or is it simply hysteria which produces what is to-day termed
the profiteer? It is probable that the modern profiteer is the same person whom we formerly called
the grafter, the extortioner, the robber, the gouger. [Legal Aid Review, April 1920]


conversion (n.)

mid-14c., originally of religion, from French conversion, from Latin conversionem (nominative
conversatio), noun of action from past participle stem of convertere (see convert (v.)). General
sense of transformation is early 15c. Of buildings, from 1921. Conversion disorder hysteria
(attested from 1946 but said to have been coined by Freud) was in DSM-IV (1994).


chorea (n.)

1806, from Modern Latin chorea Sancti Viti St. Vitus dance (originally a mass hysteria in 15c.
Europe characterized by uncontrolled dancing); from Latin chorea a dance, from Greek khoreia dance
(see chorus). Extension to the nerve disorder is from 1620s.


libido (n.)

psychic drive or energy, usually associated with sexual instinct, 1892, carried over untranslated in
English edition of Krafft-Ebing's Psychopathia Sexualis; and used in 1909 in A.A. Brill's
translation of Freud's Selected Papers on Hysteria (Freud's use of the term led to its popularity);
from Latin libido desire, lust, from libere to be pleasing, to please, ultimately cognate with Old
English lufu (see love (n.)).


compulsion (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French compulsion, from Latin compulsionem (nominative compulsio) a driving,
urging, noun of action from past participle stem of compellere compel (see compel). Psychological
sense is from 1909 in A.A. Brill's translation of Freud's Selected Papers on Hysteria, where German
Zwangsneurose is rendered as compulsion neurosis.


vapor (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French vapour, Old French vapor moisture, vapor (13c., Modern French vapeur)
and directly from Latin vaporem (nominative vapor) a warm exhalation, steam, heat, of unknown
origin. Vapors fit of fainting, hysteria, etc. is 1660s, from medieval notion of exhalations from
the stomach or other organs affecting the brain.


witch hunt (n.)

1853 in the literal sense (witch-hunting is from 1630s), from witch (n.) + hunt (n.). The extended
sense is attested from 1919, American English, later re-popularized in reaction to Cold War anti-
Communism.    Senator [Lee S.] Overman. What do you mean by witch hunt?  Mr. [Raymond] Robins. I
mean this, Senator. You are familiar with the old witch-hunt attitude, that when people get
frightened at things and see bogies, then then get out witch proclamations, and mob action and all
kinds of hysteria takes place. [Bolshevik Propaganda, U.S. Senate subcommittee hearings, 1919]


erogenous (adj.)

formed 1889 from Greek eros sexual love (see Eros) + -genous producing. A slightly earlier variant
was erogenic (1887), from French &eacute;rog&eacute;nique. Both, as OED laments, are improperly
formed. Erogenous zone attested by 1905.    In this connection reference may be made to the well-
known fact that in some hysterical subjects there are so-called erogenous zones simple pressure on
which suffices to evoke the complete orgasm. There is, perhaps, some significance, from our present
point of view, in the fact that, as emphasized by Savill (Hysterical Skin Symptoms, Lancet, January
30 1904) the skin is one of the very best places to study hysteria. [Havelock Ellis, Studies in the
Psychology of Sex, 1914]


mass (n.1)

lump, quantity, size, late 14c., from Old French masse lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot,
bar (11c.), and directly from Latin massa kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like
dough, probably from Greek maza barley cake, lump, mass, ball, related to massein to knead, from PIE
root *mag- to knead (source of Lithuanian minkyti to knead, see macerate). Sense extended in English
1580s to a large quantity, amount, or number. Strict sense in physics is from 1704.    As an
adjective from 1733, first attested in mass meeting in American English. mass culture is from 1916
in sociology (earlier in biology); mass hysteria is from 1914; mass media is from 1923; mass
movement is from 1897; mass production is from 1920; mass grave is from 1918; mass murder from 1880.


