idly (adv.)

Old English idellice; see idle + -ly (2).


yadda-yadda

and so on, 1990s, of echoic origin (compare yatata talk idly, chatter, 1940s; and yatter to talk
incessantly or idly, 1825).


chat (v.)

mid-15c., talk idly, babble, short for chatter (v.). Meaning to converse familiarly is from 1550s.
Sense of flirt with, ingratiate oneself with (in later use often with up (adv.)) is from 1898.
Related: Chatted; chatting.


fiddle (v.)

late 14c., from fiddle (n.); the figurative sense of to act nervously or idly is from 1520s.
Related: Fiddled; fiddling.


gossip (v.)

to talk idly about the affairs of others, 1620s, from gossip (n.). Related: Gossiped; gossiping.


yak (v.)

laugh, 1938, variant of yuck (2); talk idly, 1950, variant of yack. Related: Yakked; yakking.


fool (v.)

mid-14c., to be foolish, act the fool, from fool (n.). The meaning to make a fool of is recorded
from 1590s. Also as a verb 16c.-17c. was foolify. Related: Fooled; fooling. Fool around is 1875 in
the sense of pass time idly, 1970s in sense of have sexual adventures.


loll (v.)

mid-14c., lollen to lounge idly, hang loosely, perhaps related to Middle Dutch lollen to doze,
mumble, or somehow imitative of rocking or swinging. Specifically of the tongue from 1610s. Related:
Lolled; lolling. As a noun, from 1709. Grose [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785] has lollpoop A
lazy, idle drone.


jangle (v.)

c.1300, jangeln, to talk excessively, chatter, talk idly, from Old French jangler to chatter,
gossip, bawl, argue noisily (12c.), perhaps from Frankish *jangelon to jeer or some other Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch jangelen to whine). Meaning make harsh noise is first recorded late
15c. Related: Jangled; jangling.


twiddle (v.)

1540s, to trifle, of unknown origin, said to be probably imitative; of the fingers, to twirl idly,
first recorded 1670s. Figurative phrase twiddle one's thumbs have nothing to do is recorded from
1846; to twirl one's thumbs in the same sense is recorded from 1816. Related: Twiddled; twiddling.


smatter (v.)

early 15c., talk idly, chatter; talk ignorantly or superficially, of uncertain origin, perhaps
imitative. Similar forms are found in Middle High German smetern to chatter and Swedish smattra to
patter, rattle, and compare Danish snaddre chatter, jabber, Dutch snateren, German schnattern
cackle, chatter, prattle. Related: Smattered; smattering.


tattoo (n.1)

signal calling soldiers or sailors to quarters at night, 1680s, earlier tap-to (1640s), from Dutch
taptoe, from tap faucet of a cask (see tap (n.1)) + toe shut, to, from Proto-Germanic *to (see to
(prep.)). So called because police formerly visited taverns in the evening to shut off the taps of
casks [Barnhart]. In 17c. Dutch the phrase apparently was used with a transferred or figurative
sense say no more. In English, transferred sense of drumbeat is recorded from 1755. Hence, Devil's
tattoo action of idly drumming fingers in irritation or impatience (1803).


lounge (v.)

to loll idly, c.1500, Scottish, of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] from French s'allonger
(paresseusement) to lounge about, lie at full length, from Old French alongier lengthen, from Latin
longus long (see long (adj.)). Another etymology traces it through obsolete lungis (n.) slow, lazy
person (c.1560), from Middle French longis, a generic application of Longinus, supposed to be the
name of the centurion who pierced Christ's side with a spear in John xix:34. Popular etymology
associated the name directly with long (adj.). Related: Lounged; lounging.


football (n.)

open-air game, first recorded c.1400; see foot (n.) + ball (n.1). Forbidden in a Scottish statute of
1424. The first reference to the ball itself is late 15c. Figurative sense of something idly kicked
around is first recorded 1530s. Ball-kicking games date back to the Roman legions, at least, but the
sport seems to have risen to a national obsession in England, c.1630. Rules first regularized at
Cambridge, 1848; soccer (q.v.) split off in 1863.    The U.S. style (known to some in England as
stop-start rugby with padding) evolved gradually 19c.; the first true collegiate game is considered
to have been played Nov. 6, 1869, between Princeton and Rutgers, at Rutgers, but the rules there
were more like soccer. A rematch at Princeton Nov. 13, with the home team's rules, was true U.S.
football. The earliest recorded application of the word football to this is from 1881.


