imp (n.)

Old English impe, impa young shoot, graft, from impian to graft, probably an early West Germanic
borrowing from Vulgar Latin *imptus, from Late Latin impotus implanted, from Greek emphytos, verbal
adjective formed from emphyein implant, from em- in + phyein to plant (see physic).    Sense of
child, offspring (late 14c.) came from transfer of word from plants to people, with notion of
newness preserved. Modern meaning little devil (1580s) is from common use in pejorative phrases like
imp of Satan.Suche appereth as aungelles, but in very dede they be ymps of serpentes. [The
Pilgrimage of Perfection, 1526]


impact (v.)

c. 1600, press closely into something, from Latin impactus, past participle of impingere to push
into, dash against, thrust at (see impinge). Originally sense preserved in impacted teeth (1876).
Sense of strike forcefully against something first recorded 1916. Figurative sense of have a
forceful effect on is from 1935. Related: Impacting.


impact (n.)

1781, collision, from impact (v.). Figurative sense of forceful impression is from 1817 (Coleridge).


impactful (adj.)

1968, from impact + -ful. Related: Impactfully; impactfulness.


impaction (n.)

1739, from Latin impactionem (nominative impactio) a striking against, noun of action from past
participle stem of impingere (see impinge).


impair (v.)

late 14c., earlier ampayre, apeyre (c. 1300), from Old French empeirier (Modern French empirer),
from Vulgar Latin *impeiorare make worse, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Late
Latin peiorare make worse (see pejorative). In reference to driving under the influence of alcohol,
first recorded 1951 in Canadian English. Related: Impaired; impairing.


impairment (n.)

mid-14c., emparement, from Old French empeirement, from empeirier (see impair). Re-Latinized
spelling is from 1610s.


impala (n.)

1875, from Zulu im-pala gazelle.


impale (v.)

1520s, to enclose with stakes, fence in, from Middle French empaler and directly from Medieval Latin
impalare to push onto a stake, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Latin palus a
stake, prop, stay; wooden post, pole, from PIE *pak-slo-, from root *pag-/*pak- to fasten (see
pact). Sense of pierce with a pointed stake (as torture or punishment) first recorded 1610s.
Related: Impaled; impaling.


impalement (n.)

1590s, from French empalement, from empaler (see impale).


impalpable (adj.)

c. 1500, from French impalpable, from Medieval Latin impalpabilis, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + palpabilis (see palpable). Figurative use from 1774. Related:
Impalpably; impalpability.


impanate (adj.)

present in the (consecrated) bread, 1540s, from Church Latin impanatus, past participle of impanare
to embody in bread, from assmiliated form of in- in, into (see in- (2)) + panis bread (see food).


impart (v.)

early 15c., to give a part of (one's possessions); late 15c., to share, take part, from Old French
impartir (14c.), from Late Latin impartire (also impertire) to share in, divide with another,
communicate, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + partire to divide, part (see part
(v.)). Related: Imparted; imparting.


impartial (adj.)

formed in English 1590s from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + partial. First recorded
in Richard II.


impartiality (n.)

1610s; see impartial + -ity.


impassable (adj.)

that cannot be passed, 1560s, from im- + passable.


impasse (n.)

1851, blind alley, from French impasse impassable road, blind alley, impasse, from assimilated form
of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Middle French passe a passing, from passer to pass (see pass
(v.)). Supposedly coined by Voltaire as a euphemism for cul de sac. Figurative use also from 1851.


impassible (adj.)

incapable of feeling pain, exempt from suffering, mid-14c., from Old French impassible (13c.), from
Church Latin impassibilis incapable of passion, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + passibilis, from passio suffering (see passion). Related: Impassibility.


impassion (v.)

1590s, from Italian impassionare to fill with passion, from im- in, into (see im-) + passione
passion, from Latin passionem (see passion). Related: Impassioned.


impassionate (adj.)

free from passion, 1620s, from in- (1) not + passionate. Related: Impassionately.


impassioned (adj.)

c. 1600, past participle adjective from impassion.


impassive (adj.)

1660s, not feeling pain, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + passive.
Meaning void of emotions is from 1690s. Related: Impassively; impassiveness (1640s).


impassivity (n.)

1794, from impassive + -ity.


impasto (n.)

laying on of colors thickly, 1784, from Italian impasto, noun of action from impastare to raise
paste; to put in paste, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + pasta paste (see
pasta).


impatience (n.)

c. 1200, from Old French impacience (Modern French impatience) and directly from Latin impatientia,
from impatiens (see impatient).


impatient (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French impacient (Modern French impatient), from Latin impatientem (nominative
impatiens) that cannot bear, intolerant, impatient, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + patiens (see patience). Related: Impatiently.


impeach (v.)

late 14c., to impede, hinder, prevent, from Anglo-French empecher, Old French empeechier hinder
(12c., Modern French emp&ecirc;cher), from Late Latin impedicare to fetter, catch, entangle, from
assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Latin pedica shackle, from pes (genitive pedis)
foot, from PIE root *ped- (1) a foot (see foot (n.)). Sense of accuse a public officer of misconduct
first recorded 1560s, perhaps via confusion with Latin impetere attack, accuse. Related: Impeached;
impeaching.


impeachable (adj.)

c. 1500, from impeach + -able.  Related: impeachably; impeachability.


impeachment (n.)

late 14c., enpechement accusation, charge, from Old French empechement, from empeechier (see
impeach). As a judicial proceeding against a public official, from 1640s.


impeccable (adj.)

1530s, not capable of sin, from Middle French impeccable (15c.) or directly from Late Latin
impeccabilis not liable to sin, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + pecare
to sin, of unknown origin. Meaning faultless is from 1610s. Related: Impeccably.


impecunious (adj.)

lacking in money, 1590s, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Latin
pecuniosus rich, from pecunia money, property (see pecuniary). Related: Impecuniously;
impecuniosity.


impedance (n.)

1886, from impede + -ance.


impede (v.)

c. 1600, back-formation from impediment, or else from Latin impedire impede, be in the way, hinder,
detain, literally to shackle the feet (see impediment). Related: Impeded; impedes; impeding.


impediment (n.)

c. 1400, from Latin impedimentem hindrance, from impedire impede, literally to shackle the feet,
from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + pes (genitive pedis) foot, from PIE root *ped-
(1) a foot (see foot (n.)).


impedimenta (n.)

traveling equipment, c. 1600, from Latin impedimenta luggage, baggage, literally that by which one
is impeded; plural of impedimentum (see impediment).


impel (v.)

early 15c., from Latin impellere to push, strike against, drive forward, urge on, from assimilated
form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pellere to push, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Related:
Impelled; impelling.


impeller (n.)

1680s, agent noun from impel (v.). As a machine part from 1890.


impend (v.)

1590s, from figurative use of Latin impendere to hang over, to be imminent, from assimilated form of
in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pendere hang (see pendant). Related: Impended; impending.


impendent

1590s, from Latin impendens impending, present participle of impendere (see impend).


impenetrable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French impenetrable, from Latin impenetrabilis that cannot be penetrated, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + penetrabilis penetrable (see penetrate).
Related: Impenetrably; impenetrability.


impenitence (n.)

1620s, from Latin impaenitentia, from impaenitens (see impenitent). Impenitency is from 1560s.


impenitent (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin impaenitentem, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
paenitens (see penitence).


imperative (adj.)

1520s, from Late Latin imperativus pertaining to a command, from imperatus commanded, past
participle of imperare to command, to requisition, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in-
(2)) + parare prepare (see pare).


imperative (n.)

mid-15c., in grammar; later something imperative (c. 1600), from Old French imperatif and directly
from Late Latin imperativus (see imperative (adj.)).


imperator (n.)

commander-in-chief, Latin agent noun from stem of imperare to command (see imperative). In the Roman
republic, a commander; in the Roman Empire, the emperor.


imperceptibility (n.)

1670s, from imperceptible + -ity.


imperceptible (adj.)

early 15c., from French imperceptible (early 15c.), from Medieval Latin imperceptibilis, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + perceptibilis (see perceptible). Related:
Imperceptibly. OED marks imperceivable as Now rare.


imperfect (adj.)

mid-14c., imperfite, from Old French imparfait, from Latin imperfectus unfinished, incomplete, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + perfectus (see perfect). Replaced mid-16c.
by the Latin form. Related: Imperfectly.


imperfection (n.)

late 14c., from Old French imperfeccion (12c.) and directly from Late Latin imperfectionem
(nominative imperfectio), from imperfectus (see imperfect).


imperforate (adj.)

1670s, from im- + perforate (adj.).


