impairment (n.)

mid-14c., emparement, from Old French empeirement, from empeirier (see impair). Re-Latinized
spelling is from 1610s.


impair (v.)

late 14c., earlier ampayre, apeyre (c.1300), from Old French empeirier (Modern French empirer), from
Vulgar Latin *impeiorare make worse, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Late
Latin peiorare make worse (see pejorative). In reference to driving under the influence of alcohol,
first recorded 1951 in Canadian English. Related: Impaired; impairing.


superannuate (v.)

1640s, render obsolete, back-formation from superannuated. Meaning impair or disqualify by old age
is from 1690s. Related: Superannuating.


unimpaired (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of impair (v.). Rare before c.1760.


derogate (v.)

early 15c., impair (authority); disparage (reputation), from Latin derogatus, past participle of
derogare diminish (see derogatory).


corrupt (v.)

mid-14c., contaminate, impair the purity of, from Latin corruptus, past participle of corrumpere
(see corrupt (adj.)). Late 14c. as pervert the meaning of, also putrefy. Related: Corrupted;
corrupting.


detriment (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;triment or directly from Latin detrimentum a rubbing off; a
loss, damage, defeat, from past participle stem of detere to wear away, figuratively to weaken,
impair, from de- away (see de-) + terere to rub, wear (see throw (v.)).


pejorative (adj.)

depreciative, disparaging, 1888, from French p&eacute;joratif, from Late Latin peiorat-, past
participle stem of peiorare make worse, from Latin peior worse, related to pessimus worst, pessum
downward, to the ground, from PIE *ped-yos-, comparative of root *ped- to walk, stumble, impair (see
peccadillo). As a noun from 1882. English had a verb pejorate to worsen from 1640s.


hinder (v.)

Old English hindrian to harm, injure, impair, check, repress, from Proto-Germanic *hinderojan
(cognates: Old Norse hindra, Dutch hinderen, Old High German hintaron, German hindern to keep back),
from a root meaning on that side of, behind (see hind (adj.)); thus the ground sense is to put or
keep back, though this sense in English is recorded only from late 14c. Related: Hindered;
hindering.


blemish (v.)

early 14c., to hurt, damage, from Old French blemiss- to turn pale, extended stem of blemir, blesmir
to make pale; stain, discolor, also to injure (13c., Modern French bl&ecirc;mir), probably from
Frankish *blesmjan to cause to turn pale, or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *blas
shining, white, from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)).    The order of
appearance of senses in Middle English is hurt, damage; impair morally, sully (late 14c.); mar,
spoil, injure (early 15c.); to mar the beauty or soundness of (mid-15c.). Related: Blemished;
blemishing.


shake (v.)

Old English sceacan move (something) quickly to and fro, brandish; move the body or a part of it
rapidly back and forth; also go, glide, hasten, flee, depart (related to sceacdom flight); of
persons or parts of the body, to tremble especially from fever, cold, fear (class VI strong verb;
past tense scoc, past participle scacen), from Proto-Germanic *skakanan (cognates: Old Norse,
Swedish skaka, Danish skage to shift, turn, veer). No certain cognates outside Germanic, but some
suggest a possible connection to Sanskrit khaj to agitate, churn, stir about, Old Church Slavonic
skoku a leap, bound, Welsh ysgogi move.    Of the earth in earthquakes, c.1300. Meaning seize and
shake (someone or something else) is from early 14c. In reference to mixing ingredients, etc., by
shaking a container from late 14c. Meaning to rid oneself of by abrupt twists is from c.1200, also
in Middle English in reference to evading responsibility, etc. Meaning weaken, impair is from late
14c., on notion of make unstable.    To shake hands dates from 1530s. Shake a (loose) leg hurry up
first recorded 1904; shake a heel (sometimes foot) was an old way to say to dance (1660s); to shake
(one's) elbow (1620s) meant to gamble at dice. Phrase more _____ than you can shake a stick at is
attested from 1818, American English. To shake (one's) head as a sign of disapproval is recorded
from c.1300.


