impede (v.)

c.1600, back-formation from impediment, or else from Latin impedire impede, be in the way, hinder,
detain, literally to shackle the feet (see impediment). Related: Impeded; impedes; impeding.


unimpeded (adj.)

1760, from un- (1) not + past participle of impede (v.).


impedance (n.)

1886, from impede + -ance.


hamper (n.2)

1835, things important for a ship but in the way at certain times (Klein's definition), from French
hamper to impede. Hence top hamper, originally upper masts, spars, rigging, etc. of a sailing ship.


impediment (n.)

c.1400, from Latin impedimentem hindrance, from impedire impede, literally to shackle the feet, from
assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)).


embargo (n.)

1590s, from Spanish embargo seizure, embargo, noun of action from embargar restrain impede, from
Vulgar Latin *imbarricare, from in- into, upon (see in- (2)) + *barra (see bar (n.1)). As a verb,
from 1640s. Related: Embargoed.


preclude (v.)

1610s, from Latin praecludere to close, shut off; hinder, impede, from prae- before, ahead (see
pre-) + claudere to shut (see close (v.)). Related: Precluded; precluding.


impeach (v.)

late 14c., to impede, hinder, prevent, from Anglo-French empecher, Old French empeechier hinder
(12c., Modern French emp&ecirc;cher), from Late Latin impedicare to fetter, catch, entangle, from
assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Latin pedica shackle, from pes (genitive pedis)
foot. Sense of accuse a public officer of misconduct first recorded 1560s, perhaps via confusion
with Latin impetere attack, accuse. Related: Impeached; impeaching.


dispatch (v.)

1510s, to send off in a hurry, from a word in Spanish (despachar expedite, hasten) or Italian
(dispacciare to dispatch). For first element, see dis-. The exact source of the second element has
been proposed as Vulgar Latin *pactare to fasten, fix or *pactiare, or as Latin -pedicare to entrap
(from Latin pedica shackle; see impeach); and the Spanish and Italian words seem to be related to
(perhaps opposites of) Old Proven&ccedil;al empachar impede. See OED for full discussion. Meaning to
get rid of by killing is attested from 1520s. Related: Dispatched; dispatching. As a noun, from
1540s, originally dismissal; sense of a message sent speedily is first attested 1580s.


way (n.)

Old English weg road, path; course of travel; room, space, freedom of movement; also, figuratively,
course of life especially, in plural, habits of life as regards moral, ethical, or spiritual
choices, from Proto-Germanic *wegaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Dutch weg, Old Norse vegr, Old Frisian
wei, Old High German weg, German Weg, Gothic wigs way), from PIE *wegh- to move (see weigh).    From
c.1300 as manner in which something occurs. Adverbial constructions attested since Middle English
include this way in this direction, that way in that direction, both from late 15c.; out of the way
remote (c.1300). In the way so placed as to impede is from 1560s.    From the course of life sense
comes way of life (c.1600), get (or have) one's way (1590s), have it (one's) way (1709). From the
course of travel sense comes the figurative go separate ways (1837); one way or (the) other (1550s);
have it both ways (1847); and the figurative sense of come a long way (1922).    Adverbial phrase
all the way completely, to conclusion is by 1915; sexual sense implied by 1924. Make way is from
c.1200. Ways and means resources at a person's disposal is attested from early 15c. Way out means of
exit is from 1926. Encouragement phrase way to go is short for that's the way to go.


