impetuous (adj.)

late 14c., hot-tempered, fierce, from Old French impetuos (13c.) and directly from Late Latin
impetuosus impetuous, violent, from Latin impetus attack (see impetus). Related: Impetuously;
impetuousness.


vehement (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French vehement, veement impetuous, ardent (12c.), from Latin vehementem
(nominative vehemens) impetuous, eager, violent, furious, ardent, carried away, perhaps [Barnhart]
from a lost present middle participle of vehere to carry (see vehicle). The other theory is that it
represents vehe- lacking, wanting + mens mind. Related: Vehemently.


hasty (adj.)

mid-14c., speedy, quick, by 1500s replacing or nativizing earlier hastif (c.1300) eager, impetuous,
from Old French hastif speedy, rapid; forward, advanced; rash, impetuous (12c., Modern French
h&acirc;tif), from haste (see haste). Meaning requiring haste is late 14c. (the sense in hasty
pudding, 1590s, so called because it was made quickly); that of rash is from early 15c. Related:
Hastiness. Old French also had a form hasti (for loss of terminal -f, compare joli/jolif, etc.),
which may have influenced the form of the English word.    The termination was doubtless from the
first identified with native -i, -y, from OE -ig; and it is noticeable that the other Teutonic
langs. have formed corresponding adjs. of that type: Du. haastig, Ger., Da., Sw. hastig. [OED]


heady (adj.)

late 14c., headstrong, hasty, impetuous, from head (n.) + adj. suffix -y (2). First recorded 1570s
in sense of apt to go to the head.


Rahab

name of a Biblical monster, from Hebrew rahab, literally storming, against, impetuous, from rahabh
he stormed against (compare Arabic rahiba he feared, was alarmed).


impetuosity (n.)

early 15c., violent movement, rushing, from Old French impetuosit&eacute; (13c.), from Medieval
Latin impetuositatem (nominative impetuositas), from Late Latin impetuosus (see impetuous).


pettish (adj.)

1550s, impetuous, evidently from pet (n.2) in its ill humor sense + -ish. Meaning peevish, easily
annoyed is from 1590s.    It has naturally been assoc. with PET sb.1, as being a characteristic
habit of a pet or indulged and spoiled child; but the connexion of sense is not very clear or simple
.... [OED]  Related: Pettishly; pettishness.


fervent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French fervent, from Latin ferventem (nominative fervens) boiling, hot, glowing,
figuratively violent, impetuous, furious, present participle of fervere to boil, glow, from PIE root
*bhreue- (see brew (v.)). The figurative sense of impassioned is first attested c.1400. Related:
Fervency; fervently.


moody (adj.)

Old English modig brave, proud, high-spirited, impetuous, arrogant, from Proto-Germanic *modago-
(cognates: Old Saxon modag, Dutch moedig, German mutig, Old Norse mo&#240;ugr); see mood (1) + -y
(2). Meaning subject to gloomy spells is first recorded 1590s (via a Middle English sense of angry).


haste (n.)

early 13c., from Old French haste haste, urgency, hastiness (12c., Modern French h&acirc;te), from
Frankish *haifst violence, from Proto-Germanic *haifstiz (cognates: Gothic haifsts strife, Old
English h&aelig;ste violent, vehement, impetuous). To make haste is recorded by 1530s.


ram (n.)

Old English ramm male sheep, also battering ram and the zodiac sign; earlier rom male sheep, a West
Germanic word (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Dutch, Old High German ram), of unknown
origin. Perhaps [Klein] connected with Old Norse rammr strong, Old Church Slavonic ramenu impetuous,
violent.


testy (adj.)

early 15c., impetuous, rash, altered from Middle English testif headstrong (late 14c.), from Anglo-
French testif, Old French testu (Modern French t&#234;tu) stubborn, headstrong, obstinate, literally
heady, from teste head (see tete). Meaning easily irritated, irascible is first recorded 1520s.
Related: Testily; testiness.


rapid (adj.)

1630s, moving quickly, from French rapide (17c.) and directly from Latin rapidus hasty, swift,
rapid; snatching; fierce, impetuous, from rapere hurry away, carry off, seize, plunder, from PIE
root *rep- to snatch (cognates: Greek ereptomai devour, harpazein snatch away, Lithuanian raples
tongs). Meaning happening in a short time is from 1780. Related: Rapidly; rapidness. Rapid-transit
first attested 1852, in reference to street railways; rapid eye movement is from 1906.


rash (adj.)

late 14c., nimble, quick, vigorous (early 14c. as a surname), a Scottish and northern word, perhaps
from Old English -r&aelig;sc (as in ligr&aelig;sc flash of lightning) or one of its Germanic
cognates, from Proto-Germanic *raskuz (cognates: Middle Low German rasch, Middle Dutch rasc quick,
swift, German rasch quick, fast). Related to Old English horsc quick-witted. Sense of reckless,
impetuous, heedless of consequences is attested from c.1500. Related: Rashly; rashness.


rage (n.)

c.1300, madness, insanity; fit of frenzy; anger, wrath; fierceness in battle; violence of storm,
fire, etc., from Old French rage, raige spirit, passion, rage, fury, madness (11c.), from Medieval
Latin rabia, from Latin rabies madness, rage, fury, related to rabere be mad, rave (compare rabies,
which originally had this sense), from PIE *rebh- violent, impetuous (cognates: Old English rabbian
to rage). Similarly, Welsh (cynddaredd) and Breton (kounnar) words for rage, fury originally meant
hydrophobia and are compounds based on the word for dog (Welsh ci, plural cwn; Breton ki). In
15c.-16c. it also could mean rabies. The rage fashion, vogue dates from 1785.


