in

Old English in (prep.) in, into, upon, on, at, among; about, during; inne (adv.) within, inside,
from Proto-Germanic *in (cognates: Old Frisian, Dutch, German, Gothic in, Old Norse i), from PIE *en
in (cognates: Greek en, Latin in in, into, Old Irish in, Welsh yn-, Old Church Slavonic on-). As an
adjective from 1590s.    The forms merged in Middle English. Modern sense distinction between in and
on is from later Middle English. Sense of holding power (the in party) first recorded c.1600; that
of exclusive (the in-crowd, an in-joke) is from 1907 (in-group); that of stylish, fashionable (the
in thing) is from 1960. The noun sense of influence, access (have an in with) first recorded 1929 in
American English. In-and-out copulation is attested from 1610s.


in absentia

Latin, literally in (his/her/their) absence (see absence).


in extremis

at the point of death, Latin, literally in the farthest reaches.


in like Flynn

1940s slang, said to have originated in the U.S. military, perhaps from alleged sexual exploits of
Hollywood actor Errol Flynn.


in loco parentis

Latin, literally in the place of a parent (see parent).


in medias res

Latin, literally in the midst of things (see medium).


in memoriam

Latin, literally in memory of (see memory).


in situ

Latin, literally in its (original) place or position (see situate (v.)).


in toto

Latin, as a whole, completely (see total).


in utero

Latin, literally in the uterus (see uterus).


in vitro

Latin; in a test tube, culture dish, etc.; literally in glass (see vitreous).


in vivo

Latin; within a living organism (see viva).


in&#039;t

archaic; 17c. as short for in it.


in&#039;t

archaic or poetic contraction of in it.


in- (1)

prefix meaning not, opposite of, without (also im-, il-, ir- by assimilation of -n- with following
consonant), from Latin in- not, cognate with Greek an-, Old English un-, from PIE *ne not (see un-
(1)).


in- (2)

element meaning into, in, on, upon (also im-, il-, ir- by assimilation of -n- with following
consonant), from Latin in- in (see in). In Old French this often became en-, which usually was
respelled in English to conform with Latin, but not always, which accounts for pairs like
enquire/inquire. There was a native form, which in West Saxon usually appeared as on- (as in Old
English onliehtan to enlighten), and some verbs survived into Middle English (such as inwrite to
inscribe), but all now seem to be extinct. Not related to in- (1) not, which also was a common
prefix in Latin: to the Romans impressus could mean pressed or unpressed.


in-fighting (n.)

1812, from pugilism, the practice of getting at close quarters with an opponent; see in + fighting.
Old English infiht (n.) meant brawl within a house or between members of a household.


in-joke (n.)

1964, from in + joke.


in-law (n.)

1894, anyone of a relationship not natural, abstracted from father-in-law, etc.The position of the
'in-laws' (a happy phrase which is attributed ... to her Majesty, than whom no one can be better
acquainted with the article) is often not very apt to promote happiness. [Blackwood's Magazine,
1894]The earliest recorded use of the phrase is in brother-in-law (13c.); the law is Canon Law,
which defines degrees of relationship within which marriage is prohibited.


in-migration (n.)

1942, in reference to movement within the same country, from in + migration.


in-store (adj.)

also instore, 1961, from in + store (n.). In Middle English, instore was a verb meaning to restore,
renew, from Latin instaurare.


in-transit (adj.)

1918, from in + transit.


inability (n.)

mid-15c., inhabilite, disqualification for office, from in- (1) + ability. Earlier was unability
incapability; incompetence (late 14c.). General sense by c.1500.


inable (v.)

see enable.


inaccessible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French inaccessible (14c.), from Late Latin inaccessibilis unapproachable,
from in- not (see in- (1)) + accessibilis (see accessible). Related: Inaccessibly; inaccessibility.
Earlier in same sense was unaccessible (c.1400).


inaccuracy (n.)

1701, quality or condition of being inaccurate, from inaccurate + -cy. As an example of this, by
1883.


inaccurate (adj.)

1738, from in- (1) not + accurate. Related: Inaccurately (1660s).


inaction (n.)

1707, from in- (1) not, opposite of + action.


inactive (adj.)

1725, from in- (1) not, opposite of + active.


inactivity (n.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + activity. Phrase masterly inactivity attested by 1791.


inadequacy (n.)

1764, from inadequate + -cy. Related: Inadequacies.


inadequate (adj.)

1670s; see in- (1) not, opposite of + adequate. Related: Inadequately.


inadmissible (adj.)

1776, from in- (1) not, opposite of + admissible. Related: Inadmissibility.


inadvertence (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French inadvertance (14c.), from Scholastic Latin inadvertentia, from in- not
(see in- (1)) + advertentia, from Latin advertere to direct one's attention to, literally to turn
toward (see advertise).


inadvertent (adj.)

1650s, back-formation from inadvertence.


inadvertently (adv.)

1670s, literally inattentively, hence unintentionally; see inadvertent + -ly (2).


inadvisability (n.)

1839, from inadvisable + -ity.


inadvisable (adj.)

1819, from in- (1) not, opposite of + advisable.


inalienable (adj.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + alienable (see alienate). Related: Inalienably;
Inalienability.


inamorata (n.)

female lover, 1650s, from Italian innamorata, fem. of innamorato, past participle of innamorare to
fall in love, from in in + amore love (see Amy).


inamorato (n.)

1892, masc. of inamorata (q.v.).


inane (adj.)

silly, empty-headed, 1819, earlier empty (1660s), a back-formation from inanity. Related: Inanely.


inanimate (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin inanimatus lifeless, from in- not (see in- (1)) + animatus (see
animation). The same word in 17c. also was a verb meaning to infuse with life, from the other in-
(see in- (2)).


inanition (n.)

c.1400, from Old French inanition, from Latin inanitionem (nominative inanitio) emptiness, noun of
action from past participle stem of inanire to empty, from inanis empty, void, worthless, useless,
of uncertain origin.


inanity (n.)

c.1600, emptiness, hollowness, literal and figurative, from French inanit&eacute; or directly from
Latin inanitas emptiness, empty space, figuratively worthlessness, noun of quality from inanis
empty, void, worthless, useless, of uncertain origin.


inapplicable (adj.)

1650s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + applicable. Related: Inapplicably; inapplicability.


inapposite (adj.)

1620s (implied in inappositely), from in- (1) not, opposite of + apposite.


inappropriate (adj.)

1804, from in- (1) not, opposite of + appropriate (adj.). Related: Inappropriately;
inappropriateness.


inapt (adj.)

1744, from in- (1) not, opposite of + apt. Related: Inaptly; inaptness.


inaptitude (n.)

1610s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + aptitude.


