inclusive (adj.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin inclusivus, from Latin inclus-, past participle stem of includere (see
include). Related: Inclusively; inclusiveness.


all-inclusive (adj.)

1813, from all + inclusive. Related: All-inclusively; all-inclusiveness.


catholicity (n.)

1830, catholicism, from catholic + -ity. Meaning quality of being inclusive or comprehensive is by
1843.


a la carte

1826, from French &agrave; la carte, literally by the card (see card (n.)); in other words, ordered
by separate items. Distinguished from a table d'h&ocirc;te, meal served at a fixed, inclusive price.


general (adj.)

c.1200, comprehensive, inclusive, full, from Latin generalis relating to all, of a whole class
(contrasted with specialis), from genus (genitive generis) stock, kind (see genus). General store
attested by 1810, American English; a general hospital (1737) is one not restricted to one class of
persons or type of disease.


pan-

word-forming element meaning all, every, whole, all-inclusive, from Greek pan-, combining form of
pas (neuter pan, masculine and neuter genitive pantos) all, from PIE *pant- all (with derivatives
found only in Greek and Tocharian).    Commonly used as a prefix in Greek, in modern times often
with nationality names, the first example of which seems to have been Panslavism (1846). Also
panislamic (1881), pan-American (1889), pan-German (1892), pan-African (1900), pan-European (1901),
pan-Arabism (1930).


nones (n.)

early 15c., in reference to the Roman calendar, ninth day (by inclusive reckoning) before the ides
of each month (7th of March, May, July, October, 5th of other months), from Latin non&aelig;
(accusative nonas), fem. plural of nonus ninth. Ecclesiastical sense of daily office said originally
at the ninth hour of the day is from 1709; originally fixed at ninth hour from sunrise, hence about
3 p.m. (now usually somewhat earlier), from Latin nona (hora) ninth (hour), from fem. plural of
nonus ninth, contracted from *novenos, from novem nine (see nine). Also used in a sense of midday
(see noon).


octave (n.)

c.1300, utaves (plural, via Anglo-French from popular Old French form oitieve, otaves), reformed in
early 15c., from Medieval Latin octava, from Latin octava dies eighth day, fem. of octavus eighth,
from octo (see eight). Originally period of eight days after a festival, also eighth day after a
festival (counting both days, by inclusive reckoning, thus if the festival was on a Sunday, the
octaves would be the following Sunday). Verse sense of stanza of eight lines is from 1580s; musical
sense of note eight diatonic degrees above (or below) a given note is first recorded 1650s, from
Latin octava (pars) eighth part. Formerly English eighth was used in this sense (mid-15c.)


social (adj.)

late 15c., devoted to or relating to home life; 1560s as living with others, from Middle French
social (14c.) and directly from Latin socialis of companionship, of allies; united, living with
others; of marriage, conjugal, from socius companion, ally, probably originally follower, from PIE
*sokw-yo-, suffixed form of root *sekw- (1) to follow, and thus related to sequi to follow (see
sequel). Compare Old English secg, Old Norse seggr companion, which seem to have been formed on the
same notion). Related: Socially.    Sense of characterized by friendliness or geniality is from
1660s. Meaning living or liking to live with others; companionable, disposed to friendly intercourse
is from 1720s. Meaning of or pertaining to society as a natural condition of human life first
attested 1695, in Locke. Sense of pertaining to fashionable society is from 1873.  Social climber is
from 1893; social work is 1890; social worker 1886. Social drinking first attested 1807. Social
studies as an inclusive term for history, geography, economics, etc., is attested from 1916. Social
security system of state support for needy citizens is attested from 1907 (the Social Security Act
was passed by U.S. Congress in 1935). Social butterfly is from 1867, in figurative reference to
flitting.   Social contract (1763) is from translations of Rousseau. Social Darwinism attested from
1887. Social engineering attested from 1899. Social science is from 1785.  In late 19c. newspapers,
social evil is prostitution. Social justice is attested by 1718; social network by 1971; social
networking by 1984; social media by 2008.


