indolent (adj.)

1660s, painless, from Late Latin indolentem (see indolence). Sense of living easily is 1710, from
French indolent. Related: Indolently.


dundrearies (n.)

1867, long, flowing whiskers, like those worn by actor E.A. Sothern (1826-1881) while playing Lord
Dundreary, witless, indolent chief character in English dramatist Tom Taylor's play Our American
Cousin (1858).


velleity (n.)

volition in the weakest form; an indolent or inactive wish, 1610s, from Medieval Latin stem of
velleitas (from Latin velle to wish, will; see will (v.)) + -ity.


faint (adj.)

c.1300, wanting in courage, now mostly in faint-hearted (mid-15c.), from Old French feint soft,
weak, sluggish, past participle of feindre hesitate, falter, be indolent, show weakness, avoid one's
duty by pretending (see feign). Sense of weak, feeble is early 14c. Meaning producing a feeble
impression upon the senses is from 1650s.


fishing (n.)

verbal noun from fish (v.), c.1300, fysschynge; figurative use from 1540s. Fishing rod (1550s) is
older than fishing pole (1791). To go fishing is as old as Old English on fisco&eth; gan.  [O]f all
diversions which ingenuity ever devised for the relief of idleness, fishing is the worst qualified
to amuse a man who is at once indolent and impatient. [Scott, Waverly, 1814]


supine (adj.)

c.1500, lying on the back, from Latin supinus bent backwards, thrown backwards, lying on the back,
figuratively inactive, indolent, from PIE *(s)up- (see sub-). The grammatical use for Latin verbal
noun formed from the past participle stem (mid-15c.) is from Late Latin supinum verbum supine verb,
perhaps so called because, though furnished with a noun case ending, it falls back on the verb.
Related: Supinely.


slack (adj.)

Old English sl&aelig;c remiss, lax, characterized by lack of energy, sluggish, indolent, languid;
slow, gentle, easy, from Proto-Germanic *slakas (cognates: Old Saxon slak, Old Norse slakr, Old High
German slah slack, Middle Dutch lac fault, lack), from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack (see lax).
Sense of not tight (in reference to things) is first recorded c.1300. As an adverb from late 14c.
Slack-key (1975) translates Hawaiian ki ho'alu. Slack water (n.) time when tide is not flowing is
from 1769. Slack-handed remiss is from 1670s. Slack-baked baked imperfectly, half-baked is from
1823; figuratively from 1840.


sluggard (n.)

late 14c., late 13c. as a surname, habitually lazy person, from Middle English sluggi sluggish,
indolent, probably from a Scandinavian word such as dialectal Norwegian slugga be sluggish,
dialectal Norwegian sluggje heavy, slow person, dialectal Swedish slogga to be slow or sluggish.
Adjective sluggy is attested in English from early 13c.    'Tis the voice of a sluggard -- I heard
him complain:  You have wak'd me too soon, I must slumber again.  [Isaac Watts, 1674-1748]   <hr />
'Tis the voice of the Lobster: I heard him declare  You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my
hair.  [Lewis Carroll (Charles L. Dodgson), 1832-1898]     As an adjective meaning sluggish, lazy
from 1590s. Related: Sluggardly.


