indulge (v.)

1630s, to grant as a favor; 1650s, of both persons and desires, to treat with unearned favor; a
back-formation from indulgence, or else from Latin indulgere to be complaisant. Related: Indulged;
indulging.


luxuriate (v.)

1620s, to indulge in luxury, from Latin luxuriatus, past participle of luxuriare have to excess,
figuratively run riot, be dissolute, indulge to excess, from luxuria excess, rankness, luxuriance
(see luxury). Related: Luxuriated; luxuriating.


overindulge (v.)

also over-indulge, 1821, from over (adv.) + indulge.


over-indulge (v.)

1741, from over- + indulge. Related: Over-indulged; over-indulging.


canoodle (v.)

to indulge in caresses and fondling endearments [OED], by 1850s, said to be U.S. slang, of uncertain
origin. The earliest known sources are British, but they tend to identify the word as American. In
the 1830s it seems to have been in use in Britain in a sense of cheat or overpower. Related:
Canoodled; canoodling.


reminisce (v.)

1829, to recollect, back-formation from reminiscence. Meaning indulge in reminiscences is from 1871.
Somewhat colloquial [OED]. Related: Reminisced; reminiscing.


surfeit (v.)

late 14c., intransitive, indulge or feed to excess, from surfeit (n.). Related: Surfeited;
surfeiting. Transitive sense from 1590s.


pander (v.)

to indulge (another), to minister to base passions, c.1600, from pander (n.). Related: Pandered;
pandering.


cosset (v.)

1650s, to fondle, caress, indulge, from a noun (1570s) meaning lamb brought up as a pet (applied to
persons from 1590s), perhaps from Old English cot-s&aelig;ta one who dwells in a cot. Related:
Coseted; coseting. Compare German Hauslamm, Italian casiccio.


doll (v.)

1867, to pet, indulge, from doll (n.). Usually with up. Meaning to dress up is from 1906, American
English. Related: Dolled; dolling.


unfavorable (adj.)

also unfavourable, mid-15c. (implied in unfavorably), from un- (1) not + favorable (adj.).    We
must not indulge in unfavorable views of mankind, since by doing it we make bad men believe that
they are no worse than others, and we teach the good that they are good in vain. [Walter Savage
Landor, Imaginary Conversations]


favor (v.)

to regard with favor, indulge, treat with partiality, mid-14c., from Old French favorer, from favor
(see favor (n.)). Related: Favored; favoring.


sentimentalize (v.)

1764, intransitive, indulge in sentiments, from sentimental + -ize. Meaning to make sentimental
(transitive) is from 1813. Related: Sentimentalized; sentimentalizing.    Think on these things, and
let S______ go to Lincoln sessions by himself, and talk classically with country justices. In the
meantime we will philosophize and sentimentalize;--the last word is a bright invention of the moment
in which it was written, for yours or Dr. Johnson's service .... [Laurence Sterne, letter to William
Combe, Esq., dated Aug. 5, 1764, published 1787]


bloviate (v.)

1857, American English, a Midwestern word for to talk aimlessly and boastingly; to indulge in 'high
falutin', according to Farmer (1890), who seems to have been the only British lexicographer to
notice it. He says it was based on blow (v.) on the model of deviate, etc.    It seems to have been
felt as outdated slang already by late 19c. (It was a leasure for him to hear the Doctor talk, or,
as it was inelegantly expressed in the phrase of the period, 'bloviate' .... [Overland Monthly, San
Francisco, 1872, describing a scene from 1860]), but it enjoyed a revival early 1920s during the
presidency of Warren G. Harding, who wrote a notoriously ornate and incomprehensible prose (e.e.
cummings eulogized him as The only man, woman or child who wrote a simple declarative sentence with
seven grammatical errors) at which time the word took on its connection with political speech; it
faded again thereafter, but, with its derivative, bloviation, it enjoyed a revival in the 2000 U.S.
election season that continued through the era of blogging.


spoil (v.)

c.1300, to strip (someone) of clothes, strip a slain enemy, from Old French espillier to strip,
plunder, pillage, from Latin spoliare to strip, uncover, lay bare; strip of clothing, rob, plunder,
pillage, from spolia, plural of spolium arms taken from an enemy, booty; originally skin stripped
from a killed animal, from PIE *spol-yo-, perhaps from root *spel- to split, to break off (see spill
(v.)).    From late 14c. in English as strip with violence, rob, pillage, plunder, dispossess;
impoverish with excessive taxation. Used c.1400 as the verb to describe Christ's harrowing of Hell.
Sense of destroy, ruin, damage so as to render useless is from 1560s; that of to over-indulge (a
child, etc.) is from 1640s (implied in spoiled). Intransitive sense of become tainted, go bad, lose
freshness is from 1690s. To be spoiling for (a fight, etc.) is from 1865, from notion that one will
spoil if he doesn't get it.


surfing (n.)

1955, verbal noun from surf (v.). The surfing craze went nationwide in U.S. from California in 1963.
Surf-board is from 1826, originally in a Hawaiian and Polynesian context. Surf music attested from
1963.    It is highly amusing to a stranger to go out into the south part of this town, some day
when the sea is rolling in heavily over the reef, and to observe there the evolutions and rapid
career of a company of surf-players. The sport is so attractive and full of wild excitement to
Hawaiians, and withal so healthful, that I cannot but hope it will be many years before civilization
shall look it out of countenance, or make it disreputable to indulge in this manly, though it be
dangerous, exercise. [the Rev. Henry T. Cheever, Life in the Sandwich Islands, New York, 1851]   <hr
/>   The basis of surfing music is a rock and roll bass beat figuration, coupled with a raunch-type
weird-sounding lead guitar plus wailing saxes. Surfing music has to sound untrained with a certain
rough flavor to appeal to the teenagers. [music publisher Murray Wilson, quoted in Billboard, June
29, 1963]


long (adj.)

that extends considerably from end to end, Old English lang long, from Proto-Germanic *langgaz
(cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon lang, Old High German and German lang, Old Norse langr, Middle
Dutch lanc, Dutch lang, Gothic laggs long).    The Germanic words are perhaps from PIE *dlonghos-
(cognates: Latin longus, Old Persian darga-, Persian dirang, Sanskrit dirghah, Greek dolikhos long,
Greek endelekhes perpetual, Latin indulgere to indulge), from root *del- long.    The adverb is from
Old English lange, longe, from the adjective. No longer not as formerly is from c.1300; to be not
long for this world soon to die is from 1714.    The word illustrates the Old English tendency for
short a to become short o before -n- (also retained in bond/band and West Midlands dialectal lond
from land and hond from hand).   Long vowels (c.1000) originally were pronounced for an extended
time. Sporting long ball is from 1744, originally in cricket. Long jump as a sporting event is
attested from 1864. A ship's long-boat so called from 1510s. Long knives, name Native Americans gave
to white settlers (originally in Virginia/Kentucky) is from 1774.  Long in the tooth (1841 of
persons) is from horses showing age by recession of gums. Long time no see, imitative of American
Indian speech, is first recorded 1900. To be long on something, have a lot of it, is from 1900,
American English slang.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


