indulgent (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin indulgentem (nominative indulgens), present participle of indulgere (see
indulgence). Related: Indulgently.


self-indulgent (adj.)

also self indulgent, 1791, from self- + indulgent. Related: Self-indulgently.


weakness (n.)

c.1300, quality of being weak, from weak + -ness. Meaning a disadvantage, vulnerability is from
1590s. That of self-indulgent fondness is from 1712; meaning thing for which one has an indulgent
fondness is from 1822.


delicate (adj.)

late 14c., self-indulgent, loving ease; delightful; sensitive, easily hurt; feeble, from Latin
delicatus alluring, delightful, dainty, also addicted to pleasure, luxurious, effeminate; of
uncertain origin; related by folk etymology (and perhaps genuinely) to deliciae a pet, and delicere
to allure, entice (see delicious). Meaning easily broken is recorded from 1560s.


spare (v.)

Old English sparian to refrain from harming, be indulgent to, allow to go free; use sparingly, from
the source of Old English sp&aelig;r sparing, frugal, from Proto-Germanic *sparaz (cognates: Old
Saxon sparon, Old Frisian sparia, Old Norse spara, Dutch sparen, Old High German sparon, German
sparen to spare). Meaning to dispense from one's own stock, give or yield up, is recorded from early
13c. Related: Spared; sparing.


indulgence (n.)

mid-14c., freeing from temporal punishment for sin, from Old French indulgence or directly from
Latin indulgentia complaisance, fondness, remission, from indulgentem (nominative indulgens)
indulgent, kind, tender, fond, present participle of indulgere be kind, yield, of unknown origin;
perhaps from in- in + derivative of PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself.    Sense of gratification of
another's desire or humor is attested from late 14c. That of yielding to one's inclinations
(technically self-indulgence) is from 1640s. In British history, Indulgence also refers to grants of
certain liberties to Nonconformists under Charles II and James II, as special favors rather than
legal rights; specifically the Declarations of Indulgence of 1672, 1687, and 1688 in England and
1669, 1672, and 1687 in Scotland.


soft (adj.)

Old English softe, earlier sefte, gentle, mild-natured; easeful, comfortable, calm, undisturbed;
luxurious, from West Germanic *samfti, from Proto-Germanic *samftijaz level, even, smooth, gentle,
soft (cognates: Old Saxon safti, Old High German semfti, German sanft; and from a variant form with
-ch- for -f-, Middle Dutch sachte, Dutch zacht, German sacht), from root *som- fitting, agreeable.
From c.1200 of material things, not stiff, not coarse, fine; yielding to weight. From late 14c. of
wind, rain, etc. Of sounds, quiet, not loud, from early 13c. Of words, mild, restrained; courteous
mid-14c. From late 14c. as indulgent, also physically feeble; easily overcome, lacking manly
courage. From 1755 of water (relatively free from mineral salts), from 1789 of coal. Meaning
foolish, simple, silly is attested from 1620s; earlier easily moved or swayed; soft-hearted,
sympathetic; docile (early 13c.). In reference to drinks, non-alcoholic from 1880. As an adverb, Old
English softe gently; late 13c. as quietly. As an interjection from 1540s.   Soft landing is from
1958 and the U.S. space program. Adjective soft-core (in reference to pornography) is from 1966 (see
hardcore). Soft rock as a music style is attested from 1969. Soft sell is from 1955. Soft-shoe as a
dancing style is attested from 1927. Soft-boiled is from 1757 of eggs; of persons, ideas, etc., 1930
(compare half-baked). Soft-focus (adj.) of camera shots is from 1917. The softer sex women
collectively is from 1640s.


