innovation (n.)

mid-15c., restoration, renewal, from Latin innovationem (nominative innovatio), noun of action from
past participle stem of innovare (see innovate).


novelty (n.)

late 14c., quality of being new, also a new manner or fashion, an innovation; something new or
unusual, from Old French novelet&eacute; newness, innovation, change; news, new fashion (Modern
French nouveaut&eacute;), from novel new (see novel (adj.)). Meaning newness is attested from late
14c.; sense of useless but amusing object is attested from 1901 (as in novelty shop, 1973).


Levis (n.)

1926, American English, originally Levi's, from Levi Strauss and Company, original manufacturer.
Strauss' innovation was the copper rivets at strain points. A cowboy's accessory, adopted as a
fashion c.1940s.


neologism (n.)

practice of innovation in language, 1772 (in a translation from French), from French
n&eacute;ologisme, from neo- (see neo-) + Greek logos word (see lecture (n.)) + -ism. Meaning new
word or expression is from 1803. Neological is attested from 1754.


whiskey (n.)

1715, from Gaelic uisge beatha whisky, literally water of life, from Old Irish uisce water (from PIE
*ud-skio-, from root *wed- (1) water, wet; see water (n.1)) + bethu life (from PIE *gwi-wo-tut-,
suffixed form of *gwi-wo-, from root *gweie- (1) to live; see bio-).    According to Barnhart, the
Gaelic is probably a loan-translation of Medieval Latin aqua vitae, which had been applied to
intoxicating drinks since early 14c. (compare French eau de vie brandy). Other early spellings in
English include usquebea (1706) and iskie bae (1580s). In Ireland and Scotland obtained from malt;
in the U.S. commonly made from corn or rye. Spelling distinction between Scotch whisky and Irish and
American whiskey is a 19c. innovation. Whisky sour is recorded from 1889.


progressive (adj.)

c.1600, characterized by advancement (in action, character, etc.), from progress (n.) + -ive, or
else from French progressif, from past participle stem of Latin progredi. Of taxation, from 1889; of
jazz, from 1947. Meaning characterized by striving for change and innovation, avant-garde, liberal
is from 1908.    In the socio-political sense favoring reform; radically liberal, it emerged in
various British contexts from the 1880s; in the U.S. it was active as a movement in the 1890s and a
generation thereafter, the name being taken again from time to time, most recently by some more
liberal Democrats and other social activists, by c.2000. The noun in the sense one who favors social
and political change in the name of progress is first attested 1865 (originally in Christianity).
Earlier in a like sense were progressionist (1849, adjective; 1884, noun), progressist (1848).
Related: Progressively; progressiveness.


truth (n.)

Old English triew&eth; (West Saxon), treow&eth; (Mercian) faith, faithfulness, fidelity, loyalty;
veracity, quality of being true; pledge, covenant, from triewe, treowe faithful (see true (adj.)),
with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Sense of something that is true is
first recorded mid-14c. Meaning accuracy, correctness is from 1560s. English and most other IE
languages do not have a primary verb for for speak the truth, as a contrast to lie (v.). Truth squad
in U.S. political sense first attested in the 1952 U.S. presidential election campaign.    At
midweek the Republican campaign was bolstered by an innovation--the truth squad ..., a team of
senators who trailed whistle-stopping Harry Truman to field what they denounced as his wild pitches.
[Life, Oct. 13, 1952]   <hr />   Let [Truth] and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to the
worse, in a free and open encounter. [Milton, Areopagitica, 1644]


