insipid (adj.)

1610s, without taste or perceptible flavor, from French insipide (16c.), from Late Latin inspidus
tasteless, from Latin in- not (see in- (1)) + sapidus tasty, from sapere have a taste (also be wise;
see sapient). Figurative meaning uninteresting, dull first recorded 1640s, but it was also a
secondary sense in Medieval Latin.In ye coach ... went Mrs. Barlow, the King's mistress and mother
to ye Duke of Monmouth, a browne, beautifull, bold, but insipid creature. [John Evelyn, diary, Aug.
18, 1649]  Related: Insipidly.


insipidity (n.)

c.1600, from insipid + -ity.


vapid (adj.)

1650s, flat, insipid (of drinks), from Latin vapidus flat, insipid, literally that has exhaled its
vapor, related to vappa stale wine, and probably to vapor vapor. Applied from 1758 to talk and
writing deemed dull and lifeless. Related: Vapidly; vapidness.


jejune (adj.)

1610s, dull in the mind, flat, insipid, from Latin ieiunus empty, dry, barren, literally fasting,
hungry, of obscure origin.


fatuous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin fatuus foolish, insipid, silly; of uncertain origin (Buck suggests originally
stricken in the head). Related: Fatuously; fatuousness.


Byronic (adj.)

1823, pertaining to or resembling British poet George Gordon, 6th Baron Byron (1788-1824).
Perfect she was, but as perfection is  Insipid in this naughty world of ours,  Where our first
parents never learn'd to kiss  Till they were exiled from their earlier bowers,  Where all was
peace, and innocence, and bliss  (I wonder how they got through the twelve hours),  Don Jose like a
lineal son of Eve,  Went plucking various fruit without her leave.  [from Don Juan]


unsavory (adj.)

also unsavoury, early 13c., tasteless, insipid, from un- (1) not + savory (adj.). Meaning unpleasant
or disagreeable to the taste is attested from late 14c.; of persons, from c.1400. Related:
Unsavoriness.


fatuity (n.)

1530s, from Middle French fatuit&eacute; (14c.), from Latin fatuitatem (nominative fatuitas)
foolishness, from fatuus foolish, insipid, of uncertain origin.


sapid (adj.)

1630s, from Latin sapidus savory, having a taste, from sapere (see sapient). Its opposite is
insipid.


tasteless (adj.)

1590s, unable to taste; c.1600, uninteresting, insipid (figurative); 1610s, having no taste; 1670s,
tactless; from taste (n.) + -less. Related: Tastelessly; tastelessness.


fade (v.)

early 14c., lose brightness, grow pale, from Old French fader become weak, wilt, wither, from adj.
fade pale, weak, insipid (12c.), probably from Vulgar Latin *fatidus, some sort of blending of Latin
fatuus silly, tasteless + vapidus flat, flavorless. Related: Faded; fading. As a noun, from c.1300.


tame (adj.)

early Middle English tame in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior
(c.1200); of animals domesticated, reclaimed from wildness, also, of persons, meek, gentle-natured,
compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities (mid-13c.), from oblique forms of Old English
tom, tam domesticated, docile, from Proto-Germanic *tamaz (cognates: Old Norse tamr, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch tam, Old High German zam, German zahm tame, Gothic tamjan
to tame), from PIE *deme- to constrain, to force, to break (horses) (cognates: Sanskrit damayati
tames; Persian dam a tame animal; Greek daman to tame, subdue, dmetos tame; Latin domare to tame,
subdue; Old Irish damnaim I tie up, fasten, I tame, subdue).    A possible ulterior connection is
with PIE *dem- house, household (see domestic (adj.)). Meaning spiritless, weak, dull, uninspiring,
insipid is recorded from c.1600. Related: Tamely; tameness.


