insolent (adj.)

late 14c., contemptuous, arrogant, haughty, from Latin insolentem (nominative insolens) arrogant,
immoderate, literally unusual, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + solentem, present
participle of solere be accustomed, which possibly is related to sodalis close companion, and to
suescere become used to. Meaning contemptuous of rightful authority is from 1670s. Related:
Insolently.


insolence (n.)

late 14c., from Latin insolentia unusualness, haughtiness, arrogance, from insolentem (see
insolent).


swagger (v.)

1580s, to strut in a defiant or insolent manner; earliest recorded usages are in Shakespeare
(Midsummer Night's Dream, 2 Henry IV, King Lear), probably a frequentative form of swag (v.) to
sway. Meaning to boast or brag is from 1590s. Related: Swaggered; swaggering. The noun is attested
from 1725.


fresh (adj.2)

impudent, presumptuous, 1848, U.S. slang, probably from German frech insolent, cheeky, from Old High
German freh covetous, related to Old English frec greedy, bold (see freak (n.)).


contumacious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin contumaci-, stem of contumax haughty, insolent, obstinate (see contumely) + -ous.


overweening (adj.)

mid-14c., from present participle of verb overwenen be conceited, presume, be presumptuous, be over-
confident, from Old English oferwenian to be proud, become insolent or presumptuous; see over- +
ween.


hubristic (adj.)

also hybristic, 1831, from Greek hybristikos given to wantonness, insolent, from hybrizein, related
to hybris (see hubris).


obsolete (adj.)

1570s, from Latin obsoletus grown old, worn out, past participle of obsolescere fall into disuse,
probably from ob away (see ob-) + an expanded form of solere to be used to, be accustomed (see
insolent).


arrogant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French arrogant (14c.), from Latin arrogantem (nominative arrogans) assuming,
overbearing, insolent, present participle of arrogare (see arrogance). Related: Arrogantly.


superb (adj.)

1540s, noble, magnificent (of buildings, etc.), from Latin superbus grand, proud, splendid; haughty,
vain, insolent, from super above, over (see super-). The second element perhaps is from PIE root
*bhe- to be. General sense of very fine developed by 1729. Related: Superbious (c.1500); superbly.


rudesby (n.)

insolent person, 1560s, mock surname from rude + -by, common place-name (and thus surname) ending
element, as in Grimsby, Rigby. Similar formations in idlesby, sneaksby paltry, sneaking fellow
(1570s), suresby.


arrogance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French arrogance (12c.), from Latin arrogantia, from arrogantem (nominative
arrogans) assuming, overbearing, insolent, present participle of arrogare to claim for oneself,
assume, from ad- to (see ad-) + rogare ask, propose (see rogation).


petulant (adj.)

1590s, immodest, wanton, saucy, from Middle French petulant (mid-14c.), from Latin petulantem
(nominative petulans) wanton, froward, saucy, insolent, present participle of petere to attack,
assail; strive after; ask for, beg, beseech (see petition (n.)). Meaning peevish, irritable first
recorded 1775, probably by influence of pet (n.2). Related: Petulantly.


cheek (n.)

Old English ceace, cece jaw, jawbone, in late Old English also the fleshy wall of the mouth. Perhaps
from the root of Old English ceowan chew (see chew (v.)), or from Proto-Germanic *kaukon (cognates:
Middle Low German kake jaw, jawbone, Middle Dutch kake jaw, Dutch kaak), not found outside West
Germanic.    Words for cheek, jaw, and chin tend to run together in IE languages (compare PIE
*genw-, source of Greek genus jaw, cheek, geneion chin, and English chin); Aristotle considered the
chin as the front of the jaws and the cheeks as the back of them. The other Old English word for
cheek was ceafl (see jowl).    A thousand men he [Samson] slow eek with his hond,  And had no wepen
but an asses cheek.  [Chaucer, Monk's Tale]    In reference to the buttocks from c.1600. Sense of
insolence is from 1840, perhaps from a notion akin to that which led to jaw insolent speech, mouth
off, etc. To turn the other cheek is an allusion to Matt. v:39 and Luke vi:29.


