invalid (adj.2)

of no legal force, 1630s, from special use of Latin invalidus (see invalid (adj.1)).


invalid (n.)

1709, originally of disabled military men, from invalid (adj.1). Invalides is short for French
H&ocirc;tel des Invalides, home for old and disabled soldiers in the 7th arrondissement of Paris.


invalidity (n.)

1540s, from Latin invalidatus (see invalid (adj.)).


invalidate (v.)

1640s, from invalid + -ate (2). Related: Invalidated; invalidating.


invalid (adj.1)

not strong, infirm, 1640s, from Latin invalidus not strong, infirm, weak, feeble, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + validus strong (see valid). Specific meaning infirm from sickness, disease, or injury is
from 1640s.


annulment (n.)

late 15c., act of reducing to nothing; see annul + -ment. Meaning act of declaring invalid is
recorded from 1864.


sickly (adj.)

late 14c., ill, invalid, habitually ailing, from sick (adj.) + -ly (1). Meaning causing sickness in
any sense is from c.1600. Related: Sickliness.


avoidance (n.)

late 14c., action of emptying, from avoid + -ance. Sense of action of dodging or shunning is
recorded from early 15c.; it also meant action of making legally invalid, 1620s; becoming vacant (of
an office, etc.), mid-15c.


putative (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French putatif, from Late Latin putativus supposed, from Latin putat-, past
participle stem of putare to judge, suppose, believe, suspect, originally to clean, trim, prune (see
pave). At first especially in putative marriage, one which, though legally invalid, was contracted
in good faith by at least one party. Related: Putatively.


pabulum (n.)

food for anything, 1670s, from Latin pabulum fodder, food, nourishment, from PIE root *pa- to
protect, feed (see food) + instrumentive suffix *-dhlom.   Pablum (1932), derived from this, is a
trademark (Mead Johnson &amp; Co.) for a soft, bland cereal used as a food for infants and weak and
invalid people, hence figurative use (attested from 1970, first by U.S. Vice President Spiro Agnew)
in reference to mushy political prose.


void (adj.)

c.1300, unoccupied, vacant, from Anglo-French and Old French voide, viude empty, vast, wide, hollow,
waste, uncultivated, fallow, as a noun, opening, hole; loss, from Latin vocivos unoccupied, vacant,
related to vacuus empty (see vacuum (n.)). Meaning lacking or wanting (something) is recorded from
early 15c. Meaning legally invalid, without legal efficacy is attested from mid-15c.


vain (adj.)

c.1300, devoid of real value, idle, unprofitable, from Old French vain, vein worthless, void,
invalid, feeble; conceited (12c.), from Latin vanus empty, void, figuratively idle, fruitless, from
PIE *wa-no-, from root *eue- to leave, abandon, give out (cognates: Old English wanian to lessen,
wan deficient; Old Norse vanta to lack; Latin vacare to be empty, vastus empty, waste; Avestan va-
lack, Persian vang empty, poor; Sanskrit una- deficient, Armenian unain empty).    Meaning
conceited, elated with a high opinion of oneself first recorded 1690s in English; earlier silly,
idle, foolish (late 14c.). Phrase in vain to no effect (c.1300, after Latin in vanum) preserves the
original sense. Related: Vainly; vainness. Compare also vainglory.


