invective (n.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin invectiva abusive speech, from Late Latin invectivus abusive, from Latin
invectus, past participle of invehi to attack with words (see inveigh). For nuances of usage, see
humor. The earlier noun form was inveccion (mid-15c.).


taunt (n.)

1520s, bitter invective, probably from taunt (v.).


iambic

1570s (n.); 1580s (adj.), from Latin iambicus, from Greek iambikos, from iambos metrical foot of one
unaccented followed by one accented syllable, from iaptein to assail (in words), literally to put
forth. The meter of invective and lampoon in classical Greek from the time it was used for such by
Archilochos, 7c. B.C.E.


flame (v.)

early 14c., flamen, from Old French flamer, from flamme (see flame (n.)). The sense of unleash
invective on a computer network is from 1980s. Related: Flamed; flaming.


philippic (n.)

1590s, bitter invective discourse, from Middle French philippique, from Latin (orationes)
Philippic&aelig;, translation of Greek Philippikoi (logoi), the speeches made in Athens by
Demosthenes in 351-341 B.C.E. urging Greeks to unite and fight the rising power of Philip II of
Macedon. The Latin phrase was used of the speeches made by Cicero against Marc Antony in 44 and 43
B.C.E.


diatribe (n.)

1640s (in Latin form in English from 1580s), discourse, critical dissertation, from French diatribe
(15c.), from Latin diatriba learned discussion, from Greek diatribe employment, study, in Plato,
discourse, literally a wearing away (of time), from dia- away (see dia-) + tribein to wear, rub,
from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist (see throw (v.)). Sense of invective is 1804,
apparently from French.


dozen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French dozaine a dozen, from doze (12c.) twelve, from Latin duodecim twelve, from
duo two + decem ten (see ten).    The Old French fem. suffix -aine is characteristically added to
cardinals to form collectives in a precise sense (exactly 12, not about 12). The dozens invective
contest (1928) originated in slave culture, the custom probably African, the word probably from
bulldoze (q.v.) in its original sense of a whipping, a thrashing.


scathe (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse ska&eth;a to hurt, harm, damage, injure, from Proto-Germanic *skath-
(cognates: Old English scea&thorn;ian to hurt, injure, Old Saxon skathon, Old Frisian skethia,
Middle Dutch scaden, Dutch schaden, Old High German scadon, German schaden, Gothic sca&thorn;jan to
injure, damage), from PIE root *sket- to injure. Only cognate outside Germanic seems to be in Greek
a-skethes unharmed, unscathed.    It survives mostly in its negative form, unscathed, and in
figurative meaning sear with invective or satire (1852, usually as scathing) which developed from
the sense of scar, scorch used by Milton in Paradise Lost i.613 (1667).


smear (v.)

Old English smerian, smierwan to anoint or rub with grease, oil, etc., from Proto-Germanic *smerwjan
to spread grease on (cognates: Old Norse smyrja to anoint, rub with ointment, Danish sm&oslash;re,
Swedish sm&ouml;rja, Dutch smeren, Old High German smirwen apply salve, smear, German schmieren to
smear; Old Norse sm&#246;r butter), from PIE *smeru- grease (cognates: Greek myron unguent, balsam,
Old Irish smi(u)r marrow, Old English smeoru fat, grease, ointment, tallow, lard, suet, Lithuanian
smarsas fat).    Figurative sense of assault a public reputation with unsubstantiated charges is
from 1879. Related: Smeared; smearing. Smear-word, one used regardless of its literal meaning but
invested with invective, is from 1938.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


