jargon (n.)

mid-14c., unintelligible talk, gibberish; chattering, jabbering, from Old French jargon a chattering
(of birds), also language, speech, especially idle talk; thieves' Latin. Ultimately of echoic origin
(compare Latin garrire to chatter, English gargle). Often applied to something the speaker does not
understand, hence meaning mode of speech full of unfamiliar terms (1650s). Middle English also had
it as a verb, jargounen to chatter (late 14c.), from French.


APB

also a.p.b., 1960, police jargon initialism (acronym) for all-points bulletin, itself attested by
1953 (perhaps more in the jargon of detective novels than in actual police use).


zircon (n.)

1794, circon, also jargon, new name given in chemistry to jacinth, from French zircone and German
Zirkon (compare French jargon, Italian giargone), from Arabic zarqun cinnabar, bright red, from
Persian zargun gold-colored, from Avestan zari- gold-colored, from zar gold.


mort (n.1)

girl, woman (especially one of loose morals), 1560s, canting jargon, of unknown origin.


mum (n.1)

abbreviation of chrysanthemum, first attested 1915 in the jargon of gardeners.


sox (n.)

altered plural of sock (n.1), 1905, originally in commercial jargon.


skip (n.2)

short for skipper (n.1), 1830, originally in sports jargon (curling).


A-OK

1961, said to be an abbreviation of all (systems) OK; popularized in the jargon of U.S. astronauts.
See OK.


Republicrat (n.)

in U.S. political jargon, usually meaning moderate; independent, 1881, from elements of the names of
the two dominant parties; see from republican (n.) and democrat (n.).


off-limits (adj.)

forbidden, by 1881, U.S. military academies jargon, from off (adv.) + limit (n.). Earlier (1857) it
was applied to cadets, etc., who were in violation of the limitations on their movement and
behavior.


suss (v.)

to figure out, investigate and discover, 1966, earlier to suspect (1953, police jargon), a slang
shortening of suspect (v.). Related: Sussed.


borderline (n.)

1869, strip of land along a frontier, from border (n.) + line (n.). As an adjective meaning verging
on it is attested from 1907, originally in medical jargon.


liveware (n.)

people, 1966, computer-programmer jargon, from live (adj.) + ending abstracted from software, etc.


no-name (adj.)

1978, not having made a name in one's profession, originally American English sporting jargon, from
no + name (n.).


Chicom (adj.)

1962, American English, Cold War jargon, from Chinese + communist.


CD-ROM

1983, in computer jargon; also cd-rom; from compact disc read-only memory.


kill (n.1)

early 13c., a stroke, a blow, from kill (v.). Meaning act of killing is from 1814; that of a killed
animal is from 1878. Lawn tennis serve sense is from 1903. The kill the knockout is boxing jargon,
1950.


cheat (n.)

late 14c., forfeited property, from cheat (v.). Meaning a deceptive act is from 1640s; earlier, in
thieves' jargon, it meant a stolen thing (late 16c.), and earlier still dice (1530s). Meaning a
swindler is from 1660s.


bitmap (n.)

1973, in computer jargon, from bit (n.2) + map. Literally, a map of bits.


authoritarianism (n.)

1883; see authoritarian + -ism. Early use mostly in communist jargon.


educationese (n.)

the jargon of school administrators, 1966, from education + -ese.


assessment (n.)

1540s, value of property for tax purposes, from assess + -ment. Meaning determination or adjustment
of tax rate is from 1540s; general sense of estimation is recorded from 1620s. In education jargon
from 1956.


remediation (n.)

1818, noun of action from stem of Latin remediare, from span class=foreign&gt;remedium (see remedy
(n.)). In educational jargon from c.1975.


a.s.a.p.

also asap, pronounced either as a word or as four letters; from initial letters of phrase as soon as
possible, 1955, originally U.S. Army jargon.


trim (n.)

state of being prepared, 1580s, nautical jargon, fit for sailing, from trim (v.). From 1570s as
ornament, decoration; the meaning visible woodwork of a house is recorded from 1884; sense of
ornamental additions to an automobile is from 1922. Slang meaning a woman regarded as a sex object
is attested from 1955, American English.


potlatch (n.)

1845, a gift, from Chinook jargon pot-latch, a gift, from Nootka (Wakashan) patshatl giving, gift.
Later (1865) in sense ceremony in which gifts are exchanged.


moot (adj.)

debatable; not worth considering from moot case, earlier simply moot (n.) discussion of a
hypothetical law case (1530s), in law student jargon. The reference is to students gathering to test
their skills in mock cases.


blotter (n.)

1590s, thing for drying wet spots, agent noun from blot (v.). Meaning bad writer is from c.1600.
Sense of day book is from 1670s, and the word was applied early 19c. to rough drafts, scrap books,
notebooks, and draft account books. Hence the police jargon sense arrest record sheet, recorded from
1887.


libidinal (adj.)

1922, in psychology jargon, from libido (Latin genitive libidinis) + -al (1).


quibble (n.)

1610s, a pun, a play on words, probably a diminutive of obsolete quib evasion of point at issue,
based on an overuse of Latin quibus? in legal jargon, which supposedly gave it the association with
trivial argument. Meaning equivocation, evasion of the point is attested from 1660s.


revisionism (n.)

1903, from revision + -ism. Originally in Marxist jargon, rejection of gradual introduction of
socialism. Revisionist is from 1850 (adj.); 1854 (n.); in the historical sense from 1934, originally
with reference to the causes of World War I.


simulated (adj.)

1620s, feigned, past participle adjective from simulate (v.). Meaning imitative for purposes of
experiment or training is from 1966 (agent noun simulator in the related sense dates from 1947; also
see simulation). In commercial jargon, artificial, imitation by 1942.


dicey (adj.)

risky, uncertain (as the roll of dice), 1940s, aviators' jargon, from dice (n.) + -y (2). Related:
Diciness.


muck-a-muck (n.)

(self-)important person, 1912, from Chinook jargon, literally to eat; food. Also mucky-muck;
muckety-muck.


zoot suit (n.)

1942, American English slang, the first element probably a nonsense reduplication of suit (compare
reet pleat, drape shape from the same jargon).


reification (n.)

1846, act of materializing, from Latin re-, stem of res thing + -fication. In Marxist jargon,
translating German Verdinglichung.


cathected (adj.)

1936, psychoanalysis jargon, back-formation from cathectic (1927), from Greek kathektikos, from
kathexis (see cathexis).


upstage (adv.)

1870, in theatrical jargon, to the rear of the stage, from up (adv.) + stage (n.). The notion in the
verb (1921) is of drawing attention to oneself (and away from a fellow actor) by moving upstage, so
that the other actor must face away from the audience.


ambisexual (adj.)

unisex (of clothing), also bisexual, 1912 in the jargon of psychology, from ambi- + sexual. As a
humorous coinage based on ambidextrous, ambisextrous is recorded from 1929.


washboard (n.)

also wash-board, clothes-cleaning device, 1882, from wash (v.) + board (n.1). As a percussion
instrument, attested from 1925; in reference to abdominal muscles, recorded from 1950 in boxing
jargon.


gank (v.)

by 2000 as the verb to describe a situation of many players or NPCs attacking one; gamer slang,
perhaps borrowed from hip-hop and drug-abuse slang (where it is attested by 1995 in the sense of to
rob, to rip off); perhaps by 1990 in sports jargon. Of unknown origin; perhaps ultimately based on
gang. Related: Ganked; ganking.


replay (v.)

1862, in sporting jargon, from re- again + play (v.). Of recordings, attested from 1917. Related:
Replayed; replaying. The noun is from 1895, a replayed match (in sports).


dupe (n.)

1680s, from French dupe deceived person, from Middle French duppe (early 15c.), thieves' jargon,
perhaps from phrase de huppe of the hoopoe, an extravagantly crested and reputedly stupid bird.


mindset (n.)

also mind-set, habits of mind formed by previous experience, 1920, in educators' jargon, from mind
(n.) + set (v.).


tune-up (n.)

adjustments made to an automobile to improve its working, 1911, from verbal phrase tune up bring to
a state of effectiveness, 1718, in reference to musical instruments, from tune (v.) + up (adv.).
Attested from 1901 in reference to engines. Meaning event that serves as practice for a later one is
from 1934, U.S. sports jargon.


skyhook (n.)

also sky-hook, imaginary device to hold things up, 1915, originally aviators' jargon, from sky (n.)
+ hook (n.). Applied from 1935 to actual device for lifting things into the air.


obtund (v.)

c.1400, (transitive) to render dead, make dull, used occasionally in English, especially in medical
jargon; from Latin obtundere to blunt, make dull, weaken, exhaust, literally to beat against (see
obtuse). Related: Obtundation; obtunded.


walk-on (n.)

minor non-speaking role, 1902, theatrical slang, from the verbal phrase walk on, attested in theater
jargon by 1897 with a sense appear in crowd scenes, from walk (v.) + on (adv.). Meaning actor who
has such a part is attested from 1946. The sports team sense is recorded from 1974.


no-show (n.)

also no show, someone who fails to keep an appointment, 1941, from no + show (v.), in the show up,
appear sense. Originally airline jargon.


Chinook

name for a group of related native people in the Columbia River region of Washington and Oregon,
from Salishan /&#269;inuk/, name of a village site. Name also extended to a type of salmon (1851)
and warm spring wind. Chinook jargon was a mishmash of native (Chinook and Nootka), French, and
English words; it once was lingua franca in the Pacific Northwest, and it is the earliest attested
use of the word (1840).


