jostle (v.)

1540s, justle, to knock against, formed from jousten (see joust) + frequentative suffix -tle. The
usual spelling 17c.-18c. was justle. An earlier meaning of the word was to have sex with (c.1400).
Meaning to contend for the best position or place is from 1610s. Related: Jostled; jostling. As a
noun from c.1600.


nudge (v.)

to push slightly with the elbow, 1670s, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Norwegian nugge, nyggje
to jostle, rub; Icelandic nugga to rub, massage). Related: Nudged; nudging.


jolt (v.)

1590s, perhaps from Middle English jollen, chollen to knock, to batter (early 15c.), or an
alteration of obsolete jot (v.) to jostle (1520s). Perhaps related to earlier jolt head a big,
stupid head (1530s). Figurative sense of to startle, surprise is from 1872. Related: Jolted;
jolting.


scrounge (v.)

to acquire by irregular means, 1915, alteration of dialectal scrunge to search stealthily, rummage,
pilfer (1909), of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal scringe to pry about; or perhaps related
to scrouge, scrooge push, jostle (1755, also Cockney slang for a crowd), probably suggestive of
screw, squeeze. Popularized by the military in World War I. Related: Scrounged; scrounging.


rough (v.)

late 15c., from rough (adj.). Related: Roughed; roughing. Phrase rough it submit to hardships (1768)
is originally nautical:    To lie rough; to lie all night in one's clothes: called also roughing it.
Likewise to sleep on the bare deck of a ship, when the person is commonly advised to chuse the
softest plank. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1788]    To rough out shape or plan
approximately is from 1770. To rough up make rough is from 1763. To rough (someone) up beat up,
jostle violently is from 1868. The U.S. football penalty roughing was originally a term from boxing
(1866).


punch (v.)

to thrust, push; jostle; also, prod, to drive (cattle, etc.) by poking and prodding, late 14c., from
Old French ponchonner to punch, prick, stamp, from ponchon pointed tool, piercing weapon (see punch
(n.1)). Meaning to pierce, emboss with a tool is from early 15c.; meaning to stab, puncture is from
mid-15c. To punch a ticket, etc., is from mid-15c. To punch the clock record one's arrival at or
departure from the workplace using an automated timing device is from 1900. Related: Punched;
punching.    Perhaps you are some great big chief, who has a lot to say.  Who lords it o'er the
common herd who chance to come your way;  Well, here is where your arrogance gets a dreadful shock,
When you march up, like a private, salute, and PUNCH THE CLOCK.  [from Punch the Clock, by The
Skipper, The Commercial Telegraphers' Journal, May 1912]    Specialized sense to hit with the fist
first recorded 1520s. Compare Latin pugnare to fight with the fists, from a root meaning to pierce,
sting. In English this was probably influenced by punish; punch or punsch for punish is found in
documents from 14c.-15c.:    punchyth me, Lorde, and spare my blyssyd wyff Anne. [Coventry Mystery
Plays, late 15c.]    To punch (someone) out beat up is from 1971.


