joviality (n.)

1620s, from French jovialite, from jovial (see jovial).


jovial (adj.)

1580s, under the influence of the planet Jupiter, from Middle French jovial (16c.), from Italian
joviale, literally pertaining to Jupiter, and directly from Latin Iovialis of Jupiter, from Iovius
(used as genitive of Iuppiter) Jupiter, Roman god of the sky (see Jove). The meaning good-humored,
merry, is from astrological belief that those born under the sign of the planet Jupiter are of such
dispositions. Related: Jovially.


rollicking (adj.)

1811, present participle adjective from rollick be jovial in behavior (though this does not appear
in print until 1826), which perhaps is a blend of roll (v.) and frolic (v.).


rant (v.)

c.1600, to be jovial and boisterous, also to talk bombastically, from Dutch randten (earlier ranten)
talk foolishly, rave, of unknown origin (compare German rantzen to frolic, spring about). Related:
Ranted; ranting. Ranters antinomian sect which arose in England c.1645 is attested from 1651;
applied 1823 to early Methodists. A 1700 slang dictionary has rantipole a rude wild Boy or Girl
(also as a verb and adjective); to ride rantipole meant The woman uppermost in the amorous congress
[Grose].


black eye (n.)

discoloration around the eye from injury c.1600, from black (adj.) + eye (n.). Figurative sense of
injury to pride, rebuff is by 1744; that of bad reputation is from 1880s. In reference to dark eyes,
often as a mark of beauty, from 1660s. Black-eyed, of peas, attested from 1728. The black-eyed Susan
as a flower (various species) so called from 1881, for its appearance. It also was the title of a
poem by John Gay (1685-1732), which led to a popular British stage play of the same name in the mid-
19c.    All in the Downs the fleet was moored,  The streamers waving in the wind,  When black-eyed
Susan came aboard,    Oh! where shall I my true love find?  Tell me, ye jovial sailors, tell me
true,    If my sweet William sails among the crew?


Roger

masc. proper name, from Old French Rogier, from Old High German Hrotger, literally famous with the
spear, from hruod- fame, glory + ger spear (see gar (n.)). As a generic name for a person, attested
from 1630s. Slang meaning penis was popular c.1650-c.1870; hence the slang verb sense of to copulate
with (a woman), attested from 1711.    The use of the word in radio communication to mean yes, I
understand is attested from 1941, from the U.S. military phonetic alphabet word for the letter -R-,
in this case an abbreviation for received. Said to have been used by the R.A.F. since 1938. The
Jolly Roger pirate flag is first attested 1723, of unknown origin; jolly here has its otherwise
obsolete Middle English sense high-hearted, gallant. Roger de Coverley, once a favorite English
country dance, is so called from 1685, in reference to Addison's character in the Spectator. French
roger-bontemps jovial, carefree man, is attested there from 15c.


