kernel (n.)

Old English cyrnel seed, kernel, pip, from Proto-Germanic *kurnilo- (cognates: Middle High German
kornel, Middle Dutch cornel), from the root of corn seed, grain (see corn (n.1)) + -el, diminutive
suffix. Figurative sense of core or central part of anything is from 1550s.


churn (n.)

Old English cyrin, from Proto-Germanic *kernjon (cognates: Old Norse kirna, Swedish k&auml;rna,
Danish kjerne, Dutch karn, Middle High German kern); probably akin to cyrnel kernel (see kernel) and
describing the grainy appearance of churned cream.


nucleus (n.)

1704, kernel of a nut, 1708, head of a comet, from Latin nucleus kernel, from nucula little nut,
diminutive of nux (genitive nucis) nut, from PIE *kneu- nut (cognates: Middle Irish cnu, Welsh
cneuen, Middle Breton knoen nut, Old Norse hnot, Old English hnutu nut). General sense of central
part or thing, about which others cluster is from 1762. Use in reference to cells first recorded
1831. Modern atomic meaning is 1912, first by Ernest Rutherford, though theoretical use for central
point of an atom is from 1844, in Faraday.


Linux

computer operating system, named for Linux kernel,  written 1991 by Linus Torvalds of Finland (who
coined the word but did not choose it as the name).


karyo-

before vowels kary-, word-forming element used since c.1874 in biological terms referring to cell
nuclei, from Greek karyon nut, kernel, possibly from PIE root *kar- hard (see hard (adj.)).


pit (n.2)

hard seed, 1841, from Dutch pit kernel, seed, marrow, from Middle Dutch pitte, ultimately from West
Germanic *pithan-, source of pith (q.v.).


pip (n.1)

seed of an apple, 1797, shortened form of pipin seed of a fleshy fruit (early 14c.), from Old French
pepin (13c.), probably from a root *pipp-, expressing smallness (compare Italian pippolo, Spanish
pepita seed, kernel).


prokaryote (n.)

1963, from French procaryote (1925), from Greek pro- (see pro-) + karyon nut, kernel (see karyo-).


enucleation (n.)

1640s, from verb enucleate (1540s), from Latin enucleatus pure, clean, past participle of enucleare
to lay open, explain in detail, literally to remove the kernel of (see ex- + nucleus). Mostly
figurative in Latin (the notion is of getting at the core of some matter); until mid-19c. advances
in science and medicine, usually figurative in English.


eukaryotic (adj.)

also eucaryotic, characterized by well-defined cells (with nuclei and cell walls), 1957, from French
eucaryote (1925), from Greek eu well (see eu-) + karyon nut, kernel (see karyo-). Related:
Eukaryote; eucaryote.


copra (n.)

dried kernel of coconut, 1580s, from Portuguese copra (16c.), from Malayalam koppara (cognate with
Hindi khopra) coconut; related to Hindi khopri skull, from Sanskrit kharparah skull.


grit (n.)

Old English greot sand, dust, earth, gravel, from Proto-Germanic *greutan tiny particles of crushed
rock (cognates: Old Saxon griot, Old Frisian gret, Old Norse grjot rock, stone, German Grie&szlig;
grit, sand), from PIE *ghreu- rub, grind (cognates: Lithuanian grudas corn, kernel, Old Church
Slavonic gruda clod). Sense of pluck, spirit first recorded American English, 1808.


newel (n.)

mid-14c., pillar from which steps of a winding staircase radiate, from Old French noel, novel knob,
newel, kernel, stone (Modern French noyau), from Vulgar Latin *nodellus little knot, diminutive of
Latin nodulus, diminutive of nodus knot (see net (n.)). Klein's sources suggest the French word may
be from Gallo-Roman *nucale, from Latin nux nut. The meaning post at the top or bottom of a
staircase is from 1833.


grain (n.)

early 13c., scarlet dye made from insects (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French grain (12c.)
seed, grain, particle, berry, scarlet dye (see kermes for last sense), from Latin granum seed, a
grain, small kernel (see corn (n.1)).    As a collective singular meaning seed of wheat and allied
grasses used as food, it is attested from early 14c. Extended from c.1300 to other objects (such as
salt, sand). As a unit of weight, from 1540s. Used of wood (1560s), from the arrangement of fibers,
which resemble seeds. Hence, against the grain (1650), a metaphor from carpentry: cutting across the
fibers of the wood is more difficult than cutting along them.


