kindle (v.)

c.1200, cundel, to set fire to, to start on fire, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old
Norse kynda to kindle, to light a fire, Swedish quindla kindle, of uncertain origin, + frequentative
suffix -le. Figurative use from c.1300. Intransitive sense to begin to burn, to catch fire is from
c.1400. Related: Kindled; kindling.    Influenced in form, and sometimes in Middle English in sense,
with kindel to give birth (of animals), bring forth, produce (c.1200), from kindel (n.) offspring of
an animal, young one, from Old English gecynd (see kind (n.)) + -el.


tinder (n.)

dry, inflammable substance, Old English tynder, from or related to tendan to kindle, from Proto-
Germanic *tund- ignite, kindle (cognates: Gothic tandjan, Swedish t&auml;nda, German z&uuml;nden to
kindle).


kindling (n.)

material for lighting fire, 1510s, from present participle of kindle (v.). Earlier a setting alight
(c.1300).


rekindle (v.)

1590s, from re- back, again + kindle (v.). Figurative use from 1650s. Related: Rekindled;
rekindling.


enkindle (v.)

1540s (literal), 1580s (figurative), from en- (1) + kindle. Related: Enkindled; enkindling.


conflate (v.)

1540s, from Latin conflat-, past participle stem of conflare to blow up, kindle, light; bring
together, compose, also to melt together, literally to blow together, from com- with (see com-) +
flare to blow (see blow (v.1)).


inflame (v.)

mid-14c., to set on fire with passion, from Latin inflammare to set on fire, kindle, figuratively to
rouse, excite, from in- in (see in- (2)) + flammare to flame, from flamma flame (see flame (n.)).
Literal sense of to cause to burn first recorded in English late 14c.


incandescent (adj.)

1794, from French incandescent or directly from Latin incandescentem (nominative incandescens),
present participle of incandescere become warm, glow, kindle, from in- within (see in- (2)) +
candescere begin to glow, become white, inceptive of candere to glow, to shine (see candle).


incentive (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin incentivum, noun use of neuter of Latin adjective incentivus setting the
tune (in Late Latin inciting), from past participle stem of incinere strike up, from in- in, into
(see in- (2)) + canere sing (see chant (v.)). Sense influenced by association with incendere to
kindle. The adjective use, in reference to a system of rewards meant to encourage harder work, first
attested 1943 in jargon of the U.S. war economy; as a noun, in this sense, from 1948.


aurora (n.)

late 14c., from Latin Aurora, the Roman goddess of dawn, from PIE *ausus- dawn, also the name of the
Indo-European goddess of the dawn, from root *aus- (1) to shine, especially of the dawn (cognates:
Greek eos dawn, auein to dry, kindle; Sanskrit usah, Lithuanian ausra dawn; Latin auster south wind,
usum to burn; Old English east east).


anneal (v.)

Old English on&aelig;lan to set on fire, kindle, from on- on + &aelig;lan to burn, bake, from Proto-
Germanic *ailan, probably [Watkins] from PIE *ai- to burn (see ash (n.1)); related to Old English
&aelig;led fire, firebrand, Old Norse eldr, Danish ild fire. Related: Annealed; annealing.


chafe (v.)

early 14c., chaufen, c.1300, be provoked; late 14c. in literal sense to make warm, to heat, also
intransitive, to grow warm or hot, especially (early 15c.) to warm by rubbing, from Old French
chaufer heat, warm up, become warm (12c., Modern French chauffer), from Vulgar Latin *calefare, from
Latin calefacere to make hot, make warm, from calere be warm (see calorie) + facere to make, do (see
factitious).    Figurative sense from late 14c. include now-obsolete kindle (joy), inspire, make
passionate as well as provoke, vex, anger. Sense of make sore by rubbing first recorded 1520s.
Related: Chafed; chafing.


blow (v.1)

move air, Old English blawan blow, breathe, make an air current; kindle; inflate; sound a wind
instrument (class VII strong verb; past tense bleow, past participle blawen), from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;-anan (source of Old High German blaen, German bl&auml;hen), from PIE *bhle- to swell,
blow up (source of Latin flare to blow), possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole).    Meaning to squander (of money) is from 1874. Sense of depart suddenly is from 1902. Slang
do fellatio on sense is from 1933, as blow (someone) off, originally among prostitutes (compare blow
job). This usage probably is not connected to the colloquial imprecation (1781, associated with
sailors, as in Popeye's well, blow me down!), which has past participle blowed. Meaning to spend
(money) foolishly and all at once is 1890s; that of bungle an opportunity is from 1943. To blow over
pass is from 1610s, originally of storms. To blow (someone's) mind was in use by 1967; there is a
song title Blow Your Mind released in a 1965 Mirawood recording by a group called The Gas Company.


burn (v.)

12c., combination of Old Norse brenna to burn, light, and two originally distinct Old English verbs:
b&aelig;rnan to kindle (transitive) and beornan to be on fire (intransitive), all from Proto-
Germanic *brennan/*branajan (cognates: Middle Dutch bernen, Dutch branden, Old High German brinnan,
German brennen, Gothic -brannjan to set on fire). This perhaps is from PIE   *gwher- to heat, warm
(see warm (adj.)), or from PIE *bhre-n-u, from root *bhreue- to boil forth, well up (see brew (v.)).
Related: Burned/burnt (see -ed); burning.    Figuratively (of passions, battle, etc.) in Old
English. Meaning cheat, swindle, victimize is first attested 1650s. In late 18c, slang, burned meant
infected with venereal disease. To burn one's bridges (behind one) behave so as to destroy any
chance of returning to a status quo (attested by 1892 in Mark Twain), perhaps ultimately is from
reckless cavalry raids in the American Civil War. Slavic languages have historically used different
and unrelated words for the transitive and intransitive senses of set fire to/be on fire: for
example Polish pali&#263;/gorze&#263;, Russian &#382;e&#269;'/gorel.


