lace (v.)

c.1200, fasten (clothing, etc.) with laces and ties, from Old French lacier, from laz (see lace
(n.)). Also tighten (a garment) by pulling its laces (early 14c.). To lace coffee, etc., with a dash
of liquor (1670s) originally was used of sugar, and comes via the notion of to ornament or trim.
Related: Laced; lacing. Laced mutton was an old word for a whore [Johnson].


lace-up (adj.)

1831, originally of boots, from the verbal phrase, from lace (v.) + up (adv.).


lace (n.)

early 13c., laz, cord made of braided or interwoven strands of silk, etc., from Old French laz a
net, noose, string, cord, snare (Modern French lacs), from Vulgar Latin *lacium, from Latin laqueum
(nominative laqueus) noose, snare (source also of Italian laccio, Spanish lazo), a trapping and
hunting term, probably from Italic base *laq- to ensnare (compare Latin lacere to entice). Later
also net, noose, snare (c.1300); and piece of cord used to draw together the edges of slits or
openings in an article of clothing (late 14c., as in shoelace). The ornamental net pattern meaning
is first recorded 1550s. As an adjective, lace-curtain middle class (or lower-class with middle-
class pretensions), usually is used in reference to Irish-Americans, is attested by 1928.


tatting (n.)

making of knotted lace; kind of homemade lace, 1832, of uncertain origin. In French,
frivolit&eacute;.


lanyard (n.)

also laniard, alternative spelling (influenced by nautical yard (2) long beam used to support a
sail) of Middle English lainer, thong for fastening parts of armor or clothing (late 14c.), from Old
French laniere thong, lash, from lasniere, from lasne strap, thong, apparently altered (by
metathesis and influence of Old French las lace) from nasliere, from Frankish *nastila or some other
Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *nastila- (cognates: Old High German, Old Saxon nestila lace,
strap, band, German nestel string, lace, strap), from PIE root *ned- to knot.


lash (v.2)

bind, 1620s, originally nautical, from Middle French lachier, from Old French lacier to lace (see
lace (v.)). Related: Lashed; lashing.


tawdry (adj.)

no longer fresh or elegant but worn as if it were so; in cheap and ostentatious imitation of what is
rich or costly, 1670s, adjective use of noun tawdry silk necktie for women (1610s), shortened from
tawdry lace (1540s), an alteration (with adhesion of the -t- from Saint) of St. Audrey's lace, a
necktie or ribbon sold at the annual fair at Ely on Oct. 17 commemorating St. Audrey (queen of
Northumbria, died 679). Her association with lace necklaces is that she supposedly died of a throat
tumor, which, according to Bede, she considered God's punishment for her youthful stylishness.
Related: Tawdriness.    I know of a surety that I deservedly bear the weight of my trouble on my
neck, for I remember that, when I was a young maiden, I bore on it the needless weight of necklaces;
and therefore I believe the Divine goodness would have me endure the pain in my neck, that so I may
be absolved from the guilt of my needless levity, having now, instead of gold and pearls, the fiery
heat of a tumour rising on my neck. [A.M. Sellar translation, 1907]


nance (n.)

effeminate man, homosexual, 1904, from female name Nancy (q.v.), which was in use as an adjective
meaning effeminate (applied to men) from 1883, a shortening of earlier Miss Nancy.   <b>Nancy,
Miss,</b> an opprobrious epithet for an exceedingly effeminate, over-nice young man. The original
Miss Nancy, however, was a Mrs. Anna Old field, a celebrated actress, who died in 1730 and was
buried in Westminster Abbey. She was extremely vain and nice about her dress, and as she lay in
state, attended by two noblemen, she was attired, as she had directed shortly before her death, in a
very fine Brussels lace head-dress, a Holland shift with a tucker and double ruffles of the same
lace, a pair of new kid gloves, etc., a circumstance alluded to by Pope .... [William S. Walsh,
Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities, 1892]   Nancy boy effeminate male homosexual is attested by
1958.


blond (n.)

c.1755 of a type of lace, 1822 of persons; from blond (adj.).


tucker (n.)

piece of lace worn around the neck, 1680s, agent noun from tuck (v.). In Middle English tukere was
one who dresses or finishes cloth, hence the surname.


necklace (n.)

1590s, from neck (n.) + lace (n.) in the sense of cord, string. As the name of a South African form
of lynching, from 1985.


pointer (n.)

mid-14c., a tiler (early 13c. as a surname), agent noun from point (v.). From c.1500 as maker of
needlepoint lace. From 1570s as thing that points; meaning dog that stands rigid in the presence of
game, facing the quarry is recorded from 1717. Meaning item of advice first recorded 1883.


strait-laced (adj.)

early 15c., of stays or bodices, made close and tight; see strait (adj.) + lace (v.). Figurative
sense of over-precise, prudish, strict in manners or morals is from 1550s.


Chantilly

town in France near Paris; as a kind of porcelain made there, 1774; in reference to a delicate lace
originally made there, 1831. The place name is Medieval Latin Chantileium, from the Gallo-Roman
personal name Cantilius.


lacy (adj.)

1804, from lace (n.) in the decorative sense + -y (2).


shoelace (n.)

1640s, from shoe (n.) + lace (n.).


lasso

1807 (v.); 1808 (n.), American English, from Spanish lazo, from Latin laqueum (nominative laqueus)
noose, snare (see lace (n.)).


unlace (v.)

c.1300, from un- (2) opposite of +  lace (v.). Related: Unlaced; unlacing.


sphincter (n.)

1570s, from Middle French sphincter, from Late Latin sphincter contractile muscle, from Greek
sphinkter band, lace, anything that binds tight, from sphingein to squeeze, bind, of unknown origin.
First used in anatomical sense by Galen. There are several in the body; the one usually meant is the
sphincter ani.


needlepoint (n.)

point of a needle, c.1700; point lace made with the needle, 1865, from needle (n.) + point (n.).


interlace (v.)

late 14c., from Middle French entrelacer, from entre- (see entre-) + lacer (see lace). Television
sense is from 1927. Related: Interlaced; interlacing. The noun is 1904, from the verb.


Brussels

capital of old Brabant, now of Belgium, of Germanic origin, from brocca marsh + sali room, building,
from Latin cella (see cell). It arose 6c. as a fortress on an island in a river. As a type of
carpet, from 1799; as a type of lace, from 1748. Brussels sprouts (Brassica oleracea gemmifera)
attested from 1748 (first written description is from 1580s).


elicit (v.)

1640s, from Latin elicitus, past participle of elicere draw forth, from ex- out (see ex-) + -licere,
comb. form of lacere to entice, lure, deceive (related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace (n.)).
Related: Elicited; eliciting; elicits; elicitation.


aiglet (n.)

metal tag of a lace, meant to make it easier to thread through the eyelet-holes, but later merely
ornamental, mid-15c., from Middle French aiguillette, diminutive of aiguille needle, from Late Latin
acucula, itself a diminutive of Latin acus needle (see acuity). Compare Italian agucchia, Portuguese
agulha, Spanish aguja needle.


spike (v.)

1620s, to fasten with spikes, from spike (n.1). Meaning to rise in a spike is from 1958. Military
sense (1680s) means to disable guns by driving a large nail into the touch-hole. Figurative use of
this sense is from 1823. Meaning to lace (a drink) with liquor is from 1889. Journalism sense of to
kill a story before publication (1908) is from the metal spindle in which old-time editors filed
hard copy of stories after they were set in type, or especially when rejected for publication.
Related: Spiked; spiking.


enlace (v.)

late 14c., from Old French enlacer, from Late Latin *inlaciare, from in- + *lacius, from Latin
laqueus noose (see lace (n.)). Related: Enlaced; enlacing.


fetter (n.)

Old English fetor chain or shackle for the feet, from Proto-Germanic *fetero (cognates: Old Saxon
feteros (plural), Middle Dutch veter fetter, in modern Dutch lace, string, Old High German fezzera,
Old Norse fi&ouml;turr, Swedish fj&auml;tter), from PIE root *ped- foot (see foot (n.)). The
generalized sense of anything that shackles had evolved in Old English. Related Fetters.


strangle (v.)

late 13c., from Old French estrangler choke, suffocate, throttle (Modern French &#233;trangler),
from Latin strangulare to choke, stifle, check, constrain, from Greek strangalan to choke, twist,
from strangale a halter, cord, lace, related to strangos twisted, from PIE root *strenk- tight,
narrow; pull tight, twist (see string (n.)). Related: Strangled; strangling.


delicious (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in deliciously), from Old French delicios (Modern French d&eacute;licieux), from
Late Latin deliciosus delicious, delicate, from Latin delicia (plural deliciae) a delight,
allurement, charm, from delicere to allure, entice, from de- away (see de-) + lacere lure, deceive
(related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace). As a name of a type of apple, attested from 1903, first
grown by Jesse Hiatt of Iowa, U.S.A. Colloquial shortening delish is attested from 1920.


rope (n.)

Old English rap rope, cord, cable, from Proto-Germanic *raipaz (cognates: Old Norse reip, West
Frisian reap, Middle Dutch, Dutch reep rope, Old Frisian silrap shoe-thong, Gothic skauda-raip shoe-
lace, Old High German, German reif ring, hoop). Technically, only cordage above one inch in
circumference and below 10 (bigger-around than that is a cable). Nautical use varies. Finnish raippa
hoop, rope, twig is a Germanic loan-word.    To know the ropes (1840, Dana) originally is a seaman's
term. Phrase on the ropes defeated is attested from 1924, a figurative extension from the fight
ring, where ropes figure from 1829. To be at the end of (one's) rope out of resources and options is
first attested 1680s. Formerly also in many slang and extended uses related to punishment by
hanging, such as John Roper's window a noose, rope-ripe deserving to be hanged, both 16c. To give
someone (enough) rope (to hang himself) is from 1650s.


