lateral (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French lat&eacute;ral and directly from Latin lateralis belonging to the
side, from latus (genitive lateris) side (see oblate (n.)). As a noun, from 1630s, a side part. As a
type of pass to the side in U.S. football, it is attested from 1934. Related: Laterally.


ipsilateral (adj.)

1907, from Latin ipse self + lateral.


sidewinder (n.)

small horned rattlesnake of southwestern U.S., 1875, American English, from side (adj.) + agent noun
of wind (v.), so called in reference to its peculiar lateral progressive motion. Also sidewiper
(1888).


contralateral (adj.)

1882, from contra- + lateral.


bilateral (adj.)

having two sides, 1775, from bi- + lateral. Related: Bilaterally.


side-way (n.)

also sideway, 1550s, lateral space for passage or movement, from side (n.) + way (n.).


cartwheel (n.)

late 14c., wheel of a cart, from cart (n.) + wheel (n.). Meaning lateral somersault is recorded from
1861; as a verb from 1907. Related: Cartwheeled; cartwheeling.


multilateral (adj.)

also multi-lateral, 1690s, in geometry, having many sides, from multi- + Latin latus (genitive
lateris) side (see oblate (n.)). Figurative use by 1748. Meaning pertaining to three or more
countries is from 1802. Related: Multilaterally.


equilateral (adj.)

1560s, from Late Latin aequilateralis, from aequi- (see equal (adj.)) + lateralis (see lateral).


trilateral (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin trilaterus three-sided; see tri- + lateral. The Trilateral Commission
(representing Japan, the U.S., and Europe) was founded 1973. Related: Trilateralism; trilaterally.


scoliosis (n.)

lateral curvature of the spine, 1706, medical Latin, from Greek skoliosis crookedness, from skolios
bent, curved, from PIE root *skel- (3) crooked, curved, with derivatives referring to crooked parts
of the body (as in Greek skelos leg, limb). Related: Scoliotic.


amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n.)

by 1881, from French, first word from Greek a-, privative prefix, + mys, myos muscle (see muscle
(n.)) + trophikos feeding, from trophe nourishment (see -trophy). Often known in U.S. as Lou
Gehrig's disease, after the New York Yankees baseball player (1903-1941) who was diagnosed with it
in 1939.


span (n.1)

distance between two objects, from Old English span distance between the thumb and little finger of
an extended hand (as a measure of length, roughly nine inches), probably related to Middle Dutch
spannen to join, fasten (see span (v.)).    The Germanic word was borrowed into Medieval Latin as
spannus, hence Italian spanna, Old French espan hand's width, span as a unit of measure, French
empan. As a measure of volume (early 14c.), what can be held in two cupped hands. Meaning length of
time first attested 1590s; that of space between abutments of an arch, etc. is from 1725. Meaning
maximum lateral dimension of an aircraft is first recorded 1909.


aisle (n.)

late 14c., ele, lateral division of a church (usually separated by a row of pillars), from Old
French ele wing (of a bird or an army), side of a ship (12c., Modern French aile), from Latin ala,
related to axilla wing, upper arm, armpit; wing of an army, from PIE *aks- axis (see axis), via a
suffixed form *aks-la-. The root meaning in turning connects it with axle and axis.    Confused 15c.
with unrelated ile island (perhaps from notion of a detached part of a church), and so it took an
-s- when isle did, c.1700; by 1750 it had acquired an a-, on the model of French cognate aile. The
word also was confused with alley, which gave it the sense of passage between rows of pews or seats
(1731), which was thence extended to railway cars, theaters, etc.


sergeant (n.)

c.1200, servant, from Old French sergent, serjant (domestic) servant, valet; court official;
soldier, from Medieval Latin servientum (nominative serviens) servant, vassal, soldier (in Late
Latin public official), from Latin servientem serving, present participle of servire to serve (see
serve (v.)); cognate with Spanish sirviente, Italian servente; a twin of servant, and 16c. writers
sometimes use the two words interchangeably.    Specific sense of military servant is attested from
late 13c.; that of officer whose duty is to enforce judgments of a tribunal or legislative body is
from c.1300 (sergeant at arms is attested from late 14c.). Meaning non-commissioned military officer
first recorded 1540s. Originally a much more important rank than presently. As a police rank, in
Great Britain from 1839.    Middle English alternative spelling serjeant (from Old French) was
retained in Britain in special use as title of a superior order of barristers (c.1300, from legal
Latin serviens ad legem, one who serves (the king) in matters of law), from which Common Law judges
were chosen; also used of certain other officers of the royal household. sergeant-major is from
1570s. The sergeant-fish (1871) so-called for lateral markings resembling a sergeant's stripes.
Related: Sergeancy.


