lavish (v.)

1540s, from lavish (adj.). Related: Lavished; lavishing.


lavish (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lavasse (n.) torrent of rain, deluge, from Old French lavache, from
laver to wash, from Latin lavare to wash (see lave). Related: Lavishly.


profuse (adj.)

early 15c., lavish, extravagant, from Latin profusus spread out, lavish, extravagant, literally
poured forth, noun use of past participle of profundere pour forth, from pro- forth (see pro-) +
fundere to pour (see found (v.2)). Meaning bountiful is from c.1600. Related: Profusely;
profuseness.


unstinting (adj.)

late 14c., unceasing, from un- (1) not + present participle of stint (v.). Meaning lavish attested
by 1834.


uppish (adj.)

1670s, lavish, from up (adv.) + -ish. Sense of conceited, arrogant, proudly self-assertive attested
from 1734. Related: Uppishly; uppishness.


wasteful (adj.)

early 14c., destructive, from waste (n.) + -ful. Meaning lavish is from mid-15c. Related:
Wastefully; wastefulness.


sumptuous (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French sumptueux or directly from Latin sumptuosus costly, very expensive;
lavish, wasteful, from sumptus, past participle of sumere to borrow, buy, spend, eat, drink,
consume, employ, take, take up, contraction of *sub-emere, from sub- under (see sub-) + emere to
take, buy (see exempt (adj.)). Related: Sumptuously; sumptuousness.


extravagant (adj.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin extravagantem, originally a word in Canon Law for uncodified papal
decrees, present participle of extravagari wander outside or beyond, from Latin extra outside of
(see extra-) + vagari wander, roam (see vague). Extended sense of excessive, extreme first recorded
1590s; that of wasteful, lavish 1711. Related: Extravagantly.


rococo (adj.)

1836, old-fashioned, from French rococo (19c.), apparently a humorous alteration of rocaille
shellwork, pebble-work from Middle French roche rock, from Vulgar Latin *rocca stone. Specifically
of furniture or architecture of the time of Louis Quatorze and Louis Quinze, from 1841. If this is
correct, the reference is to the excessive use of shell designs in this lavish style. For
differentiation, see baroque. The general sense of tastelessly florid or ornate is from 1844.
Much of the painting, engraving, porcelain-work, etc., of the time has ... a real decorative charm,
though not of a very high order in art. Hence rococo is used attributively in contempt to note
anything feebly pretentious and tasteless in art or literature. [Century Dictionary, 1902]


