lax (adj.)

c.1400, loose (in reference to bowels), from Latin laxus wide, loose, open, figuratively loose,
free, wide, from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack, be languid (cognates: Greek legein to leave off,
stop, lagos hare, literally with drooping ears, lagnos lustful, lascivious, lagaros slack, hollow,
shrunken; Latin languere to be faint, weary, languidis faint, weak, dull, sluggish, languid). Of
rules, discipline, etc., attested from mid-15c.


lax (n.)

salmon, from Old English leax (see lox).


laxative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French laxatif (13c.), from Medieval Latin laxativus loosening, from Latin
laxatus, past participle of laxare loosen, from laxus loose, lax (see lax). The noun meaning a
laxative medicine is from late 14c.


laxity (n.)

1520s, from Middle French laxit&eacute;, from Latin laxitatem (nominative laxitas) width,
spaciousness, from laxus (see lax).


anaphylaxis (n.)

see anaphylactic.


blaxploitation (n.)

1972, from black + exploitation.


flax (n.)

Old English fleax cloth made with flax, linen, from Proto-Germanic *flakhsan (cognates: Old Frisian
flax, Middle Dutch and Dutch vlas, Old Saxon flas, Old High German flahs, German Flachs), probably
from Proto-Germanic base *fleh-, corresponding to PIE *plek- to weave, plait (see ply (v.1)). But
some connect it with PIE *pleik- (see flay) from the notion of stripping fiber to prepare it.


flaxen (adj.)

made of flax, mid-15c., from flax + -en (2). As the color of flax (usually with reference to hair)
it is attested from 1520s.


flaxseed (n.)

1560s, from flax + seed (n.).


galaxy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French galaxie, from Late Latin galaxias Milky Way, from Greek galaxias (adj.),
in galaxias kyklos, literally milky circle, from gala (genitive galaktos) milk (see lactation). The
technical astronomical sense emerged 1848. Figurative sense of brilliant assembly of persons is from
1580s. Milky Way is a translation of Latin via lactea.See yonder, lo, the Galaxy&#235; Which men
clepeth the Milky Wey, For hit is whyt. [Chaucer, House of Fame]  Astronomers began to speculate by
mid-19c. that some of the spiral nebulae they could see in telescopes were actually immense and
immensely distant structures the size and shape of the Milky Way. But the matter was not settled
until the 1920s.


klaxon (n.)

loud warning horn, 1908, originally on automobiles, said to have been named for the company that
sold them (The Klaxon Company; distributor for Lovell-McConnell Mfg. Co., Newark, N.J.), but
probably the company was named for the horn, which bore a word likely based on Greek klazein to
roar, cognate with Latin clangere to resound.


malaxation (n.)

softening, 1650s, from Late Latin malaxationem (nominative malaxatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of malaxare to soften, mollify, from Greek malassein to make soft, related to
malakos soft (see mallet).


parallax (n.)

1570s, from Middle French parallaxe (mid-16c.), from Greek parallaxis change, alteration,
inclination of two lines meeting at an angle, from parallassein to alter, make things alternate,
from para- (see para- (1)) + allassein to change, from allos other (see alias (adv.)). Related:
Parallactic.


prophylaxis (n.)

preventive treatment of disease, 1746, Modern Latin, from Greek pro (see pro-) + phylaxis a
watching, guarding (see prophylactic).


relax (v.)

late 14c., to make (something) less compact or dense, from Old French relaschier set free; soften;
reduce (14c.), from Latin relaxare relax, loosen, open, stretch out, widen again; make loose, from
re- back (see re-) + laxare loosen, from laxus loose (see lax). Of persons, to become less formal,
from 1837. Meaning decrease tension is from early 15c.; intransitive sense of to become less tense
is recorded from 1935. Related: Relaxed; relaxing.


relaxant (adj.)

1771, from Latin relaxantem (nominative relaxans), present participle of relaxare (see relax). As a
noun from 1832.


relaxation (n.)

late 14c., rupture; mid-15c., remission of a burden or penalty, from Old French relaxacion (14c.)
and directly from Latin relaxationem (nominative relaxatio) an easing, mitigation, relaxation, noun
of action from past participle stem of relaxare (see relax). Meaning relief from hard work or
ordinary cares is from 1540s.


smilax

type of lilaceous plant, c.1600, from Latin, from Greek smilax blindweed, also used of the yew and a
kind of evergreen oak.


