lechery (n.)

c. 1200, from Old French lecherie impertinence, deceit, from lecheor (see lecher).    The priests
had excellent cause to forbid us lechery: this injunction, by reserving to them acquaintance with
and absolution for these private sins, gave them an incredible ascendancy over women, and opened up
to them a career of lubricity whose scope knew no limits. [Marquis de Sade, Philosophy in the
Bedroom]


lecherous (adj.)

c. 1300, probably from lecher + -ous; or else from rare Old French lecheros. Related: Lecherously;
lecherousness.


lecher (n.)

man given to excessive sexual indulgence, late 12c., from Old French lecheor (Modern French
l&#233;cheur) one living a life of debauchery, especially one given to sexual indulgence, literally
licker, agent noun from lechier to lick, to live in debauchery or gluttony, from Frankish *likkon or
some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *likkojan to lick or some other Germanic source (see
lick). The Old French feminine form was lechiere. Middle English, meanwhile, had lickestre female
who licks; figuratively a pleasure seeker, literally lickster.


lech (n.2)

yen, strong desire (especially sexual), 1796, variant of letch. Meaning a lecher is by 1943.


letch (n.)

craving, longing, 1796, perhaps a back-formation from lecher, or from a figurative use of latch (v.)
in a secondary sense of grasp, grasp on to.


dirty (adj.)

c. 1500, from dirt + -y (2). Earlier dritty (late 14c.). Meaning smutty, morally unclean is from
1590s. Of colors, from 1690s. Dirty linen personal or familial secrets is first recorded 1860s.
Dirty work in the figurative sense is from 1764; dirty trick is from 1670s. The dirty look someone
gives you is from 1928; dirty old man superannuated lecher is from 1932. Related: dirtiness.


lamia (n.)

late 14c., from Latin lamia, from Greek lamia female vampire, literally swallower, lecher, from
laimos throat, gullet. Probably cognate with Latin lemures spirits of the dead (see lemur). Used in
early translations of the Bible for screech owls and sea monsters. Sometimes also, apparently,
mermaids.    Also kynde erre&thorn; in som beestes wondirliche j-schape, as it fare&thorn; in a
beest &thorn;at hatte lamia, &thorn;at ha&thorn; an heed as a mayde &amp; body as a grym fissche[;]
whan &thorn;at best lamya may fynde ony man, first a flatere&thorn; wi&thorn; hym with a wommannes
face and make&thorn; hym ligge by here while he may dure, &amp; whanne he may nofer&thorn;ere
suffice to here lecherye &thorn;anne he rende&thorn; hym and sle&thorn; and ete&thorn; hym. [John of
Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


