liaison (n.)

1640s, from French liaison a union, a binding together (13c.), from Late Latin ligationem
(nominative ligatio) a binding, from past participle stem of Latin ligare to bind (see ligament).
Originally a cookery term for a thickening agent for sauces. Sense of intimate relations is from
1806. Military sense of cooperation between branches, allies, etc. is from 1816. The noun meaning
one who is concerned with liaison of units, etc. is short for liaison officer.


date (n.3)

liaison, 1885, gradually evolving from date (n.1) in its general sense of appointment; romantic
sense by 1890s. Meaning person one has a date with is from 1925.


liaise (v.)

1928, back-formation from liaison. Said to be a coinage of British military men in World War I.
Related: Liaised; liaising.


date (v.2)

have a romantic liaison; 1902, from date (n.3). Related: Dated; dating.


yellow ribbon

The American folk custom of wearing or displaying a yellow ribbon to signify solidarity with loved
ones or fellow citizens at war originated during the U.S. embassy hostage crisis in Iran in 1979. It
does not have a connection to the American Civil War, beyond the use of the old British folk song
Round Her Neck She Wore A Yellow Ribbon in the John Wayne movie of the same name, with a Civil War
setting, released in 1949. The story of a ribbon tied to a tree as a signal to a convict returning
home that his loved ones have forgiven him is attested from 1959, but the ribbon in that case was
white.    The ribbon color seems to have changed to yellow first in a version retold by newspaper
columnist Pete Hamill in 1971. The story was dramatized in June 1972 on ABC-TV (James Earl Jones
played the ex-con). Later that year, Irwin Levine and L. Russell Brown copyrighted the song Tie a
Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree, which became a pop hit in early 1973 and sparked a lawsuit by
Hamill, later dropped.    In 1975, the wife of a Watergate conspirator put out yellow ribbons when
her husband was released from jail, and news coverage of that was noted and remembered by Penne
Laingen, whose husband was U.S. ambassador to Iran in 1979 and one of the Iran hostages taken in the
embassy on Nov. 4. Her yellow ribbon in his honor was written up in the Dec. 10, 1979, Washington
Post. When the hostage families organized as the Family Liaison Action Group (FLAG), they took the
yellow ribbon as their symbol. The ribbons revived in the 1991 Gulf War and again during the 2000s
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.


