license

see licence. Related: Licensed; licensing.


licensee (n.)

1837, from license + -ee.


licentious (adj.)

morally unrestrained, 1530s, from Medieval Latin licentiosus full of license, unrestrained, from
Latin licentia (see license). Related: Licentiously; licentiousness.


licence (n.)

mid-14c., liberty (to do something), leave, from Old French licence freedom, liberty, power,
possibility; permission, (12c.), from Latin licentia freedom, liberty, license, from licentem
(nominative licens). present participle of licere to be allowed, be lawful, from PIE root *leik- to
offer, bargain (cognates: Lettish likstu I come to terms). Meaning formal (usually written)
permission from authority to do something (marry, hunt, drive, etc.) is first attested early 15c.
Meaning excessive liberty, disregard of propriety is from mid-15c. No etymological justification for
the spelling with -s-; attempts to confine license to verbal use and licence to noun use (compare
advise/advice, devise/device) seem to have failed.


permit (n.)

written statement of permission or license, 1714, from permit (v.).


Savonarola

Girolamo Savonarola (1452-1498), Dominican monk famous for his fierce opposition to moral license
and Church corruption.


licence (v.)

c.1400, grant formal authorization, from license (n.). Related: Licenced; Licencing.


imprimatur (n.)

1640, Modern Latin, literally let it be printed, the formula of a book licenser, third person
singular present subjunctive passive of Latin imprimere to print (see impress). Originally of state
license to print books, later only of Roman Catholic Church.


licensure (n.)

1808, from license + -ure.


bouncer (n.)

mid-19c. in various senses, noun derivative of bounce (v.) in its original sense of thump, hit.
Earliest attested is boaster, bully, braggart (1833); also large example of its kind (1842);
enforcer of order in a bar or saloon (1865, American English, originally colloquial).  The Bouncer
is merely the English chucker out. When liberty verges on license and gaiety on wanton delirium, the
Bouncer selects the gayest of the gay, and -- bounces him! [London Daily News, July 26, 1883]


diploma (n.)

1640s, state paper, official document, from Latin diploma, from Greek diploma license, chart,
originally paper folded double, from diploun to double, fold over, from diploos double (see diploid)
+ -oma. Specific academic sense is 1680s in English.


pornography (n.)

1843, ancient obscene painting, especially in temples of Bacchus, from French pornographie, from
Greek pornographos (one) depicting prostitutes, from porne prostitute, originally bought, purchased
(with an original notion, probably of female slave sold for prostitution), related to pernanai to
sell, from PIE root *per- (5) to traffic in, to sell (see price (n.)) + graphein to write (see
-graphy). A brothel in ancient Greek was a porneion.    Pornography, or obscene painting, which in
the time of the Romans was practiced with the grossest license, prevailed especially at no
particular period in Greece, but was apparently tolerated to a considerable extent at all times.
Parrhasius, Aristides, Pausanias, Nicophanes, Chaerephanes, Arellius, and a few other [pornographoi]
are mentioned as having made themselves notorious for this species of license. [Charles Anthon,
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, New York, 1843]    In reference to modern works by 1859
(originally French novels), later as a charge against native literature; sense of obscene pictures
in modern times is from 1906. Also sometimes used late 19c. for description of prostitutes as a
matter of public hygiene. The Medical Archives in 1873 proposed porniatria for the lengthy and
really meaningless expression 'social evil hospital' ....     I shall not today attempt further to
define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description [hard-
core pornography]; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I
see it, and the motion picture involved in this case is not that. [U.S. Supreme Court Justice Potter
Stewart, concurring opinion, Jacobellis v. Ohio, 1964]    In ancient contexts, often paired with
rhypography, genre painting of low, sordid, or unsuitable subjects. Pornocracy (1860) is the
dominating influence of harlots, used specifically of the government of Rome during the first half
of the 10th century by Theodora and her daughters. Pornotopia (1966) was coined to describe the
ideal erotic-world of pornographic movies.


dispense (v.)

early 14c., from Old French dispenser give out (13c.), from Latin dispensare disburse, administer,
distribute (by weight), frequentative of dispendere pay out, from dis- out (see dis-) + pendere to
pay, weigh (see pendant).    In Medieval Latin, dispendere was used in the ecclesiastical sense of
grant license to do what is forbidden or omit what is required (a power of popes, bishops, etc.),
and thus acquired a sense of grant remission from punishment or exemption from law, hence to do away
with (1570s), do without (c.1600). Older sense is preserved in dispensary. Related: Dispensed;
dispensing.


poetic (adj.)

1520s, from poet + -ic, or else from or influenced by Middle French poetique (c.1400), from Latin
poeticus, from Greek poietikos pertaining to poetry, literally creative, productive, from poietos
made, verbal adjective of poiein to make (see poet). Related: Poetics (1727). Poetic justice ideal
justice as portrayed in plays and stories is from 1670s. Poetic license attested by 1733.    Earlier
adjective was poetical (late 14c.); also obsolete poetly (mid-15c.). Related: Poetically (early
15c.).


leave (n.)

permission, Old English leafe leave, permission, license, dative and accusative of leaf permission,
from Proto-Germanic *lauba (cognates: Old Norse leyfi permission, Old Saxon orlof, Old Frisian
orlof, German Urlaub leave of absence), from PIE *leubh- to care, desire, love, approve (see love
(n.)). Cognate with Old English lief dear, the original idea being approval resulting from pleasure.
Compare love, believe. In military sense, it is attested from 1771.


patent (n.)

late 14c., open letter or document from some authority, shortened form of Anglo-French lettre patent
(also in Medieval Latin (litter&aelig;) patentes), literally open letter (late 13c.), from Old
French patente (see patent (adj.).  The Letters Patent were ... written upon open sheets of
parchment, with the Great Seal pendent at the bottom ... [while] the 'Litter&aelig; Claus&aelig;,'
or Letters Close, ... being of a more private nature, and addressed to one or two individuals only,
were closed or folded up and sealed on the outside. [S.R. Scargill-Bird, A Guide to the Principal
Classes of Documents at the Public Record Office, 1891]  Meaning a license covering an invention is
from 1580s.


tag (n.1)

small, hanging piece from a garment, c.1400, of uncertain origin but probably from a Scandinavian
source (compare Norwegian tagg point, prong, barb, Swedish tagg prickle, thorn) and related to
Middle Low German tagge branch, twig, spike), from Proto-Germanic *tag-. The sense development might
be point of metal at the end of a cord, string, etc., hence part hanging loose. Or perhaps
ultimately from PIE *dek-, a root forming words referring to fringe, horsetail, locks of hair (see
with tail (n.1)).    Meaning a label is first recorded 1835; sense of automobile license plate is
recorded from 1935, originally underworld slang. Meaning an epithet, popular designation is recorded
from 1961, hence slang verb meaning write graffiti in public places (1990).


symbol (n.)

early 15c., creed, summary, religious belief, from Late Latin symbolum creed, token, mark, from
Greek symbolon token, watchword, sign by which one infers; ticket, a permit, license (the word was
applied c.250 by Cyprian of Carthage to the Apostles' Creed, on the notion of the mark that
distinguishes Christians from pagans), literally that which is thrown or cast together, from
assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + bole a throwing, a casting, the stroke of a missile,
bolt, beam, from bol-, nominative stem of ballein to throw (see ballistics).    The sense evolution
in Greek is from throwing things together to contrasting to comparing to token used in comparisons
to determine if something is genuine. Hence, outward sign of something. The meaning something which
stands for something else first recorded 1590 (in Faerie Queene). As a written character, 1610s.


baccalaureate (n.)

1620s, university degree of a bachelor, from Modern Latin baccalaureatus, from baccalaureus student
with the first degree, alteration of Medieval Latin baccalarius one who has attained the lowest
degree in a university, advanced student lecturing under his master's supervision but not yet having
personal license (altered by folk etymology or word-play, as if from bacca lauri laurel berry,
laurels being awarded for academic success).    The Medieval Latin word is of uncertain origin;
perhaps ultimately from Latin baculum staff (see bacillus), which the young student might carry. Or
it might be a re-Latinization of bachelor in its academic sense.     In modern U.S. usage,
baccalaureate usually is short for baccalaureate sermon (1864), a religious farewell address to a
graduating class at an American college, from the adjectival sense pertaining to the university
degree of bachelor.


ticket (n.)

1520s, short note or document, from a shortened form of Middle French etiquet label, note, from Old
French estiquette a little note (late 14c.), especially one affixed to a gate or wall as a public
notice, literally something stuck (up or on), from estiquer to affix, stick on, attach, from
Frankish *stikkan, cognate with Old English stician to pierce, from Proto-Germanic *stikken to be
stuck, stative form from PIE *steig- to stick; pointed (see stick (v.)).    Meaning card or piece of
paper that gives its holder a right or privilege is first recorded 1670s, probably developing from
the sense of certificate, license, permit. The political sense of list of candidates put forward by
a faction has been used in American English since 1711. Meaning official notification of offense is
from 1930. Big ticket item is from 1953. Slang the ticket just the thing, what is expected is
recorded from 1838, perhaps with notion of a winning lottery ticket.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


