light (adj.1)

not heavy, from Old English leoht not heavy, light in weight; easy, trifling; quick, agile, from
Proto-Germanic *lingkhtaz (cognates: Old Norse lettr, Swedish l&auml;tt, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
licht, German leicht, Gothic leihts), from PIE root *legwh- not heavy, having little weight
(cognates: Latin levis light, Old Irish lu small; see lever).    The notion in make light of (1520s)
is of unimportance. Alternative spelling lite, the darling of advertisers, is first recorded 1962.
The adverb is Old English leohte, from the adjective. Light-skirts woman of easy virtue is attested
from 1590s. To make light of is from 1520s.


light (v.1)

touch down, from Old English lihtan to alight; alleviate, leave, from Proto-Germanic *linkhtijan,
literally to make light, from *lingkhtaz not heavy (see light (adj.1)). Apparently the ground sense
is to dismount a horse, etc., and thus relieve it of one's weight. To light out leave hastily is
1870, from a nautical meaning move out, move heavy objects, of unknown origin but perhaps belonging
to this word (compare lighter (n.1)).


light-hearted (adj.)

also lighthearted, cheerful, c.1400, from light (adj.1) + hearted. Related: Light-heartedly; light-
heartedness.


light (n.)

brightness, radiant energy, Old English leht, earlier leoht light, daylight; luminous, beautiful,
from Proto-Germanic *leukhtam (cognates: Old Saxon lioht, Old Frisian liacht, Middle Dutch lucht,
Dutch licht, Old High German lioht, German Licht, Gothic liuha&#254; light), from PIE *leuk- light,
brightness (cognates: Sanskrit rocate shines; Armenian lois light, lusin moon; Greek leukos bright,
shining, white; Latin lucere to shine, lux light, lucidus clear; Old Church Slavonic luci light;
Lithuanian laukas pale; Welsh llug gleam, glimmer; Old Irish loche lightning, luchair brightness;
Hittite lukezi is bright).    The -gh- was an Anglo-French scribal attempt to render the Germanic
hard -h- sound, which has since disappeared from this word. The figurative spiritual sense was in
Old English; the sense of mental illumination is first recorded mid-15c. Meaning something used for
igniting is from 1680s. Meaning a consideration which puts something in a certain view (as in in
light of) is from 1680s. Something that's a joy and a delight has been the light of (someone's) eyes
since Old English:   &#208;u eart dohtor min, minra eagna leoht [Juliana].    To see the light come
into the world is from 1680s; later in a Christian sense.


light-headed (adj.)

also lightheaded, dizzy, 1530s; from light (adj.1) + head (n.). Related: Light-headedness.


light year (n.)

also light-year, lightyear, distance light travels in one year, 1888, from light (n.) + year.


light (v.2)

to illuminate, fill with brightness, Old English lyhtan, common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon
liohtian, Old High German liuhtan, German leuchten, Gothic liuhtjan to light), from source of from
light (n.). Related: Lighted; lighting.


lightweight (adj.)

also light-weight, 1773 in horse-racing, also in pugilism; from light (adj.1) + weight. Figurative
sense of inconsequential first attested 1809.


lights (n.)

the lungs, c.1200, literally the light (in weight) organs, from light (adj.1); also see lung.
Obsolete now except in phrases like to knock (someone's) lights out.


light-fingered (adj.)

thievish, 1540s, from light (adj.1) + finger.


lighten (v.2)

shed light upon, illuminate, brighten, early 14c., from light (n.) -en (1). Meaning to grow brighter
is late 14c. Of faces, expressions, etc., from 1795. Related: Lightened; lightening.


light (adj.2)

not dark, Old English leoht, common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German lioht, Old
Frisian liacht, German licht bright, from the source of Old English leoht (see light (n.)). Meaning
pale-hued is from 1540s.


light bulb (n.)

also lightbulb, 1884, from light (n.) + bulb.


lighter (n.2)

person who lights, 1550s, agent noun from light (v.2).


lightness (n.)

quality of having little weight, late Old English, from light (adj.1) + -ness.


lightening (n.)

the shedding of light, mid-14c., verbal noun from lighten (v.2). Meaning alleviation of weight
(literal and figurative) is from 1520s, from lighten (v.1).


lighter (n.1)

barge, late 15c., agent noun from light (adj.1), with a sense of lightening a load, or else from
Dutch lichter, from lichten to lighten, unload, on the same notion. They are used in loading or
unloading ships that cannot approach a wharf.


lighting (n.)

shining, illumination, Old English lihting, from leoht (see light (n.)).


lighthouse (n.)

1620s, from light (n.) + house (n.).


lightless (adj.)

Old English leohtleas; see light (n.) + -less.


lightly (adv.)

Old English leohtlice so as not to be heavy (of material things, but also of sleep, blows, etc.);
cognate with Old Frisian lichtelik, Old High German lihtlihho, German leichtlich, Old Norse lettlega
(see light (adj.1)). Meaning frivolously, indifferently is from early 13c.


lighten (v.1)

to make less heavy, figuratively to make cheerful, mid-14c., from light (adj.1) + -en (1). Related:
Lightened; lightening.


lightning (n.)

late 13c., present participle of lightnen make bright, extended form of Old English lihting, from
leht (see light (n.)). Meaning cheap, raw whiskey is attested from 1781, also sometimes gin.
Lightning bug is attested from 1778. Lightning rod from 1790.


luminary (n.)

mid-15c., lamp, source of (artificial) light, from Old French luminarie (12c.), lamp, lights,
lighting; candles; brightness, illumination, from Late Latin luminare light, torch, lamp, heavenly
body, literally that which gives light, from Latin lumen (genitive luminis) light, related to lucere
to shine (see light (n.)). Sense of notable person is first recorded 1690s, though the Middle
English word also had a figurative sense of source of spiritual light, example of holiness.


night-light (n.)

1640s, faint light visible in the sky at night, from night + light (n.). As small light used in
rooms at night to keep them from total darkness from 1851.


skylight (n.)

1670s, light from the sky, from sky (n.) + light (n.). Meaning small opening in a roof to admit
light is recorded from 1680s. Related: Sky-lit.


illumination (n.)

late 14c., spiritual enlightenment, from Latin illuminationem (nominative illuminatio), from past
participle stem of illuminare to throw into light, make bright, light up; figuratively to set off,
illustrate, from assimilated form of in- in, into (see in- (2)) + lumen (genitive luminis) light,
related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Meaning action of lighting is from 1560s.


luminous (adj.)

early 15c., full of light, from Latin luminosus shining, full of light, from lumen (genitive
luminis) light, related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Related: Luminously.


eclair (n.)

1861, from French &eacute;clair, literally lightning, from Old French esclair light, daylight, flash
of light, from esclairare to light up, make shine (12c.), ultimately from Latin exclarare light up,
illumine, from ex- out (see ex-) + clarus clear (see clear (adj.)).


sidelight (n.)

also side-light, c.1600, light coming from the side, from side (adj.) + light (n.). Figurative
meaning incidental information on a subject is attested from 1862.


lever (n.)

c.1300, from Old French levier (Modern French leveur) a lifter, a lever, agent noun from lever to
raise, from Latin levare to raise, from levis light in weight, from PIE root *legwh- light, having
little weight; easy, agile, nimble (cognates: Sanskrit laghuh quick, small; Greek elakhys small,
elaphros light; Old Church Slavonic liguku, Lithuanian lengvas light; Old Irish laigiu smaller,
worse; Gothic leihts, Old English leoht light (adj.)). As a verb, 1856, from the noun.


lamp (n.)

c.1200, from Old French lampe lamp, lights (12c.), from Latin lampas a light, torch, flambeau, from
Greek lampas torch, lamp, beacon, meteor, light, from lampein to shine, from nasalized form of PIE
root *lap- to shine (cognates: Lithuanian lope light, Old Irish lassar flame). Replaced Old English
leohtf&aelig;t light vessel. To smell of the lamp be a product of laborious night study is from
1570s.


Drummond light (n.)

torch that burns calcium oxide (lime) and gives off intense white light, 1854, named for Scottish
engineer Capt. Thomas Drummond, R.E., (1797-1840), who invented it c.1825.


photic (adj.)

1843, pertaining to light; 1899, pertaining to the parts of the ocean penetrated by sunlight, from
Greek phot-, comb. form of Greek phos light (related to phainein to show, to bring to light; see
phantasm) + -ic.


illustration (n.)

c.1400, a shining; early 15c., a manifestation; mid-15c., a spiritual illumination, from Old French
illustration apparition, appearance, and directly from Latin illustrationem (nominative illustratio)
vivid representation (in writing), literally an enlightening, from past participle stem of
illustrare light up, make light, illuminate; figuratively make clear, disclose, explain; adorn,
render distinguished, from assimilated form of in- in (see in- (2)) + lustrare make bright,
illuminate, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)). Mental sense of act of making clear
in the mind is from 1580s. Meaning an illustrative picture is from 1816.


lung (n.)

human respiratory organ, c.1300, from Old English lungen (plural), from Proto-Germanic *lungw-
(cognates: Old Norse lunge, Old Frisian lungen, Middle Dutch longhe, Dutch long, Old High German
lungun, German lunge lung), literally the light organ, from PIE *legwh- not heavy, having little
weight; easy, agile, nimble (cognates: Russian l&#235;gkij, Polish lekki light; Russian l&#235;gkoje
lung, Greek elaphros light in weight; see also lever).    The notion probably is from the fact that,
when thrown into a pot of water, lungs of a slaughtered animal float, while the heart, liver, etc.,
do not. Compare also Portuguese leve lung, from Latin levis light; Irish scaman lungs, from scaman
light; Welsh ysgyfaint lungs, from ysgafn light. See also lights, pulmonary. Lung cancer attested
from 1882.


lux (n.)

unit of illumination, 1889, from Latin lux light (see light (n.)).


luster (n.1)

gloss, radiance, 1520s, from Middle French lustre gloss, radiance (14c.), common Romanic (cognates:
Spanish and Portuguese lustre, Rumanian lustru, Italian lustro splendor, brilliancy), from Latin
lustrare spread light over, brighten, illumine, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)).


phosphorus (n.)

substance or organism that shines of itself, 1640s, from Latin phosphorus light-bringing, also the
morning star (a sense attested in English from 1620), from Greek Phosphoros morning star, literally
torchbearer, from phos light, contraction of phaos light, daylight (related to phainein to show, to
bring to light; see phantasm) + phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer).    As the name of
a non-metallic chemical element, it is recorded from 1680, originally one among several substances
so called; the word used exclusively of the element from c.1750. It was discovered in 1669 by
Henning Brand, merchant and alchemist of Hamburg, who derived it from urine. Lavoisier demonstrated
it was an element in 1777. According to Flood, It is the first element whose discoverer is known.


phantasm (n.)

early 13c., fantesme, from Old French fantosme a dream, illusion, fantasy; apparition, ghost,
phantom (12c.), and directly from Latin phantasma an apparition, specter, from Greek phantasma
image, phantom, apparition; mere image, unreality, from phantazein to make visible, display, from
stem of phainein to bring to light, make appear; come to light, be seen, appear; explain, expound,
inform against; appear to be so, from PIE root *bha- (1) to shine (cognates: Sanskrit bhati shines,
glitters, Old Irish ban white, light, ray of light). Spelling conformed to Latin from 16c. (see ph).
A spelling variant of phantom, differentiated, but so that the differences are elusive [Fowler].


limn (v.)

early 15c., to illuminate (manuscripts), altered from Middle English luminen, to illuminate
manuscripts (late 14c.), from Old French luminer light up, illuminate, from Latin luminare
illuminate, burnish, from lumen (genitive luminis) radiant energy, light, related to lucere to shine
(see light (n.)). Sense of portray, depict first recorded 1590s. Related: Limned.


limelight (n.)

1826, popular name for Drummond light, a brilliant light created by the incandescence of lime (n.1);
adopted for lighthouses and later for the Victorian stage, where it illuminated the principal
actors, hence the figurative sense of on stage, at the center of attention (1877).


legerdemain (n.)

early 15c., conjuring tricks, from Middle French l&eacute;ger de main quick of hand, literally light
of hand, from l&eacute;ger light in weight (from Latin levis light; see lever) + main hand (from
Latin manus; see manual).


Luna (n.)

late 14c. moon, also an alchemical name for silver; from Latin luna moon, goddess of the moon, from
*leuksna- (cognates: Old Church Slavonic luna moon, Old Prussian lauxnos stars, Middle Irish luan
light, moon), from the same source as lux, lumen light, lucere to shine (see light (n.)). The luna
moth (1841, American English) so called for the crescent-shaped markings on its wings. Lunarian
(1708) was an early word for inhabitant of the moon.


lumen (n.)

unit of luminosity, 1897, coined 1894 by French physicist Andr&eacute;-Eug&egrave;ne Blondel
(1863-1938) from Latin lumen light, related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)).


Melchior

masc. proper name, literally king of light, from Hebrew melekh king + or light.


cabriolet (n.)

light two-wheeled chaise, 1766, from French cabriolet (18c.), derivative of cabriole (see cab). So
called from its light, leaping motion.


luciferous (adj.)

light-bringing, emitting light, 1650s, from Latin lucifer (see Lucifer) + -ous. Figurative use is
earliest (1640s) and more common.


illumine (v.)

late 14c., to enlighten spiritually; mid-15c., to light up, shine light on, from Old French
illuminer, from Latin illuminare (see illumination). Related: illumined.


candle (n.)

Old English candel lamp, lantern, candle, an early ecclesiastical borrowing from Latin candela a
light, torch, candle made of tallow or wax, from candere to shine, from PIE root *kand- to glow, to
shine, to shoot out light (cognates: Sanskrit cand- to give light, shine, candra- shining, glowing,
moon; Greek kandaros coal; Welsh cann white; Middle Irish condud fuel).    Candles were unknown in
ancient Greece (where oil lamps sufficed), but common from early times among Romans and Etruscans.
Candles on birthday cakes seems to have been originally a German custom. To hold a candle to
originally meant to help in a subordinate capacity, from the notion of an assistant or apprentice
holding a candle for light while the master works (compare Old English taporberend acolyte). To burn
the candle at both ends is recorded from 1730.


