list (v.3)

to put down in a list; to make a list of, 1610s, from list (n.1). Meaning to place real estate on
the market is from 1904. Attested from c.1300 as put an edge around, from list (n.2). Related:
Listed; listing.


list (n.2)

a narrow strip, Old English liste border, hem, edge, strip, from Proto-Germanic *liston (cognates:
Old High German lista strip, border, list, Old Norse lista border, selvage,German leiste), from PIE
*leizd- border, band (see list (n.1)). The Germanic root also is the source of French liste, Italian
lista. This was the source of archaic lists place of combat, originally at the boundary of fields.


list (n.1)

catalogue consisting of names in a row or series, c.1600, from Middle English liste border, edging,
stripe (late 13c.), from Old French liste border, band, row, group, also strip of paper, or from Old
Italian lista border, strip of paper, list, both from a Germanic source (compare Old High German
lista strip, border, list, Old Norse lista border, selvage, Old English liste border), from Proto-
Germanic *liston, from PIE *leizd- border, band. The sense of enumeration is from strips of paper
used as a sort of catalogue.


list (v.1)

tilt, lean, especially of a ship, 1880, earlier (1620s) lust, of unknown origin, perhaps an
unexplained spelling variant of Middle English lysten to please, desire, wish, like (see list (v.4))
with a sense development from the notion of leaning toward what one desires (compare incline).
Related: Listed; listing. The noun in this sense is from 1630s.


listed (adj.)

included in a roll or catalogue, 1882, from past participle of list (v.3). Of telephone numbers, in
the phone book, from 1919.


listing (n.)

the placing of property with an agent to be catalogued for sale, 1906, from present participle of
list (v.3); meaning an entry in a catalogue is from 1962.


listless (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle English liste pleasure, joy, delight (see list (v.4)) + -less. Related:
Listlessly; listlessness.


list (v.2)

hear, hearken, now poetic or obsolete, from Old English hlystan hear, hearken, from hlyst hearing,
from Proto-Germanic *khlustiz, from PIE *kleu- to hear (see listen). Related: Listed; listing.


list (v.4)

to be pleased, desire (archaic), mid-12c., lusten, listen to please, desire, from Old English lystan
to please, cause pleasure or desire, provoke longing, from Proto-Germanic *lustijan (cognates: Old
Saxon lustian, Dutch lusten to like, fancy, Old High German lusten, German l&uuml;sten, Old Norse
lysta); from the root of lust (n.). Related: Listed; listing. As a noun, c.1200, from the verb.
Somehow English has lost listy (adj.) pleasant, willing (to do something); ready, quick (mid-15c.).


listen (v.)

Old English hlysnan to listen, from Proto-Germanic *khlusinon (cognates: Dutch luisteren, Old High
German hlosen to listen, German lauschen to listen), from PIE root *kleu- hearing, to hear
(cognates: Sanskrit srnoti hears, srosati hears, obeys; Avestan sraothra ear; Middle Persian srod
hearing, sound; Lithuanian klausau to hear, slove splendor, honor; Old Church Slavonic slusati to
hear, slava fame, glory, slovo word; Greek klyo hear, be called, kleos report, rumor, fame glory,
kleio make famous; Latin cluere to hear oneself called, be spoken of; Old Irish ro-clui-nethar
hears, clunim I hear, clu fame, glory, cluada ears; Welsh clywaf I hear; Old English hlud loud,
hleo&eth;or tone, tune; Old High German hlut sound; Gothic hilu&thorn; listening, attention). The
-t- probably is by influence of Old English hlystan (see list (v.2)). For vowel evolution, see bury.
As a noun from 1788 (on the listen alert).


blacklist (n.)

also black-list, black list, list of persons who have incurred suspicion, 1610s, from black (adj.),
here indicative of disgrace, censure, punishment (attested from 1590s, in black book) + list (n.).
Specifically of employers' list of workers considered troublesome (usually for union activity) is
from 1888. As a verb, from 1718. Related: Blacklisted; blacklisting.


shortlist (v.)

to place (someone) on the 'short list'  for advancement or preferment, 1955, from short list (n.) in
this sense, which is attested by 1927.


rundown (n.)

in baseball, 1908, from verbal phrase, from run (v.) + down (adv.). Meaning list of entries in a
horse race and the odds is from 1935; slang generalized sense of summary, account, list of
information or facts is from 1945.


tariff (n.)

1590s, arithmetical table, also official list of customs duties on imports or exports; law
regulating import duties, from Italian tariffa tariff, price, assessment, Medieval Latin tarifa list
of prices, book of rates, from Arabic ta'rif information, notification, a making known; inventory of
fees to be paid, verbal noun from arafa he made known, he taught. Sense of classified list of
charges made in a business is recorded from 1757. The U.S. Tariff of Abominations was passed in
1828.


repertory (n.)

1550s, an index, list, catalogue, from Late Latin repertorium inventory, list, from Latin repertus,
past participle of reperire to find, get, invent, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + parire,
archaic form of paerere produce, bring forth, from PIE root *per- attempt (see parent (n.)).
Meaning list of performances is first recorded 1845, from Anglicized use of repertoire; repertory
theater is attested from 1896. Related: Repertorial.


checklist (n.)

also check-list, 1853, American English, from check + list (n.). Two words until c.1880; hyphenated
until late 20c.


roster (n.)

1727, from Dutch rooster table, list, originally gridiron, from Middle Dutch roosten to roast (see
roast (v.)). So called from the grid of lines drawn on a paper to make a list.


backlist (n.)

1946, in publishing, from back (adj.) + list (n.). As a verb, to put on the back list, from 1983.
Related: Backlisted.


table (v.)

mid-15c., enter into a list, form into a list or catalogue, also provide with food, from table (n.).
In parliamentary sense, 1718, originally to lay on the (speaker's) table for discussion; but in U.S.
political jargon it has chiefly the sense of to postpone indefinitely (1866) via notion of lay aside
for future consideration. Related: Tabled; tabling.


play-list (n.)

also playlist, 1975 in the radio station sense, from play (v.) + list (n.).


vocabulary (n.)

1530s, list of words with explanations, from Medieval Latin vocabularium a list of words, from Latin
vocabulum word, name, noun, from vocare to name, call (see voice (n.)). Meaning range of words in
the language of a person or group is first attested 1753.


enlist (v.)

1590s, from en- (1) make, put in + list (n.). Possibly suggested by Dutch inlijsten to write on a
list. Related: Enlisted; enlisting.


inventory (n.)

early 15c., from Old French inventoire inventory, detailed list of goods, catalogue, from Medieval
Latin inventorium (Late Latin inventarium) list of what is found, from Latin inventus, past
participle of invenire to find (see invention). The verb is first recorded c.1600, from the noun.


A-list (adj.)

in celebrity sense, 1984, from A in the sense of first, best (as in A-1) + list (n.).


catalogue (n.)

early 15c., from Old French catalogue list, index (14c.), and directly from Late Latin catalogus,
from Greek katalogos a list, register, enrollment (such as the katalogos neon, the catalogue of
ships in the Iliad), from kata down; completely (see cata-) + legein to say, count (see lecture
(n.)).


menu (n.)

1837, from French menu de repas list of what is served at a meal, from Middle French menu (adj.)
small, detailed (11c.), from Latin minutus small, literally made smaller, past participle of minuere
to diminish, from root of minus to diminish (see minus). Computer usage is from 1967, from expanded
sense of any detailed list, first attested 1889.


calendar (n.)

c.1200, system of division of the year; mid-14c. as table showing divisions of the year; from Old
French calendier list, register, from Latin calendarium account book, from calendae/kalendae calends
the first day of the Roman month -- when debts fell due and accounts were reckoned -- from calare to
announce solemnly, call out, as the priests did in proclaiming the new moon that marked the calends,
from PIE root kele- (2) to call, shout (see claim (v.)).    Taken by the early Church for its
register list of saints and their feast days. The -ar spelling in English is 17c. to differentiate
it from the now obscure calender cloth-presser.


index (n.)

late 14c., the forefinger, from Latin index (genitive indicis) forefinger, pointer, sign, list,
literally anything which points out, from indicare point out (see indication). Meaning list of a
book's contents is first attested 1570s, from Latin phrases such as Index Nominum Index of Names,
index expurgatorius specification of passages to be deleted from works otherwise permitted.
Scientific sense (refractive index, etc.) is from 1829; economic sense (cost-of-living index, etc.)
is from 1870, from the scientific usage, from sense an indicator. The Church sense of forbidden
books is from index librorum prohibitorum, first published 1564 by authority of Pius IV.


Wendy

as a woman's given name, apparently coined by James M. Barrie (Peter and Wendy, 1911); it first
registers on the U.S. Social Security list of popular baby names in 1936 and was in the top 40 names
for girls born in the U.S. from 1965 to 1976


wait (v.)

c.1200, to watch with hostile intent, lie in wait for, plot against, from Anglo-French and Old North
French waitier to watch (Old French gaitier defend, watch out, be on one's guard; lie in wait for;
Modern French guetter), from Frankish *wahton or another Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *waht-
(cognates: Dutch wacht a watching, Old High German wahten, German wachten to watch, to guard; Old
High German wahhon to watch, be awake, Old English wacian to be awake; see wake (v.)). General sense
of remain in some place is from late 14c.; that of to see to it that something occurs is late 14c.
Meaning to stand by in attendance on is late 14c.; specific sense of serve as an attendant at a
table is from 1560s. Related: Waited; waiting.    To wait (something) out endure a period of waiting
is recorded from 1849. Waiting room is attested from 1680s. Waiting list is recorded from 1841; the
verb wait-list to put (someone) on a waiting list is recorded from 1960. Waiting game is recorded
from 1835, originally in horse-racing.    When speed, not stoutness, is the best of a horse, quite a
contrary system is practised. With such a horse, the jockey plays a waiting game; that is, he
carefully nurses him through the race, so as not to distress him by overpacing him; as the finish
approaches, he creeps up to his horses by degrees, but does not quit them to go in front till he
sees that the pace has made them safe, -- when he lets loose and wins. [James Christie Whyte,
History of the British Turf, London, 1840]


unlisted (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of list (v.). In reference to stocks, attested from 1905;
of phone numbers, from 1937 (American English).


screed (n.)

early 14c., fragment, also strip of cloth, from northern England dialectal variant of Old English
screade (see shred (n.)). Meaning lengthy speech is first recorded 1789, from notion of reading from
a long list.


docket (n.)

mid-15c., a summary or abstract, of unknown origin, perhaps a diminutive form related to dock (v.).
An early form was doggette. Meaning list of lawsuits to be tried is from 1709.


payroll (n.)

1740, from pay (v.) + roll (n.); total amount paid to employees over a period, hence, via records-
keeping, list of employees receiving pay.


conscript (adj.)

1530s, from Latin conscriptus, past participle of conscribere to draw up, list, literally to write
together (see conscription).


Amanda

fem. proper name, literally worthy to be loved, fem. of Latin amandus pleasing, gerundive of amare
to love (see Amy). A top 10 list name for girls born in U.S. between 1976 and 1995.


repertoire (n.)

a stock of plays, songs, etc., which a performer or company has studied and is ready to perform,
1847, from French r&eacute;pertoire, literally index, list (14c.), from Late Latin repertorium
inventory (see repertory).


higgledy-piggledy

confusedly, hurriedly, 1590s, a vocal gesture [OED] probably formed from pig and the animal's
suggestions of mess and disorder. Reduplications in the h-/p- pattern are common (as in hanky-panky,
hocus-pocus, hinch(y)-pinch(y), an obsolete children's game, attested from c.1600).    Edward Moor,
Suffolk Words and Phrases (London, 1823), quotes a list of reduplications from Ray's Collection of
English Words (1768), all said to signify any confusion or mixture; the list has higgledy-piggledy,
hurly-burly, hodge-podge, mingle-mangle, arsy-versy, kim-kam, hub-bub, crawly-mauly, and hab-nab. To
which he might have added, Moor writes, crincum-crankum, crinkle-crankle, flim-flam, fiddle-faddle,
gibble-gabble, harum-scarum, helter-skelter, hiccup-suickup, hocus-pocus, hotch-potch, hugger-
mugger, hum-drum, hum-strum, hurry-scurry, jibber-jabber, prittle-prattle, shilly-shally, tittle-
tattle, and topsy-turvy. Many of them seem to date to the 16th century.


Joshua

masc. proper name, biblical successor of Moses, from Hebrew Yehoshua, literally the Lord is
salvation. Joshua tree (1867) is perhaps so called because its shape compared to pictures of Joshua
brandishing a spear (Josh. viii:18). In the top 10 list of names for boys in the U.S. since 1979.


roll call (n.)

1775, from roll (n.) list of names used to determine who is present (a sense attested from 1590s) +
call (v.).


shopping (n.)

1764, act or practice of visiting shops, verbal noun from shop (v.). Meaning goods that have been
purchased is from 1934. Shopping bag attested from 1886; shopping list from 1913.


erratum (n.)

list of corrections attached to a printed book, 1580s, from Latin erratum (plural errata), neuter
past participle of errare (see err).


billet (v.)

1590s, to assign quarters to, earlier, as a noun, official record or register (Middle English), from
Anglo-French billette list, schedule, diminutive of bille (see bill (n.1)). Related: Billeted;
billeting.


David

masc. proper name, in Old Testament second king of Israel and Judah and author of psalms, from
Hebrew Dawidh, literally darling, beloved friend. The name was common in England and Scotland by
12c., but much earlier in Wales. A nickname form was Dawe, hence surnames Dawson, Dawkins. A top 10
list name for boys born in the U.S. from 1934 to 1992.


Sharon

fem. proper name; from the name of the fertile coastal plain between Jaffa and Mount Carmel, from
Hebrew, short for yesharon, properly the Plain, from stem of yashar was straight, was even (compare
Hebrew mishor level land, plain). A top-10 list name for girls born in the U.S. between 1943 and
1949.


tabular (adj.)

table-shaped, 1650s, from French tabulaire  or directly from Latin tabularis of a slab or tablet, of
boards or planks, from tabula slab (see table (n.)). Meaning arranged in a list or columns;
ascertained or computed by means of tables is from 1710.


Pete

familiar form of masc. proper name Peter. For Pete's sake is attested from 1903 in a list of
children's expressions published in Massachusetts, probably a euphemistic use of the disciple's name
in place of Christ; as an exclamation or quasi-oath, Peter! was in use 14c., but this likely is not
connected to the modern use.


Jane

fem. proper name, from French Jeanne, Old French Jehane, from Medieval Latin Johanna (see John). As
a generic name for girl, girlfriend it is attested from 1906 in U.S. slang. Never a top-10 list name
for girls born in the U.S., it ranked in the top 50 from 1931 to 1956. It may owe its everywoman
reputation rather to its association with John.


syllabus (n.)

1650s, table of contents of a series of lectures, etc., from Late Latin syllabus list, ultimately a
misreading of Greek sittybos parchment label, table of contents, of unknown origin. The misprint
appeared in a 15c. edition of Cicero's Ad Atticum (see OED). Had it been a real word, the proper
plural would be syllabi.


laundry (n.)

late 14c., place for washing; mid-15c. act of washing, from Old French lavanderie, from Latin
lavandaria, plural of lavandarium things to be washed, from lavare to wash (see lave). As a verb,
from 1880. Laundry list in figurative sense is from 1958.


