lively (adj.)

Old English liflic living, existing, literally life-like; from life + -ly (2). Sense of active,
energetic developed by early 13c., from notion full of life.


fandango (n.)

mid-18c., lively Spanish dance, the word of unknown etymology [OED says alleged to be of negro
origin], perhaps related to fado. Fado is lovely, but not lively, so perhaps the link, if any, is
thematic. But the late date argues against it.


frisk (v.)

1510s, to dance, frolic, from Middle English frisk lively (mid-15c.), from Middle French frisque
lively, brisk, from Old French frisque fresh, new; merry, animated (13c.), possibly from a Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch vrisch fresh, Old High German frisc lively; see fresh (adj.1)). Sense
of pat down in a search first recorded 1781. Related: Frisked; frisking. As a noun from 1520s.


vivace (adv.)

1680s, from Italian vivace brisk, lively, from Latin vivac-, stem of vivax lively, vigorous; long-
lived, enduring (see vivacity).


wake (v.)

to become awake, a Middle English merger of Old English wacan to become awake, arise, be born,
originate, and Old English wacian to be or remain awake, both from Proto-Germanic *waken (cognates:
Old Saxon wakon, Old Norse vaka, Danish vaage, Old Frisian waka, Dutch waken, Old High German
wahhen, German wachen to be awake, Gothic wakan to watch), from PIE root *weg- (2) to be strong, be
lively (cognates: Sanskrit vajah force, strength; swiftness, speed, vajayati drives on; Latin vigil
watchful, awake,  vigere be lively, thrive, velox fast, lively, vegere to enliven; vigil awake,
wakeful, vigor liveliness, activity). Causative sense to rouse from sleep is attested from c.1300.
Related: Waked; waking.


quick (adj.)

Old English cwic living, alive, animate, and figuratively, of mental qualities, rapid, ready, from
Proto-Germanic *kwikwaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian quik, Old Norse kvikr living, alive,
Dutch kwik lively, bright, sprightly, Old High German quec lively, German keck bold), from PIE root
*gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). Sense of lively, swift developed by late 12c., on notion of full of
life.    NE swift or the now more common fast may apply to rapid motion of any duration, while in
quick (in accordance with its original sense of 'live, lively') there is a notion of 'sudden' or
'soon over.' We speak of a fast horse or runner in a race, a quick starter but not a quick horse. A
somewhat similar feeling may distinguish NHG schnell and rasch or it may be more a matter of local
preference. [Buck]    Of persons, mentally active, from late 15c. Also in Middle English used of
soft soils, gravel pits, etc. where the ground is shifting and yielding (mid-14c., compare
quicksand). As an adverb from c.1300. To be quick about something is from 1937. Quick buck is from
1946, American English. Quick-change artist (1886) originally was an actor expert in playing
different roles in the same performance of a show. Quick-witted is from 1520s.


vigor (n.)

c.1300, physical strength, energy in an activity, from Anglo-French vigour, Old French vigor force,
strength (Modern French vigueur), from Latin vigorem (nominative vigor) liveliness, activity, force,
from vigere be lively, flourish, thrive, from PIE root *weg- (2) be lively or active (see wake
(v.)).


chipper (adj.)

1834, lively, nimble, American English, from northern British dialectal kipper nimble, frisky, the
origin of which is obscure.


red-hot (adj.)

late 14c., heated till it glows red (of metal, etc.); of persons, lively, passionate, it is recorded
from c.1600. Red-hot mama is 1926, jazz slang, earthy female singer, also girlfriend, lover.


spanking (adj.)

1660s, very big or fine, later (especially of horses) moving at a lively pace (1738), of uncertain
origin; perhaps from a Scandinavian source (OED compares Danish spanke to strut). Probably also
related to spanker something striking (for size, etc.), 1751; as a kind of sail from 1794.


stomp (v.)

1803, variant of stamp. Related: Stomped; stomping. Noun meaning lively social dance is recorded
from 1912 in jazz slang.


romp (n.)

1734, piece of lively play, from romp (v.). From 1706 as a wanton girl (probably a variant of ramp
(n.2)).


corky (adj.)

early 17c., light, buoyant (as cork is), hence, figuratively, of persons lively; from cork (n.) + -y
(2). Of bottled liquors or wine, having a flavor of cork, from 1889.


juicy (adj.)

early 15c., from juice (n.) + -y (2). Figurative sense weathly, full of some desired quality is from
1620s; sense of lively, suggestive, sensational is from 1883. Related: Juiciness.


spirited (adj.)

lively, energetic, 1590s, from spirit (v.) in its older sense. Milton uses it to mean possessed by a
spirit. Related: Spiritedly; spiritedness.


reel (n.2)

lively Highland dance, 1580s, probably a special use of reel (n.1), which had a secondary sense of a
whirl, whirling movement (1570s) or from reel (v.1). Applied to the music for such a dance from
1590s.


frisky (adj.)

c.1500, from frisk lively + -y (2). Related: Friskiness.


brusque (adj.)

1650s, from French brusque lively, fierce, from Italian adjective brusco sharp, tart, rough, perhaps
from Vulgar Latin *bruscum butcher's broom plant.


hijinks (n.)

also hi-jinks, high jinks, boisterous capers, lively or boisterous sport, 1842, from name of games
played at drinking parties (1690s). See jink.


livelily (adv.)

1550s, from lively + -ly (2).


jig (n.)

lively dance, 1560s, perhaps related to Middle French giguer to dance, or to the source of German
Geige violin. Meaning piece of sport, trick is 1590s, now mainly in phrase the jig is up (first
attested 1777 as the jig is over). As a verb from 1580s.


Gaylord

masc. proper name, also a surname (from early 13c.), also Galliard, from Old French Gaillart, from
Proto-Germanic *Gailhard lofty-hard, or Old French gaillard lively, brisk, gay, high-spirited, from
PIE root *gal- (3) to be able, have power.


romp (v.)

1709, to play, sport, frolic; 1734, piece of lively play; perhaps a variant of ramp (v.); but also
see romp (n.). Meaning to win (a contest) with great ease first attested 1888. Related: Romped;
romping.


allegro

1680s as a musical term, from Italian allegro cheerful, gay, from Latin alacrem (nominative alacer)
lively, cheerful, brisk (see alacrity).


airy (adj.)

late 14c., of the air, made of air, from air (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning breezy is attested from 1590s;
that of lively is from 1640s. Sense of vain, unsubstantial is from 1580s. Disparaging airy-fairy is
attested from 1920 (earlier in a sense of delicate or light as a fairy, which is how Tennyson used
it in 1830).


vivacious (adj.)

1640s, from Latin vivax (genitive vivacis) lively, vigorous (see vivacity) + -ous. Related:
Vivaciously.


shindig (n.)

dance, party, lively gathering, 1871, probably from shindy a spree, merrymaking (1821), also a game
like hockey; perhaps from shinty, name of a Scottish game akin to hockey (1771), earlier shinny (see
shinny (n.)).


skittish (adj.)

early 15c., very lively, frivolous, perhaps from Scandinavian base *skyt- (stem of Old Norse skjota
to shoot, launch, move quickly), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see
shoot (v.)). Sense of shy, nervous, apt to run first recorded c.1500, of horses. Related:
Skittishly; skittishness.


vivid (adj.)

1630s, from French vivide and perhaps also directly from Latin vividus spirited, animated, lively,
full of life, from vivus alive, from PIE *gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). Extension to colors is from
1660s. Sense of strong, distinct (as of memories, etc.) is from 1680s; that of very active or
intense (as of imagination, interest, etc.) is from 1853. Related: Vividly; vividness.


alacrity (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin alacritatem (nominative alacritas) liveliness, ardor, eagerness, from alacer
(genitive alacris) cheerful, brisk, lively; of uncertain origin, perhaps cognate with Gothic aljan
zeal, Old English ellen courage, zeal, strength, Old High German ellian.


quicksand (n.)

c.1300, from Middle English quyk living (see quick (adj.)) + sond sand (see sand (n.)). Old English
had cwecesund, but this might have meant lively strait of water.


vivacity (n.)

early 15c., liveliness, vigor, from Old French vivacite or directly from Latin vivacitatem
(nominative vivacitas) vital force, liveliness, from vivax (genitive vivacis) lively, also long-
lived, from vivere to live (see vital).


spry (adj.)

1746, active, nimble, vigorous, lively, dialectal, perhaps a shortening and alteration of sprightly
[Barnhart], or from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse spr&aelig;kr, dialectal Swedish sprygg
brisk, active), from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, from PIE root *(s)preg- (2) to jerk, scatter (see
sparse).


jive (v.1)

1928, to deceive playfully, also empty, misleading talk (n.) and a style of fast, lively jazz and
dance music, American English, from Black English, probably of African origin (compare Wolof jev,
jeu talk about someone absent, especially in a disparaging manner). Related: Jived; jiving. Used
from 1938 for New York City African-American slang.


vigorous (adj.)

c.1300 (early 13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French vigrus, Old French vigoros strong, robust,
powerful (12c., Modern French vigoreux), from Medieval Latin vigorosus, from Latin vigere be lively,
flourish, thrive (see vigor). Related: Vigorously.


enliven (v.)

1630s, give life to (enlive in same sense is from 1590s); see en- (1) make, put in + life + -en (1).
Meaning make lively or cheerful is from 1690s. Related: Enlivened; enlivening.


rack (n.2)

type of gait of a horse, 1580s, from rack (v.) move with a fast, lively gait 1520s in this sense
(implied in racking), of unknown origin; perhaps from French racquassure racking of a horse in his
pace, itself of unknown origin. Or perhaps a variant of rock (v.1).


livelihood (n.)

1610s, alteration of livelode means of keeping alive (c.1300), from Old English lifad course of
life, from lif life + lad way, course (see load). Similar formation in Old High German libleita.
Spelling assimilated to words in -hood. Earlier livelihood was a different word, meaning liveliness,
from lively.


active (adj.)

mid-14c., given to worldly activity (opposed to contemplative or monastic), from Old French actif
(12c.) or directly from Latin activus, from actus (see act (n.)). As capable of acting (opposed to
passive), from late 14c. Meaning energetic, lively is from 1590s; that of working, effective, in
operation is from 1640s. Active voice is recorded from 1765 (grammatical use of active dates from
mid-15c.).


schuhplattler (n.)

lively Alpine folk dance, 1874, from German Schuhplattler, from schuh shoe (see shoe (n.)) + south
German dialectal plattler, from platteln to dance.


watch (v.)

Old English w&aelig;ccan keep watch, be awake, from Proto-Germanic *wakjan, from PIE *weg- (2) to be
strong, lively; essentially the same word as Old English wacian be or remain awake (see wake (v.));
perhaps a Northumbrian form of it. Meaning be vigilant is from c.1200. That of to guard (someone or
some place), stand guard is late 14c. Sense of to observe, keep under observance is mid-15c.
Related: Watched; watching.


gavotte (n.)

lively dance, 1690s, from French gavotte (17c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al gavoto mountaineer's
dance, from gavot, a local name for an Alpine resident, literally boor, glutton, from gaver to
stuff, force-feed poultry, from Old Proven&ccedil;al gava crop. From the same source is French
gavache coward, dastard.


correspondent (n.)

one who communicates with another by letters, 1620s, from correspondent (adj.). The newspaper sense
is from 1711.    THE life of a newspaper correspondent, as may naturally be supposed, is one of
alternate cloud and sunshine--one day basking in an Andalusian balcony, playing a rubber at the club
on the off-nights of the Opera, being very musical when the handsome Prima Donna sings, and very
light fantastic toeish when the lively Prima Ballerina dances; another day roughing it over the
Balkan, amid sleet and snow, or starving at the tail of an ill-conditioned army, and receiving
bullets instead of billets-doux. [New Monthly Magazine, vol. 95, 1852, p.284]


pert (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in pertly), evident, unconcealed, shortened form of Middle English apert open,
frank, from Old French apert, from Latin apertus, past participle of aperire to open (see overt).
Sense of saucy, bold first recorded late 14c. Less pejorative meaning lively, brisk, in good spirits
(c.1500) survives in U.S. dialectal peart (with Middle English alternative spelling). Related:
Pertness.


gin (v.1)

in slang phrase gin up enliven, make more exciting, 1887, probably from earlier ginger up in same
sense (1849), from ginger in sense of spice, pizzazz; specifically in reference to the treatment
described in the 1811 slang dictionary under the entry for feague:    ... to put ginger up a horse's
fundament, and formerly, as it is said, a live eel, to make him lively and carry his tail well; it
is said, a forfeit is incurred by any horse-dealer's servant, who shall shew a horse without first
feaguing him. Feague is used, figuratively, for encouraging or spiriting one up.


gallant (adj.)

mid-15c., showy, finely dressed; gay, merry, from Old French galant courteous, earlier amusing,
entertaining; lively, bold (14c.), present participle of galer rejoice, make merry, generally held
to be from Latinized verb form of Frankish *wala- good, well, from Proto-Germanic *wal- (source also
of Old High German wallon to wander, go on a pilgrimage), from PIE root *wel- (2) to wish, will (see
will (v.)), but the transition of sense offers difficulties that are not fully cleared up [OED].
Sense of politely attentive to women was adopted 17c. from French.


mazurka (n.)

lively dance, also mazourka, 1818, from Russian mazurka, from Polish mazurek dance of the Mazur, a
reference to inhabitants of Mazowsze (Medieval Latin Mazovia), ancient region in central Poland. The
Polish accusative in ta&#324;czy&#263; mazurka to dance the mazurek was interpreted in Russian as a
feminine affix, hence the -ka ending.


current (adj.)

c.1300, running, flowing, from Old French corant running, lively, eager, swift, present participle
of corre to run, from Latin currere to run, move quickly (of persons or things), from PIE *kers- to
run (cognates: Greek -khouros running, Lithuanian karsiu go quickly, Old Norse horskr swift, Old
Irish and Middle Welsh carr cart, wagon, Breton karr chariot, Welsh carrog torrent). Meaning
prevalent, generally accepted is from 1560s.


scherzo (n.)

1852, from Italian scherzo, literally sport, joke, from scherzare to jest or joke, from a Germanic
source (compare Middle High German scherzen to jump merrily, enjoy oneself, German scherz sport),
from PIE *(s)ker- (2) leap, jump about. The lively second or third movement in a multi-movement
work. Scherzando is the Italian gerund of scherzare.


buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


