lode (n.)

original Middle English spelling of load (n.), and custodian of most of the original meaning of way,
course, carrying. Differentiation in sense took place 16c. Mining sense of vein of metal ore is from
c.1600, from notion of miners following it through the rock.


lodestone (n.)

magnetically polarized oxide of iron, 1510s, literally way-stone, from lode + stone (n.). So called
because it was used to make compass magnets to guide mariners. Figurative use from 1570s.


lodestar (n.)

late 14c. (late 13c. as a surname), an old name for the pole star (compare Old Norse
lei&eth;arstjarna) as the star that leads the way in navigation; from lode (n.) + star (n.).
Figurative use from late 14c.


bonanza (n.)

1844, American English, from Spanish bonanza a rich lode, originally fair weather at sea,
prosperity, from Vulgar Latin *bonacia, from Latin bonus good (see bene-).


mine (n.1)

pit or tunnel in the earth for obtaining metals and minerals, c.1300, from Old French mine vein,
lode; tunnel, shaft; mineral ore; mine (for coal, tin, etc,), of uncertain origin, probably from a
Celtic source (compare Welsh mwyn, Irish mein ore, mine), from Old Celtic *meini-. Italy and Greece
were relatively poor in minerals, thus they did not contribute a word for this to English, but there
was extensive mining from an early date in Celtic lands (Cornwall, etc.). From c.1400 as a tunnel
under fortifications to overthrow them.


Comstockery (n.)

1905, from Anthony Comstock (1844-1915), founder of New York Society for the Suppression of Vice
(1873) and self-appointed crusader against immorality, + -ery. Coined by George Bernard Shaw after
Comstock objected to Mrs. Warren's Profession. Comstockery is the world's standing joke at the
expense of the United States [Shaw, New York Times, Sept. 26, 1905]. The Comstock lode, silver vein
in Nevada, was discovered 1859 and first worked by U.S. prospector H.T.P. Comstock (1820-1870).


mother (n.1)

Old English modor female parent, from Proto-Germanic *moth&aelig;r (cognates: Old Saxon modar, Old
Frisian moder, Old Norse mo&#240;ir, Danish moder, Dutch moeder, Old High German muoter, German
Mutter), from PIE *mater- mother (cognates: Latin mater, Old Irish mathir, Lithuanian mote, Sanskrit
matar-, Greek meter, Old Church Slavonic mati), [b]ased ultimately on the baby-talk form *m&#257;-
(2); with the kinship term suffix *-ter- [Watkins]. Spelling with -th- dates from early 16c., though
that pronunciation is probably older (see father (n.)).   Mother nature first attested c.1600;
mother earth is from 1580s. Mother tongue one's native language first attested late 14c. Mother of
all ________ 1991, is Gulf War slang, from Saddam Hussein's use in reference to the coming battle;
it is an Arabic idiom (as well as an English one), for instance Ayesha, second wife of Muhammad, is
known as Mother of Believers. Mother Carey's chickens is late 18c. sailors' nickname for storm
petrels, or for snowflakes. Mother lode attested by c.1882, from mining [1849].


