loft (v.)

to hit a ball high in the air, 1856, originally in golf, from loft (n.). Related: Lofted; lofting.
An earlier sense was to put a loft on (a building), 1560s; also to store (goods) in a loft (1510s).


loft (n.)

an upper chamber, c.1300, from late Old English loft the sky; the sphere of the air, from Old Norse
lopt air, sky, originally upper story, loft, attic (Scandinavian -pt- pronounced like -ft-), from
Proto-Germanic *luftuz air, sky (cognates: Old English lyft, Dutch lucht, Old High German luft,
German Luft, Gothic luftus air).    Sense development is from loft, ceiling to sky, air. Buck
suggests ultimate connection with Old High German louft bark, louba roof, attic, etc., with
development from bark to roof made of bark to ceiling, though this did not directly inform the
meaning air, sky. But Watkins says this is probably a separate Germanic root. Meaning gallery in a
church first attested c.1500.


lofty (adj.)

exalted, of high rank, early 15c.; also with a high purpose, from loft + -y (2). From early 14c. as
a surname. Literal sense of high is attested from 1580s. Related: Loftily; loftiness.


aloft (adv.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse a lopti up above, literally up in the air, from
a in, on + lopt sky, air, atmosphere; loft, upper room (cognates: Gothic luftus, Old High German
luft, Old English lyft air; see loft).


garner (n.)

late 12c., gerner, from Old French gernier, metathesized variant of grenier storehouse, loft for
grain, from Latin granarium a store-house (see granary).


hayloft (n.)

1570s, from hay + loft (n.).


Luftwaffe

German air force in World War II era, 1935, from German Luftwaffe, literally air-weapon, from Luft
(see loft).


lift (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse lypta to raise, from Proto-Germanic *luftijan (cognates: Middle Low German
l&uuml;chten, Dutch lichten, German l&uuml;ften to lift; Old English lyft heaven, air, see loft).
The meaning steal (as in shop-lift) is first recorded 1520s. Related: Lifted; lifting.


air (n.1)

c.1300, invisible gases that make up the atmosphere, from Old French air atmosphere, breeze, weather
(12c.), from Latin aerem (nominative aer) air, lower atmosphere, sky, from Greek aer (genitive
aeros) air (related to aenai to blow, breathe), of unknown origin, possibly from a base *awer- and
thus related to aeirein to raise and arteria windpipe, artery (see aorta) on notion of lifting, that
which rises. In Homer mostly thick air, mist; later air as one of the four elements.    Words for
air in Indo-European languages tend to be associated with wind, brightness, sky. In English, air
replaced native lyft, luft (see loft (n.)). To be in the air in general awareness is from 1875; up
in the air uncertain, doubtful is from 1752. To build castles in the air is from 1590s (in 17c.
English had airmonger one preoccupied with visionary projects). Broadcasting sense (as in on the
air) first recorded 1927. To give (someone) the air dismiss is from 1900. Air pollution is attested
by 1870.


stage (n.)

mid-13c., story of a building; early 14c., raised platform used for public display (also the
platform beneath the gallows), from Old French estage building, dwelling place; stage for
performance; phase, stage, rest in a journey (12c., Modern French &#233;tage story of a house,
stage, floor, loft), from Vulgar Latin *staticum a place for standing, from Latin statum, past
participle of stare to stand (see stet). Meaning platform for presentation of a play is attested
from late 14c.; generalized for profession of an actor from 1580s.    Sense of period of development
or time in life first recorded early 14c., probably from Middle English sense of degree or step on
the 'ladder' of virtue, 'wheel' of fortune, etc., in parable illustrations and morality plays.
Meaning a step in sequence, a stage of a journey is late 14c. Meaning level of water in a river,
etc. is from 1814, American English.   Stage-name is from 1727. Stage-mother (n.) in the overbearing
mother-of-an-actress sense is from 1915. Stage-door is from 1761, hence Stage-Door Johnny young man
who frequents stage doors seeking the company of actresses, chorus girls, etc. (1907). Stage
whisper, such as used by an actor on stage to be heard by the audience, first attested 1865. Stage-
manage (v.) is from 1871.


