log (n.1)

unshaped large piece of tree, early 14c., of unknown origin. Old Norse had lag felled tree (from
stem of liggja to lie), but on phonological grounds many etymologists deny that this is the root of
English log. Instead, they suggest an independent formation meant to express the notion of something
massive by a word of appropriate sound. OED compares clog (n.) in its original Middle English sense
lump of wood. Log cabin (1770) in American English has been a figure of the honest pioneer since the
1840 presidential campaign of William Henry Harrison. Falling off a log as a type of something easy
to do is from 1839.


log (v.2)

to enter into a log-book, 1823, from log (n.2). Meaning to attain (a speed) as noted in a log is
recorded by 1883. Related: Logged; logging.


log (n.2)

record of observations, readings, etc., 1842, sailor's shortening of log-book daily record of a
ship's speed, progress, etc. (1670s), from log (n.1). The book so called because a wooden float at
the end of a line was cast out to measure a ship's speed. General sense by 1913.


log (v.1)

to fell a tree, 1717; earlier to strip a tree (1690s), from log (n.1). Related: Logged; logging.


log in (v.)

1963 in the computing sense, from log (v.2) + in (adv.).


loganberry (n.)

1893, American English, named for U.S. horticulturalist James H. Logan (1841-1928), who developed it
by crossing a blackberry and a raspberry.


logarithm (n.)

1610s, Modern Latin logarithmus, coined by Scottish mathematician John Napier (1550-1617), literally
ratio-number, from Greek logos proportion, ratio, word (see logos) + arithmos number (see
arithmetic).


logarithmic (adj.)

1690s, from logarithm + -ic. Related: Logarithmical (1630s).


logged (adj.)

reduced to the condition of a log (which was old sailors' slang for an incapacitated wooden ship),
thus inert in the water, c.1820, from log (n.1).


logger (n.1)

one who fells or cuts trees, by 1708, agent noun from log (v.1).


logger (n.2)

one who enters data in a log, 1958, agent noun from log (v.2).


loggerhead (n.)

1580s, stupid person, blockhead, perhaps from dialectal logger heavy block of wood + head (n.).
Later it meant a thick-headed iron tool (1680s), a type of cannon shot, a type of turtle (1650s).
Loggerheads fighting, fisticuffs is from 1670s, but the exact notion is uncertain, perhaps it
suggests the heavy tools used as weapons. The phrase at loggerheads in disagreement is first
recorded 1670s.    [W]e three loggerheads be: a sentence frequently written under two heads, and the
reader by repeating it makes himself the third. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


loggia (n.)

roofed galley used as an open-air room, 1742, from Italian loggia, from French loge (see lodge
(n.)).


logging (n.1)

act of felling timber, 1706, verbal noun from log (v.1).


logging (n.2)

act of recording in a log, 1941, verbal noun from log (v.2).


loggy (adj.)

heavy, sluggish, 1847, from log (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Logginess.


logic (n.)

mid-14c., branch of philosophy that treats of forms of thinking, from Old French logique (13c.),
from Latin (ars) logica, from Greek logike (techne) reasoning (art), from fem. of logikos pertaining
to speaking or reasoning, from logos reason, idea, word (see logos). Meaning logical argumentation
is from c.1600.


logical (adj.)

early 15c., based on reason, from logic + -al (1). Meaning pertaining to logic is c.1500. Attested
from 1860 as following as a reasonable consequence. Related: Logically.


logician (n.)

person skilled in logic, late 14c., from Old French logicien (13c.), from logique (see logic).


login

in the computer sense, as one word, by 1983, from log in.


logistic (adj.)

pertaining to logic, 1620s, from Medieval Latin logisticus, from Greek logistikos endued with
reason, from logikos (see logic). Related: Logistical (1560s); logistically. Logistics from this
word, in the sense art of arithmetical calculation is from 1650s.


logistics (n.)

art of moving, quartering, and supplying troops, 1879, from French (l'art) logistique (art) of
quartering troops, from Middle French logis lodging, from Old French logeiz shelter for an army,
encampment, from loge (see lodge (n.)) + Greek-derived suffix -istique (see -istic). The form in
French was influenced by logistique. Related: Logistical.


logjam (n.)

also log-jam, congestion of logs on a river, by 1851, American English; see log (n.1) + jam (v.).
The figurative sense is by 1890.


logo (n.)

1937, probably a shortening of logogram sign or character representing a word.


logo-

before vowels log-, word-forming element meaning speech, word, from Greek logos word (see logos).


logocentric (adj.)

centered on reason, 1931, from logo- + -centric.


logogram (n.)

sign or character representing a word, 1840, from Greek logos (see logos) + -gram. Generically, any
symbol representing graphically a product, idea, etc. is from 1966. The earliest use of the word
(1820) is in the sense logograph, but OED explains this as a substitute for logograph, which in this
sense is itself a mistake for logogriph.


logograph (n.)

instrument for giving a graphic representation of speech, 1879, from Greek logos (see logos) +
-graph instrument for recording; something written. Earliest use (1797) is in the sense logogriph,
and it frequently was used in this sense.


logogriph (n.)

a type of word puzzle based on synonyms, etc., and often in the form of a verse, 1590s, from French
logogriphe, from Greek logos (see logos) + griphos riddle, literally fishing basket.


logolatry (n.)

worship of words, 1810, from logo- + -latry.


logomachy (n.)

contention about, or with, words, 1560s, from logo- + -machy.


logon

in computer sense, as one word, by 1975, from log (v.) + on.


logorrhea (n.)

1878, from logos + ending from diarrhea.


logos (n.)

1580s, Logos, the divine Word, second person of the Christian Trinity, from Greek logos word,
speech, discourse, also reason, from PIE root *leg- to collect (with derivatives meaning to speak,
on notion of to pick out words; see lecture (n.)); used by Neo-Platonists in various metaphysical
and theological senses and picked up by New Testament writers.    Other English formations from
logos include logolatry worship of words, unreasonable regard for words or verbal truth (1810 in
Coleridge); logomania (1870); logophobia (1923).


logrolling (n.)

also log-rolling, in the legislative vote-trading sense, 1823, American English, from the notion of
neighbors on the frontier helping one another with the heavy work of clearing land and building
cabins (as in phrase you roll my log and I'll roll yours); see log (n.1) + rolling.    LOG-ROLLING.
1. In the lumber regions of Maine it is customary for men of different logging camps to appoint days
for helping each other in rolling the logs to the river, after they are felled and trimmed -- this
rolling being about the hardest work incident to the business. Thus the men of three or four camps
will unite, say on Monday, to roll for camp No. 1, -- on Tuesday for camp No. 2, -- on Wednesday for
camp No. 3, -- and so on, through the whole number of camps within convenient distance of each
other. [Bartlett]


logy (adj.)

dull and heavy, 1848, American English, perhaps from Dutch log heavy, dull + -y (2); compare Middle
Low German luggich sleepy, sluggish. Or perhaps a variant of loggy.


-logue

word-forming element meaning one who is immersed in or driven by, mostly from French-derived words,
ultimately from Greek -logos, -logon. Now mostly superseded by -loger, -logist except in ideologue
and a few others. As a combining element meaning kind of discourse, it is from French -logue, from
Greek -logos.


-logy

word-forming element meaning a speaking, discourse, treatise, doctrine, theory, science, from Greek
-logia (often via French -logie or Medieval Latin -logia), from root of legein to speak; thus, the
character or deportment of one who speaks or treats of (a certain subject); see lecture (n.).


-ologist

word-forming element; see -ology + -ist.


-ology

word-forming element indicating branch of knowledge, science, now the usual form of -logy.
Originally used c.1800 in nonce formations (commonsensology, etc.), it gained legitimacy by
influence of the proper formation in geology, mythology, etc., where the -o- is a stem vowel in the
previous element.


agriology (n.)

study of prehistoric human customs, 1878, from agrio-, from Greek agrios wild, literally living in
the fields, from agros field (see acre) + -logy. Related: Agriologist (n.), 1875.


allogenic (adj.)

1888, from Greek allogenes of another race, stranger, from allos other, different (see allo-) +
-genes born (see -gen) + -ic.


allograph (n.)

writing made by another person, by 1916 (implied in allographic), from allo- + -graph something
written.


anaesthesiologist (n.)

1943, American English, from anaesthesiology + -ist.


anaesthesiology (n.)

1908, from anaesthesia + -ology.    Anesthesiology. This is the new term adopted by the University
of Illinois defining the science that treats of the means and methods of producing in man or animal
various degrees of insensibility with or without hypnosis. [Medical Herald, January, 1912]


analog

chiefly U.S. spelling of analogue (q.v.).


analogize (v.)

explain by analogy, 1650s, from French analogiser (17c.) or directly from Greek analogizesthai to
reckon, sum up, from analogia (see analogy). Related: Analogized; analogizing.


analogous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin analogus, from Greek analogos proportionate, according to due proportion (see
analogy).


analogue (n.)

1826, an analogous thing, from French analogue, from Greek analogon (itself used in English from
c.1810), from ana up to (see ana-) + logos account, ratio (see lecture (n.)). Computing sense is
recorded from 1946.


analogy (n.)

1540s (perhaps early 15c.), from Old French analogie or directly from Latin analogia, from Greek
analogia proportion, from ana- upon, according to (see ana-) + logos ratio, also word, speech,
reckoning (see logos). A mathematical term used in a wider sense by Plato.


