logy (adj.)

dull and heavy, 1848, American English, perhaps from Dutch log heavy, dull + -y (2); compare Middle
Low German luggich sleepy, sluggish. Or perhaps a variant of loggy.


gastrology (n.)

cooking, good eating, 1810, from gastro- stomach + -logy.


necrology (n.)

register of deaths, obituary, 1705, from necro- + -logy.


potamology (n.)

the study of rivers, 1829, from potamo- + -logy.


ontology (n.)

metaphysical science or study of being, 1660s (Gideon Harvey), from Modern Latin ontologia (c.1600),
from onto- + -logy.


pharmacology (n.)

1721, formed in Modern Latin (1680s) from pharmaco- + -logy. Related: Pharmacological.


polemology (n.)

the study of war, 1870, from Greek polemos war, of unknown origin, + connective -o- + -logy.


biology (n.)

1819, from Greek bios life (see bio-) + -logy. Suggested 1802 by German naturalist Gottfried
Reinhold Treviranus (1776-1837), and introduced as a scientific term that year in French by Lamarck.


ornithology (n.)

1670s, from Modern Latin ornithologia (1590s); see ornitho- + -logy.


cytology (n.)

1857, from cyto- + -logy. Related: Cytologist (1884).


cardiology (n.)

1847, from cardio- + -logy. Cardiologist attested from 1885.


seismology (n.)

1852, from seismo- + -logy. Related: Seismological (1850).


thanatology (n.)

scientific study of death, 1837, from thanato- death + -logy. In 1970s, some undertakers made a bid
to be called thanatologists; but from 1974 that word has been used principally in reference to
specialists in the needs of the terminally ill.


psephology (n.)

study of elections, 1952, from Greek psephizein to vote (properly to vote with pebbles, from psephos
pebble) + -logy.


phonology (n.)

1799, from phono- + -logy.


haplology (n.)

1895; see haplo- + -logy.


lexicology (n.)

1828, from lexico- + -logy.


rhinology (n.)

1838, from rhino- + -logy.


dermatology (n.)

1819, from dermato- + -logy. Related: Dermatological.


ophthalmology (n.)

1842; see ophthalmo- + -logy. Related: Ophthalmological.


ethnology (n.)

1842, from ethno- + -logy.  Related: Ethnologist.


proctology (n.)

1896, from Greek proktos anus, from PIE *prokto- + -logy study of. Related: Proctologist (1897).


anthropology (n.)

science of the natural history of man, 1590s, originally especially of the relation between
physiology and psychology, from Modern Latin anthropologia or coined independently in English from
anthropo- + -logy. In Aristotle, anthropologos is used literally, as speaking of man.


myology (n.)

1640s; see myo- + -logy. Related: Myologist.


oology (n.)

1823, from oo- + -logy. Related: Oological.


Christology (n.)

1670s, from Christ + connective -o- + -logy.


oncology (n.)

1857, coined in English from onco- tumor + -logy science or study of. Related: Oncologist;
oncological.


planktology (n.)

1892, from German planktologie (1891); see plankton + -logy. The native formation planktonology
(1896) is less common.


choreology (n.)

the study of dancing, 1964, from Latinized form of Greek khoreia dance (see chorus) + connective -o-
+ -logy.


lithology (n.)

study of rock-formation, 1716, from Modern Latin lithologia, from litho- + -logia (see -logy).


battology (n.)

needless repetition in speaking or writing, c.1600, from Greek battologia a speaking stammeringly,
from battos stammerer, of imitative origin, + -logia (see -logy).


urology (n.)

1753, from uro- + -logy.


ufology (n.)

1959, from UFO + -logy.


geratology (n.)

study of decadence, 1884, from Greek geras (genitive geratos) old age (see geriatric) + -logy.


phycology (n.)

study of seaweeds, 1847, from phyco- + -logy. Related: Phycological; phycologist.


tribology (n.)

1965, study of friction, from comb. form of Greek tribos rubbing, from tribein to rub, rub down,
wear away (from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist; see throw (v.)) + -logy.


micrology (n.)

hair splitting, exaggerated attention to petty things, 1650s, from Greek mikrologia pettiness, care
for trifles, from micros (see micro-) + -logia (see -logy).


chronology (n.)

1590s, from Middle French chronologie or directly from Modern Latin chronologia; see chrono- +
-logy. Related: Chronologer (1570s).


phrenology (n.)

1815, literally mental science, from phreno- + -logy study of. Applied to the theory of mental
faculties originated by Gall and Spurzheim that led to the 1840s mania for reading personality clues
in the shape of one's skull and the bumps of the head. Related: Phrenological; phrenologist.


Sinologist (n.)

1814; see Sino- + -logy + -ist. Related: Sinology (1834).


zoology (n.)

science of animals, 1660s, from Modern Latin zoologia, from Greek zoion animal (see zoo-) + -logia
study (see -logy).


victimology (n.)

1958, from French victimologie (1956), from victime (see victim) + -logy.


oenology (n.)

1827, from oeno- wine + -logy. Related: Oenological; oenologist.


embryology (n.)

1859, from embryon (see embryo) + -logy. Related: Embryologist (c.1850).


hydrology (n.)

1762, from hydro- + -logy. Related: Hydrologist; hydrological (1660s).


-logy

word-forming element meaning a speaking, discourse, treatise, doctrine, theory, science, from Greek
-logia (often via French -logie or Medieval Latin -logia), from root of legein to speak; thus, the
character or deportment of one who speaks or treats of (a certain subject); see lecture (n.).


-ology

word-forming element indicating branch of knowledge, science, now the usual form of -logy.
Originally used c.1800 in nonce formations (commonsensology, etc.), it gained legitimacy by
influence of the proper formation in geology, mythology, etc., where the -o- is a stem vowel in the
previous element.


agriology (n.)

study of prehistoric human customs, 1878, from agrio-, from Greek agrios wild, literally living in
the fields, from agros field (see acre) + -logy. Related: Agriologist (n.), 1875.


teratology (n.)

study of marvels and monstrosities, 1842, from terato- + -logy. Earlier it meant marvelous narrative
(1670s), from Greek teratologia a telling of marvels. Related: Teratological; teratologist.


typology (n.)

doctrine of symbols, 1845, from Greek typos (see type (n.)) + -logy. Related: Typological;
typologically.


