low (adj.)

not high, late 13c., from lah (late 12c.), not rising much, being near the base or ground (of
objects or persons); lying on the ground or in a deep place (late 13c.), from Old Norse lagr low, or
a similar Scandinavian source (compare Swedish l&#229;g, Danish lav), from Proto-Germanic *lega-
lying flat, low (cognates: Old Frisian lech, Middle Dutch lage, Dutch laag low, dialectal German
l&auml;ge flat), from PIE *legh- to lie (see lie (v.2)).    Meaning humble in rank is from c.1200;
undignified is from 1550s; sense of dejected, dispirited is attested from 1737; meaning coarse,
vulgar is from 1759. In reference to sounds, not loud, also having a deep pitch, it is attested from
c.1300. Of prices, from c.1400. In geographical usage, low refers to the part of a country near the
sea-shore (c.1300, as in Low Countries Holland, Belgium, Luxemburg, 1540s). As an adverb c.1200,
from the adjective.


low (v.)

Old English hlowan make a noise like a cow, from Proto-Germanic *khlo- (cognates: Middle Dutch
loeyen, Dutch loeien, Old Low Franconian luon, Old High German hluojen), from imitative PIE root
*kele- (2) to shout (see claim (v.)).


low (n.1)

sound made by cows, 1540s, from low (v.).


low (adv.)

early 13c., from low (adj.). Of voices or sounds, from c.1300.


low (n.2)

hill, obsolete except in place names, Old English hlaw hill, mound, especially barrow, related to
hleonian to lean (see lean (v.)). Compare Latin clivus hill from the same PIE root.


low key (adj.)

also low-key, 1895, from low (adj.) + key (n.1), perhaps from the musical sense.


low-budget (adj.)

1939, originally of motion pictures; from low (adj.) + budget (n.).


low-class (adj.)

1868, from low (adj.) + class (n.).


low-down (adj.)

also low down, lowdown, vulgar, 1888, from low (adj.) + down (adv.). Earlier it meant humble
(1540s). As a noun, 1915, from the adjective, American English.


low-grade (adj.)

1867, originally in mining, with reference to ores, from low (adj.) + grade (n.).


low-life (adj.)

disreputable, vulgar, 1794, from low (adj.) + life; as a noun, coarse, no-good person it is recorded
from 1911. Also lowlife.


low-profile (adj.)

1957, in reference to automobile wheels, from low (adj.) + profile (n.). General sense by 1970,
American English, in reference to Nixon Administration policy of partial U.S. disengagement from
burdensome commitments abroad.


lowboy (n.)

chest of drawers on short legs, 1891, a hybrid from low (adj.) + French bois wood (see bush).


lowbrow (n.)

also low-brow, person who is not intellectual, 1902, from low (adj.) + brow. Said to have been
coined by U.S. journalist Will Irwin (1873-1948). A low brow on a man as a sign of primitive
qualities was common in 19c. fiction, but it also was considered a mark of classical beauty in
women.    A low brow and not a very high one is considered beautiful in woman, whereas a high brow
and not a low one is the stamp of manhood. [Medical Review, June 2, 1894]    As an adjective from
1913.


lower (v.1)

c.1600, to descend, sink, from lower (adj.), from Middle English lahghere (c.1200), comparative of
low (adj.). Transitive meaning to let down, to cause to descend attested from 1650s. Related:
Lowered; lowering. In the sense to cause to descend the simple verb low (Middle English lahghenn,
c.1200) was in use into the 18c.


lower (v.2)

to look dark and threatening, also lour, Middle English louren, luren to frown (early 13c.), to lurk
(mid-15c.), from Old English *luran or from its cognates, Middle Low German luren, Middle Dutch
loeren lie in wait. Form perhaps assimilated to lower (1). Related: Lowered; lowering.


lower (adj.)

c.1200, lahre, comparative of lah (see low (adj.)).


lower-case (adj.)

also lowercase, 1680s; see lower (adj.) + case (n.2).


lowercase (v.)

to set (text) in lower-case type, 1911, from lower-case (adj.). Related: Lowercased; lowercasing.


lowermost

1560s, from lower (adj.) + -most.


lowest (adj.)

c.1200, laghesst, superlative of lah (see low (adj.)).


Lowestoft (n.)

type of porcelain, named for a town in Suffolk where it was made from 1757.


lowing (n.)

early 13c., verbal noun from low (v.).


lowland (n.)

c.1500, originally with reference to Scotland, from low (adj.) + land (n.). Related: Lowlander.


lowliness (n.)

early 15c., from lowly + -ness.


lowly

c.1300 (adv.); late 14c. (adj.) humble, from low (adj.) + -ly.


lowness (n.)

early 13c., from low (adj.) + -ness.


afterglow (n.)

also after-glow, 1829, from after + glow (n.).


aglow (adj.)

1817 (in Coleridge), from a- (1) + glow. Figurative sense of flushed with pleasurable excitement is
from 1830.


allow (v.)

early 14c., allouen, to commend, praise; approve of, be pleased with; appreciate the value of; also,
take into account or give credit for, also, in law and philosophy, recognize, admit as valid (a
privilege, an excuse, a statement, etc.). From late 14c. as sanction or permit; condone; in business
use from early 15c.    The Middle English word is from Anglo-French alouer, Old French aloer,
alloiier (13c.) allot, apportion, bestow, assign, from Latin allocare (see allocate). This word in
Old French was confused and ultimately merged with aloer; alloer to praise, commend, from Latin
allaudare, adlaudare, compound of ad- to (see ad-) + laudare to praise (see laud). From the first
word came the sense preserved in allowance as money granted; from the second came its meaning
permission based on approval.    Between the two primary significations there naturally arose a
variety of uses blending them in the general idea of assign with approval, grant, concede a thing
claimed or urged, admit a thing offered, permit, etc., etc. [OED].    Related: Allowed; allowing.


allowable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French allouable, from allouer (see allow).


allowance (n.)

late 14c., praise (a sense now obsolete), from Old French aloance allowance, granting, allocation,
from alouer (see allow). Sense of a sum alloted to meet expenses is from c.1400. In accounts,
meaning a sum placed to one's credit is attested from 1520s. To make allowances is literally to add
or deduct a sum from someone's account for some special circumstance. Figurative use of the phrase
is attested from 1670s.


allowed (adj.)

late 14c., praised; mid-15c., assigned as a due share; late 15c., permitted, past participle
adjective from allow.


bedfellow (n.)

close friend, roommate, mid-15c., from bed (n.) + fellow (n.). Also (late 15c) concubine. Earlier in
the close companion sense was bed-fere (early 14c.). Bedsister husband's concubine is recorded in
Middle English (c.1300).


bellow (v.)

apparently from Old English bylgan to bellow, from PIE root *bhel- (4) to sound, roar. Originally of
animals, especially cows and bulls; used of human beings since c.1600. Related: Bellowed; bellowing.
As a noun from 1779.


bellowing (n.)

late 14c., from present participle of bellow (v.). As an adjective, recorded from 1610s.


bellows (n.)

c.1200, belwes, literally bags, plural of belu, belw, northern form of beli, from late Old English
belg bag, purse, leathern bottle (see belly (n.)). Reduced from bl&aelig;stb&aelig;lg, literally
blowing bag. Used exclusively in plural since 15c., probably due to the two handles.


below (adv.)

early 14c., biloogh, from be- by, about + logh, lou, lowe low (see low (adj.)). Apparently a variant
of earlier a-lowe (influenced by other adverbs in be-; see before), the parallel form to an-high
(now on high). Beneath was the usual word; below was very rare in Middle English and gained currency
only in 16c. It is frequent in Shakespeare. As a preposition from 1570s. According to Fowler, below
is the opposite of above and concerns difference of level and suggests comparison of independent
things. Under is the opposite of over and is concerned with superposition and subjection and
suggests some interrelation.


billow (n.)

1550s, perhaps older in dialectal use, from Old Norse bylgja a wave, a billow, from Proto-Germanic
*bulgjan (cognates: Middle High German bulge billow, bag), from PIE *bhelgh- to swell (see belly
(n.)).


billow (v.)

1590s, from billow (n.). Related: Billowed; billowing.


billowy (adj.)

1610s, from billow (n.) + -y (2). Related: Billowiness.


blow (v.1)

move air, Old English blawan blow, breathe, make an air current; kindle; inflate; sound a wind
instrument (class VII strong verb; past tense bleow, past participle blawen), from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;-anan (source of Old High German blaen, German bl&auml;hen), from PIE *bhle- to swell,
blow up (source of Latin flare to blow), possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole).    Meaning to squander (of money) is from 1874. Sense of depart suddenly is from 1902. Slang
do fellatio on sense is from 1933, as blow (someone) off, originally among prostitutes (compare blow
job). This usage probably is not connected to the colloquial imprecation (1781, associated with
sailors, as in Popeye's well, blow me down!), which has past participle blowed. Meaning to spend
(money) foolishly and all at once is 1890s; that of bungle an opportunity is from 1943. To blow over
pass is from 1610s, originally of storms. To blow (someone's) mind was in use by 1967; there is a
song title Blow Your Mind released in a 1965 Mirawood recording by a group called The Gas Company.


blow (v.2)

to bloom, blossom (intransitive), from Old English blowan to flower, blossom, flourish, from Proto-
Germanic *bl&aelig;- (cognates: Old Saxon bloian, Old Frisian bloia, Middle Dutch and Dutch bloeien,
Old High German bluoen, German bl&uuml;hen), from PIE *bhle-, extended form of *bhel- (2) to blow,
inflate, swell (see bole). This word is the source of the blown in full-blown.


blow (n.1)

hard hit, mid-15c., blowe, from northern and East Midlands dialects, perhaps from Middle Dutch
blouwen to beat, a common Germanic word of unknown origin (compare German bleuen, Gothic bliggwan to
strike). Influenced in English by blow (v.1). In reference to descriptions or accounts, blow-by-blow
is recorded from 1921, American English, originally of prize-fight broadcasts.    LIKE a hungry
kitten loves its saucer of warm milk, so do radio fans joyfully listen to the blow-by-blow broadcast
description of a boxing bout. [The Wireless Age, December 1922]


blow (n.2)

a blowing, a blast, 1650s, from blow (v.1).


blow job (n.)

also blowjob, 1961, from blow + job. Exactly which blow is meant is the subject of some debate; the
word might have begun as a euphemism for suck (thus from blow (v.1)), or it might refer to the
explosive climax of an orgasm (thus blow (v.2)). Unlike much sex slang, its date of origin probably
is pretty close to the date it first is attested in print: as recently as the early 1950s, military
pilots could innocently talk of their jet planes as blow jobs according to the Thesaurus of American
Slang. Compare blow (v.1).


blow out (n.)

also blowout, 1825, American English colloquial, outburst, brouhaha (what, in modern use, would be
called a blow up), from blow (v.1) + out. Meaning abundant feast is recorded from 1824; that of flat
tire is from 1908.


blow up (v.)

explode, 1590s, from blow (v.1) + up (adv.). As a noun, it is recorded from 1809 in the sense
outburst, quarrel. Meaning enlargement from a photograph is attested by 1945. Old English had an
adjective upablawan upblown, used of a volcano, etc.


blow-dry (v.)

1971, of hair; see blow (v.1) + dry (v.). Related: Blow-dried; blow-drying.


blow-fly (n.)

1720, from fly (n.) + blow (v.1) in an obsolete sense to deposit eggs, to infect with eggs, in
reference to to insects, apparently connected with old notions of natural history [OED].


