lumen (n.)

unit of luminosity, 1897, coined 1894 by French physicist Andr&eacute;-Eug&egrave;ne Blondel
(1863-1938) from Latin lumen light, related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)).


luminal (adj.)

of or pertaining to a lumen, 1897, with -al (1).


Luminal (n.)

trade name of phenobarbitone, used as a sedative and hypnotic, coined 1912 in German from Latin
lumen light, related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)), + -al (3), the root here being used, very
irregularly, as an equivalent of pheno- [Flood].


luminescence (n.)

1884, from Latin lumen (genitive luminis) light (see luminous) + -escence.    Fluorescence and
Phosphorescence -- Prof. E. Wiedmann has made a new study of these phenomena. He proposes the
general name luminescence for evolutions of light which do not depend on the temperature of the
substance concerned. [Photographic News, April 20, 1888]


illumination (n.)

late 14c., spiritual enlightenment, from Latin illuminationem (nominative illuminatio), from past
participle stem of illuminare to throw into light, make bright, light up; figuratively to set off,
illustrate, from assimilated form of in- in, into (see in- (2)) + lumen (genitive luminis) light,
related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Meaning action of lighting is from 1560s.


luminous (adj.)

early 15c., full of light, from Latin luminosus shining, full of light, from lumen (genitive
luminis) light, related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Related: Luminously.


limn (v.)

early 15c., to illuminate (manuscripts), altered from Middle English luminen, to illuminate
manuscripts (late 14c.), from Old French luminer light up, illuminate, from Latin luminare
illuminate, burnish, from lumen (genitive luminis) radiant energy, light, related to lucere to shine
(see light (n.)). Sense of portray, depict first recorded 1590s. Related: Limned.


luminary (n.)

mid-15c., lamp, source of (artificial) light, from Old French luminarie (12c.), lamp, lights,
lighting; candles; brightness, illumination, from Late Latin luminare light, torch, lamp, heavenly
body, literally that which gives light, from Latin lumen (genitive luminis) light, related to lucere
to shine (see light (n.)). Sense of notable person is first recorded 1690s, though the Middle
English word also had a figurative sense of source of spiritual light, example of holiness.


Luna (n.)

late 14c. moon, also an alchemical name for silver; from Latin luna moon, goddess of the moon, from
*leuksna- (cognates: Old Church Slavonic luna moon, Old Prussian lauxnos stars, Middle Irish luan
light, moon), from the same source as lux, lumen light, lucere to shine (see light (n.)). The luna
moth (1841, American English) so called for the crescent-shaped markings on its wings. Lunarian
(1708) was an early word for inhabitant of the moon.


