luster (n.2)

one who lusts, 1590s, agent noun from lust (v.).


luster (n.1)

gloss, radiance, 1520s, from Middle French lustre gloss, radiance (14c.), common Romanic (cognates:
Spanish and Portuguese lustre, Rumanian lustru, Italian lustro splendor, brilliancy), from Latin
lustrare spread light over, brighten, illumine, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)).


lackluster (adj.)

also lack-luster, c.1600, first attested in As You Like It, from lack + luster. Combinations with
lack- were frequent in 16c., such as lackland (1590s), of a landless man; lack-Latin (1530s), of an
ignorant priest.


lustre (n.)

gloss, radiance; see luster (n.1).


teriyaki

1962, from Japanese, from teri gloss, luster + yaki roast.


refulgence (n.)

1630s, from Latin refulgentia reflected luster, splendor, from refulgens (see refulgent). Related:
Refulgency (1610s).


wan (adj.)

Old English wann dark, dusky, lacking luster, later leaden, pale, gray, of uncertain origin, and not
found in other Germanic languages. The connecting notion is colorlessness. Perhaps related to wane.
Related: Wanly; wanness.


gloss (n.1)

luster, 1530s, from Scandinavian (compare Icelandic glossi flame, related to glossa to flame), or
obsolete Dutch gloos a glowing, from Middle High German glos; probably ultimately from the same
source as Old English glowan (see glow (v.)).


lustrous

c.1600, from luster + -ous. Related: Lustrously; lustrousness.


margarin (n.)

1836, from French margarine, a chemical term given to a fatty substance obtained from animal and
vegetable oil, coined by French chemist Michel Eug&egrave;ne Chevreul (1786-1889) in 1813 from
(acide) margarique margaric (acid); literally pearly, from Greek margarites pearl (see Margaret). So
called for the luster of the crystals. Now discarded in this sense as a chemical term, but preserved
in margarine.


gloss (v.)

1570s as insert a word as an explanation, from gloss (n.2). From 1650s as to add luster, from gloss
(n.1). Figurative sense of smooth over, hide is from 1729, mostly from gloss (n.1) but showing
influence of gloss (n.2) in the extended verbal sense of explain away (1630s), from idea of a note
inserted in the margin of a text to explain a difficult word. Related: Glossed; glossing.


tarnish (v.)

mid-15c. (transitive), from present participle stem of Middle French ternir dull the luster or
brightness of, make dim (15c.), probably from Old French terne (adj.) dull, dark, which according to
Diez is from a Germanic source cognate with Old High German tarnjan to conceal, hide, Old English
dyrnan to hide, darken, from Proto-Germanic *darnjaz (see dern), but there are difficulties of form,
sense, and date. Intransitive sense from 1670s. Figurative sense is from 1690s. Related: Tarnished;
tarnishing.


shine (v.)

Old English scinan shed light, be radiant, be resplendent, iluminate, of persons, be conspicuous
(class I strong verb; past tense scan, past participle scinen), from Proto-Germanic *skinan
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German skinan, Old Norse and Old Frisian skina, Dutch schijnen,
German scheinen, Gothic skeinan to shine, appear), from PIE root *skai- (2) to gleam, shine, flicker
(cognates: Sanskrit chaya brilliance, luster; shadow, Greek skia shade, Old Church Slavonic sinati
to flash up, shine, Albanian he shadow). Transitive meaning to black (boots) is from 1610s. Related:
Shined (in the shoe polish sense), otherwise shone; shining.


