maneuver (v.)

1777, from maneuver (n.), or else from French man&#339;urvrer work, work with one's hands; carry
out, prepare (12c.), from Medieval Latin manuoperare. Originally in a military sense. Figurative use
from 1801. Related: Maneuvered; maneuvering.


maneuver (n.)

planned movement of troops or warship, 1758, from French manoeuvre manipulation, maneuver, from Old
French manovre manual labor 13c.), from Medieval Latin manuopera (source of Spanish maniobra,
Italian manovra), from manuoperare work with the hands, from Latin manu operari, from manu, ablative
of manus hand (see manual (adj.)) + operari to work, operate (see operation). The same word had been
borrowed from French into Middle English in a sense hand-labor (late 15c.). General meaning artful
plan, adroit movement is from 1774. Related: Maneuvers.


maneuverable (adj.)

1913, from maneuver + -able.


Heimlich maneuver (n.)

1975, named for U.S. physician Henry Jay Heimlich  (b. 1920).


manoeuvre

also manoeuver, alternative spelling of maneuver. Also see oe; -re. Related: manoeuvres; manoeuvred;
manoeuvring.


manure (v.)

c.1400, to cultivate land, also to hold property, from Anglo-French meynoverer, Old French manouvrer
to work with the hands, cultivate; carry out; make, produce, from Medieval Latin manuoperare (see
maneuver (n.)). Sense of work the earth led to put dung on the soil (1590s) and to the current noun
meaning dung spread as fertilizer, which is first attested 1540s. Until late 18c., however, the verb
still was used in a figurative sense of to cultivate the mind, train the mental powers.It is ... his
own painfull study ... that manures and improves his ministeriall gifts. [Milton, 1641]  Related:
Manured; manuring.


play (n.)

Old English plega (West Saxon), pl&aelig;ga (Anglian) quick motion; recreation, exercise, any brisk
activity (the latter sense preserved in swordplay, etc.), from or related to Old English plegan (see
play (v.)). Meaning dramatic performance is attested by early 14c., perhaps late Old English.
Meaning free or unimpeded movement of mechanisms, etc., is from c.1200. By early Middle English it
could mean variously, a game, a martial sport, activity of children, joke or jesting, revelry,
sexual indulgence. Sporting sense the playing of a game first attested mid-15c.; sense of specific
maneuver or attempt is from 1868. To be in play (of a hit ball, etc.) is from 1788. Play-by-play is
attested from 1927. Play on words is from 1798. Play-money is attested from 1705 as money won in
gambling, by 1920 as pretend money.


