manifesto (n.)

public declaration, 1640s, from Italian manifesto public declaration explaining past actions and
announcing the motive for forthcoming ones, originally proof, from Latin manifestus (see manifest
(adj.)).


manifest (n.)

ship's cargo, 1706; see manifest (adj.). Earlier, a public declaration (c.1600; compare manifesto),
from French manifeste, verbal noun from manifester. Earlier still in English as a manifestation
(1560s).


dada

1920, from French dada hobbyhorse, child's nonsense word, selected 1916 by Romanian poet Tristan
Tzara (1896-1963), leader of the movement, for its resemblance to meaningless babble.Freedom: DADA
DADA DADA, the howl of clashing colors, the intertwining of all contradictions, grotesqueries,
trivialities: LIFE. [T. Tzara, Dada Manifesto, 1918]  Related: Dadaist; Dadaism.


communist

1841, as both a noun and adjective, from French communiste (see communism). First attested in
writing by John Goodwin Barmby (1820-1881), British Owenite and utopian socialist who founded the
London Communist Propaganda Society in 1841. Main modern sense emerged after publication of
Communist Manifesto (Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei) in 1848. Shortened form Commie attested
from 1940. Related: Communistic.


communism (n.)

social system based on collective ownership, 1843, from French communisme (c.1840) from commun (Old
French comun; see common (adj.)) + -isme (see -ism). Originally a theory of society; as name of a
political system, 1850, a translation of German Kommunismus (itself from French), in Marx and
Engels' Manifesto of the Communist Party. Compare communist. In some cases in early and mid-20c., a
term of abuse implying anti-social criminality without regard to political theory.    Each [i.e.
socialism, communism, anarchism] stands for a state of things, or a striving after it, that differs
much from that which we know; &amp; for many of us, especially those who are comfortably at home in
the world as it is, they have consequently come to be the positive, comparative, &amp; superlative,
distinguished not in kind but in degree only, of the terms of abuse applicable to those who would
disturb our peace. [Fowler]


