manipulate (v.)

1827, to handle skillfully by hand, a back-formation from manipulation. Of mental influence, from
1864. Financial sense is from 1870. In mid-20c., it served as a euphemism for masturbation. Related:
Manipulated; manipulating.


manipulator (n.)

1804, from manipulate with Latin agent noun ending. Perhaps formed on model of French manipulateur
(1783).


factoid (n.)

1973, from fact + -oid, first explained, if not coined, by Norman Mailer.Factoids ... that is, facts
which have no existence before appearing in a magazine or newspaper, creations which are not so much
lies as a product to manipulate emotion in the Silent Majority. [Mailer, Marilyn, 1973]


manipulable (adj.)

1859, from manipulate + -able. Related: Manipulability.


cook (v.)

late 14c., from cook (n.); the figurative sense of to manipulate, falsify, doctor is from 1630s.
Related: Cooked, cooking. To cook with gas is 1930s jive talk.


manipulative (adj.)

1816, in literal sense, from manipulate + -ive. Related: Manipulatively; manipulativeness.


duffer (n.)

inept person; old man, especially bad golfer, 1842, perhaps from Scottish duffar dull or stupid
person, from dowf stupid, literally deaf, from Old Norse daufr, with pejorative suffix -art. Or
perhaps from 18c. thieves' slang duff (v.) to dress or manipulate an old thing and make it look new.


train (v.)

to discipline, teach, bring to a desired state by means of instruction, 1540s, probably from earlier
sense of draw out and manipulate in order to bring to a desired form (late 14c.), specifically of
the growth of branches, vines, etc. from mid-15c.; from train (n.). Sense of point or aim (a
firearm, etc.) is from 1841. Sense of fit oneself for a performance by a regimen or exercise is from
1832. The meaning to travel by railway is recorded from 1856. Related: Trained; training.


work (v.)

a fusion of Old English wyrcan (past tense worhte, past participle geworht) prepare, perform, do,
make, construct, produce; strive after (from Proto-Germanic *wurkijan); and Old English wircan
(Mercian) to operate, function, set in motion, a secondary verb formed relatively late from Proto-
Germanic noun *werkan (see work (n.)). Sense of perform physical labor was in Old English, as was
sense ply one's trade and exert creative power, be a creator. Transitive sense manipulate (physical
substances) into a desired state or form was in Old English. Meaning have the expected or desired
effect is from late 14c. In Middle English also perform sexually (mid-13c.). Related: Worked (15c.);
working. To work up excite is from c.1600. To work over beat up, thrash is from 1927. To work
against attempt to subvert is from late 14c.


