manifest (v.)

late 14c., to spread (one's fame), to show plainly, from manifest (adj.) or else from Latin
manifestare to discover, disclose, betray (see manifest (adj.)). Meaning to display by actions is
from 1560s; reflexive sense, of diseases, etc., to reveal as in operation is from 1808. Related:
Manifested; manifesting.


manifest (adj.)

late 14c., clearly revealed, from Old French manifest evident, palpable, (12c.), or directly from
Latin manifestus plainly apprehensible, clear, apparent, evident; of offenses, proved by direct
evidence; of offenders, caught in the act, probably from manus hand (see manual) + -festus struck
(compare second element of infest).  Other nations have tried to check ... the fulfillment of our
manifest destiny to overspread the Continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our
yearly multiplying millions. [John O'Sullivan (1813-1895), U.S. Magazine &amp; Democratic Review,
July 1845]  The phrase apparently is O'Sullivan's coinage; the notion is as old as the republic.


manifest (n.)

ship's cargo, 1706; see manifest (adj.). Earlier, a public declaration (c.1600; compare manifesto),
from French manifeste, verbal noun from manifester. Earlier still in English as a manifestation
(1560s).


manifestation (n.)

early 15c., action of manifesting; exhibition, demonstration, from Late Latin manifestationem
(nominative manifestatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin manifestare (see
manifest (adj.)). Meaning an object, action, or presence by which something is made manifest is from
1785. The spiritualism sense is attested from 1853.


manifestly (adv.)

clearly, early 15c., from manifest (adj.) + -ly (2).


manifesto (n.)

public declaration, 1640s, from Italian manifesto public declaration explaining past actions and
announcing the motive for forthcoming ones, originally proof, from Latin manifestus (see manifest
(adj.)).


phanero-

before vowels phaner-, word-forming element meaning visible, manifest, from Greek phanero-, comb.
form of phaneros visible, manifest, from phainein to show (see phantasm).


epiphany (n.)

early 14c., festival of the manifestation of Christ to the gentiles (celebrated Jan. 6; usually with
a capital -E-), from Old French epiphanie, from Late Latin epiphania, neuter plural (taken as
feminine singular), from late Greek epiphaneia manifestation, striking appearance (in New Testament,
advent or manifestation of Christ), from epiphanes manifest, conspicuous, from epiphainein to
manifest, display, from epi on, to (see epi-) + phainein to show (see phantasm).    Of divine beings
other than Christ, first recorded 1660s; general literary sense of any manifestation or revelation
appeared 1840, first in De Quincey.


clear (adj.)

late 13c., bright, from Old French cler clear (of sight and hearing), light, bright, shining; sparse
(12c., Modern French clair), from Latin clarus clear, loud, of sounds; figuratively manifest, plain,
evident, in transferred use, of sights, bright, distinct; also illustrious, famous, glorious (source
of Italian chiaro, Spanish claro), from PIE *kle-ro-, from root *kele- (2) to shout (see claim
(v.)).    The sense evolution involves an identification of the spreading of sound and the spreading
of light (compare English loud, used of colors; German hell clear, bright, shining, of pitch,
distinct, ringing, high). Of complexion, from c.1300; of the weather, from late 14c.; of meanings or
explanations, manifest to the mind, comprehensible, c.1300. (An Old English word for this was
sweotol distinct, clear, evident.) Sense of free from encumbrance, apparently nautical, developed
c.1500. Phrase in the clear attested from 1715. Clear-sighted is from 1580s (clear-eyed is from
1529s); clear-headed is from 1709.


testate (adj.)

having left a valid will, late 15c., from Latin testatus public, manifest, published, past
participle of testari make a will, be witness to, declare (see testament).


communist

1841, as both a noun and adjective, from French communiste (see communism). First attested in
writing by John Goodwin Barmby (1820-1881), British Owenite and utopian socialist who founded the
London Communist Propaganda Society in 1841. Main modern sense emerged after publication of
Communist Manifesto (Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei) in 1848. Shortened form Commie attested
from 1940. Related: Communistic.


open (v.)

Old English openian to open, open up, disclose, reveal, also intransitive, become manifest, be open
to or exposed to, from Proto-Germanic *opanojan (cognates: Old Saxon opanon, Old Norse opna to open,
Middle Dutch, Dutch openen, Old High German offanon, German &#246;ffnen), from the source of open
(adj.), but etymology suggests the adjective is older. Open up cease to be secretive is from 1921.
Related: Opened; opening.


apparent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French aparant evident, obvious, visible, from Latin apparentem (nominative
apparens) visible, manifest, present participle of apparere (see appear). First attested in phrase
heir apparent (see heir). Meaning superficial is c.1400. Apparent magnitude in astronomy (how bright
a heavenly body looks from earth, as opposed to absolute magnitude, which is how bright it really
is) is attested from 1875.


