masher (n.)

thing that mashes, c.1500, agent noun from mash (v.). Meaning would-be lady-killer is from 1875,
American English, perhaps in use from 1860, probably from mash (v.) on notion either of pressing
one's attentions, or of crushing someone else's emotions (compare crush).    He was, to use a
Western expression, a 'regular heart-smasher among the women; and it may not be improper to state,
just here, that no one had a more exalted opinion of his capabilities in that line than the
aforesaid 'Jo' himself. [Harper's New Monthly Magazine, March 1861]   <hr />   He had a weakness to
be considered a regular masher of female hearts and a very wicked young man with the fair sex
generally, but there was not a well-authenticated instance of his ever having broken a heart in his
life, nor likely to be one. [Gilbert A. Pierce, Zachariah, The Congressman, Chicago, 1880]    Also
in use late 19c were mash (n.) a romantic fixation, crush (1884); mash (v.) excite sentimental
admiration (1882); mash-note love letter (1890).


mash (v.)

Old English m&aelig;scan, to mix with hot water, from same root as mash (n.). Meaning to beat into a
soft mass is mid-13c. Related: Mashed; mashing. For romantic sense, see masher.


mash (n.)

soft mixture, late Old English *masc (in masc-wyrt mash-wort, infused malt), from Proto-Germanic
*maisk- (cognates: Swedish m&auml;sk grains for pigs, German Maisch crushed grapes, infused malt,
Old English meox dung, filth), from PIE *meik- to mix (see mix (v.)). Originally a word in brewing;
general sense of anything reduced to a soft pulpy consistency is recorded from 1590s, as is the
figurative sense confused mixture, muddle. Short for mashed potatoes it is attested from 1904.


mishmash (n.)

also mish-mash, mid-15c., mysse-masche, probably an imitative reduplication of mash (n.).


mush (n.)

kind of porridge, 1670s, in the American colonies, variant of mash (n.) soft mixture. Meaning
anything soft and thick is attested from 1824.


mosh (v.)

to dance (with a certain amount of violence) to metal music in a tightly packed arena, 1987, perhaps
a variant of mash. Related: Mosh pit.


smash (v.)

1759, break to pieces, earlier kick downstairs (c.1700), probably of imitative origin (compare smack
(v.), mash (v.), crush (v.)). Meaning act with crushing force is from 1813; that of strike violently
is from 1835. Tennis sense is from 1882. Smash-and-grab (adj.) is first attested 1927.


hash (v.)

1650s, to hack, chop into small pieces, from French hacher chop up, from Old French hache ax (see
hatchet). Hash browns is short for hash browned potatoes (1917), with the -ed omitted, as in mash
potatoes. The hash marks on a football field were so called 1960s, from similarity to hash marks,
armed forces slang for service stripes on the sleeve of a military uniform (1909), which supposedly
were called that because they mark the number of years one has had free food (hash (n.1)) from the
Army; but perhaps there is a connection with the noun form of hatch (v.2).


