mass (n.1)

lump, quantity, size, late 14c., from Old French masse lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot,
bar (11c.), and directly from Latin massa kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like
dough, probably from Greek maza barley cake, lump, mass, ball, related to massein to knead, from PIE
root *mag- to knead (source of Lithuanian minkyti to knead, see macerate). Sense extended in English
1580s to a large quantity, amount, or number. Strict sense in physics is from 1704.    As an
adjective from 1733, first attested in mass meeting in American English. mass culture is from 1916
in sociology (earlier in biology); mass hysteria is from 1914; mass media is from 1923; mass
movement is from 1897; mass production is from 1920; mass grave is from 1918; mass murder from 1880.


mass (v.)

to gather in a mass (intransitive), 1560s, from mass (n.1) or from French masser. Transitive sense
by c.1600. Related: Massed; massing.


mass-produce (v.)

1921, from mass (n.1) + produce (v.). Related: Mass-produced; mass-producing.


massage (n.)

1874, from French massage friction of kneading, from masser to massage, possibly from Arabic massa
to touch, feel, handle; if so, probably picked up in Egypt during the Napoleonic campaign there.
Other possibility is that French got it in colonial India from Portuguese amassar knead, a verb from
Latin massa mass, dough (see mass (n.1)). Massage parlor first attested 1894, from the start a
euphemism for house of prostitution.


masses (n.)

people of the lower class, 1836; plural of mass (n.1).


massy (adj.)

late 14c., from mass (n.1) + -y (2).


massive (adj.)

c.1400, from Middle French massif bulky, solid, from Old French masse lump (see mass (n.1)).
Related: Massively; massiveness. U.S. Cold War strategy of massive retaliation was introduced by
J.F. Dulles in early 1954.


mass (n.2)

Eucharistic service, Old English m&aelig;sse, from Vulgar Latin *messa eucharistic service,
literally dismissal, from Late Latin missa dismissal, fem. past participle of mittere to let go,
send  (see mission); probably so called from the concluding words of the service, Ite, missa est,
Go, (the prayer) has been sent, or Go, it is the dismissal. Sometimes glossed in Old English as
sendnes send-ness.


missal (n.)

c.1300, from Old French messel book of the Mass (12c.) an ddirectly from Medieval Latin missale,
neuter of adjective missalis pertaining to the Mass, from Late Latin missa Mass (see mass (2)).


bloom (n.2)

rough mass of wrought iron, from Old English bloma lump of metal; mass, of unknown origin. Identical
in form to bloom (n.1), and sometimes regarded as a secondary sense of it, but evidence of a
connection is wanting.


onco-

word-forming element meaning bulk, mass, especially in medical use, tumor, from Latinized form of
Greek onko-, comb. form of onkos bulk, size, mass, body.


agglomeration (n.)

1774, action of collecting in a mass, from Latin agglomerationem (nominative agglomeratio), noun of
action from past participle stem of agglomerare (see agglomerate). In reference to a mass so formed,
it is recorded from 1833.


globe (n.)

mid-15c., sphere, from Middle French globe (14c.) and directly from Latin globus round mass, sphere,
ball, also, of men, a throng, crowd, body, mass, related to gleba clod, soil, land (see glebe).
Sense of planet earth, or a three-dimensional map of it first attested 1550s.


weapons of mass destruction (n.)

nuclear, biological and chemical weapons attested by 1946, apparently first used (in Russian) by the
Soviets.    The terms weapons of mass destruction and WMD mean chemical, biological, and nuclear
weapons, and chemical, biological, and nuclear materials used in the manufacture of such weapons.
[United States Code: Title 50, War and National Defense, chapter 43, รยง 2902, 2009]


somato-

before vowels somat-, word-forming element meaning the body of an organism, from comb. form of Greek
soma (genitive somatos) the body, a human body dead or living, body as opposed to spirit; material
substance; mass; a person, human being; the whole body or mass of anything, of uncertain origin.


clump (n.)

1580s, lump; cluster of trees, from Middle English clompe a lump (c.1300), from Dutch klomp lump,
mass, or Middle Low German klumpe clog, wooden shoe. Old English had clympre lump, mass of metal.


biomass (n.)

also bio-mass, c.1980, from bio- + mass (n.1).


cumulus (n.)

1650s, a heap, from Latin cumulus a heap, pile, mass, surplus, from PIE *ku-m-olo-, suffixed
shortened form of root *keue- to swell (compare Sanskrit svayati swells up, is strong, Greek kyein
to swell, Lithuanian &#353;aunas firm, solid, fit, capable). Meteorological use for rounded mass of
clouds first attested 1803.


en masse

French, literally in mass.


free-for-all (n.)

mass brawl (one in which all may participate), 1881.


Lammas (n.)

Aug. 1 harvest festival with consecration of loaves, Old English hlafm&aelig;sse, literally loaf
mass, from hlaf (see loaf (n.)) + m&aelig;sse (see mass (n.2)). Altered by influence of lamb (and
occasionally spelled lamb- in 16c.-17c.).


requiem (n.)

mass for repose of the soul of the dead, c.1300, from Latin requiem, accusative singular of requies
rest (after labor), repose, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + quies quiet (see quiet (adj.)).
It is the first word of the Mass for the Dead in the Latin liturgy: Requiem &aelig;ternam dona eis,
Domine .... [Grant them eternal rest, O Lord ....]


Chappaquiddick

place in Dukes County, Mass., from a native New England Algonquian language, literally island
adjacent to the mainland.


Springfield

type of firearm, 1813, named for the U.S. government armory in Springfield, Mass.


block (n.)

solid piece, c.1300, from Old French bloc log, block of wood (13c.), via Middle Dutch bloc trunk of
a tree or Old High German bloh, from a common Germanic source, from PIE *bhlugo-, from *bhelg- a
thick plank, beam (see balk).    Meaning mould for a hat is from 1570s. Slang sense of head is from
1630s. Extended sense of obstruction is first recorded 1640s. In cricket from 1825; in U.S. football
from 1912. The meaning in city block is 1796, from the notion of a compact mass of buildings; slang
meaning fashionable promenade is 1869.    BLOCK. A term applied in America to a square mass of
houses included between four streets. It is a very useful one. [Bartlett]


cloud (n.)

Old English clud mass of rock, hill, related to clod. Metaphoric extension to raincloud, mass of
evaporated water in the sky is attested by c.1200 based on similarity of cumulus clouds and rock
masses. The usual Old English word for cloud was weolcan. In Middle English, skie also originally
meant cloud.    The four fundamental types of cloud classification (cirrus, cumulus, stratus,
nimbus) were proposed by British amateur meteorologist Luke Howard (1772-1864) in 1802.
Figuratively, as something that casts a shadow, from early 15c.; hence under a cloud (c.1500). In
the clouds removed from earthly things; obscure, fanciful, unreal is from 1640s. Cloud-compeller
translates (poetically) Greek nephelegereta, a Homeric epithet of Zeus.


welter (n.)

1590s, confusion, from welter (v.). The meaning confused mass is first recorded 1851.


T and A (n.)

1972, short for tits and ass (a phrase attributed to Lenny Bruce), in reference to salacious U.S.
mass media; earlier it was medical shorthand for tonsils and adenoids (1942).


gunk (n.)

1949, viscous substance, American English, apparently from Gunk, trademark for a thick liquid soap
patented 1932 by A.F. Curran Co. of Malden, Mass.


brummagem (adj.)

cheap and showy, 19c., from a noun, from the vulgar pronunciation of Birmingham, England, in
reference to articles mass-manufactured there. The word also recalls Birmingham's old reputation for
counterfeiting.


concentration (n.)

1630s, action of bringing to a center, noun of action from verb concentrate (v.). Meaning a mass so
collected is from 1670s; continuous focus of mental activity is from 1846.


batting (n.)

sheets of cotton fiber, 1875, variant of obsolete bat felted mass of fur, wool, etc., from bat
(n.1), on notion of beaten fabric.


raver (n.)

c.1400, madman, agent noun from rave (v.). Meaning attendee at a mass party is from 1991. In Old
French, the noun resveor meant vagabond, night-prowler.


media (n.)

newspapers, radio, TV, etc. 1927, perhaps abstracted from mass media (1923, a technical term in
advertising), plural of medium, on notion of intermediate agency, a sense found in that word in
English from c.1600.


golem (n.)

artificial man, automaton, 1897, from Hebrew golem [Psalm cxxxix:16] shapeless mass, embryo, from
galam he wrapped up, folded.


Martinmass

from St. Martin, 4c. bishop of Tours, whose feast was Nov. 11, + mass (n.2).


Childermas (n.)

festival of the Holy Innocents (Dec. 28), late Old English *cildram&aelig;sse (c.1000), from
obsolete plural of child (q.v.) + mass (n.2).


fluff (v.)

to shake into a soft mass, 1875, from fluff (n.). Meaning make a mistake is from 1884, originally in
theater slang. Related: Fluffed; fluffing.


Michaelmas

early 12c., Sanct Micheles m&aelig;sse, the feast of St. Michael (Sept. 29, an English quarter-day),
from Michael + mass (n.2). Goose is the day's traditional fare since at least 15c.


Kilroy

U.S. military graffito character, 1945, said to be either Sgt. Francis J. Kilroy Jr., U.S. Army Air
Transport, whose friend or friends began writing his name everywhere as a prank; or war
materi&eacute;ls inspector James J. Kilroy of Quincy, Mass., who wrote Kilroy was here on everything
he checked.


buffalo (v.)

alarm, overawe, 1900, from buffalo (n.). Probably from the animals' tendency to mass panic. Related:
Buffaloed; buffaloing.


niggerhead (n.)

from nigger + head. A term used formerly in U.S. of various things, such as cheap tobacco (1843),
protruding root mass in a swamp (1859), a type of cactus (1877), and the black-eyed susan (1893).
Variant negro-head attested from 1781.


Candlemass

Old English candelm&aelig;sse (from candle + mass (n.2)), feast of the purification of the Virgin
Mary (Feb. 2), celebrated with many candles, corresponding to Celtic pagan Imbolc.


lemming (n.)

small arctic rodent, c.1600, from Norwegian lemming, from Old Norse lomundr lemming. Perhaps from
Lapp luomek. Figurative sense (in reference to their mass migrations that sometimes end in plunges
into the sea) is from 1958.


deuterium (n.)

1933, coined by U.S. chemist Harold C. Urey, with Modern Latin ending + Greek deuterion, neuter of
deuterios having second place, from deuteros second, from duo (see two). So called because it is
twice the mass of hydrogen.


mill (v.2)

to keep moving round and round in a mass, 1874 (implied in milling), originally of cattle, from mill
(n.1) on resemblance to the action of a mill wheel. Related: Milled.


moon-calf (n.)

also mooncalf, abortive, shapeless, fleshy mass, 1560s, attributed to the influence of the moon;
from moon (n.) + calf (n.). In later 16c., deformed creature, monster.


roundup (n.)

also round-up, by 1869 in the cattle drive sense; from verbal phrase round up to collect in a mass
(1610s; specifically of livestock from 1847); see round (v.) + up (adv.). Meaning summary of news
items is recorded from 1886.


rave (n.)

act of raving, 1590s, from rave (v.). Meaning temporary popular enthusiasm is from 1902; that of
highly flattering review is from 1926. Sense of rowdy party is from 1960; rave-up was British slang
for wild party from 1940; specific modern sense of mass party with loud, fast electronic music and
often psychedelic drugs is from 1989.


slip (n.3)

potter's clay, mid-15c., mud, slime, from Old English slypa, slyppe slime, paste, pulp, soft semi-
liquid mass, related to slupan to slip (see sleeve).


