mat (n.1)

loosely joined natural materials used as bedding, etc., Old English matte, from Late Latin matta mat
made of rushes (4c.), probably from Punic or Phoenician matta (compare Hebrew mittah bed, couch).
Meaning tangled mass is from 1835. That of piece of padded flooring used in gymnastics or wrestling
is attested from 1892; hence figurative phrase go to the mat do battle (1910). The Latin word also
is the source of German Matte, matze; Dutch mat, Italian matta. French natte mat, matting is from
Late Latin secondary form natta (compare napkin).


mat (adj.)

1640s, lusterless, dull (of a color or surface), from French mat dull, dead surface, from Old French
mat beaten down, withered, afflicted, dejected; dull, which is perhaps from Latin mattus maudlin
with drink, from madere to be wet or sodden, be drunk, from PIE root *mad- to be wet, drip (see mast
(n.2)). Or the French word might represent a transferred use from chess of mater to checkmate,
defeat, from Arabic (see mate (v.2)).


mat (n.2)

sheet of backing material, 1845, from French mat dull surface or finish (15c.), noun use of Old
French mat (adj.); see mat (adj.).


mat (v.)

early 15c., to make mats, from mat (n.1). From 1540s as to provide with mats, to cover with mats;
meaning to become tangled is from 1570s. Related: Matted; matting.


Mata Hari

stage name taken by exotic dancer Margaretha Gertruida Zelle (1876-1917), from Malay mata eye + hari
day, dawn.


matador (n.)

man who kills the bull in a bullfight, 1670s, from Spanish matador, literally killer, from matar to
kill or wound, probably from Arabic mata he died, from Persian (see second element in checkmate).
Fem. form is matadora.


match (n.1)

stick for striking fire, late 14c., macche, wick of a candle or lamp, from Old French meiche wick of
a candle, from Vulgar Latin *micca/*miccia (source also of Catalan metxa, Spanish mecha, Italian
miccia), probably ultimately from Latin myxa, from Greek myxa lamp wick, originally mucus, based on
notion of wick dangling from the spout of a lamp like snot from a nostril, from PIE root *meug-
slimy, slippery (see mucus). Modern spelling is from mid-15c. (English snot also had a secondary
sense of snuff of a candle, burnt part of a wick from late 14c., surviving at least to late 19c. in
northern dialects.)    Meaning piece of cord or splinter of wood soaked in sulfur, used for lighting
fires, lamps, candles, etc. is from 1530. First used 1831 for the modern type of wooden friction
match, and competed with lucifer for much of 19c. as the name for this invention.


match (n.2)

one of a pair, an equal, Old English m&aelig;cca, companion, mate, one of a pair, wife, husband, one
suited to another, an equal, from gem&aelig;cca, from Proto-Germanic *gamakon fitting well together
(cognates: Old Saxon gimaco fellow, equal, Old High German gimah comfort, ease, Middle High German
gemach comfortable, quiet, German gemach easy, leisurely), from PIE root *mak-/*mag- to fit (see
make (v.)). Middle English sense of matching adversary, person able to contend with another (c.1300)
led to sporting meaning contest, first attested 1540s.


match (v.)

to join one to another (originally especially in marriage), late 14c., from match (n.2). Meaning to
place (one) in conflict with (another) is from c.1400. That of to pair with a view to fitness is
from 1520s; that of to be equal to is from 1590s. Related: Matched; matching.


match-girl (n.)

1765, from match (n.1) + girl. The tragic story of The Little Match-Girl (Danish title Den lille
pige med svovlstikkerne) by H.C. Andersen was published first in 1845, translated into English by
1847.


match-head (n.)

1860, from match (n.1) + head (n.).


matchbook (n.)

also match-book, in reference to a folder holding fire-starting devices, 1913, from match (n.1) +
book (n.).


matchbox (n.)

also match-box, 1786, from match (n.1) + box (n.).


matchcoat (n.)

fur-skinned mantle worn by Native Americans, 1640s, originally matchco, probably a native word
(compare Ojibwa majigoode petticoat, woman's dress), altered by influence of coat (n.).


matchless (adj.)

peerless, 1520s, from match (n.2) + -less. Related: Matchlessly; matchlessness.


matchlock (n.)

1690s, from match (n.1), in reference to the firing mechanism, + lock (n.1) in the firearm sense
(1540s); probably so called for its resemblance to a door-latching device.


matchmaker (n.)

also match-maker, marriage-broker, 1630s, from match (n.2) + maker. Related: Match-making.


mate (n.1)

associate, fellow, comrade, mid-14c., also companion (late 14c.), from Middle Low German mate,
gemate one eating at the same table, messmate, from Proto-Germanic *ga-maton having food (*matiz)
together (*ga-), which is etymologically identical with companion. Cognate with Danish and Swedish
mat, German Maat mate, Dutch maat, from German. Meaning one of a wedded pair is attested from 1540s.
Used as a form of address by sailors, laborers, etc., since at least mid-15c. Meaning officer on a
merchant vessel is from late 15c.


mate (v.1)

c.1500, to equal, rival, 1590s as to match, couple, marry, join in marriage, from mate (n.1). Also,
of animals, to pair for the purpose of breeding. Related: Mated; mating.


mate (v.2)

checkmate, c.1300, from Old French mater to checkmate, defeat, overcome, from mat checkmated (see
checkmate (v.)).


mate (n.2)

in chess, a condition of checkmate, c.1300, mat, from Middle French mat, from Old French mater (see
mate (v.2)).


mater-

comb. form meaning mother, from Latin mater (see mother (n.)).


materia medica (n.)

substances used in medicine, Latin, literally medical matter.


material (adj.)

mid-14c., real, ordinary; earthly, drawn from the material world; a term in scholastic philosophy
and theology, from Old French material, materiel (14c.) and directly from Late Latin materialis
(adj.) of or belonging to matter, from Latin materia matter, stuff, wood, timber (see matter). From
late 14c. as made of matter, having material existence; material, physical, substantial; from late
15c. as important, relevant.


material (n.)

late 14c., substance, matter from which a thing is made, from material (adj.).


materialism (n.)

1748, philosophy that nothing exists except matter (from French mat&#233;rialisme); 1851 as a way of
life based entirely on consumer goods. From material + ism.


materialist (n.)

1660s and after in various philosophical and theological senses, on model of French
mat&#233;rialiste, from material (n.) + -ist. Also see materialism.


materialistic (adj.)

1829, from materialist + -ic. Related: Materialistically.


materiality (n.)

1520s, that which is the matter of something, from Modern Latin materialitas, from materialis (see
material (adj.)). From 1560s as quality of being material; 1640s as quality of being important to
matters at hand.


materialization (n.)

1822, noun of action from materialize.


materialize (v.)

1710, represent as material, from material (adj.) + -ize. Meaning â&euro;&oelig;appear in bodily
formâ&euro;? is 1880, in spiritualism. Related: Materialized; materializing.


materially (adv.)

late 14c., from material (adj.) + -ly (2).


materiel (n.)

1814, from French mat&eacute;riel material, noun use of adj. mat&#233;riel (see material (adj.)). A
later borrowing of the same word that became material (n.).


maternal (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French maternel (14c.), from Vulgar Latin *maternalis, from Latin maternus
maternal, of a mother, from mater mother (see mother (n.1)).


maternity (n.)

1610s, quality or condition of being a mother, from French maternit&eacute; motherhood (15c.), from
Medieval Latin maternitatem (nominative maternitas) motherhood, from Latin maternus (see maternal).
Used from 1893 as a quasi-adjective in reference to garments designed for pregnant women.


matey (n.)

1833, diminutive of mate (n.) in its male friend sense + -y (3).


math (n.1)

American English shortening of mathematics, 1890; the British preference, maths, is attested from
1911.


math (n.2)

a mowing, Old English m&aelig;&eth; mowing, cutting of grass, from Proto-Germanic *mediz (cognates:
Old Frisian meth, Old High German mad, German Mahd mowing, hay crop), from PIE *me- (4) to cut grass
(see mow (v.)).


mathematic (n.)

late 14c. as singular noun, replaced by early 17c. by mathematics, from Latin mathematica (plural),
from Greek mathematike tekhne mathematical science, feminine singular of mathematikos (adj.)
relating to mathematics, scientific, astronomical; disposed to learn, from mathema (genitive
mathematos) science, knowledge, mathematical knowledge; a lesson, literally that which is learnt;
related to manthanein to learn, from PIE root *mendh- to learn (cognates: Greek menthere to care,
Lithuanian mandras wide-awake, Old Church Slavonic madru wise, sage, Gothic mundonsis to look at,
German munter awake, lively). As an adjective, 1540s, from French math&#233;matique or directly from
Latin mathematicus.


mathematical (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin mathematicus (see mathematic) + -al (1). Related: Mathematically.


mathematician (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French mathematicien, from mathematique, from Latin mathematicus (see
mathematic).


mathematics (n.)

1580s; see mathematic + -ics. Originally denoting the mathematical sciences collectively, including
geometry, astronomy, optics.


maths (n.)

see math.


Matilda

fem. proper name, from French Mathilde, of Germanic origin, literally mighty in battle; compare Old
High German Mahthilda, from mahti might, power + hildi battle, from Proto-Germanic *hildiz battle,
from PIE *kel- (1) to strike, cut. The name also was late 19c. Australian slang for a traveller's
bundle or swag, hence the expression waltzing Matilda to travel on foot (by 1889).    In my
electorate nearly every man you meet who is not waltzing Matilda rides a bicycle. [Parliamentary
Debates, Australia, 1907]    The lyrics of the song of that name, sometimes called the unofficial
Australian national anthem, are said to date to 1893.


matin (n.)

see matins.


matinee (n.)

afternoon performance, 1848, from French matin&eacute;e (musicale), from  matin&eacute;e morning
(with a sense here of daytime), from matin morning, from Old French matines (see matins). Originally
as a French word in English; it lost its foreignness by late 19c.


matins (n.)

canonical hour, mid-13c., from Old French matines (12c.), from Late Latin matutinas (nominative
matutin&aelig;) morning prayers, originally matutinas vigilias morning watches, from Latin matutinus
of or in the morning, associated with Matuta, Roman dawn goddess (see manana). The Old English word
was uht-sang, from uhte daybreak.


matri-

word-forming element meaning mother, from comb. form of Latin mater (genitive matris) mother (see
mother (n.1)).


matriarch (n.)

mother who heads a family or tribe, c.1600, from matri- + -arch, abstracted from patriarch.


matriarchal (adj.)

1780 (in reference to bee colonies); see matriarch + -al (1); patterned after patriarchy [Barnhart].
Related: Matriarchally.


