matrix (n.)

late 14c., uterus, womb, from Old French matrice womb, uterus, from Latin matrix (genitive matricis)
pregnant animal, in Late Latin womb, also source, origin, from mater (genitive matris) mother (see
mother (n.1)). Sense of place or medium where something is developed is first recorded 1550s; sense
of embedding or enclosing mass first recorded 1640s. Logical sense of array of possible combinations
of truth-values is attested from 1914. As a verb from 1951.


madrigal (n.)

short love poem, also part-song for three or more voices, 1580s, from Italian madrigale, probably
from Venetian dialect madregal simple, ingenuous, from Late Latin matricalis invented, original,
literally of or from the womb, from matrix (genitive matricis) womb (see matrix).


matriculate (v.)

1570s, to admit a student to a college by enrolling his name on the register, from Late Latin
matriculatus, past participle of matriculare to register, from Latin matricula public register,
diminutive of matrix (genitive matricis) list, roll, also sources, womb (see matrix).    The
connection of senses in the Latin word seems to be via confusion of Greek metra womb (from meter
mother; see mother (n.1)) and an identical but different Greek word metra meaning register, lot (see
meter (n.2)). Evidently Latin matrix was used to translate both, though it originally shared meaning
with only one. Related: Matriculated; matriculating.


plasm (n.)

1610s, mold or matrix, cast; see plasma. Meaning living matter of a cell is from 1864.


establishment (n.)

late 15c., settled arrangement, also income, property, from establish + -ment. Meaning established
church is from 1731; Sense of place of business is from 1832. Meaning social matrix of ruling people
and institutions is attested occasionally from 1923, current use from 1955.


dot (n.)

Old English dott speck, head of a boil, perhaps related to Norwegian dot lump, small knot, Dutch dot
knot, small bunch, wisp, Old High German tutta nipple; ultimate origin unclear.    Known from a
single source c.1000; the word reappeared with modern meaning mark c.1530; not common until 18c.
Morse telegraph sense is from 1838. On the dot punctual is 1909, in reference to a clock dial face.
Dot-matrix first attested 1975.


signature (n.)

1530s, a kind of document in Scottish law, from Middle French signature (16c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin signatura signature, a rescript, in classical Latin the matrix of a seal, from
signatus, past participle of signare to mark with a stamp, sign (see sign (v.)).    Meaning one's
own name written in one's own hand is from 1570s, replacing sign-manual (early 15c.) in this sense.
Musical sense of signs placed it the beginning of a staff to indicate the key and rhythm is from
1806. Meaning a distinguishing mark of any kind is from 1620s.


