meagerness (n.)

also meagreness, early 15c., from meager + -ness.


meagerly (adv.)

also meagrely, 1580s, from meager + -ly (2).


meager (adj.)

late 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), lean, thin, emaciated (of persons or animals), from Old French
megre, maigre thin (12c.), from Latin macrum (nominative macer) lean, thin (source of Spanish,
Portuguese, and Italian magro), from PIE *makro- (see macro-). Of material things (land, food, etc.)
from early 15c. Cognate Germanic words (Old Norse magr thin, Old High German magar, German mager,
Middle Dutch magher, Dutch mager, Old English m&#230;ger) come directly from the PIE root via Proto-
Germanic *magras and are not from Latin.


measly (adj.)

affected with measles, 1680s, from measle (see measles) + -y (2); sense of meager and contemptible
first recorded 1864 in British slang.


meagre (adj.)

chiefly British English spelling of meager (q.v.); for spelling, see -re.


scanty (adj.)

1650s, meager, barely sufficient for use; 1701, too small, limited in scope, from scant + -y (2).
Related: Scantiness (1560s). Scanties (n.) underwear (especially for women) attested from 1928.


litotes (n.)

rhetorical figure in which an affirmative is expressed by the negative of its opposite, from Greek
litotes, literally plainness, simplicity, from litos smooth, plain, small, meager, from PIE root
*(s)lei- slimy, sticky, slippery (hence smooth); see slime (n.).


scrannel (adj.)

thin, meager, 1630s; any modern use traces to Milton (Lycidas, 124), who may have invented it out of
dialectal scranny (see scrawny). Or it might be from a Scandinavian source akin to Norwegian skran
rubbish. Compare English dialectal and Scottish skran scraps, broken victuals; refuse, in military
slang food.


gracile (adj.)

1620s, from Latin gracilis slender, thin, fine; plain, simple. Not etymologically connected to grace
but often regarded as if it is. Perhaps a dissimilated form related to Latin cracens slender; if so,
perhaps cognate with Sanskrit krsah thin, weak, Avestan keresa- lean, meager, Lithuanian kar&#353;tu
to be very old, to age.


scrimp (v.)

to make too small, 1774, originally in English an adjective, scant, meager (1718), possibly from a
Scandinavian source (compare Swedish skrumpna to shrink, shrivel up, Danish skrumpen shrunken,
shriveled), or from a continental Germanic source akin to Middle High German schrimpfen, German
schrumpfen to shrivel, from Proto-Germanic *skrimp-, from PIE root *(s)kerb- to turn, bend. Related:
Scrimped; scrimping.


tenuous (adj.)

1590s, thin, unsubstantial, irregularly formed from Latin tenuis thin, drawn out, meager, slim,
slender, figuratively trifling, insignificant, poor, low in rank, from PIE root *ten- to stretch
(cognates: Sanskrit tanuh thin, literally stretched out; see tenet) + -ous. The correct form with
respect to the Latin is tenuious. The figurative sense of having slight importance, not substantial
is found from 1817 in English. Related: Tenuously; tenuousness.


malinger (v.)

1820, from French malingrer to suffer, perhaps also pretend to be ill, from malingre ailing, sickly
(13c.), of uncertain origin, possibly a blend of mingre sickly, miserable and malade ill. Mingre is
itself a blend of maigre meager + haingre sick, haggard, possibly from Germanic (compare Middle High
German hager thin). The sense evolution may be through notion of beggars with sham sores. Related:
Malingered; malingering; malingerer (1785).


