meddle (v.)

early 14c., to mingle, blend, mix, from Old North French medler (Old French mesler, 12c., Modern
French m&#234;ler) to mix, mingle, to meddle, from Vulgar Latin *misculare (source of
Proven&ccedil;al mesclar, Spanish mezclar, Italian mescolare, meschiare), from Latin miscere to mix
(see mix (v.)). From late 14c. as busy oneself, be concerned with, engage in; also disparagingly
interfere, be officious, make a nuisance of oneself (the notion is of meddling too much). From mid-
14c. to 1700, it also was a euphemism for have sexual intercourse. Related: Meddled; meddling.


meddler (n.)

late 14c., practitioner, agent noun from meddle (v.). Meaning one who interferes, a nuisance is mid-
15c.


meddlesome (adj.)

1610s, from meddle + -some (1). Earlier was medlous quarrelsome, meddlesome (mid-15c.). Related:
Meddlesomely. Character name Meddlesome Mattie attested from 1814.


mell (v.)

to mix, meddle, c. 1300, mellen, from Old French meller, variant of mesler (see meddle). Related:
Melled; melling.


meddling (n.)

action of blending, mid-14c., from present participle of meddle (v.). Meaning action of taking part,
interference is late 14c. As a past participle adjective, from 1520s. Related: Meddlingly.


medley (n.)

c. 1300, hand-to-hand combat, from Old French medlee, variant of meslee (see meddle). Meaning
combination, mixture is from mid-15c.; that of musical combination consisting of diverse parts is
from 1620s.


tamper (v.)

meddle, interfere, 1560s, figurative use of tamper to work in clay, etc., so as to mix it
thoroughly, probably originally a variant of temper (v.), which is how it often was spelled at
first. Perhaps it is a dialectal workmen's pronunciation. Related: Tampered; tampering.


melange (n.)

1650s, from French m&eacute;lange (15c.), from m&ecirc;ler to mix, mingle, from Old French mesler
(see meddle).


melee (n.)

1640s, from French m&ecirc;l&eacute;e, from Old French meslee brawl, confused fight; mixture, blend
(12c.), noun use of fem. past participle of mesler to mix, mingle (see meddle). See also medley.
Borrowed in Middle English as melle but lost and then reborrowed 17c.


pell-mell (adv.)

confusedly, 1570s, from Middle French p&ecirc;le-m&ecirc;le, from Old French pesle mesle (12c.),
apparently a jingling rhyme on the second element, which is from the stem of the verb mesler to mix,
mingle (see meddle). Phonetic French form pelly melly is attested in English from mid-15c.


intermeddle (v.)

late 14c., from Latin inter- (see inter-) + Anglo-French medler (see meddle (v.)).


intrigue (v.)

1610s, to trick, deceive, cheat (earlier entriken, late 14c.), from French intriguer (16c.), from
Italian intrigare to plot, meddle, from Latin intricare entangle (see intricate). Meaning to plot or
scheme first recorded 1714; that of to excite curiosity is from 1894. Related: Intrigued; intriguing
(1680s, plotting, scheming; meaning exciting curiosity is from 1909).


interfere (v.)

mid-15c., to strike against, from Middle French enterferer to strike each other, from entre- between
(see entre-) + ferir to strike, from Latin ferire to knock, strike, related to Latin forare to bore,
pierce (see bore (v.), and compare punch (v.), which has both the senses to hit and to make a hole
in). Figurative sense of to meddle with, oppose unrightfully is from 1630s. Related: Interfered;
interfering.


fire (n.)

Old English fyr fire, a fire, from Proto-Germanic *fur-i- (cognates: Old Saxon fiur, Old Frisian
fiur, Old Norse f&uuml;rr, Middle Dutch and Dutch vuur, Old High German fiur, German Feuer fire),
from PIE *perjos, from root *pa&#601;wr- fire (cognates: Armenian hur fire, torch, Czech pyr hot
ashes, Greek pyr, Umbrian pir, Sanskrit pu, Hittite pahhur fire). Current spelling is attested as
early as 1200, but did not fully displace Middle English fier (preserved in fiery) until c. 1600.
PIE apparently had two roots for fire: *paewr- and *egni- (source of Latin ignis). The former was
inanimate, referring to fire as a substance, and the latter was animate, referring to it as a living
force (compare water (n.1)).    Brend child fuir fordrede&thorn; [The Proverbs of Hendyng, c. 1250]
English fire was applied to ardent, burning passions or feelings from mid-14c. Meaning discharge of
firearms, action of guns, etc. is from 1580s. To be on fire is from c. 1500 (in fire attested from
c. 1400, as is on a flame on fire). To play with fire in the figurative sense risk disaster, meddle
carelessly or ignorantly with a dangerous matter is by 1861, from the common warning to children.
Phrase where's the fire?, said to one in an obvious hurry, is by 1917, American English.   Fire-bell
is from 1620s; fire-alarm as a self-acting, mechanical device is from 1808 as a theoretical
creation; practical versions began to appear in the early 1830s. Fire-escape (n.) is from 1788 (the
original so-called was a sort of rope-ladder disguised as a small settee); fire-extinguisher is from
1826. A fire-bucket (1580s) carries water to a fire. Fire-house is from 1899; fire-hall from 1867,
fire-station from 1828. Fire company men for managing a fire-engine is from 1744, American English.
Fire brigade firefighters organized in a body in a particular place is from 1838. Fire department,
usually a branch of local government, is from 1805. Fire-chief is from 1877; fire-ranger from 1909.
Symbolic fire and the sword is by c. 1600 (translating Latin flamma ferroque absumi); earlier yron
and fyre (1560s), with suerd &amp; flawme (mid-15c.), mid fure &amp; mid here (with fire and armed
force), c. 1200. Fire-breathing is from 1590s. To set the river on fire, accomplish something
surprising or remarkable (usually with a negative and said of one considered foolish or incompetent)
is by 1830, often with the name of a river, varying according to locality, but the original is set
the Thames on fire (1796). The hypothetical feat was mentioned as the type of something impossibly
difficult by 1720; it circulated as a theoretical possibility under some current models of chemistry
c. 1792-95, which may have contributed to the rise of the expression.    [A]mong other fanciful
modes of demonstrating the practicability of conducting the gas wherever it might be required, he
anchored a small boat in the stream about 50 yards from the shore, to which he conveyed a pipe,
having the end turned up so as to rise above the water, and forcing the gas through the pipe,
lighted it just above the surface, observing to his friends that he had now set the river on fire.
[On the Origins and Progress of Gas-lighting, in Repertory of Patent Inventions, vol. III, London,
1827]


