mediocre (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French m&eacute;diocre (16c.), from Latin mediocris of middling height or state,
moderate, ordinary, figuratively mediocre, mean, inferior, originally halfway up a mountain, from
medius middle (see medial (adj.)) + ocris jagged mountain (cognate with Greek okris peak, point,
Welsh ochr corner, border, Latin acer sharp; see acrid). As a noun, medicore thing or person, by
1834.


mediocrity (n.)

early 15c., moderation; intermediate state or amount, from Middle French m&#233;diocrit&#233; and
directly from Latin mediocritatem (nominative mediocritas) a middle state, middling condition,
medium, from mediocris (see mediocre). Neutral at first; disparaging sense began to predominate from
late 16c. The meaning person of mediocre abilities or attainments is from 1690s. Before the tinge of
disparagement crept in, another name for the Golden Mean was golden mediocrity.


so-so

1520s as an adverb, indifferently; as an adjective, mediocre, neither too good nor too bad, 1540s;
from so.


palooka (n.)

mediocre prizefighter, 1926, of unknown origin, credited to U.S. sportswriter and Variety staffer
Jack Conway (d.1928). Non-boxing sense of average person is from Joe Palooka, hero of Ham Fisher's
comic strip.


Mickey Mouse

cartoon mouse character created 1928 by U.S. animator Walt Disney (1901-1966). As an adjective
meaning small and worthless it dates from 1936, originally used especially of mediocre dance-band
music, a put-down based on the type of tunes played as background in cartoon films.


half-wit (n.)

1670s, originally a would-be wit whose abilities are mediocre; sense of simpleton (one lacking all
his wits) is first attested 1755.Half-wits are fleas; so little and so light,We scarce could know
they live, but that they bite.[Dryden, All for Love]  Phrase out of half wit half out of one's mind
was in Middle English (late 14c.). Half-witted lacking common sense is from 1640s.


mean (adj.1)

low-quality, c.1200, shared by all, from imene, from Old English gem&aelig;ne common, public,
general, universal, shared by all, from Proto-Germanic *ga-mainiz possessed jointly (cognates: Old
Frisian mene, Old Saxon gimeni, Middle Low German gemeine, Middle Dutch gemene, Dutch gemeen, German
gemein, Gothic gamains common), from PIE *ko-moin-i- held in common, a compound adjective formed
from collective prefix *ko- together (Proto-Germanic *ga-) + *moi-n-, suffixed form of PIE root
*mei- (1) to change, exchange (see mutable). Compare second element in common (adj.), a word with a
sense evolution parallel to that of this word.  Of things, inferior, second-rate, from late 14c. (a
secondary sense in Old English was false, wicked). Notion of so-so, mediocre led to confusion with
mean (n.). Meaning inferior in rank or status (of persons) emerged early 14c.; that of ordinary from
late 14c.; that of stingy, nasty first recorded 1660s; weaker sense of disobliging, pettily
offensive is from 1839, originally American English slang. Inverted sense of remarkably good (i.e.
plays a mean saxophone) first recorded c.1900, perhaps from phrase no mean _______ not inferior
(1590s, also, not average, reflecting further confusion with mean (n.)).


