melancholy (adj.)

late 14c., with or caused by black bile; sullen, gloomy, sad, from melancholy (n.); sense of
deplorable (of a fact or state of things) is from 1710.


melancholy (n.)

c.1300, condition characterized by sullenness, gloom, irritability, from Old French melancolie black
bile, ill disposition, anger, annoyance (13c.), from Late Latin melancholia, from Greek melankholia
sadness, literally (excess of) black bile, from melas (genitive melanos) black (see melanin) + khole
bile (see Chloe). Medieval physiology attributed depression to excess of black bile, a secretion of
the spleen and one of the body's four humors.    The Latin word also is the source of Spanish
melancolia, Italian melancolia, German Melancholie, Danish melankoli, etc. Old French variant
malencolie (also in Middle English) is by false association with mal sickness.


hypochondriac (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the hypochondria, also afflicted with melancholy, from French hypocondriaque
(16c.), from Medieval Latin hypochondriacus, from Greek hypokhondriakos pertaining to the upper
abdomen, from hypokhondria (see hypochondria). The noun is from 1630s, melancholy person; in the
modern sense from 1888.


melancholic (adj.)

late 14c., from melancholy + -ic, or else from Late Latin melancholicus, from Greek melankholikos
choleric, from melankholia â&euro;&oelig;sadnessâ&euro;? (see melancholy). As a noun, from 1580s.
Earlier adjective formation was melancholian (mid-14c.), and melancholiac (mid-19c.) also was tried.


hypochondria (n.)

1839, illness without a specific cause, earlier (1660s) depression or melancholy without real cause,
earlier still (late 14c.) ipocondrie upper abdomen, from Late Latin hypochondria the abdomen, from
Greek hypokhondria (neuter plural of hypokhondrios), from hypo- under (see sub-) + khondros
cartilage (of the breastbone); see grind (v.). Reflecting ancient belief that the viscera of the
hypochondria were the seat of melancholy and the source of the vapors that caused such feelings.


chagrin (n.)

1650s, melancholy, from French chagrin melancholy, anxiety, vexation (14c.), from Old North French
chagreiner or Angevin dialect chagraigner sadden, of unknown origin, perhaps [Gamillscheg] from Old
French graignier grieve over, be angry, from graigne sadness, resentment, grief, vexation, from
graim sorrowful, of unknown origin, perhaps from a Germanic source (compare Old High German gram
angry, fierce). But OED and other sources trace it to an identical Old French word, borrowed into
English phonetically as shagreen, meaning rough skin or hide, of uncertain origin, the connecting
notion being roughness, harshness. Modern sense of feeling of irritation from disappointment is
1716.


melancholiac (n.)

1863, from melancholy. Earlier in same sense was melancholian (mid-14c.).


melancholia (n.)

1690s, from Modern Latin melancholia (see melancholy).


gubber-tushed (adj.)

Gubber Tushed is when teeth stand out, and not in order. [R. Holme, Armoury, 1688].Every Lover
admires his Mistress, though she have ... a nose like a promontory, gubber-tushed, rotten teeth,
(etc.). [Robert Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy, 1621]


hippish (adj.)

somewhat depressed, 1706, from hip (n.) melancholy, variant of hyp, short for hypochondria.


mumps (n.)

type of contagious disease, c.1600, from plural of mump a grimace (1590s), originally a verb, to
whine like a beggar (1580s), from Dutch mompen to cheat, deceive, originally probably to mumble,
whine, of imitative origin. The infectious disease probably so called in reference to swelling of
the salivary glands of the face and/or to painful difficulty swallowing. Mumps also was used from
17c. to mean a fit of melancholy.


gloom

c.1300 as a verb, to look sullen or displeased, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Norwegian
dialectal glome to stare somberly). Not considered to be related to Old English glom twilight, but
perhaps to Middle Low German glum turbid, Dutch gluren to leer. The noun is 1590s in Scottish,
sullen look, from the verb. Sense of darkness, obscurity is first recorded 1629 in Milton's poetry;
that of melancholy is 1744 (gloomy in this sense is attested from 1580s).


atrabilious (adj.)

1650s, from Latin atra bilis, translating Greek melankholia black bile (see melancholy; also compare
bile). Atra is fem. of ater black, dark, gloomy, perhaps related to root of atrocity. Related:
Atrabiliousness.


monocle (n.)

single eyeglass, 1886, from French monocle, noun use of adjective monocle one-eyed, blind in one eye
(13c.), from Late Latin monoculus one-eyed, from Greek monos single, alone (see mono-) + Latin
oculus eye (see eye (n.)).That this, a hybrid, a Gallicism, and a word with no obvious meaning to
the Englishman who hears it for the first time, should have ousted the entirely satisfactory
eyeglass is a melancholy illustration of the popular taste in language. [Fowler]


depression (n.)

late 14c. as a term in astronomy, from Old French depression (14c.) or directly from Latin
depressionem (nominative depressio), noun of action from past participle stem of deprimere to press
down, depress (see depress).    Attested from 1650s in the literal sense; meaning dejection,
depression of spirits is from early 15c. (as a clinical term in psychology, from 1905);
meteorological sense is from 1881 (in reference to barometric pressure); meaning a lowering or
reduction in economic activity was in use by 1826; given a specific application (with capital D-) by
1934 to the one that began worldwide in 1929. For melancholy, depression an Old English word was
grevoushede.


cholera (n.)

late 14c., bile, melancholy (originally the same as choler), from Middle French cholera or directly
from Late Latin cholera, from Greek kholera a type of disease characterized by diarrhea, supposedly
caused by choler (Celsus), from khole gall, bile, from khloazein to be green, from khloros (see
Chloe). But another sense of khole was drainpipe, gutter.    Revived 1560s in classical sense as a
name for a severe digestive disorder (rarely fatal to adults); and 1704 (especially as cholera
morbus), for a highly lethal disease endemic in India, periodically breaking out in global
epidemics, especially that reaching Britain and America in the early 1830s.


torch (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French torche torch, also handful of straw (for wiping or cleaning, hence French
torcher to wipe, wipe down), originally twisted thing, then torch formed of twisted tow dipped in
wax, probably from Vulgar Latin *torca, alteration of Late Latin torqua, from Latin torquere to
twist (see torque (n.)).    In Britain, also applied to the battery-driven version (in U.S., a
flashlight). To pass the torch is an ancient metaphor from the Greek torch-races (lampadedromia)
where the goal was to reach the finish line with the torch still burning. Torch-bearer leader of a
cause is from 1530s. Torch song is 1927 (My Melancholy Baby, performed by Tommy Lyman, is said to
have been the first so called), from carry a torch suffer an unrequited love (also 1927), Broadway
slang, but the sense is obscure.


death (n.)

Old English dea&eth; death, dying, cause of death, in plura, ghosts, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon doth, Old Frisian dath, Dutch dood, Old High German tod, German Tod, Old Norse
dau&eth;i, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Gothic dau&thorn;as death), from verbal stem *dheu-
(3) to die (see die (v.)) + *-thuz suffix indicating act, process, condition.    I would not that
death should take me asleep. I would not have him meerly seise me, and onely declare me to be dead,
but win me, and overcome me. When I must shipwrack, I would do it in a sea, where mine impotencie
might have some excuse; not in a sullen weedy lake, where I could not have so much as exercise for
my swimming. [John Donne, letter to Sir Henry Goodere, Sept. 1608]   Death's-head, a symbol of
mortality, is from 1590s. Death row first recorded 1940s. Death knell is attested from 1814; death
penalty from 1875; death rate from 1859. Slang be death on be very good at is from 1839. Death wish
first recorded 1896. The death-watch beetle (1660s) inhabits houses, makes a ticking noise like a
watch, and was superstitiously supposed to portend death.    FEW ears have escaped the noise of the
death-watch, that is, the little clickling sound heard often in many rooms, somewhat resembling that
of a watch; and this is conceived to be of an evil omen or prediction of some person's death:
wherein notwithstanding there is nothing of rational presage or just cause of terror unto melancholy
and meticulous heads. For this noise is made by a little sheathwinged grey insect, found often in
wainscot benches and wood-work in the summer. [Browne, Vulgar Errors]


black (adj.)

Old English bl&aelig;c dark, from Proto-Germanic *blakaz burned (cognates: Old Norse blakkr dark,
Old High German blah black, Swedish bl&auml;ck ink, Dutch blaken to burn), from PIE *bhleg- to burn,
gleam, shine, flash (cognates: Greek phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin flagrare to blaze, glow, burn),
from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.).    The same root produced Old English
blac bright, shining, glittering, pale; the connecting notions being, perhaps, fire (bright) and
burned (dark). The usual Old English word for black was sweart (see swart). According to OED: In ME.
it is often doubtful whether blac, blak, blake, means 'black, dark,' or 'pale, colourless, wan,
livid.'  Used of dark-skinned people in Old English.    Of coffee, first attested 1796. Meaning
fierce, terrible, wicked is late 14c. The color of sin and sorrow since at least c.1300; sense of
with dark purposes, malignant emerged 1580s (as in black magic). Black face in reference to a
performance style originated in U.S., is from 1868. Black flag, flown (especially by pirates) as a
signal of no mercy, from 1590s. Black dog melancholy attested from 1826. Black belt is from 1875 in
reference to districts of the U.S. South with heaviest African population; 1870 with reference to
fertility of soil; 1913 in judo sense. Black power is from 1966, associated with Stokely Carmichael.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


