membership (n.)

1640s, state of being a member, from member + -ship. Meaning number of members is from 1850.


member (n.)

late 13c., sex organ (compare Latin membrum virile, but in English originally of women as well as
men), also, body part or organ (in plural, the body), from Old French membre part, portion; topic,
subject; limb, member of the body; member (of a group, etc.), 11c., from Latin membrum limb, member
of the body, part, probably from PIE *mems-ro, from root *mems- flesh, meat (cognates: Sanskrit
mamsam flesh; Greek meninx membrane, meros thigh (the fleshy part); Gothic mimz flesh). In English,
sense of person belonging to a group is first attested early 14c., from notion of constituent part
of a complex structure. Meaning one who has been elected to parliament is from early 15c.


laborer (n.)

mid-14c., manual worker, especially an unskilled one, agent noun from labor (v.). Meaning member of
the working class, member of the lowest social rank is from c. 1400.


senator (n.)

c. 1200, member of an (ancient) senate, from Old French senator (Modern French s&#233;nateur), from
Latin senator member of the senate, from senex old; old man (see senate). An Old English word for
one was folcwita. As member of a (modern) governing body from late 14c.; specifically in U.S. use
from 1788. Fem. form senatress attested from 1731. The Senators was the name of the professional
baseball team in Washington, D.C., from 1891 to 1971.


Octobrist (n.)

1., from Russian oktyabrist, member of the league formed October 1905 in response to imperial
policies; 2., from Russian Oktyabryonok, member of a Russian communist children's organization
founded 1925 and named in honor of the October Revolution.


brahmin (n.)

member of Boston's upper class, 1823, figurative use of Brahman member of the highest priestly Hindu
caste, late 15c., from Sanskrit brahmana-s, from brahman- prayer, also the universal soul, the
Absolute, which is of uncertain origin. Related to Brahma.


membrane (n.)

early 15c., thin layer of skin or tissue, a term in anatomy, from Latin membrana a skin, membrane;
parchment (skin prepared for writing), from membrum limb, member of the body (see member). The
etymological sense is that which covers the members of the body.


non-member (n.)

1640s, from non- + member.


Muggletonian (n.)

1660s, member of the sect founded by English tailor Lodowicke Muggleton (1609-1698).


lith (n.)

joint, limb, Old English li&thorn; limb, member, joint, cognate with Old Frisian lith, Dutch lid,
Old High German lid, Old Norse li&eth;r, Gothic li&thorn;us, German glied limb, member.


Moonie (n.)

1974, a member of the Unification Church, headed by Sun Myung Moon.


Magus (n.)

member of the ancient Persian priestly caste, late 14c., singular of magi (q.v.).


Shriner (n.)

1882, a member of the Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine (established 1872).


Bircher (n.)

1961, member of the U.S. anti-communist John Birch Society, founded 1958.


Black Shirt

1922, member of Fasci di Combattimento, Italian paramilitary unit founded 1919 by Mussolini; so
called for their uniforms.


representative (n.)

1640s, example, type, from representative (adj.); 1690s in sense of member of a legislative body.


Manchu

1650s, member of Tungusic race of Manchuria which conquered China in 1644 and remained its ruling
class until the Revolution of 1912. From Manchu, literally pure, name of the tribe descended from
the Nu-chen Tartars.


Girondist (n.)

1795, member of the moderate republican party of France, 1791-93, from Gironde, name of a department
in southwestern France; the faction so called because its leaders were deputies elected from there.


Sweet Adeline

female barbershop singing group member, 1947, from the name of a popular close harmony song by
Richard Armstrong &amp; Harry Gerard, You're the Flower of my Heart, Sweet Adeline (1903).


Umayyad

member of a Muslim dynasty which ruled the Caliphate 661-750 C.E. and in 756 C.E. founded an emirate
in Spain, 1758, from Arabic, from Umayya, proper name of an ancestor of Muhammad from whom the
dynasty claimed descent.


communitarian (n.)

1841, member of a commune, from community + ending from utilitarian, etc. The adjective is attested
from 1909.


Catholic (n.)

member of the Roman Catholic church, 1560s, from Catholic (adj.).


royal (n.)

royal person, c. 1400, from royal (adj.). Specifically member of the royal family from 1774.


limb (n.1)

part or member, Old English lim limb, joint, main branch of a tree, from Proto-Germanic *limu-
(cognates: Old Norse limr limb, lim small branch of a tree), a variant of *li&thorn;u- (source of
Old English li&thorn;, Old Frisian lith, Old Norse li&eth;r, Gothic li&thorn;us a limb; and with
prefix ga-, source of German Glied limb, member), from PIE root *lei- to bend, be movable, be
nimble. The parasitic -b began to appear late 1500s for no etymological reason (perhaps by influence
of limb (n.2)). In Old and Middle English, and until lately in dialects, it could mean any visible
body part.The lymmes of generacion were shewed manyfestly. [Caxton, The subtyl historyes and fables
of Esope, Auyan, Alfonce, and Poge, 1484]Hence, limb-lifter fornicator (1570s). To go out on a limb
in figurative sense enter a risky situation is from 1897. Life and limb in reference to the body
inclusively is from c. 1200.


regular (n.)

c. 1400, member of a religious order, from regular (adj.). Sense of soldier of a standing army is
from 1756. Meaning regular customer is from 1852; meaning leaded gasoline is from 1978.


Redemptorist (n.)

member of the Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer (founded Naples, 1732, by St. Alphonsus
Liguori), 1835 in English. Fem. form is Redemptoristine.


Wobbly (n.)

1914, member of Industrial Workers of the World (I.W.W.). Probably some sort of elaboration of the W
aspect of the acronym.


chetnik (n.)

member of a Balkan guerrilla force, 1904, from Serbian &#269;etnik, from &#269;eta band, troop.


Mountie (n.)

1914, member of the Royal Canadian (originally North-west) Mounted Police, formed 1873 to keep order
in the former Hudson's Bay Company lands. Also see -ie.


plebeian (n.)

member of the lowest class, 1530s, from Latin plebius person not of noble rank, from adjective
meaning of the common people (see plebeian (adj.)).


Shiite (n.)

1728, a member of the Shia sect of Islam, from Shia + -ite (1), Latin-derived suffix denoting
follower.


Sandinista (n.)

member of a Nicaraguan revolutionary group, 1928, from Spanish, from name of Augusto C&eacute;sar
Sandino (1893-1934), Nicaraguan nationalist leader; the modern organization of this name was founded
in 1963. Related: Sandanistas.


Shafi&#039;i (n.)

member of one of the four principal schools of Sunni Muslims, 1704, from Arabic, from ash-Shafi'i,
cognomen of founder Abu Abdallah Muhammad ibn Idris (767-819). Related: Shafi'ite.


Liberia

African nation, begun as a resettlement project of freed American slaves in 1816 by the American
Colonization Society, the name chosen by society member and U.S. senator Robert Goodloe Harper
(1765-1825) from Latin liber free (see liberal).


Carmelite (n.)

c. 1500, from Medieval Latin Carmelites, member of an order of mendicant friars (White Friars)
founded 12c. by Berthold of Calabria on Mount Carmel in what is now northwest Israel.


Samnite (n.)

member of an ancient people who inhabited Samnium in Italy, late 14c., from Latin Samnites (plural),
from Samnium, probably related to Sabine (q.v.).


Mennonite (n.)

member of an Anabaptist sect, 1560s, from name of Menno Simons (1492-1559), founder of the sect in
Friesland, + -ite (1). As an adjective by 1727. Alternative form Mennonist (n.) attested from 1640s.


heckler (n.)

mid-15c., one who uses a heckle (late 13c., as a surname, Will. le Hekelere), agent noun from heckle
(v.). Sense of audience member that taunts a public speaker is from 1885. Fem. form hekelstere is
attested from c. 1500.


harmonist (n.)

1742, one skilled in musical harmony, from harmony + -ist. Also writer who 'harmonizes' the parallel
narratives of the Gospel (1713) and member of a communistic religious movement in Pennsylvania
(1824). From the former comes harmonistics (1859).


Areopagite (n.)

member of the Areopagus court, late 14c.; see Areopagus + -ite (1). See Acts xvii:34.


republican (n.)

one who favors a republic or republican principles (or, as Johnson puts it, One who thinks a
commonwealth without monarchy the best government), 1690s; see from republican (adj.). With capital
R-, in reference to a member of a specific U.S. political party (the Anti-Federalists) from 1782,
though this was not the ancestor of the modern U.S. Republican Party, which dates from 1854.


federalist (n.)

1787, American English, member or supporter of the Federal party in U.S. politics (originally of
supporters of the Philadelphia constitution), from federal + -ist. General sense of one who supports
federal union is from 1792. The party expired c. 1824. As an adjective by 1801.


Nimrod

great hunter, 1712, a reference to the biblical son of Cush, referred to (Gen. x:8-9) as a mighty
hunter before the Lord. It came to mean geek, klutz by 1983 in teenager slang, for unknown reasons.
(Amateur theories include its occasional use in Bugs Bunny cartoon episodes featuring rabbit-hunting
Elmer Fudd as a foil; its possible ironic use, among hunters, for a clumsy member of their
fraternity; or a stereotype of deer hunters by the non-hunting population in the U.S.)


baptist (n.)

c. 1200, one who baptizes; see baptize + -ist. As member of a Protestant sect that believes in adult
baptism by immersion (with capital B-), attested from 1654; their opponents called them anabaptists.


Jesuit

1540s, from Modern Latin Jesuita, member of the Society of Jesus, founded 1533 by Ignatius Loyola to
combat Protestantism. Their enemies (in both Catholic and Protestant lands) accused them of belief
that ends justify means, hence the sense a dissembling person (1630s), and jesuitical deceitful
(1610s).


squire (n.)

early 13c., young man who attends a knight, later member of the landowning class ranking below a
knight (c. 1300), from Old French esquier squire, literally shield carrier (see esquire). Meaning
country gentleman, landed proprietor is from 1670s; as a general term of address to a gentleman, it
is attested from 1828.


Crip (n.)

member of a major U.S. street gang, founded in South Central Los Angeles 1971, the name supposedly
originally was cribs, partly a reference to the youth of most of the original members, and when they
began carrying pimp canes it was altered to Crip, which has been attested in U.S. slang as a
shortening of cripple (n.) since 1918.


gangster (n.)

member of a criminal gang, 1896, American English, from gang (n.) in its criminal sense + -ster.
Related: Gangsterism (1918).


irredentist (n.)

1882, member of Italian political party which (after 1878) demanded the annexation of neighboring
Italian-speaking regions (Trieste, S. Tyrol, Nice, Corsica, etc.), from Italian Irredentista, from
(Italia) irredenta unredeemed (Italy). Related: Irredentism.


Sikh (n.)

1781, member of a politico-religious community established c. 1500 in Punjab by Nanak Shah, from
Hindi sikh disciple, from Sanskrit siksati studies, learns, related to saknoti he is able, he is
strong (see Shakti).


