menace (n.)

c.1300, declaration of hostile intent, also act of threatening, from Old French menace menace,
threat (9c.), from Vulgar Latin minacia threat, menace (also source of Spanish amenaza, Italian
minaccia), singular of Latin minaci&aelig; threatening things, from minax (genitive minacis)
threatening, from minari threaten, jut, project, from min&aelig; threats, projecting points, from
PIE root *men- (2) to project. Applied to persons from 1936.


menace (v.)

c.1300, from Old French menacer threaten, urge (11c.), Anglo-French manasser, from Vulgar Latin
*minaciare to threaten, from minacia (see menace (n.)). Related: Menaced; menacing.


menacing (adj.)

1540s, present participle adjective from menace (v.). Related: Menacingly.


minatory (adj.)

expressing a threat, 1530s, from Middle French minatoire, from Late Latin minatorius, from minat-,
stem of minari to threaten (see menace (n.)).


minacious (adj.)

threatening, 1650s, from Latin minaci-, stem of minax threatening, menacing (from minari; see menace
(n.)) + -ous. Related: Minaciously.


prominent (adj.)

mid-15c., projecting, jutting out, from Latin prominentem (nominative prominens) prominent, present
participle of prominere jut or stand out, be prominent, overhang, from pro- before, forward (see
pro-) + minere to project, from minae projections, threats (see menace (n.)). Meaning conspicuous is
from 1759; that of notable, leading is from 1849. Related: Prominently.


amenable (adj.)

1590s, liable, from Anglo-French amenable, Middle French amener answerable (to the law), from
&agrave; to (see ad-) + mener to lead, from Latin minare to drive (cattle) with shouts, variant of
minari threaten (see menace (n.)). Sense of tractable is from 1803, from notion of disposed to
answer or submit to influence. Related: Amenably.


denounce (v.)

early 14c., announce, from Old French denoncier (12c., Modern French d&eacute;noncer), from Latin
denuntiare to announce, proclaim; denounce, menace; command, order, from de- down + nuntiare
proclaim, announce, from nuntius messenger (see nuncio). Negative sense in English via meaning to
declare or proclaim something as cursed, excommunicated, forgiven, removed from office. Related:
Denounced; denouncing.


demeanor (n.)

late 15c., from obsolete Middle English demean handle, manage, conduct, later behave in a certain
way (early 14c.), from Old French demener (11c.) to guide, conduct; to live, dwell, from de-
completely (see de-) + mener to lead, direct, from Latin minare to threaten, in Late Latin to drive
(a herd of animals); see menace. Sense in English evolved from notion of conduct, manage (oneself).
Spelling changed by influence of nouns in -or, -our.


promenade (n.)

1560s, leisurely walk, from Middle French promenade (16c.), from se promener go for a walk, from
Late Latin prominare to drive (animals) onward, from pro- forth (see pro-) + minare to drive
(animals) with shouts, from minari to threaten (see menace (n.)).    Meaning place for walking is
1640s; specifically walkway by the sea late 18c.; British sense of music hall favored by 'loose
women and the simpletons who run after them' is attested from 1863. Sense of dance given by a school
is from 1887.


threat (n.)

Old English &thorn;reat crowd, troop, also oppression, coercion, menace, related to &thorn;reotan to
trouble, weary, from Proto-Germanic *thrautam (cognates: Dutch verdreiten, German verdrie&szlig;en
to vex), from PIE *treud- to push, press squeeze (cognates: Latin trudere to press, thrust, Old
Church Slavonic trudu oppression, Middle Irish trott quarrel, conflict, Middle Welsh cythrud
torture, torment, afflict). Sense of conditional declaration of hostile intention was in Old
English.


