merger (n.)

1728 in legal sense, extinguishment by absorption,  from merge (v.), on analogy of French
infinitives used as nouns (see waiver). From 1889 in the business sense; not common until c.1926.
General meaning any act of merging is from 1881.


Paypal (n.)

e-commerce money transfer business, formed 2000 by merger of earlier firms.


ginormous (adj.)

by 1948, perhaps 1942, apparently originally a World War II military colloquialism, from a merger of
gigantic + enormous.


sexpert (n.)

sex therapist, 1924, from jocular merger of sex (n.) + expert.


fantabulous (adj.)

1959, creative merger of fantastic and fabulous.


chifferobe (n.)

also chifforobe; article of furniture having drawers as well as space for hanging clothes, c.1917,
from merger of chiffonier + wardrobe (n.).


transceiver (n.)

1934, from a merger of transmitter + receiver.


buttercup (n.)

type of small wildflower with a yellow bloom, 1777, from a merger of two older names, gold-cups and
butterflower. See butter (n.) + cup (n.).


another (adj.)

early 13c., merger of an other. Old English used simply o&thorn;er. Originally a second of two.
Compound reciprocal pronoun one another is recorded from 1520s.


pavan (n.)

slow, stately dance, 1530s, from French pavane (1520s), probably from Spanish pavana, from pavo
peacock (from Latin pavo), in reference to the bird's courting movements. But some see an Italian
origin and trace the name to Padovana Paduan. Possibly there was a merger of two distinct dance
words.


brunch

1896, British student slang merger of breakfast and lunch.To be fashionable nowadays we must
'brunch'. Truly an excellent portmanteau word, introduced, by the way, last year, by Mr. Guy
Beringer, in the now defunct Hunter's Weekly, and indicating a combined breakfast and lunch. [Punch,
Aug. 1, 1896]


Mercedes-Benz

motorcar brand first marketed 1926 after merger of two earlier companies. The firstg part of the
name, Mercedes, marketed as a car name from 1901, chosen by Austrian manufacturer Emil Jellinik for
his daughter, Mercedes. The Benz is from the other company, from name of Karl Benz, creator of the
Benz Patent Motorwagen (1886).


emerge (v.)

1560s, from Middle French &eacute;merger, from Latin emergere rise out or up, bring forth, bring to
light, from ex- out (see ex-) + mergere to dip, sink (see merge). The notion is of rising from a
liquid by virtue of buoyancy. Related: Emerged; emerging.


Budapest

Hungarian capital, formed 1872 from merger of two cities on opposite shores of the Danube, Buda
(probably from a word originally meaning water) + Pest, a Hungarian word meaning furnace, oven,
cove, also in Slavic (compare Russian pech'). Compare Ofen, literally oven, the old German name for
the place.


Durham

c.1000, Dunholm city on a hill, a merger of Old English dun hill (see down (n.2)) and Scandinavian
holmr (see holm). The change from -n- to -r- is a result of Norman confusion (see Shrewsbury). As a
breed of cattle, by 1810.


tower (n.1)

Old English torr tower, watchtower, from Latin turris a tower, citadel, high structure (also source
of Old French tor, 11c.; Spanish, Italian torre tower), possibly from a pre-Indo-European
Mediterranean language. Meaning lofty pile or mass is recorded from mid-14c. Also borrowed
separately 13c. as tour, from Old French tur; the modern spelling (1520s) represents a merger of the
two forms.


bundle (n.)

early 14c., bound collection of things, from Middle Dutch bondel, diminutive of bond, from binden to
bind, or perhaps a merger of this word and Old English byndele binding, from Proto-Germanic
*bundilin (source also of German b&uuml;ndel to bundle), from PIE root *bhendh- tie (see bend (v.)).
Meaning a lot of money is from 1899. To be a bundle of nerves very anxious is from 1938.


peony (n.)

a 16c. merger of Middle English pyony (from Old English peonie) and Old North French pione (Modern
French pivoine), both from Late Latin peonia, from Latin p&aelig;onia, from Greek paionia (fem. of
paionios), perhaps from Paion, physician of the gods (or Apollo in this aspect), and so called for
the plant's healing qualities. The root, flowers, and seeds formerly were used in medicine.


dapple (v.)

early 15c. (implied in past participle adjective dappled), perhaps from a Scandinavian source akin
to Old Norse depill spot, Norwegian dape puddle. Perhaps a back-formation from, or merger with,
Middle English adjective dapple-gray apple-gray (late 14c.), based on resemblance to the markings on
an apple (compare Old Norse apalgrar dapple-gray), or, as it was used of gray horses with round
blotches, perhaps via resemblance to apples themselves.


parsley (n.)

14c. merger of Old English petersilie and Old French peresil (13c., Modern French persil), both from
Medieval Latin petrosilium, from Latin petroselinum, from Greek petroselinon rock-parsley, from
petros rock, stone + selinon celery (see celery).


waiver (n.)

act of waiving, 1620s (modern usage is often short for waiver clause); from Anglo-French legal usage
of infinitive as a noun (see waive). Baseball waivers is recorded from 1907. Other survivals of noun
use of infinitives in Anglo-French legalese include disclaimer, merger, rejoinder, misnomer, ouster,
retainer, attainder.


acknowledge (v.)

1550s, a blend of Middle English aknow (from Old English oncnawan understand, from on + cnawan
recognize; see know) and Middle English knowlechen admit, acknowledge (c.1200; see knowledge). In
the merger, a parasitic -c- slipped in, so that while the kn- became a simple n sound (as in know),
the -c- stepped up to preserve, in this word, the ancient kn- sound. Related: Acknowledged;
acknowledging.


ore (n.)

12c., a merger of Old English ora ore, unworked metal (related to eor&thorn;e earth, see earth; and
cognate with Low German ur iron-containing ore, Dutch oer, Old Norse aurr gravel); and Old English
ar brass, copper, bronze, from Proto-Germanic *ajiz- (cognates: Old Norse eir brass, copper, German
ehern brazen, Gothic aiz bronze), from PIE root *aus- (2) gold (see aureate). The two words were not
fully assimilated till 17c.; what emerged has the form of ar but the meaning of ora.


diminish (v.)

early 15c., from merger of two obsolete verbs, diminue and minish. Diminue is from Old French
diminuer make small, from Latin diminuere break into small pieces, variant of deminuere lessen,
diminish, from de- completely + minuere make small (see minus).   Minish is from Old French
menuisier, from Latin minuere. Related: Diminished; diminishes; diminishing.


solicit (v.)

early 15c., to disturb, trouble, from Middle French soliciter (14c.), from Latin sollicitare to
disturb, rouse, trouble, harass; stimulate, provoke, from sollicitus agitated, from sollus whole,
entire + citus aroused, past participle of ciere shake, excite, set in motion (see cite). Related:
Solicited; soliciting.    Meaning entreat, petition is from 1520s. Meaning to further (business
affairs) evolved mid-15c. from Middle French sense of manage affairs. The sexual sense (often in
reference to prostitutes) is attested from 1710, probably from a merger of the business sense and an
earlier sense of to court or beg the favor of (a woman), attested from 1590s.


prissy (adj.)

1895, probably Southern U.S. dialect, first attested in Joel Chandler Harris, perhaps an alteration
of precise (q.v.), or a merger of prim and sissy [OED]. Related: Prissily; prissiness.    []Then Mrs
Blue Hen rumpled up her feathers and got mad with herself, and went to setting. I reckon that's what
you call it. I've heard some call it 'setting' and others 'sitting.' Once, when I was courting, I
spoke of a sitting hen, but the young lady said I was too prissy for anything.    What is prissy?
asked Sweetest Susan.    Mr. Rabbit shut his eyes and scratched his ear. Then he shook his head
slowly.    It's nothing but a girl's word, remarked Mrs. Meadows by way of explanation. It means
that somebody's trying hard to show off.    I reckon that's so, said Mr. Rabbit, opening his eyes.
He appeared to be much relieved.  [Joel Chandler Harris, Mr. Rabbit at Home]


stain (v.)

late 14c., damage or blemish the appearance of, probably representing a merger of Old Norse steina
to paint, color, stain, and a shortened form of Middle English disteynen to discolor or stain, from
Old French desteign-, stem of desteindre to remove the color (Modern French d&#233;teindre), from
des- (from Latin dis- remove; see dis-) + Old French teindre to dye, from Latin tingere (see
tincture). Meaning to color (fabric, wood, etc.) is from 1650s. Intransitive sense to become
stained, take stain is from 1877. Related: Stained; staining. Stained glass is attested from 1791.


soil (n.1)

c.1300, originally land, area, place, from Anglo-French soil piece of ground, place (13c.), from an
merger or confusion of Old French sol bottom, ground, soil (12c., from Latin solum soil, ground; see
sole (n.1)), Old French soeul, sueil threshold, area, place (from Latin solium seat), and Old French
soil, soille a miry place, from soillier (see soil (v.)).    Meaning place of one's nativity is from
c.1400. Meaning mould, earth, dirt (especially that which plants grow in) is attested from mid-15c.


wake (v.)

to become awake, a Middle English merger of Old English wacan to become awake, arise, be born,
originate, and Old English wacian to be or remain awake, both from Proto-Germanic *waken (cognates:
Old Saxon wakon, Old Norse vaka, Danish vaage, Old Frisian waka, Dutch waken, Old High German
wahhen, German wachen to be awake, Gothic wakan to watch), from PIE root *weg- (2) to be strong, be
lively (cognates: Sanskrit vajah force, strength; swiftness, speed, vajayati drives on; Latin vigil
watchful, awake,  vigere be lively, thrive, velox fast, lively, vegere to enliven; vigil awake,
wakeful, vigor liveliness, activity). Causative sense to rouse from sleep is attested from c.1300.
Related: Waked; waking.


polka (n.)

1844, from French polka, German Polka, probably from Czech polka, the dance, literally Polish woman
(Polish Polka), fem. of Polak a Pole. The word might also be an alteration of Czech pulka half, for
the half-steps of Bohemian peasant dances. Or it could be a merger of the two. The dance was in
vogue first in Prague, 1835; it reached London by the spring of 1842.   Vous n'en &#234;tes encore
qu'au galop, vieil arri&#233;r&#233;, et nous en sommes &#224; la polka! Oui, c'est la polka que
nous avons dans&#233;e &#224; ce fameux bal Valenlino. Vous demandez ce que c'est que la polka,
homme de l ann&#233;e derni&#232;re! La contredanse a v&#233;cu; le galop, rococo; la valse &#224;
deux temps, dans le troisi&#232;me dessous; il n'y a plus que la polka, la sublime, l'enivrante
polka, dont les salons raffolent, que les femmes de la haute, les banqui&#233;res les plus cossues
et les comtesses les plus choenosophoses &#233;tudient jour et nuit. [La France Dramatique, Paris,
1841]    As a verb by 1846 (polk also was tried).


bid (v.)

probably a merger of two old words: The sense in bid farewell is from Old English biddan to ask,
entreat, pray, beseech; order; beg (class V strong verb, past tense b&aelig;d, past participle
beden), from Proto-Germanic *bidjan to pray, entreat (source also of German bitten to ask, attested
from 8c.), which, according to Kluge and Watkins is from a PIE root *gwhedh- to ask, pray (see bead
(n.)).    To bid at an auction, meanwhile, is from Old English beodan offer, proclaim (class II
strong verb; past tense bead, past participle boden), from Proto-Germanic *beudan to stretch out,
reach out, offer, present, (source also of German bieten to offer), from PIE root *bheudh- to be
aware, make aware (cognates: Sanskrit bodhati is awake, is watchful, observes, buddhah awakened,
enlightened; Old Church Slavonic bljudo to observe; Lithuanian budeti to be awake; Old Irish buide
contentment, thanks). As a noun, 1788, from the verb.


door (n.)

Middle English merger of Old English dor (neuter; plural doru) large door, gate, and Old English
duru (fem., plural dura) door, gate, wicket; both from Proto-Germanic *dur- (cognates: Old Saxon
duru, Old Norse dyrr, Danish d&oslash;r, Old Frisian dure, Old High German turi, German T&uuml;r).
The Germanic words are from PIE *dhwer- a doorway, a door, a gate (cognates: Greek thyra, Latin
foris, Gaulish doro mouth, Gothic dauro gate, Sanskrit dv&aacute;rah door, gate, Old Persian duvara-
door, Old Prussian dwaris gate, Russian dver' a door).    The base form is frequently in dual or
plural, leading to speculation that houses of the original Indo-Europeans had doors with two
swinging halves. Middle English had both dure and dor; form dore predominated by 16c., but was
supplanted by door.A door is what a dog is perpetually on the wrong side of. [Ogden Nash]


awake (v.)

a merger of two Middle English verbs: 1. awaken, from Old English aw&aelig;cnan (earlier
onw&aelig;cnan; strong, past tense awoc, past participle awacen) to awake, arise, originate, from a
on + wacan to arise, become awake (see wake (v.)); and 2. awakien, from Old English awacian (weak,
past participle awacode) to awaken, revive; arise; originate, spring from, from a on (see a (2)) +
wacian to be awake, remain awake, watch (see watch (v.)).    Both originally were intransitive only;
the transitive sense being expressed by Middle English awecchen (from Old English aweccan) until
later Middle English. In Modern English, the tendency has been to restrict the strong past tense and
past participle (awoke, awoken) to the original intransitive sense and the weak inflection
(awakened) to the transitive, but this never has been complete (see wake (v.); also compare awaken).


walk (v.)

travel on foot, c.1200, a merger of two verbs, 1. Old English wealcan to toss, roll, move round
(past tense weolc, past participle wealcen), and 2. wealcian to roll up, curl, from Proto-Germanic
*welk- (cognates: Old Norse valka to drag about, Danish valke to full (cloth), Middle Dutch walken
to knead, press, full (cloth), Old High German walchan to knead, German walken to full), perhaps
ultimately from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, roll (see volvox).    The shift in sense is perhaps from
a colloquial use of the Old English word or via the sense of to full cloth (by treading on it),
though this sense does not appear until after the change in meaning. In 13c. it is used of snakes
and the passage of time, and in 15c. of wheeled carts. Rarely is there so specific a word as NE
walk, clearly distinguished from both go and run [Buck]. Meaning to go away is recorded from mid-
15c. Transitive meaning to exercise a dog (or horse) is from late 15c.; meaning to escort (someone)
in a walk is from 1620s. Meaning move (a heavy object) by turning and shoving it in a manner
suggesting walking is by 1890. To walk it off, of an injury, etc., is from 1741. Related: Walked;
walking.


band (n.1)

a flat strip, also something that binds, a merger of two words, ultimately from the same source. In
the sense that by which someone or something is bound, it is attested from early 12c., from Old
Norse band thin strip that ties or constrains, from Proto-Germanic *bindan, from PIE *bendh- to bind
(cognates: Gothic bandi that which binds; Sanskrit bandhah a tying, bandage, source of bandana;
Middle Irish bainna bracelet; see bend (v.), bind (v.)). Most of the figurative senses of this word
have passed into bond (n.), which originally was a phonetic variant of this band.    The meaning a
flat strip (late 14c.) is from Old French bande strip, edge, side, via Old North French bende, from
Old High German binda, from Proto-Germanic *bindan (see above). In Middle English, this was
distinguished by the spelling bande, but since the loss of the final -e the words have fully merged.
Meaning broad stripe of color is from late 15c.; the electronics sense of range of frequencies or
wavelengths is from 1922. The Old North French form was retained in heraldic bend. Band saw is
recorded from 1864.


run (v.)

the modern verb is a merger of two related Old English words, in both of which the first letters
sometimes switched places. The first is intransitive rinnan, irnan to run, flow, run together (past
tense ran, past participle runnen), cognate with Middle Dutch runnen, Old Saxon, Old High German,
Gothic rinnan, German rinnen to flow, run.    The second is Old English transitive weak verb
&aelig;rnan, earnan ride, run to, reach, gain by running (probably a metathesis of *rennan), from
Proto-Germanic *rannjanan, causative of the root *ren- to run. This is cognate with Old Saxon
renian, Old High German rennen, German rennen, Gothic rannjan.    Both are from PIE *ri-ne-a-,
nasalized form of root *reie- to flow, run  (see Rhine).    Of streams, etc., from c.1200; of
machinery, from 1560s. Meaning be in charge of is first attested 1861, originally American English.
Meaning seek office in an election is from 1826, American English. Phrase run for it take flight is
attested from 1640s. Many figurative uses are from horseracing or hunting (such as to run
(something) into the ground, 1836, American English).    To run across meet is attested from 1855,
American English. To run short exhaust one's supply is from 1752; to run out of in the same sense is
from 1713. To run around with consort with is from 1887. Run away flee in the face of danger is from
late 14c. To run late is from 1954.


line (n.)

a Middle English merger of Old English line cable, rope; series, row, row of letters; rule,
direction, and Old French ligne guideline, cord, string; lineage, descent; both from Latin linea
linen thread, string, line, from phrase linea restis linen cord, from fem. of lineus (adj.) of
linen, from linum linen (see linen).    Oldest sense is rope, cord, string; extended late 14c. to a
thread-like mark (from sense cord used by builders for making things level, mid-14c.), also track,
course, direction. Sense of things or people arranged in a straight line is from 1550s. That of cord
bearing hooks used in fishing is from c.1300. Meaning one's occupation, branch of business is from
1630s, probably from misunderstood KJV translation of 2 Cor. x:16, And not to boast in another mans
line of things made ready to our hand, where line translates Greek kanon, literally measuring rod.
Meaning class of goods in stock is from 1834. Meaning telegraph wire is from 1847 (later telephone
wire).    Meaning policy or set of policies of a political faction is 1892, American English, from
notion of a procession of followers; this is the sense in party line. In British army, the Line
(1802) is the regular, numbered troops, as distinguished from guards and auxiliaries. In the Navy
(1704, as in ship of the line) it refers to the battle line. Lines words of an actor's part is from
1882. Lines of communication were originally transverse trenches in siegeworks.


point (n.)

c.1200, minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc., a merger of two words,
both ultimately from Latin pungere prick, pierce, puncture (see pungent). The Latin neuter past
participle punctum was used as a noun, meaning small hole made by pricking, subsequently extended to
anything that looked like one, hence, dot, particle, etc. This yielded Old French point dot;
smallest amount, which was borrowed in Middle English by c.1300.    Meanwhile the Latin fem. past
participle of pungere was puncta, which was used in Medieval Latin to mean sharp tip, and became Old
French pointe point of a weapon, vanguard of an army, which also passed into English, early 14c.
The senses have merged in English, but remain distinct in French. Extended senses are from the
notion of minute, single, or separate items in an extended whole. Meaning small mark, dot in English
is mid-14c. Meaning distinguishing feature is recorded from late 15c. Meaning a unit of score in a
game is first recorded 1746. As a typeface unit (in Britain and U.S., one twelfth of a pica), it
went into use in U.S. 1883. As a measure of weight for precious stones (one one-hundredth of a
carat) it is recorded from 1931.   The point the matter being discussed is attested from late 14c.;
meaning sense, purpose, advantage (usually in the negative, as in what's the point?) is first
recorded 1903. Point of honor (1610s) translates French point d'honneur. Point of no return (1941)
is originally aviators' term for the point in a flight before which any engine failure requires an
immediate turn around and return to the point of departure, and beyond which such return is no
longer practical.


be (v.)

Old English beon, beom, bion be, exist, come to be, become, happen, from Proto-Germanic *biju- I am,
I will be. This b-root is from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, grow, come into being, and in addition
to the words in English it yielded German present first and second person singular (bin, bist, from
Old High German bim I am, bist thou art), Latin perfective tenses of esse (fui I was, etc.), Old
Church Slavonic byti be, Greek phu- become, Old Irish bi'u I am, Lithuanian bu'ti to be, Russian
byt' to be, etc. It also is behind Sanskrit bhavah becoming, bhavati becomes, happens, bhumih earth,
world.     The modern verb to be in its entirety represents the merger of two once-distinct verbs,
the b-root represented by be and the am/was verb, which was itself a conglomerate. Roger Lass (Old
English) describes the verb as a collection of semantically related paradigm fragments, while
Weekley calls it an accidental conglomeration from the different Old English dial[ect]s. It is the
most irregular verb in Modern English and the most common. Collective in all Germanic languages, it
has eight different forms in Modern English:   BE (infinitive, subjunctive, imperative)  AM (present
1st person singular)  ARE (present 2nd person singular and all plural)  IS (present 3rd person
singular)  WAS (past 1st and 3rd persons singular)  WERE (past 2nd person singular, all plural;
subjunctive)  BEING (progressive &amp; present participle; gerund)  BEEN (perfect participle).
The paradigm in Old English was:<table width=400 bgcolor=#CCFFFF cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4
border=1><tr><td> </td><td>SING.</td><td>PL.</td></tr><tr><td>1st pres.</td><td>ic eomic
beo</td><td>we sind(on)we beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pres.</td><td>&thorn;u eart&thorn;u
bist</td><td>ge sind(on)ge beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pres.</td><td>he ishe bi&eth;</td><td>hie
sind(on)hie beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>1st pret.</td><td>ic w&aelig;s</td><td>we
w&aelig;ron</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pret.</td><td>&thorn;u w&aelig;re</td><td>ge
waeron</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pret.</td><td>heo w&aelig;s</td><td>hie w&aelig;ron</td></tr><tr><td>1st
pret. subj.</td><td>ic w&aelig;re</td><td>we w&aelig;ren</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pret.
subj.</td><td>&thorn;u w&aelig;re</td><td>ge w&aelig;ren</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pret.
subj.</td><td>Egcfer&eth; w&aelig;re</td><td>hie w&aelig;ren</td></tr></table>The b-root had no past
tense in Old English, but often served as future tense of am/was. In 13c. it took the place of the
infinitive, participle and imperative forms of am/was. Later its plural forms (we beth, ye ben, they
be) became standard in Middle English and it made inroads into the singular (I be, thou beest, he
beth), but forms of are claimed this turf in the 1500s and replaced be in the plural. For the origin
and evolution of the am/was branches of this tangle, see am and was.    That but this blow Might be
the be all, and the end all. [Macbeth I.vii.5]


