meter (v.)

to measure by means of a meter, 1884, from meter (n.3). Meaning install parking meters is from 1957.


meter (n.3)

device for measuring, abstracted 1832 from gas-meter, etc., from French -m&egrave;tre, used in
combinations (in English from 1790), from Latin metrum measure or cognate Greek metron measure (see
meter (n.2)). Influenced by English meter person who measures (late 14c., agent noun from mete
(v.)). As short for parking meter from 1960. Meter maid first recorded 1957; meter reader 1963.


meter (n.1)

also metre, poetic measure, Old English meter meter, versification, from Latin metrum, from Greek
metron meter, a verse; that by which anything is measured; measure, length, size, limit, proportion,
from PIE root *me- (2) to measure (see meter (n.2)). Possibly reborrowed early 14c. (after a
300-year gap in recorded use) from Old French metre, with specific sense of metrical scheme in
verse, from Latin metrum.


meter (n.2)

also metre, unit of length, 1797, from French m&egrave;tre (18c.), from Greek metron measure, from
PIE root *me- (2) to measure (cognates: Greek metra lot, portion, Sanskrit mati measures, matra
measure, Avestan, Old Persian ma-, Latin metri to measure). Developed by French Academy of Sciences
for system of weights and measures based on a decimal system originated 1670 by French clergyman
Gabriel Mouton. Originally intended to be one ten-millionth of the length of a quadrant of the
meridian.


metrical (adj.)

pertaining to versification, early 15c., from Latin metricus metrical, from Greek metrikos of or for
meter, metrical, from metron poetic meter (see meter (n.2)). Old English had meterlic in this sense.


metric (n.)

science of versification, 1760, from Greek he metrike prosody, plural of metron meter, a verse; that
by which anything is measured; measure, length, size, limit, proportion (see meter (n.2)).


metric (adj.)

pertaining to the system of measures based on the meter, 1855, from French m&eacute;trique, from
m&egrave;ter (see meter (n.2)). In this sense, metrical is attested from 1797.


-meter

word-forming element meaning device or instrument for measuring; commonly -ometer, occasionally
-imeter; from French -m&egrave;tre, from Greek metron a measure (see meter (n.2)).


ithyphallic

1610s, poem in ithyphallic meter, from Greek ithyphallos phallos carried in the festivals, from
ithys straight + phallos erect penis (see phallus). As an adjective from 1795. The meter was that of
the Bacchic hymns, which were sung in the rites during which such phalloses were carried. Thus, in
Victorian times, the word also meant grossly indecent (1864).


stere (n.)

unit of the metric system for solid measure, 1798, from French st&egrave;re unit of volume equal to
one cubic meter, from Greek stereos solid, stiff, firm, from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid (see
stereo-). Little used, cubic meter generally serving instead.


telemeter (n.)

1860, a rangefinder for surveying and artillery, from French t&eacute;l&eacute;m&egrave;tre (1852),
from t&eacute;l&eacute;- far (see tele-) + m&egrave;tre meter (see -meter). Used from 1953 for a
pay-as-you-watch TV system with a coin box attached to the set. Related: Telemetry.


hexameter (adj.)

1540s, from Latin hexameter, from Greek hexametros, from hex six (see hexa-) + metron meter (see
meter (n.2)). As a noun from 1570s. Related: Hexametric.


symmetry (n.)

1560s, relation of parts, proportion, from Middle French symm&#233;trie (16c.) and directly from
Latin symmetria, from Greek symmetria agreement in dimensions, due proportion, arrangement, from
symmetros having a common measure, even, proportionate, from assimilated form of syn- together (see
syn-) + metron meter (see meter (n.2)). Meaning harmonic arrangement of parts first recorded 1590s.


matriculate (v.)

1570s, to admit a student to a college by enrolling his name on the register, from Late Latin
matriculatus, past participle of matriculare to register, from Latin matricula public register,
diminutive of matrix (genitive matricis) list, roll, also sources, womb (see matrix).    The
connection of senses in the Latin word seems to be via confusion of Greek metra womb (from meter
mother; see mother (n.1)) and an identical but different Greek word metra meaning register, lot (see
meter (n.2)). Evidently Latin matrix was used to translate both, though it originally shared meaning
with only one. Related: Matriculated; matriculating.


psychrometer (n.)

instrument to measure moisture in the atmosphere, 1749, from Latinized form of Greek psykhros cold +
-meter.


interferometer (n.)

instrument for measuring the interference of light waves, 1897, a hybrid from interfere + meter (3).


voltmeter (n.)

instrument for measuring the difference of potentials in volts, 1882, from volt + meter (n.3).


ammeter (n.)

instrument for measuring the strength of electric currents, 1882, from ampere + -meter.


calorimeter (n.)

1794, from calorie + -meter. A hybrid word.


galvanometer (n.)

1802, from comb. form of galvanism + -meter.


metrics (n.)

study of meter, 1892, variant of metric (n.); also see -ics.


micron (n.)

one millionth of a meter, 1892, coined 1880 in French from Greek mikron, neuter of mikros small (see
mica).


potentiometer (n.)

1868, a hybrid formed from comb. form of Latin potentia power (see potential) + Greek-derived
-meter.


seismometer (n.)

instrument for measuring the intensity and motion of earthquakes, 1841, from seismo- + -meter.
Originally different from a seismograph but now practically the same thing.


barometer (n.)

1660s, from Greek baros weight (see grave (adj.)) + -meter. Probably coined (and certainly
popularized) by English scientist Robert Boyle (1627-1691).


clinometer (n.)

measurer of slopes and elevations, 1811, from clino- + -meter. Related: Clinometric.


anemometer (n.)

1727, from anemo- wind + -meter.


chronometer (n.)

1735, from chrono- time + -meter. Related: Chronometric.


Metis

first wife of Zeus, from Greek Metis, literally advice, wisdom, counsel; cunning, skill, craft, from
PIE root *me- to measure (see meter (n.2)).


tachometer (n.)

speed-measuring instrument, 1810, coined by inventor, Bryan Donkin, from tacho- speed + -meter.
Related: Tachometry.


decimeter (n.)

1809, from deci- + meter (n.2).


hydrometer (n.)

1670s, from hydro- + meter (n.3).


metre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of meter (n.); for spelling, see -re.


micrometer (n.)

1660s, from micro- + -meter. Originally a telescope attachment; from 1884 as a craftsman's fine
measuring tool. Related: Micrometry; micrometric.


spirometer (n.)

contrivance for measuring lung capacity, 1846, formed irregularly from Latin spirare to breathe (see
spirit (n.)) + -meter. Related: Spirometry.


odometer (n.)

1791, from French odom&egrave;tre (1724), from Greek hodos way (see cede) + -meter. First recorded
in writings of Thomas Jefferson.


nanometer (n.)

also nanometre, 1963, from nano- + meter (n.2).


gasometer (n.)

1790, from gas + -meter. Related: Gasometric.


doggerel

late 14c. (adj.); 1630s (n.), Any rhyming verse in which the meter is forced into metronomic
regularity by the stressing of normally unstressed syllables and in which rhyme is forced or banal
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry]. probably from dog (n.) + pejorative suffix -rel and applied
to bad poetry perhaps with a suggestion of puppyish clumsiness, or being fit only for dogs. Attested
as a surname from mid-13c., but the sense is not evident.


endometrium (n.)

1882, medical Latin, from endo- + Greek metra uterus, related to meter (see mother (n.1)).


kilometer (n.)

1810, from French kilom&egrave;tre (1795); see kilo- + meter (n.2). Related: Kilometric.


iambic

1570s (n.); 1580s (adj.), from Latin iambicus, from Greek iambikos, from iambos metrical foot of one
unaccented followed by one accented syllable, from iaptein to assail (in words), literally to put
forth. The meter of invective and lampoon in classical Greek from the time it was used for such by
Archilochos, 7c. B.C.E.


spectrometer (n.)

1863, from German Spectrometer (Moritz Meyerstein, 1863); see spectro- + -meter.


perimeter (n.)

early 15c., line around a figure or surface, from Latin perimetros, from Greek perimetron
circumference, from peri-  around (see peri-) + metron measure (see meter (n.2)). Military sense of
boundary of a defended position is attested from 1943.


isometric (adj.)

1838, literally of the same measure, coined from Greek isos equal (see iso-) + metron measure (see
meter (n.2)). Originally a method of using perspective in drawing; the physiological sense relating
to muscular action is from 1891, from German isometrisch in this sense (1882).


trimeter (n.)

a verse of three metrical feet, 1560s, from Latin trimetrus, from Greek trimetros having three
measures, from tri- three (see tri-) + metron a measure (see meter (n.2)). Related: Trimetrical.


diameter (n.)

late 14c., from Old French diametre, from Latin diametrus, from Greek diametros (gramme) diagonal of
a circle, from dia- across, through (see dia-) + metron a measure (see meter (n.2)).


pedometer (n.)

instrument for measuring distances covered by a walker, 1723, from French p&eacute;dom&egrave;tre
(1712), a hybrid coined from Latin pedis (genitive of pes foot; see foot (n.)) + Greek metron a
measure (see meter (n.2)). At first Englished as waywiser.


trigonometry (n.)

branch of mathematics that deals with relations between sides and angles of triangles, 1610s, from
Modern Latin trigonometria (Barthelemi Pitiscus, 1595), from Greek trigonon triangle (from tri-
three, see tri-, + gonia angle, see knee (n.)) + metron a measure (see meter (n.2)).


manometer (n.)

1730, from French manom&egrave;tre (1706), said to have been coined by French mathematician Pierre
Varignon (1654-1722) from Greek manos thin, rare; loose in texture, porous; scanty, few (see mono-)
+ -m&egrave;tre (see -meter). Related: Manometric.


