meteorology (n.)

science of the atmosphere, weather forecasting, 1610s, from French m&eacute;t&eacute;orologie and
directly from Greek meteorologia treatise on celestial phenomena, discussion of high things, from
meteoron, literally thing high up (see meteor), + -logia treatment of (see -logy).


continentality (n.)

1897, a term in meteorology, from German kontinentalit&auml;t (1895), from Latin continentem (see
continent (adj.)).


meteorologist (n.)

1620s, from meteorology + -ist. Earlier was meteorologician (1570s). Greek meteorologos meant one
who deals with celestial phenomena, astronomer.


pentad (n.)

1650s, from Greek pentas (genitive pentados) group of five (see five). Meaning period of five years
is from 1880; meaning period of five days is from 1906, originally in meteorology.


cirrous (adj.)

1650s in biology; 1815 in meteorology, from Latin cirrus (see cirrus) + -ous.


cirrus (n.)

1708, curl-like fringe or tuft, from Latin cirrus a lock of hair, tendril, curl, ringlet of hair;
the fringe of a garment. In meteorology, cirrus clouds attested from 1803. So called from fancied
resemblance of shape.


meteorological (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French m&#233;t&#233;orologique or Greek meteorologikos; see meteorology + -ical.
Related: Meteorologically.


butterfly (n.)

Old English buttorfleoge, evidently butter (n.) + fly (n.), but of obscure signification. Perhaps
based on the old notion that the insects (or witches disguised as butterflies) consume butter or
milk that is left uncovered. Or, less creatively, simply because the pale yellow color of many
species' wings suggests the color of butter. Another theory connects it to the color of the insect's
excrement, based on Dutch cognate boterschijte. An overview of words for butterfly in various
languages can be found here. Also see papillon.    Applied to persons from c.1600, originally in
reference to vain and gaudy attire; by 1806 in reference to transformation from early lowly state;
in reference to flitting tendencies by 1873. The swimming stroke so called from 1936. Butterflies
light stomach spasms caused by anxiety is from 1908.    The butterfly effect is a deceptively simple
insight extracted from a complex modern field. As a low-profile assistant professor in MIT's
department of meteorology in 1961, [Edward] Lorenz created an early computer program to simulate
weather. One day he changed one of a dozen numbers representing atmospheric conditions, from .506127
to .506. That tiny alteration utterly transformed his long-term forecast, a point Lorenz amplified
in his 1972 paper, Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly's Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado
in Texas? [Peter Dizikes, The Meaning of the Butterfly, The Boston Globe, June 8, 2008]


