methodical (adj.)

1560s, with -al (1) and methodic (1540s), from Middle French methodique, from Late Latin methodicus,
from Greek methodikos, from methodos (see method). Related: Methodically.


systematic (adj.)

1670s, pertaining to a system, from French syst&#233;matique or directly from Late Latin
systematicus, from Greek systematikos combined in a whole, from systema (genitive systematos); see
system. From 1789 as methodical, often in a bad sense, ruthlessly methodical. Related: Systematical
(1660s); systematically.


methodize (v.)

to make methodical, 1580s, from method + -ize. Related: Methodized; methodizing.


selection (n.)

1620s, act of selecting, from Latin selectionem (nominative selectio) a choosing out, choice,
selection, noun of action from past participle stem of seligere (see select (adj.)). Meaning thing
selected is from 1805. Biological sense is from 1837; applied to actions of breeders (methodical
selection), hence its use by Darwin (natural selection; 1857). French s&#233;lection is a 19c.
borrowing from English.


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


