zirconium (n.)

metallic chemical element, 1808, coined by German chemist and mineralogist Martin Heinrich Klaproth
(1743-1817) in 1789; so called because it was found in zircon.


uranium (n.)

rare metallic element, 1797, named 1789 in Modern Latin by its discoverer, German chemist and
mineralogist Martin Heinrich Klaproth (1743-1817), for the recently found planet Uranus (q.v.).


gadolinium

metallic element, named 1886 by J.C. Marginac in honor of Johan Gadolin (1760-1852), Finnish
mineralogist and chemist, who in 1794 first began investigation of the earth which eventually
yielded this element and several others.


tellurium (n.)

metallic element, 1800, coined 1798 in Modern Latin by German chemist and mineralogist Martin
Heinrich Klaproth (1743-1817) from Latin tellus (genitive telluris) earth (see tellurian) + -ium.


titanium (n.)

metallic element, 1796, Modern Latin, named in 1795 by German chemist and mineralogist Martin
Heinrich Klaproth (1743-1817) from Latin Titan (see titan) as sons of the earth. He previously had
named uranium. A pure specimen was not isolated until 1887.


mineralogy (n.)

1680s, a hybrid from mineral (n.) + -logy or else from French min&#233;ralogie (1640s). Related:
Mineralogist; mineralogical.


lanthanum (n.)

metallic rare earth element, 1841, coined in Modern Latin by Swedish chemist and mineralogist Carl
Gustav Mosander (1797-1858), who discovered it in 1839, from Greek lanthanein to lie hidden, escape
notice, from PIE root *ladh- to be hidden (see latent). So called because the element was concealed
in rare minerals.


graphite (n.)

1796, from German Graphit black lead, coined 1789 by German mineralogist Abraham Gottlob Werner
(1750-1817) from Greek graphein write (see -graphy) + mineral suffix -ite. So called because it was
used in pencils. Related: Graphitic.


plagioclase (n.)

triclinic feldspar, 1868, from German, coined 1847 by German mineralogist Johann Friedrich August
Breithaupt (1791-1873) from plagio- + Greek klasis fracture, from stem of klan to break (see
clastic). Related: Plagioclastic.


calcite (n.)

crystalling calcium carbonate, 1849, from German Calcit, coined by Austrian mineralogist Wilhelm
Karl von Hardinger (1795-1871) from Latin calx (genitive calcis) lime (see chalk (n.)) + mineral
suffix -ite (2) (German -it).


loess (n.)

1833 (in Lyell), unstratified deposit of loam, coined 1823 by German mineralogist Karl C&auml;sar
von Leonhard (1779-1862) from German L&ouml;ss yellowish-gray soil, from Swiss German l&ouml;sch
(adj.) loose (compare German los; see loose). Related: Loessial.


nickel (n.)

whitish metal element, 1755, coined in 1754 by Swedish mineralogist Axel von Cronstedt (1722-1765)
from shortening of Swedish kopparnickel copper-colored ore (from which it was first obtained), a
half-translation of German Kupfernickel, literally copper demon, from Kupfer (see copper) + Nickel
demon, goblin, rascal (a pet form of masc. proper name Nikolaus, compare English Old Nick the devil;
see Nicholas); the ore so called by miners because it looked like copper but yielded none.
Meaning coin made partly of nickel is from 1857, when the U.S. introduced one-cent coins made of
nickel to replace the old bulky copper pennies. Application to five-cent piece (originally one part
nickel, three parts copper) is from 1883, American English; in earlier circulation there were silver
half-dimes. To nickel-and-dime (someone) is from 1964 (nickels and dimes very small amounts of money
is attested from 1893).


