mining (n.)

1520s, verbal noun from mine (v.1).


metal (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French metal metal; material, substance, stuff (12c.), from Latin metallum metal;
mine, quarry, mineral, what is got by mining, from Greek metallon metal, ore (senses only in post-
classical texts; originally mine, quarry, pit), probably from metalleuein to mine, to quarry, of
unknown origin, but related somehow to metallan to seek after. Compare Greek metalleutes a miner,
metalleia a searching for metals, mining.


tenderfoot (n.)

1866, American English, originally of newcomers to ranching or mining districts, from tender (adj.)
+ foot (n.). The U.S. equivalent of what in Great Britain was generally called a greenhand. As a
level in Boy Scouting, it is recorded from 1908.    Among the Indians, more than half of every
sentence is expressed by signs. And miners illustrate their conversation by the various terms used
in mining. I have always noticed how clearly these terms conveyed the idea sought. Awkwardness in
comprehending this dialect easily reveals that the hearer bears the disgrace of being a pilgrim, or
a tender-foot, as they style the new emigrant. [A Year in Montana, Atlantic Monthly, August 1866]
Tender-footed (adj.) cautious, originally of horses, is recorded from 1680s; of persons from 1854.


kibble (n.)

ground-up meat used as dog food, etc., apparently from the verb meaning to bruise or grind coarsely,
attested from 1790, first in milling, but of unknown origin. The same or an identical word was used
in the coal trade in the late 19c. and in mining from the 1670s for bucket used to haul up ore or
waste.


drifter (n.)

1864, as a mining term; 1883, boat fishing with drift-nets; agent noun from drift (v.). Meaning
vagrant is from 1908.


prospector (n.)

also prospecter, 1846 in the mining sense; agent noun from prospect (v.).


lode (n.)

original Middle English spelling of load (n.), and custodian of most of the original meaning of way,
course, carrying. Differentiation in sense took place 16c. Mining sense of vein of metal ore is from
c.1600, from notion of miners following it through the rock.


dump (n.)

place where refuse is dumped, 1865, originally of mining operations, from dump (v.). Meaning any
shabby place is from 1899. Meaning act of defecating is from 1942.


paydirt (n.)

also pay dirt, profit, success, 1873, from pay (n.) + dirt (n.); a word from mining, where it was
used in a literal sense from 1856.


stockpile (n.)

1872, originally a term in mining, from stock (n.2) + pile (n.). Extended to general use during
World War II. The verb is attested from 1921. Related: Stockpiled; stockpiling.


low-grade (adj.)

1867, originally in mining, with reference to ores, from low (adj.) + grade (n.).


airhead (n.)

empty-headed person, 1972, from air (n.1) + head (n.). Earlier as a term in mining (mid-19c.) and as
a military term based on beachhead (1950).


railroad (n.)

1757, from rail (n.1) + road. Originally road laid with rails for heavy wagons (in mining). The
process itself (but not the word) seems to have been in use by late 17c. Application to passenger
and freight trains dates from 1825, though tending to be replaced in this sense in England by
railway.


mineral (n.)

late 14c., substance obtained by mining, from Medieval Latin minerale something mined, noun use of
neuter of mineralis pertaining to mines, from minera mine. Meaning material substance that is
neither animal nor vegetable is first recorded c.1600. Modern scientific sense is from 1813.


claim (n.)

early 14c., a demand of a right; right of claiming, from Old French claime claim, complaint, from
clamer (see claim (v.)). Meaning thing claimed or demanded is from 1792; specifically piece of land
allotted and taken (chiefly U.S. and Australia, in reference to mining) is from 1851. Insurance
sense is from 1878.


prospect (v.)

explore for gold, examine land with a view to a mining claim, 1841, from prospect (n.) in
specialized sense of spot giving prospects of ore (1832). Earlier in a sense look forth, look out
over (1550s), from Latin prospectare. Related: Prospected; prospecting.


mine (v.1)

to dig, c.1300, to tunnel under fortifications to overthrow them, from mine (n.1) or from Old French
miner to dig, mine; exterminate. From mid-14c. as to dig in the earth (for treasure, etc.).
Figurative use from mid-14c. Related: Mined; mining.


stope (n.)

1747, a mining word, from Low German stope a step, apparently cognate with step (n.). As a verb from
1778, remove the contents of a vein, literally to cut in stopes. Related: Stoped; stoping.


Molly Maguire (n.)

secret society in the mining districts of Pennsylvania, 1867 (suppressed 1876); named for earlier
secret society formed in Ireland (1843) to resist payment of rents. From Molly (see Moll) + common
Irish surname Maguire. Memebers were said to sometimes wear women's clothing as disguise.


mine (v.2)

lay explosives, 1620s, in reference to old tactic of tunneling under enemy fortifications to blow
them up; a specialized sense of mine (v.1) via a sense of dig under foundations to undermine them
(late 14c.), and miner in this sense is attested from late 13c. Related: Mined; mining.


sump (n.)

mid-15c., marsh, morass (from mid-13c. in place names), from Middle Dutch somp or Middle Low German
sump, from Proto-Germanic *sumpaz, from PIE *swombho- spongy. Meaning pit to collect water is first
found 1650s. Sump-pump (1884) originally was in mining.


vein (n.)

c.1300, from Old French veine vein, artery, pulse (12c.), from Latin vena a blood vessel, also a
water course, a vein of metal, a person's natural ability or interest, of unknown origin. The mining
sense is attested in English from late 14c. (Greek phleps vein had the same secondary sense).
Figurative sense of strain or intermixture (of some quality) is recorded from 1560s; that of a humor
or mood, natural tendency is first recorded 1570s.


mine (n.1)

pit or tunnel in the earth for obtaining metals and minerals, c.1300, from Old French mine vein,
lode; tunnel, shaft; mineral ore; mine (for coal, tin, etc,), of uncertain origin, probably from a
Celtic source (compare Welsh mwyn, Irish mein ore, mine), from Old Celtic *meini-. Italy and Greece
were relatively poor in minerals, thus they did not contribute a word for this to English, but there
was extensive mining from an early date in Celtic lands (Cornwall, etc.). From c.1400 as a tunnel
under fortifications to overthrow them.


Krugerrand (n.)

also Kruger rand, 1967, South African gold coin (issued for investment purposes) bearing a portrait
of Transvaal President Stephanus Johannes Paulus Kruger (1825-1904); second element is rand, unit of
decimal currency introduced in Republic of South Africa 1961, named for The Rand, gold-mining area
in Transvaal, short for Witwatersrand (see rand).


pocket (n.)

mid-14c., pokete, bag, pouch, small sack, from Anglo-French pokete (13c.), diminutive of Old North
French poque bag (Old French pouche), from a Germanic source akin to Frankish *pokka bag, from
Proto-Germanic *puk- (see poke (n.)).    Meaning small bag worn on the person, especially one sewn
into a garment is from early 15c. Sense in billiards is from 1754. Mining sense is attested from
1850; military sense of area held by troops surrounded by the enemy is from 1918; the general sense
of small area different than its surroundings (1926) apparently was extended from the military use.
Figuratively, one's money (conceived as being kept in a pocket) is from 1717. Pope Pokett (late
15c.) was figurative of the greedy and corrupt Church.


mother (n.1)

Old English modor female parent, from Proto-Germanic *moth&aelig;r (cognates: Old Saxon modar, Old
Frisian moder, Old Norse mo&#240;ir, Danish moder, Dutch moeder, Old High German muoter, German
Mutter), from PIE *mater- mother (cognates: Latin mater, Old Irish mathir, Lithuanian mote, Sanskrit
matar-, Greek meter, Old Church Slavonic mati), [b]ased ultimately on the baby-talk form *m&#257;-
(2); with the kinship term suffix *-ter- [Watkins]. Spelling with -th- dates from early 16c., though
that pronunciation is probably older (see father (n.)).   Mother nature first attested c.1600;
mother earth is from 1580s. Mother tongue one's native language first attested late 14c. Mother of
all ________ 1991, is Gulf War slang, from Saddam Hussein's use in reference to the coming battle;
it is an Arabic idiom (as well as an English one), for instance Ayesha, second wife of Muhammad, is
known as Mother of Believers. Mother Carey's chickens is late 18c. sailors' nickname for storm
petrels, or for snowflakes. Mother lode attested by c.1882, from mining [1849].


strike (v.)

Old English strican (past tense strac, past participle stricen) pass lightly over, stroke, smooth,
rub, also go, move, proceed, from Proto-Germanic *strikan- (cognates: Old Norse strykva to stroke,
Old Frisian strika, Middle Dutch streken, Dutch strijken to smooth, stroke, rub, Old High German
strihhan, German streichen), from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (see strigil). Related to
streak and stroke, and perhaps influenced in sense development by cognate Old Norse striuka.
Sense of to deal a blow developed by early 14c.; meaning to collide is from mid-14c.; that of to hit
with a missile is from late 14c. Meaning to cancel or expunge (as with the stroke of a pen) is
attested from late 14c. A Middle English sense is preserved in strike for go toward. Sense of come
upon, find is from 1835 (especially in mining, well-digging, etc., hence strike it rich, 1854).
Baseball sense is from 1853.  To strike a balance is from the sense balance accounts (1530s).
Meaning refuse to work to force an employer to meet demands is from 1768, perhaps from notion of
striking or downing one's tools, or from sailors' practice of striking (lowering) a ship's sails as
a symbol of refusal to go to sea (1768), which preserves the verb's original sense of make level,
smooth.


