miniature (adj.)

small, 1714, from minature (n.). Of dog breeds, from 1889. Of golf, from 1893.


miniature (n.)

1580s, a reduced image, from Italian miniatura manuscript illumination or small picture, from past
participle of miniare to illuminate a manuscript, from Latin miniare to paint red, from minium red
lead, used in ancient times to make red ink, a word said to be of Iberian origin. Sense development
is because pictures in medieval manuscripts were small, but no doubt there was influence as well
from the similar-sounding Latin words that express smallness: minor, minimus, minutus, etc.


mini-

word-forming element meaning miniature, minor, abstracted from miniature, with sense perhaps
influenced by minimum.


twee (adj.)

tiny, dainty, miniature, 1905, from childish pronunciation of sweet (adj.). Compare tummy from
stomach.


miniaturist (n.)

maker of miniatures, 1800, from miniature (n.) + -ist.


pug (n.)

1560s, general term of endearment (also puggy), probably related to puck (n.2); one of the earliest
senses is sprite, imp (1610s). The sense of miniature dog is from 1749 (pug-dog); that of monkey is
1660s. The word at various times meant a bargeman (1590s), a harlot (c.1600), and an upper servant
in a great house (1847).


go-cart (n.)

also gocart, 1670s, originally a litter, sedan chair; also an infant's walker (1680s), from go +
cart (n.). The modern form go-kart (1959) was coined in reference to a kind of miniature racing car
with a frame body and a two-stroke engine.


locket (n.)

mid-14c., iron cross-bar of a window, from Old French loquet door-handle, bolt, latch, diminutive of
loc lock, latch, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old Norse lok fastening, lock;
see lock (n.1)). Meaning ornamental case with hinged cover (containing a lock of hair, miniature
portrait, etc.) first recorded 1670s.


miniaturize (v.)

1946, from miniature (adj.) + -ize. Minify in same sense is from 1670s, on analogy of magnify.
Related: Miniaturized; miniaturizing.


microcosm (n.)

c.1200, mycrocossmos (modern form from early 15c.), human nature, man viewed as the epitome of
creation, literally miniature world, from Middle French microcosme and in earliest use directly from
Medieval Latin microcosmus, from Greek mikros small (see mica) + kosmos world (see cosmos). General
sense of a community constituting a world unto itself is attested from 1560s. Related: Microcosmic.
A native expression in the same sense was petty world (c.1600).


Tom

familiar shortening of masc. proper name Thomas, used by late 14c. as a type of a nickname for a
common man (as in Tom, Dick, and Harry, 1734). Applied 17c. as a nickname for several exceptionally
large bells. Short for Uncle Tom in the sense of black man regarded as too servile to whites is
recorded from 1959. Tom Walker, U.S. Southern colloquial for the devil is recorded from 1833. Tom
and Jerry is first attested 1828 and later used in many extended senses, originally were the names
of the two chief characters (Corinthian Tom and Jerry Hawthorn) in Pierce Egan's Life in London
(1821); the U.S. cat and mouse cartoon characters debuted 1940 in Puss Gets the Boot. Tom Thumb
(1570s) was a miniature man in popular tradition before P.T. Barnum took the name for a dwarf he
exhibited. Tom-tit titmouse is from 1709. Compare tomcat.


frog (n.1)

Old English frogga, a diminutive of frox, forsc, frosc frog, from Proto-Germanic *fruska-z
(cognates: Old Norse froskr, Middle Dutch vorsc, German Frosch frog), probably literally hopper,
from PIE root *preu- to hop (cognates: Sanskrit provate hops, Russian prygat to hop, jump).    The
Latin word (rana) is imitative of croaking. Collateral Middle English forms frude, froud are from
Old Norse frau&eth;r frog, and frosk frog survived in English dialects into the 19c.    I always eat
fricasseed frogs regretfully; they remind one so much of miniature human thighs, and make one feel
cannibalistic and horrid .... [H. Ellen Brown, A Girl's Wanderings in Hungary, 1896]     As a
derogatory term for Frenchman, 1778 (short for frog-eater), but before that (1650s) it meant Dutch
(from frog-land marshy land). To have a frog in the throat be hoarse is from 1892, from the croaking
sound.


