mire (v.)

c.1400, in figurative sense of to involve in difficulties, from mire (n.). Literal sense is from
1550s. Related: Mired; miring.


mire (n.)

c.1300, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse myrr bog, swamp, from Proto-Germanic *miuzja-
(source of Old English mos bog, marsh), from PIE *meus- damp (see moss).


sludge (n.)

mud, mire, ooze, 1640s, of uncertain origin, possibly a variant of Middle English slutch mud, mire,
or a variant of slush (n.).


ooze (n.)

soft mud, Old English wase soft mud, mire, from Proto-Germanic *waison (cognates: Old Saxon waso wet
ground, mire, Old Norse veisa pond of stagnant water), from PIE *wes- (2) wet. Modern spelling is
mid-1500s.


miry (adj.)

late 14c., from mire (n.) + -y (2).


slob (n.)

1780, mud, muddy land, from Irish slab mud, mire dirt, itself probably borrowed from English slab
muddy place (c.1600), from a Scandinavian source (compare Icelandic slabb sludge). The meaning
untidy person is first recorded 1887, from earlier expressions such as slob of a man (1861).


loam (n.)

Old English lam clay, mud, mire, earth, from Proto-Germanic *laimaz (cognates: Old Saxon lemo, Dutch
leem, German Lehm loam), from PIE root *(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)). As a type of highly fertile
clayey soil, it is attested from 1660s. As a verb from c.1600.


moil (v.)

to labour in the mire [Johnson], c.1400, from Old French moillier to wet, moisten (12c., Modern
French mouiller), from Vulgar Latin *molliare, from Latin mollis soft, from PIE *mel- soft  (see
mild). Related: Moiled; moiling.


quagmire (n.)

1570s, bog, marsh, from obsolete quag bog, marsh + mire (n.). Early spellings include quamyre
(1550s), quabmire (1590s), quadmire (c.1600). Extended sense of difficult situation, inescapable bad
position is recorded by 1766; but this seems to have been not in common use in much of 19c. (absent
in Century Dictionary, 1902), but revived in a narrower sense in reference to military invasions in
American English, 1965, with reference to Vietnam (popularized in the book title The Making of a
Quagmire by David Halberstam).


slick (v.)

Old English -slician (in nigslicod newly made sleek), from Proto-Germanic *slikojan, from base
*slikaz (cognates: Old Norse slikr smooth, Old High German slihhan to glide, German schleichen to
creep, crawl, sneak, Dutch slijk mud, mire), from PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from root
*(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)). Related: Slicked; slicking.


latex (n.)

1660s, body fluid, from Latin latex (genitive laticis) liquid, fluid, probably from Greek latax
dregs, from PIE root *lat- wet (cognates: Middle Irish laith beer, Welsh llaid mud, mire, Lithuanian
latakas pool, puddle, Old Norse le&thorn;ja filth). Used 1835 to mean milky liquid from plants.
Meaning water-dispersed polymer particles (used in rubber goods, paints, etc.) is from 1937. As an
adjective by 1954, in place of clasically correct laticiferous.


pismire (n.)

ant, late 14c. (early 14c. as a surname), from pyss urine (said to be in reference to the acrid
smell of an anthill) + mire an ant, probably from Old Norse maurr ant (cognates: Swedish myra,
Danish myre, Middle Dutch miere, Dutch mier, Crimean Gothic miera ant), from PIE base *morwi- (see
Formica (2)). Compare pissant, also early Dutch mierseycke (from seycke urine), Finnish kusiainen
(from kusi urine). He is as angry as a pissemyre,Though &thorn;at he haue al that he kan
desire.[Chaucer]Applied contemptuously to persons from 1560s.


pollution (n.)

mid-14c., discharge of semen other than during sex, later, desecration, defilement (late 14c.), from
Late Latin pollutionem (nominative pollutio) defilement, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin polluere to soil, defile, contaminate, from por- before + -luere smear, from PIE root *leu-
dirt; make dirty (cognates: Latin lutum mud, mire, clay, lues filth; Greek lyma filth, dirt,
disgrace, lymax rubbish, refuse; Old Irish loth mud, dirt; Lithuanian lutynas pool, puddle). Sense
of contamination of the environment first recorded c.1860, but not common until c.1955.


lime (n.1)

chalky mineral used in making mortar, from Old English lim sticky substance, birdlime, mortar,
cement, gluten, from Proto-Germanic *leimaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse, Danish lim, Dutch lijm,
German Leim birdlime), from PIE root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (cognates: Latin limus slime,
mud, mire, linere to smear; see slime (n.)). Lime is made by putting limestone or shells in a red
heat, which burns off the carbonic acid and leaves a brittle white solid which dissolves easily in
water. Hence lime-kiln (late 13c.), lime-burner (early 14c.). As a verb, c.1200, from the noun.


fen (n.)

Old English fenn mud, mire, dirt; fen, marsh, moor, from Proto-Germanic *fanjam- (cognates: Old
Saxon feni, Old Frisian fenne, Middle Dutch venne, Dutch veen, Old High German fenna, German Fenn
marsh, Old Norse fen, Gothic fani mud), from PIE *pen- swamp (cognates: Gaulish anam water, Sanskrit
pankah bog, marsh, mud, Old Prussian pannean swampland). Italian and Spanish fango, Old French fanc,
French fange mud are loan-words from Germanic. The native Latin word was limus or lutum.


addle (v.)

1712, from addle (n.) urine, liquid filth, from Old English adela mud, mire, liquid manure (cognate
with Old Swedish adel urine, Middle Low German adel, Dutch aal puddle).    Used in noun phrase addle
egg (mid-13c.) egg that does not hatch, rotten egg, literally urine egg, a loan-translation of Latin
ovum urinum, which is itself an erroneous loan-translation of Greek ourion oon putrid egg, literally
wind egg, from ourios of the wind (confused by Roman writers with ourios of urine, from ouron
urine). Because of this usage, from c.1600 the noun in English was taken as an adjective meaning
putrid, and thence given a figurative extension to empty, vain, idle, also confused, muddled,
unsound (1706). The verb followed a like course. Related: Addled; addling.


slime (n.)

Old English slim slime, from Proto-Germanic *slimaz (cognates: Old Norse slim, Old Frisian slym,
Dutch slijm slime, phlegm, German Schleim slime), probably related to Old English lim birdlime;
sticky substance, from PIE root *(s)lei- slimy, sticky, slippery (cognates: Sanskrit linati sticks,
stays, adheres to; slips into, disappears; Russian slimak snail; Old Church Slavonic slina spittle;
Old Irish sligim to smear, leinam I follow, literally I stick to; Welsh llyfn smooth; Greek leimax
snail, limne marsh, pool, lake, alinein to anoint, besmear; Latin limus slime, mud, mire, linere to
daub, besmear, rub out, erase). As an insult to a person from mid-15c. Slime-mold is from 1880.


