miscellaneous (adj.)

1630s, from Latin miscellaneus mixed, miscellaneous, from miscellus mixed, from miscere to mix (see
mix (v.)). Related: Miscellaneously.


miscellany (n.)

a mixture, medley, 1590s, from Latin miscellanea a writing on miscellaneous subjects, originally
meat hash, hodge-podge (food for gladiators), neuter plural of miscellaneus (see miscellaneous).


notions (n.)

miscellaneous articles, 1805, American English, from notion with the idea of clever invention.


vagrancy (n.)

life of idle begging, 1706, from vagrant + -cy. Earlier in a figurative sense, mental wandering
(1640s). By late 18c. used in law as a catch-all for miscellaneous petty offenses against public
order.


grab-bag (n.)

miscellaneous mixture, 1854, originally a carnival game; from grab + bag (n.).


omnium gatherum

1520s, miscellaneous collection, humorous coinage from Latin omnium of all (genitive plural of
omnis; see omni-) + Latinized form of English gather.


potpourri (n.)

also pot-pourri, 1610s, mixed meats served in a stew, from French pot pourri stew, literally rotten
pot (loan-translation of Spanish olla podrida), from pourri, past participle of pourrir to rot, from
Vulgar Latin *putrire, from Latin putrescere grow rotten (see putrescent). Notion of medley led to
meaning mixture of dried flowers and spices, first recorded in English 1749. Figurative sense
(originally in music) of miscellaneous collection is recorded from 1855.


pie (n.1)

pastry, mid-14c. (probably older; piehus bakery is attested from late 12c.), from Medieval Latin pie
meat or fish enclosed in pastry (c.1300), perhaps related to Medieval Latin pia pie, pastry, also
possibly connected with pica magpie (see pie (n.2)) on notion of the bird's habit of collecting
miscellaneous objects. Figurative of something to be shared out by 1967.    According to OED, not
known outside English, except Gaelic pighe, which is from English. In the Middle Ages, a pie had
many ingredients, a pastry but one. Fruit pies began to appear c.1600. Figurative sense of something
easy is from 1889. Pie-eyed drunk is from 1904. Phrase pie in the sky is 1911, from Joe Hill's
Wobbly parody of hymns. Pieman is not attested earlier than the nursery rhyme Simple Simon (c.1820).
Pie chart is from 1922.


set (n.2)

act of setting; condition of being set (of a heavenly body), mid-14c., from set (v.) or its
identical past participle. Many disparate senses collect under this word because of the far-flung
meanings assigned to the verb:   Action of hardening, 1837; also manner or position in which
something is set (1530s), hence general movement, direction, tendency (1560s); build, form (1610s),
hence bearing, carriage (1855); action of fixing the hair in a particular style (1933).    Something
that has been set (1510s), hence the use in tennis (1570s) and the theatrical meaning scenery for an
individual scene in a play, etc., recorded from 1859. Other meanings OED groups under miscellaneous
technical senses include piece of electrical apparatus (1891, first in telegraphy); burrow of a
badger (1898). Old English had set seat, in plural camp; stable, but OED finds it doubtful whether
this survived beyond OE. Compare set (n.1).   Set (n.1) and set (n.2) are not always distinguished
in dictionaries; OED has them as two entries, Century Dictionary as one. The difference of opinion
seems to be whether the set meaning group, grouping (here (n.2)) is a borrowing of the unrelated
French word that sounds like the native English one, or a borrowing of the sense only, which was
absorbed into the English word.


