miserly (adj.)

1590s, from miser + -ly (1). Related: Miserliness.


cheapskate (n.)

also cheap skate, miserly person, 1896, from cheap (adj.), second element perhaps from American
English slang skate worn-out horse (1894), of uncertain origin.


piker (n.)

miserly person, 1872, formerly poor migrant to California (1860), earlier pike (1854), perhaps
originally vagrant who wanders the pike (n.1) (which is the notion in Sussex dialectal piker
vagrant, tramp, gypsy, 1838), but Barnhart, OED and others suggest the American English word
ultimately is a reference to people from Pike County, Missouri.


nasty (adj.)

c.1400, foul, filthy, dirty, unclean, of unknown origin; perhaps [Barnhart] from Old French nastre
miserly, envious, malicious, spiteful, shortened form of villenastre infamous, bad, from vilein
villain + -astre, pejorative suffix, from Latin -aster.    Alternative etymology [OED] is from Dutch
nestig dirty, literally like a bird's nest. Likely reinforced in either case by a Scandinavian
source (compare Swedish dialectal naskug dirty, nasty), which also might be the source of the Middle
English word. Of weather, from 1630s; of things generally, unpleasant, offensive, from 1705. Of
people, ill-tempered, from 1825. Noun meaning something nasty is from 1935. Related: Nastily;
nastiness.


close (adj.)

late 14c., strictly confined, also secret, from Old French clos confined; concealed, secret;
taciturn (12c.), from Latin clausus close, reserved, past participle adjective from claudere stop
up, fasten, shut (see close (v.)); main sense shifting to near (late 15c.) by way of closing the gap
between two things. Related: Closely.    Meaning narrowly confined, pent up is late 14c. Meaning
near in a figurative sense, of persons, from 1560s. Meaning full of attention to detail is from
1660s. Of contests, from 1855. Close call is from 1866, in a quotation in an anecdote from 1863,
possibly a term from the American Civil War; close shave in the figurative sense is 1820, American
English. Close range is from 1814. Close-minded is attested from 1818. Close-fisted penurious,
miserly is from c.1600.


penny (n.)

Old English pening, penig, Northumbrian penning penny, from Proto-Germanic *panninggaz (cognates:
Old Norse penningr, Swedish p&auml;nning, Danish penge, Old Frisian panning, Old Saxon pending,
Middle Dutch pennic, Dutch penning, Old High German pfenning, German Pfennig, not recorded in
Gothic, where skatts is used instead), of unknown origin.    Offa's reformed coinage on light, broad
flans is likely to have begun c.760-5 in London, with an awareness of developments in Francia and
East Anglia. ... The broad flan penny established by Offa remained the principal denomination, with
only minor changes, until the fourteenth century. [Anna Gannon, The Iconography of Early Anglo-Saxon
Coinage, Oxford, 2003]    The English coin was originally set at one-twelfth of a shilling and was
of silver, later copper, then bronze. There are two plural forms: pennies of individual coins, pence
collectively. In translations it rendered various foreign coins of small denomination, especially
Latin denarius, whence comes its abbreviation d.   As American English colloquial for cent, it is
recorded from 1889. Penny-a-liner writer for a journal or newspaper is attested from 1834. Penny
dreadful cheap and gory fiction dates from c.1870. Phrase penny-wise and pound-foolish is recorded
from c.1600. Penny-pincher miserly person is recorded from 1906 (as an adjective penny-pinching is
recorded from 1858, American English). Penny loafers attested from 1960.


