mishap (n.)

early 14c., bad luck, unlucky accident, from mis- (1) bad + hap luck. Probably on analogy of Old
French meschance (see mischance (n.)).


mischance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French mescheance misfortune, mishap, accident; wickedness, malice, from Vulgar
Latin *minuscadentiam; see mis- (2) + chance (n.). Now usually bad luck; formerly much stronger:
calamity, disaster.


unhappy (adj.)

c.1300, causing misfortune or trouble (to oneself or others), from un- (1) not + happy. Meaning
unfortunate, unlucky is recorded from late 14c.; sense of miserable, wretched is recorded from late
14c. (originally via misfortune or mishap).


recovery (n.)

mid-14c., return to health, from Anglo-French recoverie (c.1300), Old French recovree remedy, cure,
recovery, from past participle stem of recovrer (see recover). Meaning a gaining possession by legal
action is from early 15c. That of act of righting oneself after a blunder, mishap, etc. is from
1520s.


misadventure (n.)

late 13c., misaventure, from Old French mesaventure (12c.) accident, mishap, from mesavenir to turn
out badly; see mis- (2) + adventure (n.).


accident (n.)

late 14c., an occurrence, incident, event, from Old French accident (12c.), from Latin accidentem
(nominative accidens), present participle of accidere happen, fall out, fall upon, from ad- to (see
ad-) + cadere fall (see case (n.1)). Meaning grew from something that happens, an event, to
something that happens by chance, then mishap. Philosophical sense non-essential characteristic of a
thing is late 14c. Meaning unplanned child is attested by 1932.


case (n.1)

early 13c., what befalls one; state of affairs, from Old French cas an event, happening, situation,
quarrel, trial, from Latin casus a chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, mishap, literally a
falling, from cas-, past participle stem of cadere to fall, sink, settle down, decline, perish (used
widely: of the setting of heavenly bodies, the fall of Troy, suicides), from PIE root *kad- to lay
out, fall or make fall, yield, break up (cognates: Sanskrit sad- to fall down, Armenian chacnum to
fall, become low, perhaps also Middle Irish casar hail, lightning). The notion being that which
falls as that which happens (compare befall).    Meaning instance, example is from c.1300. Meaning
actual state of affairs is from c.1400. Given widespread extended and transferred senses in English
in law (16c.), medicine (18c.), etc.; the grammatical sense (late 14c.) was in Latin. U.S. slang
meaning person is from 1848. In case in the event is recorded from mid-14c. Case history is from
1879, originally medical; case study study of a particular case is from 1879, originally legal.


