mitigate (v.)

early 15c., relieve (pain), from Latin mitigatus, past participle of mitigare soften, make tender,
ripen, mellow, tame, figuratively, make mild or gentle, pacify, soothe, ultimately from mitis
gentle, soft (from PIE *mei- mild) + root of agere do, make, act (see act). First element is from
PIE root *mei- soft, mild. Related: Mitigated; mitigating; mitigates.


mitigating (adj,.)

extenuating, 1610s, present participle adjective from mitigate.


mitigant (adj.)

1540s, from Latin mitigantem, present participle of mitigare (see mitigate). As a noun from 1865.


unmitigated (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of mitigate (v.).


mitigation (n.)

mid-14c., from Latin mitigationem (nominative mitigatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of mitigare (see mitigate).


sugar (v.)

early 15c., to sweeten with sugar, also figuratively, to make more pleasing, mitigate the harshness
of, from sugar (n.).  Related: Sugared; sugaring.


immitigable (adj.)

1570s, from Latin immitigabilis, from assimilated form of in- not (see in- (1) + mitigabilis, from
past participle stem of mitigare make mild or gentle (see mitigate). Related: Immitigably.


soften (v.)

late 14c., to mitigate, diminish (transitive), from soft (adj.) + -en (1). Meaning to make
physically soft is from 1520s; intransitive sense of to become softer is attested from 1610s. Soften
up in military sense of weaken defenses is from 1940. Related: Softened; softening.


moderate (adj.)

late 14c., originally of weather and other physical conditions, from Latin moderatus within bounds,
observing moderation; figuratively modest, restrained, past participle of moderari to regulate,
mitigate, restrain, temper, set a measure, keep (something) within measure, related to modus
measure, from PIE *med-es-, from base *med- (see medical (adj.)). The notion is keeping within due
measure. In English, of persons from early 15c.; of opinions from 1640s; of prices from 1904.
Related: Moderateness.


relieve (v.)

late 14c., alleviate (pain, etc.), mitigate; afford comfort; allow respite; diminish the pressure
of, also give alms to, provide for; also figuratively, take heart, cheer up; from Old French relever
to raise, relieve (11c.) and directly from Latin relevare to raise, alleviate, lift up, free from a
burden, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + levare to lift up, lighten, from levis not heavy
(see lever).    The notion is to raise (someone) out of trouble. From c.1400 as advance to the
rescue in battle; also return from battle; recall (troops). Meaning release from duty is from early
15c. Related: relieved; relieving.


lenient (adj.)

1650s, relaxing, soothing, from Middle French lenient, from Latin lenientem (nominative leniens),
present participle of lenire to soften, alleviate, mitigate, allay, calm, from lenis mild, gentle,
calm, probably from PIE root *le- to leave, yield, let go, slacken (cognates: Lithuanian lenas
quiet, tranquil, tame, slow, Old Church Slavonic lena lazy, Latin lassus faint, weary, Old English
l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, l&aelig;tan to leave behind). Sense of mild, merciful (of persons) first
recorded 1787. In earlier use was lenitive, attested from early 15c. of medicines, 1610s of persons.


