monarchy (n.)

state ruled by monarchical government, mid-14c.; rule by one person, late 14c.; from Old French
monarchie sovereignty, absolute power (13c.), from Late Latin monarchia, from Greek monarkhia
absolute rule, literally ruling of one, from monos alone (see mono-) + arkhein to rule (see archon).


monarch (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French monarque (14c.) or directly from Late Latin monarcha, from Greek
monarkhes one who rules alone (see monarchy). As a type of large butterfly, from 1890.


republican (n.)

one who favors a republic or republican principles (or, as Johnson puts it, One who thinks a
commonwealth without monarchy the best government), 1690s; see from republican (adj.). With capital
R-, in reference to a member of a specific U.S. political party (the Anti-Federalists) from 1782,
though this was not the ancestor of the modern U.S. Republican Party, which dates from 1854.


monarchist (n.)

1640s, from monarchy + -ist. Related: Monarchistic.


monarchism (n.)

from French monarchisme, from monarchie (see monarchy).


Prussia (n.)

from Medieval Latin Borussi, Prusi, Latinized forms of the native name of the Lithuanian people who
lived in the bend of the Baltic before being conquered 12c. and exterminated by (mostly) German
crusaders who replaced them as the inhabitants. Perhaps from Slavic *Po-Rus (The Land) Near the Rusi
(Russians). The duchy of Prussia after union with the Mark of Brandenberg, became the core of the
Prussian monarchy and later the chief state in the German Empire.


constitutional (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to a person's (physical or mental) constitution, from constitution + -al (1).
Meaning beneficial to bodily constitution is from 1750. Meaning authorized or allowed by the
political constitution is from 1765. Constitutional monarchy is recorded from 1801, from French.
Related: Constitutionally.


limited (adj.)

1550s, past participle adjective from limit (v.); as a stand-alone for limited express train, by
1883. Limited edition is from 1920; limited monarchy from 1640s; limited war is from 1948. In
British company names, Limited (abbrev. Ltd.), 1855, is short for limited liability company, one in
which the liability of partners is limited, usually to the amount of their capital investment.


aristocracy (n.)

1560s, from Middle French aristocracie (Modern French aristocratie), from Late Latin aristocratia,
from Greek aristokratia government or rule of the best, from aristos best (originally most fitting,
from PIE *ar-isto-, superlative form of *ar- to fit together; see arm (n.1)) + kratos rule, power
(see -cracy).    At first in a literal sense of government by those who are the best citizens;
meaning rule by a privileged class (best-born or best-favored by fortune) is from 1570s and became
paramount 17c. Hence, the meaning patrician order (1650s). In early use contrasted with monarchy;
after French and American revolutions, with democracy.


fifth (adj.)

c.1200, fift, from Old English fifta, from fif five (see five) + -ta (see -th (1)). Altered 14c. by
influence of fourth. Compare Old Frisian fifta, Old Saxon fifto, Old Norse fimmti, Dutch vijfde, Old
High German fimfto, German f&uuml;nfte, Gothic fimfta.    Noun meaning fifth part of a gallon of
liquor is first recorded 1938, American English. Fifth Avenue (in New York City) has been used
figuratively for elegance, taste since at least 1858. Fifth wheel superfluous person or thing first
attested 1902. Fifth-monarchy-man, 17c. for anrachist zealot, is a reference to Dan. ii:44.


restoration (n.)

late 14c., a means of healing or restoring health; renewing of something lost, from Old French
restoration (Modern French restauration) and directly from Late Latin restorationem (nominative
restoratio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin restaurare (see restore).    Mid-15c.
as the repairing of a building; c.1500 as a restoring to a former state. With a capital R-, in
reference to the reestablishment of the English monarchy under Charles II in 1660, from 1718. As a
period in English theater, attested from 1898. In French history, it refers to 1814. An earlier word
in this sense was restauration (late 14c.), from French.


absolute (adj.)

late 14c., unrestricted; complete, perfect; also not relative to something else (mid-15c.), from
Middle French absolut (14c., Old French asolu, Modern French absolu), from Latin absolutus, past
participle of absolvere to set free, make separate (see absolve).    Most of the current senses also
were in the Latin word. Sense evolution was detached, disengaged, thus perfect, pure. Meaning
despotic (1610s) is from notion of absolute in position. Absolute monarchy is recorded from 1735
(absolute king is recorded from 1610s); scientific absolute magnitude (1902), absolute value (1907)
are from early 20c. In metaphysics, the absolute that which is absolute is from 1809.


