mystic (n.)

exponent of mystical theology, 1670s, from mystic (adj.). In Middle English, the noun meant symbolic
meaning, interpretation (early 14c.).


mystic (adj.)

late 14c., spiritually allegorical, pertaining to mysteries of faith, from Old French mistique
mysterious, full of mystery (14c.), or directly from Latin mysticus mystical, mystic, of secret
rites (source also of Italian mistico, Spanish mistico), from Greek mystikos secret, mystic,
connected with the mysteries, from mystes one who has been initiated (see mystery (n.1)). Meaning
pertaining to occult practices or ancient religions first recorded 1610s.


mystical (adj.)

late 15c., enigmatic, obscure, symbolic, from mystic + -al (1). Related: Mystically. Meaning having
spiritual significance is from 1520s.


mysticism (n.)

1736, from mystic (adj.) + -ism.


Mystic

place name in Connecticut, U.S., deformed from Algonquian missituk great tidal river, from missi
large + -tuk tidal river.


mystique (n.)

1891, atmosphere of mystery, from French mystique a mystic; mystical, from Latin mysticus (see
mystic (adj.)).


mystify (v.)

1814, from French mystifier (1772), a verb formed irregularly from mystique a mystic (see mystic
(adj.)) + -fier (see -fy). Related: Mystified; mystifying.


Shriner (n.)

1882, a member of the Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine (established 1872).


Swedenborgian

1791, from name of Emanuel Svedberg, Swedish mystic and religious philosopher (1668-1772). His
followers organized 1788 as The New Church.


Rasputin

acquired name (Russian, literally debauchee) of Grigory Yefimovich Novykh (c.1872-1916), mystic and
faith healer who held sway over court of Nicholas II of Russia. His nickname is from his doctrine of
rebirth through sin, that true holy communion must be preceded by immersion in sin. His name used
figuratively in English from 1937 for anyone felt to have an insidious and corrupting influence.


Schwenkfeldian

1560s, from Casper Schwenkfeld (1490-1561), Silesian Protestant mystic who founded the sect.
Schwenkfelder is attested from 1882.


Orphic (adj.)

1670s, from Greek orphikos pertaining to Orpheus, master musician of Thrace, son of Eagrus and
Calliope, husband of Eurydice, whose name (of unknown origin) was associated with mystic doctrines.
Related: Orphism.


theosophy (n.)

1640s (implied in theosophical), knowledge of divine things obtained through mystic study, from
Medieval Latin theosophia (c.880), from Late Greek theosophia (c.500) wisdom concerning God or
things divine, from Greek theosophos one wise about God, from theos god (see theo-) + sophia skill,
knowledge of, acquaintance with; philosophy, from sophos wise, learned (see sophist).    Applied
variously over the years, including to the followers of Swedenborg. Taken as the name of a modern
philosophical system (sometimes called Esoteric Buddhism), founded in New York 1875 as Theosophical
Society by Madame Blavatsky and others, which has elements of Hinduism and Buddhism and claims
supernatural knowledge of the divinity and his words deeper than that obtained from empiricism.
Related: Theosophist.


