nationalization (n.)

1801, act of rendering national in character, from nationalize + -ation. Meaning act of bringing
(property) under control of the national government is from 1874.


national (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French national (from Old French nation), and also from nation + -al (1). As a
noun, citizen of a (particular) nation, from 1887. National anthem first recorded 1819, in Shelley.
Related: Nationally.


nationalize (v.)

1800, invest with a national character, from national + -ize. Meaning bring under state control is
from 1869. Related: Nationalized; nationalizing.


nationality (n.)

1690s, national quality, from national + -ity (in some usages perhaps from French nationalit&#233;.
As fact of belonging to or being a citizen of a particular state, from 1828, gradually shading into
race, ethnicity. Meaning separate existence as a nation is recorded from 1832. Related:
Nationalities.    But I do love a country that loves itself. I love a country that insists on its
own nationality which is the same thing as a person's insisting on his own personality. [Robert
Frost, letter, April 21, 1919]


nationalist (n.)

one devoted to his nation, 1715, from national in a now obsolete sense of patriotic (1711) + -ist.
Related: Nationalistic; nationalistically.


NAACP

abbreviation of National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, first attested 1910.
Organization founded Feb. 12, 1909, as National Negro Committee.


supra-national (adj.)

also supranational, 1871 (T.H. Huxley), from supra- + national. Perhaps inspired by German supra-
national (1865).


duma (n.)

Russian national assembly, 1870 (in reference to city councils; the national one was set up in
1905), literally thought, from a Germanic source (compare Gothic doms judgment, English doom, deem).


Realtor (n.)

1916, real estate agent, American English, coined by real estate agent Charles N. Chadbourn of
Minneapolis, Minn., to distinguish the legitimate section of the business; popularized 1920s;
patented as Realtor by the National Association of Real Estate Boards.    The 1916 Convention of the
National Association of Real Estate Boards (NAREB) approved the adoption of the term as the official
designation of an active member of the Association. In 1920 the District Court of Hennepin County,
Minnesota, decided in favor of the Realtors in a case against a telephone directory publisher that
had indiscriminately used the word in listings. The court asserted that the word had never been used
in any way whatsoever until so invented and could thus be used only by those duly licensed by the
National Association of Real Estate Boards. Until the Lanham Acts of 1948 changed federal patent
regulations to allow protection for registered collective marks, the National Association fought and
won sixteen cases on the local and state levels to protect its symbolic property. [Jeffrey M.
Hornstein, The Rise of Realtor, in The Middling Sorts: Explorations in the History of the American
Middle Class, New York, 2001]


multinational (adj.)

also multi-national, by 1921, from multi- + national. Originally with reference to states; later (by
1960) to corporations and organizations. As a noun, short for multinational corporation, attested by
1971.


technocracy (n.)

1919, coined by W.H. Smyth as a name for a new system of government by technical experts, from
techno- + -cracy.    William Henry Smyth, a distinguished engineer of Berkeley, California, wrote at
the close of the war a series of thoughtful papers for the New York magazine Industrial Management,
on the subject of Technocracy. His thesis was the need of a Supreme National Council of Scientists
to advise us how best to live, and how most efficiently to realize our individual aspirations and
our national purpose. [The Bookman, March 1922]


Ku Klux Klan

1867, American English, Kuklux Klan, a made-up name, supposedly from Greek kyklos circle (see cycle
(n.)) + English clan. Originally an organization of former Confederate officers and soldiers, it was
put down by the U.S. military, 1870s. Revived 1915 as a national racist Protestant fraternal
organization, it grew to prominence but fractured in the 1930s. It had a smaller national revival
1950s as an anti-civil rights group, later with anti-government leanings.


Nazi

1930, noun and adjective, from German Nazi, abbreviation of German pronunciation of
Nationalsozialist (based on earlier German sozi, popular abbreviation of socialist), from
Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei National Socialist German Workers' Party, led by
Hitler from 1920.    The 24th edition of Etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch der deutschen Sprache (2002)
says the word Nazi was favored in southern Germany (supposedly from c.1924) among opponents of
National Socialism because the nickname Nazi, Naczi (from the masc. proper name Ignatz, German form
of Ignatius) was used colloquially to mean a foolish person, clumsy or awkward person. Ignatz was a
popular name in Catholic Austria, and according to one source in World War I Nazi was a generic name
in the German Empire for the soldiers of Austria-Hungary.    An older use of Nazi for national-
sozial is attested in German from 1903, but EWdS does not think it contributed to the word as
applied to Hitler and his followers. The NSDAP for a time attempted to adopt the Nazi designation as
what the Germans call a despite-word, but they gave this up, and the NSDAP is said to have generally
avoided the term. Before 1930, party members had been called in English National Socialists, which
dates from 1923. The use of Nazi Germany, Nazi regime, etc., was popularized by German exiles
abroad. From them, it spread into other languages, and eventually was brought back to Germany, after
the war. In the USSR, the terms national socialist and Nazi were said to have been forbidden after
1932, presumably to avoid any taint to the good word socialist. Soviet literature refers to
fascists.


GNP (n.)

abbreviation of gross national product, attested by 1953.


Seven Champions (n.)

1590s, the national saints of England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, France, Spain, and Italy, viz.
George, Andrew, David, Patrick, Denys, James, and Anthony.


Fannie Mae (n.)

1948, from FNMA, acronym of Federal National Mortgage Association, established 1938.


NASDAQ

U.S. stock exchange, founded 1971, an acronym from National Association of Securities Dealers
Automated Quotations.


NASA

U.S. space agency, acronym of National Aeronautics and Space Administration, set up in 1958.


Amtrak

U.S. government-run railway corporation, 1971, contraction of American Track. Also is known as
National Railway Passenger Corp.


SNCF

French national railway, 1949, initialism (acronym) for Soci&eacute;t&eacute; Nationale des Chemins
de Fer.


Davis Cup

donated 1900 as a national tennis championship trophy by U.S. statesman Dwight Filley Davis
(1879-1945) while still an undergraduate at Harvard.


KGB

national security agency of the Soviet Union from 1954 to 1991, attested from 1955 in English,
initialism (acronym) of Russian Komitet gosudarstvennoy bezopasnosti Committee for State Security.


pork (n.)

c.1300 (early 13c. in surname Porkuiller), flesh of a pig as food, from Old French porc pig, swine,
boar, and directly from Latin porcus pig, tame swine, from PIE *porko- young swine (cognates:
Umbrian purka; Old Church Slavonic prase young pig; Lithuanian parsas pig; and Old English fearh,
Middle Dutch varken, both from Proto-Germanic *farhaz).   Pork barrel in the literal sense is from
1801, American English; meaning state's financial resources (available for distribution) is attested
from 1907 (in full, national pork barrel); it was noted as an expression of U.S. President President
William Howard Taft:    Now there is a proposition that we issue $500,000,000 or $1,000,000,000 of
bonds for a waterway, and then that we just apportion part to the Mississippi and part to the
Atlantic, a part to the Missouri and a part to the Ohio. I am opposed to it. I am opposed to it
because it not only smells of the pork barrel, but it will be the pork barrel itself. Let every
project stand on its bottom. [The Outlook, Nov. 6, 1909, quoting Taft]    The magazine article that
includes the quote opens with:    We doubt whether any one knows how or when, or from what
application of what story, the phrase the National pork barrel has come into use. If not a very
elegant simile, it is at least an expressive one, and suggests a graphic picture of Congressmen
eager for local advantage going, one after another, to the National pork barrel to take away their
slices for home consumption.   Pork in this sense is attested from 1862 (compare figurative use of
bacon). Pork chop is attested from 1858. Pork pie is from 1732; pork-pie hat (1855) originally
described a woman's style popular c.1855-65, so called for its shape.


John Bull

Englishman who exemplifies the national character, 1772, from name of a character representing the
English nation in Arbuthnot's satire History of John Bull (1712).


Kraut (n.)

a German (especially a German soldier), 1841, but popularized during World War I, from German kraut
cabbage, considered a characteristic national dish.


Seoul

South Korean capital, from Korean soul, literally capital. It was the national capital from 1392
until Japanese annexation in 1910.


Irgun

militant Zionist organization, 1946, from Modern Hebrew, literally organization, in full Irgun Zvai
Leumi national military organization.


Ginnie Mae

1970, fleshed out in the form of a fem. proper name, from GNMA, acronym of Government National
Mortgage Association.


PBS

abbreviation of Public Broadcasting Service, 1970, America English. It succeeded National
Educational Television (NET).


-gate

suffix attached to any word to indicate scandal involving, 1973, abstracted from Watergate, the
Washington, D.C., building complex, home of the National Headquarters of the Democratic Party when
it was burglarized June 17, 1972, by operatives later found to be working for the staff and re-
election campaign of U.S. President Richard Nixon.


no-smoking (adj.)

1905; the sign wording itself is attested by 1817.    Smoking is a vice to [sic] -- and a national
one, of such magnitude that railroad corporations throughout all their routes in the United States,
have a special command in large letters, conspicuously placed at depots and inside of the cars -- No
smoking allowed here. [The Sailor's Magazine, December 1840]


R.O.T.C.

also ROTC, 1916, American English, initialism (acronym) for Reserve Officers' Training Corps,
established as part of the National Defense Act of 1916.


are (n.)

square unit of 10 meters on each side, 1819, from French, formed 1795 by decree of the French
National Convention, from Latin area vacant piece of ground (see area).


Grammy (n.)

statuette awarded by the American National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, 1959, from the
gram- in gramophone, on the model of Emmy.


welch (v.)

1857, racing slang, to refuse or avoid payment of money laid as a bet, probably a disparaging use of
the national name Welsh. Related: Welched; welching.


Israeli

1948; from Israel + Hebrew national designation suffix -i. Coined to distinguish citizens of the
modern state from the ancient people who had been known in English since late 14c. as Israelites.


Turk (n.)

c.1300, from French Turc, from Medieval Latin Turcus, from Byzantine Greek Tourkos, Persian turk, a
national name, of unknown origin. Said to mean strength in Turkish. Compare Chinese tu-kin, recorded
from c.177 B.C.E. as the name of a people living south of the Altai Mountains (identified by some
with the Huns). In Persian, turk, in addition to the national name, also could mean a beautiful
youth, a barbarian, a robber.    In English, the Ottoman sultan was the Grand Turk (late 15c.), and
the Turk was used collectively for the Turkish people or for Ottoman power (late 15c.). From 14c.
and especially 16c.-18c. Turk could mean a Muslim, reflecting the Turkish political power's status
in the Western mind as the Muslim nation par excellence. Hence Turkery Islam (1580s); turn Turk
convert to Islam.    Meaning person of Irish descent is first recorded 1914 in U.S., apparently
originating among Irish-Americans; of unknown origin (Irish torc boar, hog has been suggested).
Young Turk (1908) was a member of an early 20c. political group in the Ottoman Empire that sought
rejuvenation of the Turkish nation. Turkish bath is attested from 1640s; Turkish delight from 1877.


Augustan (adj.)

1640s, from Latin Augustanus, pertaining to Augustus (Caesar), whose reign was connected with the
palmy period of Latin literature [OED]; hence, period of purity and refinement in any national
literature (1712).


sarong (n.)

skirt-like garment, the Malay national garment, 1834, from Malay sarung sheath, covering. OED traces
it to some mod. form of Skr. saranga variegated.


transnational (adj.)

1921, from trans- + national (adj.). Related: Transnationally.


Majlis (n.)

Persian national assembly, 1821, from Arabic majlis assembly, literally session, from jalasa he sat
down.


Marsellaise (n.)

French national republican song, 1826, from fem. of adjective Marseillais of Marseilles. The tune
originally was War Song for the Rhine Army, composed (for the Strasbourg volunteers) by royalist
officer Capt. Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle (1760-1836); current name is because it was sung
enthusiastically by soldiers from Marseilles advancing on the Tuileries, Aug. 10, 1792.


clearance (n.)

1560s, action of clearing, from clear (v.) + -ance. Meaning a clear space is from 1788. Meaning
approval, permission (especially to land or take off an aircraft) is from 1944, American English;
national security sense recorded from 1948. Clearance sale attested by 1843.


lobbyist (n.)

1863, American English, from lobby (n.) in the political sense + -ist.    [A] strong lobbyist will
permit himself to lose heavily at the poker-table, under the assumption that the great Congressman
who wins the stake will look leniently upon the little appropriation he means to ask for. [George A.
Townsend, Events at the National Capital and the Campaign of 1876, Hartford, Conn., 1876]


Zionism (n.)

movement for forming (later supporting) a Jewish national state in Palestine, 1896, from German
Zionismus (from Zion + Latin-derived suffix -ismus; see -ism); first recorded 1886 in
Selbstemancipation, by Matthias Acher (pseudonym of Nathan Birnbaum (1864-1937)).


Sorb (n.)

1843, from German Sorbe, from Slavic Serb, the national designation. Slavic people surviving in
Lusatia, eastern Saxony, also known as Wends. Related: Sorbian (1836); earlier Sorabian (1788), from
Medieval Latin Sorabi.


institute (n.)

1510s, purpose, design, from institute (v.). From 1540s as an established law. The sense of
organization, society is from 1828, borrowed from French Institut national des Sciences et des Arts,
established 1795 to replace the royal academies, from Latin institutum, neuter past participle of
instituere.


red cross (n.)

early 15c., national emblem of England (St. George's Cross), also the badge of the Order of the
Temple. Hence red-cross knight, one bearing such a marking on shield or crest. In 17c., a red cross
was the mark placed on the doors of London houses inflected with the plague. Red Cross (in Muslim
lands, red crescent) adopted as a symbol of ambulance service 1864 by the Geneva Conference.


NASCAR

acronym for National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, U.S. auto racing promotion group founded
1948 in Daytona Beach, Florida. NASCAR dad in U.S. political parlance, small-town, often Southern
white man who abandons traditional Democratic leanings to vote Republican at least once every four
years coined 2003 by Democratic pollster Celinda Lake.


Seven Sisters

the Pleiades, early 15c. (see Pleiades), seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione, placed among the
stars by Zeus. The Pleiades also are known as the Seven Stars  (see seven). As a late-20c. name for
the major multi-national petroleum companies, it is attested from 1962. They were listed in 1976 as
Exxon, Mobil, Gulf, Standard Oil of California, Texaco, British Petroleum, and Royal Dutch Shell.


