nautical (adj.)

1550s, from -al (1) + nautic from Middle French nautique, from Latin nauticus pertaining to ships or
sailors, from Greek nautikos seafaring, naval, from nautes sailor, from naus ship, from PIE *nau-
(2) boat (see naval).


slew (v.)

to turn, swing, twist, 1834, earlier slue (1769), a nautical word, of unknown origin. Slewed (1801)
is old nautical slang for drunk. Slew-foot clumsy person who walks with feet turned out is from
1896.


stay (v.2)

support, sustain, early 15c., from Middle French estayer (Modern French &#233;tayer), originally in
nautical use, secure by stays, from estaie (see stay (n.1)). The nautical sense in English is from
1620s. Related: Stayed; staying.


coaming (n.)

1610s, nautical, of unknown origin.


junk (n.1)

worthless stuff, mid-14c., junke old cable or rope (nautical), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old
French junc rush, reed, also used figuratively as a type of something of little value, from Latin
iuncus rush, reed (but OED finds no evidence of connexion). Nautical use extended to old refuse from
boats and ships (1842), then to old or discarded articles of any kind (1884). Junk food is from
1971; junk art is from 1966; junk mail first attested 1954.


hail (v.1)

to call from a distance, 1560s, originally nautical, from hail (interj.). Related: Hailed; hailing.
Hail fellow well met is 1580s, from a familiar greeting. Hail Mary (c.1300) is the angelic
salutation (Latin ave Maria) in Luke i:58, used as a devotional recitation. As a desperation play in
U.S. football, attested by 1940. To hail from is 1841, originally nautical. Hail, Columbia, the
popular patriotic song, was a euphemism for hell in American English slang from c.1850-1910.


cable (n.)

c.1200, from Old North French cable, from Medieval Latin capulum lasso, rope, halter for cattle,
from Latin capere to take, seize (see capable). Technically, in nautical use, a rope 10 or more
inches around; in non-nautical use, a rope of wire (not hemp or fiber). Given a new range of senses
in 19c.: Meaning message received by telegraphic cable is from 1883 (short for cable message). Cable
car is from 1879. Cable television first attested 1963; shortened form cable is from 1972.


ken (n.1)

range of sight, 1580s, a nautical abbreviation of kenning.


sag (n.)

1580s, in nautical use, from sag (v.). From 1727 of landforms; 1861 of wires, cables, etc.


ditty bag (n.)

1850s nautical slang, perhaps from British naval phrase commodity bag.


cootie (n.)

body lice, 1917, British World War I slang, earlier in nautical use, said to be from Malay kutu dog
tick.


skivvies (n.)

underwear, 1932, nautical slang, of unknown origin. An earlier skivvy/skivey was London slang for
female domestic servant (1902).


hove (v.1)

wait, linger, hover, mid-13c., of unknown origin. Chiefly nautical at first, of ships standing off a
coast, also of birds in the air. Common 13c.-16c., then superseded by its derivative, hover.


round robin (n.)

petition or complaint signed in a circle to disguise the order in which names were affixed and
prevent ringleaders from being identified, 1730, originally in reference to sailors and frequently
identified as a nautical term. As a kind of tournament in which each player plays the others, it is
recorded from 1895.


trimmer (n.)

1550s, one who trims, agent noun from trim (v.). Meaning one who changes opinions, actions, etc. to
suit circumstances is from 1680s, from the verb in the nautical sense of adjust the balance of sails
or yards with reference to the wind's direction (1620s).


squeegee (n.)

wooden scraping instrument with a rubber blade, 1844, a nautical word originally, perhaps from
squeege to press (1782), an alteration of squeeze (v.). Later in photography, then window-washing.


hitch (n.)

1660s, a limp or hobble; 1670s, an abrupt movement, from hitch (v.). Meaning a means by which a rope
is made fast is from 1769, nautical. The sense of obstruction is first recorded 1748; military sense
of enlistment is from 1835.


portsider (n.)

left-handed person, 1913, American English baseball slang, from port (n.1) in the nautical sense +
side (n.).


pawl (n.)

bar preventing a capstan from recoiling (nautical) 1620s, of unknown origin; perhaps from French pal
stake [OED] or &eacute;paule shoulder [Klein].


dead reckoning

might be from nautical abbreviation ded. (deduced) in log books, but it also fits dead (adj.) in the
sense of unrelieved, absolute.


cockpit (n.)

1580s, a pit for fighting cocks, from cock (n.1) + pit (n.1). Used in nautical sense (1706) for
midshipmen's compartment below decks; transferred to airplanes (1914) and to cars (1930s).


batten (n.)

strip of wood (especially used to fasten canvas over ships' hatches), 1650s, anglicized variant of
baton a stick, a staff (see baton). Nautical use attested from 1769.


awash (adj.)

1825, originally nautical, on the level of, flush with, from a- (1) on + wash (n.). Figurative use
by 1912.


alongside (adv.)

1707, from along + side (n.). A word formed from a phrase. Originally mostly nautical.


forge (v.2)

1610s, make way, move ahead, of unknown origin, perhaps an alteration of force (v.), but perhaps
rather from forge (n.), via notion of steady hammering at something. Originally nautical, in
reference to vessels.


top-hamper (n.)

1791, originally the upper masts, sails, and rigging of a sailing ship, from top (n.1) + hamper (n.)
in the nautical sense of things necessary but often in the way.


aweigh (adj.)

raised, perpendicular, 1620s, nautical, from a- (1) + weigh.


top-sider (n.)

kind of casual shoe, 1937, from topside in nautical sense of upper deck of a ship, where the rubber
soles would provide good grip; from top (n.1) + side (n.).


kanaka (n.)

U.S. nautical and Australian name for native of South Sea islands, 1840, from Hawaiian kanaka man
(Samoan tangata).


trim (n.)

state of being prepared, 1580s, nautical jargon, fit for sailing, from trim (v.). From 1570s as
ornament, decoration; the meaning visible woodwork of a house is recorded from 1884; sense of
ornamental additions to an automobile is from 1922. Slang meaning a woman regarded as a sex object
is attested from 1955, American English.


overbear (v.)

late 14c., to carry over, from over- + bear (v.). Meaning to bear down by weight of physical force
is from 1535 (in Coverdale), originally nautical, of an overwhelming wind; figurative sense of to
overcome and repress by power, authority, etc. is from 1560s.


awning (n.)

1624, origin uncertain (first recorded use is by Capt. John Smith), perhaps from Middle French
auvans, plural of auvent a sloping roof, itself of doubtful etym[ology] (OED). A nautical term only
until sense of cover for windows or porch emerged 1852.


hatchway (n.)

1620s, originally nautical, from hatch (n.) + way (n.).


hummock (n.)

knoll, hillock, 1550s, originally nautical, conical small hill on a seacoast, of obscure origin,
though second element is diminutive suffix -ock. In Florida, where the local form is hammock, it
means a clump of hardwood trees on a knoll in a swamp or on a key.


mainstay (n.)

chief support, 1787, figurative use of a nautical noun meaning stay which extends from the main-top
to the foot of the foremast (late 15c.), from main (adj.) + stay (n.).


afoul (adv.)

1809, originally nautical, in collision or entanglement, from a- (1) + foul (adj.). From 1833 in
general sense of in violent or hostile conflict, mainly in phrases such as run afoul of.


galoot (n.)

awkward or boorish man, 1812, nautical, raw recruit, green hand, apparently originally a sailor's
contemptuous word for soldiers or marines, of uncertain origin. Dictionary of American Slang
proposes galut, Sierra Leone creole form of Spanish galeoto galley slave.


abeam (adv.)

at right angles to the keel, c.1836, nautical, literally on beam; see a- (1) + beam (n.).


shin (v.)

to climb by using arms and legs (originally a nautical word), 1829, from shin (n.). Related:
Shinned; shinning.


boom (n.2)

in the business sense, 1873, sometimes said to be from boom (n.1), from the nautical meaning a long
spar run out to extend the foot of a sail -- a ship booming being one in full sail. But it could
just as well be from boom (v.) on the notion of suddenness.


yard-arm (n.)

also yardarm, 1550s, from yard (n.2) in the nautical sense (attested from Old English) + arm (n.1).
In 19c. British naval custom, it was permissible to begin drinking when the sun was over the yard-
arm.


pennant (n.)

1610s, rope for hoisting, probably a blend of pendant in the nautical sense of suspended rope and
pennon. Use for flag on a warship first recorded 1690s; flag symbolizing a sports championship
(especially baseball) is from 1880; as a synonym for championship it was first used 1915.


guy (n.1)

rope, chain, wire, mid-14c., leader, from Old French guie a guide, from guier (see guide (v.)); or
from a similar word in North Sea Germanic. The rope sense is nautical, first recorded 1620s.


graveyard (n.)

1773, from grave (n.) + yard (n.1). Graveyard shift late-night work is c.1907, from earlier nautical
term, in reference to the loneliness of after-hours work.


squall (n.)

sudden, violent gust of wind, 1719, originally nautical, probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare Norwegian skval sudden rush of water, Swedish skvala to gush, pour down), probably
ultimately a derivative of squall (v.).


upwind (adv.)

also up-wind, 1838, from up (adv.) + wind (n.1). Originally a nautical term. As an adjective from
1942.


camber (n.)

1610s, nautical term, from Old French cambre, chambre bent, from Latin camurum (nominative camur)
crooked, arched; related to camera.


bucko (n.)

term of address, originally (1883) nautical and with a sense of swaggering, domineering fellow.
Probably from buck (n.1) in the slang sense of a blood or choice spirit.There are in London divers
lodges or societies of Bucks, formed in imitation of the Free Masons: one was held at the Rose, in
Monkwell-street, about the year 1705. The president is styled the Grand Buck. [Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, 1811]


ballyhoo (n.)

publicity, hype, 1908, from circus slang, a short sample of a sideshow (1901), of unknown origin.
There is a village of Ballyhooly in County Cork, Ireland. In nautical lingo, ballahou or ballahoo
(1867, perhaps 1836) meant an ungainly vessel, from Spanish balahu schooner.


headway (n.)

c.1300, main road, highway, from Old English heafodweg; see head (adj.) + way (n.). Sense of motion
forward first attested 1748, short for ahead-way; ultimately nautical (see leeway).


