nip (n.2)

a pinch; a sharp bite, 1540s, from nip (v.). Meaning a chill in the weather is from 1610s, probably
so called for its effect on vegetation. Nip and tuck a close thing is recorded from 1832, perhaps
from sailing or tailoring.


nip (v.)

to pinch sharply; to bite suddenly, late 14c., related to Middle Low German nipen to nip, to pinch,
Middle Dutch nipen to pinch, Dutch nijpen, Old Norse hnippa to prod, but the exact evolution of the
stem is obscure. Related: Nipped; nipping. To nip (something) in the bud in the figurative sense is
first recorded c.1600.


nip (n.1)

small measure of spirits, 1796, shortening of nipperkin (1670s) quantity of liquor of a half pint or
less, possibly of Dutch or Low German origin and related to nip (v.). Reinforced by nip (n.2) on
notion of fragment or bit pinched off (c.1600).


nipper (n.)

small boy, 1859, originally (1530s) a pickpocket who pinched other people's property; see nip (v.).


nipple (n.)

1530s, nyppell, teat, duct-laden extremity of a mammalian breast, alteration of neble (1520s),
probably diminutive of neb bill, beak, snout (see neb), hence, literally a small projection. In
reference to an artificial device on an infant's bottle, from 1875. A 16c.-17c. slang term for a
woman's nipples was cherrilets.


Nipponese

Japanese, 1859, from Nippon, Japanese word for Japan, from ni(chi) the sun + pon, hon source, which
is said to be from Chinese for rising sun-place. Derisive slang shortening Nip attested from 1942.


nippy (adj.)

1898, in reference to a biting chill in the air, from nip (n.2) + -y (2). Related: Nippiness.


catnip (n.)

1712, American English, from cat (n.) + nip, from Old English nepte catnip, from Latin nepta, name
of an aromatic herb. The older name is Middle English catmint (mid-13c.).


conniption (n.)

1833, American English, origin uncertain; perhaps related to corruption, which was used in a sense
of anger from 1799, or from English dialectal canapshus ill-tempered, captious, probably a
corruption of captious.


guttersnipe (n.)

also gutter-snipe, 1857, from gutter (n.) + snipe (n.); originally Wall Street slang for
streetcorner broker, attested later (1869) as street urchin, also one who gathers rags and paper
from gutters. As a name for the common snipe, it dates from 1874 but is perhaps earlier.


juniper (n.)

evergreen shrub, late 14c., from Latin iuniperus (source of French geni&egrave;vre, Spanish enebro,
Portuguese zimbro, Italian ginepro), of uncertain origin, perhaps related to iunco reed. Watkins has
it from PIE *yoini-paros bearing juniper berries, from *yoi-ni- juniper berry. Applied to various
North American species from 1748. In the Bible, it renders Hebrew rethem, the name of a white-
flowered shrub unrelated to the European evergreen.


manipulable (adj.)

1859, from manipulate + -able. Related: Manipulability.


manipulate (v.)

1827, to handle skillfully by hand, a back-formation from manipulation. Of mental influence, from
1864. Financial sense is from 1870. In mid-20c., it served as a euphemism for masturbation. Related:
Manipulated; manipulating.


manipulation (n.)

c.1730, a method of digging ore, from French manipulation, from manipule handful (a pharmacists'
measure), from Latin manipulus handful, sheaf, bundle, from manus hand (see manual) + root of plere
to fill (see pleio-). Sense of skillful handling of objects is first recorded 1826; extended 1828 to
handling of persons as well as objects.


manipulative (adj.)

1816, in literal sense, from manipulate + -ive. Related: Manipulatively; manipulativeness.


manipulator (n.)

1804, from manipulate with Latin agent noun ending. Perhaps formed on model of French manipulateur
(1783).


omnipotence (n.)

mid-15c., omnipotens, from Middle French omnipotence, from Late Latin omnipotentia almighty power,
from Latin omnipotentem omnipotent (see omnipotent). Related: Omnipotency (late 15c.).


omnipotent (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French omnipotent almighty, all-powerful (11c.) or directly from Latin
omnipotentem (nominative omnipotens) all-powerful, almighty, from omnis all (see omni-) + potens
(genitive potentis) powerful (see potent). Strictly only of God or a deity; general sense of having
absolute power or authority is attested from 1590s.


omnipresence (n.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin omnipraesentia, from omnipraesens, from Latin omnis all, every (see
omni-) + praesens present (see present (adj.)).


omnipresent (adj.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin omnipraesentem (nominative omnipraesens); see omnipresence. Related:
Omnipresently.


parsnip (n.)

16c., parsnepe, corruption (by influence of Middle English nepe turnip; see neep) of Middle English
passenep (late 14c.), from Old French pasnaise parsnip, also male member (Modern French panais),
from Latin pastinaca parsnip, carrot, from pastinum two-pronged fork (related to pastinare to dig up
the ground); so called from the shape of the root. The parsnip was considered a kind of turnip.


pinniped (n.)

1842, from Modern Latin Pinnipedia, suborder of aquatic carnivorous mammals (seals and walruses),
literally having feet as fins, from Latin pinna in secondary sense fin (see pin (n.)) + pes,
genitive pedis foot (see foot (n.)).


plenipotentiary (adj.)

1640s, from French pl&#233;nipotentiaire and directly from Medieval Latin plenipotentiarius having
full power, from Late Latin plenipotens, from Latin plenus full (see plenary) + potentem powerful
(see potent). As a noun from 1650s.


snip (n.)

1550s, small piece of cut-out cloth, probably from Dutch or Low German snippen to snip, shred, of
imitative origin. Meaning cut made by scissors is from 1590s. As a nickname or cant word for a
tailor, 1590s. Snip-snap-snorum, the card game, is 1755, from Low German.


snip (v.)

to cut at one light, quick stroke, 1580s, from snip (n.). Related: Snipped; snipping.


snipe (v.)

shoot from a hidden place, 1773 (among British soldiers in India), in reference to hunting snipe as
game, from snipe (n.). Figurative use from 1892. Related: Sniped; sniping.


snipe (n.)

long-billed marsh bird, early 14c., from Old Norse -snipa in myrisnipa moor snipe; perhaps a common
Germanic term (compare Old Saxon sneppa, Middle Dutch snippe, Dutch snip, Old High German snepfa,
German Schnepfe snipe, Swedish sn&#228;ppa sandpiper), perhaps originally snipper. The Old English
name was snite, which is of uncertain derivation. An opprobrious term (see guttersnipe) since
c.1600.


sniper (n.)

sharpshooter; one who shoots from a hidden place, 1824, agent noun from snipe (v.). The birds were
considered a challenging target for an expert shooter:    Snipe Shooting is a good trial of the
gunner's skill, who often engages in this diversion, without the assistance of a dog of any kind; a
steady pointer, however, is a good companion. [Sportsman's Calendar, London, December 1818]


snippers (n.)

scissors, 1590s, plural agent noun from snip (v.).


snippet (n.)

1660s, from snip (n.) + diminutive suffix -et.


snippy (adj.)

1727, parsimonious; 1848, fault-finding, sharp; 1886, fragmentary; from snip (n.) + -y (2). Related:
Snippily; snippiness.


snips (n.)

small, stout-handled shears for metal-working, 1846, from snip (v.).


turnip (n.)

c.1500, turnepe, probably from turn (from its shape, as though turned on a lathe) + Middle English
nepe turnip, from Old English n&aelig;p, from Latin napus turnip. The modern form of the word
emerged late 18c.


unipersonal (adj.)

1810, from uni- + personal (adj.).


unipolar (adj.)

1812, originally in electricity, from uni- + polar. Related: Unipolarity.


Winnipeg

originally the name of the lake, probably from Ojibwa (Algonquian) winipeg dirty water; compare
winad it is dirty. Etymologically related to Winnebago.


