nonsense (n.)

1610s, from non- + sense; perhaps influenced by French nonsens.


horsefeathers (n.)

nonsense, 1928, said to have been coined by U.S. cartoonist Billy De Beck; perhaps a variant of
horseshit nonsense, though the latter is attested only from 1940s.


no-nonsense (adj.)

not tolerating foolishness, businesslike, 1928, from phrase to stand no nonsense, which is attested
from 1821, originally in sporting slang.


fudge (v.)

put together clumsily or dishonestly, 1610s, perhaps an alteration of fadge make suit, fit (1570s),
of unknown origin. As an interjection meaning lies, nonsense from 1766; the noun meaning nonsense is
1791. It could be a natural extension from the verb. But Farmer suggests provincial French fuche,
feuche, an exclamation of contempt from Low German futsch = begone.  The traditional English story
traces fudge in this sense to a sailor's retort to anything considered lies or nonsense, from
Captain Fudge, who always brought home his owners a good cargo of lies [Isaac Disraeli, 1791, citing
a pamphlet from 1700]. It seems there really was a late 17c. Captain Fudge, called Lying Fudge, and
perhaps his name reinforced this form of fadge in the sense of contrive without the necessary
materials. The surname is from Fuche, a pet form of the masc. proper name Fulcher, from Germanic and
meaning literally people-army.


doo-wop

1958, from the nonsense harmony phrases sung under the vocal lead (this one attested from mid-
1950s).


hooey (n.)

nonsense, foolishness, 1922, American English slang, of unknown origin.


guff (n.)

empty talk, nonsense, 1888, from earlier sense of puff of air (1825), of imitative origin.


flibbertigibbet (n.)

1540s, chattering gossip, flighty woman, probably a nonsense word meant to sound like fast talking;
as the name of a devil or fiend it dates from c.1600.


twaddle (n.)

silly talk, prosy nonsense, 1782, probably from twattle (1550s), of obscure origin.


bollocks (n.)

testicles, 1744, see bollix. In British slang, as an ejaculation meaning nonsense, recorded from
1919.


bosh (n.)

empty talk, nonsense, 1834, from Turkish, literally empty. Introduced in Ayesha, popular romance
novel by J.J. Morier (1780-1849).


Hottentot

1670s, from S.African Dutch, said to mean stammerer, it is from hot en tot hot and tot, nonsense
words imitative of the clicking, jerking Khoisan speech.


scat (n.1)

nonsense patter sung to jazz, 1926, probably of imitative origin, from one of the syllables used. As
a verb, 1935, from the noun. Related: Scatting.


panjandrum (n.)

mock name for a pompous personage, 1755, invented by Samuel Foote (1720-1777) in a long passage full
of nonsense written to test the memory of actor Charles Macklin (1697-1797), who said he could
repeat anything after hearing it once.


bebop (n.)

1944, from bebop, rebop, bop, nonsense words in jazz lyrics, attested from at least 1928. The style
is associated with Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie.


Jabberwocky

1872, nonsense word (perhaps based on jabber) coined by Lewis Carroll, for the poem of the same
name, which he published in Through the Looking-Glass. The poem is about a fabulous beast called the
Jabberwock.


bunk (n.2)

nonsense, 1900, short for bunkum, phonetic spelling of Buncombe, a county in North Carolina. The
usual story (by 1841) of its origin is this: At the close of the protracted Missouri statehood
debates, supposedly on Feb. 25, 1820, N.C. Representative Felix Walker (1753-1828) began what
promised to be a long, dull, irrelevant speech, and he resisted calls to cut it short by saying he
was bound to say something that could appear in the newspapers in the home district and prove he was
on the job. I shall not be speaking to the House, he confessed, but to Buncombe. Bunkum has been
American English slang for nonsense since 1841 (from 1838 as generic for a U.S. Representative's
home district).    MR. WALKER, of North Carolina, rose then to address the Committee on the question
[of Missouri statehood]; but the question was called for so clamorously and so perseveringly that
Mr. W. could proceed no farther than to move that the committee rise. [Annals of Congress, House of
Representatives, 16th Congress, 1st Session, p. 1539]


runcible

1871, a nonsense word coined by Edward Lear; used especially in runcible spoon spoon with three
short tines like a fork, which first took the name 1926.


blithering (adj.)

1880, present participle adjective (from the first typically with idiot) from blither (v.) to talk
nonsense. From 1872 as a verbal noun.


drip (n.)

mid-15c., from drip (v.). The slang meaning stupid, feeble, or dull person is first recorded 1932,
perhaps from earlier American English slang sense nonsense (1919).


crap (n.)

act of defecation, 1898; see crap (v.). Sense of rubbish, nonsense also first recorded 1898.


falderol (n.)

also falderal, folderol, 1701, nonsense refrain in songs; meaning gewgaw, trifle is attested from
1820.


bippy (n.)

by 1968, buttocks, ass, U.S. slang, the kind of thing that once sounded naughty on Laugh-In (and
briefly popularized by that program). As it often was used with you bet your ... it may be nonsense
chosen for alliteration, but there may be some whiff of bipedal in it.


claptrap (n.)

c.1730, trick to 'catch' applause, a stage term; from clap (v.) + trap (n.). Extended sense of
cheap, showy language is from 1819; hence nonsense, rubbish.


fib (n.)

1610s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from fibble-fable nonsense (1580s), a reduplication of fable.


bric-a-brac (n.)

1840, from obsolete French &agrave; bric et &agrave; brac (16c.) at random, any old way, a nonsense
phrase.


limerick (n.)

nonsense verse of five lines, 1896, perhaps from the county and city in Ireland, but if so the
connection is obscure. Often (after OED's Murray) attributed to a party game in which each guest in
turn made up a nonsense verse and all sang a refrain with the line Will you come up to Limerick? but
he reported this in 1898 and earlier evidence is wanting. Or perhaps from Learic, from Edward Lear
(1812-1888) English humorist who popularized the form. Earliest examples are in French, which
further complicates the quest for the origin. OED's first record of the word is in a letter of
Aubrey Beardsley. The place name is literally bare ground, from Irish Liumneach, from lom bare,
thin. It was famous for hooks.    The limerick may be the only traditional form in English not
borrowed from the poetry of another language. Although the oldest known examples are in French, the
name is from Limerick, Ireland. John Ciardi suggests that the Irish Brigade, which served in France
for most of the eighteenth centiry, might have taken the form to France or developed an English
version of a French form. ... The contemporary limerick usually depends on a pun or some other turn
of wit. It is also likely to be somewhat suggestive or downright dirty. [Miller Williams, Patterns
of Poetry, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1986]


hootenanny (n.)

informal session of folk musicians, 1940, American English, earlier a gadget (1927), of unknown
origin, perhaps a nonsense word.    Another device used by the professional car thief, and one
recently developed to perfection, according to a large Chicago lock-testing laboratory, is a
hootenanny, so-called by the criminals using it. [Popular Mechanics, February 1931]


workmanlike (adj.)

efficient, no-nonsense, 1739, from workman + like (adj.).


fad (n.)

1834, hobby, pet project; 1881 as fashion, craze, perhaps shortened from fiddle-faddle. Or perhaps
from French fadaise trifle, nonsense, ultimately from Latin fatuus stupid.


nonsensical (adj.)

1650s, from nonsense + -ical. Related: Nonsensically.


applesauce (n.)

by 1739, American English, from apple + sauce. Slang meaning nonsense is attested from 1921 and was
noted as a vogue word early 1920s. Mencken credits it to cartoonist T.A. (Tad) Dorgan. DAS suggests
the word was thus used because applesauce was cheap fare served in boardinghouses.


zoot suit (n.)

1942, American English slang, the first element probably a nonsense reduplication of suit (compare
reet pleat, drape shape from the same jargon).


crud (n.)

nonsense, rubbish, 1940, U.S. slang; originally 1920s army and college student slang for venereal
disease. Said to be a metathesis variant of curd, which actually makes it an unconscious return to
the original Middle English form of that word (see curd). As G.I. name for disease of any and every
sort it is attested from 1945.


fiddlestick (n.)

15c., originally the bow of a fiddle, from fiddle (n.) and stick (n.). Meaning nonsense (usually
fiddlesticks) is from 1620s.


drivel (v.)

Old English dreflian to dribble or run at the nose, slobber, from Proto-Germanic *drab-, from PIE
*dher- (1) to make muddy, darken. Meaning to speak nonsense is mid-14c. Related: Driveling,
drivelling.


blither (v.)

1868, variant of blether talk nonsense, 1520s, a northern British and Scottish word, from Middle
English blather (see blather (v.)). Related: Blithered; blithering.


fuss (n.)

1701, perhaps an alteration of force, or imitative of bubbling or sputtering sounds, or from Danish
fjas foolery, nonsense. First attested in Anglo-Irish writers, but no obvious connections to Irish.
To make a fuss was earlier to keep a fuss (1726).


bull (n.3)

false talk, fraud, Middle English, apparently from Old French bole deception, trick, scheming,
intrigue, and perhaps connected to modern Icelandic bull nonsense.  Sais christ to ypocrites ... yee
ar ... all ful with wickednes, tresun and bull. [Cursor Mundi, early 14c.]  There also was a verb
bull meaning to mock, cheat, which dates from 1530s.


burlesque (n.)

1660s, derisive imitation, grotesque parody, from French burlesque (16c.), from Italian burlesco,
from burla joke, fun, mockery, possibly ultimately from Late Latin burra trifle, nonsense, literally
flock of wool. Modern sense of variety show featuring striptease is American English, 1870.
Originally (1857) the sketches at the end of minstrel shows. As a verb, from 1670s.


la-la

nonsense refrain in songs, probably from Old English la, a common exclamation; but la-la is
imitative of babbling speech in many languages (compare Greek lalage babble, prattle, Sanskrit
lalalla imitation of stammering Latin lallare to sing to sleep, lull, German lallen to stammer,
Lithuanian laluoti to stammer).


dada

1920, from French dada hobbyhorse, child's nonsense word, selected 1916 by Romanian poet Tristan
Tzara (1896-1963), leader of the movement, for its resemblance to meaningless babble.Freedom: DADA
DADA DADA, the howl of clashing colors, the intertwining of all contradictions, grotesqueries,
trivialities: LIFE. [T. Tzara, Dada Manifesto, 1918]  Related: Dadaist; Dadaism.


amphigory (n.)

1809, burlesque nonsense writing or verse, from French amphigouri, of unknown origin, perhaps from
Greek amphi- (see amphi-) + gyros circle, thus circle on both sides, or second element may be from
Greek -agoria speech (compare allegory, category). Related: Amphigoric.


vive (interj.)

1590s (in vive le roi), from French, literally long live ______; French equivalent of viva (q.v.).
Jocular phrase vive la diff&eacute;rence in reference to the difference between men and women is
recorded from 1963. Also in vive la bagatelle, literally long live nonsense, denoting a carefree
attitude to life.


banana (n.)

1590s, borrowed by Spanish or Portuguese from a West African word, possibly Wolof banana. The plant
was introduced to the New World from Africa in 1516. Top banana, second banana, etc. are 1950s, from
show business slang use of banana for comedian, especially in a burlesque show. Banana split first
attested 1920. Banana oil nonsense is slang from c.1910.


hokey-pokey

1847, false cheap material, perhaps an alteration of hocus-pocus, or from the nonsense chorus and
title of a comic song (Hokey Pokey Whankey Fong) that was popular c.1830. Applied especially to
cheap ice cream sold by street vendors (1884), in Philadelphia, and perhaps other places, it meant
shaved ice with artificial flavoring. The words also were the title of a Weber-Fields musical revue
from 1912. The modern dance song of that name hit the U.S. in 1950 (Life described it Nov. 27, 1950,
as a tuneless stomp that is now sweeping the U.C.L.A. campus), but it is said to have originated in
Britain in World War II, perhaps from a Canadian source.


hoochy koochy (n.)

also hoochie-coochie, hootchy kootchy, erotic suggestive women's dance (involving a lot of hip-
grinding), 1898, of obscure origin, usually associated, without evidence, with the Chicago world's
fair of 1893 and belly-dancer Little Egypt (who might not even have been there), but the word itself
is attested from 1890, as the stage name of minstrel singer Hoochy-Coochy Rice, though its meaning
there is unclear, perhaps a nonsense word.    To-day, however, in place of the danse du ventre or
the coochie-coochie we have the loop-the-loop or the razzle-dazzle, which latter, while not exactly
edifying at least do not serve to deprave public taste. [The Redemption of 'Old Coney,' in Broadway
Magazine, April 1904]


zilch (n.)

nothing, 1957; insignificant person, 1933, from use of Zilch as a generic comical-sounding surname
for an insignificant person (especially Joe Zilch). There was a Mr. Zilch (1931), comic character in
the magazine Ballyhoo, and the use perhaps originated c.1922 in U.S. college or theater slang.
Probably a nonsense syllable, suggestive of the end of the alphabet, but Zilch is an actual German
surname of Slavic origin.    The [Cadence] agency aims to have each album cover actually promote the
record, on the theory that the day of pretty, boffy, zoomy and zingy covers for the sake of zilch is
no more. [Billboard, Oct. 28, 1957]


baloney (n.)

1894, variant of bologna sausage (q.v.). As slang for nonsense, 1922, American English (popularized
1930s by N.Y. Gov. Alfred E. Smith; in this sense sometimes said to have been one of the coinages of
legendary Variety staffer Jack Conway), from earlier sense of idiot (by 1915), perhaps influenced by
blarney, but usually regarded as being from the sausage, as a type traditionally made from odds and
ends. It also was ring slang early 20c. for an inferior fighter.    The aristocratic Kid's first
brawl for sugar was had in Sandusky, Odryo, with a boloney entitled Young Du Fresne. He gave the
green and nervous Kid a proper pastin' for six rounds and the disgusted Dummy sold me his find for a
hundred bucks, leavin' the clubhouse just in time to miss seein' the boy get stung, get mad, and win
by a knockout. [H.C. Witwer, The Leather Pushers, Colliers, Oct. 16, 1920]


sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


