nuclear (adj.)

1846, of or like the nucleus of a cell, from nucleus + -ar, probably by influence of French
nucl&eacute;aire. Use in atomic physics is from 1914; of weapons, from 1945. Hence nuclear physics
(1933), nuclear energy (1941), nuclear war (1954). Nuclear winter coined by Richard Turco, but first
attested in article by Carl Sagan in Parade magazine, Oct. 30, 1983. General sense of central is
from 1912. Nuclear family, originally a sociologists' term, is first attested 1949 in Social
Structure, by American anthropologist G.P. Murdock (1897-1985). Alternative adjective nucleal is
recorded from 1840.


weapons of mass destruction (n.)

nuclear, biological and chemical weapons attested by 1946, apparently first used (in Russian) by the
Soviets.    The terms weapons of mass destruction and WMD mean chemical, biological, and nuclear
weapons, and chemical, biological, and nuclear materials used in the manufacture of such weapons.
[United States Code: Title 50, War and National Defense, chapter 43, รยง 2902, 2009]


nuke (n.)

short for nuclear weapon, 1959, U.S. military slang (see nuclear). The verb is attested from 1962;
the slang sense of to cook in a microwave oven is from 1987. Related: Nuked; nuking.


critical (adj.)

1580s, censorious, from critic + -al (1). Meaning pertaining to criticism is from 1741; medical
sense is from c.1600; meaning of the nature of a crisis is from 1640s; that of crucial is from 1841,
from the decisive sense in Latin criticus. Related: Criticality (1756; in the nuclear sense, 1950);
critically (1650s, accurately; 1815, in a critical situation). In nuclear science, critical mass is
attested from 1940.


reactor (n.)

one that reacts, 1835, agent noun in Latin form from react. In nuclear sense, attested from 1945.


collateral damage (n.)

by 1873 in legal cases; in modern use, generally a euphemism for the coincidental killing of
civilians, U.S. coinage, c.1968, at first generally with reference to nuclear weapons.


Fermium (n.)

discovered in the debris of a 1952 U.S. nuclear test in the Pacific, named 1955 for Italian-born
U.S. physicist Enrico Fermi (1901-1954).


nimby

acronym for not in my back yard, 1980, American English, supposedly coined by Walter Rodgers of the
American Nuclear Society.


Einsteinium (n.)

discovered in the debris of a 1952 U.S. nuclear test in the Pacific, named 1955 for physicist Albert
Einstein (1879-1955).


breeder (n.)

1570s, one who produces or originates, agent noun from breed (v.). Meaning one who breeds cattle or
some other animal is recorded from 1530s. Of nuclear reactors, from 1948. As a scornful homosexual
term for heterosexual person, attested from 1986.


overkill (n.)

1958, from over- + kill (v.). Originally in reference to nuclear arsenals; the general sense is from
1965. The verb is attested from 1946.


thermonuclear (adj.)

1938 with reference to stars, 1953 of weapons (technically only to describe the hydrogen bomb), from
thermo- + nuclear.


Chernobyl

city in Ukraine (Ukrainian Chornobyl), from Russian chernobylnik mugwort. Site of 1986 nuclear
disaster.


meltdown (n.)

by 1937 in the ice-cream industry; by 1956 in reference to a nuclear reactor, from verbal phrase,
from melt (v.) + down (adv.). Metaphoric extension since 1979.


deterrent

1829, noun and adjective, in Bentham, from Latin deterrentem, present participle of deterrere (see
deter). In reference to nuclear weapons, from 1954.


crit

shortening of criticism, from 1908; shortening of critical from 1957 (originally among nuclear
physicists).


suitcase (n.)

1898, from suit (n.) + case (n.2). Originally a case for holding a suit of clothes. In reference to
small nuclear weapons, 1954.


mononuclear (adj.)

1886; see mono- + nuclear.


megadeath (n.)

1953, from mega- in scientific sense (one million) + death (n.). The death of one million persons,
as a measure of the effectiveness of nuclear weapons. The resulting pile of dead bodies would be a
megacorpse, according to writings on the topic.


SALT (n.)

Cold War U.S.-U.S.S.R. nuclear weapons negotiations, 1968, acronym for Strategic Arms Limitation
Talks (which would make SALT talks redundant, but the last element sometimes also is understood as
treaty).


non-proliferation (n.)

also nonproliferation, 1965, from non- + proliferation; originally in reference to nuclear weapons.


fission (n.)

1841, division of a cell or organism, from Latin fissionem (nominative fissio) a breaking up,
cleaving, from past participle stem of findere to split (see fissure). Cognate with Old English
bitan to bite. Nuclear physics sense is 1939. As a verb, from 1929.


tactical (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to tactics, from Modern Latin tactica (see tactics) + -al (1). Meaning
characterized by adroit management is from 1883. In reference to nuclear weapons (for limited use in
military operations, opposed to strategic) it is recorded from 1957. Related: Tactically.


scenario (n.)

1868, sketch of the plot of a play, from Italian scenario, from Late Latin scenarius of stage
scenes, from Latin scena scene (see scene). Meaning imagined situation is first recorded 1960, in
reference to hypothetical nuclear wars.


core (n.)

late 14c., probably from Old French coeur core of fruit, heart of lettuce, literally heart, from
Latin cor heart, from PIE root *kerd- heart (see heart). Nuclear reactor sense is from 1949.


fusion (n.)

1550s, from Middle French fusion, from Latin fusionem (nominative fusio) an outpouring, effusion,
noun of action from fusus, past participle of fundere pour, melt (see found (v.2)). In nuclear
physics sense, first recorded 1947; in jazz sense, by 1972.


promethium (n.)

radioactive element, long one of the missing elements, 1948, so called by discoverers Jacob Marinsky
and Lawrence Glendenin, who detected it in 1945 in the fusion products of uranium while working on
the Manhattan Project. From Prometheus, who stole fire from the gods and was punished for it, +
element name ending -ium. The name not only symbolizes the dramatic way in which the element may be
produced in quantity as a result of man's harnessing of the energy of nuclear fission, but also
warns man of the impending danger of punishment by the vulture of war. [Marinsky and Glendenin]


trident (n.)

three-pointed spear, mid-15c., from Latin noun use of adjective tridentem (nominative tridens)
three-pronged, three-toothed, from tri- three (see tri-) + dens tooth (see tooth). As a type of U.S.
nuclear-powered submarine, recorded from 1972. Related: Tridental.


escalate (v.)

1922, back-formation from escalator, replacing earlier verb escalade (1801), from the noun escalade.
Escalate came into general use with a figurative sense of raise after 1959 in reference to the
possibility of nuclear war. Related: Escalated; escalating.


proliferation (n.)

1859, formation or development of cells, from French prolif&#233;ration, from prolif&#232;re
producing offspring, from Latin proles offspring (see prolific) + ferre to bear (see infer). Meaning
enlargement, extension, increase is from 1920; especially of nuclear weapons (1966).


conventional (adj.)

late 15c., of the nature of an agreement, from Late Latin conventionalis pertaining to convention or
agreement, from Latin conventionem (see convention). Meaning of the nature of a convention is from
1812, now rare; established by social convention is from 1761; that of following tradition is from
1831; that of non-nuclear is from 1955. Realted: Conventionality; conventionally.


Polaris (n.)

1769, short for stella polaris, Modern Latin, literally the pole star (see polar). The ancient
Greeks called it Phoenice, the Phoenician (star), because the Phoenicians used it for navigation,
though due to precession of the equinoxes it was not then the pole star. Also see pole (n.2). The
Old English word for it was Scip-steorra ship-star, reflecting its importance in navigation. As the
name of a U.S. Navy long-range submarine-launched guided nuclear missile, it dates from 1957.


stable (adj.)

mid-12c., trustworthy, reliable; mid-13c., constant, steadfast; virtuous; from Old French stable,
estable constant, steadfast, unchanging, from Latin stabilis firm, steadfast, stable, fixed,
figuratively durable, unwavering, literally able to stand, from PIE *ste-dhli-, from root *sta- to
stand (see stet). From c.1300 as well-founded, well-established, secure (of governments, etc.).
Physical sense of secure against falling is recorded from late 14c.; also of even temperament. Of
nuclear isotopes, from 1904.


strange (adj.)

late 13c., from elsewhere, foreign, unknown, unfamiliar, from Old French estrange foreign, alien,
unusual, unfamiliar, curious; distant; inhospitable; estranged, separated (Modern French
&eacute;trange), from Latin extraneus foreign, external, from without (source also of Italian strano
strange, foreign, Spanish estra&#241;o), from extra outside of (see extra). In early use also
strounge, straunge. Sense of queer, surprising is attested from late 14c. In nuclear physics, from
1956.


greens (n.)

freshly cut branches used for decoration, 1690s; vegetables, 1725, from green. Greens ecology
political party, first recorded 1978, from German die Gr&uuml;nen (West Germany), an outgrowth of
Gr&uuml;ne Aktion Zukunft Green Campaign for the Future, a mainly anti-nuclear power movement,
and/or gr&uuml;ne Listen green lists (of environmental candidates). Green (adj.) in the sense of
environmental is attested from 1972; Greenpeace, the international conservation and environmental
protection group, is from 1971.


brinkmanship (n.)

also brinksmanship, with parasitic -s- and construction based on salesmanship, sportsmanship, etc.;
from brink (the image of the brink of war dates to at least 1840).    Associated with the policies
advocated by John Foster Dulles (1888-1959), U.S. Secretary of State 1953-1959. The word springs
from Dulles' philosophy as outlined in a magazine interview [with Time-Life Washington bureau chief
James Shepley] early 1956:    The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the
necessary art. If you cannot master it, you inevitably get into war. If you try to run away from it,
if you are scared to go to the brink, you are lost.    The quote was widely criticized by the
Eisenhower Administration's opponents, and the first attested use of brinkmanship seems to have been
in such a context, a few weeks after the magazine appeared, by Democratic presidential candidate
Adlai Stevenson criticizing Dulles for boasting of his brinkmanship, ... the art of bringing us to
the edge of the nuclear abyss.


mutual (adj.)

late 15c., originally of feelings, from Middle French mutuel (14c.), from Latin mutuus reciprocal,
done in exchange, from PIE root *mei- (1) to change, exchange (see mutable).    The essence of its
meaning is that it involves the relation x is or does to y as y to x; &amp; not the relation, x is
or does to z as y to z. [Fowler]   Mutual Admiration Society (1851) seems to have been coined by
Thoreau. Mutual fund is recorded from 1950. The Cold War's mutual assured destruction attested from
1966. (Assured destruction was an early 1960s term in U.S. military policy circles in reference to
nuclear weapons as a deterrent, popularized c.1964 by Robert McNamara, U.S. Secretary of Defense
under Lyndon Johnson, e.g. statement before House Armed Services Committee, Feb. 18, 1965; the
mutual perhaps first added by Donald Brennan, conservative defense analyst and a public critic of
the policy, who also noted the acronym MAD.)


chain (n.)

c.1300, from Old French chaeine chain (12c., Modern French cha&icirc;ne), from Latin catena chain
(source also of Spanish cadena, Italian catena), of unknown origin, perhaps from PIE root *kat- to
twist, twine (cognates: Latin cassis hunting net, snare).    Figurative use from c.1600. As a type
of ornament worn about the neck, from late 14c. Chain of stores is American English, 1846. Chain
gang is from 1834; chain reaction is from 1916 in physics, specific nuclear physics sense is from
1938; chain mail first recorded 1822, in Scott, from mail (n.2). Before that, mail alone sufficed.
Chain letter recorded from 1892; usually to raise money at first; decried from the start as a
nuisance.Nine out of every ten givers are reluctant and unwilling, and are coerced into giving
through the awful fear of breaking the chain, so that the spirit of charity is woefully absent. [St.
Nicholas magazine, vol. XXVI, April 1899] Chain smoker is attested from 1886, originally of Bismarck
(who smoked cigars), thus probably a loan-translation of German Kettenraucher. Chain-smoking is from
1930.


