nurture (v.)

to feed or nourish, early 15c., from nurture (n.). Related: Nurtured; nurturing.


nurture (n.)

c.1300, breeding, upbringing, from Old French norture, nourreture food, nourishment; education,
training, from Late Latin nutritia (see nursery).


nourish (v.)

late 13c., to bring up, nurture (a child, a feeling, etc.), from Old French norriss-, stem of norrir
raise, bring up, nurture, foster; maintain, provide for (12c., Modern French nourrir), from Latin
nutrire to feed, nurse, foster, support, preserve, from *nutri (older form of nutrix nurse),
literally she who gives suck, from PIE *nu- (from root *(s)nau- to swim, flow, let flow, hence to
suckle; see nutriment) + fem. agent suffix. Related: Nourished; nourishing.


nurturance (n.)

1938, from nurture + -ance. Related: Nurturant.


environmentalism (n.)

1923, as a psychological theory (in the nature vs. nurture debate), from environmental + -ism. The
ecological sense is from 1972. Related: Environmentalist (n.), 1916 in the psychological sense, 1970
in the ecological sense.


upbringing (n.)

1510s, act of rearing a young person, from up (adv.) + bringing (see bring (v.)). Mainly in Scottish
in 16c.; in general use from c.1870, according to OED. A verb upbring (past participle upbrought)
was in Middle English in a sense raise, rear, bring up, nurture (c.1300), but in Middle English
upbringing is attested only as act of introducing (c.1400).


nature (n.)

late 13c., restorative powers of the body, bodily processes; powers of growth; from Old French
nature nature, being, principle of life; character, essence, from Latin natura course of things;
natural character, constitution, quality; the universe, literally birth, from natus born, past
participle of nasci to be born, from PIE *gene- to give birth, beget (see genus).    From late 14c.
as creation, the universe; also heredity, birth, hereditary circumstance; essential qualities,
innate disposition (as in human nature); nature personified, Mother Nature. Specifically as material
world beyond human civilization or society from 1660s. Nature and nurture have been contrasted since
1874.  Nature should be avoided in such vague expressions as 'a lover of nature,' 'poems about
nature.' Unless more specific statements follow, the reader cannot tell whether the poems have to do
with natural scenery, rural life, the sunset, the untouched wilderness, or the habits of squirrels.
[Strunk &amp; White, The Elements of Style, 3rd ed., 1979]


