obliterate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin obliteratus, past participle of obliterare cause to disappear, blot out, erase,
efface, figuratively cause to be forgotten, from ob against (see ob-) + littera (also litera)
letter, script (see letter (n.)); abstracted from phrase literas scribere write across letters,
strike out letters. Related: Obliterated; obliterating.


obliteration (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin obliterationem (nominative obliteratio), noun of action from past participle
stem of obliterare (see obliterate).


blot (v.)

early 15c., to make blots; mid-15c. to blot out, obliterate (words), from blot (n.). Related:
Blotted; blotting.


alliterate (v.)

to use alliteration, 1776 (implied in alliterated), back-formation from alliteration, on analogy of
obliterate. Related: Alliterating.


wipeout (n.)

also wipe-out, 1962, American English, surfer slang, from wipe (v.) + out. Sense of destruction,
defeat, a killing is recorded from 1968. Verbal phrase wipe out destroy, obliterate is from 1610s.


deface (v.)

mid-14c., to obliterate, from Old French desfacier mutilate, destroy, disfigure, from des- away from
(see dis-) + Vulgar Latin *facia (see face (n.)). Weaker sense of to mar, make ugly is late 14c. in
English. Related: Defaced; defacing.


extinguish (v.)

c.1500 (implied in extinguishable), from Latin extinguere/exstinguere quench, wipe out, obliterate,
from ex- out (see ex-) + stinguere quench, from PIE *steig- to prick, stick, pierce. Related:
Extinguished; extinguishing.


wash-out (n.)

also washout, 1877, act of washing out (a drain, etc.), from verbal phrase; see wash (v.) + out
(adv.). From 1873 as excavation of a roadbed, etc., by erosion is from 1873. Meaning a disappointing
failure is from 1902, from verbal phrase wash out obliterate, cancel (something written in ink),
attested from 1570s. Hence also the colloquial sense of to call off (an event) due to bad weather,
etc. (1917). Of colored material, washed-out faded is from 1837.


rub (v.)

early 14c., transitive and intransitive, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to East Frisian rubben
to scratch, rub, and Low German rubbeling rough, uneven, or similar words in Scandinavian (compare
Danish rubbe to rub, scrub, Norwegian rubba), of uncertain origin. Related: Rubbed; rubbing.    To
rub (someone) the wrong way is from 1853; probably the notion is of cats' fur. To rub noses in
greeting as a sign of friendship (attested from 1822) formerly was common among Eskimos, Maoris, and
some other Pacific Islanders. Rub out obliterate is from 1560s; underworld slang sense of kill is
recorded from 1848, American English. Rub off remove by rubbing is from 1590s; meaning have an
influence is recorded from 1959.


