oblique (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French oblique (14c.) and directly from Latin obliquus slanting, sidelong,
indirect, from ob against (see ob-) + root of licinus bent upward, from PIE root *lei- to bend, be
movable (see limb (n.1)). As a type of muscles, in reference to the axis of the body, 1610s (adj.),
1800 (n.). Related: Obliquely; obliqueness.


loxo-

word-forming element meaning oblique, before vowels lox-, from Greek loxos slanting, crosswise,
oblique. E.g. loxodromics art of oblique sailing.


queer (adj.)

c.1500, strange, peculiar, eccentric, from Scottish, perhaps from Low German (Brunswick dialect)
queer oblique, off-center, related to German quer oblique, perverse, odd, from Old High German twerh
oblique, from PIE root *terkw- to turn, twist, wind (see thwart (adv.)).    Sense of homosexual
first recorded 1922; the noun in this sense is 1935, from the adjective. Related: Queerly. Queer
studies as an academic discipline attested from 1994.


plagio-

before vowels plagi-, word-forming element meaning slanting, oblique, from comb. form of Greek
plagios oblique, slanting, from plagos side, from PIE *plag- flat, spread, from *plak- (1) to be
flat (see placenta).


me (pron.)

Old English me (dative), me, mec (accusative); oblique cases of I, from Proto-Germanic *meke
(accusative), *mes (dative), cognates: Old Frisian mi/mir, Old Saxon mi, Middle Dutch mi, Dutch mij,
Old High German mih/mir, German mich/mir, Old Norse mik/mer, Gothic mik/mis; from PIE root *me-,
oblique form of the personal pronoun of the first person singular (nominative *eg; see I); cognates:
Sanskrit, Avestan mam, Greek eme, Latin me, mihi, Old Irish me, Welsh mi me, Old Church Slavonic me,
Hittite ammuk.    Erroneous or vulgar use for nominative (such as it is me) attested from c.1500.
Dative preserved in obsolete meseems, methinks and expressions such as sing me a song (dative of
interest). Reflexively, myself, for myself, to myself from late Old English.


bias (n.)

1520s, from French biais slant, slope, oblique, also figuratively, expedient, means (13c.,
originally in Old French a past participle adjective, sideways, askance, against the grain), of
unknown origin, probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al biais, with cognates in Old Catalan and
Sardinian; possibly from Vulgar Latin *(e)bigassius, from Greek epikarsios athwart, crosswise, at an
angle, from epi- upon + karsios oblique, from PIE *krs-yo-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)). It became a noun in Old French. [A] technical term in the game of bowls, whence come all the
later uses of the word [OED]. Transferred sense of predisposition, prejudice is from 1570s in
English.    For what a man had rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, because they narrow hope; the deeper
things of nature, from superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride, lest his
mind should seem to be occupied with things mean and transitory; things not commonly believed, out
of deference to the opinion of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and sometimes
imperceptible, in which the affections colour and infect the understanding. [Francis Bacon, Novum
Organum, 1620]


slant (n.)

1650s, an oblique direction or plane (originally of landforms), from slant (v.). Meaning a way of
regarding something is from 1905. Derogatory slang sense of a slant-eyed Asian person is recorded
from 1943, from earlier slant-eyes (1929).


ab initio

c.1600, Latin, literally from the beginning, from oblique case of initium entrance, beginning,
related to verb inire to go into, enter upon, begin (see initial).


meadow (n.)

Old English m&aelig;dwe meadow, pasture, originally land covered in grass which is mown for hay;
oblique case of m&aelig;d (see mead (n.2)).


ferocious (adj.)

1640s, from Latin ferocis, oblique case of ferox fierce, wild-looking (see ferocity). Related:
Ferociously; ferociousness.


Sardinia

large island west of Italy, Latin, from Greek Sardo; perhaps named for the local Iberian people who
settled there; the original form and meaning of the name is lost. A Punic (Phoenician) stelle from
7c. B.C.E. refers to it as Shardan. The oblique cases are sometimes Sardonos, etc., as if from
*Sardon. Related: Sardinian.


obliquity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French obliquit&eacute; (14c.), from Latin obliquitatem (nominative
obliquitas) slanting direction, obliquity, noun of quality from obliquus (see oblique).


trey (n.)

late 14c., card, die, or domino with three spots, from Anglo-French, Old French treis (Modern French
trois), oblique case of treie three, from Latin tria (neuter) three (see three). In slang use for
three (of anything) from 1887.


Tuatha de Danann

1680s, from Irish Tuatha d&eacute; Danann, literally the people of Danann, from plural of tuath (see
Teutonic) + Danann, apparently originally an oblique case of Danu, mother of the gods.


shore (v.)

mid-14c., to prop, support with a prop; of obscure etymology though widespread in Germanic (Middle
Dutch schooren to prop up, support, Old Norse skor&eth;a (n.) a piece of timber set up as a
support). Related: Shored; shoring. Also as a noun, post or beam for temporary support of something
(mid-15c.), especially an oblique timber to brace the side of a building or excavation.


sidle (v.)

to move or go sideways, 1690s, back-formation from obsolete Middle English sidlyng (adv.) obliquely,
sideways; aslant; laterally (early 14c., perhaps in Old English), from side (n.) + adverbial suffix
-ling; altered on analogy of verbs ending in -le. Related: Sidled; sidling. Old English had
sidlingweg (n.) sidelong-way, oblique road.


innuendo (n.)

1670s, oblique hint, indiscreet suggestion, usually a deprecatory one, from Latin innuendo by
meaning, pointing to, literally giving a nod to, ablative of gerund of innuere to mean, signify,
literally to nod to, from in- at + nuere to nod (see numinous). Originally a legal phrase (1560s)
from Medieval Latin, with the sense of to wit. It often introduced the derogatory meaning alleged in
libel cases, which influenced its broader meaning. As a verb, from 1706.


slope (v.)

1590s, go in an oblique direction, from earlier adjective meaning slanting (c.1500), probably from
Middle English aslope (adv.) on the incline (late 15c.), from Old English *aslopen, past participle
of aslupan to slip away, from a- away + slupan to slip (see sleeve). From 1709 as to be in a
slanting position; transitive sense place in a slanting position is from c.1600. Related: Sloped;
sloping.


ferocity (n.)

c.1600, from French f&eacute;rocit&eacute;, from Latin ferocitatem (nominative ferocitas)
fierceness, from ferocis, oblique case of ferox wild, bold, courageous, warlike, fierce, literally
wild-looking, a derivative of ferus wild (see fierce) + -ox, -ocem (genitive -ocis), a suffix
meaning looking or appearing (cognate with Greek ops eye, sight).


bezel (n.)

1610s, sloping edge, also groove in which a stone is set, from Old French *besel (13c.; Modern
French biseau), cognate with Spanish bisel; of uncertain origin, perhaps literally a stone with two
angles, from Vulgar Latin *bis-alus, from bis- twice (see bis-) + ala wing, side (see alar). Meaning
oblique face of a gem is from c.1840. The verb meaning grind (a tool) down to an edge is from 1670s.


plagal (adj.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin plagalis, from plaga the plagal mode, probably from plagius, from
Medieval Greek plagius plagal, in classical Greek oblique, from plagos side (see plagio-).


scowl (v.)

mid-14c., from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian skule look furtively, squint, look
embarrassed, Danish skule to scowl, cast down the eyes). Probably related to Old English sceolh wry,
oblique, Old High German scelah curved, German scheel squint-eyed; from PIE root *sqel- crooked,
curved, bent. Related: Scowled; scowling.


skew (v.)

late 15c., to turn aside (intransitive), from Old North French eskiuer shy away from, avoid, Old
French eschiver (see eschew). Transitive sense of turn (something) aside is from 1570s. Meaning
depict unfairly first recorded 1872, on notion of being give oblique direction to, hence to distort,
to make slant. Statistical sense dates from 1929. Related: Skewed; skewing. The adjectival meaning
slanting, turned to one side is recorded from c.1600, from the verb; noun meaning slant, deviation
first attested 1680s.


us (pron.)

Old English us (cognate with Old Saxon, Old Frisian us, Old Norse, Swedish oss, Dutch ons, German
uns), accusative and dative plural of we, from PIE *nes- (2), forming oblique cases of the first
person plural personal pronoun (cognates: Sanskrit nas, Avestan na, Hittite nash us; Greek no we
two; Latin nos we, us; Old Church Slavonic ny us, nasu our; Old Irish ni, Welsh ni we, us). The -n-
is preserved in Germanic in Dutch ons, German uns.


sinew (n.)

Old English seonowe, oblique form of nominative sionu sinew, from Proto-Germanic *senawo (cognates:
Old Saxon sinewa, Old Norse sina, Old Frisian sine, Middle Dutch senuwe, Dutch zenuw, Old High
German senawa, German Sehne), from PIE root *sai- to tie, bind (cognates: Sanskrit snavah sinew,
Avestan snavar, Irish sin chain).


our (pron.)

Old English ure of us, genitive plural of the first person pronoun, from Proto-Germanic *ons
(cognates: Old Saxon usa, Old Frisian use, Old High German unsar, German unser, Gothic unsar our),
from PIE *nes-, oblique case of personal pronoun in first person plural (source of Latin nos we,
noster our). Also compare ours. Ourselves (late 15c.), modeled on yourselves, replaced original
construction we selfe, us selfum, etc.


romantic (adj.)

1650s, of the nature of a literary romance, from French romantique, from Middle French romant a
romance, oblique case of Old French romanz verse narrative (see romance (n.)).    As a literary
style, opposed to classical since before 1812; in music, from 1885. Meaning characteristic of an
ideal love affair (such as usually formed the subject of literary romances) is from 1660s. Meaning
having a love affair as a theme is from 1960. Related: Romantical (1670s); romantically. Compare
romanticism.


if (conj.)

Old English gif (initial g- in Old English pronounced with a sound close to Modern English -y-),
from Proto-Germanic *ja-ba (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse ef, Old Frisian gef, Old High German ibu,
German ob, Dutch of if, whether), from PIE pronomial stem *i- [Watkins]; Klein, OED suggest probably
originally from an oblique case of a noun meaning doubt (compare Old High German iba condition,
stipulation, doubt, Old Norse if doubt, hesitation, Swedish j&auml;f exception, challenge). As a
noun from 1510s.


signify (v.)

late 13c., be a sign of, indicate, mean, from Old French signifier (12c.), from Latin significare to
make signs, show by signs, point out, express; mean, signify; foreshadow, portend, from significus
(adj.), from signum sign (see sign (n.)) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Intransitive
sense of to be of importance is attested from 1660s. Meaning engage in mock-hostile banter is
American English black slang first recorded 1932.    ...'signifying,' which in Harlemese means
making a series of oblique remarks apparently addressed to no one in particular, but unmistakable in
intention in such a close-knit circle. [Down Beat, March 7, 1968]


slim (adj.)

1650s, thin, slight, slender, from Dutch slim bad, sly, clever, from Middle Dutch slim bad, crooked,
from Proto-Germanic *slembaz oblique, crooked (cognates: Middle High German slimp slanting, awry,
German schlimm bad, cunning, unwell). In English 17c. also sometimes with a sense sly, cunning,
crafty. Related: Slimly; slimness. With obsolete extended adjectival forms Slimsy flimsy,
unsubstantial (1845); slimikin small and slender (1745). Slim Jim attested from 1887 in sense of
very thin person; from 1902 as a type of slender cigar; from 1975 as a brand of meat snack.


Sunday (n.)

first day of the week, Old English sunnand&aelig;g (Northumbrian sunnad&aelig;g), literally day of
the sun, from sunnan, oblique case of sunne sun (see sun (n.)) + d&aelig;g day (see day). A Germanic
loan-translation of Latin dies solis day of the sun, which is itself a loan-translation of Greek
hemera heliou. Compare Old Saxon sunnun dag, Old Frisian sunnandei, Old Norse sunnundagr, Dutch
zondag, German Sonntag Sunday.    In European Christian cultures outside Germanic often with a name
meaning the Lord's Day (Latin Dominica). Sunday-school dates from 1783 (originally for secular
instruction); Sunday clothes is from 1640s. Sunday driver is from 1925.


thwart (adv.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source, probably Old Norse &thorn;vert across, originally neuter of
thverr (adj.) transverse, across, cognate with Old English &thorn;weorh transverse, perverse, angry,
cross, from Proto-Germanic *thwerh- twisted, oblique (cognates: Middle Dutch dwers, Dutch dwars
cross-grained, contrary, Old High German twerh, German quer, Gothic &thorn;wairhs angry), altered
(by influence of *thwer- to turn) from *therkh-, from PIE *terkw- to twist (cognates: Latin torquere
to twist, Sanskrit tarkuh spindle, Old Church Slavonic traku band, girdle, Old High German drahsil
turner, German drechseln to turn on a lathe), possibly a variant of *twerk- to cut. From mid-13c. as
an adjective.


N

in nickname, newt, and British dialectal naunt, the -n- belongs to a preceding indefinite article an
or possessive pronoun mine.    Other examples of this from Middle English manuscripts include a
neilond (an island, early 13c.), a narawe (an arrow, c.1400), a nox (an ox, c.1400), a noke (an oak,
early 15c.), a nappyle (an apple, early 15c.), a negge (an egg, 15c.). In 16c., an idiot sometimes
became a nidiot, which, with still-common casual pronunciation, became nidget, which, alas, has not
survived.    The process also worked in surnames, from oblique cases of Old English at by, near, as
in Nock/Nokes/Noaks from atten Oke by the oak; Nye from atten ye near the lowland; and see
Nashville.    But it is more common for an English word to lose an -n- to a preceding a: apron,
auger, adder, umpire, humble pie, etc. The mathematical use of n for an indefinite number is first
recorded 1852, in to the nth power.


tame (adj.)

early Middle English tame in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior
(c.1200); of animals domesticated, reclaimed from wildness, also, of persons, meek, gentle-natured,
compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities (mid-13c.), from oblique forms of Old English
tom, tam domesticated, docile, from Proto-Germanic *tamaz (cognates: Old Norse tamr, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch tam, Old High German zam, German zahm tame, Gothic tamjan
to tame), from PIE *deme- to constrain, to force, to break (horses) (cognates: Sanskrit damayati
tames; Persian dam a tame animal; Greek daman to tame, subdue, dmetos tame; Latin domare to tame,
subdue; Old Irish damnaim I tie up, fasten, I tame, subdue).    A possible ulterior connection is
with PIE *dem- house, household (see domestic (adj.)). Meaning spiritless, weak, dull, uninspiring,
insipid is recorded from c.1600. Related: Tamely; tameness.


the

definite article, late Old English &thorn;e, nominative masculine form of the demonstrative pronoun
and adjective. After c.950, it replaced earlier se (masc.), seo (fem.), &thorn;&aelig;t (neuter),
and probably represents se altered by the th- form which was used in all the masculine oblique cases
(see below).   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1>
<tr> <td></td> <td>Masc.</td> <td>Fem.</td> <td>Neut.</td> <td>Plural</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Nom.</td>
<td>se</td> <td>seo</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;t</td> <td>&thorn;a</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Acc.</td>
<td>&thorn;one</td> <td>&thorn;a</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;t</td> <td>&thorn;a</td> </tr> <tr>
<td>Gen.</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;s</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;re</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;s</td>
<td>&thorn;ara</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Dat.</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;m</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;re</td>
<td>&thorn;&aelig;m</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;m</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Inst.</td> <td>&thorn;y,
&thorn;on</td> <td>--</td> <td>&thorn;y, &thorn;on</td> <td>--</td> </tr> </table>   Old English se
is from PIE root *so- this, that (cognates: Sanskrit sa, Avestan ha, Greek ho, he the, Irish and
Gaelic so this). For the &thorn;- forms, see that. The s- forms were entirely superseded in English
by mid-13c., excepting a slightly longer dialectal survival in Kent. Old English used 10 different
words for the (see table), but did not distinguish the from that. That survived for a time as a
definite article before vowels (that one or that other).    Adverbial use in the more the merrier,
the sooner the better, etc. is a relic of Old English &thorn;y, the instrumentive case of the neuter
demonstrative (see that).


shadow (n.)

Old English sceadwe, sceaduwe the effect of interception of sunlight, dark image cast by someone or
something when interposed between an object and a source of light, oblique cases (to the, from the,
of the, in the) of sceadu (see shade (n.)). Shadow is to shade (n.) as meadow is to mead (n.2).
Similar formation in Old Saxon skado, Middle Dutch schaeduwe, Dutch schaduw, Old High German scato,
German schatten, Gothic skadus shadow, shade.    From mid-13c. as darkened area created by shadows,
shade. From early 13c. in sense anything unreal; mid-14c. as a ghost; late 14c. as a foreshadowing,
prefiguration. Meaning imitation, copy is from 1690s. Sense of the faintest trace is from 1580s;
that of a spy who follows is from 1859.    As a designation of members of an opposition party chosen
as counterparts of the government in power, it is recorded from 1906. Shadow of Death (c.1200)
translates Vulgate umbra mortis (Ps. xxiii:4, etc.), which itself translates Greek skia thanatou,
perhaps a mistranslation of a Hebrew word for intense darkness. In Beowulf, Gendel is a sceadugenga,
a shadow-goer, and another word for darkness is sceaduhelm. To be afraid of one's (own) shadow be
very timorous is from 1580s.


this (pron.)

Old English &thorn;is, neuter demonstrative pronoun and adjective (masc. &thorn;es, fem.
&thorn;eos), probably from a North Sea Germanic pronoun *tha-si-, formed by combining the base
*&thorn;a- (see that) with -s, which is probably identical with Old English se the (representing
here a specific thing), or with Old English seo, imperative of see (v.) to behold. Compare Old Saxon
these, Old Frisian this, Old Norse &thorn;essi, Middle Dutch dese, Dutch deze, Old High German
deser, German dieser.    Once fully inflected, with 10 distinct forms (see table below); the oblique
cases and other genders gradually fell away by 15c. The Old English plural was &thorn;&aelig;s
(nominative and accusative), which in Northern Middle English became thas, and in Midlands and
Southern England became thos. The Southern form began to be used late 13c. as the plural of that
(replacing Middle English tho, from Old English &thorn;a) and acquired an -e (apparently from the
influence of Middle English adjective plurals in -e; compare alle from all, summe from sum some),
emerging early 14c. as modern those.    About 1175 thes (probably a variant of Old English
&thorn;&aelig;s) began to be used as the plural of this, and by 1200 it had taken the form these,
the final -e acquired via the same mechanism that gave one to those.  <table width=90%
bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1><tr><td></td><td>Masc.</td><td>Fem
.</td><td>Neut.</td><td>Plural</td></tr><tr><td>Nom.</td><td>&thorn;es</td><td>&thorn;eos</td><td>&t
horn;is</td><td>&thorn;as</td></tr><tr><td>Acc.</td><td>&thorn;isne</td><td>&thorn;as</td><td>&thorn
;is</td><td>&thorn;as</td></tr><tr><td>Gen.</td><td>&thorn;isses</td><td>&thorn;isse</td><td>&thorn;
isses</td><td>&thorn;issa</td></tr><tr><td>Dat.</td><td>&thorn;issum</td><td>&thorn;isse</td><td>&th
orn;issum</td><td>&thorn;issum</td></tr><tr><td>Inst.</td><td>&thorn;ys</td><td>&thorn;isse</td><td>
&thorn;ys</td><td>&thorn;issum</td></tr></table>


night (n.)

Old English niht (West Saxon neaht, Anglian n&aelig;ht, neht) night, darkness; the vowel indicating
that the modern word derives from oblique cases (genitive nihte, dative niht), from Proto-Germanic
*nakht- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German naht, Old Frisian and Dutch nacht, German Nacht,
Old Norse natt, Gothic nahts).    The Germanic words are from PIE *nekwt- night (cognates: Greek
nuks a night, Latin nox, Old Irish nochd, Sanskrit naktam at night, Lithuanian naktis night, Old
Church Slavonic nosti, Russian noch', Welsh henoid tonight), according to Watkins, probably from a
verbal root *neg- to be dark, be night. For spelling with -gh- see fight.The fact that the Aryans
have a common name for night, but not for day (q.v.), is due to the fact that they reckoned by
nights. [Weekley]Compare German Weihnachten Christmas. In early times, the day was held to begin at
sunset, so Old English monanniht Monday night was the night before Monday, or what we would call
Sunday night.    To work nights preserves the Old English genitive of time. Night shift is attested
from 1710 in the sense of garment worn by a woman at night (see shift (n.1)); meaning gang of
workers employed after dark is from 1839. Night soil excrement (1770) is so called because it was
removed (from cesspools, etc.) after dark. Night train attested from 1838. Night life habitual
nocturnal carousing attested from 1852.


proud (adj.)

late Old English  prud, prute excellent, splendid; arrogant, haughty, probably from Old French prud,
oblique case of adjective prouz brave, valiant (11c., Modern French preux; compare prud'homme brave
man), from Late Latin prode advantageous, profitable (source also of Italian prode valiant), a back-
formation from Latin prodesse be useful, from pro- before, for, instead of (see pro-) + esse to be
(see essence). Also see pride (n.), prowess.    Meaning elated by some act, fact, or thing is from
mid-13c. To do (someone) proud attested by 1819. Related: Proudness. The -d- in prodesse is probably
due to the influence of forms like red-eo-, 'I go back,' red-imo- 'I buy back,' etc. [OED]. The Old
English form with -te probably is from or influenced by pride.    The sense of have a high opinion
of oneself, not found in Old French, might reflect the Anglo-Saxons' opinion of the Norman knights
who called themselves proud. Old Norse pru&eth;r, probably from the same French source, had only the
sense brave, gallant, magnificent, stately (compare Icelandic pru&eth;ur, Middle Swedish prudh,
Middle Danish prud). Likewise a group of pride words in the Romance languages -- such as French
orgueil, Italian orgoglio, Spanish orgullo -- are borrowings from Germanic, where they had positive
senses (Old High German urgol distinguished).    Most Indo-European languages use the same word for
proud in its good and bad senses, but in many the bad sense seems to be the earlier one. The usual
way to form the word is by some compound of terms for over or high and words for heart, mood,
thought, or appearance; such as Greek hyperephanos, literally over-appearing; Gothic
hauh&thorn;uhts, literally high-conscience. Old English had ofermodig over-moody (mood in Anglo-
Saxon was a much more potent word than presently) and heahheort high-heart. Words for proud in other
Indo-European languages sometimes reflect a physical sense of being swollen or puffed up; such as
Welsh balch, probably from a root meaning to swell, and Modern Greek kamari, from ancient Greek
kamarou furnish with a vault or arched cover, with a sense evolution via make an arch, to puff out
the chest, to be puffed up (compare English slang chesty).


