obscure (v.)

early 15c., to cover (something), cloud over, from obscure (adj.) or else from Middle French
obscurer, from Latin obscurare to make dark, darken, obscure, from obscurus. Related: Obscured;
obscuring.


obscure (adj.)

c.1400, dark, figuratively morally unenlightened; gloomy, from Old French obscur, oscur dark,
clouded, gloomy; dim, not clear (12c.) and directly from Latin obscurus dark, dusky, shady,
figuratively unknown; unintelligible; hard to discern; from insignificant ancestors, from ob over
(see ob-) + -scurus covered, from PIE *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see sky). Related: Obscurely.


sundog (n.)

mock sun, parhelion, 1650s; the second element is of obscure origin.


Kiwanis

businessmen's and professionals' society, formed in Detroit, Michigan, U.S., in 1915, the name is of
obscure meaning.


punnet (n.)

small, round chip basket, 1822, chiefly British, of obscure origin.


Illyria

ancient country on the northeast shore of the Adriatic in modern Croatia; the name is of obscure
origin.


chimichanga (n.)

deep-fried burrito, by 1964; the thing and the name for it seem to have originated somewhere along
the western U.S.-Mexico border (Arizona, Sonora), but beyond that all is obscure.


ginseng (n.)

1690s, from Chinese jen-shen. First element means man, but the meaning of the second is obscure.


goo (n.)

1903, American English, of obscure origin, probably a back-formation from gooey.


twaddle (n.)

silly talk, prosy nonsense, 1782, probably from twattle (1550s), of obscure origin.


shandy (n.)

mix of beer and fizzy lemonade, 1888, shortening of shandygaff (1853), of obscure origin.


Nick

masc. proper name, familiar form of Nicholas. As the devil by 1640s, but the reason for it is
obscure.


chouse (n.)

swindler, swindle, 1650s, said to be from Turkish chaush sergeant, herald, messenger, but the sense
connection is obscure.


dicky (n.)

detached shirt front, 1811; a small bird, 1851; diminutive of dick, but the applications are obscure
in both cases.


jejune (adj.)

1610s, dull in the mind, flat, insipid, from Latin ieiunus empty, dry, barren, literally fasting,
hungry, of obscure origin.


aroint (v.)

intransitive verb, c.1600, used by Shakespeare (only in imperative: begone!), obsolete and of
obscure origin. [T]he subject of numerous conjectures, none of which can be said to have even a
prima facie probability. [OED]


limp (adj.)

1706, flaccid, drooping, of obscure origin, perhaps related to limp (v.).


chipper (adj.)

1834, lively, nimble, American English, from northern British dialectal kipper nimble, frisky, the
origin of which is obscure.


sprig (n.)

shoot, twig or spray of a plant, shrub, c.1400, probably related to Old English spr&aelig;c shoot,
twig, of obscure origin.


fit (n.1)

1823, the fitting of one thing to another, later (1831) the way something fits. Originally an
adversary of equal power (mid-13c.), obscure, possibly from Old English fitt a conflict, a struggle
(see fit (n.2)).


lutz (n.)

type of skating jump, 1932, from the name Alois Lutz, an obscure Austrian skater of the 1920s [James
R. Hines, Historical Dictionary of Figure Skating, 2011], who is said to have first performed it in
1913.


dug (n.)

animal nipple, or, contemptuously, the human female breast, 1520s, origin obscure, related to
Swedish dagga, Danish d&aelig;gge to suckle.


tussock (n.)

1540s, tuft of hair, of uncertain origin; perhaps a diminutive of earlier tusk (1520s) with the same
meaning (and also of obscure origin). Meaning tuft of grass is first recorded c.1600.


crotchety (adj.)

1825, from crotchet whim or fancy + -y (2). But the sense evolution is obscure.


charley horse (n.)

1887, sporting slang, origin obscure, probably from somebody's long-forgotten lame racehorse.
Charley horse seems to have been a name for a horse or a type of horse (perhaps especially a lame
one) around that time.


mystical (adj.)

late 15c., enigmatic, obscure, symbolic, from mystic + -al (1). Related: Mystically. Meaning having
spiritual significance is from 1520s.


involute (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin involutus rolled up, intricate, obscure, past participle of involvere (see
involve).


Nazareth

town in Lower Galilee, childhood home of Jesus, from Hebrew Natzerath, of unknown origin, perhaps a
corruption of Gennesaret Sea of Galilee. An obscure village, not named in the Old Testament or
contemporary rabbinical texts.


marcasite (n.)

crystalized pyrite, early 15c., from Medieval Latin marchasita, of obscure origin, perhaps via
Spanish, probably from Arabic, though OED doubts this. Perhaps ultimately from Persian marquashisha
[Klein]. This name has been used for a number of substances but mainly for iron pyrites and
especially for the crystalline forms used in the 18th century for ornaments. [Flood]


hummock (n.)

knoll, hillock, 1550s, originally nautical, conical small hill on a seacoast, of obscure origin,
though second element is diminutive suffix -ock. In Florida, where the local form is hammock, it
means a clump of hardwood trees on a knoll in a swamp or on a key.


bilk (v.)

1650s, from or along with the noun (1630s), first used as a cribbage term; as a verb, to spoil
(someone's) score. Origin obscure, it was believed in 17c. to be a word signifying nothing; perhaps
it s a thinned form of balk to hinder. Meaning to defraud is first recorded 1670s. Related: Bilked;
bilking.


barrister (n.)

1540s, a student of law who has been called to the bar, from bar (n.3) in the legal sense + -ster.
Also see attorney. The second element is obscure.


contraption (n.)

1825, western England dialect, origin obscure, perhaps from con(trive) + trap, or deception.


obscuration (n.)

late 15c., from Latin obscurationem (nominative obscuratio) a darkening, obscuring, noun of action
from past participle stem of obscurare (see obscure (v.)).


skidoo (v.)

a vogue word of 1905, to leave in a hurry, perhaps a variant of skedaddle (q.v.). The association
with twenty-three is as old as the word, but the exact connection is obscure.    Then skidoo, little
girl, skidoo.  23 is the number for you.  [1906]


declension (n.)

mid-15c., ultimately from Latin declinationem (nominative declinatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of declinare (see decline (v.)); perhaps via French; the form is irregular, and its
history obscure [OED].


sheer (v.)

1620s, deviate from course (of a ship), of obscure origin, perhaps from Dutch scheren to move aside,
withdraw, depart, originally to separate (see shear (v.)). Related: Sheered; shearing. As a noun
from 1660s.


dodge (v.)

to move to and fro (especially in an effort to avoid something), 1560s, origin and sense evolution
obscure, perhaps akin to Scottish dodd to jog. Common from early 18c. in figurative sense of to
swindle, to play shifting tricks. Related: Dodged; dodging.


Nantucket

island off Massachusetts, early forms include Natocke, Nantican, Nautican; from an obscure southern
New England Algonquian word, perhaps meaning in the middle of waters. Related: Nantucketer.


moniker (n.)

1849, said to be originally a hobo term (but attested in London underclass from 1851), of uncertain
origin; perhaps from monk (monks and nuns take new names with their vows, and early 19c. British
tramps referred to themselves as in the monkery). Its origins seem always to have been obscure:
Sir H. Rawlinson can decipher cuneiform, but can he tell us why moniker--the word has a certain
Coptic or Egyptian twang--means a name painted on a trunk? [The Saturday Review, Dec. 19, 1857]


cloud (v.)

early 15c., overspread with clouds, cover, darken, from cloud (n.). From 1510s as to render dim or
obscure; 1590s as to overspread with gloom. Intransitive sense of become cloudy is from 1560s.
Related: Clouded; clouding.


Aesopic (adj.)

1927, in reference to Soviet literary censorship: obscure or ambiguous writing, often allegorical,
which disguises dissent, from Aesop + -ic. The term (Russian ezopovskii, 1875) arose under the Tsars
and the style was used by Russian communists. Once they took power the word was applied by them as a
charge against their own dissidents.


cheesed (adj.)

disgruntled, exasperated, 1941, British slang, origin obscure, connections uncertain. See cheese
(n.1), cheese (n.2), cheesy.


obscurant (adj.)

1878, from Latin obscurantem (nominative obscurans), present participle of obscurare (see obscure
(v.)).


dunderhead (n.)

1620s, from head (n.); the first element is obscure; perhaps from Middle Dutch doner, donder to
thunder (compare blunderbuss).


blimp (n.)

1916, of obscure origin, many claimants. One of the weird coinages of the airmen [Weekley]. Common
theory is that it is from designers' prototype nickname Type B-limp, in the sense of without
internal framework, as opposed to Type A-rigid; thus see limp (adj.).


aubain (n.)

1727, from French aubaine (12c.), of unknown origin, perhaps from Medieval Latin Albanus, but the
sense is obscure. Klein suggests Frankish *alibanus, literally belonging to another ban. A right of
French kings, whereby they claimed the property of every non-naturalized stranger who died in their
realm. Abolished 1819.


becloud (v.)

1590s, from be- + cloud. Figurative sense of to obscure is recorded from 1610s. Related: Beclouded;
beclouding.


dark (adj.)

Old English deorc dark, obscure, gloomy; sad, cheerless; sinister, wicked, from Proto-Germanic
*derkaz (cognates: Old High German tarchanjan to hide, conceal). Absence of light especially at
night is the original meaning. Application to colors is 16c. Theater slang for closed is from 1916.


love apple (n.)

tomato, 1570s, corresponding to French pomme d'amour, German liebesapfel, but the reason for the
term remains obscure. One guess is that it is a corruption of Italian pomo de'Mori or Spanish pome
dei Moro, literally Moorish apple.


