obsolete (adj.)

1570s, from Latin obsoletus grown old, worn out, past participle of obsolescere fall into disuse,
probably from ob away (see ob-) + an expanded form of solere to be used to, be accustomed (see
insolent).


swipe (n.)

1807, a driving stroke made with the arms in full swing, perhaps a dialectal variant of sweep (n.),
or in part from obsolete swip a stroke, blow (c.1200), from Proto-Germanic *swip-, related to Old
English swipu a stick, whip; chastisement. Other possible sources or influences are Middle English
swope to sweep with broad movements (in reference to brooms, swords, etc.), from Old English swapan;
obsolete swaip stroke, blow; or obsolete swape oar, pole.


obsolesce (v.)

1801, from Latin obsolescere to grow old, wear out, lose value, become obsolete, inchoative of
obsolere fall into disuse (see obsolete). Related: Obsolesced; obsolescing.


mob-cap (n.)

a type of woman's indoor cap, 1795 (as simply mob, 1748), from cap (n.) + obsolete mob (n.)
negligent attire (1660s), earlier a strumpet (earlier form mab, 1550s), related to obsolete verb mob
to tousle the hair, to dress untidily (1660s), and perhaps ultimately from mop, but influenced by
Mab as a female name. Dutch has a similar compound, mopmuts, but the relationship between it and the
English word is uncertain.


demented (adj.)

1640s, from obsolete dement drive mad.


alarum (n.)

obsolete and poetic spelling of alarm (n.).


badder (adj.)

obsolete or colloquial comparative of bad, common 14c.-18c.


baddest (adj.)

obsolete or colloquial superlative of bad, common 14c.-18c.


swang

obsolete past tense of swing (v.).


bize

obsolete form of bice.


burgeois

obsolete form of bourgeois.


cameleon (n.)

obsolete form of chameleon.


campagne (n.)

obsolete form of campaign.


cannister (n.)

obsolete form of canister.


chamomile (n.)

obsolete form of camomile.


chear

obsolete spelling of cheer (n.).


commen

obsolete spelling of common.


confit

obsolete form of comfit.


coronel (n.)

obsolete form of colonel.


cort (n.)

obsolete form of court.


destin (v.)

obsolete form of destine (q.v.).


fantom (n.)

obsolete form of phantom.


growse

obsolete spelling of grouse.


hir (pron.)

Middle English obsolete form of her.


inhance (v.)

obsolete form of enhance.


intail (v.)

obsolete form of entail.


insue (v.)

obsolete form of ensue.


intice (v.)

obsolete spelling of entice.


tabacco (n.)

obsolete form of tobacco.


wae (n.)

obsolete or dialectal Scottish form of woe.


quillet (n.)

a quibble, obsolete, prob. a corruption of L. quidlibet 'what you please' [Klein].


terrine (n.)

earthenware dish, 1706, obsolete original form of tureen.


marry (interj.)

a common oath in the Middle Ages, mid-14c., now obsolete, a corruption of the name of the Virgin
Mary.


oliphant (n.)

obsolete form of elephant, c.1200; also used in Middle English with sense ivory horn.


precipitious (adj.)

1610s, now obsolete, but prefered by purists for the sense high and steep over the later formation
precipitous.


pash (n.)

head, 1610s, now obsolete or dialectal, of uncertain origin. In 20c. the word was used as an
colloquial shortening of passion.


aroint (v.)

intransitive verb, c.1600, used by Shakespeare (only in imperative: begone!), obsolete and of
obscure origin. [T]he subject of numerous conjectures, none of which can be said to have even a
prima facie probability. [OED]


grok (v.)

to understand empathically, 1961, arbitrary formation by U.S. science fiction writer Robert A.
Heinlein (1907-1988) in his book Stranger in a Strange Land. In popular use 1960s; perhaps obsolete
now except in internet technology circles.


fiddle-faddle

1570s (n.); 1630s (v.), apparently a reduplication of obsolete faddle to trifle.


geezer (n.)

1885, variant of obsolete Cockney guiser mummer (late 15c.; see guise).


blowzy (adj.)

c.1770, from obsolete blouze (1570s), wench, beggar's trull, perhaps originally a cant term, + -y
(2).


conject (v.)

late 14c., obsolete verb replaced by conjecture (v.). Also in form congette.


cometh (v.)

obsolete or poetic 2nd and 3rd person singular of come, from Old English cyme&eth;.


contex (v.)

obsolete 16c.-17c. verb from Latin contexere to weave together (see context).


batting (n.)

sheets of cotton fiber, 1875, variant of obsolete bat felted mass of fur, wool, etc., from bat
(n.1), on notion of beaten fabric.


superannuate (v.)

1640s, render obsolete, back-formation from superannuated. Meaning impair or disqualify by old age
is from 1690s. Related: Superannuating.


shock (v.1)

to come into violent contact, strike against suddenly and violently, 1570s, now archaic or obsolete,
from shock (n.1). Meaning to give (something) an electric shock is from 1746; sense of to offend,
displease is first recorded 1690s.


Apollo

Olympian deity, god of music, poetry, medicine, etc., later identified with Helios, the sun god; the
name is a Latin form of Greek Apollon, said to be perhaps related to an obsolete Greek verb meaning
to drive away (evil, etc.) [Klein, citing Usener].


purge (n.)

1560s, that which purges, from purge (v.). Meaning a purgative, an act of purging is from 1590s.
Political sense from 1730. Earliest sense in English was the now-obsolete one examination in a legal
court (mid-15c.).


heretofore

c.1200, from here + obsolete Old English toforan.


