obstinate (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin obstinatus resolute, resolved, determined, inflexible, stubborn, past
participle of obstinare persist, stand stubbornly, set one's mind on, from ob by (see ob-) + stinare
(related to stare stand) from PIE *ste-no-, from root *sta- to stand (see stet). Related:
Obstinately.


recusant (adj.)

obstinate in refusal, 1550s, from Latin recusantem (nominative recusans) refusing to obey, present
participle of recusare make an objection against; decline, refuse, reject; be reluctant to (see
recuse). The noun meaning one obstinate in refusing is from 1610s.


pigheaded (adj.)

also pig-headed; 1756, having a head resembling a pig; 1788 as obstinate; see pig (n.) + head (n.).
Usually, but not always, figurative.    A pig-headed man must be one, who, like a driven pig, always
will do exactly the opposite to what other people--in the case of the pig his luckless driver--wish
him to do, that is to say he is an obstinate man. [The Sedberghian, June 1882]


refractory (adj.)

stubborn, obstinate, perverse, 1610s (earlier refractorious, 1550s, refractary, c.1600), from Latin
refractarius obstinate, stubborn, from past participle stem of refringere (see refraction). Related:
Refractorily; refractoriness.


opinionated (adj.)

obstinate, c.1600, past participle adjective from opinionate.


ostinato

1876, from Italian ostinato, literally obstinate, persistent.


asinine (adj.)

c.1600, obstinate, stupid, from Latin asininus stupid, literally like an ass, from asinus ass, also
dolt, blockhead (see ass (n.1)). The literal sense in English is recorded from 1620s.


obstinacy (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin obstinatia, from obstinatus (see obstinate).


obstinance (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin obstinantia, from obstinantem, from obstinatus resolved, determined,
resolute (see obstinate).


willful (adj.)

also wilful, c.1200, strong-willed, usually in a bad sense, obstinate, unreasonable, from will (n.)
+ -ful. From late 14c. as eager (to do something). Mid-14c., of actions, done on purpose,
intentional, due to one's own will. Related: Willfullness.


contumacious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin contumaci-, stem of contumax haughty, insolent, obstinate (see contumely) + -ous.


unbend (v.)

mid-13c., relax a bow by unstringing it, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + bend (v.). Intransitive
sense from 1746. Figurative meaning to become genial, relax (1748) has a sense opposite to that of
unbending inflexible, obstinate (1680s), which does not derive from the bow-stringing image.


bull-headed (adj.)

also bullheaded, obstinate, 1818, from bull (n.1) + head (n.).


contentious (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle French contentieux, from Latin contentiosus obstinate, quarrelsome, from
contentionem (see contend). Related: Contentiously; contentiousness.


stiff-necked (adj.)

stubborn, obstinate, 1520s (in Tindale's rendition of Acts vii:51), from stiff (adj.) + neck (n.);
translating Latin dura cervice in Vulgate, from Greek sklero trachelos, a literal translation from
Hebrew qesheh 'oref.


rebel (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French rebelle stubborn, obstinate, rebellious (12c.) and directly from Latin
rebellis insurgent, rebellious, from rebellare to rebel, revolt, from re- opposite, against, or
perhaps again (see re-) + bellare wage war, from bellum war.


pertinacity (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French pertinacit&eacute; (early 15c.), from Old French pertinace obstinate,
stubborn, from Latin pertinacem (nominative pertinax) very firm, tenacious, steadfast, persevering,
from per- very (see per) + tenax (see tenacious). It drove out earlier pertinacy (late 14c.).


testy (adj.)

early 15c., impetuous, rash, altered from Middle English testif headstrong (late 14c.), from Anglo-
French testif, Old French testu (Modern French t&#234;tu) stubborn, headstrong, obstinate, literally
heady, from teste head (see tete). Meaning easily irritated, irascible is first recorded 1520s.
Related: Testily; testiness.


stern (adj.)

Old English styrne severe, strict, grave, hard, cruel, from Proto-Germanic *sternijaz (cognates:
Middle High German sterre, German starr stiff, st&ouml;rrig obstinate; Gothic andstaurran to be
stiff; Old Norse stara; Old English starian to look or gaze upon), from PIE root *ster- (1) rigid,
stiff (see stereo-). Related: Sternly; sternness.


perverse (adj.)

mid-14c., wicked, from Old French pervers unnatural, degenerate; perverse, contrary (12c.) and
directly from Latin perversus turned away, contrary, askew, figuratively, turned away from what is
right, wrong, malicious, spiteful, past participle of pervertere to corrupt (see pervert (v.)). The
Latin word is glossed in Old English by forcerred, from past participle of forcyrran to avoid, from
cierran to turn, return. Meaning wrong, not in accord with what is accepted is from 1560s; sense of
obstinate, stubborn is from 1570s. It keeps the non-sexual senses of pervert (v.) and allows the
psychological ones to go with perverted. Related: Perversely; perverseness.


mule (n.1)

offspring of donkey and horse, from Old English mul, Old French mul mule, hinny (12c., fem. mule),
both from Latin mulus (fem. mula) a mule, probably from a pre-Latin Mediterranean language.The mule
combines the strength of the horse with the endurance and surefootedness of the ass, and is
extensively bred for certain employments for which it is more suited than either; it is ordinarily
incapable of procreation. With no good grounds, the mule is a proverbial type of obstinacy.
[OED]Properly, the offspring of a he-ass and a mare; that of a she-ass and a stallion is technically
a hinny. Used allusively of hybrids and things of mixed nature. As a type of spinning machine,
attested from 1797 (so called because a hybrid of distinct warp and woof machines). Meaning
obstinate, stupid, or stubborn person is from 1470s; that of narcotics smuggler or courier first
attested 1935.


stark (adj.)

Old English stearc stiff, strong, rigid, obstinate; stern, severe, hard; harsh, rough, violent, from
Proto-Germanic *starkaz (cognates: Old Norse sterkr, Danish, Old Frisian sterk, Middle Dutch starc,
Old High German starah, German stark, Gothic *starks), from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid (see
stereo-). From the same root as stare (v.).    Meaning utter, sheer, complete first recorded c.1400,
perhaps from influence of common phrase stark dead (late 14c.), with stark mistaken as an intensive
adjective. Sense of bare, barren is from 1833. As an adverb from c.1200. Related: Starkly;
starkness. Stark-raving (adj.) is from 1640s; earlier stark-staring 1530s.


stare (v.)

Old English starian to stare, gaze, look fixedly at, from Proto-Germanic *staren be rigid (cognates:
Old Norse stara, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch staren, Old High German staren, German starren
to stare at; German starren to stiffen, starr stiff; Old Norse storr proud; Old High German storren
to stand out, project; Gothic andstaurran to be obstinate), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm,
stiff, rigid (see stereo- and compare torpor).    Not originally implying rudeness. To stare
(someone) down is from 1848. Related: Stared; staring.


sturdy (adj.)

c.1300, hard to manage, reckless, violent, from Old French estordi (11c., Modern French
&#233;tourdi) violent, originally dazed, past participle of estordiir to daze, stun, stupefy, from
Vulgar Latin *exturdire, which some presume to be from Latin intensive prefix ex- + turdus thrush.
Barnhart suggests the notion is of thrushes eating grape remnants at wineries and behaving as if
drunk (Italian tordo thrush also means simpleton, and French has the expression so&#251;l comme une
grive drunk as a thrush). OED, however, regards all this as open to grave objection. Century
Dictionary compares Latin torpidus dull.    Sense of solidly built, strong and hardy first recorded
late 14c. Related: Sturdily; sturdiness. Sturdy-boots obstinate person is from 1762; a sturdy beggar
in old language was one capable of work (c.1400).


cat (n.)

Old English catt (c.700), from West Germanic (c.400-450), from Proto-Germanic *kattuz (cognates: Old
Frisian katte, Old Norse k&ouml;ttr, Dutch kat, Old High German kazza, German Katze), from Late
Latin cattus.    The near-universal European word now, it appeared in Europe as Latin catta
(Martial, c.75 C.E.), Byzantine Greek katta (c.350) and was in general use on the continent by
c.700, replacing Latin feles. Probably ultimately Afro-Asiatic (compare Nubian kadis, Berber
kadiska, both meaning cat). Arabic qitt tomcat may be from the same source. Cats were domestic in
Egypt from c.2000 B.C.E., but not a familiar household animal to classical Greeks and Romans. The
nine lives have been proverbial since at least 1560s.    The Late Latin word also is the source of
Old Irish and Gaelic cat, Welsh kath, Breton kaz, Italian gatto, Spanish gato, French chat (12c.).
Independent, but ultimately from the same source are words in the Slavic group: Old Church Slavonic
kotuka, kotel'a, Bulgarian kotka, Russian ko&#353;ka, Polish kot, along with Lithuanian kate and
non-Indo-European Finnish katti, which is from Lithuanian.    Extended to lions, tigers, etc.
c.1600. As a term of contempt for a woman, from early 13c. Slang sense of prostitute is from at
least c.1400. Slang sense of fellow, guy, is from 1920, originally in U.S. Black English; narrower
sense of jazz enthusiast is recorded from 1931.   Cat's paw (1769, but cat's foot in the same sense,
1590s) refers to old folk tale in which the monkey tricks the cat into pawing chestnuts from a fire;
the monkey gets the nuts, the cat gets a burnt paw. Cat bath hurried or partial cleaning is from
1953. Cat burglar is from 1907, so called for stealth. Cat-witted small-minded, obstinate, and
spiteful (1670s) deserved to survive. For Cat's meow, cat's pajamas, see bee's knees.


