oil (n.)

late 12c., olive oil, from Anglo-French and Old North French olie, from Old French oile, uile oil
(12c., Modern French huile), from Latin oleum oil, olive oil (source of Spanish, Italian olio), from
Greek elaion olive tree, from elaia (see olive). Old English &aelig;le, Dutch olie, German &Ouml;l,
etc. all are from Latin. It meant olive oil exclusively till c.1300, when meaning began to be
extended to any fatty, greasy substance. Use for petroleum first recorded 1520s, but not common
until 19c. The artist's oils (1660s), short for oil-color (1530s), are paints made by grinding
pigment in oil.


oil (v.)

mid-15c., from oil (n.). Related: Oiled; oiling. An Old English verb in this sense was besmyrian.


oilcloth (n.)

1690s, cotton or a similar fabric waterproofed with oil, from oil (n.) + cloth. In reference to an
oil-treated canvas used as a cheap floor covering, 1796.


oily (adj.)

1520s, from oil (n.) +  -y (2). Figurative meaning smooth, unctuous is from 1590s. Related:
Oiliness.


aerofoil (n.)

1907, from aero- + foil (n.).


airfoil (n.)

1922, U.S. form of aerofoil.


boil (v.)

early 13c., from Old French bolir boil, bubble up, ferment, gush (12c., Modern French bouillir),
from Latin bullire to bubble, seethe, from PIE base *beu- to swell (see bull (n.2)). The native word
is seethe. Figurative sense of to agitate the feelings is from 1640s.I am impatient, and my blood
boyls high. [Thomas Otway, Alcibiades, 1675]  Related: Boiled; boiling. Boiling point is recorded
from 1773.


boil (n.)

hard tumor, altered from Middle English bile (Kentish bele), perhaps by association with the verb;
from Old English byl, byle boil, carbuncle, from West Germanic *buljon- swelling (cognates: Old
Frisian bele, Old High German bulia, German Beule). Perhaps ultimately from PIE root *bhel- (2) to
swell (see bole), or from *beu- to grow, swell (see bull (n.2); also compare boast (n.)). Compare
Old Irish bolach pustule, Gothic ufbauljan to puff up, Icelandic beyla hump.


boiler (n.)

1540s, agent noun from boil (v.). Meaning vessel for boiling is from 1725; steam engine sense is
from 1757.


boilermaker (n.)

a maker of boilers for engines, 1814, from boiler (n.) + maker. Meaning shot of whiskey with a glass
of beer is short for boilermaker's delight (1910), strong cheap whiskey, so called in jest from the
notion that it would clean the scales from the interior of a boiler.


boilerplate (n.)

newspaper (and now information technology) slang for unit of writing that can be used over and over
without change, 1893, from a literal meaning (1840) metal rolled in large, flat plates for use in
making steam boilers. The connecting notion is probably of sturdiness or reusability. From 1890s to
1950s, publicity items were cast or stamped in metal ready for the printing press and distributed to
newspapers as filler. The largest supplier was Western Newspaper Union.


broil (v.1)

to cook, late 14c. (earlier to burn, mid-14c.), from Old French bruller to broil, roast (Modern
French br&#251;ler), earlier brusler to burn (11c.), which, with Italian bruciare, is of uncertain
and much-disputed origin.    Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *brodum broth, borrowed from Germanic and
ultimately related to brew (v.). Gamillscheg proposes it to be from Latin ustulare to scorch, singe
(from ustus, past participle of urere to burn) and altered by influence of Germanic burn words
beginning in br-. Related: Broiled; broiling.


broil (v.2)

early 15c., to quarrel, brawl, also mix up, present in disorder, from Anglo-French broiller mix up,
confuse, Old French brooillier to mix, mingle, figuratively to have sexual intercourse (13c., Modern
French brouiller), perhaps from breu, bro stock, broth, brew, from Frankish or another Germanic
source (compare Old High German brod broth) akin to broth (see brew (v.)); also compare imbroglio.


broiler (n.)

late 14c., grill or gridiron used in broiling, agent noun from broil (v.1). From c.1300 as a
surname, perhaps meaning cook who specializes in broiling. Meaning chicken for broiling is from
1876.


cinquefoil (n.)

from Latin quinquefolium, from quinque (see five) + folium (see folio).


coil (v.)

to wind, 1610s, from Middle French coillir to gather, pick, from Latin colligere to gather together
(see collect). Meaning specialized perhaps in nautical usage. Related: Coiled; coiling.


coil (n.)

1620s, from coil (v.). Related: Coils.


despoil (v.)

c.1300, from Old French despoillier (12c., Modern French d&eacute;pouiller) to strip, rob, deprive
of, steal, borrow, from Latin despoliare to rob, despoil, plunder, from de- entirely (see de-) +
spoliare to strip of clothing, rob, from spolium armor, booty (see spoil (v.)). Related: Despoiled;
despoiling.


doily (n.)

1714, short for doily-napkin (1711), from doily thin, woolen fabric; supposedly from Doiley, surname
of a 17c.-early 18c. dry-goods dealer on London's Strand. Doily earlier meant genteel, affordable
woolens (1670s), evidently from the same source. The surname is d'Ouilly, from one of several places
called Ouilly in Normandy.


embroil (v.)

c.1600, throw into disorder, from French embrouillier (cognate of Italian imbrogliare), from en- in
(see en- (1)) + brouiller confuse, from Old French brooillier (see broil (v.2)). Sense of involve in
a quarrel is first attested c.1610. Related: Embroiled; embroiling.


foil (v.)

c.1300, foilen to spoil a trace or scent by running over it, irregularly from Old French fouler
trample, from Vulgar Latin *fullare to clean cloth (by treading on it), from Latin fullo one who
cleans cloth, fuller, of unknown origin.    Hence, to overthrow, defeat (1540s). Sense of frustrate
the efforts of first recorded 1560s. Related: Foiled; foiling. Foiled again! as a cry of defeat and
dismay is from at least 1847.


foil (n.)

thin sheet of metal, early 14c., from Old French fueille leaf, from Latin folia leaves, plural
(mistaken for fem. singular) of folium leaf (see folio).    The sense of one who enhances another by
contrast (1580s) is from the practice of backing a gem with metal foil to make it shine more
brilliantly. The meaning light sword used in fencing (1590s) could be from this sense, or from foil
(v.). The modern sense of metallic food wrap is from 1946.


hard-boiled (adj.)

also hardboiled, 1723 in reference to eggs, from hard + boiled. In transferred sense severe, tough,
from 1886.


hydrofoil (n.)

1959, boat that travels through water on wings, short for hydrofoil boat, originally the name of the
wings themselves (1920); formed in English from hydro- + foil (n.).


moil (v.)

to labour in the mire [Johnson], c.1400, from Old French moillier to wet, moisten (12c., Modern
French mouiller), from Vulgar Latin *molliare, from Latin mollis soft, from PIE *mel- soft  (see
mild). Related: Moiled; moiling.


moil (n.)

toil, labor, 1612, from moil (v.).


parboil (v.)

late 14c., to boil partially; mid-15c., to boil thoroughly, from Old French parboillir to boil
thoroughly, from Medieval Latin perbullire to boil thoroughly, from Latin per through, thoroughly +
bullire to boil (see boil (v.)). Main modern meaning boil partially is by mistaken association of
the prefix with part. Related: Parboiled; parboiling.


poilu (n.)

French private soldier, 1914, from French poilu, literally hairy, from poil hair, not of the head,
but of beards, animal coats, etc., from Latin pilus (see pile (n.3)). In 19c. French the adjective
had a secondary sense of strong, brave, courageous (Balzac).


potboiler (n.)

also pot-boiler, 1864 in the figurative literary sense, from pot (n.1) + agent noun from boil (v.).
The notion is of something one writes solely to put food on the table.


quatrefoil (n.)

flower with four leaves, early 15c., from Old French quatrefoil, from quatre four (see four) + foil
leaf (see foil (n.)).


recoil (n.)

c.1300, retreat, from Old French recul recoil, backward movement, retreat, from reculer (see recoil
(v.)). Meaning back-kick of a firearm is from 1570s.


recoil (v.)

early 13c. (transitive) force back, drive back, from Old French reculer to go back, give way,
recede, retreat (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *reculare, from Latin re- back (see re-) + culus backside,
bottom, fundament. Meaning shrink back, retreat is first recorded c.1300; and that of spring back
(as a gun) in 1520s. Related: Recoiled; recoiling.


roil (v.)

1580s, of uncertain origin, probably from Middle French rouiller to rust, make muddy, from Old
French roil mud, muck, rust (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *robicula, from Latin robigo rust (see
robust). An earlier borrowing of the French verb is Middle English roil to roam or rove about (early
14c.). Related: Roiled; roiling.


soil (v.)

early 13c., to defile or pollute with sin, from Old French soillier to splatter with mud, to foul or
make dirty, originally to wallow (12c., Modern French souillier), from souil tub, wild boar's
wallow, pigsty, which is from either Latin solium tub for bathing; seat, or Latin suculus little
pig, from sus pig. Literal meaning to make dirty, begrime is attested from c.1300 in English.
Related: Soiled; soiling.


soil (n.1)

c.1300, originally land, area, place, from Anglo-French soil piece of ground, place (13c.), from an
merger or confusion of Old French sol bottom, ground, soil (12c., from Latin solum soil, ground; see
sole (n.1)), Old French soeul, sueil threshold, area, place (from Latin solium seat), and Old French
soil, soille a miry place, from soillier (see soil (v.)).    Meaning place of one's nativity is from
c.1400. Meaning mould, earth, dirt (especially that which plants grow in) is attested from mid-15c.


soil (n.2)

filth, dirt, refuse matter, sewage, liquid likely to contain excrement, c.1600, earlier miry or
muddy place (early 15c.), from Old French soille miry place, from soillier (v.) to make dirty, and
in part a native formation from soil (v.). This is the sense in archaic night-soil.


spoil (v.)

c.1300, to strip (someone) of clothes, strip a slain enemy, from Old French espillier to strip,
plunder, pillage, from Latin spoliare to strip, uncover, lay bare; strip of clothing, rob, plunder,
pillage, from spolia, plural of spolium arms taken from an enemy, booty; originally skin stripped
from a killed animal, from PIE *spol-yo-, perhaps from root *spel- to split, to break off (see spill
(v.)).    From late 14c. in English as strip with violence, rob, pillage, plunder, dispossess;
impoverish with excessive taxation. Used c.1400 as the verb to describe Christ's harrowing of Hell.
Sense of destroy, ruin, damage so as to render useless is from 1560s; that of to over-indulge (a
child, etc.) is from 1640s (implied in spoiled). Intransitive sense of become tainted, go bad, lose
freshness is from 1690s. To be spoiling for (a fight, etc.) is from 1865, from notion that one will
spoil if he doesn't get it.


spoil (n.)

booty, goods captured in time of war, mid-14c., spoils (collective singular), from spoil (v.) or
else from Old French espoille booty, spoil, from the verb in French, and in part from Latin spolium.
Also from the Latin noun are Spanish espolio, Italian spoglio.    Transferred sense of that which
has been acquired by special effort is from 1750. Spoils has stood cynically for public offices,
etc. aince at least 1770. Spoils system in U.S. politics attested by 1839, commonly associated with
the administration of President Andrew Jackson, on the notion of to the victor belongs the spoils.


spoil-sport (n.)

1786, from verbal phrase (attested by 1711); see spoil (v.) + sport (n.).


spoiled (adj.)

over-indulged, 1640s, past participle adjective from spoil (v.).


spoiler (n.)

1530s, one who robs or plunders, agent noun from spoil (v.). Meaning one who mars another's chance
at victory is attested from 1950 in U.S. politics, perhaps from boxing. Aeronautics sense is from
1928, because the flap thwarts the lift on the plane; transferred to structures serving a similar
purpose on speedboats (1957) and motor vehicles (1963). Meaning information about the plot of a
movie, etc., which might 'spoil' it for one who has not seen it is attested by 1982.


subsoil (n.)

1799, from sub- + soil (n.).


tinfoil (n.)

also tin-foil, late 15c., from tin (n.) + foil (n.).


toil (v.)

early 14c., toilen, pull at, tug, from Anglo-French toiller, Old French toellier pull or drag about
(see toil (n.1)). Intransitive meaning struggle, work hard, labor for considerable time is from late
14c., perhaps by influence of till (v.). Related: Toiled; toiling.


toil (n.1)

hard work, c.1300, originally turmoil, contention, dispute, from Anglo-French toil (13c.), from
toiler agitate, stir up, entangle, writhe about, from Old French toeillier drag about, make dirty
(12c.), usually said to be from Latin tudiculare crush with a small hammer, from tudicula mill for
crushing olives, instrument for crushing, from Latin tudes hammer, from PIE *tud-, variant of
*(s)teu- to push, stroke, knock, beat (see obtuse). Sense of hard work, labor (1590s) is from the
related verb (see toil (v.)).


toil (n.2)

net, snare, 1520s, from Middle French toile hunting net, cloth, web (compare toile d'araign&eacute;e
cobweb), from Old French toile cloth (11c.), from Latin tela web, net, warp of a fabric, from PIE
*teks- to weave (see texture (n.)). Now used largely in plural (as in caught in the toils of the
law).


toile (n.)

type of heavy, coarse cloth, c.1400, from Old French toile linen cloth, canvas (see toil (n.2)). As
a type of dress material, from 1794.


toilet (n.)

1530s, cover or bag for clothes, from Middle French toilette a cloth, bag for clothes, diminutive of
toile cloth, net (see toil (n.2)). Sense evolution in English (mostly following French uses) is to
act or process of dressing (1680s); then a dressing room (1819), especially one with a lavatory
attached; then lavatory or porcelain plumbing fixture (1895), an American euphemistic use. Toilet
paper is attested from 1884 (the Middle English equivalent was arse-wisp). Toilet training is
recorded from 1940.


toiletries (n.)

odds and ends used in grooming, 1924, from toiletry (1892); see toilet + -ry.


toilsome (adj.)

1580s, from toil (v.) + -some (1). An earlier word was toilous (early 15c.). The opposite, toilless
(c.1600) is much less common.


