heortology (n.)

study of religious feasts and calendars, 1900, from Greek heorte feast + -ology. The immediate
source of the English word is in French or German.


neonatology (n.)

branch of medicine concerned with newborn infants, 1960, from neonate recently born infant + -ology.


histology (n.)

study of organic tissues, 1847, from histo- + -ology.


climatology (n.)

scientific study of climates, 1803, from climate + -ology.


escapologist (n.)

performer who specializes in getting out of confinement, 1926; see escape + -ology.


primatology (n.)

study of Primates, 1941, from primate (n.) + -ology.


reflexology (n.)

1927, as a psychological theory, from German reflexologie (1912); see reflex + -ology. As a foot
massage technique, first recorded 1976.


audiology (n.)

science of hearing and treatment of deafness, 1946, from audio- + -ology. Related: Audiologist.


ichthyology (n.)

1640s, Modern Latin, from Greek ikhthys fish + -ology. Related: Ichthyologist.


awning (n.)

1624, origin uncertain (first recorded use is by Capt. John Smith), perhaps from Middle French
auvans, plural of auvent a sloping roof, itself of doubtful etym[ology] (OED). A nautical term only
until sense of cover for windows or porch emerged 1852.


criminology (n.)

1890, from Latin stem of criminal + -ology. Criminologist is recorded from 1857.


-ologist

word-forming element; see -ology + -ist.


virology (n.)

1935, from comb. form of virus + -ology. Related: Virological.


arachnologist (n.)

student of spiders, 1806; see arachnid + -ology. Related: Arachnology.


anaesthesiology (n.)

1908, from anaesthesia + -ology.    Anesthesiology. This is the new term adopted by the University
of Illinois defining the science that treats of the means and methods of producing in man or animal
various degrees of insensibility with or without hypnosis. [Medical Herald, January, 1912]


petrology (n.)

1811 (erroneously as petralogy), from petro- (1) rock + -ology.


cryptology (n.)

1640s, from crypto- + -ology.


dendrology (n.)

1708, from dendro- + -ology.


futurology (n.)

1946, from future + -ology.


demonology (n.)

1590s; see demon + -ology.


hygrology (n.)

1790; see hygro- + -ology.


endocrinology (n.)

1919, from endocrine + -ology. Related: Endocrinologist.


nephrology (n.)

1839, from nephro- + -ology. Related: Nephrologist.


Egyptology (n.)

1859, from Egypt + -ology. Related: Egyptologist.


Assyriology (n.)

1846, from Assyria + -ology. Related: Assyriologist.


irenology (n.)

study of peace, 1974, from Greek eirene peace + -ology. Related: Irenological.


kymatology (n.)

science of waves, from Greek kyma (genitive kymatos) wave + -ology. Related: Kymatological.


aristology (n.)

science of dining, 1835, from Greek ariston breakfast (see ere; so called from being the early meal
of the day) + -ology. Related: Aristological.


sexology (n.)

1902, from sex (n.) + -ology. Related: Sexologist.


cosmetology (n.)

1855, from French cosm&eacute;tologie, from Latinized form of Greek kosmetos (see cosmetic) +
-ology.


martyrology (n.)

1590s, a native formation from martyr (n.) + -ology, or else from Church Latin martyrologium, from
Ecclesiastical Greek martyrologicon.


hamartiology (n.)

that part of theology which deals with sin, 1875, from Greek hamartia sin (see hamartia) + -ology.


methodology (n.)

1800, from French m&eacute;thodologie or directly from Modern Latin methodologia; see method +
-ology.


symbology (n.)

1840, contracted from symbolology, from comb. form of Greek symbolon token (see symbol) + -ology.


immunology (n.)

by 1906, a hybrid from comb. form of immune + -ology. Related: Immunological; immunologist.


vexillology (n.)

study of flags, 1959, from Latin vexillum flag, military ensign, banner (from velum a sail, curtain,
veil; see veil (n.)) + -ology.


radiology (n.)

1900, medical use of X-rays, later extended to scientific study of radiation, from radio-, comb.
form of radiation, + Greek-based scientific suffix -ology. Related: Radiological.


-ology

word-forming element indicating branch of knowledge, science, now the usual form of -logy.
Originally used c.1800 in nonce formations (commonsensology, etc.), it gained legitimacy by
influence of the proper formation in geology, mythology, etc., where the -o- is a stem vowel in the
previous element.


rheumatology (n.)

1949, from Greek rheumat-, stem of rheuma discharge (see rheum) + -ology. Related: Rheumatologist.


bacteriology (n.)

1884, from German; see bacteria + -ology. Related: Bacteriological (1886). Bacteriological warfare
is from 1924.


gemmologist (n.)

1931, from gemmology (1811), from Latin gemma (see gem) + -ology.


semiology (n.)

1690s, sign language, from Greek semeion a sign, mark, token, from sema (compare semiotic) + -ology.
As branch of medical science concerned with symptoms, 1839; as logical theory of signs from 1923.
Related: Semiological.


soteriology (n.)

1847, in reference to health; 1864 in reference to salvation, from German soteriologie, from Greek
soteria preservation, salvation, from soizein save, preserve, related to sos safe, healthy, of
uncertain origin. With -ology.


deontology (n.)

science of moral duty, 1826, from Greek deont-, comb. form of deon that which is binding, duty,
neuter present participle of dei is binding; + -ology. Said to have been coined by Bentham. Related:
Deontological.


kinesiology (n.)

1894, from kinesi-, comb. form of Greek kinesis movement, motion (see cite) + -ology. Related:
Kinesiological; kinesiologically.


serology (n.)

1907, from sero-, comb. form of serum, + -ology. Related: Serological; serologist.


musicology (n.)

the study of the science of music, 1909, from music + -ology. Related: Musicological; musicologist.


eschatology (n.)

1844, from Greek eskhatos last, furthest, uttermost, extreme, most remote (from ex out of, Boeotian
es-; see ex-) + -ology. Originally in theology, the study of the four last things: death, judgment,
heaven, hell. Related: Eschatological; eschatologically.


glaciology (n.)

1856, from Latin glacies ice (see glacial) + -ology. Related: Glaciological; glaciologist.


hagiology (n.)

study of saints' lives, 1807, from Greek hagios holy, devoted to the gods + -ology. First element
perhaps from PIE *yag- to worship, reverence, and cognate with Greek agnos chaste, Sanskrit yajati
reveres (a god) with sacrifices, worships, Old Persian ayadana temple. Related: Hagiologist (1805).


