on (prep.)

Old English on, unstressed variant of an in, on, into, from Proto-Germanic *ana on (cognates: Dutch
aan, German an, Gothic ana on, upon), from PIE root *an- on (cognates: Avestan ana on, Greek ana on,
upon, Latin an-, Old Church Slavonic na, Lithuanian nuo down from). Also used in Old English in many
places where we would now use in. From 16c.-18c. (and still in northern England dialect) often
reduced to o'. Phrase on to aware is from 1877. On time is from 1890.


on-looker (n.)

spectator, c.1600, from on + agent noun from look (v.).


on-site (adj.)

also onsite, 1959, from on + site. Originally in reference to Cold War military inspections.


onager (n.)

Asiatic wild ass, mid-14c., from Latin onager, from Greek onagros, from onos ass (related to Latin
asinus, but the ultimate source is unknown) + agrios wild, literally living in the fields, from
agros field (see acre).


onanism (n.)

masturbation, also coitus interruptus, 1727, from Onan, son of Judah (Gen. xxxviii:9), who spilled
his seed on the ground rather than impregnate his dead brother's wife: And Onan knew that the seed
should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled it
on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother. The moral of this verse was redirected
by those who sought to suppress masturbation.


onboard (adj.)

1966 as one word, from on + board (n.2).


once (adv.)

c.1200, anes, from ane one (see one ) + adverbial genitive. Replaced Old English &aelig;ne. Spelling
changed as pronunciation shifted from two syllables to one after c.1300. Pronunciation change to
wuns parallels that of one. As an emphatic, meaning once and for all, it is attested from c.1300,
but this now is regarded as a Pennsylvania German dialect formation. Meaning in a past time (but not
necessarily just one time) is from mid-13c.   Once upon a time as the beginning of a story is
recorded from 1590s. At once originally (early 13c.) meant simultaneously, later in one company
(c.1300), and preserved the sense of one in the word; the phrase typically appeared as one word,
atones; the modern meaning immediately is attested from 1530s.


once-over (n.)

inspection, 1913, from once + over.


onco-

word-forming element meaning bulk, mass, especially in medical use, tumor, from Latinized form of
Greek onko-, comb. form of onkos bulk, size, mass, body.


oncogene (n.)

1969, from onco- + -gene, from root of Greek gignere (perf. genui) beget, from PIE *gen- produce
(see genus). Related: Oncogenesis (1832).


oncology (n.)

1857, coined in English from onco- tumor + -logy science or study of. Related: Oncologist;
oncological.


oncoming (adj.)

1844, from on + coming, present participle of come (v.).


one (n.)

c.1200, from Old English an (adjective, pronoun, noun) one, from Proto-Germanic *ainaz (cognates:
Old Norse einn, Danish een, Old Frisian an, Dutch een, German ein, Gothic ains), from PIE *oi-no-
one, unique (cognates: Greek oinos ace (on dice); Latin unus one; Old Persian aivam; Old Church
Slavonic -inu, ino-; Lithuanian vienas; Old Irish oin; Breton un one).    Originally pronounced as
it still is in only, and in dialectal good 'un, young 'un, etc.; the now-standard pronunciation wun
began c.14c. in southwest and west England (Tyndale, a Gloucester man, spells it won in his Bible
translation), and it began to be general 18c. Use as indefinite pronoun influenced by unrelated
French on and Latin homo.   One and only sweetheart is from 1906. One of those things unpredictable
occurrence is from 1934. Slang one-arm bandit a type of slot machine is recorded by 1938. One-night
stand is 1880 in performance sense; 1963 in sexual sense. One of the boys ordinary amiable fellow is
from 1893. One-track mind is from 1927. Drinking expression one for the road is from 1950 (as a song
title).


one-horse (adj.)

small-scale, petty 1853, American English, colloquial, in reference to towns so small they only had
one horse.


one-liner (n.)

short joke, witty remark, 1969, from one + line.


one-of-a-kind

adjectival phrase attested from 1961.


one-off (n.)

single example of a manufactured product, 1934, from one + off. Later given figurative extension.


one-shot (adj.)

1907, achieved in a single attempt (original reference is to golf), from one + shot (n.). Meaning
happening or of use only once is from 1937.


one-sided (adj.)

1833, dealing with one side of a question or dispute, from one + side (n.). Related: One-sidedly;
one-sidedness.


one-upsmanship (n.)

1952, from noun phrase one up scoring one more point than one's opponent (1919).


one-way (adj.)

1906, in reference to travel tickets; 1914 in reference to streets; 1940 in reference to windows,
mirrors, etc.; from one + way (n.).


Oneida

Iroquois tribe of upper N.Y. state, who later moved in part to Wisconsin, 1666, named for its
principal settlement, from Oneida onenyote', literally erected stone, containing -neny- stone and
-ot- to stand.


oneiric (adj.)

1859, from Greek oneiros a dream (see oneiro-) + -ic.


oneiro-

before vowels oneir-, word-forming element meaning dream, from Greek oneiros a dream, from PIE
*oner- dream.


oneirocritic (n.)

a judge or interpreter of dreams, 1650s from Greek oneirokritikos pertaining to the interpretation
of dreams, from oneirokrites interpreter of dreams, from oneiros a dream (see oneiro-) + krites
discerner, judge (see critic).


oneirocritical (adj.)

1580s, from oneiro- + critic + -al (1).


oneiromancy (n.)

1650s; see oneiro- + -mancy. Greek had oneiromantis an interpreter of dreams. Related: oneiromantic.


oneness (n.)

1590s, from one + -ness. A re-formation of Middle English onnesse, which vanished by 13c.


onerous (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French onereus, honereus (14c., Modern French on&eacute;reux) and directly from
Latin onerosus, from onus (genitive oneris) burden (see onus).


oneself

1540s, one's self. Hyphenated 18c.; written as one word from c.1827, on model of himself, itself,
etc.


ongoing (adj.)

also on-going, 1877, from on + going (see go).


onion (n.)

early 12c., from Anglo-French union, Old French oignon onion (formerly also oingnon), and directly
from Latin unionem (nominative unio), colloquial rustic Roman for a kind of onion, also pearl (via
notion of a string of onions), literally one, unity; sense connection is the successive layers of an
onion, in contrast with garlic or cloves.    Old English had ynne (in ynne-leac), from the same
Latin source, which also produced Irish inniun, Welsh wynwyn and similar words in Germanic. In
Dutch, the ending in -n was mistaken for a plural inflection and new singular ui formed. The usual
Indo-European name is represented by Greek kromion, Irish crem, Welsh craf, Old English hramsa,
Lithuanian kremuse.    The usual Latin word was cepa, a loan from an unknown language; it is the
source of Old French cive, Old English cipe, and, via Late Latin diminutive cepulla, Italian
cipolla, Spanish cebolla, Polish cebula. German Zwiebel also is from this source, but altered by
folk etymology in Old High German (zwibolla) from words for two and ball. Onion ring is attested
from 1952.   Onion dome attested from 1956; onion grass from 1883; onion skin as a type of paper
from 1892. Onions, the surname, is attested from mid-12c. (Ennian), from Old Welsh Enniaun,
ultimately from Latin Annianus, which was associated with Welsh einion anvil.


oniony (adj.)

1838, from onion + -y (2). Related: Onioniness.


online (adj.)

in reference to computers, directly connected to a peripheral device, 1950 (originally as on-line).


onlooker (n.)

c.1600, from on + agent noun from look (v.).


only (adj.)

Old English &aelig;nlic, anlic only, unique, solitary, literally one-like, from an one (see one) +
-lic -like (see -ly (1)). Use as an adverb and conjunction developed in Middle English. Distinction
of only and alone (now usually in reference to emotional states) is unusual; in many languages the
same word serves for both. German also has a distinction in allein/einzig. Phrase only-begotten
(mid-15c.) is biblical, translating Latin unigenitus, Greek monogenes. The Old English form was
ancenned.


onnagata (n.)

in Kabuki and similar drama, a man who plays female roles, 1901, from Japanese, from onna woman +
kata figure.


onomastic (adj.)

1716, from French onomastique (17c.), from Greek onomastikos of or belonging to naming, from
onomastos named, verbal adjective of onomazein to name, from onoma name (see name).


onomastics (n.)

scientific study of names and naming, 1936, from onomastic; also see -ics.


onomatopoeia (n.)

1570s, from Late Latin onomatopoeia, from Greek onomatopoiia the making of a name or word (in
imitation of a sound associated with the thing being named), from onomatopoios, from onoma (genitive
onomatos) word, name (see name (n.)) + a derivative of poiein compose, make (see poet). Related:
Onomatopoeic; onomatopoeial.


onomatopoeic (adj.)

1860, from French onomatopo&#233;ique or else from onomatopoeia + -ic.


Onondaga

tribe in the Iroquois Confederacy, 1684, named for its principal settlement, from Onondaga onontake,
literally on the hill.


onset (n.)

1530s, attack, assault, from on + set (n.); compare verbal phrase to set (something) on (someone).
Weaker sense of beginning, start first recorded 1560s. Figurative use in reference to a calamity,
disease, etc. is from 1580s.


onslaught (n.)

1620s, anslaight, somehow from or on analogy of Dutch aanslag attack, from Middle Dutch aenslach,
from aen on (see on) + slach blow, related to slaen slay. Spelling influenced by obsolete (since
c.1400) English slaught (n.) slaughter, from Old English sleaht (see slaughter (n.)). No record of
its use in 18c.; apparently revived by Scott.


Ontario

from Mohawk (Iroquoian) ontari:io beautiful lake or great lake, from /-qtar-/ lake, river. Related:
Ontarian.


ontic (adj.)

1949, from onto- + -ic.


onto (prep.)

1580s, as on to, from on + to. Appeared much later than parallel into. As a closed compound (on
analogy of into), first recorded 1715.


onto-

word-forming element meaning a being, individual; being, existence, from Greek onto-, from stem of
on (genitive ontos) being, neuter present participle of einai to be (see essence).


ontogeny (n.)

development of an individual, 1872, from onto- + -geny. Related: Ontogenic; ontogenesis.


ontological (adj.)

1782, from ontology + -ical. Related: Ontologically


