ooze (v.)

late 14c., wosen, verbal derivative of Old English noun wos juice, sap, from Proto-Germanic *wosan
(source of Middle Low German wose scum), from same source as ooze (n.). Modern spelling from late
1500s. The Old English verb was wesan. Related: Oozed; oozing.


ooze (n.)

soft mud, Old English wase soft mud, mire, from Proto-Germanic *waison (cognates: Old Saxon waso wet
ground, mire, Old Norse veisa pond of stagnant water), from PIE *wes- (2) wet. Modern spelling is
mid-1500s.


sludge (n.)

mud, mire, ooze, 1640s, of uncertain origin, possibly a variant of Middle English slutch mud, mire,
or a variant of slush (n.).


oozy (adj.)

Old English wosig juicy, moist (see ooze (v.)). Related: Ooziness.


seep (v.)

1790, variant of sipe (c.1500), possibly from Old English sipian to seep, from Proto-Germanic *sip-
(cognates: Middle High German sifen, Dutch sijpelen to ooze), from PIE root *seib- to pour out,
drip, trickle (see soap (n.)). Related: Seeped; seeping.


stagnate (v.)

1660s, from Latin stagnatum, stagnatus, past participle of stagnare to stagnate, from stagnatum
standing water, pond, swamp, perhaps from a PIE root *stag- to seep drip (cognates: Greek stazein to
ooze, drip; see stalactite). Figurative use by 1709. Related: Stagnated; stagnating.


suds (n.)

1540s, dregs, leavings, muck, especially in East Anglia, ooze left by flood (according to OED this
may be the original sense), perhaps borrowed from Middle Dutch sudse marsh, bog, or related words in
Frisian and Low German, cognate with Old English soden boiled, from Proto-Germanic *suth-, from PIE
*seut- to seethe, boil (see seethe). Meaning soapy water dates from 1580s; slang meaning beer first
attested 1904. Related: Sudsy.


exude (v.)

1570s, from Latin exudare/exsudare ooze out like sweat, from ex- out (see ex-) + sudare to sweat,
from sudor sweat (see sweat (v.)). Related: Exuded; exudes; exuding.


rheum (n.)

mucous discharge, late 14c., from Old French reume a cold (13c., Modern French rhume), from Latin
rheuma, from Greek rheuma discharge from the body, flux; a stream, current, flood, a flowing,
literally that which flows, from rhein to flow, from PIE root *sreu- to flow (cognates: Sanskrit
sravati flows, srotah stream; Avestan thraotah- stream, river, Old Persian rauta river; Greek rheos
a flowing, stream, rhythmos rhythm, rhytos fluid, liquid; Old Irish sruaim, Irish sruth stream,
river; Welsh ffrwd stream; Old Norse straumr, Old English stream, Old High German strom (second
element in maelstrom); Lettish strauma stream, river; Lithuanian sraveti to trickle, ooze; Old
Church Slavonic struja river, o-strovu island, literally that which is surrounded by a river; Polish
strumie&#324; brook).


