optimistic (adj.)

1845, from optimist + -ic. Related: Optimistical (1809); optimistically.


rose-colored (adj.)

optimistic, 1854, from rose (n.1) on the notion of something uncommonly beautiful.


downbeat

1876 (n.), in reference to downward stroke of a conductor's baton; 1952 (adj.) in figurative sense
of pessimistic, but that is probably via associations of the word down (adv.), because the beat
itself is no more pessimistic than the upbeat is optimistic.


up (adj.)

c.1300, dwelling inland or upland, from up (adv.). Meaning going up is from 1784. From 1815 as
excited, exhilarated, happy, hence enthusiastic, optimistic. Up-and-coming promising is from 1848.
Musical up-tempo (adj.) is recorded from 1948.


Micawber (n.)

as a type of a childishly impractical man living in optimistic fantasy, from the character of
Wilkins Micawber in Dickens' David Copperfield (1850).    I am at present, my dear Copperfield,
engaged in the sale of corn upon commission. It is not an avocation of a remunerative description --
in other words it does not pay -- and some temporary embarrassments of a pecuniary nature have been
the consequence. I am however delighted to add that I have now an immediate prospect of something
turning up ....


Panglossian (adj.)

optimistic (usually ironic or disparaging), 1831, from French Panglosse, name of the philosopher and
tutor in Voltaire's Candide (1758), from pan- (see pan-) + Greek glossa, literally tongue (see gloss
(n.2)).


starry (adj.)

late 14c., from star (n.) + -y (2). Starry-eyed unrealistically optimistic is attested from 1884;
earlier descriptive of bright eyes. Related: Starrily; starriness.


upbeat (adj.)

with a positive mood, 1947, apparently from on the upbeat improving, getting better, attested from
1934 and a favorite of Billboard headline-writers in the early 1940s, from the musical noun upbeat
(1869), referring to the beat of a bar at which the conductor's baton is in a raised position; from
up (adv.) + beat (n.). The optimistic sense apparently for no other reason than that it sounds like
a happy word (the musical upbeat is no more inherently positive than any other beat).


sunny (adj.)

full of sun, early 14c., from sun (n.) + -y (2). Compare Dutch zonnig, German sonnig. Figurative
sense of cheerful is attested from 1540s. Sunny side in reference to optimistic outlook is from
1831. Eggs served sunny side up first attested 1887, in lunch counter slang, in reference to
appearance when served.    Young Man (in Park Row coffee-and-cake saloon)--Waiter, I want a
beefsteak, unpeeled potatoes, and a couple of eggs fried on one side only!    Waiter
(vociferously)--Slaughter in the pan, a Murphy with his coat on, an' two white wings with the sunny
side up! [Puck, April 27, 1887]     Related: Sunnily; sunniness. As a noun meaning sunfish from
1835.


