orifice (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French orifice the opening of a wound (14c.) and directly from Latin
orificium an opening, literally mouth-making, from os (genitive oris) mouth (see oral) + facere make
(see factitious). Related: Orificial.


vaginismus (n.)

spasmodic narrowing of the orifice of the vagina, 1861, medical Latin, from vagina + -ismus (see
-ism).


foramen (n.)

plural foramina, 1670s, from Latin foramen hole, opening, aperture, orifice, from forare to pierce
(see bore (v.)).


ostomy (n.)

1957, abstracted from colostomy, etc.; ultimately from Modern Latin stoma opening, orifice, from
Greek stoma mouth (see stoma).


pylorus (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin pylorus the lower orifice of the stomach, from Greek pyloros, literally
gatekeeper, porter, from pyle gate (see pylon) + ouros watcher, guardian (see warrant (n.)).
Related: Pyloric.


colostomy (n.)

1888, from colon (n.2) +  Modern Latin -stoma opening, orifice, from Greek stoma opening, mouth (see
stoma).


tracheostomy (n.)

1726, from tracheo-, used as a comb. form of trachea + -ostomy artificial opening, from Modern Latin
stoma opening, orifice, from Greek stoma mouth (see stoma).


Foraminifera

1835, Modern Latin, neuter plural of foraminifer bearing holes, from Latin foramen hole, opening,
orifice (see foramen) + -fer bearing, from ferre to bear (see infer). So called because the shells
usually are perforated by pores. Related: Foraminiferous.


stoma (n.)

orifice, small opening in an animal body, 1680s, Modern Latin, from Greek stoma (genitive stomatos)
mouth; mouthpiece; talk, voice; mouth of a river; any outlet or inlet, from PIE root *stom-en-,
denoting various body parts and orifices (cognates: Avestan staman- mouth (of a dog), Hittite
shtamar mouth, Middle Breton staffn mouth, jawbone, Cornish stefenic palate). Surgical sense is
attested from 1937.


hole (n.)

Old English hol orifice, hollow place, cave, perforation, from Proto-Germanic *hul (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German hol, Middle Dutch hool, Old Norse holr, German hohl hollow,
Gothic us-hulon to hollow out), from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    As a
contemptuous word for small dingy lodging or abode it is attested from 1610s. Meaning a fix, scrape,
mess is from 1760. Obscene slang use for vulva is implied from mid-14c. Hole in the wall small and
unpretentious place is from 1822; to hole up first recorded 1875. To need (something) like a hole in
the head, applied to something useless or detrimental, first recorded 1944 in entertainment
publications, probably a translation of a Yiddish expression such as ich darf es vi a loch in kop.


