ostentatious (adj.)

1701, from ostentation + -ous. Earlier in a similar sense were ostentative (c.1600); ostentive
(1590s). Related: Ostentatiously; ostentatiousness (1650s).


flourish (n.)

c.1500, a blossom, from flourish (v.). Meaning ostentatious waving of a weapon is from 1550s; that
of literary or rhetorical embellishment is from c.1600.


splash (n.)

1736, water or liquid thrown upon anything, from splash (v.). Meaning striking or ostentatious
display is first attested 1804. Sense of small quantity of soda water, etc., added to a drink is
from 1922. Of color or light, 1832.


splurge (n.)

1828, ostentatious display, American English, of uncertain origin; originally among the class of
words considered characteristic of Western (i.e. Kentucky) dialect. Perhaps a blend of splash and
surge. The meaning extravagant indulgence in spending is first recorded 1928.


unostentatious (adj.)

1747, from un- (1) not + ostentatious (adj.). Related: Unostentatiously.


show-off (n.)

1776, a display; see show (v.) + off (adv.). From 1801 as a deliberate and ostentatious display; in
reference to the person who makes such a display, attested from 1924. The verbal phrase is first
recorded 1793 as make a conspicuous and obvious display. Noun showing-off is from 1874.


airily (adv.)

1766, from airy with ostentatious air (see air (n.2)) + -ly (2).


pomposity (n.)

early 15c., pomp, solemnity, from Medieval Latin pompositas, from Late Latin pomposus stately,
pompous (see pompous). The sense of ostentatious display is from 1610s; earlier in French
pomposit&eacute;.


splurge (v.)

to make an ostentatious display, to put on a splurge (in the older sense of the noun), by 1843, from
splurge (n.). Thornton's American Glossary has an 1848 citation defining splurge (v.) as to
expatiate at large, to appeal to broad and general principles. Meaning to spend extravagantly is by
1934. Related: Splurged; splurging.


brag (v.)

mid-14c., braggen to make a loud sound, also to talk boastfully, of obscure origin, perhaps related
to bray of a trumpet, or related to the Middle English adjective brag ostentatious, proud; spirited,
brave (early 14c.), which probably is from Celtic. Other sources suggest Old Norse bragr the best,
the toast (of anything), also poetry. Also see braggart for another possibility. Related: Bragged;
bragging.


bluestocking (n.)

also blue-stocking, 1790, derisive word for a woman considered too learned, traces to a London
literary salon founded c.1750 by Elizabeth Montagu on the Parisian model, featuring intellectual
discussion instead of card games, and in place of ostentatious evening attire, simple dress,
including Benjamin Stillingfleet's blue-gray tradesman's hose which he wore in place of gentleman's
black silk, hence the term, first applied in derision to the whole set by Admiral Boscawen. None of
the ladies wore blue stockings. Borrowed by the neighbors in loan-translations, such as French bas-
bleu, Dutch blauwkous, German Blaustrumpf.


show (n.)

c.1300, act of exhibiting to view, from show (v.). Sense of appearance put on with intention to
deceive is recorded from 1520s. Meaning display, spectacle is first recorded 1560s; that of
ostentatious display is from 1713 (showy is from 1712). Sense of entertainment program on radio or
TV is first recorded 1932. Meaning third place in a horse race is from 1925, American English (see
the verb).   Show of hands is attested from 1789; Phrase for show for appearance's sake is from
c.1700. Show business is attested from 1850; shortened form show biz used in Billboard from 1942.
Actor's creed the show must go on is attested from 1890. Show-stopper is from 1926; show trial first
recorded 1937.


swank (adj.)

stylish, classy, posh, 1913, from earlier noun or verb; A midland and s.w. dial. word taken into
general slang use at the beginning of the 20th cent. [OED]; compare swank (n.) ostentatious
behavior, noted in 1854 as a Northampton word; swank (v.), from 1809 as to strut, behave
ostentatiously. Perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *swank-, from PIE *sweng(w)-, a Germanic root
meaning to swing, turn, toss (cognates: Middle High German swanken to sway, totter, turn, swing, Old
High German swingan to swing; see swing (v.)). Perhaps the notion is of swinging the body
ostentatiously (compare swagger).    A separate word-thread derives from Old English swancor pliant,
bending, and from this comes swanky (n.) active or clever young fellow (c.1500).


tawdry (adj.)

no longer fresh or elegant but worn as if it were so; in cheap and ostentatious imitation of what is
rich or costly, 1670s, adjective use of noun tawdry silk necktie for women (1610s), shortened from
tawdry lace (1540s), an alteration (with adhesion of the -t- from Saint) of St. Audrey's lace, a
necktie or ribbon sold at the annual fair at Ely on Oct. 17 commemorating St. Audrey (queen of
Northumbria, died 679). Her association with lace necklaces is that she supposedly died of a throat
tumor, which, according to Bede, she considered God's punishment for her youthful stylishness.
Related: Tawdriness.    I know of a surety that I deservedly bear the weight of my trouble on my
neck, for I remember that, when I was a young maiden, I bore on it the needless weight of necklaces;
and therefore I believe the Divine goodness would have me endure the pain in my neck, that so I may
be absolved from the guilt of my needless levity, having now, instead of gold and pearls, the fiery
heat of a tumour rising on my neck. [A.M. Sellar translation, 1907]


queen (n.)

Old English cwen queen, female ruler of a state, woman, wife, from Proto-Germanic *kwoeniz
(cognates: Old Saxon quan wife, Old Norse kvaen, Gothic quens), ablaut variant of *kwenon (source of
quean), from PIE *gwen- woman, wife supposedly originally honored woman (cognates: Greek gyn&eacute;
a woman, a wife; Gaelic bean woman; Sanskrit janis a woman, gn&aacute; wife of a god, a goddess;
Avestan jainish wife; Armenian kin woman; Old Church Slavonic zena, Old Prussian genna woman; Gothic
qino a woman, wife; q&eacute;ns a queen).    The original sense seems to have been wife, specialized
by Old English to wife of a king. In Old Norse, still mostly of a wife generally, as in kvan-fang
marriage, taking of a wife, kvanlauss unmarried, widowed, kvan-riki the domineering of a wife.
English is one of the few Indo-European languages to have a word for queen that is not a feminine
derivative of a word for king. The others are Scandinavian: Old Norse drottning, Danish dronning,
Swedish drottning queen, in Old Norse also mistress, but these also are held to be ultimately from
male words, such as Old Norse drottinn master.    Used of chess piece from mid-15c. (as a verb in
chess, in reference to a pawn that has reached the last rank, from 1789), of playing card from
1570s. Of bees from c.1600 (until late 17c., they generally were thought to be kings; as in Henry V,
I.ii); queen bee in a figurative sense is from 1807. Meaning male homosexual (especially a feminine
and ostentatious one) first certainly recorded 1924; probably here an alteration of quean, which is
earlier in this sense. Queen Anne first used 1878 for style characteristic of the time of Queen Anne
of Great Britain and Ireland, who reigned 1702-14. Cincinnati, Ohio, has been the Queen City (of the
West) since 1835.


