outfit (v.)

1840, from outfit (n.). Related: Outfitted; outfitting; outfitter.


outfit (n.)

1769, act of fitting out (a ship, etc.) for an expedition, from out + fit (v.). Sense of articles
and equipment required for an expedition first attested 1787, American English; meaning a person's
clothes is first recorded 1852; sense of group of people is from 1883.


rig (n.)

distinctive arrangement of sails, masts, etc. on a ship, 1822, from rig (v.). Extended to costume,
clothing outfit (1843); horse-drawn vehicle (1831), which led to sense of truck, bus, etc. (1851);
and apparatus for well-sinking (1875).


fatigues (n.)

extra duties of a soldier, 1776, from fatigue. As a military clothing outfit, from 1836, short for
fatigue dress (1833).


kit (n.1)

late 13c., round wooden tub, perhaps from Middle Dutch kitte jug, tankard, wooden container, of
unknown origin. Meaning collection of personal effects, especially for traveling (originally in
reference to a soldier), is from 1785; that of outfit of tools for a workman is from 1851. Of drum
sets, by 1929. Meaning article to be assembled by the buyer is from 1930s.


apparel (n.)

personal outfit or attire, early 14c., also ship's rigging, from Old French apareil preparation,
from apareillier (see apparel (v.)). Earlier in same sense was apparelment (early 14c.).


layette (n.)

baby's outfit, 1839, from French layette, properly the box in which it comes, subsequently
transferred to the linen, from Middle French layette chest of drawers, from laie drawer, box, from
Middle Dutch laeye, related to lade, load (v.).


haywire (n.)

soft wire for binding bales of hay, by 1891, from hay + wire (n.). Adjective meaning poorly
equipped, makeshift is 1905, American English, from the sense of something only held together with
haywire, particularly said to be from use of the stuff in New England lumber camps for jury-rigging
and makeshift purposes, so that hay wire outfit became the contemptuous term for loggers with poor
logging equipment [Bryant, Logging, 1913]. Its springy, uncontrollable quality led to the sense in
go haywire (by 1915).


Dane (n.)

native of Denmark, from Danish Daner (replacing Old English Dene (plural)); used in Old English of
Northmen generally. Perhaps ultimately from a source related to Old High German tanar sand bank, in
reference to their homeland; or from Proto-Germanic *den- low ground, for the same reason.
Applied 1774 to a breed of large dogs. Danegeld not known by that name in Old English, or until
1086, long after the end of the Viking depredations. Supposedly originally a tax to pay for
protection from the Northmen (either to outfit defensive armies or to buy peace). Danelaw (c.1050)
was the Danish law in force over that large part of England under Viking rule after c.878; the
application to the land itself is modern (1837).


joint (n.)

late 13c., a part of a body where two bones meet and move in contact with one another, from Old
French joint joint of the body (12c.), from Latin iunctus united, connected, associated, past
participle of iungere join (see jugular). Related: Joints. Slang meaning of place, building,
establishment (especially one where persons meet for shady activities) first recorded 1877, American
English, from an earlier Anglo-Irish sense (1821), perhaps on the notion of a side-room, one joined
to a main room. The original U.S. sense was especially of an opium-smoking den.    Meaning marijuana
cigarette (1938) is perhaps from notion of something often smoked in common, but there are other
possibilities; earlier joint in drug slang meant hypodermic outfit (1935). Meaning prison is
attested from 1953 but probably is older. Out of joint in the figurative sense is from early 15c.
(literally, of bone displacement, late 14c.).


school (n.1)

place of instruction, Old English scol, from Latin schola intermission of work, leisure for
learning; learned conversation, debate; lecture; meeting place for teachers and students, place of
instruction; disciples of a teacher, body of followers, sect, from Greek skhole spare time, leisure,
rest ease; idleness; that in which leisure is employed; learned discussion; also a place for
lectures, school; originally a holding back, a keeping clear, from skhein to get (from PIE root
*segh- to hold, hold in one's power, to have; see scheme (n.)) + -ole by analogy with bole a throw,
stole outfit, etc.    The original notion is leisure, which passed to otiose discussion (in Athens
or Rome the favorite or proper use for free time), then place for such discussion. The Latin word
was widely borrowed (Old French escole, French &eacute;cole, Spanish escuela, Italian scuola, Old
High German scuola, German Schule, Swedish skola, Gaelic sgiol, Welsh ysgol, Russian shkola).
Translated in Old English as larhus, literally lore house, but this seems to have been a glossary
word only.    Meaning students attending a school in English is attested from c.1300; sense of
school building is first recorded 1590s. Sense of people united by a general similarity of
principles and methods is from 1610s; hence school of thought (1864). School of hard knocks rough
experience in life is recorded from 1912 (in George Ade); to tell tales out of school betray
damaging secrets is from 1540s. School bus is from 1908. School days is from 1590s. School board
from 1870.


