overbearing (adj.)

figurative present participle adjective from overbear (v.) in its sense to bear down.


controlling (adj.)

overbearing, 1570s, present participle adjective from control (v.).


masterly (adj.)

1530s, overbearing; 1660s, skillful, from master (n.) + -ly.


termagant (n.)

c.1500, violent, overbearing person (especially of women), from Teruagant, Teruagaunt (c.1200), name
of a fictitious Muslim deity appearing in medieval morality plays, from Old French Tervagant, a
proper name in Chanson de Roland (c.1100), of uncertain origin. As an adjective from 1590s.


heavy-handed (adj.)

also heavyhanded, 1630s, originally weary or clumsy; from heavy (adj.) + handed. Sense of
overbearing is first recorded 1883.


arrogant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French arrogant (14c.), from Latin arrogantem (nominative arrogans) assuming,
overbearing, insolent, present participle of arrogare (see arrogance). Related: Arrogantly.


arrogance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French arrogance (12c.), from Latin arrogantia, from arrogantem (nominative
arrogans) assuming, overbearing, insolent, present participle of arrogare to claim for oneself,
assume, from ad- to (see ad-) + rogare ask, propose (see rogation).


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


stage (n.)

mid-13c., story of a building; early 14c., raised platform used for public display (also the
platform beneath the gallows), from Old French estage building, dwelling place; stage for
performance; phase, stage, rest in a journey (12c., Modern French &#233;tage story of a house,
stage, floor, loft), from Vulgar Latin *staticum a place for standing, from Latin statum, past
participle of stare to stand (see stet). Meaning platform for presentation of a play is attested
from late 14c.; generalized for profession of an actor from 1580s.    Sense of period of development
or time in life first recorded early 14c., probably from Middle English sense of degree or step on
the 'ladder' of virtue, 'wheel' of fortune, etc., in parable illustrations and morality plays.
Meaning a step in sequence, a stage of a journey is late 14c. Meaning level of water in a river,
etc. is from 1814, American English.   Stage-name is from 1727. Stage-mother (n.) in the overbearing
mother-of-an-actress sense is from 1915. Stage-door is from 1761, hence Stage-Door Johnny young man
who frequents stage doors seeking the company of actresses, chorus girls, etc. (1907). Stage
whisper, such as used by an actor on stage to be heard by the audience, first attested 1865. Stage-
manage (v.) is from 1871.


