pallid (adj.)

lacking color, 1580s, from Latin pallidus pale, colorless, from root of pallere be pale (see
pallor).


pale (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French paile pale, light-colored (12c., Modern French p&#226;le), from Latin
pallidus pale, pallid, wan, colorless, from pallere be pale, grow pale, from PIE *pel- (2) pale (see
pallor). Pale-face, supposed North American Indian word for European, is attested from 1822.


blue (1)

c.1300, bleu, blwe, etc., from Old French blo pale, pallid, wan, light-colored; blond; discolored;
blue, blue-gray, from Frankish *blao or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old English blaw, Old Saxon and Old High German blao, Danish blaa, Swedish
bl&#229;, Old Frisian blau, Middle Dutch bla, Dutch blauw, German blau blue), from PIE *bhle-was
light-colored, blue, blond, yellow, from PIE root bhel- (1) to shine, flash (see bleach (v.)).
The same PIE root yielded Latin flavus yellow, Old Spanish blavo yellowish-gray, Greek phalos white,
Welsh blawr gray, Old Norse bla livid (the meaning in black and blue), showing the usual slippery
definition of color words in Indo-European The present spelling is since 16c., from French influence
(Modern French bleu).    The exact color to which the Gmc. term applies varies in the older
dialects; M.H.G. bla is also 'yellow,' whereas the Scandinavian words may refer esp. to a deep,
swarthy black, e.g. O.N. blama&eth;r, N.Icel. blama&eth;ur 'Negro' [Buck]   <hr />   Few words enter
more largely into the composition of slang, and colloquialisms bordering on slang, than does the
word BLUE. Expressive alike of the utmost contempt, as of all that men hold dearest and love best,
its manifold combinations, in ever varying shades of meaning, greet the philologist at every turn.
[John S. Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890, p.252]    The color of constancy
since Chaucer at least, but apparently for no deeper reason than the rhyme in true blue (c.1500).
From early times blue was the distinctive color of the dress of servants, which may be the reason
police uniforms are blue, a tradition Farmer dates to Elizabethan times. For blue ribbon see cordon
bleu under cordon. Blue whale attested from 1851, so called for its color. The flower name blue bell
is recorded by 1570s. Blue streak, of something resembling a bolt of lightning (for quickness,
intensity, etc.) is from 1830, U.S. Western slang.    Many Indo-European languages seem to have had
a word to describe the color of the sea, encompasing blue and green and gray; such as Irish glass
(see Chloe); Old English h&aelig;wen blue, gray, related to har (see hoar); Serbo-Croatian sinji
gray-blue, sea-green; Lithuanian &#353;yvas, Russian sivyj gray.


