paradigm (n.)

late 15c., from Late Latin paradigma pattern, example, especially in grammar, from Greek paradeigma
pattern, model; precedent, example, from paradeiknynai exhibit, represent, literally show side by
side, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + deiknynai to show (cognate with Latin dicere to show; see
diction). Related: Paradigmatic; paradigmatical.


be (v.)

Old English beon, beom, bion be, exist, come to be, become, happen, from Proto-Germanic *biju- I am,
I will be. This b-root is from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, grow, come into being, and in addition
to the words in English it yielded German present first and second person singular (bin, bist, from
Old High German bim I am, bist thou art), Latin perfective tenses of esse (fui I was, etc.), Old
Church Slavonic byti be, Greek phu- become, Old Irish bi'u I am, Lithuanian bu'ti to be, Russian
byt' to be, etc. It also is behind Sanskrit bhavah becoming, bhavati becomes, happens, bhumih earth,
world.     The modern verb to be in its entirety represents the merger of two once-distinct verbs,
the b-root represented by be and the am/was verb, which was itself a conglomerate. Roger Lass (Old
English) describes the verb as a collection of semantically related paradigm fragments, while
Weekley calls it an accidental conglomeration from the different Old English dial[ect]s. It is the
most irregular verb in Modern English and the most common. Collective in all Germanic languages, it
has eight different forms in Modern English:   BE (infinitive, subjunctive, imperative)  AM (present
1st person singular)  ARE (present 2nd person singular and all plural)  IS (present 3rd person
singular)  WAS (past 1st and 3rd persons singular)  WERE (past 2nd person singular, all plural;
subjunctive)  BEING (progressive &amp; present participle; gerund)  BEEN (perfect participle).
The paradigm in Old English was:<table width=400 bgcolor=#CCFFFF cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4
border=1><tr><td> </td><td>SING.</td><td>PL.</td></tr><tr><td>1st pres.</td><td>ic eomic
beo</td><td>we sind(on)we beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pres.</td><td>&thorn;u eart&thorn;u
bist</td><td>ge sind(on)ge beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pres.</td><td>he ishe bi&eth;</td><td>hie
sind(on)hie beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>1st pret.</td><td>ic w&aelig;s</td><td>we
w&aelig;ron</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pret.</td><td>&thorn;u w&aelig;re</td><td>ge
waeron</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pret.</td><td>heo w&aelig;s</td><td>hie w&aelig;ron</td></tr><tr><td>1st
pret. subj.</td><td>ic w&aelig;re</td><td>we w&aelig;ren</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pret.
subj.</td><td>&thorn;u w&aelig;re</td><td>ge w&aelig;ren</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pret.
subj.</td><td>Egcfer&eth; w&aelig;re</td><td>hie w&aelig;ren</td></tr></table>The b-root had no past
tense in Old English, but often served as future tense of am/was. In 13c. it took the place of the
infinitive, participle and imperative forms of am/was. Later its plural forms (we beth, ye ben, they
be) became standard in Middle English and it made inroads into the singular (I be, thou beest, he
beth), but forms of are claimed this turf in the 1500s and replaced be in the plural. For the origin
and evolution of the am/was branches of this tangle, see am and was.    That but this blow Might be
the be all, and the end all. [Macbeth I.vii.5]


he (pron.)

Old English he (see paradigm of Old English third person pronoun below), from Proto-Germanic *hi-
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch he, hi, Dutch hy, Old High German he), from PIE
*ki-, variant of *ko-, the this, here (as opposed to that, there) root (cognates: Hittite ki this,
Greek ekeinos that person, Old Church Slavonic si, Lithuanian &#353;is this), and thus the source of
the third person pronouns in Old English. The feminine, hio, was replaced in early Middle English by
forms from other stems (see she), while the h- wore off Old English neuter hit to make modern it.
The Proto-Germanic root also is the source of the first element in German heute today, literally the
day (compare Old English heod&aelig;g).   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF cellspacing=1
cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><strong>case</strong></td> <td><strong>SINGULAR</strong></td>
<td>-</td> <td>-</td> <td><strong>PLURAL</strong></td> </tr> <tr> <td>-</td>
<td><strong>masc.</strong></td> <td><strong>neut.</strong></td> <td><strong>fem.</strong></td>
<td><strong>(all genders)</strong></td> </tr> <tr> <td><strong>nom.</strong></td> <td>he</td>
<td>hit</td> <td>heo, hio</td> <td>hie, hi</td> </tr> <tr> <td><strong>acc.</strong></td>
<td>hine</td> <td>hit</td> <td>hie, hi</td> <td>hie, hi</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><strong>gen.</strong></td> <td>his</td> <td>his</td> <td>hire</td> <td>hira, heora</td> </tr>
<tr> <td><strong>dat.</strong></td> <td>him</td> <td>him</td> <td>hire</td> <td>him, heom</td> </tr>
</table>   Pleonastic use with the noun (Mistah Kurtz, he dead) is attested from late Old English.
With animal words, meaning male (he-goat, etc.) from c.1300.


