parody (v.)

c.1745, from parody (n.). Related: Parodied; parodying.


parody (n.)

1590s (first recorded use in English is in Ben Jonson), from or in imitation of Latin parodia
parody, from Greek paroidia burlesque song or poem, from para- beside, parallel to (see para- (1),
in this case, mock-) + oide song, ode (see ode). The meaning poor or feeble imitation is from 1830.
Related: Parodic; parodical.


hoser (n.)

contemptible person, also hose-head, by 1982, a term popularized by the Canadian parody comic sketch
Great White North with the fictional McKenzie Brothers on SCTV.


spoof (n.)

hoax, deception, 1889, from spouf (1884), name of a game invented by British comedian Arthur Roberts
(1852-1933). Sense of a parody, satirical skit or play is first recorded 1958, from verb in this
sense (1914).


spoof (v.)

1889, to hoax, deceive, trick; from 1914 as to parody or satirize; see spoof (n.). Related: Spoofed;
spoofing.


parodist (n.)

1742, from French parodiste (18c.), from parodie (see parody (n.)).


burlesque (n.)

1660s, derisive imitation, grotesque parody, from French burlesque (16c.), from Italian burlesco,
from burla joke, fun, mockery, possibly ultimately from Late Latin burra trifle, nonsense, literally
flock of wool. Modern sense of variety show featuring striptease is American English, 1870.
Originally (1857) the sketches at the end of minstrel shows. As a verb, from 1670s.


pie (n.1)

pastry, mid-14c. (probably older; piehus bakery is attested from late 12c.), from Medieval Latin pie
meat or fish enclosed in pastry (c.1300), perhaps related to Medieval Latin pia pie, pastry, also
possibly connected with pica magpie (see pie (n.2)) on notion of the bird's habit of collecting
miscellaneous objects. Figurative of something to be shared out by 1967.    According to OED, not
known outside English, except Gaelic pighe, which is from English. In the Middle Ages, a pie had
many ingredients, a pastry but one. Fruit pies began to appear c.1600. Figurative sense of something
easy is from 1889. Pie-eyed drunk is from 1904. Phrase pie in the sky is 1911, from Joe Hill's
Wobbly parody of hymns. Pieman is not attested earlier than the nursery rhyme Simple Simon (c.1820).
Pie chart is from 1922.


vaudeville (n.)

1735, a country song, especially one for the stage, from French vaudeville (16c.), alteration (by
influence of ville town) of Middle French vaudevire, said to be from (chanson du) Vau de Vire (song
of the) valley of Vire, in the Calvados region of Normandy, first applied to the popular satirical
songs of Olivier Basselin, a 15c. poet who lived in Vire. The alternative explanation is that
vaudevire derives from Middle French dialectal vauder to go + virer to turn. From the popularity of
the songs in France grew a form of theatrical entertainment based on parodies of popular opera and
drama, interspersed with songs.    The Th&#233;atre du Vaudeville is rich in parodies, which follow
rapidly upon every new piece given at the Opera, or at the Th&#233;atre Fran&ccedil;ais. Their
parody upon Hamlet is too ludicrous for description, but irresistibly laughable; and the elegaut
light ballet of La Colombe Retrouv&#233;e [The Dove found again], I saw parodied at the Vaudeville
as La Maison Retrouv&#233;e [The House found again], with a breadth of farce quite beyond the genius
of Sadler's Wells. Some of the acting here, particularly that of the men, is exquisite; and the
orchestra like all the orchestras in Paris is full and excellent. [France in 1816, by Lady Morgan]
As a sort of popular stage variety entertainment show suitable for families, from c.1881 in U.S.,
displaced by movies after c.1914, considered dead from 1932.


