passionate (adj.)

early 15c., angry; emotional, from Medieval Latin passionatus affected with passion, from Latin
passio (genitive passionis) passion (see passion). Specific sense of amorous is attested from 1580s.
Related: Passionately.


hot-blooded (adj.)

passionate, 1590s; a relic of medieval physiology theory.


cupidity (n.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French cupidite, Middle French cupidit&eacute;, from Latin cupiditatem
(nominative cupiditas) passionate desire, lust; ambition, from cupidus eager, passionate, from
cupere to desire (perhaps cognate with Sanskrit kupyati bubbles up, becomes agitated, Old Church
Slavonic kypeti to boil, Lithuanian kupeti to boil over). Despite the primarily erotic sense of the
Latin word, in English cupidity originally, and still especially, means desire for wealth.


erotomaniac (n.)

one driven mad by passionate love (sometimes also used in the sense of nymphomaniac), 1858, from
erotomania.


Romeo (n.)

a lover, passionate admirer, seducer of women, 1766, from the name of the hero in Shakespeare's
tragedy Romeo and Juliet (1590s).


red-hot (adj.)

late 14c., heated till it glows red (of metal, etc.); of persons, lively, passionate, it is recorded
from c. 1600. Red-hot mama is 1926, jazz slang, earthy female singer, also girlfriend, lover.


brainy (adj.)

1845, from brain (n.) + -y (2). Latin equivalent cerebrosus meant passionate, hot-headed, leading
Tucker to remark that  'Brainy' is not a natural expression for 'frantic.'


impassionate (adj.)

free from passion, 1620s, from in- (1) not + passionate. Related: Impassionately.


spitfire (n.)

1610s, a cannon, from spit (v.) + fire (n.); c. 1600 as an adjective. Meaning irascible, passionate
person is from 1670s. Replaced earlier shitfire (similar formation in Florentine cacafuoco).


stage-struck (adj.)

possessed by a passionate desire to perform on stage, 1813, from stage (n.) + past participle
adjective from strike (v.). Earlier was stage-smitten (1680s).


affectionate (adj.)

1580s, fond, loving, from affection + -ate (1). Early, now mostly obsolete, senses included inclined
(1530s), prejudiced (1530s), passionate (1540s), earnest (c. 1600). Other forms also used in the
main modern sense of the word included affectious (1580s), affectuous (mid-15c.).


dispassionate (adj.)

1590s, from dis- the opposite of (see dis-) + passionate. Related: Dispassionately.


erotic (adj.)

1650s, from French &eacute;rotique (16c.), from Greek erotikos caused by passionate love, referring
to love, from eros (genitive erotos) sexual love (see Eros). Earlier form was erotical (1620s).


Cupid

Roman god of passionate love, late 14c., from Latin Cupido, personification of cupido desire, love,
from cupere to desire (see cupidity). Identified with Greek Eros. Cupid's bow  as a shape,
especially of lips, is from 1858.


flagellum (n.)

long, lash-like appendage, 1837, from Latin flagellum whip, scourge, also figurative, diminutive of
flagrum a whip, from PIE root *bhlag- to strike (cognates: Latin flagitium shameful act, passionate
deed, disgraceful thing, flagitare to demand importunately; Old Norse blakra to flutter with the
wings, blekkja to impose upon; Lithuanian bla&#353;kau to and fro).


flagitious (adj.)

shamefully wicked, criminal, late 14c., from Old French flagicieus or directly from Latin
flagitiosus shameful, disgraceful, infamous, from flagitium shameful act, passionate deed,
disgraceful thing, related to flagrum a whip, scourge, lash, and flagitare to demand importunately,
all from PIE root *bhlag- to strike (see flagellum). Related: Flagitiously; flagitiousness.


covet (v.)

mid-13c., from Old French coveitier covet, desire, lust after (12c., Modern French convoiter,
influenced by con- words), probably ultimately from Latin cupiditas passionate desire, eagerness,
ambition, from cupidus very desirous, from cupere long for, desire (see cupidity). Related: Coveted;
coveting.


zeal (n.)

passionate ardor in pursuit of an objective or course of action, late 14c., from Old French zel
(Modern French z&#232;le) and directly from Late Latin zelus zeal, emulation (source also of Italian
zelo, Spanish celo), a Church word, from Greek zelos ardor, eager rivalry, emulation, a noble
passion [Liddell &amp; Scott], but also jealousy; prom PIE *ya- to seek, request, desire. From mid-
15c. as devotion.


broth (n.)

Old English bro&thorn;, from Proto-Germanic *bruthan (cognates: Old High German *brod), from verb
root *bhreue- to heat, boil, bubble; liquid in which something has been boiled (source also of Old
English breowan to brew; see brew (v.)). Picked up from Germanic by the Romanic and Celtic
languages.    The Irishism broth of a boy, which is in Byron, was thought to originate from the
Irish Broth, passion -- Brotha passionate, spirited ... [Farmer], and if so is not immediately
related.


hate (v.)

Old English hatian regard with extreme ill-will, have a passionate aversion to, treat as an enemy,
from Proto-Germanic *haton (cognates: Old Saxon haton, Old Norse hata, German hassen, Gothic hatan
to hate), from PIE root *kad- sorrow, hatred (cognates: Avestan sadra- grief, sorrow, calamity,
Greek kedos care, trouble, sorrow, Welsh cas pain, anger). Related: Hated; hating. French haine
(n.), hair (v.) are Germanic. Hate crime attested from 1988.


chafe (v.)

early 14c., chaufen, c. 1300, be provoked; late 14c. in literal sense to make warm, to heat, also
intransitive, to grow warm or hot, especially (early 15c.) to warm by rubbing, from Old French
chaufer heat, warm up, become warm (12c., Modern French chauffer), from Vulgar Latin *calefare, from
Latin calefacere to make hot, make warm, from calere be warm (see calorie) + facere to make, do (see
factitious).    Figurative sense from late 14c. include now-obsolete kindle (joy), inspire, make
passionate as well as provoke, vex, anger. Sense of make sore by rubbing first recorded 1520s.
Related: Chafed; chafing.


brew (v.)

Old English breowan to brew (class II strong verb, past tense breaw, past participle browen), from
Proto-Germanic *breuwan to brew (cognates: Old Norse brugga, Old Frisian briuwa, Middle Dutch
brouwen, Old High German briuwan, German brauen to brew), from PIE root *bhreu&#601;- to bubble,
boil, effervesce (cognates: Sanskrit bhurnih violent, passionate, Greek phrear well, spring,
cistern, Latin fervere to boil, foam, Thracian Greek brytos fermented liquor made from barley,
Russian bruja current, Old Irish bruth heat; Old English beorma yeast; Old High German brato roast
meat), the original sense thus being make a drink by boiling. Related: Brewed; brewing.


affair (n.)

c. 1300, what one has to do, from Anglo-French afere, Old French afaire  business, event; rank,
estate (12c., Modern French affaire), from the infinitive phrase &agrave; faire to do, from Latin ad
to (see ad-) + facere to do, make (see factitious).    A Northern word originally, brought into
general use and given a French spelling by Caxton (15c.). General sense of vague proceedings (in
romance, war, etc.) first attested 1702. Meaning an affair of the heart; a passionate episode is
from French affaire de coeur (itself attested in English from 1809); to have an affair with someone
in this sense is by 1726, earlier have an affair of love:    'Tis manife&#383;tly contrary to the
Law of Nature, that one Woman &#383;hould cohabit or have an Affair of Love with more than one Man
at the &#383;ame time. [Pufendorf's Law of Nature and Nations, transl. J. Spavan, London, 1716]
<hr />   Thus, in our dialect, a vicious man is a man of pleasure, a sharper is one that plays the
whole game, a lady is said to have an affair, a gentleman to be a gallant, a rogue in business to be
one that knows the world. By this means, we have no such things as sots, debauchees, whores, rogues,
or the like, in the beau monde, who may enjoy their vices without incurring disagreeable
appellations. [George Berkeley, Alciphron or the Minute Philosopher, 1732]


