paste (v.1)

to stick with paste, 1560s; see paste (n.). Related: Pasted; pasting.


paste (n.)

c.1300 (mid-12c. as a surname), dough, from Old French paste dough, pastry (13c., Modern French
p&#226;te), from Late Latin pasta dough, pastry cake, paste (see pasta). Meaning glue mixture is
first attested mid-15c.


paste-up (n.)

1930, from paste (v.) + up (adv.).


pasteboard (n.)

1540s, from paste (n.) + board (n.1). So called because it is made of sheets of paper pasted
together.


paste (v.2)

hit hard, 1846, probably an alteration of baste beat (see lambaste). Related: Pasted; pasting.


pastel (n.)

1660s, crayons, chalk-like pigment used in crayons, from French pastel crayon, from Italian pastello
a pastel, literally material reduced to a paste, from Late Latin pastellus dye from the leaves of
the woad plant, diminutive of pasta (see pasta). Meaning pale or light color (like that of pastels)
first recorded 1899. As an adjective from 1884.


pastry (n.)

mid-15c., food made with paste, not originally limited to sweets, from Middle English paste (see
paste (n.)) + -ry. Probably influenced by Old French pastaierie pastry (Modern French
p&#226;tisserie), from pastoier pastry cook, from paste (see paste (n.)); also borrowed from
Medieval Latin pasteria pastry, from Latin pasta. Specific sense of small confection made of pastry
is from 1906. Pastry-cook attested from 1712.


pate (n.2)

paste, 1706, from French p&acirc;t&eacute;, from Old French paste, earlier past&eacute;e, from paste
(see paste (n.)).


impasto (n.)

laying on of colors thickly, 1784, from Italian impasto, noun of action from impastare to raise
paste; to put in paste, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + pasta paste (see
pasta).


pasty (adj.)

resembling paste, 1650s, from paste (n.) + -y (2). Related: Pastiness.


patty (n.)

small pie, 1710, from patti-pan (1690s) something baked in a small pan, from French
p&acirc;t&eacute;, from Old French paste (see paste (n.)).


toothpaste (n.)

also tooth-paste, 1832, from tooth + paste (n.). Earlier substances were tooth-powder (1540s);
tooth-soap (c.1600).


pastiche (n.)

a medley made up of fragments from different works, 1878, from French pastiche (18c.), from Italian
pasticcio medley, pastry cake, from Vulgar Latin *pasticium composed of paste, from Late Latin pasta
paste, pastry cake (see pasta). Borrowed earlier (1752) in the Italian form.


patisserie (n.)

1784, from French p&acirc;tisserie pastry shop, from p&acirc;tisser pastry-seller, pastry-cook, from
Old French pasticier (14c.), from Medieval Latin pasticium pasty, composed of paste, from Late Latin
pasta paste, pastry cake (see pasta).


stickum (n.)

glue, paste, 1909, from stick (v.).


miso (n.)

type of paste used in Japanese cooking, 1727, from Japanese.


pasties (n.)

adhesive patches worn over the nipples by exotic dancers, 1957, plural diminutive from paste (v.).


slip (n.3)

potter's clay, mid-15c., mud, slime, from Old English slypa, slyppe slime, paste, pulp, soft semi-
liquid mass, related to slupan to slip (see sleeve).


rhinestone (n.)

colorless imitation stone of paste or leaded glass, 1879, a loan-translation of French caillou du
Rhin Rhine pebble, so called because they were made near Strasburg, on the River Rhine, and invented
there late 17c. Extensively worn later 18c.    Rhinestone jewelry, a reproduction of the ornaments
of the Louis XV. period, is all the rage in Paris. The Rhinestones are as brilliant as diamonds, and
being set in silver, will stand any amount of wear or of cleaning. [The American Stationer, March
20, 1879]


pasty (n)

c.1300, a type of pastry pie, from Old French paste dough, pastry, from Vulgar Latin *pastata meat
wrapped in pastry from Latin pasta (see pasta).


marshmallow (n.)

Old English mersc-mealwe kind of mallow plant (Althea officinalis) which grows near salt marshes;
from marsh + mallow. The confection (so called from 1877) originally was made from paste from the
roots of this plant. The Greek word for the plant, althaea, is from althein to heal.


semolina (n.)

meal from hard kernels of wheat, 1797, alteration of Italian semolino grits; paste for soups,
diminutive of semola bran, from Latin simila the finest flour, probably from the same Semitic source
as Greek semidalis the finest flour (compare Assyrian samidu, Syrian semida fine meal).


pasta (n.)

1874, from Italian pasta, from Late Latin pasta dough, pastry cake, paste, from Greek pasta barley
porridge, probably originally a salted mess of food, from neuter plural of pastos (adj.) sprinkled,
salted, from passein to sprinkle, from PIE root *kwet- to shake (see quash).


chocolate (n.)

c.1600, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) xocolatl, possibly from xocolia to make bitter + atl water. Brought
to Spain by 1520, from thence to the rest of Europe. Originally a drink; as a paste or cake made of
ground, roasted, sweetened cacao seeds, 1640s.  To a Coffee-house, to drink jocolatte, very good
[Pepys, Diary, Nov. 24, 1664].  As a color from 1776. Chocolate chip is from 1940; chocolatier is
attested from 1888.


glue (n.)

early 13c., from Old French glu birdlime (12c.), from Late Latin glutem (nominative glus) glue, from
Latin gluten glue, beeswax, from PIE *gleit- to glue, paste (cognates: Lithuanian glitus sticky,
glitas mucus; Old English cli&eth;a plaster), from root *glei- to stick together (see clay). In
reference to glue from boiled animal hoofs and hides, c.1400. Glue-sniffing attested from 1963.


wafer (n.)

late 14c., thin cake of paste, generally disk-shaped, from Anglo-French wafre, Old North French
waufre honeycomb, wafer (Old French gaufre wafer, waffle), probably from Frankish *wafel or another
Germanic source (compare Flemish wafer, altered from Middle Dutch wafel honeycomb; see waffle (n.)).
Eucharistic bread first so called 1550s.


macaroni (n.)

tube-shaped food made of dried wheaten paste [Klein], 1590s, from southern Italian dialectal
maccaroni (Italian maccheroni), plural of maccarone, name for a kind of pasty food, possibly from
maccare bruise, batter, crush, of unknown origin, or from late Greek makaria food made from barley.
Used after c.1764 to mean a fop, a dandy; typical of elegant young men (as in Yankee Doodle) because
it was an exotic dish at a time when certain young men who had traveled the continent were affecting
French and Italian fashions and accents. There is said to have been a Macaroni Club in Britain,
which was the immediate source of this usage in English.


mustard (n.)

late 13c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French mostarde mustard, mustard plant (Modern French
moutarde), from moust must, from Latin mustum new wine (see must (n.1)); so called because it was
originally prepared by adding must to the ground seeds of the plant to make a paste. As a color
name, it is attested from 1848.   Mustard gas, World War I poison (first used by the Germans at
Ypres, 1917), so called for its color and smell and burning effect on eyes and lungs; chemical name
is dichlordiethyl sulfide, it contains no mustard, and is an atomized liquid, not a gas. To cut the
mustard (1907, usually in negative) is probably from slang mustard genuine article, best thing
(1903) on notion of that which enhances flavor.I'm not headlined in the bills, but I'm the mustard
in the salad dressing just the same. [O.Henry, Cabbages and Kings, 1904]


