pastry (n.)

mid-15c., food made with paste, not originally limited to sweets, from Middle English paste (see
paste (n.)) + -ry. Probably influenced by Old French pastaierie pastry (Modern French
p&#226;tisserie), from pastoier pastry cook, from paste (see paste (n.)); also borrowed from
Medieval Latin pasteria pastry, from Latin pasta. Specific sense of small confection made of pastry
is from 1906. Pastry-cook attested from 1712.


patisserie (n.)

1784, from French p&acirc;tisserie pastry shop, from p&acirc;tisser pastry-seller, pastry-cook, from
Old French pasticier (14c.), from Medieval Latin pasticium pasty, composed of paste, from Late Latin
pasta paste, pastry cake (see pasta).


pasty (n)

c.1300, a type of pastry pie, from Old French paste dough, pastry, from Vulgar Latin *pastata meat
wrapped in pastry from Latin pasta (see pasta).


pie (n.1)

pastry, mid-14c. (probably older; piehus bakery is attested from late 12c.), from Medieval Latin pie
meat or fish enclosed in pastry (c.1300), perhaps related to Medieval Latin pia pie, pastry, also
possibly connected with pica magpie (see pie (n.2)) on notion of the bird's habit of collecting
miscellaneous objects. Figurative of something to be shared out by 1967.    According to OED, not
known outside English, except Gaelic pighe, which is from English. In the Middle Ages, a pie had
many ingredients, a pastry but one. Fruit pies began to appear c.1600. Figurative sense of something
easy is from 1889. Pie-eyed drunk is from 1904. Phrase pie in the sky is 1911, from Joe Hill's
Wobbly parody of hymns. Pieman is not attested earlier than the nursery rhyme Simple Simon (c.1820).
Pie chart is from 1922.


paste (n.)

c.1300 (mid-12c. as a surname), dough, from Old French paste dough, pastry (13c., Modern French
p&#226;te), from Late Latin pasta dough, pastry cake, paste (see pasta). Meaning glue mixture is
first attested mid-15c.


pastiche (n.)

a medley made up of fragments from different works, 1878, from French pastiche (18c.), from Italian
pasticcio medley, pastry cake, from Vulgar Latin *pasticium composed of paste, from Late Latin pasta
paste, pastry cake (see pasta). Borrowed earlier (1752) in the Italian form.


long johns (n.)

type of warm underwear, 1943, originally for U.S. GIs. By 1919 as a type of pastry. Long john also
was used of various sorts of worm, potato, sled, etc.


latke (n.)

pancake made with grated potatoes, 1927, from Yiddish, from Russian latka pastry, said to mean
literally a patch, but by Watkins traced to Greek elaia olive.


religieuse (n.)

a nun, a religious woman, 1690s, from French, fem. of religieux monk, noun use of adjective meaning
religious (see religious). As a type of pastry, attested from 1929.


Madeleine

fem. proper name, variation of Madeline. The kind of small, rich confection is attested from 1845,
said in OED to be named for Madeleine Paulmier, 19c. French pastry cook; any use with a sense of
small thing that evokes powerful nostalgia is due to Proust (1922).


turnover (n.)

also turn-over, 1650s, action of turning over, from the verbal phrase; see turn (v.) + over (adv.).
As a kind of pastry tart, from 1798. Meaning number of employees leaving a place and being replaced
is recorded from 1955.


chiffon (n.)

feminine finery, sheer silk fabric, 1765, from French chiffon (17c.), diminutive of chiffe a rag,
piece of cloth (17c.), of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of English chip (n.1) or one of its
Germanic cousins. Klein suggests Arabic. Extension to pastry is attested by 1929.


chou (n.)

fashionable knot in a woman's dress or hat, 1883; earlier small, round, cream-filled pastry (1706),
from French chou, literally cabbage (12c.), from Latin caulis cabbage, literally stalk (see cole).


puff (n.)

c.1200, perhaps Old English, puf, puffe short, quick blast; act of puffing, from puff (v.). Meaning
type of light pastry is recorded from late 14c.; that of small pad for applying powder to skin or
hair is from 1650s. Figurative sense of flattery, inflated praise is first recorded 1732. Derogatory
use for homosexual male is recorded by 1902.


Danish

Old English Denisc people of Denmark (see Dane); danish pastry is 1934; shortened form danish is
from 1963.


strudel (n.)

kind of Austrian pastry, 1893, from German Strudel, literally eddy, whirlpool, from Old High German
stredan to bubble, boil, whirl, eddy, from PIE root *ser- (2) to flow (see serum).


tart (n.1)

small pie, late 14c., from Old French tarte flat, open-topped pastry (13c.), possibly an alteration
of torte, from Late Latin torta round loaf of bread (in Medieval Latin a cake, tart), perhaps from
past participle of torquere to twist.


foie gras (n.)

1818, short for p&acirc;t&eacute; de foie gras (see pate (n.2)). P&acirc;t&eacute; de foie gras
(1827 in English) is literally pie of fat liver; originally served in a pastry (as still in Alsace),
the phrase now chiefly in English with reference to the filling.


pasta (n.)

1874, from Italian pasta, from Late Latin pasta dough, pastry cake, paste, from Greek pasta barley
porridge, probably originally a salted mess of food, from neuter plural of pastos (adj.) sprinkled,
salted, from passein to sprinkle, from PIE root *kwet- to shake (see quash).


stuff (v.)

mid-14c., furnish with (goods, provisions, etc.), also reinforce (troops), from Old French estofer
pad, upholster, fit out (Modern French &#233;toffer), from estoffe, and probably also in part from
stuff (n.).    From c.1400 as fill, cram full; fill (the belly) with food or drink, gorge; from
early 15c. as to clog (the sinuses, etc.); from late 14c. as fill (a mattress, etc.) with padding,
line with padding; also in the cookery sense, in reference to filing the interior of a pastry or the
cavity of a fowl or beast. The ballot-box sense is attested from 1854, American English; in
expressions of contempt and suggestive of bodily orifices, it dates from 1952.


confection (n.)

mid-14c., confescioun, from Old French confeccion (12c., Modern French confection) drawing up (of a
treaty, etc.); article, product, in pharmacology, mixture, compound, from Late Latin confectionem
(nominative confectio) a confection, in classical Latin, a making, preparing, noun of action from
confect-, past participle stem of conficere to prepare, from com- with (see com-) + facere to make,
do (see factitious). Originally the making by means of ingredients, sense of candy or light pastry
predominated from 16c.


bear (n.)

Old English bera bear, from Proto-Germanic *beron, literally the brown (one) (cognates: Old Norse
bj&ouml;rn, Middle Dutch bere, Dutch beer, Old High German bero, German B&auml;r), from PIE *bher-
(3) bright, brown (see brown (adj.)).    Greek arktos and Latin ursus retain the PIE root word for
bear (*rtko; see Arctic), but it is believed to have been ritually replaced in the northern branches
because of hunters' taboo on names of wild animals (compare the Irish equivalent the good calf,
Welsh honey-pig, Lithuanian the licker, Russian medved honey-eater). Others connect the Germanic
word with Latin ferus wild, as if it meant the wild animal (par excellence) of the northern woods.
Symbolic of Russia since 1794. Used of uncouth persons since 1570s. Stock market meaning speculator
for a fall is 1709 shortening of bearskin jobber (from the proverb sell the bearskin before one has
caught the bear); i.e. one who sells stock for future delivery, expecting that meanwhile prices will
fall. Paired with bull from c.1720. Bear claw as a type of large pastry is from 1942, originally
chiefly western U.S.


