pauper (n.)

1510s, person destitute of property or means of livelihood, from Latin pauper poor, not wealthy, of
small means (see poor (adj.)). Originally in English a legal word, from Latin phrase in forma
pauperis (late 15c.) in the character of a poor person, thus allowed to sue in court without legal
fees.


poor (n.)

poor persons collectively, mid-12c., from poor (adj.). The Latin adjective pauper poor also was used
in a noun sense a poor man.


poverty (n.)

late 12c., from Old French poverte poverty, misery, wretched condition (Modern French
pauvret&#233;), from Latin paupertatem (nominative paupertas) poverty, from pauper poor (see poor
(adj.)).Seeing so much poverty everywhere makes me think that God is not rich. He gives the
appearance of it, but I suspect some financial difficulties. [Victor Hugo, Les Mis&eacute;rables,
1862] Poverty line attested from 1901; poverty trap from 1966; poverty-stricken from 1803.


poor (adj.)

c.1200, lacking money or resources, destitute; needy, indigent; small, scanty, from Old French povre
poor, wretched, dispossessed; inadequate; weak, thin (Modern French pauvre), from Latin pauper poor,
not wealthy, from pre-Latin *pau-paros producing little; getting little, a compound from the roots
of paucus little (see paucity) and parare to produce, bring forth (see pare).    Replaced Old
English earm. Figuratively from early 14c. Meaning of inferior quality is from c.1300. Of inhabited
places from c.1300; of soil, etc., from late 14c. The poor boy sandwich, made of simple but filling
ingredients, was invented and named in New Orleans in 1921. To poor mouth deny one's advantages is
from 1965 (to make a poor mouth whine is Scottish dialect from 1822). Slang poor man's ________ the
cheaper alternative to _______, is from 1854.


few (adj.)

Old English feawe (plural; contracted to fea) few, seldom, even a little, from Proto-Germanic *faw-,
from PIE root *pau- (1) few, little (cognates: Latin paucus few, little, paullus little, parvus
little, small, pauper poor; Greek pauros few, little, pais (genitive paidos) child; Latin puer
child, boy, pullus young animal; Oscan puklu child; Sanskrit potah a young animal, putrah son; Old
English fola young horse; Old Norse fylja young female horse; Old Church Slavonic puta bird;
Lithuanian putytis young animal, young bird). Always plural in Old English.    Phrase few and far
between attested from 1660s. Unusual ironic use in quite a few many (1883), earlier a good few
(1828). The noun is late 12c., fewe, from the adjective.  Never in the field of human conflict was
so much owed by so many to so few. [Winston Churchill, 1940]


