peevish (adj.)

late 14c., peyvesshe perverse, capricious, silly, of uncertain origin, possibly modeled on Latin
perversus reversed, perverse, past participle of pervertere to turn about (see pervert (v.)).
Meaning cross, fretful first recorded 1520s. Related: Peevishly; peevishness.


cynical (adj.)

1580s, resembling Cynic philosophers, from cynic + -al (1). By late 17c. the meaning had shaded into
the general one of critical, disparaging the motives of others, captious, sneering, peevish.
Related: Cynically.


crabby (adj.)

1520s, in now-obsolete sense crooked, gnarled, rough, from extended sense of crab (n.1) + -y (2).
Meaning disagreeable, sour, peevish is attested from 1776, American English. Both senses were found
earlier in crabbed.


crabbed (adj.)

late 14c., peevish, angry, ill-tempered, from crab (n.1), from the crab's combative disposition;
mid-15c. as resembling a crab in reference to crookedness. Of taste bitter, harsh, late 14c., from
crab (n.2).


cross-patch (n.)

peevish person, usually female, c.1700, from cross (adj.) + patch (n.1) piece.


peeve (v.)

1907 (implied in peeved), back-formation from peevish. As a noun, attested by 1910. Related: Peeved;
peeving; peeves.


pettish (adj.)

1550s, impetuous, evidently from pet (n.2) in its ill humor sense + -ish. Meaning peevish, easily
annoyed is from 1590s.    It has naturally been assoc. with PET sb.1, as being a characteristic
habit of a pet or indulged and spoiled child; but the connexion of sense is not very clear or simple
.... [OED]  Related: Pettishly; pettishness.


snappish (adj.)

peevish, 1540s, from snap (v.) + -ish. Related: Snappishly; snappishness.


morose (adj.)

1530s gloomy, from Latin morosus morose, peevish, hypercritical, fastidious, from mos (genitive
moris) habit, custom (see moral (adj.)). In English, manners by itself means (good) manners, but
here the implication in Latin is (bad) manners. Related: Morosity.


petulant (adj.)

1590s, immodest, wanton, saucy, from Middle French petulant (mid-14c.), from Latin petulantem
(nominative petulans) wanton, froward, saucy, insolent, present participle of petere to attack,
assail; strive after; ask for, beg, beseech (see petition (n.)). Meaning peevish, irritable first
recorded 1775, probably by influence of pet (n.2). Related: Petulantly.


bilious (adj.)

1540s, pertaining to bile, biliary, from French bilieux, from Latin biliosus pertaining to bile,
from bilis (see bile). Meaning wrathful, peevish, ill-tempered (as people afflicted with an excess
of bile were believed to be) is attested from 1560s. This is the main modern sense in English and
French; the more literal meaning being taken up by biliary. Related: Biliousness.


fret (v.)

be peevish or worried, early 12c., from Old English fretan eat, devour (in Old English used of
monsters and Vikings; in Middle English used of animals' eating), from Proto-Germanic compound *fra-
for- + *etan to eat (cognates: Dutch vreton, Old High German freggan, German fressen, Gothic
fraitan). Transitive sense of eat away is from late 12c. Figurative sense of irritate, worry, eat
one's heart out is c.1200. Modern German still distinguishes essen for humans and fressen for
animals. Related: Fretted; fretting. As a noun, from early 15c.


sour (adj.)

Old English sur sour, tart, acid, fermented, from Proto-Germanic *sura- sour (cognates: Old Norse
surr, Middle Dutch suur, Dutch zuur, Old High German sur, German Sauer), from PIE root *suro- sour,
salty, bitter (cognates: Old Church Slavonic syru, Russian syroi moist, raw; Lithuanian suras salty,
suris cheese).    Meaning having a peevish disposition is from early 13c. Sense in whisky sour
(1885) is with lemon added (1862). Sour cream is attested from 1855. French sur sour, tart (12c.) is
a Germanic loan-word.


shrew (n.)

small insectivorous mammal, Old English screawa shrew-mouse, unknown outside English, and the
absence of evidence for the word between the OE. period and the 16th c is remarkable [OED]. Perhaps
from Proto-Germanic *skraw-, from PIE *skreu- to cut; cutting tool (see shred (n.)), in reference to
the shrew's pointed snout. Alternative Old English word for it was scirfemus, from sceorfan to gnaw.
The meaning peevish, malignant, clamorous, spiteful, vexatious, turbulent woman [Johnson] is late
14c., from earlier sense of spiteful person (male or female), mid-13c., traditionally said to derive
from some supposed malignant influence of the animal, which was once believed to have a venomous
bite and was held in superstitious dread (compare beshrew). Paired with sheep from 1560s as the
contrasting types of wives.


