pen (n.3)

slang, prison, 1884, shortening of penitentiary; earlier use (1845) probably is a figurative
extension of pen (n.2).


pen (n.1)

writing implement, late 13c., from Old French pene quill pen; feather (12c.) and directly from Latin
penna a feather, plume, in plural a wing, in Late Latin, a pen for writing, from Old Latin petna,
pesna, from PIE *pet-na-, suffixed form of root *pet- to rush; to fly (see petition (n.)).    Latin
penna and pinna a feather, plume; in plural a wing; also a pinnacle; battlement (see pin (n.)) are
treated as identical in Watkins, etc., but regarded as separate (but confused) Latin words by Tucker
and others, who derive pinna from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike (n.1)) and see the feather/wing
sense as secondary.    In later French, this word means only long feather of a bird, while the
equivalent of English plume is used for writing implement, the senses of the two words thus are
reversed from the situation in English. Pen-and-ink (adj.) is attested from 1670s. Pen name is
recorded from mid-19c.


pen (v.2)

to enclose in a pen, c.1200, from Old English *pennian, from the source of pen (n.2). Related:
Penned; penning.


pen (n.2)

enclosure for animals, Old English penn, penne, enclosure, pen, fold, of uncertain origin, perhaps
related to Old English pinn pin, peg (see pin (n.)) on notion of a bolted gate or else structure
made of pointed stakes.


pen (v.1)

late 15c., from pen (n.). Related: Penned; penning.


pen-

Brythonic for head; common in place names in Cornwall and Wales (such as Penzance, see also
Pendragon).


pen-pal (n.)

also pen pal, 1931, from pen (n.1) + pal (n.). gradually replacing earlier pen-friend (1919).


penal (adj.)

pertaining to punishment, mid-15c., from Old French peinal (12c., Modern French p&#233;nal) and
directly from Medieval Latin penalis, from Latin poenalis pertaining to punishment, from poena
punishment, from Greek poine blood-money, fine, penalty, punishment, from PIE *kwoina, from root
*kwei- to pay, atone, compensate (cognates: Greek time price, worth, honor, esteem, respect, tinein
to pay a price, punish, take vengeance; Sanskrit cinoti observes, notes; Avestan kaena punishment,
vengeance; Old Church Slavonic cena honor, price; Lithuanian kaina value, price).


penalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of penalize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Penalised; penalising.


penalize (v.)

1868, from penal + -ize. Related: Penalized; penalizing.


penalty (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French penalit&eacute; and directly from Medieval Latin poenalitatem
(nominative poenalitas), from Latin poenalis (see penal). The sporting sense is first recorded 1885.
Ice hockey penalty box attested by 1931.


penance (n.)

late 13c., religious discipline or self-mortification as a token of repentance and as atonement for
some sin, from Anglo-French penaunce, Old French peneance (12c.), from Latin p&aelig;nitentia (see
penitence). Transferred sense is recorded from c.1300.


penates (n.)

Roman household gods, 1510s, from Latin penates gods of the inside of the house, related to penatus
sanctuary of a temple (especially that of Vesta), cognate with penitus within (see penetrate).


pence (n.)

late 14c., contraction of penies, collective plural of penny. Spelling with -ce reflects the
voiceless pronunciation.


penchant (n.)

1670s, from French penchant, noun use of present participle of Old French pencher to incline, from
Vulgar Latin *pendicare, a frequentative formed from Latin pendere to hang (see pendant (n.)).


pencil (n.)

early 14c., an artist's fine brush of camel hair, from Old French pincel artist's paintbrush (13c.,
Modern French pinceau), from Latin penicillus painter's brush, hair-pencil, literally little tail,
diminutive of peniculus brush, itself a diminutive of penis tail (see penis). Small brushes formerly
were used for writing before modern lead or chalk pencils; meaning graphite writing implement
apparently evolved late 16c. Derogatory slang pencil-pusher office worker is from 1881; pencil neck
weak person first recorded 1973.


pencil (v.)

1530s, to mark or sketch with a pencil-brush, from pencil (n.). In reference to lead pencils from
1760s. Related: Penciled; penciling. To pencil (something) in arrange tentatively is attested from
1942.


pend (v.)

c.1500, to depend, to hang, from French pendre, from Late Latin pendere to hang (see pendant). In
some cases short for depend.


pendant (n.)

early 14c., loose, hanging part of anything, from Anglo-French pendaunt hanging (c.1300), Old French
pendant (13c.), noun use of present participle of pendre to hang, from Latin pendere to hang, from
PIE *(s)pend-, extended form of root *(s)pen- to pull, draw, stretch (see span (v.)). Meaning
dangling part of an earring is attested from 1550s. Nautical sense of tapering flag is recorded from
late 15c. In this sense presumably a corruption of pennon [OED].


pendency (n.)

1630s, from pendent + -cy.


pendent (adj.)

c.1600 respelling of Middle English pendaunt hanging, overhanging (late 14c., from Old French
pendant; see pendant) on model of its Latin original, pendentem.


pendentive (n.)

1727, from French pendentif (mid-16c.), from Latin pendentem (nominative pendens) hanging, present
participle of pendere to hang (see pendent (adj.)).


pending (prep.)

1640s, during, in the process of, preposition formed from root of French pendant during, literally
hanging, present participle of pendere to hang, to suspend (see pendant). Meaning patterned on a
secondary sense of Latin pendente not decided, literally hanging, in legal phrase pendente lite
while the suit is pending. Use of the present participle before nouns caused it to be regarded as a
preposition. As an adjective from 1797.


pendragon (n.)

Welsh warlord (mainly known now in Arthurian Uther Pendragon), late 15c., title of a chief leader in
war of ancient Britain or Wales, from pen head (see pen-) + dragon, which figured on the standard of
a cohort.


pendular (adj.)

1734, from French pendulaire, from pendule, from pendre (see pendant).


pendulous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin pendulus hanging down, figuratively doubtful, uncertain, hesitating, from pendere
to hang (see pendant). Related: Pendulously.


pendulum (n.)

1660, from Modern Latin pendulum (1643), noun use of neuter of Latin adjective pendulus hanging
down, from pendere to hang (see pendant). The Modern Latin word is perhaps a Latinization of Italian
pendolo.


Penelope

fem. proper name, name of the faithful wife in the Odyssey, from Greek Penelopeia, probably related
to pene thread on the bobbin, from penos web, cognate with Latin pannus cloth garment (see pane
(n.)). Used in English as the type of the virtuous wife (1580) as it was in Latin.


penetrable (adj.)

early 15c., penetrating, from Latin penetrabilis penetrable, vulnerable, from penetrare (see
penetrate). Meaning capable of being penetrated is attested from 1530s; figurative use by 1590s.
Related: Penetrability.


penetrate (v.)

1520s, from Latin penetratus, past participle of penetrare to put or get into, enter into, related
to penitus within, inmost, penus innermost part of a temple, store of food, penates household gods.
Related: Penetrated; penetrating.


penetrating (adj.)

touching the feelings intensely, 1630s, figurative present participle adjective from penetrate (v.).


penetration (n.)

c.1600, insight, shrewdness, from Latin penetrationem (nominative penetratio) a penetrating or
piercing, noun of action from past participle stem of penetrare (see penetrate). The sexual sense is
attested from 1610s.


penguin (n.)

1570s, originally used of the great auk of Newfoundland (now extinct), shift in meaning to the
Antarctic bird (which looks something like it, found by Drake in Magellan's Straits in 1578) is from
1580s. Of unknown origin, though often asserted to be from Welsh pen head (see pen-) + gwyn white
(see Gwendolyn), but Barnhart says the proposed formation is not proper Welsh. The great auk had a
large white patch between its bill and eye. The French and Breton versions of the word ultimately
are from English.


penholder (n.)

1815, from pen (n.1) + holder.


penicillin (n.)

1929, coined in English by Alexander Fleming (1881-1955), who first recognized its antibiotic
properties, from Modern Latin Penicillium notatum (1867), the name of the mould from which it was
first obtained, from Latin penicillus paintbrush (see pencil (n.)), in reference to the shape of the
mould cells.


peninsula (n.)

1530s, from Latin p&aelig;ninsula a peninsula, literally almost an island, from p&aelig;ne almost +
insula island (see isle). Earlier translated as demie island.


peninsular (adj.)

1610s, from peninsula + -ar.


penis (n.)

1670s, perhaps from French p&eacute;nis or directly from Latin penis penis, earlier tail, from PIE
*pes- penis (cognates: Sanskrit pasas-, Greek peos, posthe penis, probably also Old English
f&aelig;sl progeny, offspring, Old Norse f&ouml;sull, German Fasel young of animals, brood). The
proper plural is penes. The adjective is penial. In psychological writing, penis envy is attested
from 1924.


penitence (n.)

c.1200, from Old French penitence (11c.) and directly from Latin paenitentia repentance, noun of
condition from paenitentum (nominative paenitens) penitent, present participle of paenitere cause or
feel regret, probably originally is not enough, is unsatisfactory, from paene nearby, almost.


penitent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French p&eacute;nitent (14c.) and directly from Latin paenitentem (see
penitence). As a noun, late 14c., from the adjective.


penitential (adj.)

c.1500, from Medieval Latin penitentialis, from Latin paenitentia repentance (see penitence).


penitentiary (n.)

early 15c., place of punishment for offenses against the church, from Medieval Latin penitentiaria,
from fem. of penitentiarius (adj.) of penance, from Latin paenitentia penitence (see penitence).
Meaning house of correction (originally an asylum for prostitutes) is from 1806, short for
penitentiary house (1776). Slang shortening pen is attested from 1884.


penknife (n.)

early 15c., from pen (n.1) + knife (n.). So called because such small knives were used to sharpen
quills.


penman (n.)

1610s, copyist, clerk, scrivener (obsolete), from pen (n.1) + man (n.).


penmanship (n.)

1690s, from obsolete penman copyist, clerk, scrivener + -ship.


pennant (n.)

1610s, rope for hoisting, probably a blend of pendant in the nautical sense of suspended rope and
pennon. Use for flag on a warship first recorded 1690s; flag symbolizing a sports championship
(especially baseball) is from 1880; as a synonym for championship it was first used 1915.


penniless (adj.)

destitute, early 14c., penyles, from penny + -less.


pennon (n.)

long, narrow flag (often triangular or swallow-tailed), late 14c., from Old French penon feathers of
an arrow; streamer, flag, banner, from penne feather, from Latin penna feather (see pen (n.1)).


Pennsylvania

American colony, later U.S. state, 1681, literally Penn's Woods, a hybrid formed from the surname
Penn (Welsh, literally head) + Latin sylvania (see sylvan). Not named for William Penn, the
proprietor, but, on suggestion of Charles II, for Penn's late father, Admiral William Penn
(1621-1670), who had lent the king the money that was repaid to the son in the form of land for a
Quaker settlement in America. The story goes that the younger Penn wanted to call it New Wales, but
the king's secretary, a Welshman of orthodox religion, wouldn't hear of it. Pennsylvania Dutch is
attested from 1824.


Pennsylvanian (adj.)

1698, from Pennsylvania + -an. In reference to a geological system, attested from 1891. As a noun
meaning a person of Pennsylvania, by 1685.


