pessimism (n.)

1794 worst condition possible, borrowed (by Coleridge) from French pessimisme, formed (on model of
French optimisme) from Latin pessimus worst, originally bottom-most, from PIE *ped-samo-,
superlative of root *pes- foot (see foot (n.)). As a name given to the doctrines of Schopenhauer,
Hartmann, etc., that this is the worst possible world, or that everything tends toward evil, it is
first recorded 1835, from German pessimismus (Schopenhauer, 1819). The attempt to make a verb of it
as pessimize (1862) did not succeed.


pessimist (n.)

1820, one who habitually expects the worst (Knowles' dictionary, 1835, defines it as A universal
complainer), from 19c. French pessimiste (see pessimism).


weltschmerz (n.)

pessimism about life, 1872 (1863 as a German word in English), from German Weltschmerz, coined 1810
by Jean Paul Richter, from Welt world (see world) + Schmerz pain (see smart (n.)). Popularized in
German by Heine.


poetry (n.)

late 14c., poetry; a poem; ancient literature; poetical works, fables, or tales, from Old French
poetrie (13c.), and perhaps directly from Medieval Latin poetria (c.650), from Latin poeta (see
poet). In classical Latin, poetria meant poetess.    ... I decided not to tell lies in verse. Not to
feign any emotion that I did not feel; not to pretend to believe in optimism or pessimism, or
unreversible progress; not to say anything because it was popular, or generally accepted, or
fashionable in intellectual circles, unless I myself believed it; and not to believe easily.
[Robinson Jeffers (1887-1962), forward to Selected Poems]    Figurative use from 1660s. Old English
had metergeweorc verse, metercr&#230;ft art of versification. Modern English lacks a true verb form
in this group of words, though poeticize (1804), poetize (1580s, from French po&eacute;tiser), and
poetrize (c.1600) have been tried. Poetry in motion (1826) perhaps is from poetry of motion (1813)
dance (also poetry of the foot, 1660s).


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


