phobia (n.)

irrational fear, horror, aversion, 1786, perhaps on model of similar use in French, abstracted from
compounds in -phobia, from Greek -phobia, from phobos fear, panic fear, terror, outward show of
fear; object of fear or terror, originally flight (still the only sense in Homer), but it became the
common word for fear via the notion of panic, fright (compare phobein put to flight, frighten), from
PIE root *bhegw- to run (cognates: Lithuanian begu to flee; Old Church Slavonic begu flight, bezati
to flee, run; Old Norse bekkr a stream). Psychological sense attested by 1895.


-phobia

word-forming element meaning excessive or irrational fear of, from Latin -phobia and directly from
Greek -phobia panic fear of, from phobos fear (see phobia). In widespread popular use with native
words from c.1800. Related: -phobic.


phobophobia (n.)

morbid dread of being alarmed, 1890; see phobia.


xenophobia (n.)

1903, from xeno- foreign, strange + -phobia fear. Earlier (c.1884) it meant agoraphobia.


symmetrophobia (n.)

1809, from comb. form of symmetry + -phobia. Supposed to be evident in Egyptian temples and Japanese
art.


arachnophobia (n.)

1925, from comb. form of arachnid + -phobia fear.


pyrophobia (n.)

morbid fear or fire, 1871, from pyro- + -phobia.


hemophobia (n.)

1886, from hemo- blood + -phobia fear.


psychrophobia (n.)

1727, from psychro- cold + -phobia fear.


androphobia (n.)

morbid fear of the male sex (sometimes, rather, of the human race or of crowds), 1844, from andro- +
-phobia. Related: Androphobic.


phobic (adj.)

1888, from phobia + -ic. As a noun from 1968. The Greek adjective was phobetikos liable to fear.


nyctophobia (n.)

medical Latin, from nycto- night + -phobia fear. Related: Nyctophobic.


philophobia (n.)

by 1976, from philo- + -phobia.


phonophobia (n.)

1877, from phono- + -phobia.


Negrophobia (n.)

1819, from Negro + -phobia.


photophobia (n.)

1799, from photo- + -phobia. Related: Photophobic.


necrophobia (n.)

abnormal fear of death or corpses, 1833, from necro- + -phobia fear. Related: Necrophobic.


mysophobia (n.)

dread of dirt or defilement, 1879, from Greek mysos uncleanliness, from PIE *meus- damp (see moss) +
-phobia.


sitophobia (n.)

morbid aversion to food (or certain foods), 1882, from Greek sitos wheat, corn, meal; food, of
unknown origin, + -phobia. Related: Sitophobe; sitophobic.


Satanophobia (n.)

morbid dread of Satan, 1860, from Satan + -phobia, with connective -o-.


ailurophobia (n.)

morbid fear of cats, 1905, from -phobia fear + ailouros cat, of unknown origin. Folk etymology
connects it with aiolos quick-moving + oura tail. Related: Ailurophobe (1914).


chaetophobia (n.)

fear of hair, from chaeto- hair; bristle + -phobia fear.


sciophobia (n.)

fear of shadows, 1977, from scio-, Latinized comb. form of Greek skia shade, shadow (see shine (v.))
+ -phobia. Related: sciophobe; sciophobic.


homophobic (adj.)

by 1971, from homo- (2) homosexual + -phobia + -ic. Related: Homophobe; homophobia (which word is
said to date from 1969).


zoophobia (n.)

1901, from zoo- animal + -phobia. Related: Zoophobic; zoophobe.


Anglophobia (n.)

1793, from Anglo- + -phobia. Related: Anglophobe; Anglophobic.


ophidiophobia (n.)

1914, excessive fear of snakes or reptiles, from ophidio- apparently extracted from Modern Latin
ophidia, a word coined arbitrarily (to provide an -ia form to serve as an order name in taxonomy)
from Greek ophis serpent (see ophio-) + -phobia.


triskaidekaphobia (n.)

fear of the number 13, 1908, also triskaidecaphobia, from Greek treiskaideka, triskaideka thirteen
(from treis three + deka ten) + -phobia fear.


autophobia (n.)

fear of referring to oneself, 1845 (as autophoby), from Greek autos self (see auto-) + -phobia fear.
Related: Autophobic; autophobe.


-phobe

word-forming element meaning one who fears or hates, from French -phobe, from Latin -phobus, from
Greek -phobos fearing, from phobos fear, panic, flight, phobein put to flight, frighten (see
phobia).


agoraphobia (n.)

fear of open spaces, 1873, from German Agorophobie, coined 1871 by Berlin psychiatrist Carl Westphal
(1833-1890) from Greek agora open space (see agora) + -phobia fear. Related: Agoraphobe;
agoraphobic.


claustrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of being shut up in a confined space, coined 1879 (in article by Italian-born, French-
naturalized Swiss-English physician Dr. Benjamin Ball (1834-1892)) from Latin claustrum a bolt, a
means of closing; a place shut in, confined place, frontier fortress (in Medieval Latin cloister),
past participle of claudere to close (see close (v.)) + -phobia fear.


hydrophobia (n.)

late 14c., idroforbia, a symptom of rabies in man (sometimes used for the disease itself), from Late
Latin hydrophobia (Celsius, 50 C.E.), from Greek hydrophobos dreading water, from hydr-, stem of
hydros water (see water (n.1)) + phobos dread, fear (see phobia). So called because human sufferers
show aversion to water and have difficulty swallowing it. In Old English as w&aelig;terfyrhtness.


acrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of heights, 1887, medical Latin, from Greek akros at the end, the top (see acrid) +
-phobia fear. Coined by Italian physician Dr. Andrea Verga in a paper describing the condition, from
which Verga himself suffered.    In this paper, read somewhat over a year ago at the congress of
alienists at Pavia, the author makes confession of his own extreme dread of high places. Though
fearless of the contagion of cholera, he has palpitations on mounting a step-ladder, finds it
unpleasant to ride on the top of a coach or to look out of even a first-story window, and has never
used an elevator. [American Journal of Psychology, Nov. 1888, abstract of Verga's report]


ergophobia (n.)

fear of work, 1905, coinage by British medical man Dr. William Dunnett Spanton, from Greek ergos
work (see organ) + -phobia fear.    Mr. W.D. Spanton (Leeds) considered that the most prominent
causes of physical degeneration were--efforts to rear premature and diseased infants, absurd
educational high pressure, cigarette smoking in the younger generation, and late hours at night; in
fact, the love of pleasure and ergophobia in all classes of society. He considered that there was
too much cheap philanthropy, that life was made too easy for the young poor, and that by modern
educational methods proper parental discipline was rendered almost impossible. [report on the 73rd
annual meeting of the British Medical Association, Nature, Aug. 3, 1905]


coulrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of clowns, by 2001 (said in Web sites to date from 1990s or even 1980s), a popular term,
not from psychology, possibly facetious, though the phenomenon is real enough; said to be built from
Greek kolon limb, with some supposed sense of stilt-walker, hence clown + -phobia.    Ancient Greek
words for clown were skl&ecirc;ro-paikt&ecirc;s, from paizein to play (like a child); or
deikeliktas; other classical words used for theatrical clowns were related to rustic, peasant
(compare Latin fossor clown, literally laborer, digger, related to fossil).    The whole creation
looks suspiciously like the sort of thing idle pseudo-intellectuals invent on the Internet and which
every smarty-pants takes up thereafter; perhaps it is a mangling of Modern Greek klooun clown, which
is the English word borrowed into Greek.


