adenine (n.)

crystaline base, 1885, coined by German physiologist/chemist Albrecht Kossel (1853-1927) from Greek
aden gland (see inguinal) + chemical suffix -ine (2). So called because it was derived from the
pancreas of an ox.


Pavlovian (adj.)

1931, from the theories, experiments, and methods of Russian physiologist Ivan Petrovich Pavlov
(1849-1936), especially in connection with the salivary reflexes of dogs in response to mental
stimulus of the sound of a bell (attested from 1911, in Pavloff [sic] method).


cerebration (n.)

1853, coined by English physiologist Dr. William B. Carpenter (1813-1885) from Latin cerebrum brain
(see cerebral) + -ation. Related: Cerebrate (v.); cerebrated.


enzyme (n.)

1881, as a biochemical term, from German Enzym, coined 1878 by German physiologist Wilhelm
K&uuml;hne (1837-1900), from Modern Greek enzymos leavened, from en in (see en- (2)) + zyme leaven
(see zymurgy).


glycogen (n.)

starch-like substance found in the liver and animal tissue, 1860, from French glycog&egrave;ne,
sugar-producer, from Greek glykys sweet (see glucose) + French -g&egrave;ne (see -gen). Coined in
1848 by French physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-1878).


trypsin (n.)

chief digestive enzyme of pancreatic juice, 1876, coined 1874 by German physiologist Wilhelm
Friedrich K&#252;hne (1837-1900), apparently from Greek tripsis rubbing, friction (from tribein to
rub, rub down, wear away, from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist (see throw (v.)) + chemical
suffix -in (2). Said to be so called because it first was obtained (in 1862) by rubbing the pancreas
with glycerin.


synapse (n.)

junction between two nerve cells, 1899, medical Latin, from Greek synapsis conjunction, from or
related to synaptein to clasp, join together, tie or bind together, be connected with, from syn-
together (see syn-) + haptein to fasten (see apse). Introduced by English physiologist Sir Michael
Foster (1836-1907) at the suggestion of English classical scholar Arthur Woollgar Verral
(1851-1912).


plankton (n.)

1891, from German Plankton (1887), coined by German physiologist Viktor Hensen (1835-1924) from
Greek plankton, neuter of planktos wandering, drifting, verbal adjective from plazesthai to wander,
drift, from plazein to drive astray, from PIE root *plak- (2) to strike, hit  (see plague (n.)).
Related: Planktonic.


hormone (n.)

1905, from Greek hormon that which sets in motion, present participle of horman impel, urge on, from
horme onset, impulse, from PIE *or-sma-, from root *er- to move, set in motion. Used by Hippocrates
to denote a vital principle; modern meaning coined by English physiologist Ernest Henry Starling
(1866-1927). Jung used horme (1915) in reference to hypothetical mental energy that drives
unconscious activities and instincts. Related: Hormones.


protoplasm (n.)

1848, from German Protoplasma (1846), used by German botanist Hugo von Mohl (1805-1872), on notion
of first-formed, from Greek proto- first (see proto-) + plasma something molded (see -plasm).    The
word was in Late Latin with a sense of first created thing, and it might have existed in
ecclesiastical Greek in a different sense. It was used 1839 by Czech physiologist Johannes
Evangelista Purkinje (1787-1869) to denote the gelatinous fluid found in living tissue. The modern
meaning is a refinement of this. This word prevailed, though German language purists preferred
Urschleim.


physiology (n.)

1560s, study and description of natural objects, from Middle French physiologie or directly from
Latin physiologia natural science, study of nature, from Greek physiologia natural science, inquiry
into nature, from physio- nature (see physio-) + logia study (see -logy). Meaning science of the
normal function of living things is attested from 1610s. Related: Physiologic; physiologist.


