physiology (n.)

1560s, study and description of natural objects, from Middle French physiologie or directly from
Latin physiologia natural science, study of nature, from Greek physiologia natural science, inquiry
into nature, from physio- nature (see physio-) + logia study (see -logy). Meaning science of the
normal function of living things is attested from 1610s. Related: Physiologic; physiologist.


physiological (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to natural science, from physiology + -ical. From 1814 as pertaining to
physiology. Related: Physiologically.


hot-blooded (adj.)

passionate, 1590s; a relic of medieval physiology theory.


autonomic (adj.)

1832, pertaining to autonomy (q.v.); used mostly in physiology. Autonomical is recorded from 1650s.


sinusoid

1823 in mathematics; 1900 in physiology, from sinus + -oid. Related: Sinusoidal.


consensus (n.)

1854 as a term in physiology; 1861 of persons; from Latin consensus agreement, accord, past
participle of consentire (see consent). There is an isolated instance of the word from 1633.


pathophysiology (adj.)

1952, from patho- + physiology.


anthropology (n.)

science of the natural history of man, 1590s, originally especially of the relation between
physiology and psychology, from Modern Latin anthropologia or coined independently in English from
anthropo- + -logy. In Aristotle, anthropologos is used literally, as speaking of man.


saturnine (adj.)

gloomy, morose, sluggish, grave, mid-15c., literally born under the influence of the planet Saturn,
from Middle English Saturne (see Saturn) + -ine (1). Medieval physiology believed these
characteristics to be caused by the astrological influence of the planet Saturn, which was the most
remote from the Sun (in the limited knowledge of the times) and thus coldest and slowest in its
revolution.


bipolar (adj.)

having two poles, from bi- + polar; 1810 with figurative sense of of double aspect; 1859 with
reference to physiology. Psychiatric use in reference to what had been called manic-depressive
psychosis is said to have begun 1957 with German psychiatrist Karl Leonhard. The term became popular
early 1990s. Bipolar disorder was in DSM III (1980).


parenchyma (n.)

1650s, Modern Latin, from Greek parenkhyma something poured in beside, from para- beside (see para-
(1)) + enkhyma infusion, from en- in + khein to pour (see found (v.2)). In ancient physiology, the
stuff that was supposed to make up the liver, lungs, etc., which was believed to be formed from
blood strained through the capillaries and congealed.


metabolism (n.)

in physiology sense, 1878, from French m&eacute;tabolisme, from Greek metabole a change, from
metaballein to change, from meta- over (see meta-) + ballein to throw (see ballistics).


sanguine (adj.)

blood-red, late 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French sanguin (fem. sanguine), from Latin
sanguineus of blood, also bloody, bloodthirsty, from sanguis (genitive sanguinis) blood (see
sanguinary). Meaning cheerful, hopeful, confident first attested c.1500, because these qualities
were thought in medieval physiology to spring from an excess of blood as one of the four humors.
Also in Middle English as a noun, type of red cloth (early 14c.).


complexion (n.)

mid-14c., bodily constitution, from Old French complexion, complession combination of humors, hence
temperament, character, make-up, from Latin complexionem (nominative complexio) combination (in Late
Latin, physical constitution), from complexus (see complex (adj.)). Meaning appearance of the skin
of the face is first recorded mid-15c. In medieval physiology, the color of the face indicated
temperament or health.


lymph (n.)

1725 in physiology sense, colorless fluid found in the body, from French lymphe, from Latin lympha
water, clear water, a goddess of water, variant of lump&aelig; waters, altered by influence of Greek
nymphe goddess of a spring, nymph. The word was used earlier in English in the classical sense pure
water, water (1620s), also (1670s) with reference to colorless fluids in plants. Also see lymphatic.
Lymph node is attested from 1892.


bursa (n.)

by 1788 as an English word in physiology, shortened from medieval Latin bursa mucosa mucus pouch,
from Medieval Latin bursa bag, purse, from Late Latin bursa, variant of byrsa hide, from Greek byrsa
hide, skin, wineskin, drum, of unknown origin; compare purse (n.).


spleen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French esplen, from Latin splen, from Greek splen the milt, spleen, from PIE
*spelgh- spleen, milt (cognates: Sanskrit plihan-, Avestan sperezan, Armenian p'aicaln, Latin lien,
Old Church Slavonic slezena, Lithuanian blu&#382;nis, Old Prussian blusne, Old Irish selg spleen).
Regarded in medieval physiology as the seat of morose feelings and bad temper. Hence figurative
sense of violent ill-temper (1580s, implied in spleenful); and thence spleenless free from anger,
ill-humor, malice, or spite (1610s).


phlegm (n.)

late 14c., fleem viscid mucus (the stuff itself and also regarded as a bodily humor), from Old
French fleume (13c., Modern French flegme), from Late Latin phlegma, one of the four humors of the
body, from Greek phlegma humor caused by heat, lit inflammation, heat, from phlegein to burn,
related to phlox (genitive phlogos) flame, blaze, from PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, from root *bhel-
(1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Modern form is attested from c.1660. The cold, moist
humor of the body, in medieval physiology, it was believed to cause apathy.


melancholy (n.)

c.1300, condition characterized by sullenness, gloom, irritability, from Old French melancolie black
bile, ill disposition, anger, annoyance (13c.), from Late Latin melancholia, from Greek melankholia
sadness, literally (excess of) black bile, from melas (genitive melanos) black (see melanin) + khole
bile (see Chloe). Medieval physiology attributed depression to excess of black bile, a secretion of
the spleen and one of the body's four humors.    The Latin word also is the source of Spanish
melancolia, Italian melancolia, German Melancholie, Danish melankoli, etc. Old French variant
malencolie (also in Middle English) is by false association with mal sickness.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


