physical (n.)

a physical examination, by 1934, from physical (adj.).


physical (adj.)

early 15c., of or pertaining to material nature (in medicine, opposed to surgical), from Medieval
Latin physicalis of nature, natural, from Latin physica study of nature (see physic). Meaning
pertaining to matter is from 1590s; meaning having to do with the body, corporeal is attested from
1780. Meaning characterized by bodily attributes or activities is attested from 1970. Physical
education first recorded 1838; abbreviated form phys ed is from 1955. Physical therapy is from 1922.
Related: Physically.


physicality (n.)

1590s, from physical + -ity.


Pilates

c.1980, physical fitness regimen developed c.1920 by German-born physical fitness teacher Joseph
Pilates (1883-1967).


physico-

word-forming element meaning physical, physically; natural, from Latinized comb. form of Greek
physikos natural, physical (see physic).


PE

1956 as an abbreviation of physical education (see physical).


touch (v.)

late 13c., make deliberate physical contact with, from Old French tochier to touch, hit, knock;
mention, deal with (11c., Modern French toucher), from Vulgar Latin *toccare to knock, strike as a
bell (source also of Spanish tocar, Italian toccare), perhaps of imitative origin. Related: Touched;
touching.    From c.1300 in transitive sense bring into physical contact, also pertain to. Other
senses attested from 14c. are perceive by physical contact, examine by sense of touch, also be or
come into physical contact with; come to rest on; border on, be contiguous with; also use the sense
of touch, and mention, describe. From early 14c. as affect or move mentally or emotionally, with
notion of to touch the heart or mind. Also from early 14c. as have sexual contact with. Meaning to
get or borrow money first recorded 1760. Touch-and-go (adj.) is recorded from 1812, apparently from
the name of a tag-like game, first recorded 1650s. Touch football is first attested 1933. Touch-me-
not (1590s) translates Latin noli-me-tangere.


psychosomatic (adj.)

1847, pertaining to the relation between mind and body, from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) +
somatikos, from soma (genitive somatos) body (see somato-). Applied from 1938 to physical disorders
with psychological causes. Etymologically it could as easily apply to emotional disorders with
physical causes, but it is rarely used as such.


amend (v.)

early 13c., to free from faults, rectify, from Old French amender (12c.), from Latin emendare to
correct, free from fault, from ex- out (see ex-) + menda fault, blemish, from PIE *mend- physical
defect, fault (cognates: Sanskrit minda physical blemish, Old Irish mennar stain, blemish, Welsh
mann sign, mark).    Supplanted in senses of repair, cure by its shortened offspring mend (v.).
Meaning to add to legislation (ostensibly to correct or improve it) is recorded from 1777. Related:
Amended; amending.


exercise (n.)

mid-14c., condition of being in active operation; practice for the sake of training, from Old French
exercice (13c.) exercise, execution of power; physical or spiritual exercise, from Latin exercitium
training, exercise, from exercitare, frequentative of exercere keep busy, drive on, literally remove
restraint, from ex- off (see ex-) + arcere keep away, prevent, enclose, from PIE *ark- to hold,
contain, guard (see arcane).    Original sense may have been driving farm animals to the field to
plow. Meaning physical activity first recorded in English late 14c.; in reference to written
schoolwork from early 17c. The ending was abstracted for formations such as dancercise (1967);
jazzercise (1977); and boxercise (1985).


qi (n.)

physical life force, 1850, from Chinese qi air, breath.


faculties (n.)

early 16c., powers or properties of one's self, also physical functions; plural of faculty.


facilities (n.)

opportunities, 1809, plural of facility. Sense of physical means of doing something is from 1872.


yielding (adj.)

late 14c., generous in rewarding, present participle adjective from yield (v.). From 1660s as giving
way to physical force.


sorry (adj.)

Old English sarig distressed, grieved, full of sorrow (not found in the physical sense of sore),
from Proto-Germanic *sairiga- painful (cognates: Old Saxon serag, Middle Dutch seerigh sore; sad,
sorry, Dutch zeerig sore, full of sores, Old High German serag, Swedish s&#229;rig sore, full of
sores), from *sairaz pain (physical and mental); related to *saira- suffering, sick, ill (see sore
(adj.)). Meaning wretched, worthless, poor first recorded mid-13c. Spelling shift from -a- to -o- by
influence of sorrow. Apologetic sense (short for I'm sorry) is attested from 1834; phrase sorry
about that popularized 1960s by U.S. TV show Get Smart. Related: Sorrily; sorriness.


bod (n.)

1788, a person, short for body. Meaning physical body is recorded from 1933.


trainer (n.)

c.1600, one who educates or instructs, agent noun from train (v.). Meaning one who prepares another
for feats requiring physical fitness is from 1823, originally of horse-trainers.


senses (n.)

mental faculties, conscious cognitive powers, sanity, 1560s, from sense (n.). Meaning faculties of
physical sensation is from 1590s.


oomph

sexual attractiveness, 1937, suggestive visceral physical sound. Ann Sheridan
(1915Ã¢&euro;&ldquo;1967) was the original Hollywood oomph girl (1939).


backing (n.)

1590s, support; 1640s, retreat; verbal noun from back (v.). Physical sense of anything forming a
backing to something else is from 1793. Meaning musical accompaniment is recorded from 1940.


work (v.)

a fusion of Old English wyrcan (past tense worhte, past participle geworht) prepare, perform, do,
make, construct, produce; strive after (from Proto-Germanic *wurkijan); and Old English wircan
(Mercian) to operate, function, set in motion, a secondary verb formed relatively late from Proto-
Germanic noun *werkan (see work (n.)). Sense of perform physical labor was in Old English, as was
sense ply one's trade and exert creative power, be a creator. Transitive sense manipulate (physical
substances) into a desired state or form was in Old English. Meaning have the expected or desired
effect is from late 14c. In Middle English also perform sexually (mid-13c.). Related: Worked (15c.);
working. To work up excite is from c.1600. To work over beat up, thrash is from 1927. To work
against attempt to subvert is from late 14c.


awkwardness (n.)

1704, lack of grace, from awkward + -ness. Meaning physical clumsiness is attested from c.1770; that
of social embarrassment is from 1788.


matterless (adj.)

late 14c., insubstantial, immaterial, without physical substance, from matter (n.) + -less. From
1610s as devoid of sense or meaning.


mugging (n.)

violent physical attack, 1846, verbal noun from mug (v.1). As grimmacing, making faces, 1937, from
mug (v.2).


ordeal (n.)

Old English ordel, ordal, trial by physical test, literally judgment, verdict, from Proto-Germanic
noun *uz-dailjam (cognates: Old Saxon urdeli, Old Frisian urdel, Dutch oordeel, German urteil
judgment), literally that which is dealt out (by the gods), from *uzdailijan share out, related to
Old English ad&aelig;lan to deal out (see deal (n.1)). Curiously absent in Middle English, and
perhaps reborrowed 16c. from Medieval Latin or Middle French, which got it from Germanic.    The
notion is of the kind of arduous physical test (such as walking blindfolded and barefoot between
red-hot plowshares) that was believed to determine a person's guilt or innocence by immediate
judgment of the deity, an ancient Teutonic mode of trial. English retains a more exact sense of the
word; its cognates in German, etc., have been generalized.    Metaphoric extension to anything which
tests character or endurance is attested from 1650s. The prefix or- survives in English only in this
word, but was common in Old English and other Germanic languages (Gothic ur-, Old Norse or-, etc.)
and originally was an adverb and preposition meaning out.


hewer (n.)

cutter (of stone or wood), mid-12c. as a surname, agent noun from hew (v.). Hwers of wood and
drawers of water as the lowliest sort of physical laborers is from Joshua ix:12.


viewpoint (n.)

1856, of mental positions; 1858 in a physical sense, from view + point (n.).


incontinently (adv.)

early 15c., immediately, without delay, from incontinent + -ly (2). In reference to physical
looseness, from 1550s.


natural (n.)

person with a natural gift or talent, 1925, originally in prizefighting, from natural (adj.). In
Middle English, the word as a noun meant natural capacity, physical ability or power (early 14c.),
and it was common in sense a native of a place in Shakespeare's day. Also in 17c., a mistress.


basketball (n.)

1892, American English, from basket + ball (n.1). The game was invented 1891 by James A. Naismith
(1861-1939), physical education instructor in Springfield, Massachusetts, U.S.


infantilism (n.)

1894 in a psychological sense; see infantile + -ism. Earlier in a physiological sense, retarded and
imperfect physical development.


overbear (v.)

late 14c., to carry over, from over- + bear (v.). Meaning to bear down by weight of physical force
is from 1535 (in Coverdale), originally nautical, of an overwhelming wind; figurative sense of to
overcome and repress by power, authority, etc. is from 1560s.


superpower (n.)

1944, in geopolitical sense of nation with great interest and ability to exert force in worldwide
theaters of conflict, from super- + power (n.). The word itself is attested in physical (electrical
power) senses from 1922.


kinesis (n.)

physical movement, 1819, from Greek kinesis movement, motion (see cite).


build (n.)

style of construction, 1660s, from build (v.). Earlier in this sense was built (1610s). Meaning
physical construction and fitness of a person attested by 1981. Earliest sense, now obsolete, was a
building (early 14c.).


hardware (n.)

mid-15c., small metal goods, from hard + ware (n.). In the sense of physical components of a
computer it dates from 1947. Hardware store attested by 1789.


undefiled (adj.)

c.1300, undefylde, from un- (1) not + past participle of defile (v.). Originally of morals; sexual
sense is attested from mid-15c. Physical sense of not made dirty is from 1580s.


firewall (n.)

1851 as a physical wall meant to prevent the spread of fire in a structure, from fire (n.) + wall
(n.). Computer sense is by 1990.


traumatize (v.)

1893, in reference to physical wounds; 1949 in the psychological sense, from Greek traumat-, stem of
trauma (see trauma).


geophysical (adj.)

1888, from geo- earth + physical (adj.).


pansexual (adj.)

1926 (pansexualism is from 1917), from pan- + sexual. Originally in reference to the view that the
sex instinct plays the primary part in all human activity, mental and physical; this was held by his
critics to be the view of Freud, therefore a term of reproach leveled at early psychology.


unnatural (adj.)

early 15c., not in accord with physical nature, from un- (1) not + natural (adj.). Meaning
artificial is attested from 1746; that of at variance with moral standards is from 1520s. Related:
Unnaturally; unnaturalness.


embody (v.)

1540s, in reference to a soul or spirit invested with a physical form; of principles, ideas, etc.,
from 1660s; from en- (1) in + body. Related: Embodied; embodying.


destabilize (v.)

1934 in a physical sense; earlier (1924) with reference to political systems, governments, nations,
etc.; see de- + stabilize. Related: Destabilized; destabilizing.


chemistry (n.)

c.1600, alchemy, from chemist + -ry; also see chemical (adj.). The meaning natural physical process
is 1640s, and the scientific study not so called until 1788. The figurative sense of instinctual
attraction or affinity is attested slightly earlier, from the alchemical sense.


pang (n.)

1520s, sudden physical pain, of unknown origin, perhaps related to prong (prongys of deth is
recorded from mid-15c.). Reference to mental or emotional pain is from 1560s. Related: Pangs.


benumb (v.)

late 15c., from be- + numb. Originally of mental states; of the physical body from 1520s. Related:
Benumbed; benumbing.


common sense (n.)

14c., originally the power of uniting mentally the impressions conveyed by the five physical senses,
thus ordinary understanding, without which one is foolish or insane (Latin sensus communis, Greek
koine aisthesis); meaning good sense is from 1726. Also, as an adjective, commonsense.


physio-

word-forming element meaning nature, natural, physical, from Greek physio-, comb. form of physios
nature (see physic).


armless (adj.)

late 14c., of physical conditions, from arm (n.1) + -less. Meaning without weapons is attested from
1610s (from arm (n.2)), but that sense is more typically expressed by unarmed.


