pinch (n.)

late 15c., critical juncture (as in baseball pinch hitter, attested from 1912), from pinch (v.).
This figurative sense is attested earlier than the literal sense of act of pinching (1590s) or that
of small quantity (as much as can be pinched between a thumb and finger), which is from 1580s. There
is a use of the noun from mid-15c. apparently meaning fold or pleat of fabric.


pinch (v.)

early 13c., from Old North French *pinchier to pinch, squeeze, nip; steal (Old French pincier,
Modern French pincer), of uncertain origin, possibly from Vulgar Latin *punctiare to pierce, which
might be a blend of Latin punctum point + *piccare to pierce. Meaning to steal in English is from
1650s. Sense of to be stingy is recorded from early 14c. Related: Pinched; pinching.


pince-nez (n.)

folding eyeglasses, 1876, French, literally pinch-nose, from pincer to pinch (see pinch (v.)) + nez
nose (see nose (n.)).


nip (v.)

to pinch sharply; to bite suddenly, late 14c., related to Middle Low German nipen to nip, to pinch,
Middle Dutch nipen to pinch, Dutch nijpen, Old Norse hnippa to prod, but the exact evolution of the
stem is obscure. Related: Nipped; nipping. To nip (something) in the bud in the figurative sense is
first recorded c.1600.


twinge (n.)

1540s, a pinch, a nipping, from obsolete verb twinge to pinch, tweak, from Old English twengan to
pinch, from Proto-Germanic *twangjan (cognates: Old Frisian thwinga, Old Norse &#254;vinga, Danish
tvinge, Dutch dwingen, Old High German thwingan, German zwingen to compel, force), from PIE *twengh-
to press in on (see thong). Meaning sharp, sudden minor pain is recorded from c.1600. Figurative
sense (with reference to shame, remorse, etc.) is recorded from 1620s.


pincers (n.)

early 14c., tool for grasping or nipping, from Old French pinceure pincers, tongs, from pincier to
pinch (see pinch). Applied to animal parts from 1650s. Related: Pincer.


cram (v.)

Old English crammian press something into something else, from Proto-Germanic *kram-/*krem-
(cognates: Old High German krimman to press, pinch, Old Norse kremja to squeeze, pinch), from PIE
root *ger- to gather (see gregarious). Meaning study intensely for an exam originally was British
student slang first recorded 1803. Related: Crammed; cramming.


nip (n.2)

a pinch; a sharp bite, 1540s, from nip (v.). Meaning a chill in the weather is from 1610s, probably
so called for its effect on vegetation. Nip and tuck a close thing is recorded from 1832, perhaps
from sailing or tailoring.


pinscher (n.)

1926, from German Pinscher, also Pinsch, probably from English pinch, in reference to its clipped
ears.


pizzicato (n.)

1845, from Italian pizzicato plucked, past participle of pizzicare to pluck (strings), pinch, from
pizzare to prick, to sting, from Old Italian pizzo point, edge, from Vulgar Latin *pits-, probably
of imitative origin. As an adjective from 1880.


snuff (v.1)

to cut or pinch off the burned part of a candle wick, mid-15c., from noun snoffe burned part of a
candle wick (late 14c.), of unknown origin, perhaps related to snuff (v.2). The meaning to die is
from 1865; that of to kill is from 1932; snuff-film, originally an urban legend, is from 1975.


nap (n.1)

downy surface of cloth, mid-15c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German noppe nap, tuft of wool,
probably introduced by Flemish cloth-workers. Cognate with Old English hnoppian to pluck, ahneopan
pluck off, Old Swedish niupa to pinch, Gothic dis-hniupan to tear.


tweak (v.)

pinch, pluck, twist, usually to the nose, c.1600, probably from Middle English twikken to draw, tug,
pluck (mid-15c.), from Old English twiccian to pluck, of obscure origin; perhaps related to twitch.
Meaning to make fine adjustments is attested from 1966. Related: Tweaked; tweaking.


nab (v.)

to catch (someone), 1680s, probably a variant of dialectal nap to seize, catch, lay hold of (1670s,
now surviving only in kidnap), which possibly is from Scandinavian (compare Norwegian nappe, Swedish
nappa to catch, snatch; Danish nappe to pinch, pull); reinforced by Middle English napand grasping,
greedy. Related: Nabbed; nabbing.


twitch (v.)

late 12c., to-twic-chen pull apart with a quick jerk, related to Old English twiccian to pluck,
gather, catch hold of, from Proto-Germanic *twikjon- (cognates: Low German twicken, Dutch twikken,
Old High German gizwickan, German zwicken to pinch, tweak). Related: Twitched; twitching.


thong (n.)

Old English &thorn;wong, &thorn;wang narrow strip of leather (used as a cord, band, strip, etc.),
from Proto-Germanic *thwang- (cognates: Old Norse &thorn;vengr), from PIE root *twengh- to press in
on, to restrain (cognates: Old English twengan to pinch, squeeze). As a kind of sandal, first
attested 1965; as a kind of bikini briefs, 1990.


prong (n.)

early 15c., prange pointed instrument; mid-15c., pronge pain, from Anglo-Latin pronga prong, pointed
tool, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle Low German prange stick, restraining device,
prangen to press, pinch. See also prod, which might be related. Prong-horned antelope is from 1815
(short form pronghorn attested from 1826).


Dobermann pinscher (n.)

1917, for Ludwig Dobermann, 19c. German dog-breeder in Thuringia. Pinscher fox terrier seems to be a
19c. borrowing from English pinch (see Kluge).   Der Kutscher aus gutem Hause verschafft sich, wie
er kann und wenn er kann, einen ganz kleinen englischen Pinscher, der den Pferden sehr gut gut folgt
und die gro&szlig;en D&auml;nen von ehedem ersetzt hat, aus J.J. Rousseau's Zeit, der von dem
d&auml;nischen Hunde umgerannt wurde, wie ihr wi&szlig;t. [Paris, oder, Das Buch der Hundert und
Ein, Volume 6, Theodor Hell (pseud.), Potsdam, 1833]


higgledy-piggledy

confusedly, hurriedly, 1590s, a vocal gesture [OED] probably formed from pig and the animal's
suggestions of mess and disorder. Reduplications in the h-/p- pattern are common (as in hanky-panky,
hocus-pocus, hinch(y)-pinch(y), an obsolete children's game, attested from c.1600).    Edward Moor,
Suffolk Words and Phrases (London, 1823), quotes a list of reduplications from Ray's Collection of
English Words (1768), all said to signify any confusion or mixture; the list has higgledy-piggledy,
hurly-burly, hodge-podge, mingle-mangle, arsy-versy, kim-kam, hub-bub, crawly-mauly, and hab-nab. To
which he might have added, Moor writes, crincum-crankum, crinkle-crankle, flim-flam, fiddle-faddle,
gibble-gabble, harum-scarum, helter-skelter, hiccup-suickup, hocus-pocus, hotch-potch, hugger-
mugger, hum-drum, hum-strum, hurry-scurry, jibber-jabber, prittle-prattle, shilly-shally, tittle-
tattle, and topsy-turvy. Many of them seem to date to the 16th century.


