pliable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ploiable flexible, bendable, from plier to bend (see ply (n.)). Related:
Pliably, pliability.


applicable (adj.)

1560s, pliable, with -able + Latin applicare (see apply). Meaning capable of being applied is from
1650s; earlier in this sense was appliable (mid-15c.).


mobile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French mobile (14c.), from Latin mobilis movable, easy to move; loose, not
firm, figuratively, pliable, flexible, susceptible, nimble, quick; changeable, inconstant, fickle,
contraction of *movibilis, from movere to move (see move (v.)). Sociology sense from 1927. Mobile
home first recorded 1940.


bagel (n.)

1919, from Yiddish beygl, from Middle High German boug- ring, bracelet, from Old High German boug a
ring, related to Old English beag ring (in poetry, an Anglo-Saxon lord was beaggifa ring-giver),
from Proto-Germanic *baugaz-, from PIE root *bheug- (3) to bend, with derivatives referring to bent,
pliable, or curved objects (such as Old High German biogan to bend; see bow (v.)).


bight (n.)

Old English byht bend, angle, corner (related to bow), from Proto-Germanic *buhtiz (cognates: Middle
Low German bucht, German Bucht, Dutch bocht, Danish bught bight, bay), from PIE root *bheug- (3) to
bend, with derivatives referring to bent, pliable, or curved objects (cognates: Old English beag,
Old High German boug ring; see bow (v.)). Sense of indentation on a coastline is from late 15c.


buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


bloat (v.)

1670s, to cause to swell (earlier, in reference to cured fish, to cause to be soft, 1610s), from now
obsolete bloat (adj.), attested from c.1300 as soft, flabby, flexible, pliable, but by 17c. meaning
puffed up, swollen. Perhaps from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse blautr soaked, soft from
being cooked in liquid (compare Swedish bl&#246;t fisk soaked fish), possibly from Proto-Germanic
*blaut-, from PIE *bhleu- to swell, well up, overflow, an extension of root *bhel- (2) to blow,
inflate, swell (see bole).    Influenced by or combined with Old English blawan blow, puff.
Figurative use by 1711. Intransitive meaning to swell, to become swollen is from 1735. Related:
Bloated; bloating.


bow (v.)

Old English bugan to bend, to bow down, to bend the body in condescension, also to turn back (class
II strong verb; past tense beag, past participle bogen), from Proto-Germanic *bugon (cognates: Dutch
buigen, Middle Low German bugen, Old High German biogan, German biegen, Gothic biugan to bend, Old
Norse boginn bent), from *beugen, from PIE root *bheug- (3) to bend, with derivatives referring to
bent, pliable, or curved objects (cognates: Sanskrit bhujati bends, thrusts aside; Old High German
boug, Old English beag a ring). The noun in this sense is first recorded 1650s. Related: Bowed;
bowing. Bow out withdraw is from 1942.


