plump (v.2)

to become plump, 1530s, from plump (adj.). Meaning to plump (something) up, to cause to swell is
from 1530s. Related: Plumped; plumping.


plump (adj.)

late 15c., blunt, dull (in manners), from Dutch plomp blunt, thick, massive, stumpy, probably
related to plompen fall or drop heavily (see plump (v.)). Meaning fleshy, of rounded form is from
1540s in English. Danish and Swedish plump rude, coarse, clumsy are from the Low German word and
represent a different sense development.


plump (v.1)

c.1300, to fall or strike with a full impact, common Low German word, from or related to Middle
Dutch and Dutch plompen, East Frisian plumpen, Middle Low German plumpen, probably more or less
imitative of something hard striking something soft. Hence plump (n.) a firm blow, in pugilism
usually one to the stomach.    To plump; to strike, or shoot. I'll give you a plump in the bread
basket, or the victualling office; I'll give you a blow in the stomach. [Grose, Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   <hr />   Or, even if any of them should suspect me, I know how to
bring myself off. It is but pretending to be affronted, stripping directly, challenging him to
fight, and before he can be on his guard, hitting him a plump in the bread-basket, that shall make
him throw up his accounts; and I'll engage he will have but very little stomach to accuse me after.
[The Reverie: or A Flight to the Paradise of Fools, London, 1763]


plumpness (n.)

1540s, from plump (adj.) + -ness.


buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


Rubenesque (adj.)

of a woman's body, rounded and alluringly plump, 1904, of the type characteristic of the paintings
of Flemish painter Sir Peter Paul Rubens (1577-1640).


sleek (adj.)

1580s, variant of Middle English slike (see slick (adj.)). Originally of healthy-looking animal
hair; applied to persons 1630s, with sense of plump and smooth-skinned. Figurative meaning slick,
fawning, flattering is from 1590s.


bulky (adj.)

mid-15c., plump, stout, from bulk (n.) + -y (2). Related: Bulkiness.


fleshy (adj.)

plump, mid-14c., from flesh (n.) + -y (2). Related: Fleshiness.


zaftig (adj.)

alluringly plump, curvaceous, buxom, 1937, from Yiddish zaftik, literally juicy, from zaft juice,
from Middle High German saft juice (see sap (n.1)).


plumb (adj.)

perpendicular, vertical, mid-15c., from plumb (n.). The notion of exact measurement led to extended
sense of completely, downright (1748), sometimes spelled plump, plum, or plunk.


crummy (adj.)

1560s, easily crumbled; 1570s, like bread, from crumb + -y (2). The second sense probably accounts
for 18c. (and later in dialects) use, of a woman, attractively plump, full-figured, buxom. Slang
meaning shoddy, filthy, inferior, poorly made in use by 1859, probably is from the first sense, but
influenced by crumb in its slang sense of louse.


obese (adj.)

1650s, back-formation from obesity and in part from Latin obesus fat, stout, plump, past participle
of obedere that has eaten itself fat (see obesity). According to OED, Rare before 19th c. Related:
Obeseness. Latin obesus was translated in Old English as oferf&#230;t overfat.


fulsome (adj.)

Middle English compound of ful full (see full (adj.)) + -som (see -some (1)). Sense evolved from
abundant, full (mid-13c.) to plump, well-fed (mid-14c.) to overgrown, overfed (1640s) and thus, of
language, offensive to taste or good manners (1660s). Since the 1960s, however, it commonly has been
used in its original, favorable sense, especially in fulsome praise. Related: Fulsomely;
fulsomeness.


bunting (n.2)

lark-like bird, c.1300, bountyng, of unknown origin. Perhaps from buntin plump (compare baby
bunting, also Scots buntin short and thick; Welsh bontin rump, and bontinog big-assed), or a double
diminutive of French bon. Or it might be named in reference to speckled plumage and be from an
unrecorded Old English word akin to German bunt speckled, Dutch bont.


pudgy (adj.)

also podgy, 1824, from colloquial pudge anything short and thick + -y (2). Perhaps related to pudsy
plump (1754), possibly a diminutive of nursery word pud hand, forepaw (from 17c.). A connection with
pudding also has been conjectured. In late 19c. often on lists of English local or dialectal words;
sources also mention puddy, punchy, pluggy, pudget as relatives or variants. Related: Pudginess.


lubber (n.)

mid-14c., big, clumsy, stupid fellow who lives in idleness, from lobre, earlier lobi lazy lout,
probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Swedish dialectal lubber a plump, lazy fellow). But OED
suggests a possible connection with Old French lobeor swindler, parasite, with sense altered by
association with lob (n.) in the bumpkin sense. A sailors' word since 16c. (as in landlubber), but
earliest attested use is of lazy monks (abbey-lubber). Compare also lubberwort, the name of the
mythical herb that produces laziness (1540s); and Lubberland imaginary land of plenty without work
(1590s). Sometimes also Lubbard (1580s).


fat (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;tt fat, fatted, plump, obese, originally a contracted past participle of
f&aelig;ttian to cram, stuff, from Proto-Germanic *faitaz fat (cognates: Old Frisian fatt, Old Norse
feitr, Dutch vet, German feist), from PIE *poid- to abound in water, milk, fat, etc. (source also of
Greek piduein to gush forth), from root *peie- to be fat, swell (cognates: Sanskrit payate swells,
exuberates, pituh juice, sap, resin; Lithuanian pienas milk; Greek pion fat, wealthy; Latin pinguis
fat).    Teen slang meaning attractive, up to date (also later phat) is attested from 1951. Fat cat
privileged and rich person is from 1928; fat chance no chance at all attested from 1905, perhaps
ironic (the expression is found earlier in the sense good opportunity). Fathead is from 1842; fat-
witted is from 1590s; fatso is first recorded 1943. Expression the fat is in the fire originally
meant the plan has failed (1560s).


