polar (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French polaire (16c.) or directly from Medieval Latin polaris of or pertaining to
the poles, from Latin polus an end of an axis (see pole (n.2)). Meaning directly opposite in
character or tendency is attested from 1832. Polar bear first recorded 1781.


polarize (v.)

1811, in optics, from French polariser, coined by French physicist &Eacute;tienne-Louis Malus
(1775-1812) as a term in optics, from Modern Latin polaris polar (see polar). Transferred sense of
to accentuate a division in a group or system is first recorded 1949 in Arthur Koestler. Related:
Polarized; polarizing.


polarity (n.)

1640s, originally of magnets, from polar + -ity.


Polaris (n.)

1769, short for stella polaris, Modern Latin, literally the pole star (see polar). The ancient
Greeks called it Phoenice, the Phoenician (star), because the Phoenicians used it for navigation,
though due to precession of the equinoxes it was not then the pole star. Also see pole (n.2). The
Old English word for it was Scip-steorra ship-star, reflecting its importance in navigation. As the
name of a U.S. Navy long-range submarine-launched guided nuclear missile, it dates from 1957.


non-polar (adj.)

also nonpolar, 1892, from non- + polar.


multipolar (adj.)

also multi-polar, 1859, from multi- + polar. Related: Multipolarity.


circumpolar (adj.)

1680s in astronomy; 1690s in geography, from circum- + polar.


unipolar (adj.)

1812, originally in electricity, from uni- + polar. Related: Unipolarity.


bipolar (adj.)

having two poles, from bi- + polar; 1810 with figurative sense of of double aspect; 1859 with
reference to physiology. Psychiatric use in reference to what had been called manic-depressive
psychosis is said to have begun 1957 with German psychiatrist Karl Leonhard. The term became popular
early 1990s. Bipolar disorder was in DSM III (1980).


Arctic Circle

1550s, in reference to a celestial circle, a line around the sky which, in any location, bounds the
stars which   are ever-visible from that latitude (in the Northern Hemisphere, this is focused on
the celestial north pole); the concept goes back to the ancient Greeks, for whom this set of
constellations included most prominently the two bears (arktoi), hence the name for the circle (see
arctic). Of Earth, the circle 66 degrees 32 minutes north of the equator, marking the southern
extremity of the polar day, it is recorded from 1620s.


mensa (n.)

altar top, 1848, Latin, literally table, also meal, supper, and altar, sacrificial table, hence used
in Church Latin for upper slab of a church altar (see mesa). With a capital M-, the name of an
organization for people of IQs of 148 or more founded in England in 1946, the name chosen, according
to the organization, to suggest a round table type group. The constellation was originally Mons
Mensae Table Mountain.    La Caille, who did so much for our knowledge of the southern heavens,
formed the figure from stars under the Greater Cloud, between the poles of the equator and the
ecliptic, just north of the polar Octans; the title being suggested by the fact that the Table
Mountain, back of Cape Town, which had witnessed his nightly vigils and daily toils, also was
frequently capped by a cloud. [Richard Hinckley Allen, Star Names and Their Meanings, London: 1899]


