porridge (n.)

1530s, porage soup of meat and vegetables, alteration of pottage, perhaps from influence of Middle
English porray, porreie leek broth, from Old French poree leek soup, from Vulgar Latin *porrata,
from Latin porrum leek. Spelling with -idge attested from c.1600. Association with oatmeal is 1640s,
first in Scottish.


pulse (n.2)

peas, beans, lentils, late 13c., from Old French pouls, pols and directly from Latin puls thick
gruel, porridge, mush, probably via Etruscan, from Greek poltos porridge made from flour, from PIE
*pel- (1) dust, flour (see pollen; also compare poultice).


mush (n.)

kind of porridge, 1670s, in the American colonies, variant of mash (n.) soft mixture. Meaning
anything soft and thick is attested from 1824.


gooey (adj.)

1893, American English slang, from goo + -y (2). The first element perhaps somehow imitative, or
shortened from burgoo (1787) thick porridge.


atheroma (n.)

encysted tumor, 1706, medical Latin, from Greek atheroma, from athere groats, porridge (related to
ather chaff), in reference to what is inside. For ending, see -oma.


poultice (n.)

16c. alteration of Middle English pultes (late 14c.), ultimately from Latin pultes, plural of puls
porridge (see pulse (n.2)).


porringer (n.)

late 15c., alteration of potynger, potager small dish for stew, from Middle English potage (see
pottage) by the same course of changes that produced porridge; and with intrusive -n- by 1530s
(compare passenger).


grout (n.)

1580s, thin, fluid mortar, originally coarse porridge, perhaps from Old English gruta (plural)
coarse meal, related to Old English grytta (see grits). As a verb from 1838. Related: grouted;
grouting.


pasta (n.)

1874, from Italian pasta, from Late Latin pasta dough, pastry cake, paste, from Greek pasta barley
porridge, probably originally a salted mess of food, from neuter plural of pastos (adj.) sprinkled,
salted, from passein to sprinkle, from PIE root *kwet- to shake (see quash).


gruel (n.)

late 12c., meal or flour made of beans, lentils, etc., from Old French gruel fine meal, from
Frankish *grut (cognate with Middle Dutch grute coarse meal, malt; Middle High German gruz grain),
from PIE *ghreu- to rub, grind (see grit). Meaning thin porridge or soup is late 14c.


pollen (n.)

1760 as a botanical term for the fertilizing element of flowers (from Linn&aelig;us, 1751), earlier
fine flour (1520s), from Latin pollen mill dust; fine flour, related to polenta peeled barley, and
pulvis (genitive pulveris) dust, from PIE root *pel- (1) dust; flour (cognates: Greek poltos pap,
porridge, Sanskrit p&#225;lalam ground seeds, Lithuanian pelenai, Old Church Slavonic popelu,
Russian p&#233;pel&#365; ashes).


