pose (n.)

act of posing the body, 1818, from pose (v.1), in a sense developed in the French cognate.
Figuratively from 1884.


poser (n.)

one who practices an affected attitude, 1881, agent noun from pose (v.1); revived in teen-ager slang
by 1983. Meaning question that puzzles is from 1793 from pose (v.2); earlier it meant one who asks
testing questions (1580s).


pose (v.2)

to puzzle, confuse, perplex, 1590s, earlier question, interrogate (1520s), probably from Middle
French poser suppose, assume, from Old French poser to put, place, set (see pose (v.1)). Also in
some cases a shortening of English appose examine closely, and oppose. Related: Posed; posing.


poseur (n.)

one who practices affected attitudes, 1866, from French poseur, from verb poser affect an attitude
or pose, from Old French poser to put, place, set (see pose (v.1)). The word is English poser in
French garb, and thus could itself be considered an affectation.


pose (v.1)

late 14c., suggest, propose, suppose, assume, from Old French poser put, place, propose, a term in
debating, from Late Latin pausare to halt, rest, pause (source also of Italian posare, Spanish
posar; see pause (v.)). The Old French verb (in common with cognates in Spanish, Italian,
Portuguese) acquired the sense of Latin ponere to put, place, by confusion of the similar stems.
Meaning put in a certain position is from early 15c. Sense of assume a certain attitude is from
1840; the transitive sense (as an artist's model, etc.) is from 1859. Related: Posed; posing.


camp (adj.)

tasteless, 1909, homosexual slang, of uncertain origin, perhaps from mid-17c. French camper to
portray, pose (as in se camper put oneself in a bold, provocative pose); popularized 1964 by Susan
Sontag's essay Notes on Camp. Campy is attested from 1959.


posable (adj.)

1972 of questions; 1975 of action figures; from pose (v.1 and 2) + -able.


puzzle (v.)

1590s, pusle bewilder, confound, possibly frequentative of pose (v.) in obsolete sense of perplex
(compare nuzzle from nose). Related: Puzzled; puzzling.


arabesque (n.)

1610s, Moorish or Arabic ornamental design, from French arabesque (16c.), from Italian arabesco,
from Arabo Arab, with reference to Moorish architecture. As a ballet pose, first attested 1830.
Musical sense, in reference to an ornamented theme, is from 1864, originally the title given by
Robert Schumann to one of his piano pieces.


impose (v.)

late 14c., to lay (a crime, etc.) to the account of, from Old French imposer put, place; impute,
charge, accuse (c.1300), from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + poser put, place (see
pose (v.1)). Sense of to lay on as a burden first recorded 1580s. Related: Imposed; imposing.


expose (v.)

early 15c., to leave without shelter or defense, from Middle French exposer lay open, set forth
(13c.), from Latin exponere set forth (see expound), altered by confusion with poser to place, lay
down (see pose (v.1)). Meaning to exhibit openly is from 1620s; that of to unmask is from 1690s.
Photographic sense is from 1839. Related: Exposed; exposes; exposing.


riddle (v.2)

to pose as a riddle, 1570s, from riddle (n.1). Related: Riddled; riddler; riddling.


propose (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French proposer propose, advance, suggest (12c.), from pro- forth (see pro-) +
poser put, place (see pose (v.1)). Meaning make an offer of marriage is  first recorded 1764.
Related: Proposed; proposing. See also propone, which coexisted with this word for a time.


juxtapose (v.)

1851, from French juxtaposer (1835), from Latin iuxta (see juxtaposition) + French poser (see pose
(v.1)). Related: Juxtaposed; juxtaposing.


depose (v.)

c.1300, from Old French deposer (12c.), from de- down (see de-) + poser put, place (see pose (v.1)).
Related: Deposed; deposing.


oppose (v.)

late 14c., from Old French oposer oppose, resist, rival; contradict, state opposing point of view
(12c.), from poser to place, lay down (see pose (v.1)), blended with Latin opponere oppose, object
to, set against (see opponent). Related: Opposed; opposing.


interpose (v.)

1590s, from Middle French interposer (14c.), from inter- (see inter-) + poser (see pose (v.1)).
Related: Interposed; interposing.


appose (v.)

to apply (one thing to another), 1590s, either from French apposer (from a to; see ad-, + poser to
place; see pose (v.1)), or else formed in English from Latin apponere (see apposite) on analogy of
compose, expose, etc. In Middle English, an identical word was a variant spelling of oppose.
Related: Apposed; apposing.


superpose (v.)

1823, from French superposer, from super- (see super-) + poser (see pose (v.1)). Related:
Superposed; superposing.


purpose (n.)

c.1300, intention, aim, goal, from Anglo-French purpos, Old French porpos aim, intention (12c.),
from porposer to put forth, from por- forth (from Latin pro- forth; see pur-) + Old French poser to
put, place (see pose (v.1)). On purpose by design is attested from 1580s; earlier of purpose (early
15c.).


