privation (n.)

mid-14c., action of depriving, from Old French privacion and directly from Latin privationem
(nominative privatio) a taking away, noun of action from past participle stem of privare deprive
(see private (adj.)). Meaning want of life's comforts or of some necessity is attested from 1790.


hardship (n.)

c.1200, quality of being hard, from hard + -ship. Meaning disadvantage, suffering, privation is
c.1400.


privative (adj.)

1580s, expressing negation (as do the prefixes un-, a- (2), etc.), from Latin privativus denoting
privation, negative, from privatus, past participle of privare (see private).


indigence (n.)

late 14c., from Old French indigence indigence, need, privation (13c.), from Latin indigentia need,
want; insatiable desire, from indigentem (nominative indigens), present participle of indigere to
need, from indu in, within + egere be in need, want, from PIE *eg- to lack (cognates: Old Norse ekla
want, lack, Old High German eccherode thin, weak).


default (n.)

early 13c., offense, crime, sin, later (late 13c.) failure, failure to act, from Old French defaute
(12c.) fault, defect, failure, culpability, lack, privation, from Vulgar Latin *defallita a
deficiency or failure, past participle of *defallere, from Latin de- away (see de-) + fallere to
deceive, to cheat; to put wrong, to lead astray, cause to be mistaken; to escape notice of, be
concealed from (see fail (v.)). The financial sense is first recorded 1858; the computing sense is
from 1966.


necessity (n.)

late 14c., constraining power of circumstances, from Old French necessit&eacute; need, necessity;
privation, poverty; distress, torment; obligation, duty (12c.), from Latin necessitatem (nominative
necessitas) compulsion, need for attention, unavoidableness, destiny, from necesse (see necessary).
Meaning condition of being in need in English is from late 15c.    Necessity is the Mother of
Invention. [Richard Franck, c.1624-1708, English author and angler, Northern Memoirs, 1658]    To
maken vertu of necessite is in Chaucer. Related: Necessities.


belt (n.)

Old English belt belt, girdle, from Proto-Germanic *baltjaz (cognates: Old High German balz, Old
Norse balti, Swedish b&auml;lte), an early Germanic borrowing from Latin balteus girdle, sword belt,
said by Varro to be an Etruscan word.    As a mark of rank or distinction, mid-14c.; references to
boxing championship belts date from 1812. Mechanical sense is from 1795. Transferred sense of broad
stripe encircling something is from 1660s. Below the belt unfair (1889) is from pugilism. To get
something under (one's) belt is to get it into one's stomach. To tighten (one's) belt endure
privation is from 1887.


