prompt (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French prompt and directly from Latin promptus brought forth, hence visible,
apparent, evident, past participle of promere to take or bring out or forth (see prompt
(v.)).Related: Promptly; promptitude.


prompt (n.)

early 15c., readiness, from Latin promptus (see prompt (v.)). Meaning hint, act of prompting is from
1590s. Computer sense attested by 1977.


prompter (n.)

1540s, agent noun from prompt (v.)). Earlier was promptator (mid-15c.).


promptness (n.)

1520s, from prompt (adj.) + -ness.


prompt (v.)

mid-14c., prompten, from Latin promptus, past participle of promere to bring forth, from pro-
forward (see pro-) + emere to take (see exempt (adj.)). Theatrical sense of to assist a speaker with
lines is first recorded early 15c. Related: Prompted; prompting.


unprompted (adj.)

from un- (1) not + past participle of prompt (v.).


expeditious (adj.)

late 15c., expedycius useful, fitting, from Latin expeditus disengaged, ready, prompt, past
participle of expidere (see expedite). Meaning speedy is from 1590s. Related: Expeditiously;
expeditiousness.


imprompt (adj.)

(obsolete) 1759, from Latin impromptus unready, hesitating, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + promptus ready (see prompt).


suggest (v.)

1520s, place before another's mind; put forward a proposition, from Latin suggestus, past participle
of suggerere bring up, bring under, lay beneath; furnish, afford, supply; prompt (see suggestion).
Meaning to act so as to call up the idea of (something else) is from 1709. Related: Suggested;
suggesting.


clock-watcher (n.)

employee habitually prompt in leaving, 1887, from clock (n.1) + agent noun from watch (v.). Related:
Clock-watching. Compare earlier tell-clock idler (c.1600).


punctual (adj.)

c.1400, from Medieval Latin punctualis, from Latin punctus a pricking (see point (n.)). Originally
having a sharp point; of the nature of a point; meaning prompt first recorded 1670s, from notion of
insisting on fine points. Related: Punctually.


pronto (adv.)

1850, from Spanish pronto, perhaps influenced by Italian pronto (borrowed by English 1740), both
from Latin promptus (see prompt).


inspire (v.)

mid-14c., enspiren, to fill (the mind, heart, etc., with grace, etc.); also to prompt or induce
(someone to do something), from Old French enspirer (13c.), from Latin inspirare inflame; blow into
(see inspiration), a loan-translation of Greek pnein in the Bible. General sense of influence or
animate with an idea or purpose is from late 14c. Also sometimes used in literal sense in Middle
English. Related: Inspired; inspires; inspiring.


obsequious (adj.)

late 15c., prompt to serve, from Middle French obs&#233;quieux (15c.), from Latin obsequiosus
compliant, obedient, from obsequium compliance, dutiful service, from obsequi to accommodate oneself
to the will of another, from ob after (see ob-) + sequi to follow (see sequel). Pejorative sense of
fawning, sycophantic had emerged by 1590s. Related: Obsequiously; obsequiousness (mid-15c.).


strenuous (adj.)

characterized by great effort, mid-15c. (implied in strenuously), from Latin strenuus active, brisk,
quick, nimble, prompt, vigorous, keen. Probably cognate with Greek strenes, strenos keen, strong,
strenos arrogance, eager desire, Old English stierne hard, severe, keen (see stern (adj.)). Mocked
by Ben Jonson as a pedantic neologism in Poetaster (1601). Sense of requiring much energy is first
recorded 1670s. Related: Strenuousness; strenuosity.


March

third month, c.1200, from Anglo-French marche, Old French marz, from Latin Martius (mensis) (month)
of Mars, from Mars (genitive Martis). Replaced Old English hre&eth;mona&thorn;, the first part of
which is of uncertain meaning, perhaps from hr&aelig;d quick, nimble, ready, active, alert, prompt.
For March hare, proverbial type of madness, see mad.


present (adj.)

c.1300, existing at the time, from Old French present evident, at hand, within reach; as a noun, the
present time (11c., Modern French pr&#233;sent) and directly from Latin praesentem (nominative
praesens) present, at hand, in sight; immediate; prompt, instant; contemporary, from present
participle of pr&aelig;esse be before (someone or something), be at hand, from prae- before (see
pre-) + esse to be (see essence). Meaning being there is from mid-14c. in English. As a grammatical
tense, recorded from late 14c.


rather (adv.)

Old English hra&thorn;or more quickly, earlier, sooner, also more readily, comparative of
hra&thorn;e, hr&aelig;&thorn;e quickly, hastily, promptly, readily, immediately, which is related to
hr&aelig;&eth; quick, nimble, prompt, ready, from Proto-Germanic *khratha- (cognates: Old Norse
hra&eth;r, Old High German hrad), from PIE *kret- to shake. The base form rathe was obsolete by 18c.
except in poetry (Tennyson); superlative rathest fell from use by 17c. Meaning more willingly is
recorded from c.1300; sense of more truly is attested from late 14c.    The rather lambes bene
starved with cold  [Spenser, The Shepheardes Calender (Februarie), 1579]


suggestion (n.)

mid-14c., a prompting to evil, from Anglo-French and Old French suggestioun hint, temptation, from
Latin suggestionem (nominative suggestio) an addition, intimation, suggestion, noun of action from
suggestus, past participle of suggerere bring up, bring under, lay beneath; furnish, afford, supply;
prompt, from sub up (see sub-) + gerere bring, carry (see gest). Sense evolution in Latin is from
heap up, build to bring forward an idea. Meaning proposal, statement, declaration appeared by late
14c., but original English notion of evil prompting remains in suggestive. Hypnotism sense is from
1887.


move (v.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French mover, Old French movoir to move, get moving, set out; set in motion;
introduce (Modern French mouvoir), from Latin movere move, set in motion; remove; disturb (past
participle motus, frequentative motare), from PIE root *meue- to push away (cognates: Sanskrit kama-
muta moved by love and probably mivati pushes, moves; Lithuanian mauti push on; Greek ameusasthai to
surpass, amyno push away).    Intransitive sense developed in Old French and came thence to English,
though it now is rare in French. Meaning to affect with emotion is from c.1300; that of to prompt or
impel toward some action is from late 14c. Sense of to change one's place of residence is from 1707.
Meaning to propose (something) in an assembly, etc., is first attested mid-15c.  Related: Moved;
moving.


stall (n.2)

pretense or evasive story to avoid doing something, 1812, from earlier sense thief's assistant
(1590s, also staller), from a variant of stale bird used as a decoy to lure other birds (mid-15c.),
from Anglo-French estale decoy, pigeon used to lure a hawk (13c., compare stool pigeon), literally
standstill, from Old French estal place, stand, stall, from Frankish *stal- position, ultimately
from Germanic and cognate with Old English steall (see stall (n.1)). Compare Old English
st&aelig;lhran decoy reindeer, German stellvogel decoy bird. Figurative sense of deception, means of
allurement is first recorded 1520s. Also see stall (v.2).    The stallers up are gratified with such
part of the gains acquired as the liberality of the knuckling gentlemen may prompt them to bestow.
[J.H. Vaux, Flash Dictionary, 1812]


tall (adj.)

high in stature, 1520s, probably from Middle English tal handsome, good-looking; valiant; lively in
speech; large, big; humble, meek, from Old English get&aelig;l prompt, active, from Germanic
*(ge)-tala- (cognates: Old High German gi-zal quick, Gothic un-tals indocile). Main modern sense
being of more than average height (and slim in proportion to height) probably evolved out of earlier
meanings brave, valiant, seemly, proper (c.1400), attractive, handsome (late 14c.).    Sense
evolution is remarkable [OED], but adjectives applied to persons can wander far in meaning (such as
pretty, buxom, German klein small, little, which in Middle High German meant the same as its English
cognate clean (adj.)). Meaning having a (defined) height, whether lofty or not is from 1580s.
Meaning exaggerated (as in tall tale) is American English colloquial attested by 1846. Phrase tall,
dark, and handsome is recorded from 1906. Related: Tallness.


