prostrate (v.)

early 15c., prostraten, prostrate oneself, from prostrate (adj.). Related: Prostrated; prostrating.


prostrate (adj.)

mid-14c., lying face-down (in submission, worship, etc.), from Latin prostratus, past participle of
prosternere strew in front, throw down, from pro- forth (see pro-) + sternere to spread out, from
PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Figurative use from 1590s.
General sense of laid out, knocked flat is from 1670s.


prostration (n.)

c.1400, action of prostrating oneself, from Old French prostracion (14c.) or directly from Late
Latin prostrationem (nominative prostratio), noun of action from past participle stem of prosternere
(see prostrate (v.)); or else a native formation from prostrate (v.). Meaning weakness, exhaustion,
dejection is from 1650s.


flatten (v.)

late 14c., to prostrate oneself, also to fall flat, from flat (adj.) + -en (1). Meaning to make flat
is 1620s. Related: Flattened; flattening.


nuzzle (v.)

early 15c., to bring the nose to the ground, back-formation from noselyng on the nose, prostrate,
frequentative of nose (v.); meaning burrow with the nose is first attested 1520s; that of lie snug
is from 1590s, influenced by nestle, or by nursle, frequentative of nurse. Related: Nuzzled;
nuzzling.


procumbent (adj.)

leaning forward, 1660s, from Latin procumbentem (nominative procumbens), present participle of
procumbere to fall forward, fall prostrate, from pro forward (see pro-) + -cumbere to lie down (see
succumb). Related: Procumbently.


stratum (n.)

horizontal layer, 1590s, from Modern Latin special use of Latin stratum thing spread out, coverlet,
beadspread, horse-blanket; pavement, noun uses of neuter of stratus prostrate, prone, past
participle of sternere to spread out, lay down, stretch out, from PIE *stre-to- to stretch, extend,
from root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)).


consternation (n.)

1610s, from French consternation dismay, confusion, from Latin consternationem (nominative
consternatio) confusion, dismay, from consternat-, past participle stem of consternare overcome,
confuse, dismay, perplex, terrify, alarm, probably related to consternere throw down, prostrate,
from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + sternere to spread out (see stratum).


stretch (v.)

Old English streccan (transitive and intransitive) to stretch, spread out, prostrate; reach, extend
(past tense strehte, past participle streht), from Proto-Germanic *strakjanan (cognates: Danish
str&aelig;kke, Swedish str&auml;cka, Old Frisian strekka, Old High German strecchan, Middle Low
German, Middle Dutch, Old High German, German strecken to stretch, draw out), perhaps a variant of
the root of stark, or else from PIE root *strenk- tight, narrow; pull tight, twist (see string
(n.)).    Meaning to extend (the limbs or wings) is from c.1200; that of to lay out for burial is
from early 13c. To stretch one's legs take a walk is from c.1600. Meaning to lengthen by force first
recorded late 14c.; figurative sense of to enlarge beyond proper limits, exaggerate, is from 1550s.
Stretch limo first attested 1973. Stretch marks is attested from 1960. Related: Stretched;
stretching.


