prosaic (adj.)

1650s, having to do with prose, from Middle French prosaique and directly from Medieval Latin
prosaicus in prose (16c.), from Latin prosa prose (see prose). Meaning having the character of prose
(in contrast to the feeling of poetry) is by 1746; extended sense of ordinary is by 1813, both from
French.


pedestrian (adj.)

1716, prosaic, dull (of writing), from Latin pedester (genitive pedestris) plain, not versified,
prosaic, literally on foot (sense contrasted with equester on horseback), from pedes one who goes on
foot, from pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)). Meaning going on foot is first attested 1791
in English (it also was a sense of Latin pedester). The earlier adjective in English was pedestrial
(1610s).


Pyrex (n.)

1915, proprietary name (Corning Glass Works, Corning, N.Y.), arbitrary coinage, in which eager
etymologists see implications of Greek pyr fire and perhaps Latin rex king; but the prosaic
inventors say it was based on pie (n.1), because pie dishes were among the first products made from
it. The -r- is purely euphonious.


beautician (n.)

first recorded 1924, American English (the Cleveland, Ohio, telephone directory, to be precise),
from beauty + ending as in technician. Beauty salon is from 1922, a substitution for prosaic beauty
shop (1901).


matter-of-fact

also matter of fact, 1570s as a noun, originally a legal term (translating Latin res facti), that
portion of an enquiry concerned with the truth or falsehood of alleged facts, opposed to matter of
law. As an adjective from 1712. Meaning prosaic, unimaginative is from 1787. Related: Matter-of-
factly; matter-of-factness. German Tatsache is said to be a loan-translation of the English word.


flat (adj.)

early 14c., from Old Norse flatr, from Proto-Germanic *flataz (cognates: Old Saxon flat flat,
shallow,: Old High German flaz flat, level, Old English flet, Old High German flezzi floor), perhaps
from PIE *plat- to spread (source of Greek platys broad, flat; see plaice (n.)).    Sense of
prosaic, dull is from 1570s; used of drink from c.1600; of musical notes from 1590s, because the
tone is lowered. Flat-out (adv.) openly, directly is from 1932; earlier it was a noun meaning total
failure (1870, U.S. colloquial).


X

The entire entry for X in Johnson's dictionary (1756) is: X is a letter, which, though found in
Saxon words, begins no word in the English language. Most English words beginning in -x- are of
Greek origin or modern commercial coinages. East Anglian in 14c. showed a tendency to use -x- for
initial sh-, sch- (such as xal for shall), which didn't catch on but seems an improvement over the
current system. As a symbol of a kiss on a letter, etc., it is recorded from 1765. In malt liquor,
XX denoted double quality and XXX strongest quality (1827).    Algebraic meaning unknown quantity
(1660 in English, from French), sometimes is said to be from medieval use, originally a crossed -r-,
in that case probably from Latin radix (see root (n.)). Other theories trace it to Arabic (Klein),
but a more prosaic explanation says Descartes (1637) took x, y, z, the last three letters of the
alphabet, for unknowns to correspond to a, b, c, used for known quantities.    Used allusively for
unknown person from 1797, something unknown since 1859. As a type of chromosome, attested from 1902
(first so called in German; Henking, 1891). To designate films deemed suitable for adults only,
first used 1950 in Britain; adopted in U.S. Nov. 1, 1968. The XYZ Affair in American history (1797)
involved French agents designated by those letters.


