prosperity (n.)

c.1200, from Old French prosprete (12c., Modern French prosp&#233;rit&#233;) and directly from Latin
prosperitatem (nominative prosperitas) good fortune, from prosperus (see prosper).


Edward

masc. proper name, from Old English Eadweard, literally prosperity-guard, from ead wealth,
prosperity + weard guardian (see ward (n.)). Among the 10 most popular names for boys born in the
U.S. every year from 1895 to 1930.


Edgar

masc. proper name, from Old English Ead-gar, literally prosperity-spear, from ead prosperity + gar
(see gar).


Han

Chinese dynasty, 206 B.C.E.-220 C.E., its rule marked by prosperity, military success, and the
introduction of Buddhism.


thrift (n.)

c.1300, fact or condition of thriving, also prosperity, savings, from Middle English thriven to
thrive (see thrive), influenced by (or from) Old Norse &thorn;rift, variant of &thorn;rif
prosperity, from &thorn;rifask to thrive. Sense of habit of saving, economy first recorded 1550s
(thrifty in this sense is recorded from 1520s; also see spendthrift). Thrift shop attested by 1919.


Edwin

masc. proper name, from Old English Ead-wine, literally prosperity-friend.


wealth (n.)

mid-13c., happiness, also prosperity in abundance of possessions or riches, from Middle English wele
well-being (see weal (n.1)) on analogy of health.


successful (adj.)

1580s, from success + -ful. Originally having or resulting in any kind of success; since late 19c.
it has tended to mean wealthy, resulting in financial prosperity unless otherwise indicated.
Related: Successfully.


Edmund

masc. proper name, Old English Eadmund, literally prosperity-protector. The second element is
related to Latin manus hand, from PIE *man- hand (see manual (adj.)).


Potemkin

in reference to Grigory Aleksandrovich Potemkin (1739-1791), favorite of Catherine II of Russia,
especially in reference to the sham villages supposedly erected under his orders for the
empress√¢&euro;&trade; tour of Crimea (1787) to create an impression of prosperity and progress. The
silent film Battleship Potemkin dates from 1925, depicting (with elaboration) events of 1905 and the
mutiny of a Russian battleship named for the Tsarist minister.


Edith

fem. proper name, Old English Eadgy&eth;, from ead wealth, prosperity, happiness + gu&eth; war. A
fairly common name; it survived through the Middle Ages, probably on the popularity of St.
Eadgy&eth; of Wilton (962-84, abbess, daughter of King Edgar of England), fell from favor 16c., was
revived in fashion 19c.


bonanza (n.)

1844, American English, from Spanish bonanza a rich lode, originally fair weather at sea,
prosperity, from Vulgar Latin *bonacia, from Latin bonus good (see bene-).


boom (v.)

mid-15c., earliest use was for bees and wasps, probably echoic of humming. The meaning make a loud
noise is 15c. Compare bomb. Meaning to burst into prosperity (of places, businesses, etc.) is 1871,
American English. Related: Boomed; booming. Boom box first attested 1978.


hail (interj.)

greetings! c.1200, from Old Norse heill health, prosperity, good luck, or a similar Scandinavian
source, and in part from Old English hals, shortening of w&aelig;s h&aelig;il be healthy (see health
and also wassail).


blight (n.)

1610s, origin obscure; according to OED it emerged into literary speech from the talk of gardeners
and farmers, perhaps ultimately from Old English bl&aelig;ce, bl&aelig;c&eth;u, a scrofulous skin
condition and/or from Old Norse blikna become pale. Used in a general way of agricultural diseases,
sometimes with suggestion of invisible baleful influence; hence figurative sense of anything which
withers hopes or prospects or checks prosperity (1828). Compare slang blighter. Urban blight
attested by 1935.


health (n.)

Old English h&aelig;l&thorn; wholeness, a being whole, sound or well, from Proto-Germanic *hailitho,
from PIE *kailo- whole, uninjured, of good omen (cognates: Old English hal hale, whole; Old Norse
heill healthy; Old English halig,  Old Norse helge holy, sacred; Old English h&aelig;lan to heal).
With Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)). Of physical health in Middle English,
but also prosperity, happiness, welfare; preservation, safety.


recession (n.)

1640s, act of receding, a going back, from French r&#233;cession a going backward, a withdrawing,
and directly from Latin  recessionem (nominative recessio) a going back, noun of action from past
participle stem of recedere (see recede).    Sense of temporary decline in economic activity, 1929,
noun of action from recess (q.v.): The material prosperity of the United States is too firmly based,
in our opinion, for a revival in industrial activity -- even if  we have to face an immediate
recession of some magnitude -- to be long delayed. [Economist, Nov. 2, 1929]Ayto notes, There was
more than a hint of euphemism in the coining of this term.


state (n.2)

political organization of a country, supreme civil power, government, c.1300, from special use of
state (n.1); this sense grew out of the meaning condition of a country with regard to government,
prosperity, etc. (late 13c.), from Latin phrases such as status rei public&aelig; condition (or
existence) of the republic.    The sense of a semi-independent political entity under a federal
authority, one of the bodies politic which together make up a federal republic is from 1774. The
British North American colonies occasionally were called states as far back as 1630s; the States has
been short for the United States of America since 1777; also of the Netherlands. State rights in
U.S. political sense is attested from 1798; form states rights is first recorded 1858. Church and
state have been contrasted from 1580s. State-socialism attested from 1850.


dexterity (n.)

1520s, from Middle French dexterit&eacute; (16c.), from Latin dexteritatem (nominative dexteritas)
readiness, skillfulness, prosperity, from dexter skillful, also right (hand) (source of Old French
destre, Spanish diestro, etc.), from PIE root *deks- on the right hand, hence south to one facing
east (cognates: Sanskrit daksinah on the right hand, southern, skillful; Avestan dashina- on the
right hand; Greek dexios on the right hand, also fortunate, clever; Old Irish dess on the right
hand, southern; Welsh deheu; Gaulish Dexsiva, name of a goddess of fortune; Gothic taihswa;
Lithuanian desinas; Old Church Slavonic desnu, Russian desnoj). The Latin form is with the
comparative suffix -ter, thus meaning etymologically the better direction. Middle English dester
meant right hand, and in heraldry dexter means on the right side.


estate (n.)

early 13c., rank, standing, condition, from Anglo-French astat, Old French estat state, position,
condition, health, status, legal estate (Modern French &eacute;tat), from Latin status state or
condition, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).    For the excrescent e-, see e-. Sense of
property is late 14c., from that of worldly prosperity; specific application to landed property
(usually of large extent) is first recorded in American English 1620s. A native word for this was
Middle English ethel (Old English &aelig;&eth;el) ancestral land or estate, patrimony. Meaning
collective assets of a dead person or debtor is from 1830.    The three estates (in Sweden and
Aragon, four) conceived as orders in the body politic date from late 14c. In France, they are the
clergy, nobles, and townsmen; in England, originally the clergy, barons, and commons, later Lords
Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and commons. For Fourth Estate see four.


peace (n.)

mid-12c., freedom from civil disorder, from Anglo-French pes, Old French pais peace, reconciliation,
silence, permission (11c., Modern French paix), from Latin pacem (nominative pax) compact,
agreement, treaty of peace, tranquility, absence of war (source of Proven&ccedil;al patz, Spanish
paz, Italian pace), from PIE *pag-/*pak- fasten, related to pacisci to covenant or agree (see pact).
Replaced Old English fri&eth;, also sibb, which also meant happiness. Modern spelling is 1500s,
reflecting vowel shift. Sense in peace of mind is from c.1200. Used in various greetings from
c.1300, from Biblical Latin pax, Greek eirene, which were used by translators to render Hebrew
shalom, properly safety, welfare, prosperity.    Sense of quiet is attested by 1300; meaning absence
or cessation of war or hostility is attested from c.1300. As a type of hybrid tea rose (developed
1939 in France by Francois Meilland), so called from 1944. Native American peace pipe is first
recorded 1760. Peace-officer attested from 1714. Peace offering is from 1530s. Phrase peace with
honor first recorded 1607 (in Coriolanus). The U.S. Peace Corps was set up March 1, 1962. Peace
sign, both the hand gesture and the graphic, attested from 1968.


speed (n.)

Old English sped success, a successful course; prosperity, riches, wealth; luck; opportunity,
advancement, from Proto-Germanic *spodiz (cognates: Old Saxon spod success, Dutch spoed haste,
speed, Old High German spuot success, Old Saxon spodian to cause to succeed, Middle Dutch spoeden,
Old High German spuoten to haste), from PIE *spo-ti-, from root *spe- (1) to thrive, prosper
(cognates: Sanskrit sphayate increases, Latin sperare to hope, Old Church Slavonic spechu endeavor,
Lithuanian speju to have leisure).    Meaning rapidity of movement, quickness, swiftness emerged in
late Old English (at first usually adverbially, in dative plural, as in spedum feran). Meaning rate
of motion or progress (whether fast or slow) is from c.1200. Meaning gear of a machine is attested
from 1866. Meaning methamphetamine, or a related drug, first attested 1967, from its effect on
users.   Speed limit is from 1879 (originally of locomotives); speed-trap is from 1908. Speed bump
is 1975; figurative sense is 1990s. Full speed is recorded from late 14c. Speed reading first
attested 1965. Speedball mix of cocaine and morphine or heroin is recorded from 1909.


