protrude (v.)

1610s, to thrust forward or onward, to drive along; 1640s, to cause to stick out, from Latin
protrudere thrust forward; push out, from pro- forward (see pro-) + trudere to thrust (see
extrusion). Intransitive meaning jut out, bulge forth recorded from 1620s. Related: Protruded;
protruding.


exsert (v.)

to thrust forth, protrude, 1660s, biologists' variant of exert (q.v.).


protrusion (n.)

1640s, from French protrusion, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin protrudere to push
out (see protrude), or from a similar formation in English.


bulge (v.)

to protrude, swell out, 1670s, from bulge (n.). Related: Bulged; bulging.


jut (v.1)

to protrude, mid-15c., corruption of obsolete jet (see jetty). Related: Jutted; jutting.


bug (v.1)

to bulge, protrude, 1872, originally of eyes, perhaps from a humorous or dialect mispronunciation of
bulge (v.). Related: Bugged; bugging. As an adjective, bug-eyed recorded from 1872; so commonly used
of space creatures in mid-20c. science fiction that the initialism (acronym) BEM for bug-eyed
monster was current by 1953.


pop (v.)

cause to make a short, quick sound, mid-15c.; intransitive sense make a short, quick sound is from
1570s; imitative. Of eyes, to protrude (as if about to burst), from 1670s. Sense of to appear or put
suddenly (often with up, off, in, etc.) is recorded from mid-15c. Baseball sense of to hit a ball
high in the air is from 1867. To pop the question is from 1725, specific sense of propose marriage
is from 1826. Related: Popped; popping.


rakish (adj.)

1706, debauched, disreputable, from rake (n.2) + -ish. Related: Rakishly; rakishness.    The meaning
smart, jaunty, dashing (1824) is said to be a different word, probably from rake slant, slope
(1620s), used especially in reference to a ship's hull or sails, of uncertain origin, perhaps from
Scandinavian (compare Old Swedish raka project, reach; Danish rage protrude, project) related to Old
English reccan stretch. The piratical craft of former times were distinguished for their rakish
build [Century Dictionary].


strut (v.)

walk in a vain, important manner, walk with affected dignity, 1590s, from Middle English strouten
display one's clothes proudly, vainly flaunt fine attire (late 14c.), earlier to stick out,
protrude, bulge, swell, from Old English strutian to stand out stiffly, swell or bulge out, from
Proto-Germanic *strut- (cognates: Danish strutte, German strotzen to be puffed up, be swelled,
German Strau&szlig; fight), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stereo-).
Originally of the air or the attitude; modern sense, focused on the walk, first recorded 1510s.
Related: Strutted; strutting. To strut (one's) stuff is first recorded 1926, from strut as the name
of a dance popular from c.1900. The noun meaning a vain and affectedly dignified manner of walking
is from c.1600.


