psychology (n.)

1650s, study of the soul, from Modern Latin psychologia, probably coined mid-16c. in Germany by
Melanchthon from Latinized form of Greek psykhe- breath, spirit, soul (see psyche) + logia study of
(see -logy). Meaning study of the mind first recorded 1748, from Christian Wolff's Psychologia
empirica (1732); main modern behavioral sense is from early 1890s.


ambivalent (adj.)

1916, originally a term in psychology; back-formation from ambivalence. In general use by 1929.


construct (n.)

1871 in linguistics, 1890 in psychology, 1933 in the general sense of anything constructed; from
construct (v.).


somatization (n.)

1909 in biology (Rignano); 1920 in psychology; from somato-  body + -ization.


acting (n.)

c.1600, performance of deeds; 1660s, performance of plays; verbal noun from present participle of
act (v.). Acting out in psychology is from 1945.


hedonistic (adj.)

1866, from hedonist + -ic. The earlier adjectival form was hedonic (1650s), of or having to do with
the Cyrenaic school of philosophy; by 1901 in psychology.


perseverate (v.)

1915, in psychology, a back-formation from perseveration. Related: Perseverating; perseverative.


thanatos (n.)

death instinct, 1935, in Freudian psychology, from Greek thanatos death (see thanato-).


libidinal (adj.)

1922, in psychology jargon, from libido (Latin genitive libidinis) + -al (1).


parapsychology (n.)

1924, from para- (1) beside + psychology.


behavioral (adj.)

1927, in psychology, from behavior + -al (1).


pansexual (adj.)

1926 (pansexualism is from 1917), from pan- + sexual. Originally in reference to the view that the
sex instinct plays the primary part in all human activity, mental and physical; this was held by his
critics to be the view of Freud, therefore a term of reproach leveled at early psychology.


ambisexual (adj.)

unisex (of clothing), also bisexual, 1912 in the jargon of psychology, from ambi- + sexual. As a
humorous coinage based on ambidextrous, ambisextrous is recorded from 1929.


anthropology (n.)

science of the natural history of man, 1590s, originally especially of the relation between
physiology and psychology, from Modern Latin anthropologia or coined independently in English from
anthropo- + -logy. In Aristotle, anthropologos is used literally, as speaking of man.


surgent (adj.)

rising in waves, 1590s, from Latin surgentem (nominative surgens) rising, present participle of
surgere to rise (see surge (n.)). In psychology from 1933.


psychologist (n.)

1727; see psychology + -ist.


empathetic (adj.)

1932, in psychology, from empathy on model of sympathetic and to distinguish it from empathic.
Related: Empathetically.


ambivert (n.)

person exhibiting features of an extrovert and an introvert, coined by Kimball Young in Source Book
for Social Psychology (1927), from ambi- about, around + Latin vertere, as in introvert. Related:
Ambiversion.


psychobabble (n.)

1976, from psycho- (representing psychology) + babble (n.). Earlier was psychologese (1961).


parapraxis (n.)

faulty action, blunder, 1904, from Modern Latin, from para- contrary (see para- (1)) + Greek praxis
a doing, transaction, business (see praxis). In psychology, a minor error held to reveal a
subconscious motive.


introvert (v.)

1650s, from Latin intro- inward (see intro-) + vertere to turn (see versus). The noun, introverted
person (opposed to extrovert) is 1918, from German psychology, introduced there by C.G. Jung
(1875-1961).


extroversion (n.)

mid-17c., condition of being turned inside out, noun of action from obsolete verb extrovert (v.) to
turn inside out, from extro- + Latin vertere (see versus). Earliest as a word in mysticism;
pathological sense attested from 1836; modern use in psychology attested by 1920.


depressive (adj.)

1610s, from Latin depress-, past participle stem of deprimere (see depress) + -ive. In psychology,
from 1905.


empathize (v.)

1924, in psychology, from empathy + -ize. Related: Empathized; empathizing.


role (n.)

part or character one takes, c.1600, from French r&ocirc;le part played by a person in life,
literally roll (of paper) on which an actor's part is written, from Old French rolle (see roll
(n.)). Meaning function performed characteristically by someone is from 1875. In the social
psychology sense from 1913. Role model first attested 1957.


psych

as a noun, short for psychology in various senses (e.g. as an academic study, in student slang by
1895). As a verb, first attested 1917 as to subject to psychoanalysis, short for psychoanalyze. From
1934 as to outsmart (also psych out); from 1963 as to unnerve. However to psych (oneself) up is from
1972; to be psyched up is attested from 1968.


proactive (adj.)

also pro-active, of persons or policies, as an opposition to reactive, 1921, from pro- + active.
From 1933, in psychology (learning theory). Related: Proactively; proactiveness; proactivity.


semiotic (adj.)

1620s, of symptoms, relating to signs of diseases, from Greek semeiotikos significant, also
observant of signs, adjective form of semeiosis indication, from semeioun to signal, to interpret a
sign, from semeion a sign, mark, token, from sema sign (see semantic). Its use in psychology dates
to 1923. Related: Semiotical (1580s).


unconscious (adj.)

1712, unaware, not marked by conscious thought, from un- (1) not + conscious. Meaning temporarily
insensible, knocked out is recorded from 1860. Related: Unconsciously; unconsciousness. In
psychology, the noun the unconscious (1876) is a loan-translation of German das Unbewusste. The
adjective in this sense is recorded from 1912.


innervate (v.)

1870, from in- (2) in + Latin nervus (see nerve) + -ate. Probably rather a back-formation from
innervation (1832). Related: Innervated. Innervation in psychology is from 1880.


significant (adj.)

1570s, having a meaning, from Latin significantem (nominative significans, present participle of
significare make known, indicate (see signify). Earlier in the same sense was significative
(c.1400). Often having a special or secret meaning, hence important (1761). Related: Significantly.
Significant figure is from 1680s. Significant other (n.) attested by 1961, in psychology, the most
influential other person in the patient's world.


affect (n.)

late 14c., mental state, from Latin noun use of affectus furnished, supplied, endowed, figuratively
disposed, constituted, inclined, past participle of afficere to do; treat, use, manage, handle; act
on; have influence on, do something to, a verb of broad meaning, from ad- to (see ad-) + facere
(past participle factus) do (see factitious). Perhaps obsolete except in psychology. Related:
Affects.


semantic (adj.)

1894, from French s&eacute;mantique, applied by Michel Br&eacute;al (1883) to the psychology of
language, from Greek semantikos significant, from semainein to show by sign, signify, point out,
indicate by a sign, from sema sign, mark, token; omen, portent; constellation; grave (Doric sama),
from PIE root *dheie- to see, look (cognates: Sanskrit dhyati he meditates; see zen).


archetype (n.)

original pattern from which copies are made, 1540s [Barnhart] or c.1600 [OED], from Latin
archetypum, from Greek arkhetypon pattern, model, figure on a seal, neuter of adjective arkhetypos
first-moulded, from arkhe- first (see archon) + typos model, type, blow, mark of a blow (see type).
Jungian psychology sense of pervasive idea or image from the collective unconscious is from 1919.


extraverted (adj.)

in modern psychology, 1915, a variant of extroverted (see extrovert). Related: Extravert (n.), for
which also see extrovert. There was a verb extravert in mid- to late 17c. meaning to turn outward so
as to be visible, from Latin extra outward + vertere to turn.


self-image (n.)

also self-image, 1904 in psychology, from self- + image (n.).


Gestalt

1922, from German Gestaltqualit&auml;t (1890, introduced by German philosopher Christian von
Ehrenfels, 1859-1932), from German gestalt shape, form, figure, configuration, appearance,
abstracted from ungestalt deformity, noun use of adj. ungestalt misshapen, from gestalt, obsolete
past participle of stellen to place, arrange (see stall (n.1)). As a school of psychology, it was
founded c.1912 by M Wertheimer, K. Koffka, W. K&ouml;hler.


subliminal (adj.)

1873, below the threshold (of consciousness or sensation), formed from Latin stem of sublime (Latin
limen, genitive liminis) + -al (1)). Apparently a loan-translation of German unter der Schwelle (des
Bewusstseins) beneath the threshold (of consciousness), from Johann Friedrich Herbart (1776-1841),
author of a textbook on psychology published in 1824. The scare over subliminal advertising came in
1957. Related: Subliminally.


psychopath (n.)

1885, in the criminal psychology sense, a back-formation from psychopathic.    The Daily Telegraph
had, the other day, a long article commenting on a Russian woman who had murdered a little girl. A
Dr. Balinsky prevailed upon the jury to give a verdict of acquittal, because she was a psychopath.
The Daily Telegraph regards this term as a new coinage, but it has been long known amongst
Spiritualists, yet in another sense. [The Medium and Daybreak, Jan. 16, 1885]    The case alluded
to, and the means of acquittal, were briefly notorious in England and brought the word into currency
in the modern sense.


persona (n.)

1917, outward or social personality, a Jungian psychology term, from Latin persona person (see
person). Used earlier (1909) by Ezra Pound in the sense literary character representing voice of the
author. Persona grata is Late Latin, literally an acceptable person, originally applied to
diplomatic representatives acceptable to the governments to which they were sent; hence also persona
non grata (plural person&aelig; non grat&aelig;).


aversion (n.)

a turning away from, 1590s; figurative sense of mental attitude of repugnance is from 1650s, from
Middle French aversion and directly from Latin aversionem (nominative aversio), noun of action from
past participle stem of aversus turned away, backwards, behind, hostile, itself past participle of
avertere (see avert). Earlier in the literal sense of a turning away from (1590s). Aversion therapy
in psychology is from 1950.


acrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of heights, 1887, medical Latin, from Greek akros at the end, the top (see acrid) +
-phobia fear. Coined by Italian physician Dr. Andrea Verga in a paper describing the condition, from
which Verga himself suffered.    In this paper, read somewhat over a year ago at the congress of
alienists at Pavia, the author makes confession of his own extreme dread of high places. Though
fearless of the contagion of cholera, he has palpitations on mounting a step-ladder, finds it
unpleasant to ride on the top of a coach or to look out of even a first-story window, and has never
used an elevator. [American Journal of Psychology, Nov. 1888, abstract of Verga's report]


encounter (n.)

c.1300, meeting of adversaries, confrontation, from Old French encontre meeting; fight; opportunity,
noun use of preposition/adverb encontre against, counter to from Late Latin incontra in front of,
from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + contra against (see contra). Modern use of the word in psychology
is from 1967, from the work of U.S. psychologist Carl Rogers (1902-1987). Encounter group attested
from 1967.


herd (n.)

Old English heord herd, flock, from Proto-Germanic *herdo- (cognates: Old Norse hjor&eth;, Old High
German herta, German Herde, Gothic hairda herd), from PIE *kerdh- a row, group, herd (cognates:
Sanskrit &#347;&#225;rdhah herd, troop, Old Church Slavonic &#269;reda herd, Greek korthys heap,
Lithuanian kerd&#382;ius shepherd). Herd instinct in psychology is first recorded 1908.


plateau (n.)

1796, elevated tract of relatively level land, from French plateau table-land, from Old French
platel (12c.) flat piece of metal, wood, etc., diminutive of plat flat surface or thing, noun use of
adjective plat flat, stretched out (12c.), perhaps from Vulgar Latin *plattus, from Greek platys
flat, wide, broad (see plaice). Meaning stage at which no progress is apparent is attested from
1897, originally in psychology of learning. In reference to sexual stimulation from 1960.


psychological (adj.)

1680s; see psychology + -ical. Related: Psychologically. Psychological warfare recorded from 1940.
Psychological moment was in vogue from 1871, from French moment psychologique moment of immediate
expectation of something about to happen.    The original German phrase, misinterpreted by the
French &amp; imported together with its false sense into English, meant the psychic factor, the
mental effect, the influence exerted by a state of mind, &amp; not a point of time at all, das
Moment in German corresponding to our momentum, not our moment. [Fowler]


depression (n.)

late 14c. as a term in astronomy, from Old French depression (14c.) or directly from Latin
depressionem (nominative depressio), noun of action from past participle stem of deprimere to press
down, depress (see depress).    Attested from 1650s in the literal sense; meaning dejection,
depression of spirits is from early 15c. (as a clinical term in psychology, from 1905);
meteorological sense is from 1881 (in reference to barometric pressure); meaning a lowering or
reduction in economic activity was in use by 1826; given a specific application (with capital D-) by
1934 to the one that began worldwide in 1929. For melancholy, depression an Old English word was
grevoushede.


bisexual (adj.)

1824, having both sexes in one being, hermaphroditic, from bi- + sexual. Meaning attracted to both
sexes is from 1914; the noun in this sense is attested from 1922, and compare bisexuality. Not in
general use until 1950s. Ambisexual was proposed in this sense early 20c.    I suggest that the term
ambisexuality be used in psychology instead of the expression bisexual predisposition. This would
connote that we understand by this predisposition, not the presence of male and female material in
the organism (Fliess), nor of male and female sex hunger in the mind, but the child's psychical
capacity for bestowing his erotism, originally objectless, on either the male or the female sex, or
on both. [S. Ferenczi, Sex in Psycho-Analysis, transl. Ernest Jones, Boston, 1916]


relate (v.)

1520s, to recount, tell, from Middle French relater refer, report (14c.) and directly from Latin
relatus, used as past participle of referre bring back, bear back (see refer), from re- back, again
+ latus (see oblate (n.)).    Meaning stand in some relation; have reference or respect is from
1640s; transitive sense of bring (something) into relation with (something else) is from 1690s.
Meaning to establish a relation between is from 1771. Sense of to feel connected or sympathetic to
is attested from 1950, originally in psychology jargon. Related: Related; relating.


erogenous (adj.)

formed 1889 from Greek eros sexual love (see Eros) + -genous producing. A slightly earlier variant
was erogenic (1887), from French &eacute;rog&eacute;nique. Both, as OED laments, are improperly
formed. Erogenous zone attested by 1905.    In this connection reference may be made to the well-
known fact that in some hysterical subjects there are so-called erogenous zones simple pressure on
which suffices to evoke the complete orgasm. There is, perhaps, some significance, from our present
point of view, in the fact that, as emphasized by Savill (Hysterical Skin Symptoms, Lancet, January
30 1904) the skin is one of the very best places to study hysteria. [Havelock Ellis, Studies in the
Psychology of Sex, 1914]


