psychologist (n.)

1727; see psychology + -ist.


cognitive dissonance (n.)

1957, developed and apparently coined by U.S. social psychologist Leon Festinger (1919-1989).


sociopath (n.)

1930, coined by psychologist G.E. Partridge from socio- on model of psychopath.


behaviorism (n.)

coined 1913 by U.S. psychologist John B. Watson (1878-1958) from behavior + -ism. Behaviorist is
from the same time.


self-actualization (n.)

1939, from self- + actualization. Popularized, though not coined, by U.S. psychologist and
philosopher Abraham H. Maslow (1908-1970).


biofeedback (n.)

also bio-feedback, 1969, from bio- + feedback. Said to have been coined by U.S. psychologist and
parapsychologist Gardner Murphy (1890-1975).


Skinner box (n.)

1940 (earlier Skinner apparatus, 1938), from U.S. psychologist B.F. Skinner (1904-1990).


psycho (n.)

1925, short for psychologist; as short for psychopath from 1942.


lifestyle (n.)

also life-style, 1929, from life (n.) + style (n.); originally a specific term used by Austrian
psychologist Alfred Adler (1870-1937); broader sense is by 1961.


telepathy (n.)

1882, coined (along with tel&aelig;sthesia) by English psychologist Frederic Myers (1843-1901),
literally feeling from afar, from tele- + -pathy. The noun telepath is an 1889 back-formation.


Stanford-Binet

intelligence test, first published 1916 as a revision and extension of the Binet-Simon intelligence
tests, from Stanford University (California, U.S.) + the name of French psychologist Alfred Binet
(1857-1911), who devised the attempt at a scientific measurement of intelligence.


head-shrinker (n.)

also head-shrinker, 1926 in literal sense, from head (n.) + agent noun from shrink (v.); as U.S.
slang for psychologist, by 1950.


operant (adj.)

that works, early 15c., from Latin operantem (nominative operans), present participle of operari to
work (see operation). Psychological sense of involving behavior modification coined 1937 by U.S.
psychologist B.F. Skinner (as in operant conditioning, 1938, Skinner).


anhedonia (n.)

inability to feel pleasure, 1897, from French anh&eacute;donie, coined 1896 by French psychologist
Theodule Ribot (1839-1916) as an opposite to analgesia, from Greek an-, privative prefix (see an-
(1)), + hedone pleasure (see hedonist).


I.Q.

1922, abbreviation of intelligence quotient, a 1921 translation of German Intelligenz-quotient,
coined 1912 by German psychologist William L. Stern (1871-1938).    Intelligence is a general
capacity of an individual consciously to adjust his thinking to new requirements: it is general
mental adaptability to new problems and conditions of life. [Stern, The Psychological Methods of
Testing Intelligence, 1914]


eidetic (adj.)

pertaining to the faculty of projecting images, 1924, from German eidetisch, coined by German
psychologist Erich Jaensch (1883-1940), from Greek eidetikos pertaining to images, also pertaining
to knowledge, from eidesis knowledge, from eidos form, shape (see -oid).


ambivalence (n.)

simultaneous conflicting feelings, 1924 (1912 as ambivalency), from German Ambivalenz, coined 1910
by Swiss psychologist Eugen Bleuler (1857-1939) on model of German Equivalenz equivalence, etc.,
from Latin ambi- both (see ambi-) + valentia strength, from present participle of valere be strong
(see valiant). A psychological term that by 1929 had taken on a broader literary and general sense.


premature (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin praematurus early ripe (as fruit), too early, untimely, from prae before (see
pre-) + maturus ripe, timely (see mature (v.)). Related: Prematurely; prematurity; prematuration.
Premature ejaculation is attested from 1848; Latin euphemism ejaculatio praecox dates to 1891 in
English but was used earlier in German and appears to have been, at first at least, the
psychologist's term for it.


encounter (n.)

c.1300, meeting of adversaries, confrontation, from Old French encontre meeting; fight; opportunity,
noun use of preposition/adverb encontre against, counter to from Late Latin incontra in front of,
from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + contra against (see contra). Modern use of the word in psychology
is from 1967, from the work of U.S. psychologist Carl Rogers (1902-1987). Encounter group attested
from 1967.


dysphemism (n.)

1884, substitution of a vulgar or derogatory word or expression for a dignified or normal one, from
Greek dys- bad, abnormal, difficult (see dys-) + pheme speaking, from phanai speak (see fame (n.);
Greek dysphemia meant ill language, words of ill omen). The opposite of euphemism. Rediscovered 1933
from French formation dysph&eacute;misme (1927, Carnoy).    The French psychologist Albert J. Carnoy
gave an extensive definition in his study Le Science du Mot, which in translation runs: Dysphemism
is unpitying, brutal, mocking. It is also a reaction against pedantry, rigidity and pretentiousness,
but also against nobility and dignity in language (1927, xxii, 351). [Geoffrey L. Hughes, An
Encyclopedia of Swearing, 2006]


