psychiatrist (n.)

1875, from psychiatry + -ist.A psychiatrist is a man who goes to the Folies Berg&egrave;re and looks
at the audience. [Anglican Bishop Mervyn Stockwood, 1961]  An older name was mad-doctor (1703); also
psychiater expert in mental diseases (1852), from Greek psyche + iatros. Also see alienist.


schm-

substituted for the initial sound of a word and reduplicated with it to convey derision (as in
Oedipus schmoedipus in the punchline of the old joke about the Jewish mother and the psychiatrist),
1929, from the numerous Yiddish words that begin with this sound.


Freudian (adj.)

1910, used at first in a general way for sexual, from name of Sigmund Freud (1856-1939), Austrian
psychiatrist. Freudian slip first attested 1959.


shrink (n.)

an act of shrinking, 1580s, from shrink (v.). Slang meaning psychiatrist, (1966) is from head-
shrinker.


autism (n.)

1912, from German Autismus, coined 1912 by Swiss psychiatrist Paul Bleuler (1857-1939) from comb.
form of Greek autos- self (see auto-) + -ismos suffix of action or of state. The notion is of morbid
self-absorption.


hebephrenia (n.)

adolescent insanity, 1886, coined in Modern Latin by German psychiatrist Ewald Escker in 1871, from
Greek hebe youth (see Hebe (1)) + phrene mind (see phreno-).


Rorschach

1927, in reference to a personality test using ink blots, developed by Swiss psychiatrist Hermann
Rorschach (1885-1922). The town so named on the Swiss side of Lake Constance is from an early form
of German R&ouml;hr reeds + Schachen lakeside.


schizophrenia (n.)

1912, from Modern Latin, literally a splitting of the mind, from German Schizophrenie, coined in
1910 by Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler (1857-1939), from Greek skhizein to split (see schizo-) +
phren (genitive phrenos) diaphragm, heart, mind, of unknown origin.


bipolar (adj.)

having two poles, from bi- + polar; 1810 with figurative sense of of double aspect; 1859 with
reference to physiology. Psychiatric use in reference to what had been called manic-depressive
psychosis is said to have begun 1957 with German psychiatrist Karl Leonhard. The term became popular
early 1990s. Bipolar disorder was in DSM III (1980).


psychodrama (n.)

also psycho-drama, 1937 (in writing of U.S. psychiatrist Jacob L. Moreno (1889-1974)), from psycho-
+ drama. Related: Psychodramatic.


agoraphobia (n.)

fear of open spaces, 1873, from German Agorophobie, coined 1871 by Berlin psychiatrist Carl Westphal
(1833-1890) from Greek agora open space (see agora) + -phobia fear. Related: Agoraphobe;
agoraphobic.


narcissism (n.)

1905, from German Narzissismus, coined 1899 (in Die sexuellen Perversit&auml;ten), by German
psychiatrist Paul N&auml;cke (1851-1913), on a comparison suggested 1898 by Havelock Ellis, from
Greek Narkissos, name of a beautiful youth in mythology (Ovid, Metamorphoses, iii.370) who fell in
love with his own reflection in a spring and was turned to the flower narcissus (q.v.). Coleridge
used the word in a letter from 1822.    But already Krishna, enamoured of himself, had resolved to
experience lust for his own self; he manifested his own Nature in the cow-herd girls and enjoyed
them. [Karapatri, Lingopasana-rahasya, Siddhanta, II, 1941-2]    Sometimes erroneously as narcism.


psychedelic (adj.)

occasionally psychodelic, 1956, of drugs, suggested by British-born Canadian psychiatrist Humphry
Osmond (1917-2004) in a letter to Aldous Huxley and used by Osmond in a scientific paper published
the next year; from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) + deloun make visible, reveal, from delos
visible, clear, from PIE root *dyeu- to shine (see diurnal). In popular use from 1965 with reference
to anything producing effects similar to that of a psychedelic drug or enhancing the effects of such
a drug. As a noun from 1956.


