pun (n.)

1660s (first attested in Dryden), of uncertain origin, perhaps from pundigron, which is perhaps a
humorous alteration of Italian puntiglio equivocation, trivial objection, diminutive of Latin
punctum point. This is pure speculation. The verb also is attested from 1660s. Related: Punned;
punning.   Pun was prob. one of the clipped words, such as cit, mob, nob, snob, which came into
fashionable slang at or after the Restoration. [OED]


punch (v.)

to thrust, push; jostle; also, prod, to drive (cattle, etc.) by poking and prodding, late 14c., from
Old French ponchonner to punch, prick, stamp, from ponchon pointed tool, piercing weapon (see punch
(n.1)). Meaning to pierce, emboss with a tool is from early 15c.; meaning to stab, puncture is from
mid-15c. To punch a ticket, etc., is from mid-15c. To punch the clock record one's arrival at or
departure from the workplace using an automated timing device is from 1900. Related: Punched;
punching.    Perhaps you are some great big chief, who has a lot to say.  Who lords it o'er the
common herd who chance to come your way;  Well, here is where your arrogance gets a dreadful shock,
When you march up, like a private, salute, and PUNCH THE CLOCK.  [from Punch the Clock, by The
Skipper, The Commercial Telegraphers' Journal, May 1912]    Specialized sense to hit with the fist
first recorded 1520s. Compare Latin pugnare to fight with the fists, from a root meaning to pierce,
sting. In English this was probably influenced by punish; punch or punsch for punish is found in
documents from 14c.-15c.:    punchyth me, Lorde, and spare my blyssyd wyff Anne. [Coventry Mystery
Plays, late 15c.]    To punch (someone) out beat up is from 1971.


punch (n.1)

pointed tool for making holes or embossing, late 14c., short for puncheon (mid-14c.), from Old
French ponchon, poinchon pointed tool, piercing weapon, from Vulgar Latin *punctionem (nominative
*punctio) pointed tool, from past participle stem of Latin pungere to prick (see pungent). From mid-
15c. as a stab, thrust; late 15c. as a dagger. Meaning machine for pressing or stamping a die is
from 1620s.


punch (n.2)

type of mixed drink, 1630s, traditionally since 17c. said to derive from Hindi panch five, in
reference to the number of original ingredients (spirits, water, lemon juice, sugar, spice), from
Sanskrit panchan-s, from pancha five (see five). But there are difficulties (see OED), and
connection to puncheon (n.1) is not impossible.


Punch (n.)

the puppet show star, 1709, shortening of Punchinello (1666), from Italian (Neapolitan)
Pollecinella, Pollecenella, diminutive of pollecena turkey pullet, probably in allusion to his big
nose. The phrase pleased as punch apparently refers to his unfailing triumph over enemies. The comic
weekly of this name was published in London from 1841.


punch (n.3)

a quick blow with the fist, by 1570s, probably from punch (v.). In early use also of blows with the
foot or jabs with a staff or club. Originally especially of blows that sink in to some degree (...
whom he unmercifully bruises and batters from head to foot: here a slap in the chaps, there a black
eye, now a punch in the stomach, and then a kick on the breech, Monthly Review, 1763). Figurative
sense of forceful, vigorous quality is recorded from 1911. To beat (someone) to the punch in the
figurative sense is from 1915, a metaphor from boxing (attested by 1913). Punch line (also punch-
line) is from 1915 (originally in popular-song writing); punch-drunk is from 1915 (alternative form
slug-nutty is from 1933).


punch-bowl (n.)

1690s, from punch (n.2) + bowl (n.).


puncheon (n.1)

barrel or cask for soap or liquor; iron vessel, c.1400, from Old French ponchon, ponson wine vessel
(13c.), of unknown origin. Uncertain connection with puncheon slab of timber, strut, wooden beam
used as a support in building (mid-14c.). Punch (n.2) in the drink sense is too late to be the
source of the cask sense.


puncheon (n.2)

pointed tool for punching or piercing used by masons, also die for coining or seal-making, mid-14c.;
see punch (n.1). Meaning stamp, die is from c.1500, a specialized use.


Punchinello (n.)

see Punch.


punching (n.)

c.1400, the cutting out of figures; early 15c. as a blow with the fist, verbal noun from punch (v.).
Related: Punching-bag (1889, figurative sense by 1903; also punch-bag).


punchless (adj.)

1950 of fighters and others lacking requisite power, from punch (n.1); 1853 of situations in which
one might seek a drink, from punch (n.2). Related: Punchlessly; punchlessness.


punchy (adj.1)

nervously anxious; irritable from fatigue, 1937, from punch (v.) + -y (2). Perhaps originally a
shortening of punch-drunk. Related: Punchily; punchiness.


punchy (adj.2)

full of vigor, 1926, from punch (n.3) + -y (2). Related: Punchily; punchiness.


punctate (adj.)

dotted, marked with dots, 1760, from Modern Latin punctuatus, from Latin punctum point (see point).
Related: Punctation.


punctilio (n.)

1590s, point, also detail of action, from Italian puntiglio or Spanish puntillo, diminutive of punto
point (see point (n.)).


punctilious (adj.)

1630s, probably from Italian puntiglioso, from puntiglio fine point, from Latin punctum prick (see
point (n.)). Related: Punctiliously; punctiliousness.


punctual (adj.)

c.1400, from Medieval Latin punctualis, from Latin punctus a pricking (see point (n.)). Originally
having a sharp point; of the nature of a point; meaning prompt first recorded 1670s, from notion of
insisting on fine points. Related: Punctually.


punctuality (n.)

exactness, 1610s; see punctual + -ity. Meaning promptness is from 1777.


punctuate (v.)

1630s, to point out, from Medieval Latin punctuatus, past participle of punctuare, from Latin
punctus (see point (n.)). Meaning in reference to text, to have pauses or stops indicated, is from
1818, probably a back-formation from punctuation. Hence, interrupted at intervals (1833). Related:
Punctuated; punctuating.


punctuation (n.)

1530s, pointing of the psalms, from Medieval Latin punctuationem (nominative punctuatio) a marking
with points, noun of action from past participle stem of punctuare to mark with points or dots, from
Latin punctus a prick (see point (n.)). Meaning system of inserting pauses in written matter is
recorded from 1660s.    [P]unctuation is cold notation; it is not frustrated speech; it is
typographic code. [Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style, 2004]


puncture (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin punctura a pricking, from Latin punctus, past participle of pungere to
prick, pierce (see pungent).


puncture (v.)

1690s, from puncture (n.). Related: Punctured; puncturing.


pundit (n.)

1670s, learned Hindu, especially one versed in Sanskrit lore, from Hindi payndit a learned man,
master, teacher, from Sanskrit payndita-s a learned man, scholar, of uncertain origin. Broader
application in English is first recorded 1816. Related: Punditry.


pungency (n.)

1640s, from pungent + -cy.


pungent (adj.)

1590s, sharp, poignant (of pain or grief), from Latin pungentem (nominative pungens), present
participle of pungere to prick, pierce, sting, figuratively, to vex, grieve, trouble, afflict,
related to pugnus fist (see pugnacious). Meaning having powerful odor or taste first recorded 1660s.
Literal sense sharp, pointed (c.1600) is very rare in English, mostly limited to botany. Middle
English and early Modern English also had a now-obsolete verb punge to prick, pierce; to smart,
cause to sting, from Latin pungere. Related: Pungently.


Punic (adj.)

pertaining to Carthage, 1530s, from Latin Punicus, earlier Poenicus Carthaginian, originally
Phoenician (adj.), Carthage having been founded as a Phoenician colony, from Poenus (n.), from Greek
Phoinix Phoenician (see Phoenician). Carthaginians were proverbial among the Romans as treacherous
and perfidious. Punic Wars were three wars between the Romans and the Carthaginians fought 264-146
B.C.E. Related: Punical (early 15c.).


punish (v.)

c.1300, from Old French puniss-, extended present participle stem of punir to punish, from Latin
punire punish, correct, chastise; take vengeance for; inflict a penalty on, cause pain for some
offense, earlier poenire, from poena penalty, punishment (see penal). Colloquial meaning to inflict
heavy damage or loss is first recorded 1801, originally in boxing. Related: Punished; punishing.


punishable (adj.)

1530s, of persons; 1540s, of offenses, from punish + -able.


punisher (n.)

mid-14c., agent noun from punish (v.).


punishing (adj.)

hard-hitting, 1811, present participle adjective from punish (v.). Related: Punishingly.


punishment (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French punisement (late 13c.), Old French punissement, from punir (see
punish). Meaning rough handling is from 1811.


punitive (adj.)

1620s, inflicting or involving punishment, from French punitif (16c.) or directly from Medieval
Latin punitivus, from Latin punitus, past participle of punire to punish, correct, chastise (see
punish).


Punjab

region on the Indian subcontinent, from Hindi Panjab, from Persian panj five (from PIE *penkwo-; see
five) + ab water, from Iranian *ap-, from PIE *ap- (2) water (see water (n.1)). So called for its
five rivers. Related: Punjabi.


punji (n.)

sharpened and often poisoned bamboo stake set in a hole as a trap for animals or enemies, 1872, of
unknown origin, probably from a Tibeto-Burman language (first recorded in a Bengal context).


punk (adj.)

inferior, bad, 1896, also as a noun, something worthless, earlier rotten wood used as tinder
(1680s), A word in common use in New England, as well as in the other Northern States and Canada
[Bartlett]; perhaps from Delaware (Algonquian) ponk, literally dust, powder, ashes; but Gaelic spong
tinder also has been suggested (compare spunk touchwood, tinder, 1580s).


punk (n.2)

worthless person (especially a young hoodlum), 1917, probably from punk kid criminal's apprentice,
underworld slang first attested 1904 (with overtones of catamite). Ultimately from punk (n.1) or
else from punk prostitute, harlot, strumpet, first recorded 1590s, of unknown origin.    For sense
shift from harlot to homosexual, compare gay. By 1923 used generally for young boy, inexperienced
person (originally in show business, as in punk day, circus slang from 1930, day when children are
admitted free). The verb meaning to back out of is from 1920.    The young criminal sense is no
doubt the inspiration in punk rock first attested 1971 (in a Dave Marsh article in Creem, referring
to Rudi Question Mark Martinez); popularized 1976.    If you looked different, people tried to
intimidate you all the time. It was the same kind of crap you had to put up with as a hippie, when
people started growing long hair. Only now it was the guys with the long hair yelling at you. You
think they would have learned something. I had this extreme parrot red hair and I got hassled so
much I carried a sign that said FUCK YOU ASSHOLE. I got so tired of yelling it, I would just hold up
the sign. [Bobby Startup, Philadelphia punk DJ, Philadelphia Weekly, Oct. 10, 2001]


punk (n.1)

Chinese incense, 1870, from punk (adj.).


punky (adj.)

1872, of wood, from punk (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Punkiness.


punnet (n.)

small, round chip basket, 1822, chiefly British, of obscure origin.


punster (n.)

c.1700, a low wit who endeavours at reputation by double meaning [Johnson], from pun + -ster.


punt (n.1)

kick, 1845; see punt (v.).


punt (n.2)

flat-bottomed river boat, late Old English punt, perhaps an ancient survival of British Latin ponto
flat-bottomed boat (see OED), a kind of Gallic transport (Caesar), also floating bridge (Gellius),
from Latin pontem (nominative pons) bridge (see pontoon). Or from or influenced by Old French
cognate pont large, flat boat.


punt (v.)

to kick a ball dropped from the hands before it hits the ground, 1845, first in a Rugby list of
football rules, perhaps from dialectal punt to push, strike, alteration of Midlands dialect bunt to
push, butt with the head, of unknown origin, perhaps echoic. Student slang meaning give up, drop a
course so as not to fail, 1970s, is because a U.S. football team punts when it cannot advance the
ball. Related: Punted; punting.


punter (n.)

1888 in football, agent noun from punt (v.).


punty (n.)

iron rod used in manipulating hot glass, 1660s, from French pontil, a diminutive form from Latin
punctum a point (see point (n.)).


puny (adj.)

1570s, inferior in rank (1540s as a noun, junior pupil, freshman), from Middle French puisn&eacute;
(Modern French pu&icirc;n&eacute;), from Old French puisne born later, younger, youngest (12c.,
contrasted with aisn&eacute; first-born), from puis nez, from puis afterward (from Vulgar Latin
*postius, from Latin postea after this, hereafter, from post after, see post-, + ea there) + Old
French n&eacute; born, from Latin natus, past participle of nasci be born (Old Latin gnasci; see
genus). Sense of small, weak, insignificant first recorded 1590s. Compare puisne. Related: Puniness.


acupuncture (n.)

1680s, pricking with a needle to ease pain, from Latin acus needle (see acuity) + puncture. The verb
is first recorded 1972.


acupuncturist (n.)

1843, from acupuncture + -ist.


compunction (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French compunction (12c., Modern French componction), from Late Latin
compunctionem (nominative compunctio) remorse; a pricking (of conscience), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin compungere to severely prick, sting, from com-, intensive prefix (see
com-), + pungere to prick (see pungent). Used in figurative sense by early Church writers.
Originally a much more intense feeling, similar to remorse, or contrition.


