puny (adj.)

1570s, inferior in rank (1540s as a noun, junior pupil, freshman), from Middle French puisn&eacute;
(Modern French pu&icirc;n&eacute;), from Old French puisne born later, younger, youngest (12c.,
contrasted with aisn&eacute; first-born), from puis nez, from puis afterward (from Vulgar Latin
*postius, from Latin postea after this, hereafter, from post after, see post-, + ea there) + Old
French n&eacute; born, from Latin natus, past participle of nasci be born (Old Latin gnasci; see
genus). Sense of small, weak, insignificant first recorded 1590s. Compare puisne. Related: Puniness.


shrimp (n.)

early 14c., slender, edible marine crustacean, probably from Old Norse skreppa thin person, from
Proto-Germanic *skrimp- (see scrimp). Related to Old English scrimman to shrink; the connecting
notion is probably thinness (compare Danish dialectal skrimpe thin cattle). The meaning puny person
in English is attested from late 14c.; an especially puny one might be a shrimplet (1680s).


puisne (adj.)

junior, c.1300 in Anglo-Latin, from Old French puisn&eacute; born later, younger, youngest (see
puny).


corpuscle (n.)

1650s, any small particle, from Latin corpusculum a puny body; an atom, particle, diminutive of
corpus body (see corporeal). First applied to blood cells 1845. Related: Corpuscular.


caitiff (adj.)

c.1300, wicked, base, cowardly, from Old North French caitive captive, miserable (Old French
chaitif, 12c., Modern French ch&eacute;tif puny, sickly, poor, weak), from Latin captivum (see
captive, which was a later, scholarly borrowing of the same word). In most Romance languages, it has
acquired a pejorative sense.


Appalachia

cultural and geographical region of inland Eastern U.S., 1880s, from the Appalachian Mountains,
which are its core. Earlier Appalachia was proposed as a better name for United States of America by
Washington Irving in 1839 (though he preferred Alleghenia) and this may have been the coinage of the
word.    It is a thousand pities that the puny witticisms of a few professional objectors should
have the power to prevent, even for a year, the adoption of a name for our country. At present we
have, clearly, none. There should be no hesitation about Appalachia. In the first place, it is
distinctive. America is not, and can never be made so. We may legislate as much as we please, and
assume for our country whatever name we think right Ã¢&euro;&rdquo; but to use it will be no name,
to any purpose for which a name is needed, unless we can take it away from the regions which employ
it at present. South America is America, and will insist upon remaining so. [Edgar Allan Poe, 1846]


