purchase (n.)

c.1300, purchas, acquisition, gain; also, something acquired or received, a possession; property,
goods; especially booty, spoil; goods gained by pillage or robbery (to make purchase was to seize by
robbery). Also mercenary soldier, one who fights for booty. From Anglo-French purchace, Old French
porchaz acquisition, gain, profit; seizing, plunder; search pursuit, effort, from Anglo-French
purchaser, Old French porchacier (see purchase (v.)).    From early 14c. as endeavor, effort,
exertion; instigation, contrivance; late 14c. as act of acquiring, procurement. Meaning that which
is bought is from 1580s. The sense of hold or position for advantageously applying power (1711) is
extended from the nautical verb meaning to haul or draw (especially by mechanical power), often used
in reference to hauling up anchors, attested from 1560s. Wif of purchase (early 14c.) was a term for
concubine.


purchase (v.)

c.1300, acquire, obtain; get, receive; procure, provide, also accomplish or bring about; instigate;
cause, contrive, plot; recruit, hire, from Anglo-French purchaser go after, Old French porchacier
search for, procure; purchase; aim at, strive for, pursue eagerly (11c., Modern French pourchasser),
from pur- forth (possibly used here as an intensive prefix; see pur-) + Old French chacier run
after, to hunt, chase (see chase (v.)).    Originally to obtain or receive as due in any way,
including through merit or suffering; specific sense of acquire for money, pay money for, buy is
from mid-14c., though the word continued to be used for to get by conquest in war, obtain as booty
up to 17c. Related: Purchased; purchasing.


purchaser (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French, Old French porchaceor, agent noun from porchacier (see purchase (v.)).


chapman (n.)

peddler, itinerant tradesman, Middle English form of Old English ceapman tradesman, from West
Germanic compound *kaupman- (cognates: Old High German choufman, German Kauffman, Middle Dutch and
Dutch koopman), formed with equivalents of man (n.) + West Germanic *kaup- (cognates: Old Saxon cop,
Old Frisian kap trade, purchase, Middle Dutch coop, Dutch koop trade, market, bargain, kauf trader,
Old English ceap barter, business; a purchase), from Proto-Germanic *kaupoz- (cognates: Danish
kj&oslash;b purchase, bargain, Old Norse kaup bargain, pay; compare also Old Church Slavonic kupiti
to buy, a Germanic loan-word), probably an early Germanic borrowing from Latin caupo (genitive
cauponis) petty tradesman, huckster, of unknown origin. Compare also cheap (adj.).


venal (adj.)

1650s, capable of being obtained for a price; that can be corrupted; 1660s, offered for sale, from
French v&eacute;nal, Old French venel for sale (of prostitutes, etc.; 12c.), from Latin venalis for
sale, to be sold; capable of being bribed, from venum (nominative *venus) for sale, from PIE root
*wes- (1) to buy, sell (cognates: Sanskrit vasnah purchase money, vasnam reward, vasnayati he
bargains, haggles; Greek onos price paid, purchase, oneisthai to buy). Typically with a bad sense of
ready to sell one's services or influence for money and from sordid motives; to be bought basely or
meanly.


buy (n.)

a purchase, especially a worthwhile one, 1879, American English, from buy (v.).


cheap (adj.)

low in price, that may be bought at small cost, c.1500, ultimately from Old English noun ceap
traffic, a purchase, from ceapian (v.) trade, probably from an early Germanic borrowing from Latin
caupo petty tradesman, huckster (see chapman).    The sense evolution is from the noun meaning a
barter, a purchase to a purchase as rated by the buyer, hence adjectival meaning inexpensive, the
main modern sense, via Middle English phrases such as god chep favorable bargain (12c., a
translation of French a bon march&eacute;).    Sense of lightly esteemed, common is from 1590s
(compare similar evolution of Latin vilis). The meaning low in price was represented in Old English
by undeor, literally un-dear (but deop ceap, literally deep cheap, meant high price).    The word
also was used in Old English for market (as in ceapd&aelig;g market day), a sense surviving in place
names Cheapside, East Cheap, etc. Related: Cheaply. Expression on the cheap is first attested 1888.
Cheap shot originally was U.S. football jargon for a head-on tackle; extended sense unfair hit in
politics, etc. is by 1970. German billig cheap is from Middle Low German billik, originally fair,
just, with a sense evolution via billiger preis fair price, etc.


buy-in (v.)

verbal phrase, to purchase a commission or stock, 1826, from buy (v.) + in (adv.). As a noun by
1970.


New Orleans

founded 1718 as Nouvelle Orl&eacute;ans, in honor of French regent Philippe, duc
d√¢&euro;&trade;Orl&eacute;ans (1674-1723); anglicized after purchase by the U.S. in 1803.


emption (n.)

late 15c., purchase, from Latin emptionem (nominative emptio) a buying, purchasing, noun of action
from past participle stem of emere to buy (see exempt (adj.)).


buy-out (n.)

also buy-out, the purchasing of a controlling share in a company, 1976, from verbal phrase buy out
purchase someone's estate and turn him out of it, 1640s, from buy (v.) + out (adv.).


repurchase (v.)

1590s, from re- + purchase (v.). Related: Repurchased; repurchasing.


billingsgate (n.)

1670s, the kind of coarse, abusive language once used by women in the Billingsgate market on the
River Thames below London Bridge.  Billingsgate is the market where the fishwomen assemble to
purchase fish; and where, in their dealings and disputes they are somewhat apt to leave decency and
good manners a little on the left hand. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811]  The place name is
Old English Billingesgate, gate of (a man called) Billing; the gate probably being a gap in the
Roman river wall. The market is mid-13c., not exclusively a fish market until late 17c.


manciple (n.)

officer or servant who purchases provisions for a college, monastery, etc., early 13c., from Old
French mancipe servant, official, manciple, from Latin mancipium servant, slave, slave obtained by
legal transfer; the legal purchase of a thing, literally a taking in hand, from manus hand (see
manual (adj.)) + root of capere to take (see capable).


salary (n.)

late 13c., compensation, payment, whether periodical, for regular service or for a specific service;
from Anglo-French salarie, Old French salaire wages, pay, reward, from Latin salarium salary,
stipend, pension, originally salt-money, soldier's allowance for the purchase of salt, noun use of
neuter of adjective salarius pertaining to salt, from sal (genitive salis) salt (see salt (n.)).
Japanese sarariman male salaried worker, literally salary-man, is from English.


knock (v.)

Old English cnocian (West Saxon cnucian), to pound, beat; knock (on a door), likely of imitative
origin. Meaning deprecate, put down is from 1892. Related: Knocked; knocking. Knock-kneed first
attested 1774. Knock-down, drag-out is from 1827. Command knock it off stop it is first recorded
1880, perhaps from auctioneer's term for dispose of quickly:    At the commencement of the sales, he
gave every one that wanted to purchase a paper containing a description of the lands that were to be
sold; and, as the sales were cried, he called over the numbers and described the land; and when it
got up to one dollar and a quarter an acre, if no body bid, after it was cried two or three times,
he would say, knock it off, knock it off. [U.S. Senate record, 1834]


ring (v.1)

sound a bell, Old English hringan sound, give a certain resonant sound when struck; announce by
bells, from Proto-Germanic *khrengan (cognates: Old Norse hringja, Swedish ringa, Middle Dutch
ringen), probably of imitative origin. Related: Rang; rung. Originally a weak verb, strong
inflection began in early Middle English by influence of sing, etc. To ring down a theatrical
curtain is from 1772, from the custom of signaling for it by ringing a bell. To ring up a purchase
on a cash register is by 1937, from the bell that sounded. Specialized sense give a resonant sound
when struck as an indication of genuineness or purity, with transferred use (as in to ring hollow)
is from 1610s.


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


