purge (n.)

1560s, that which purges, from purge (v.). Meaning a purgative, an act of purging is from 1590s.
Political sense from 1730. Earliest sense in English was the now-obsolete one examination in a legal
court (mid-15c.).


purgery (n.)

bleaching room for sugar, 1847, from French purgerie (1838), from purger (see purge (v.)). For the
legal term, see perjury.


purge (v.)

c.1300, clear of a charge or suspicion; late 14c., cleanse, clear, purify, from Anglo-French purger,
Old French purgier wash, clean; refine, purify morally or physically (12c., Modern French purger)
and directly from Latin purgare cleanse, make clean; purify, especially of the body, free from what
is superfluous; remove, clear away, figuratively refute, justify, vindicate (also source of Spanish
purgar, Italian purgare), from Old Latin purigare, from purus pure (see pure) + root of agere to
drive, make (see act (n.)). Related: Purged; purging.


expurgation (n.)

early 15c., a cleansing from impurity, from Latin expurgationem (nominative expurgatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of expurgare to cleanse out, purge, purify, from ex- out (see ex-)
+ purgare to purge (see purge (v.)). Sense of remove objectionable passages from a literary work
first recorded in English 1610s.


spurge (n.)

plant species, late 14c., from Old French espurge, from espurgier to purge (transitive and
intransitive), from Latin expurgare, from ex- out (see ex-) + purgare to purge (see purge (v.)). So
called from the purgative and emetic properties of the plant's root.


purgative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French purgatif (14c.) and directly from Late Latin purgativus, from purgat-,
past participle stem of Latin purgare (see purge (v.)). The noun is attested from early 15c. (Old
English medical texts have cl&#230;nsungdrenc).


expurgate (v.)

1620s, back-formation from expurgation or from Latin expurgatus, past participle of expurgare to
cleanse out, purge, purify (see expurgation). Related: Expurgated; expurgating. The earlier verb was
simply expurge (late 15c.), from Middle French expurger.


purgatory (n.)

c.1200, from Old French purgatore and directly from Medieval Latin purgatorium (St. Bernard, early
12c.), in Latin, means of cleansing, noun use of neuter of purgatorius (adj.) purging, cleansing,
from purgat-, past participle stem of Latin purgare (see purge (v.)). Figurative use from late 14c.


cleanse (v.)

Old English cl&aelig;nsian to cleanse, purge, purify, chasten, justify, from West Germanic
*klainson, from *klainoz (see clean (adj.)). Despite its modern spelling (16c.), it retains its
Middle English pronunciation. Related: Cleansed; cleansing.


purgation (n.)

late 14c., purification from sin, also discharge of waste, from Old French purgacion a cleansing,
medical or spiritual (12c., Modern French purgation) and directly from Latin purgationem (nominative
purgatio) a cleansing, purging, figuratively an apology, justification, noun of action from past
participle stem of purgare (see purge (v.)).


catharsis (n.)

1803, bodily purging, from Latinized form of Greek katharsis purging, cleansing, from stem of
kathairein to purify, purge, from katharos pure, clear of dirt, clean, spotless; open, free; clear
of shame or guilt; purified (with most of the extended senses now found in Modern English clear,
clean, pure), of unknown origin. Originally medical in English; of emotions from 1872; psychotherapy
sense first recorded 1909, in Brill's translation of Freud.


