puzzle (n.)

c.1600, state of being puzzled, from puzzle (v.); meaning perplexing question is from 1650s; that of
a toy contrived to test one's ingenuity is from 1814.


puzzler (n.)

1650s, agent noun from puzzle (v.).


puzzlement (n.)

1822, from puzzle + -ment.


puzzle (v.)

1590s, pusle bewilder, confound, possibly frequentative of pose (v.) in obsolete sense of perplex
(compare nuzzle from nose). Related: Puzzled; puzzling.


crossword puzzle

January 1914, from cross (adj.) + word + puzzle. The first one ran in the New York World newspaper
Dec. 21, 1913, but was called word-cross.


tangram (n.)

Chinese geometric puzzle, 1864, said to be an arbitrary formation based on anagram, etc. First
element perhaps Chinese t'an to extend, or t'ang, commonly used in Cantonese for Chinese. Some
suggest it is the name of the inventor, but no such person is known to Chinese scholars [OED].
Another theory involves the Tanka, an outcast aboriginal people of southern China, and Western
sailors who discovered the puzzle from their Tanka girlfriends. Perhaps from an obscure sense of
tram. The Chinese name is Ch'i ch'iao t'u seven ingenious plan.


crossword (n.)

1925, short for crossword puzzle (q.v.).


conundrum (n.)

1590s, Oxford University slang for pedant, also whim, etc., later (1790) riddle, puzzle. Also
spelled quonundrum. The sort of ponderous pseudo-Latin word that was once the height of humor in
learned circles.


puzzling (adj.)

bewildering, 1660s, present participle adjective from puzzle (v.). Related: Puzzlingly.


floor (v.)

early 15c., to furnish with a floor, from floor (n.). Sense of puzzle, confound is 1830, from notion
of knock down to the floor (1640s). Related: Floored; flooring.


logogriph (n.)

a type of word puzzle based on synonyms, etc., and often in the form of a verse, 1590s, from French
logogriphe, from Greek logos (see logos) + griphos riddle, literally fishing basket.


jigsaw (n.)

also jig-saw, vertical reciprocating saw, 1855, American English, from jig with its notion of rapid
up-and-down motion + saw (n.1). Jigsaw puzzle first recorded 1906; originally one with pieces cut by
a jigsaw.


bepuzzle (v.)

1826, from be- + puzzle (v.). Related: Bepuzzled; bepuzzling.


pose (v.2)

to puzzle, confuse, perplex, 1590s, earlier question, interrogate (1520s), probably from Middle
French poser suppose, assume, from Old French poser to put, place, set (see pose (v.1)). Also in
some cases a shortening of English appose examine closely, and oppose. Related: Posed; posing.


queer (v.)

to spoil, ruin, 1812, from queer (adj.). Related: Queered; queering. Earlier it meant to puzzle,
ridicule, cheat (1790). To queer the pitch (1846) is in reference to the patter of an itinerant
tradesman or showman (see pitch (n.1)).    These wanderers, and those who are still seen
occasionally in the back streets of the metropolis, are said to 'go a-pitching ;' the spot they
select for their performance is their 'pitch,' and any interruption of their feats, such as an
accident, or the interference of a policeman, is said to 'queer the pitch,'--in other words, to
spoil it. [Thomas Frost, Circus Life and Circus Celebrities, London, 1875]


path (n.)

Old English pa&thorn;, p&aelig;&thorn; path, track, from West Germanic *patha- (cognates: Old
Frisian path, Middle Dutch pat, Dutch pad, Old High German pfad, German Pfad path), of uncertain
origin. The original initial -p- in a Germanic word is an etymological puzzle. Don Ringe (From
Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic, Oxford 2006) describes it as An obvious loan from Iranian
..., clearly borrowed after Grimm√¢&euro;&trade;s Law had run its course. Watkins says the word is
probably borrowed (? via Scythian) from Iranian *path-, from PIE root *pent- to tread, go, pass
(source of Avestan patha way; see find (v.)), but this is too much of a stretch for OED and others.
In Scotland and Northern England, commonly a steep ascent of a hill or in a road.


