quack (n.2)

duck sound, 1839, from quack (v.).


quack (n.1)

medical charlatan, 1630s, short for quacksalver (1570s), from obsolete Dutch quacksalver (modern
kwakzalver), literally hawker of salve, from Middle Dutch quacken to brag, boast, literally to croak
(see quack (v.)) + salf salve, salven to rub with ointment (see salve (v.)). As an adjective from
1650s. The oldest attested form of the word in this sense in English is as a verb, to play the quack
(1620s). The Dutch word also is the source of German Quacksalber, Danish kvaksalver, Swedish
kvacksalvare.


quacker (n.)

a duck, 1846, agent noun from quack (v.).


quacksalver (n.)

1570s; see quack (n.1).


quackery (n.)

1690s, from quack (n.) + -ery.


quack (v.)

to make a duck sound, 1610s, earlier quake (1520s), variant of quelke (early 14c.), of echoic origin
(compare Middle Dutch quacken, Old Church Slavonic kvakati, Latin coaxare to croak, Greek koax the
croaking of frogs, Hittite akuwakuwash frog). Middle English on the quakke (14c.) meant hoarse,
croaking. Related: Quacked; quacking.


elixir (n.)

mid-13c., from Medieval Latin elixir philosopher's stone, believed by alchemists to transmute baser
metals into gold and/or to cure diseases and prolong life, from Arabic al-iksir, probably from late
Greek xerion powder for drying wounds, from xeros dry (see xerasia). General sense of strong tonic
is 1590s; used for quack medicines from at least 1630s.


charlatan (n.)

1610s, from French charlatan mountebank, babbler (16c.), from Italian ciarlatano a quack, from
ciarlare to prate, babble, from ciarla chat, prattle, perhaps imitative of ducks' quacking. Related:
Charlatanism; charlatanical; charlatanry.


canard (n.)

before 1850, from French canard a hoax, literally a duck (from Old French quanart, probably echoic
of a duck's quack); said by Littr&eacute; to be from the phrase vendre un canard &agrave;
moiti&eacute; to half-sell a duck, thus, from some long-forgotten joke, to cheat.


medicaster (n.)

quack, c.1600, from Latin *medicaster (source also of Italian medicastro, French m&#233;dicastre,
16c.), from medicus (see medical (adj.)). The feminine form is medicastra. Compare also -aster.


empiric (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin empiricus a physician guided by experience, from Greek empeirikos experienced,
from empeiria experience, from empeiros skilled, from en in (see en- (2)) + peira trial, experiment,
from PIE *per- to try, risk. Originally a school of ancient physicians who based their practice on
experience rather than theory. Earlier as a noun (1540s) in reference to the sect, and earliest
(1520s) in a sense quack doctor which was in frequent use 16c.-19c.


nostrum (n.)

quack medicine, c.1600, from Latin nostrum remedium our remedy, presumably that prepared by the
person offering it, from Latin nostrum, neuter of noster our, from nos we, from PIE *nos (see us).


mountebank (n.)

a doctor that mounts a bench in the market, and boasts his infallible remedies and cures [Johnson],
1570s, from Italian montambanco, contraction of monta in banco quack, juggler, literally mount on
bench (to be seen by crowd), from monta, imperative of montare to mount (see mount (v.)) + banco,
variant of banca bench (see bank (n.2)). Figurative and extended senses from 1580s.


tractor (n.)

1856, something that pulls, from Modern Latin tractor that which draws, agent noun from past
participle stem of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Earlier used of a quack device
consisting of two metal rods which were supposed to relieve rheumatism (1798, in full Perkins's
metallic tractor); still the main sense in Century Dictionary (1891).    Sense of an engine or
vehicle for pulling wagons or plows is recorded by 1896, from earlier traction engine (1859). The
meaning powerful truck for pulling a freight trailer is first found 1926; tractor-trailer as
combined motor-truck and trailer is from 1914.


