quarry (v.)

1774, from quarry (n.2). Related: Quarried; quarrying.


quarry (n.1)

what is hunted, early 14c., quirre entrails of deer placed on the hide and given to dogs of the
chase as a reward, from Anglo-French quirreie, Old French cuiriee the spoil, quarry (Modern French
cur&#233;e), altered (by influence of Old French cuir skin, from Latin corium hide), from Old French
cor&eacute;e viscera, entrails, from Vulgar Latin *corata entrails, from Latin cor heart (see
heart). Sense of anything chased in hunt is first recorded 1610s; earlier bird targeted by a hawk or
other raptor (late 15c.).


quarryman (n.)

1610s, from quarry (n.2) + man (n.). Related: Quarrymen.


quarry (n.2)

open place where rocks are excavated, c.1400 (mid-13c. as a place name), from Medieval Latin
quareia, dissimilated from quarreria (mid-13c.), literally place where stones are squared, from
Latin quadrare to square (see quadrant).


metal (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French metal metal; material, substance, stuff (12c.), from Latin metallum metal;
mine, quarry, mineral, what is got by mining, from Greek metallon metal, ore (senses only in post-
classical texts; originally mine, quarry, pit), probably from metalleuein to mine, to quarry, of
unknown origin, but related somehow to metallan to seek after. Compare Greek metalleutes a miner,
metalleia a searching for metals, mining.


pointer (n.)

mid-14c., a tiler (early 13c. as a surname), agent noun from point (v.). From c.1500 as maker of
needlepoint lace. From 1570s as thing that points; meaning dog that stands rigid in the presence of
game, facing the quarry is recorded from 1717. Meaning item of advice first recorded 1883.


delf (n.)

late Old English d&aelig;lf trench, ditch, quarry, from gedelf digging, a digging, from delfan to
dig (see delve).


relay (v.)

c.1400, to set a pack of (fresh) hounds after a quarry; also change horses, from Old French
relaiier, from relai (see relay (n.)). Related: Relayed; relaying.


terrier (n.)

kind of dog, early 15c., from Old French chien terrier terrier dog, literally earth dog, from
Medieval Latin terrarius of earth, from Latin terra earth (see terrain). So called because the dogs
pursue their quarry (foxes, badgers, etc.) into their burrows.


trail (v.)

c.1300, to hang down loosely and flow behind (of a gown, sleeve, etc.), from Old French trailler to
tow; pick up the scent of a quarry, ultimately from Vulgar Latin *tragulare to drag, from Latin
tragula dragnet, javelin thrown by a strap, probably related to trahere to pull (see tract (n.1)).
Transitive sense of to tow or pull along the ground is from c.1400. The meaning follow the trail of
(an animal, etc.) is first recorded late 14c. Meaning to lag behind is from 1957. Related: Trailed;
trailing.


mort (n.2)

note sounded on a horn at the death of the quarry, c.1500, from French mort dead, from Latin mortem
(source of Spanish muerte, Italian morte), accusative of mors death (see mortal (adj.)). Or from
French mort dead, from Vulgar Latin *mortus, from Latin mortuus.


