rag (n.)

scrap of cloth, early 14c., probably from Old Norse r&#246;gg shaggy tuft, earlier raggw-, or
possibly from Old Danish rag (see rug), or a back-formation from ragged, It also may represent an
unrecorded Old English cognate of Old Norse r&#246;gg. In any case, from Proto-Germanic *rawwa-,
from PIE root *reue- (2) to smash, knock down, tear up, uproot (see rough (adj.)).    As an
insulting term for newspaper, magazine it dates from 1734; slang for tampon, sanitary napkin is
attested from 1930s (on the rag menstruating is from 1948). Rags personal clothing is from 1855
(singular), American English. Rags-to-riches rise from poverty to wealth is attested by 1896. Rag-
picker is from 1860; rag-shop from 1829.


rag (v.)

scold, 1739, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Danish dialectal rag grudge. Related: Ragged;
ragging. Compare bullyrag, ballarag intimidate (1807).


rag-bag (n.)

1820, from rag (n.1) + bag (n.). Figurative sense of motley collection is first recorded 1864.


rag-doll (n.)

child's plaything, 1776 (from 1757 as a dressed-up woman), from rag (n.1) + doll (n.). Rag-baby
attested from 1798. Shakespeare has babe of clowts (i.e. clouts), 1590s.


raga (n.)

1788, from Sanskrit raga-s harmony, melody, mode in music, literally color, mood, related to rajyati
it is dyed, from PIE *reg- (3) to dye (cognates: Greek rhegos blanket, rug).


ragamuffin (n.)

mid-14c., demon, also in surnames (Isabella Ragamuffyn, 1344), from Middle English raggi ragged
(rag-y?) + fanciful ending (or else second element is Middle Dutch muffe mitten). Or, as Johnson has
it, From rag and I know not what else. Ragged was used of the devil from c.1300 in reference to
shaggy appearance. Raggeman was used by Langland as the name of a demon, and compare Old French
Ragamoffyn, name of a demon in a mystery play. Sense of dirty, disreputable boy is from 1580s.
Compare in the same sense ragabash (c.1600).


rage (n.)

c.1300, madness, insanity; fit of frenzy; anger, wrath; fierceness in battle; violence of storm,
fire, etc., from Old French rage, raige spirit, passion, rage, fury, madness (11c.), from Medieval
Latin rabia, from Latin rabies madness, rage, fury, related to rabere be mad, rave (compare rabies,
which originally had this sense), from PIE *rebh- violent, impetuous (cognates: Old English rabbian
to rage). Similarly, Welsh (cynddaredd) and Breton (kounnar) words for rage, fury originally meant
hydrophobia and are compounds based on the word for dog (Welsh ci, plural cwn; Breton ki). In
15c.-16c. it also could mean rabies. The rage fashion, vogue dates from 1785.


rage (v.)

mid-13c., to play, romp, from rage (n.). Meanings be furious; speak passionately; go mad first
recorded c.1300. Of things from 1530s. Related: Raged; raging.


ragged (adj.)

rough, shaggy, c.1300, past participle adjective as though from a verb form of rag (n.). Compare
Latin pannosus ragged, wrinkly, from pannus piece of cloth. But  the word might reflect a broader,
older meaning; perhaps from or reinforced by Old Norse ragga&eth;r shaggy, via Old English raggig
shaggy, bristly, rough (which, Barnhart writes, was almost surely developed from Scandinavian). Of
clothes, early 14c.; of persons, late 14c. To run (someone) ragged is from 1915. Related: Raggedly;
raggedness.


raggedy (adj.)

1845, U.S. Southern, from ragged + -y (2). Raggedy Ann stories first published 1918, character
created by U.S. illustrator Johnny Gruelle (1880-1938). The tangle of tales about the origin of the
doll and the name probably are mostly invention, sorrow's grieving-shrine for Marcella Gruelle
(1902-1915), best left alone.


raggedy-ass (adj.)

by 1930, from raggedy + ass (n.2).


raghead (n.)

insulting term for South Asian or Middle Eastern person, 1910, from rag (n.) + head (n.); in
reference to turbans, etc.


raglan (n.)

type of overcoat, 1863, named for British general Lord Raglan (1788-1855), commander of British
forces in the Crimean War. The name is from a place in Wales.


Ragnarok (n.)

in Norse mythology, the last battle of the world, in which gods and men will be destroyed by
monsters and darkness, 1770, from Old Norse ragna, genitive of r&ouml;gn gods + r&ouml;k destined
end or r&ouml;kr twilight. Also see Gotterdammerung.


ragout (n.)

highly seasoned meat and vegetable stew, 1650s, from French rago&#251;t (mid-17c.), from Middle
French rago&#251;ter awaken the appetite, from Old French re- back (see re-) + &agrave; to +
go&#251;t taste, from Latin gustum (nominative gustus); see gusto.


ragtag (n.)

also rag-tag, ragged people collectively, 1820, from rag (n.) + tag (n.); originally in expression
rag-tag and bobtail the rabble (tag-rag and bobtail is found in 1650s), with bobtail an old 17c.
word for cur. Tag and rag was very common in 16-17th c. [OED]


ragtime (n.)

also rag-time, syncopated, jazzy piano music, 1897, perhaps from rag dance ball (1895, American
English dialect), or a shortening of ragged, in reference to the syncopated melody. Rag (n.) ragtime
dance tune is from 1899.    If rag-time was called tempo di raga or rague-temps it might win honor
more speedily. ... What the derivation of the word is[,] I have not the faintest idea. The negroes
call their clog-dancing ragging and the dance a rag. [Rupert Hughes, Boston Musical Record, April
1900]   <hr />   Conceive the futility of trying to reduce the intangible ragness to a strict system
of misbegotten grace notes and untimely rests! In attempting to perfect, and simplify, art is
destroying the unhampered spirit in which consists the whole beauty of rag-time music. The very
essence of rag-time is that it shall lack all art, depending for the spirit to be infused more upon
the performer than upon the composer himself. [Yale Literary Magazine, June, 1899]   <hr />   Her
first rag-time was The Bully, in which she made great sport by bringing a little coloured boy on the
stage with her. Miss [May] Irwin says the way to learn to sing rag-time is to catch a negro and
study him. [Lewis C. Strang, Famous Actresses of the Day in America, Boston, 1899]


ragtop (n.)

convertible car, 1954, from rag (n.) + top (n.1).


ragweed (n.)

1790, from ragged + weed (n.); so called from shape of the leaves. Applied to a different plant
(ragwort) from 1650s.


ragwort (n.)

mid-15c., from ragged, in reference to the appearance of the leaves, + wort.


amperage (n.)

strength of an electric current, 1889, from ampere on model of voltage.


anchorage (n.)

mid-14c., toll or charge for anchoring (see anchor (v.) + -age. Meaning act of dropping anchor,
being at anchor is from 1610s; that of place suitable for anchoring is from 1706. The Alaska city of
Anchorage was founded 1914.


Aragon

medieval Spanish kingdom, named for a river that runs through it, probably from a PIE root meaning
water.


arbitrage (n.)

exercise of the function of an arbitrator, late 15c., from Old French arbitrage arbitration,
judgment, from arbitrer to arbitrate, judge, from Late Latin arbitrari, from Latin arbiter (see
arbiter).


arrearage (n.)

unpaid debt, early 14c., from Old French arierage detriment, prejudice (in a legal sense) (Modern
French arr&eacute;rage), from arere behind; see arrears.


asparagus (n.)

late 14c., aspergy; late Old English sparage, from Latin asparagus (in Medieval Latin often
sparagus), from Greek asparagos, of uncertain origin; probably from PIE root *sp(h)er(e)g- to spring
up (though perhaps not originally a Greek word).    In Middle English, asperages sometimes was
regarded as a plural, with false singular aspergy. By 16c. the word had been anglicized as far as
sperach, sperage. It was respelled by c.1600 to conform with classical Latin, but in 17c. the folk-
etymologized variant sparrowgrass took hold, persisting into 19c., during which time asparagus had
an air of stiffness and pedantry [John Walker, Critical Pronouncing Dictionary, 1791]. Known in Old
English as eor&eth;nafela.


average (n.)

late 15c., financial loss incurred through damage to goods in transit, from French avarie damage to
ship, and Italian avaria; a word from 12c. Mediterranean maritime trade (compare Spanish averia;
other Germanic forms, Dutch avarij, German haferei, etc., also are from Romanic languages), of
uncertain origin. Sometimes traced to Arabic 'arwariya damaged merchandise. Meaning shifted to equal
sharing of such loss by the interested parties. Transferred sense of statement of a medial estimate
is first recorded 1735. The mathematical extension is from 1755.


average (adj.)

1770; see average (n.).


average (v.)

1769, from average (n.). Related: Averaged; averaging.


barrage (n.)

1859, action of barring; man-made barrier in a stream, from French barrer to stop, from barre bar,
from Old French barre (see bar (n.1)). Artillery sense is 1916, from World War I French phrase tir
de barrage barrier fire intended to isolate the objective. As a verb by 1917. Related: Barraged;
barraging.


bedraggle (v.)

1727, from be- + draggle, frequentative of drag.


bedraggled (adj.)

1727, past participle adjective from bedraggle.


beverage (n.)

mid-13c., from Anglo-French beverage, Old French bevrage, from Old French boivre to drink (Modern
French boire; from Latin bibere to imbibe; see imbibe) + -age, suffix forming mass or abstract
nouns.


borage (n.)

flowering plant used in salads, mid-13c., from Anglo-French, Old French borage (13c., Modern French
bourrache), from Medieval Latin borrago. Klein says this is ultimately from Arabic abu arak,
literally the father of sweat, so called by Arab physicians for its effect on humans. But OED says
it's from Latin borra rough hair, short wool, in reference to the texture of the foliage.


brag (n.)

late 14c., pomp; arrogance, pride; see brag (v.); the exact relationship of the forms is uncertain.
Meaning that which is boasted is from 1530s. As a once-popular poker-like card game, from 1734.


brag (v.)

mid-14c., braggen to make a loud sound, also to talk boastfully, of obscure origin, perhaps related
to bray of a trumpet, or related to the Middle English adjective brag ostentatious, proud; spirited,
brave (early 14c.), which probably is from Celtic. Other sources suggest Old Norse bragr the best,
the toast (of anything), also poetry. Also see braggart for another possibility. Related: Bragged;
bragging.


Braganza

city in Portugal (Portuguese Bragan&#231;a), from Celtic briga height


braggadocio (n.)

Spenser's coinage, 1590, as a name for his personification of vainglory, from brag, with
augmentative ending by analogy to the Italian words then in vogue in England. In general use by 1594
for an empty swaggerer; of the talk of such persons, from 1734.


braggart (n.)

1570s, from French bragard (16c.), with pejorative ending (see -ard) + Middle French braguer to
flaunt, brag, perhaps originally to show off clothes, especially breeches, from brague breeches (see
bracket). There may be an element of codpiece-flaunting in all this.    The word in English has been
at least influenced by brag (v.), even if, as some claim, it is unrelated to it. Bragger arrogant or
boastful person, agent noun from brag (v.), attested in English from late 14c.


brokerage (n.)

mid-15c., a broker's trade, from broker (n.) + -age. Also, in 17c., a pimp's trade.


courage (n.)

c.1300, from Old French corage (12c., Modern French courage) heart, innermost feelings; temper, from
Vulgar Latin *coraticum (source of Italian coraggio, Spanish coraje), from Latin cor heart (see
heart) which remains a common metaphor for inner strength.    In Middle English, used broadly for
what is in one's mind or thoughts, hence bravery, but also wrath, pride, confidence, lustiness, or
any sort of inclination. Replaced Old English ellen, which also meant zeal, strength.


courageous (adj.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French corageous, Old French corageus (12c., Modern French courageux), from
corage (see courage). Related: Courageously; courageousness.


coverage (n.)

mid-15c., charge for a booth at a fair, from cover + -age. Reintroduced 1912, American English, in
insurance.


crag (n.)

early 14c.; as a place-name element attested from c.1200, probably from a Celtic source akin to Old
Irish crec rock, and carrac cliff, Welsh craig rock, stone, Manx creg, Breton krag.


craggy (adj.)

mid-15c.; see crag + -y (2). Related: Cragginess.


defragment (v.)

1992, in computer sense, from de- + fragment. Related: Defragmented; defragmenting.


demurrage (n.)

1640s, from Old French demorage, from demorer (see demur).


diaphragm (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin diaphragma, from Greek diaphragma partition, barrier, muscle which
divides the thorax from the abdomen, from diaphrassein to barricade, from dia- across (see dia-) +
phrassein to fence or hedge in. The native word is midriff. Meaning contraceptive cap is from 1933.


discourage (v.)

mid-15c., discoragen, from Middle French descourager, from Old French descoragier, from des- away
(see dis-) + corage (see courage). Related: Discouraged; discouragement; discouraging.


disparage (v.)

early 14c., degrade socially, from Old French desparagier (Modern French d&eacute;parager) reduce in
rank, degrade, devalue, depreciate, originally to marry unequally, and thus by extension the
disgrace or dishonor involved in this, from des- away (see dis-) + parage rank, lineage (see peer
(n.)). Sense of belittle first recorded 1530s. Related: Disparaged; disparaging; disparagingly.


