rail-splitter (n.)

1853, from rail (n.1) + agent noun from split (v.). Usually with reference to or suggestion of U.S.
president Abraham Lincoln, as it figured in his political biography.


rail (v.2)

fence in with rails, late 14c., from rail (n.1). Related: Railed; railing.


raillery (n.)

good-humored ridicule, 1650s, from rail (v.) + -ery, or perhaps from French raillerie, from Middle
French railler to tease (see rail (v.1)).


railroading (n.)

1842, travel by rail, from railroad (n.). As business of running railways from 1882.


rail (n.2)

small wading bird, mid-15c., from Old French raale (13c.), related to r&acirc;ler to rattle, of
unknown origin, perhaps imitative of its cry.


railway (n.)

1812 in modern sense, from rail (n.1) + way (n.). Earlier used of any sort of road on which rails
(originally wooden) were laid for easier transport (1776).


railing (n.)

construction in which rails form an important part, early 15c., verbal noun from rail (v.2).
Technically, railings (late 15c.) are horizontal, palings are vertical.


railroad (n.)

1757, from rail (n.1) + road. Originally road laid with rails for heavy wagons (in mining). The
process itself (but not the word) seems to have been in use by late 17c. Application to passenger
and freight trains dates from 1825, though tending to be replaced in this sense in England by
railway.


rail (v.1)

complain, mid-15c., from Middle French railler to tease or joke (15c.), perhaps from Old
Proven&ccedil;al ralhar scoff, to chat, to joke, from Vulgar Latin *ragulare to bray (source also of
Italian ragghiare to bray), from Late Latin ragere to roar, probably of imitative origin. See rally
(v.2). Related: Railed; railing.


rail (n.1)

horizontal bar passing from one post or support to another, c.1300, from Old French reille bolt,
bar, from Vulgar Latin *regla, from Latin regula straight stick, diminutive form related to regere
to straighten, guide (see regal). Used figuratively for thinness from 1872. To be off the rails in a
figurative sense is from 1848, an image from the railroads. In U.S. use, A piece of timber, cleft,
hewed, or sawed, inserted in upright posts for fencing [Webster, 1830].


rally (v.2)

make fun of, tease, 1660s, from French railler to rail, reproach (see rail (v.)).


sora (n.)

small, short-billed North American bird species, the Carolina rail, 1705, probably from a native
name.


monorail (n.)

1897, a hybrid coined from mono- + rail (n.1).


derail (v.)

1850, in both transitive and intransitive senses, from French d&eacute;railler to go off the rails,
from de- (see de-) + railler (see rail (n.1)). In general use first in U.S. Related: Derailed;
derailing.


chide (v.)

late 12c., scold, nag, rail, originally intransitive, from Old English cidan to contend, quarrel,
complain. Not found outside Old English (though Liberman says it is probably related to OHG
*k&icirc;dal 'wedge,' with a sense evolution from brandishing sticks to scold, reprove). Past tense,
past participle can be chided or chid or even (past participle) chidden (Shakespeare used it);
present participle is chiding.


guard (n.)

early 15c., one who keeps watch, from Middle French garde guardian, warden, keeper; watching,
keeping, custody, from Old French garder to keep, maintain, preserve, protect (corresponding to Old
North French warder, see gu-), from Frankish *wardon, from Proto-Germanic *wardo- to guard (see ward
(v.)). Abstract or collective sense of a keeping, a custody (as in bodyguard) also is from early
15c. Sword-play and fisticuffs sense is from 1590s. Guard-rail attested from 1860.


taffrail (n.)

1814, alteration of tafferel (1704) upper panel on the stern of a ship (often ornamented), earlier,
a carved panel (1620s), from Dutch tafereel panel for painting or carving, dissimulation from
*tafeleel, diminutive of tafel table, from the general West Germanic borrowing of Latin tabula slab,
board (see table (n.)). The word developed in Dutch from the custom of ornamenting (by painting or
carving) the high, flat stern of old sailing ships; spelling and sense altered in English by
influence of rail (n.).


stake (n.1)

pointed stick or post, Old English staca pin, stake, from Proto-Germanic *stakon (cognates: Old
Norse stiaki, Danish stage, Old Frisian stake, Middle Dutch stake, Dutch staak, German stake), from
PIE root *steg- (1) pole, stick. The Germanic word has been borrowed in Spanish (estaca), Old French
(estaque), and Italian stacca) and was borrowed back as attach.    Meaning post upon which persons
were bound for death by burning is recorded from c.1200. Meaning vertical bar affixed to the edge of
a platform of s truck, rail car, etc., to hold boards to keep the load from falling off is from
1875; hence stake-body as a type of truck (1907). In pull up stakes, The allusion is to pulling up
the stakes of a tent [Bartlett].


third (adj.)

late Old English metathesis of &thorn;ridda, from Proto-Germanic *thridja- (cognates: Old Frisian
thredda, Old Saxon thriddio, Middle Low German drudde, Dutch derde, Old High German dritto, German
dritte, Old Norse &thorn;ri&eth;e, Danish tredie, Swedish tredje, Gothic &thorn;ridja), from PIE
*tri-tyo- (cognates: Sanskrit trtiyas, Avestan thritya, Greek tritos, Latin tertius (source of
Italian terzo, Spanish tercio, French tiers), Old Church Slavonic tretiji, Lithuanian trecias, Old
Irish triss, Welsh tryde), suffixed form of root *trei-  (see three).    Metathesis of thrid into
third is attested from c.950 in Northumbrian, but overall thrid was prevalent up to 16c. The noun
meaning third part of anything is recorded from late 14c. Third rail in electric railway sense is
recorded from 1890. Third World War as a possibility first recorded 1947. Third-rate of poor quality
is from 1814, ultimately from classification of ships (1640s); third class in railway travel is from
1839. Third Reich (1930) is a partial translation of German drittes Reich (1923). Third party in
law, insurance, etc., is from 1818.


