rally (n.)

1650s, originally in the military sense of a regrouping for renewed action after a repulse, from
rally (v.1). Sense of mass meeting to stir enthusiasm first attested 1840, American English. Sense
of gathering of automobile enthusiasts is from 1932, from French rallye, itself from the English
noun. Sports sense of long series of hits in tennis, etc., is from 1881, earlier series of back-and-
forth blows in a boxing match (1829).


rally (v.1)

bring together, c.1600, from French rallier, from Old French ralier reassemble, unite again, from
re- again (see re-) + alier unite (see ally (v.)). Intransitive meaning pull together hastily,
recover order, revive, rouse is from 1660s. Related: Rallied; rallying. Rally round the flag (1862)
is a line from popular American Civil War song Battle Cry of Freedom.


rally (v.2)

make fun of, tease, 1660s, from French railler to rail, reproach (see rail (v.)).


rely (v.)

early 14c., to gather, assemble (transitive and intransitive), from Old French relier assemble, put
together; fasten, attach, rally, oblige, from Latin religare fasten, bind fast, from re-, intensive
prefix (see re-), + ligare to bind (see ligament). Sense of depend, trust is from 1570s, perhaps via
notion of rally to, fall back on. Typically used with on, perhaps by influence of lie (v.2).
Related: Relied; relying.


Monte Carlo

Italian, literally Charles's Mountain, founded 1866 and named for Charles III of Monaco (1818-1889).
The car rally there dates to 1911.


pep (n.)

vigor, energy, 1912, shortened form of pepper (n.), which was used in the figurative sense of
spirit, energy from at least 1847. Pep rally is attested from 1945; pep talk from 1926. To pep
(something) up is from 1925.


resource (n.)

1610s, means of supplying a want or deficiency, from French resourse a source, spring, noun use of
fem. past participle of Old French resourdre to rally, raise again, from Latin resurgere rise again
(see resurgent). Resources a country's wealth first recorded 1779.


rail (v.1)

complain, mid-15c., from Middle French railler to tease or joke (15c.), perhaps from Old
Proven&ccedil;al ralhar scoff, to chat, to joke, from Vulgar Latin *ragulare to bray (source also of
Italian ragghiare to bray), from Late Latin ragere to roar, probably of imitative origin. See rally
(v.2). Related: Railed; railing.


stonewall (n.)

also stone wall, Old English stanwalle; see stone (n.) + wall (n.). As nickname of Confederate
General Thomas J. Jackson (1824-1863), bestowed 1861 on the occasion of the First Battle of Bull
Run, supposedly by Gen. Bernard Bee, urging his brigade to rally around Jackson, who was standing
like a stone wall. Bee was killed in the battle; the account of the nickname appeared in Southern
newspapers within four days of the battle.    On the face of it this account has no character of
authenticity, and the words ascribed to Bee smack less of the battlefield than of the editorial
sanctum. ... It seems inherently probable that something was said by somebody, during or immediately
after the battle, that likened Jackson or his men or both to a stone wall. [R.M. Johnston, Bull Run:
Its Strategy and Tactics, Boston, 1913]


