ram (v.)

to beat with a heavy implement, c.1300, from ram (n.). Related: Rammed; ramming.


ram (n.)

Old English ramm male sheep, also battering ram and the zodiac sign; earlier rom male sheep, a West
Germanic word (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Dutch, Old High German ram), of unknown
origin. Perhaps [Klein] connected with Old Norse rammr strong, Old Church Slavonic ramenu impetuous,
violent.


RAM (n.)

1957, acronym for random access memory (computerese).


Rama

incarnation of Vishnu, from Sanskrit Ramah, literally lovely, from stem of ramate stands still,
rests, is pleased.


ramada (n.)

arbor, porch, 1869, from American Spanish ramada tent, shelter, from Spanish ramada an arbor, from
rama branch, from Vulgar Latin *rama, collective of Latin ramus branch (see ramus).


Ramadan (n.)

ninth month of the Muslim year, 1590s, from Arabic Ramadan (Turkish and Persian ramazan), originally
the hot month, from ramida be burnt, scorched (compare Mishnaic Hebrew remetz hot ashes, embers). In
the Islamic lunar calendar, it passes through all seasons in a cycle of about 33 years, but
evidently originally it was a summer month.


ramble (v.)

mid-15c., perhaps frequentative of romen to walk, go (see roam), perhaps via romblen (late 14c.) to
ramble. The vowel change perhaps by influence of Middle Dutch rammelen, a derivative of rammen
copulate, used of the night wanderings of the amorous cat [Weekley]. Meaning to talk or write
incoherently is from 1630s. Related: Rambled; rambling.


ramble (n.)

a roving or wandering, 1650s, from ramble (v.).


rambler (n.)

1620s, agent noun from ramble (v.).


rambling (adj.)

1623, present participle adjective from ramble (v.).


Rambo

used allusively from 1985, in reference to John Rambo, hero of David Morrell's novel First Blood
(1972), popularized as portrayed by Sylvester Stallone in Hollywood movie version (1982), a U.S.
Vietnam veteran, macho and self-sufficient, and bent on violent retribution [OED]. The family name
is an old one in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, originally Swedish, sometimes said to represent
Swedish place name Ramberget, or to be from French Huguenots who took refuge in Sweden.


rambunctious (adj.)

1859, earlier rumbunctious, 1830, probably altered (by influence of ram) from rumbustious.


ramekin

1706, from French ramequin (late 17c.), said to be from a Germanic source (compare Middle Low German
rom cream), from Proto-Germanic *rau(g)ma-, of uncertain origin.


ramification (n.)

1670s, a branching out, from French ramification, from ramifier (see ramify). Transferred sense of
outgrowth, consequence first recorded 1755. Related: Ramifications.


ramify (v.)

early 15c., branch out, from Middle French ramifier (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin ramificare to
form branches, from Latin ramus branch (see ramus) + root of facere to make (see factitious).
Related: Ramified; ramifying.


ramjet (n.)

1942, from ram (v.) + jet (n.).


rammy (adj.)

c.1600, from ram (n.) + -y (2). Related: Ramminess.


ramp (n.1)

1778, slope, from French rampe, back-formation from Old French verb ramper to climb, scale, mount;
see ramp (v.). Meaning road on or off a major highway is from 1952, American English.


ramp (n.2)

rude, boisterous girl or woman, mid-15c., perhaps from ramp (v.). Compare romp in Johnson's
Dictionary (1755): a rude, awkward, boisterous, untaught girl.


ramp (v.)

c.1300, to climb; to stand on the hind legs (of animals), from Old French ramper to climb, scale,
mount (12c., in Modern French to creep, crawl), perhaps from Frankish *rampon to contract oneself
(compare Old High German rimpfan to wrinkle, Old English hrimpan to fold, wrinkle), via notion of
the bodily contraction involved in climbing [Klein], from Proto-Germanic *hrimp- to contract
oneself. Related: Ramped; ramping.


rampage (v.)

1715, in Scottish, probably from Middle English verb ramp rave, rush wildly about (c.1300),
especially of beasts rearing on their hind legs, as if climbing, from Old French ramper (see ramp
(n.1), also see rampant). Related: Rampaged; rampaging.


rampage (n.)

1861, from rampage (v.).


rampancy (n.)

1660s, from rampant + -cy.


rampant (adj.)

late 14c., standing on the hind legs (as a heraldic lion often does), thus, also, fierce, ravenous
(late 14c.), from Old French rampant, present participle of ramper to climb, scale, mount (see
rampage (v.)). Sense of growing without check (in running rampant), first recorded 1610s, probably
is via the notion of fierce disposition or else preserves the older French sense.


rampart (n.)

earthen elevation around a place for fortification, sometimes also including parapets, 1580s, from
Middle French rempart, rampart, from remparer to fortify, from re- again (see re-) + emparer
fortify, take possession of, from Old Proven&ccedil;al amparer, from Vulgar Latin *anteparare
prepare, properly to make preparations beforehand, from Latin ante- before (see ante) + parare
prepare (see pare). With excrescent -t in French, perhaps by influence of boulevart (see boulevard).


ramrod (n.)

1757, literally a rod used in ramming (the charge of a gun), from ram (v.) + rod. Used figuratively
for straightness or stiffness from 1939, also figuratively for formality, primness (ramroddy is in
Century Dictionary, 1902). The verb is 1948, from the noun. Related: Ramrodded; ramrodding.


ramshackle (adj.)

1809, back-formation from ramshackled, earlier ranshackled (1670s), alteration of ransackled, past
participle of ransackle (see ransack). The word seems to have been Scottish.    Reading over this
note to an American gentleman, he seemed to take alarm, lest the word ramshackle should be palmed on
his country. I take it home willingly, as a Scotticism, and one well applied, as may be afterwards
shown. [Robert Gourlay, General Introduction to a Statistical Account of Upper Canada, London, 1822]
Jamieson's Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language (1825) has it as a noun meaning
thoughtless, ignorant fellow.


ramus (n.)

a branch (anatomical), 1803, from Latin ramus a branch, bough, twig, related to radix root; see
radish.


-gram

suffix from telegram (1852), first abstracted 1979 (in Gorillagram, a proprietary name in U.S.), and
put to wide use in forming new words, such as stripagram (1981). The construction violates Greek
grammar, as an adverb could not properly form part of a compound noun.


-rama

noun suffix meaning sight, view, spectacular display or instance of, 1824, abstracted from panorama
(q.v.), ultimately from Greek horama sight, spectacle, that which is seen.


A-frame

type of framework shaped like the letter A, 1909; in building construction, attested from 1932.


anagram (n.)

transposition of letters in a word so as to form another, 1580s, from French anagramme or Modern
Latin anagramma (16c.), both from Greek anagrammatizein transpose letters, from ana- up, back (see
ana-) + gramma (genitive grammatos) letter (see grammar). Related: Anagrammatical; anagrammatically.


angiogram (n.)

1933, from angio- + -gram.


Aramaic

northern branch of Semitic language group, 1834, from biblical land of Aram, roughly corresponding
to modern Syria; probably related to Hebrew and Aramaic rum to be high, thus originally highland.
Aramaic became the lingua franca of the Assyrian empire and later for centuries was the official
language of the Persian kingdom and the daily language of Israel at the time of Christ.


ashram (n.)

religious hermitage, 1917, from Sanskrit asramah, from a-, adnomial prefix, + sramah effort, toll,
fatigue.


bramble (n.)

Old English br&aelig;mbel rough, prickly shrub (especially the blackberry bush), with euphonic -b-,
from earlier br&aelig;mel, from Proto-Germanic *br&aelig;maz (see broom).


buckram (n.)

early 13c., from Old French boquerant fine oriental cloth (12c., Modern French bougran), probably
(along with Spanish bucar&#225;n, Italian bucherame) from Bukhara, city in central Asia from which
it was imported to Europe. Originally a name of a delicate, costly fabric, it later came to mean
coarse linen used for lining. The -m in the English word may indicate Italian origin (compare
Italian bucherame, 14c.).


caramba

exclamation of dismay or surprise, 1835, from Spanish, said to be a euphemism for carajo penis, from
Vulgar Latin *caraculum little arrow.


caramel (n.)

1725, from French caramel burnt sugar (17c.), via Old Spanish caramel (modern caramelo), ultimately
from Medieval Latin cannamellis, traditionally from Latin canna (see cane (n.)) + mellis, genitive
of mel honey (see Melissa). But some give the Medieval Latin word an Arabic origin, or trace it to
Latin calamus reed, cane.


caramelize (v.)

1837, from caramel + -ize. Earlier was past participle adjective carameled (1727). Related:
Caramelized; caramelizing.


cardiogram (n.)

1876, from cardio- + -gram.


centigram (n.)

also centigramme, 1801, from French centigramme; see centi- + gram.


ceramic (adj.)

1850, keramic, from Greek keramikos, from keramos potter's clay, pottery, tiles, perhaps from a pre-
Hellenic word. Watkins suggests possible connection with Latin cremare to burn, but Klein's sources
are firmly against this. Spelling influenced by French c&#233;ramique (1806). Related: ceramist
(1855). Ceramics is attested from 1857.


Cinerama (n.)

proprietary name, 1951, from cinema + -rama. Purists point out that the proper formation would be
*Cinorama.


cram (v.)

Old English crammian press something into something else, from Proto-Germanic *kram-/*krem-
(cognates: Old High German krimman to press, pinch, Old Norse kremja to squeeze, pinch), from PIE
root *ger- to gather (see gregarious). Meaning study intensely for an exam originally was British
student slang first recorded 1803. Related: Crammed; cramming.


cramp (n.1)

muscle contraction, late 14c., from Old French crampe, from a Frankish or other Germanic word
(compare Old High German krapmhe cramp, spasm, related to kramph bent, crooked), from a Proto-
Germanic root forming many words for bent, crooked, including, via French, crampon. Writer's cramp
is first attested 1842 as the name of a physical affliction of the hand, in reference to
translations of German medical papers (Stromeyer); also known as scrivener's palsy.


cramp (n.2)

metal bar bent at both ends, early 15c., from Middle Dutch crampe or Middle Low German krampe, both
from the same Proto-Germanic root that yielded cramp (n.1). Metaphoric sense of something that
confines or hinders first recorded 1719.


cramp (v.1)

to contract (of muscles), early 15c., from cramp (n.1). Related: Cramped; cramping.


cramp (v.2)

to bend or twist, early 14c., from cramp (n.2) and Old French crampir. Later compress forcibly
(1550s), and, figuratively, to restrict (1620s). Related: Cramped; cramping.


crampon (n.)

metal bar bent at the ends for fastening, c.1300, from Old French crampoun, from Germanic (see cramp
(n.1); also compare cramp (n.2)).


