rank (v.)

1570s, arrange in lines; 1590s, put in order, classify; assign a rank to, from rank (n.). Related:
Ranked; ranking.


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


rank and file (n.)

1590s, in reference to the horizontal and vertical lines of soldiers marching in formation; thence
generalized to common soldiers (1796) and common people (1860).


rank (n.)

early 14c., row, line series; c.1400, a row of an army, from Old French renc, ranc row, line (Modern
French rang), from Frankish *hring or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German hring
circle, ring), from Proto-Germanic *hringaz circle, ring, something curved (see ring (n.1)).
Meaning a social division, class of persons is from early 15c. Meaning high station in society is
from early 15c. Meaning a relative position is from c.1600.


unalterable (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + alterable. Related: Unalterably.    He reach'd a middle height, and at the
stars,      Which are the brain of heaven, he look'd, and sank.        Around the ancient track
march'd, rank on rank,    The army of unalterable law.    [George Meredith, Lucifer in Starlight]


premier (adj.)

mid-15c., first in time; late 15c. as first in rank, from Middle French premier first, chief, from
Latin primarius of the first rank, chief (see primary (adj.)).


tier (n.)

row, rank, range, mid-15c., from Middle French tire, from Old French tire (13c.) rank, sequence,
order, kind, also likeness, image; state, condition, probably from tirer to draw, draw out (see
tirade).


inferior (adj.)

early 15c., of land, low, lower, from Latin inferior lower, further down (also used figuratively),
comparative of inferus (adj.) that is below or beneath, from infra below (see infra-). Meaning lower
in degree, rank, or importance is from 1530s; also in an absolute sense, of low quality or rank.


major (n.)

military rank, 1640s, from French major, short for sergent-major, originally a higher rank than at
present, from Medieval Latin major chief officer, magnate, superior person, from Latin maior an
elder, adult, noun use of the adjective (see major (adj.)). The musical sense attested by 1797.


ensign (n.)

late 14c., via Scottish, from Old French enseigne (12c.) mark, symbol, signal; flag, standard,
pennant, from Latin insignia (plural); see insignia. Sense of banner, flag is c.1400; that of
soldier who carries one is first recorded 1510s. U.S. Navy sense of commissioned officer of the
lowest rank is from 1862. French navy had rank of enseigne de vaisseau since at least early 18c.


disparage (v.)

early 14c., degrade socially, from Old French desparagier (Modern French d&eacute;parager) reduce in
rank, degrade, devalue, depreciate, originally to marry unequally, and thus by extension the
disgrace or dishonor involved in this, from des- away (see dis-) + parage rank, lineage (see peer
(n.)). Sense of belittle first recorded 1530s. Related: Disparaged; disparaging; disparagingly.


arrange (v.)

late 14c., draw up a line of battle, from Old French arengier (12c.), from a- to (see ad-) + rangier
set in a row (Modern French ranger), from rang rank, from Frankish *hring (see rank (n.)).    A rare
word until the meaning generalized to to place things in order c.1780-1800. Musical sense of adapt
for other instruments or voices is from 1808. Related: Arranged; arranging. Arranged marriage
attested from 1854.


vice-president (n.)

also vice president, 1570s, one who acts as a deputy for a president, from vice- + president. Made
into an official rank and given a different meaning (vice = next in rank to) in the U.S.
Constitution (1787).    There seems to be no doubt of my election as V[ice] Pres[iden]t. It will
have at least one advantage, that of permitting me to devote more of my time to my private affairs.
[John C. Calhoun, letter to wife, Nov. 12, 1824]    Related: vice presidential; vice presidency.


nobility (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being excellent or rare, from Old French nobilite high rank; dignity, grace;
great deed (12c., Modern French nobilit&eacute;), and directly from Latin nobilitatem (nominative
nobilitas) celebrity, fame; high birth; excellence, superiority; the nobles, from nobilis well-
known, prominent (see noble (adj.)). Meaning quality of being of noble rank or birth is attested
from late 14c.; sense of noble class collectively is from 1520s.


subordinate (adj.)

mid-15c., having an inferior rank, from Medieval Latin subordinatus placed in a lower order, made
subject, past participle of subordinare place in a lower order, from Latin sub under (see sub-) +
ordinare arrange, set in order (see ordain). Related: Subordinance; subordinant; subordinately. For
of or pertaining to the classificatory rank of a suborder, subordinal (1842) is used.


sort (n.)

late 14c., group of people, animals, etc.; kind or variety of person or animal, from Old French
sorte class, kind, from Latin sortem (nominative sors) lot; fate, destiny; share, portion; rank,
category; sex, class, oracular response, prophecy, from PIE root *ser- (3) to line up (cognates:
Latin serere to arrange, attach, join; see series). The sense evolution in Vulgar Latin is from what
is allotted to one by fate, to fortune, condition, to rank, class, order. Later (mid-15c.) group,
class, or category of items; kind or variety of thing; pattern, design. Out of sorts not in usual
good condition is attested from 1620s, with literal sense of out of stock.


subordinate (n.)

one inferior in power, rank, office, etc., 1630s, from subordinate (adj.).


noble (n.)

man of rank, c.1300, from noble (adj.). The same noun sense also is in Old French and Latin. Late
14c. as the name of an English coin first issued in reign of Edward III.


leveller (n.)

1590s, someone or something that makes level; agent noun of level (v.). From 1640s as the name of a
political party of the time of Charles I that advocated abolishing all differences of position and
rank.


grass roots (n.)

1766, literally; figurative use from 1901 in sense fundamental level; U.S. political sense of the
rank and file of the electorate is attested from 1912; also grassroots.


excellency (n.)

high rank, c.1200, from Latin excellentia (see excellence); as a title of honor it dates from early
14c.


fore-

from fore (adv.), which was used as a prefix in Old English and other Germanic languages with a
sense of before in time, rank, position, etc., or designating the front part or earliest time.


laborer (n.)

mid-14c., manual worker, especially an unskilled one, agent noun from labor (v.). Meaning member of
the working class, member of the lowest social rank is from c.1400.


inferior (n.)

person inferior to another in rank, etc., early 15c., from inferior (adj.).


dress (n.)

c.1600, originally any clothing, especially that appropriate to rank or to some ceremony; sense of
woman's garment is first recorded 1630s, with overtones of made not merely to clothe but to adorn.
Dress rehearsal first recorded 1828.


Seder (n.)

home service on the first nights of Passover, 1865, from Hebrew sedher order, procedure, related to
sedherah row, rank.


advance (n.)

c.1300, boasting, ostentation, from advance (v.). Early 15c. as advancement in rank, wealth, etc.
Advances amorous overtures is from 1706.


banneret (n.)

c.1300, an order of knighthood, originally in reference to one who could lead his men into battle
under his own banner. Later it meant one who received rank for valiant deeds done in the king's
presence in battle. Also a small banner (c.1300).


bigwig (n.)

1731, from big + wig, in reference to the imposing wigs formerly worn by men of rank or authority.


plebeian (n.)

member of the lowest class, 1530s, from Latin plebius person not of noble rank, from adjective
meaning of the common people (see plebeian (adj.)).


aga (n.)

title of rank, especially in Turkey, c.1600, from Turkish agha chief, master, lord, related to East
Turk. agha elder brother.


under (prep., adv.)

Old English under (prep.) beneath, among, before, in the presence of, in subjection to, under the
rule of, by means of, also, as an adverb, beneath, below, underneath, expressing position with
reference to that which is above, from Proto-Germanic *under- (cognates: Old Frisian under, Dutch
onder, Old High German untar, German unter, Old Norse undir, Gothic undar), from PIE *ndher- under
(cognates: Sanskrit adhah below; Avestan athara- lower; Latin infernus lower, infra below).
Productive as a prefix in Old English, as in German and Scandinavian (often forming words modeled on
Latin ones in sub-). Notion of inferior in rank, position, etc. was present in Old English. With
reference to standards, less than in age, price, value, etc., late 14c. As an adjective, lower in
position; lower in rank or degree from 13c. Also used in Old English as a preposition meaning
between, among, as still in under these circumstances, etc. (though this may be an entirely separate
root; see understand).   Under the weather indisposed is from 1810. Under the table is from 1921 in
the sense of very drunk, 1940s in sense of illegal. To get something under (one's) belt is from
1954; to keep something under (one's) hat secret is from 1885; to have something under (one's) nose
in plain sight is from 1540s; to speak under (one's) breath in a low voice is attested from 1832. To
be under (someone's) thumb entirely controlled (by that person) is recorded from 1754.


forefront (n.)

late 15c., a Germanic-Latin hybrid, from fore- + front (n.). Originally of buildings; the main
modern sense is from military meaning front rank of an army (1510s).


demigod (n.)

1520s, from demi- + god, rendering Latin semideus. The child of sexual intercourse between a deity
and a mortal, a man raised to divine rank, or a minor god.


rivalry (n.)

1590s; from rival + -ry. Shakespeare has rivality (Antony and Cleopatra), but from the secondary
sense of the root word and meaning partnership, equality in rank.


order (n.)

early 13c., body of persons living under a religious discipline, from Old French ordre position,
estate; rule, regulation; religious order (11c.), from earlier ordene, from Latin ordinem
(nominative ordo) row, rank, series, arrangement, originally a row of threads in a loom, from Italic
root *ord- to arrange, arrangement (source of ordiri to begin to weave; compare primordial), of
unknown origin.    Meaning a rank in the (secular) community is first recorded c.1300; meaning
command, directive is first recorded 1540s, from the notion of to keep in order. Military and
honorary orders grew our of the fraternities of Crusader knights. Business and commerce sense is
attested from 1837. In natural history, as a classification of living things, it is first recorded
1760. Meaning condition of a community which is under the rule of law is from late 15c.    Phrase in
order to (1650s) preserves etymological notion of sequence. The word reflects a medieval notion: a
system of parts subject to certain uniform, established ranks or proportions, and was used of
everything from architecture to angels. Old English expressed many of the same ideas with
endebyrdnes. In short order without delay is from 1834, American English; order of battle is from
1769.


gently (adv.)

early 14c., befitting one of gentle rank, from gentle + -ly (2). Meaning quietly, softly is from
1550s.


abasement (n.)

early 15c., embarrassment, dread, fear, from abase + -ment. Sense of action of lowering in price is
mid-15c.; action of lowering in rank is 1560s; condition of being abased is from 1610s.


knighthood (n.)

Old English cnihthad the period between childhood and manhood; see knight (n.) + -hood. Sense of
rank or dignity of a knight is from c.1300, and probably is an independent formation.


rate (v.2)

estimate the worth or value of, mid-15c., from rate (n.). Intransitive sense of have a certain
value, rank, or standing is from 1809; specifically as have high value from 1928. Related: Rated;
rating.


grandee (n.)

1590s, from Spanish grande nobleman of the first rank, originally an adjective, great, from Latin
grandis big, great (see grand (adj.)).


pecking (n.)

verbal noun from peck (v.), late 14c. As a behavior among hens, pecking order (1928) translates
German hackliste (T.J. Schjelderuo-Ebbe, 1922); transferred sense of human hierarchy based on rank
or status is from 1955.


coordinate (v.)

1660s, to place in the same rank, from Latin coordinare (see coordination). Meaning to arrange in
proper position (transitive) is from 1847; that of to work together in order (intransitive) is from
1863. Related: Coordinated; coordinating.


caliphate (n.)

dominion of a caliph, 1610s, from caliph + -ate (1). Meaning rank of a caliph is recorded from 1753.


sergeant (n.)

c.1200, servant, from Old French sergent, serjant (domestic) servant, valet; court official;
soldier, from Medieval Latin servientum (nominative serviens) servant, vassal, soldier (in Late
Latin public official), from Latin servientem serving, present participle of servire to serve (see
serve (v.)); cognate with Spanish sirviente, Italian servente; a twin of servant, and 16c. writers
sometimes use the two words interchangeably.    Specific sense of military servant is attested from
late 13c.; that of officer whose duty is to enforce judgments of a tribunal or legislative body is
from c.1300 (sergeant at arms is attested from late 14c.). Meaning non-commissioned military officer
first recorded 1540s. Originally a much more important rank than presently. As a police rank, in
Great Britain from 1839.    Middle English alternative spelling serjeant (from Old French) was
retained in Britain in special use as title of a superior order of barristers (c.1300, from legal
Latin serviens ad legem, one who serves (the king) in matters of law), from which Common Law judges
were chosen; also used of certain other officers of the royal household. sergeant-major is from
1570s. The sergeant-fish (1871) so-called for lateral markings resembling a sergeant's stripes.
Related: Sergeancy.


sovereignty (n.)

mid-14c., pre-eminence, from Anglo-French sovereynete, Old French souverainete, from soverain (see
sovereign (adj.)). Meaning authority, rule, supremacy of power or rank is recorded from late 14c.;
sense of existence as an independent state is from 1715.


small (n.)

early 13c., small person or animal, from small (adj.). From c.1300 as persons of low rank (opposed
to great); late 15c. as the small part of something (such as small of the back, 1530s).


dainty (n.)

c.1300, excellence, elegance; a luxury, from Old French deintie (12c.) price, value, also delicacy,
pleasure, from Latin dignitatem (nominative dignitas) greatness, rank, worthiness, worth, beauty,
from dignus worthy (see dignity).


gleek (n.)

card game, 1530s, from French glic, ghelicque (15c.), perhaps from Middle Dutch ghelic (Dutch
gelijk) like, because one of the goals of the game is collecting cards of the same rank.


masterpiece (n.)

c.1600, from master (n.) + piece (n.). A loan-translation of Dutch meesterstuk work by which a
craftsman attains the rank of master (or its German cognate Meisterst&uuml;ck).


