rare (adj.1)

unusual, late 14c., thin, airy, porous; mid-15c., few in number and widely separated, sparsely
distributed, seldom found; from Old French rere sparse (14c.), from Latin rarus thinly sown, having
a loose texture; not thick; having intervals between, full of empty spaces, from PIE *ra-ro-, from
root *ere- to separate; adjoin (cognates: Sanskrit rte besides, except, viralah distant, tight,
rare; Old Church Slavonic rediku rare, Old Hittite arha&#353; border, Lithuanian irti to be
dissolved). Few in number, hence, unusual. Related: Rareness. In chemistry, rare earth is from 1818.


rarefy (v.)

late 14c., from Old French rarefier (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin rarificare, from Latin
rarefacere make rare, from rarus rare, thin (see rare (adj.1)) + facere to make (see factitious).
Related: Rarefied.


rarely (adv.)

1550s, from rare (adj.1) + -ly (2). Seldom, not often; also finely, excellently.


rare (v.)

rise up, 1833, dialectal variant of rear (v.1). Sense of eager (in raring to go) first recorded
1909. Related: Rared; raring.


raree show

peep show contained in a box, 1680s, so called in imitation of the foreign way of pronouncing rare
show [Johnson]. Johnson's statement is prob. correct; the early exhibitors of peep-shows appear to
have been usually Savoyards, from whom the form was no doubt adopted [OED]. Early peep shows were
more innocent than what usually was meant later by that word.


rarebit

1785, perversion of (Welsh) rabbit, as if from rare + bit. See Welsh.


rare (adj.2)

undercooked, 1650s, variant of Middle English rere, from Old English hrere lightly cooked, probably
related to hreran to stir, move, shake, agitate, from Proto-Germanic *hror- (cognates: Old Frisian
hrera to stir, move, Old Saxon hrorian, Dutch roeren, German r&#252;hren, Old Norse hroera), from
PIE base *kere- to mix, confuse; cook (cognates: Greek kera- to mix, krasis mixture). Originally of
eggs, not recorded in reference to meat until 1784, and according to OED, in this sense formerly
often regarded as an Americanism, although it was current in many English dialects ....


lanthanum (n.)

metallic rare earth element, 1841, coined in Modern Latin by Swedish chemist and mineralogist Carl
Gustav Mosander (1797-1858), who discovered it in 1839, from Greek lanthanein to lie hidden, escape
notice, from PIE root *ladh- to be hidden (see latent). So called because the element was concealed
in rare minerals.


rarity (n.)

early 15c., thinness; 1550s, fewness, from Middle French rarit&eacute; or directly from Latin
raritas thinness, looseness of texture; fewness, from rarus (see rare (adj.1)). Sense of a rare
thing or event is from 1590s.


Brooke

fem. proper name, rare in U.S. before 1965, popular 1980s, 1990s.


rara avis (n.)

c.1600, peculiar person, from Latin rara avis, literally strange bird, from rara, fem. of rarus rare
(see rare (adj.1)) + avis bird (see aviary). Latin plural is rar&aelig; aves. Horace's peacock (a
Roman delicacy), Juvenal's black swan (Rara avis in terris, nigroque simillima cygno).


annal (n.)

rare singular of annals (q.v.).


surviver (n.)

c.1600, rare nativized agent noun from survive.


Kayla

fem. proper name, extended form of Kay. Rare before 1962; a top-20 name for girls born in the U.S.
1988-2004.


Karen (2)

fem. proper name, Danish shortened form of Katherine. Rare before 1928; a top-10 name for girls born
in the U.S. 1951-1968.


urge (n.)

1610s, act of urging, from urge (v.). Marked as rare in Century Dictionary (1902); in frequent use
from c.1910 [OED].


tussle (n.)

a struggle, conflict, scuffle, 1620s (but rare before 19c.), from tussle (v.).


apo koinu

Greek, literally in common. Applied to sentences with one subject and two predicates; a formation
rare in modern English, though it occurs more often in Old English. Compare koine.


ytterbium (n.)

metallic rare-earth element, 1879, coined in Modern Latin by Swedish chemist Carl Gustaf Mosander
(1797-1858) from Ytterby, name of a town in Sweden where mineral containing it was found.


yttrium

metallic rare-earth element, 1866, coined in Modern Latin by Swedish chemist Carl Gustaf Mosander
(1797-1858) from Ytterby, name of a town in Sweden where mineral containing it was found.


crestfallen (adj.)

1580s, past participle adjective, but the verb crestfall is recorded only from 1610s, in reference
to diseased horses, and is rare. It's possible that the image behind this use of the word is not
cocks, as often is asserted, but horses.


reject (n.)

1550s, a castaway (rare), from reject (v.). Modern use probably a re-formation of the same word:
thing cast aside as unsatisfactory (1893); person considered low-quality and worthless (1925, from
use in militaries).


uranium (n.)

rare metallic element, 1797, named 1789 in Modern Latin by its discoverer, German chemist and
mineralogist Martin Heinrich Klaproth (1743-1817), for the recently found planet Uranus (q.v.).


teen (n.)

teen-aged person, 1818 (but rare before 20c.), from -teen. As an adjective meaning of or for teen-
agers, from 1947.


pettifogging

1570s as a verbal noun; c.1600 as a past participle adjective; see pettifogger. A verb pettifog is
rare and attested only from 1640s.


some (adj.)

Old English sum some, a, a certain one, something, a certain quantity; a certain number; with
numerals out of (as in sum feowra one of four); from Proto-Germanic *suma- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Old High German sum, Old Norse sumr, Gothic sums), from PIE *smm-o-, suffixed form of root
*sem- (1) one, also as one (adv.), together with (see same). For substitution of -o- for -u-, see
come.  The word has had greater currency in English than in the other Teutonic languages, in some of
which it is now restricted to dialect use, or represented only by derivatives or compounds ....
[OED]    As a pronoun from c.1100; as an adverb from late 13c. Meaning remarkable is attested from
1808, American English colloquial. A possessive form is attested from 1560s, but always was rare.
Many combination forms (somewhat, sometime, somewhere) were in Middle English but often written as
two words till 17-19c. Somewhen is rare and since 19c. used almost exclusively in combination with
the more common compounds; somewho someone is attested from late 14c. but did not endure. Scott
(1816) has somegate somewhere, in some way, somehow, and somekins some kind of a is recorded from
c.1200. Get some have sexual intercourse is attested 1899 in a quote attributed to Abe Lincoln from
c.1840.


europium (n.)

rare earth element, 1901, named by its discoverer, French chemist Eug&egrave;ne Demar&ccedil;ay
(1852-1903) in 1896, from Europe + -ium.


dependance (n.)

c.1400, early variant of dependence, rare since c.1800; see -ance.


unimpaired (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of impair (v.). Rare before c.1760.


dependancy (n.)

early variant of dependency, rare since c.1800; see -ance.


unfortunately (adv.)

1540s, in an unfortunate manner, by ill-fortune, from unfortunate + -ly (2). The original meaning is
now rare; the main modern sense of sad to say, unhappily, unluckily, in parenthetical use, is
recorded from 1770s.


embitter (v.)

c.1600, from em- + bitter. Now rare in its literal sense; figurative meaning first attested 1630s.
Related: Embittered.


submittal (n.)

act or process of submitting, 1866, from submit (v.) + -ance. Marked rare in Century Dictionary and
OED. Submittance (17c.) also is used.


unconscionable (adj.)

1560s, showing no regard for conscience, from un- (1) + now rare conscionable conscientious.
Related: Unconscionably.


around (adv.)

c.1300, in circumference, from phrase on round. Rare before 1600. In sense of here and there with no
fixed direction it is 1776, American English (properly about). Of time, from 1888. To have been
around gained worldly experience is from 1927, U.S. colloquial.


hybrid (n.)

c.1600, from Latin hybrida, variant of ibrida mongrel, specifically offspring of a tame sow and a
wild boar, of unknown origin but probably from Greek and somehow related to hubris. A rare word
before c.1850. The adjective is attested from 1716.


fluorescent (adj.)

1853, from fluor- + -escent (see fluorescence). The fluorescent electric lamp patent was applied for
in 1896 by U.S. inventor Thomas A. Edison, but such lights were rare before 1938.


Erin

ancient name of Ireland, from Old English Erinn, dative of Eriu Ireland (see Irish). As a girl's
name in U.S., rare before 1954, popular 1976-1985.


uncommon (adj.)

1540s, not possessed in common, from un- (1) not + common (adj.). Meaning not commonly occurring,
unusual, rare is recorded from 1610s. Related: Uncommonly.


thunderstruck (adj.)

1610s, from thunder (n.) + struck. Originally figurative; the literal sense (1630s) always has been
rare. Thunder-strike (v.), is a back-formation.


natterjack (n.)

1769, rare kind of British toad with a yellow stripe on its back; second element probably proper
name jack (q.v.); for first element, Weekley suggests connection with attor poison (see attercop).


outlook (n.)

mental view or survey, 1742, from out (adv.) + look (v.). The meaning prospect for the future is
attested from 1851. Earliest sense was a look-out (1660s). The literal sense of vigilant watch, act
or practice of looking out (1815) is rare; look-out being used instead for this.


insolvency (n.)

1660s; see insolvent + -cy. Insolvence (1793) is rare.


comprehendible (adj.)

1814 (rare), from comprehend + -ible; a native formation alongside comprehensible.


quake (n.)

early 14c., a trembling in fear, from quake (v.). Rare except in combinations. Now usually as a
shortening of earthquake, in which use it is attested from 1640s. Old English had the verbal noun
cwacung shaking, trembling.


hafnium (n.)

rare element, 1923, Modern Latin, from Hafnia, Medieval Latin form of Danish Havn harbor, the usual
pre-1400 name of Copenhagen, Denmark, where it was discovered by physicist Dirk Coster (1889-1950)
and chemist George de Hevesy (1885-1966).


supportive (adj.)

1590s, from support (v.) + -ive. Called rare in OED 1st edition and Century Dictionary. Related:
Supportively; supportiveness.


kempt (adj.)

well-combed, neat, late 14c., from past tense of dialectal kemb, from Old English cemdan (see
unkempt). A rare word after c.1500; any modern use probably is a whimsical back-formation from
unkempt.


incumbent (adj.)

1560s, in relation to duties or obligations, from Latin incumbentem (nominative incumbens), present
participle of incumbere (see incumbent (n.)). The literal, physical sense is rare in English and
first attested 1620s.


corpse (n.)

1540s, variant spelling of corps (q.v.). The -p- originally was silent, as in French, and with some
speakers still is. The terminal -e was rare before 19c. Corpse-candle is attested from 1690s.


