ravage (n.)

1610s, from French ravage destruction (see ravage (v.)). Related: Ravages.


ravage (v.)

1610s, from French ravager lay waste, devastate, from Old French ravage destruction, especially by
flood (14c.), from ravir to take away hastily (see ravish). Related: Ravaged; ravaging.


waste (v.)

c.1200, devastate, ravage, ruin, from Anglo-French and Old North French waster to waste, squander,
spoil, ruin (Old French gaster; Modern French g&#226;ter), altered (by influence of Frankish
*wostjan) from Latin vastare lay waste, from vastus empty, desolate, waste (see vain). Related:
wasted; wasting.    The Germanic word also existed in Old English as westan to lay waste, ravage.
Spanish gastar, Italian guastare also are from Germanic. Meaning to lose strength or health; pine;
weaken is attested from c.1300; the sense of squander, spend or consume uselessly is first recorded
mid-14c.; meaning to kill is from 1964. Waste not, want not attested from 1778.


depredate (v.)

1620s, from Latin depredatus, past participle of depraedare to pillage, ravage (see depredation).


harry (v.)

Old English hergian make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder, the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (cognates: Old Frisian urheria lay
waste, ravage, plunder, Old Norse herja to make a raid, to plunder, Old Saxon and Old High German
herion, German verheeren to destroy, lay waste, devastate), from *harjaz an armed force (cognates:
Old English here, Old Norse herr crowd, great number; army, troop, Old Saxon and Old Frisian heri,
Dutch heir, Old High German har, German Heer host, army, Gothic harjis), from PIE root *koro- war
also war-band, hose, army (cognates: Lithuanian karas war, quarrel, karias host, army; Old Church
Slavonic kara strife; Middle Irish cuire troop; Old Persian kara host, people, army; Greek koiranos
ruler, leader, commander). Weakened sense of worry, goad, harass is from c.1400. Related: Harried;
harrying.


depopulate (v.)

1540s; see de- + populate. Perhaps from Latin depopulatus, past participle of depopulari to lay
waste, ravage. Related: Depopulated; depopulating. Earlier in same sense was dispeplen (early 15c.).


prey (v.)

c.1300, to plunder, pillage, ravage, from prey (n.) and in part from Old French preer, earlier
preder (c.1040), from Late Latin praedare, from praeda (see prey (n.)). Its sense of to kill and
devour is attested from mid-14c. Related: Preyed; preying.


destroy (v.)

early 13c., from Old French destruire (12c., Modern French d&eacute;truire) destroy, ravage, lay
waste, from Vulgar Latin *destrugere (source of Italian distruggere), refashioned (influenced by
destructus), from Latin destruere tear down, demolish, literally un-build, from de- un-, down (see
de-) + struere to pile, build (see structure (n.)). Related: Destroyed; destroying.


