rebuke (n.)

early 15c., a reproof, reprimand, from rebuke (v.).


rebuke (v.)

early 14c., to reprimand, reprove; chide, scold, from Anglo-French rebuker to repel, beat back, Old
French rebuchier, from re- back (see re-) + buschier to strike, chop wood, from busche (French
bÃ&fnof;Â»che) wood, from Proto-Germanic *busk- (see bush (n.)). Related: Rebuked; rebuking.


snub (n.)

rebuke, intentional slight, 1530s, from snub (v.).


hit (n.)

late 15c., a rebuke; 1590s as a blow, from hit (v.). Meaning successful play, song, person, etc.,
1811, is from the verbal sense of to hit the mark, succeed (c.1400). Underworld slang meaning a
killing is from 1970. Meaning dose of narcotic is 1951, from phrases such as hit the bottle.


reproof (n.)

mid-14c., a shame, a disgrace, also a censure, a rebuke, from Old French reprove reproach,
rejection, verbal noun from reprover to blame, accuse (see reprove).


snape (v.)

also sneap, to be hard upon, rebuke, revile, snub, early 14c., from Old Norse sneypa to outrage,
dishonor, disgrace, probably related to similar-sounding words meaning cut (compare snip (v.)).
Verbal meaning bevel the end (of a timber) to fit an inclined surface is of uncertain origin or
connection. Snaiping rebuking, reproaching, reviling is attested from early 14c.


reprehend (v.)

mid-14c., from Latin reprehendere blame, censure, rebuke; seize, restrain, literally pull back, hold
back, from re- back (see re-) + prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile).


beard (v.)

c.1300, to grow or have a beard, from beard (n.). The sense of confront boldly and directly is from
Middle English phrases such as rennen in berd oppose openly (c.1200), reproven in the berd to rebuke
directly and personally (c.1400), on the same notion as modern slang get in (someone's) face.
Related: Bearded; bearding.


correction (n.)

mid-14c., action of correcting, from Old French correccion (13c.) correction, amendment; punishment,
rebuke, from Latin correctionem (nominative correctio), noun of action from past participle stem of
corrigere (see correct (v.)). Meaning chastisement is from late 14c. Meaning an instance of
correction is from 1520s. House of correction was in a royal statute from 1575.


reproach (v.)

mid-14c., reprochen to rebuke, reproach, from  Anglo-French repruchier, Old French reprochier
upbraid, blame, accuse, speak ill of, from reproche (see reproach (n.)). Related: Reproached;
reproaching.


objurgate (v.)

1610s, from Latin obiurgatus, past participle of obiurgare to chide, rebuke, from ob- (see ob-) +
iurgare to quarrel, scold, from phrase iure agere to deal in a lawsuit, from ablative of ius right;
law; suit (see just (adj.)) + agere to do, act, set in motion (see act (n.)). Related: Objurgatory.


snub (v.)

mid-14c., to check, reprove, rebuke, from Old Norse snubba to curse, chide, snub, scold, reprove.
The ground sense is perhaps to cut off, and the word probably is related to snip. Compare Swedish
snobba lop off, snuff (a candle), Old Norse snubbotr snubbed, nipped, with the tip cut off. Meaning
treat coldly appeared early 18c. Related: Snubbed; snubbing.


blame (v.)

c.1200, find fault with; c.1300, lay blame on, from Old French blasmer (12c., Modern French
bl&acirc;mer) to rebuke, reprimand, condemn, criticize, from Vulgar Latin *blastemare, from Late
Latin blasphemare revile, reproach (see blaspheme). Replaced Old English witan with long i. Related:
Blamed; blaming.


rap (n.)

c.1300, a quick, light blow, stroke, also a fart (late 15c.), native or borrowed from a Scandinavian
source (compare Danish rap, Swedish rapp light blow); either way probably of imitative origin
(compare slap, clap).    Slang meaning rebuke, blame, responsibility is from 1777; specific meaning
criminal indictment (as in rap sheet, 1960) is from 1903. To beat the rap is from 1927. Meaning
music with improvised words first in New York City slang, 1979 (see rap (v.2)).


challenge (v.)

c.1200, to rebuke, from Old French chalongier complain, protest; haggle, quibble, from Vulgar Latin
calumniare to accuse falsely, from Latin calumniari to accuse falsely, misrepresent, slander, from
calumnia trickery (see calumny).    From late 13c. as to object to, take exception to; c.1300 as to
accuse, especially to accuse falsely, also to call to account; late 14c. as to call to fight. Also
used in Middle English with sense claim, take to oneself. Related: Challenged; challenging.


reproach (n.)

mid-14c., a rebuke, blame, censure; also object of scorn or contempt; c.1400, as disgrace, state of
disgrace, from Old French reproche blame, shame, disgrace (12c.), from reprochier to blame, bring up
against, said by some French etymologists to be from Vulgar Latin *repropiare, from Latin re-
opposite of + prope near (see propinquity), with suggestions of bring near to as in modern get in
(someone's) face. But others would have it from *reprobicare, from Latin reprobus/reprobare (see
reprobate (adj.)).


