reduce (v.)

late 14c., bring back, from Old French reducer (14c.), from Latin reducere lead back, bring back,
figuratively restore, replace, from re- back (see re-) + ducere bring, lead (see duke (n.)). Meaning
bring to an inferior condition is 1570s; that of bring to a lower rank is 1640s (military reduce to
ranks is from 1802); that of subdue by force of arms is 1610s. Sense of to lower, diminish, lessen
is from 1787. Related: Reduced; reducing.


atomize (v.)

reduce to atoms, 1845; reduce a liquid to a very fine mist, 1865, verb formed from atom + -ize.
Related: Atomized; atomizing. Originally in reference to medical treatment for injured or diseased
lungs; sense of to destroy with atomic weapons is from 1945.


transformer (n.)

c.1600, one who or that which transforms, agent noun from transform (v.). Meaning device to reduce
electrical currents is from 1882.


reclaim (v.)

early 14c., call back a hawk to the glove, from Old French reclamer to call upon, invoke; claim;
seduce; to call back a hawk (12c.) and directly from Latin reclamare cry out against, contradict,
protest, appeal, from re- opposite, against (see re-) + clamare cry out (see claim (v.)).    Call
back a hawk, hence to make tame (mid-15c.), subdue, reduce to obedience, make amenable to control
(late 14c.). In many Middle English uses with no sense of return or reciprocation. Meaning revoke (a
grant, gift, etc.) is from late 15c. That of recall (someone) from an erring course to a proper
state is mid-15c. Sense of get back by effort might reflect influence of claim. Meaning bring waste
land into useful condition fit for cultivation first attested 1764, probably on notion of reduce to
obedience. Related: Reclaimed; reclaiming.


bate (v.1)

to reduce, to lessen in intensity, c.1300, shortening of abate (q.v.). Now only in phrase bated
breath, which was used by Shakespeare in The Merchant of Venice (1596).


axe (v.)

1670s, to shape or cut with an axe, from axe (n.). Meaning to remove, severely reduce, usually
figurative, recorded by 1922. Related: Axed; axing.


redux (adj.)

restored, brought back, Latin, from reducere (see reduce). In book titles at least since 1662
(Dryden, Astraea Redux, written on the restoration of Charles II).


minuend (n.)

number from which another number is to be subtracted, 1706, from Latin minuendus (numerus),
gerundive past participle of minuere to reduce, diminish, make small (see minus).


mark-down (n.)

1880, from expression mark down reduce in price (see mark (v.)).


reducible (adj.)

mid-15c.; see reduce + -ible. Compare Old French redusible.


char (v.)

to reduce to charcoal, 1670s, probably a back-formation from charcoal (q.v.). Related: Charred;
charring.


unmake (v.)

late 14c., bring down, dethrone; early 15c., undo, destroy, reduce to an unmade state, from un- (2)
reverse, opposite of + make (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch ontmaken, German entmachen.


beggar (v.)

reduce to poverty, mid-15c., from beggar (n.). Related: Beggared; beggaring. Figurative use by
1640s.


slim (v.)

1808, to scamp one's work, do carelessly or superficially, from slim (adj.). Meaning to make slim (a
garment, etc.) is from 1862; meaning reduce (one's) weight is from 1930. Related: Slimmed; slimming.


halve (v.)

c.1200, halfen to divide in halves; see half. Meaning to reduce by half is from c.1400. Related:
Halved; halving.


sober (v.)

late 14c., reduce to a quiet condition (transitive), from sober (adj.). Meaning render grave or
serious is from 1726. Intransitive sense of become sober (since 1847 often with up) is from 1820.
Related: Sobered; sobering.


scheme (v.)

devise a scheme, 1767 (earlier reduce to a scheme, 1716), from scheme (n.). Related: Schemed;
scheming.


pulp (v.)

1660s reduce to pulp (implied in pulping), from pulp (n.). As to remove the pulp from, from 1791.
Related: Pulped.


reductive (adj.)

1630s, that reduces; 1650s, that leads or brings back, from Medieval Latin reductivus, from reduct-,
past participle stem of Latin reducere (see reduce). Related: Reductively.


tone (v.)

to impart tone to, 1811, from tone (n.). Related: Toned; toning. To tone (something) down originally
was in painting (1831); general sense of reduce, moderate is by 1847.


master (v.)

early 13c., to get the better of, from master (n.) and also from Old French maistrier, from Medieval
Latin magistrare. Meaning to reduce to subjugation is early 15c.; that of to acquire complete
knowledge is from 1740s. Related: Mastered; mastering.


lineament (n.)

early 15c., distinctive feature of the body, outline, from Middle French lineament, from Latin
lineamentum contour, outline, literally a line, stroke, mark, from lineare to reduce to a straight
line, from linea (see line (n.)). Figurative sense of a characteristic is attested from 1630s.


deforest (v.)

1880 in modern sense, from de- + forest. Related: Deforested; deforesting. Disforest in the sense to
clear of trees is from 1660s. Disafforest is attested in this sense from 1842; originally it meant
reduce from the legal status of a forest (1590s).


sweater (n.)

woolen vest or jersey, originally worn in rowing, 1882, from earlier sweaters clothing worn to
produce sweating and reduce weight (1828), plural agent noun from sweat (v.). As a fashion garment,
attested from 1925. Earlier it meant one who works hard (1520s). Sweater girl is attested from 1940;
Lana Turner (1920-1995) was the first, from her appearance in the film They Won't Forget (1937).


reduction (n.)

early 15c., a restoring to a former state; a subjugation (of a people, etc.), from Middle French
reducion (13c., Modern French r&eacute;duction) and directly from Latin reductionem (nominative
reductio) a leading back, restoration, noun of action from past participle stem of reducere (see
reduce). Meaning diminution, a lessening is from 1670s; chemical sense of reversion to a simpler
form is from 1660s.


submit (v.)

late 14c., to place (oneself) under the control of another, to yield oneself, from Latin submittere
to yield, lower, let down, put under, reduce, from sub under (see sub-) + mittere let go, send (see
mission). Transitive sense of refer to another for consideration first recorded 1550s. Related:
Submitted; submitting.


pulverize (v.)

early 15c., from Late Latin pulverizare reduce to powder or dust, from Latin pulvis (genitive
pulveris) dust, powder (see pollen). Related: Pulverized; pulverizing.


habiliment (n.)

often habiliments, early 15c., munitions, weapons, from Middle French habillement, from abiller
prepare or fit out, probably from habile fit, suitable (see able). Alternative etymology [Barnhart,
Klein] makes the French verb originally mean reduce a tree by stripping off the branches, from a- to
+ bille stick of wood. Sense of clothing, dress developed late 15c., by association with habit (n.).


scale (v.3)

weigh in scales, 1690s, from scale (n.2). Earlier to compare, estimate (c.1600). Meaning measure or
regulate by a scale is from 1798, from scale (n.3); that of weigh out in proper quantities is from
1841. Scale down reduce proportionately is attested from 1887. Scale factor is from 1948. Related:
Scaled; scaling.


nebulizer (n.)

1865, agent noun from verb nebulize to reduce to a mist or spray (1865), from Latin nebula mist (see
nebula) + -ize. Related: Nebulization.


soothe (v.)

Old English so&eth;ian show to be true, from so&eth; true (see sooth). Sense of quiet, comfort,
mollify is first recorded 1690s, via notion of to assuage one by asserting that what he says is true
(i.e. to be a yes-man), a sense attested from 1560s (and compare Old English geso&eth; a parasite,
flatterer). Meaning reduce the intensity (of a pain, etc.) is from 1711. Related: Soothed; soothing.


correct (v.)

mid-14c., to set right, rectify (a fault or error), from Latin correctus, past participle of
corrigere to put straight, reduce to order, set right; in transferred use, to reform, amend,
especially of speech or writing, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + regere to lead straight,
rule (see regal). Originally of persons; with reference to writing, etc., attested from late 14c.
Related: Corrected; correcting.


retail (v.)

mid-14c. sell in small quantities or parcels, from Old French retaillier cut back, cut off, pare,
clip, reduce, circumcise, from re- back (see re-) + taillier to cut, trim (see tailor (n.)).
Sometimes also to deal out (information, etc.) in small quantities; hand down by report; recount,
tell over again (1590s). Related: Retailed; retailing.


annihilate (v.)

1520s, from an obsolete adjective meaning reduced to nothing (late 14c.), originally the past
participle of a verb, anihil, from Old French annichiler (14c.), from Late Latin annihilare to
reduce to nothing, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + nihil nothing (see nil). Related: Annihilated;
annihilating.


liquidate (v.)

1570s, to reduce to order, to set out clearly (of accounts), from Late Latin or Medieval Latin
liquidatus, past participle of liquidare to melt, make liquid or clear, clarify, from Latin liquidus
(see liquid). Sense of clear away (a debt) first recorded 1755. The meaning wipe out, kill is from
1924, possibly from Russian likvidirovat. Related: Liquidated; liquidating.


subdue (v.)

late 14c., to conquer and reduce to subjection, from Old French souduire, but this meant deceive,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, lead away, carry off; withdraw (see subduce). The primary
sense in English seems to have been taken in Anglo-French from Latin subdere and attached to this
word. Related: Subdued; subduing. As an associated noun, subdual is attested from 1670s (subduction
having acquired other senses).


redact (v.)

early 15c., bring into organized form, from Latin redactus, past participle of redigere to drive
back, force back; bring back; collect, call in; bring down, reduce, from re- back, again (see re-) +
agere to drive (see act (n.)). Specific meaning arrange, edit is from 1851.


disparage (v.)

early 14c., degrade socially, from Old French desparagier (Modern French d&eacute;parager) reduce in
rank, degrade, devalue, depreciate, originally to marry unequally, and thus by extension the
disgrace or dishonor involved in this, from des- away (see dis-) + parage rank, lineage (see peer
(n.)). Sense of belittle first recorded 1530s. Related: Disparaged; disparaging; disparagingly.


rebate (v.)

late 14c., to reduce; early 15c., to deduct, subtract, from Old French rabattre beat down, drive
back, also deduct, from re- repeatedly (see re-) + abattre beat down (see abate). Meaning to pay
back (a sum) as a rebate is from 1957. Related: Rebated; rebating.


extenuate (v.)

1520s, from Latin extenuatus, past participle of extenuare lessen, make small, reduce, diminish,
from ex- out (see ex-) + tenuare make thin, from tenuis thin (see tenet). Related: Extenuated;
extenuating. Extenuating circumstances attested from 1660s.


relax (v.)

late 14c., to make (something) less compact or dense, from Old French relaschier set free; soften;
reduce (14c.), from Latin relaxare relax, loosen, open, stretch out, widen again; make loose, from
re- back (see re-) + laxare loosen, from laxus loose (see lax). Of persons, to become less formal,
from 1837. Meaning decrease tension is from early 15c.; intransitive sense of to become less tense
is recorded from 1935. Related: Relaxed; relaxing.


submission (n.)

late 14c., act of referring to a third party for judgment or decision, from Old French submission or
directly from Latin submissionem (nominative submissio) a lowering, letting down; sinking, noun of
action from past participle stem of submittere to let down, put down, lower, reduce, yield (see
submit).    Sense of humble obedience is first recorded mid-15c. Modern French submission has been
replaced by doublet soumission. English in 16c.-17c. also had an adjective submiss humble,
submissive.  Submissionist in various political historical contexts is from 1828.


dock (v.)

cut an animal's tail, late 14c., from dok (n.) fleshy part of an animal's tail (mid-14c.), related
to Old English -docca muscle, from Proto-Germanic *dokko something round, bundle (cognates: Old
Norse dokka bundle, girl, Danish dukke doll, German Docke small column, bundle, doll, smart girl).
Meaning to reduce (someone's) pay for some infraction is first recorded 1822. Related: Docked;
docking.


resolve (v.)

late 14c., melt, dissolve, reduce to liquid; intransitive sense from c.1400; from Old French
resolver or directly from Latin resolvere to loosen, loose, unyoke, undo; explain; relax; set free;
make void, dispel, from re-, perhaps intensive, or back (see re-), + solvere loosen (see solve).
Early 15c. as separate into components, hence the use in optics (1785). Meaning determine, decide
upon is from 1520s, hence pass a resolution (1580s). For sense evolution, compare resolute (adj.).
Related: Resolved; resolving.


qwerty

1929, from the first six keys on a standard typewriter keyboard, read as though text, from top left.
Mechanical typewriter patented 1867; the QWERTY layout itself is said to date to 1887, dominant in
U.S. from early 20c.; it is not meant to slow down typists, but to separate the letters in common
digraphs (-sh-, -ck-, etc.) to reduce jamming of swing-arms in old-style machines. It actually
speeds typing by requiring alternate-hand strokes, which is one reason the alternative DVORAK
keyboard is not appreciably faster. Remnants of the original alphabetic typewriter keyboard remain
in the second row of letter keys: FGH-JKL. The French standard was AZERTY; in Germany, QWERTZ; in
Italy, QZERTY.


redoubt (n.)

also redout, small, enclosed military work, c.1600, from French redoute (17c.), from Italian
ridotto, earlier ridotta, place of retreat, from Medieval Latin reductus place of refuge, retreat,
noun use of past participle of reducere to lead or bring back (see reduce). The -b- was added by
influence of unrelated English redoubt (v.) to dread, fear (see redoubtable). As an adjective, Latin
reductus meant withdrawn, retired; remote, distant.


minus (prep.)

late 15c., with subtraction of, from Latin minus less, neuter of minor smaller, from PIE *mi-nu-,
suffixed form of root *mei- (2) small (cognates: Latin minuere to diminish, reduce, lessen, Greek
meion less, smaller, Old English minsian to diminish, Sanskrit miyate diminishes, declines, Russian
men'she less).    Mathematical use in expressions of calculation did not exist in the word in
classical Latin and is probably from North Sea medieval commercial usage of Latin plus and minus to
indicate surplus or deficiency of weight or measure. Origin of the minus sign is disputed.


stump (v.)

early 13c., to stumble over a tree-stump or other obstacle (obsolete), from the source of stump
(n.). From 1590s as reduce to a stump. Sense of walk stiffly and clumsily is first recorded c.1600.
Sense of baffle, bring to a halt by obstacles or impediments is first recorded 1807, American
English, perhaps in reference to plowing newly cleared land, but compare earlier sense to challenge,
dare (1766).    Meaning go on a speaking tour during a political campaign is from 1838, American
English, from phrase stump speech (1820), large tree stumps being a natural perch for rural orators
(this custom is attested from 1775), especially in new settlements. Related: Stumped; stumping.


waterlogged (adj.)

1759 (in an account of the Battle of Lagos in Universal Magazine, September), from water (n.1) + log
(n.); the notion apparently is of reduce to a log-like condition.     WATER LOGGED, the state of a
ship when, by receiving a great quantity of water into her hold, by leaking, &amp;c.;, she has
become heavy and inactive upon the sea, so as to yield without resistance to the efforts of every
wave rushing over her decks. As, in this dangerous situation, the center of gravity is no longer
fixed, but fluctuating from place to place, the stability of the ship is utterly lost. She is
therefore almost totally deprived of the use of her sails, which would operate to overset her, or
press the head under water. Hence there is no resource for the crew, except to free her by the
pumps, or to abandon her by the boats as soon as possible. [William Falconer, An Universal
Dictionary of the Marine, London, 1784]    The verb waterlog (1779) appears to be a back-formation.


trim (v.)

mid-15c., probably from Old English trymian, trymman strengthen, fortify, confirm; comfort; incite;
set in order, arrange, prepare, make ready; become strong, from trum strong, stable, from Proto-
Germanic *trum-, from PIE *dru-mo-, suffixed form of *deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true).
Examples in Middle English are wanting.    Original sense is preserved in nautical phrase in
fighting trim (see trim (n.)); where the verb meant distribute the load of a ship so she floats on
an even keel (1570s). Meaning make neat by cutting is first recorded 1520s; that of decorate, adorn
is from 1540s. Sense of reduce is attested from 1966.


