regent (n.)

one who rules during the minority or absence of a sovereign, c.1400, from the adjective (now
archaic, attested in English late 14c.), from Old French regent and directly from Medieval Latin
regentem (nominative regens), from Latin regens ruler, governor, noun use of present participle of
regere to rule, direct (see regal). Senses of university faculty member is attested from mid-15c.,
originally Scottish.


vice-regent (n.)

also viceregent, 1580s, from vice- + regent (n.). Difficult to distinguish from vicegerent.


regency (n.)

early 15c., government by regents, from Medieval Latin regentia, from Latin regens (see regent).
Notable instances were: France 1715-1723 (under Philip, Duke of Orleans), Britain 1811-1820 (under
George, Prince of Wales, Prince Regent), in each case with suggestion of debauchery [Weekley]. In
reference to the style of that time, attested from 1880 (there is an unexplained use in Jane Austen
from 1793). Compare French equivalent R&eacute;gence, attested in English from 1919. U.S. Albany
Regency refers to dominant political faction in New York state c.1820-1850.


New Orleans

founded 1718 as Nouvelle Orl&eacute;ans, in honor of French regent Philippe, duc
d√¢&euro;&trade;Orl&eacute;ans (1674-1723); anglicized after purchase by the U.S. in 1803.


zoo (n.)

c.1847, short for Zoological Gardens of the London Zoological Society, established 1828 in Regent's
Park to house the society's collection of wild animals. The first three letters taken as one
syllable. From a mere vulgarism, this corruption has passed into wide colloquial use [Century
Dictionary]. Slang meaning crowded and chaotic place first recorded 1935.


corpulent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French corpulent stout, fat, from Latin corpulentus fleshy, fat, from corpus
body (see corporeal) + -ulentus full of. Leigh Hunt was sent to prison for two years for calling the
Prince Regent corpulent in print in 1812.


roue (n.)

debauchee, 1800, from French rou&eacute; dissipated man, rake, originally past participle of Old
French rouer to break on the wheel (15c.), from Latin rotare roll (see rotary). Said to have been
first applied in French c.1720 to dissolute friends of the Duke of Orleans (regent of France
1715-23), to suggest the punishment they deserved; but probably rather from a secondary, figurative
sense in French of jaded, worn out, from the notion of broken, run-over, beat down.


prince (n.)

c.1200, ruler of a principality (mid-12c. as a surname), from Old French prince prince, noble lord
(12c.), from Latin princeps (genitive principis) first man, chief leader; ruler, sovereign, noun use
of adjective meaning that takes first, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + root of capere to take
(see capable). German cognate f&uuml;rst, from Old High German furist first, is apparently an
imitation of the Latin formation. Colloquial meaning admirable or generous person is from 1911,
American English. Prince Regent was the title of George, Prince of Wales (later George VI) during
the mental incapacity of George III (1811-1820).


