relic (n.)

early 13c., body part or other object from a holy person, from Old French relique (11c., plural
reliques), from Late Latin reliqui&aelig; (plural) remains of a martyr, in classical Latin remains,
remnants, noun use of fem. plural of reliquus remaining, that which remains, related to relinquere
(perfective reliqui) to leave behind (see relinquish). Sense of remains, ruins is from early 14c.
Old English used reliquias, directly from Latin.


hot-blooded (adj.)

passionate, 1590s; a relic of medieval physiology theory.


relique (n.)

Frenchified spelling of relic (q.v.).


reliquary (n.)

receptacle for keeping relics, 1650s, from French reliquaire (14c.), from relique (see relic).


fungo (n.)

1867, baseball slang, perhaps from dialectal fonge catch, a relic of Old English fon seize (see
fang), or possibly from the German cognate fangen. Not in OED 2nd ed. (1989).


riding (n.2)

one of the three districts into which Yorkshire was divided, late 13c., from late Old English
*&thorn;ri&eth;ing, a relic of Viking rule, from Old Norse &eth;ri&eth;jungr third part, from
&eth;ri&eth;i third (see third). The initial consonant merged with final consonant of preceding
north, west, or east.


fiery (adj.)

late 13c., from Middle English fier fire (see fire (n.)) + -y (2). The spelling is a relic of one of
the attempts to render Old English y in fyr in a changing system of vowel sounds. Related:
Fieriness.


Olaf

masc. proper name, from Old Norse An-leifr, literally ancestor's relic; first element related to Old
High German ano ancestor; second element related to Old English l&aelig;fan to leave (see leave
(v.)).


Myanmar

an old name for a part of Burma and a word for the country in native speech, officially chosen by
military rulers of Burma in 1989. Reasons given include casting off a relic of colonialism, or
downplaying of the connection to the Burman ethnic majority.    It should be pointed out that this
renaming has virtually no impact on Burmese citizens speaking in Burmese, who continue to refer to
both Myanma as well as Bama (this not unlike formal reference in the English language to 'The
Netherlands' while informally using 'Holland'). [Gustaaf Houtman, Mental Culture in Burmese Crisis
Politics, 1999]


dial (n.)

early 15c., sundial, earlier dial of a compass (mid-14c.), apparently from Medieval Latin dialis
daily, from Latin dies day (see diurnal).    The word perhaps was abstracted from a phrase such as
Medieval Latin rota dialis daily wheel, and evolved to mean any round plate over which something
rotates. Telephone sense is from 1879, which led to dial tone (1921), the signal to begin dialing,
which term soon might be the sole relic of the rotary phone.


clew (n.)

ball of thread or yarn, northern English and Scottish relic of Old English cliewen sphere, ball,
skein, ball of thread or yarn, probably from West Germanic *kleuwin (cognates: Old Saxon cleuwin,
Dutch kluwen), from Proto-Germanic *kliwjo-, from PIE *gleu- gather into a mass, conglomerate (see
clay).


alderman (n.)

Old English aldormonn (Mercian), ealdormann (West Saxon) ruler, prince, chief; chief officer of a
shire, from aldor, ealder patriarch (comparative of ald old; see old) + monn, mann man (see man
(n.)). A relic of the days when the elders were automatically in charge of the clan or tribe, but
already in Old English used for king's viceroys, regardless of age. The word yielded in Old English
to eorl, and after the Norman Conquest to count (n.). Meaning headman of a guild (early 12c.) passed
to magistrate of a city (c.1200) as the guilds became identified with municipal government.


she (pron.)

mid-12c., probably evolving from Old English seo, sio (accusative sie), fem. of demonstrative
pronoun (masc. se) the, from PIE root *so- this, that (see the). The Old English word for she was
heo, hio, however by 13c. the pronunciation of this had converged by phonetic evolution with he he,
which apparently led to the fem. demonstrative pronoun being used in place of the pronoun (compare
similar development in Dutch zij, German sie, Greek he, etc.). The original h- survives in her. A
relic of the Old English pronoun is in Manchester-area dialectal oo she. As a noun meaning a female,
she is attested from 1530s.


chapel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French chapele (12c., Modern French chapelle), from Medieval Latin cappella
chapel, sanctuary for relics, literally little cape, diminutive of Late Latin cappa cape (see cap
(n.)); by tradition, originally in reference to the sanctuary in France in which the miraculous cape
of St. Martin of Tours, patron saint of France, was preserved; meaning extended in most European
languages to any sanctuary. (While serving Rome as a soldier deployed in Gaul, Martin cut his
military coat in half to share it with a ragged beggar. That night, Martin dreamed Christ wearing
the half-cloak; the half Martin kept was the relic.)


firn (n.)

consolidated snow, the raw material of glaciers, 1853, literally last year's snow,
n&eacute;v&eacute;, from German Firn, from Swiss dialectal firn of last year, from Middle High
German virne old, from Old High German firni, related to Old English fyrn old, Gothic fairns of last
year, from Proto-Germanic *fur-/*for- (see first). The only English relic of a useful word meaning
of last year that was widespread in Indo-European languages. It has cognates in Lithuanian pernai
last year, Greek perysi a year ago, last year, Sanskrit parut of last year.


sanctuary (n.)

early 14c., building set apart for holy worship, from Anglo-French sentuarie, Old French saintuaire
sacred relic, holy thing; reliquary, sanctuary, from Late Latin sanctuarium a sacred place, shrine
(especially the Hebrew Holy of Holies; see sanctum), also a private room, from Latin sanctus holy
(see saint (n.)).    Since the time of Constantine and by medieval Church law, fugitives or debtors
enjoyed immunity from arrest in certain churches, hence transferred sense of immunity from
punishment (late 14c.). Exceptions were made in England in cases of treason and sacrilege. General
(non-ecclesiastical) sense of place of refuge or protection is attested from 1560s; as land set
aside for wild plants or animals to breed and live it is recorded from 1879.


day (n.)

Old English d&aelig;g day, also lifetime, from Proto-Germanic *dagaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Middle
Dutch, Dutch dag, Old Frisian dei, Old High German tag, German Tag, Old Norse dagr, Gothic dags),
from PIE *dhegh-.    Not considered to be related to Latin dies (see diurnal), but rather to
Sanskrit dah to burn, Lithuanian dagas hot season, Old Prussian dagis summer. Meaning originally, in
English, the daylight hours; expanded to mean the 24-hour period in late Anglo-Saxon times. The day
formerly began at sunset, hence Old English Wodnesniht was what we would call Tuesday night. Names
of the weekdays were not regularly capitalized in English until 17c. Day off first recorded 1883;
day-tripper first recorded 1897. The days in nowadays, etc. is a relic of the Old English and Middle
English use of the adverbial genitive.


the

definite article, late Old English &thorn;e, nominative masculine form of the demonstrative pronoun
and adjective. After c.950, it replaced earlier se (masc.), seo (fem.), &thorn;&aelig;t (neuter),
and probably represents se altered by the th- form which was used in all the masculine oblique cases
(see below).   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1>
<tr> <td></td> <td>Masc.</td> <td>Fem.</td> <td>Neut.</td> <td>Plural</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Nom.</td>
<td>se</td> <td>seo</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;t</td> <td>&thorn;a</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Acc.</td>
<td>&thorn;one</td> <td>&thorn;a</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;t</td> <td>&thorn;a</td> </tr> <tr>
<td>Gen.</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;s</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;re</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;s</td>
<td>&thorn;ara</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Dat.</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;m</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;re</td>
<td>&thorn;&aelig;m</td> <td>&thorn;&aelig;m</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Inst.</td> <td>&thorn;y,
&thorn;on</td> <td>--</td> <td>&thorn;y, &thorn;on</td> <td>--</td> </tr> </table>   Old English se
is from PIE root *so- this, that (cognates: Sanskrit sa, Avestan ha, Greek ho, he the, Irish and
Gaelic so this). For the &thorn;- forms, see that. The s- forms were entirely superseded in English
by mid-13c., excepting a slightly longer dialectal survival in Kent. Old English used 10 different
words for the (see table), but did not distinguish the from that. That survived for a time as a
definite article before vowels (that one or that other).    Adverbial use in the more the merrier,
the sooner the better, etc. is a relic of Old English &thorn;y, the instrumentive case of the neuter
demonstrative (see that).


saint (n.)

early 12c., from Old French saint, seinte a saint; a holy relic, displacing or altering Old English
sanct, both from Latin sanctus holy, consecrated (used as a noun in Late Latin; also source of
Spanish santo, santa, Italian san, etc.), properly past participle of sancire consecrate (see
sacred). Adopted into most Germanic languages (Old Frisian sankt, Dutch sint, German Sanct).
Originally an adjective prefixed to the name of a canonized person; by c.1300 it came to be regarded
as a noun. Meaning person of extraordinary holiness is recorded from 1560s.  <b>Saint</b>, n. A dead
sinner revised and edited. The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator,
Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called
saint: 'I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint. He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards. In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool.'
[Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Perhaps you have imagined that this humility
in the saints is a pious illusion at which God smiles. That is a most dangerous error. It is
theoretically dangerous, because it makes you identify a virtue (i.e., a perfection) with an
illusion (i.e., an imperfection), which must be nonsense. It is practically dangerous because it
encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a
halo round his own silly head. No, depend upon it; when the saints say that they--even they--are
vile, they are recording truth with scientific accuracy. [C.S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 1940]
Saint Bernard, the breed of mastiff dogs (1839), so called because the monks of the hospice of the
pass of St. Bernard (between Italy and Switzerland) sent them to rescue snowbound travelers; St.
Elmo's Fire corposant (1560s) is from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of
Mediterranean sailors, a corruption of the name of St. Erasmus, an Italian bishop martyred in 303.


