repast (n.)

late 14c., from Old French repast (Modern Frech repas) a meal, food, from Late Latin repastus meal
(also source of Spanish repasto, noun use of past participle of repascere to feed again, from Latin
re- repeatedly (see re-) + pascere to graze (see pastor). The verb (intransitive) is from late 15c.


banquet (n.)

late 15c., feast, sumptuous entertainment, from French banquet (15c.; in Old French only small
bench), from Old Italian banchetto, diminutive of banco bench; originally a snack eaten on a bench
(rather than at table), hence a slight repast between meals; the meaning has entirely reversed. As a
verb from 1510s.


luncheon (n.)

light repast between mealtimes, 1650s (lunching; spelling luncheon by 1706); earlier thick piece,
hunk, 1570s (luncheon), of uncertain origin. Perhaps northern English dialectal lunch hunk of bread
or cheese (1580s; probably from Spanish lonja a slice, literally loin), blended with or influenced
by nuncheon (Middle English nonechenche, mid-14c.) light mid-day meal, from none noon (see noon) +
schench drink, from Old English scenc, from scencan pour out.     Despite the form lunching in the
1650s source OED discounts that it possibly could be from lunch (v.), which is much later. It
suggests perhaps an analogy with truncheon, etc. Especially in reference to an early afternoon meal
eaten by those who have a noontime dinner.


lunch (n.)

mid-day repast, 1786, shortened form of luncheon (q.v.). The verb meaning to take to lunch (said to
be from the noun) also is attested from 1786:    PRATTLE. I always to be &#383;ure, makes a point to
keep up the dignity of the family I lives in. Wou'd you take a more &#383;olid refre&#383;hment?--
Have you lunch'd, Mr. Bribe?    BRIBE. Lunch'd O dear! Permit me, my dear Mrs. Prattle, to
refre&#383;h my sponge, upon the honey dew that clings to your ravi&#383;hing pouters. O! Mrs.
Prattle, this &#383;hall be my lunch. (ki&#383;&#383;es)     [The Mode, in William Davies' Plays
Written for a Private Theatre, London, 1786]    But as late as 1817 the only definition of lunch in
Webster's is a large piece of food. OED says in 1820s the word was regarded either as a vulgarism,
or as a fashionable affectation. Related: Lunched; lunching. Lunch money is attested from 1868;
lunch-time (n.) is from 1821; lunch hour is from 1840. Slang phrase out to lunch insane, stupid,
clueless first recorded 1955, on notion of being not there. Old English had nonmete afternoon meal,
literally noon-meat.


