reprimand (v.)

1680s, from reprimand (n.) or else from French r&#233;primander (17c.), from r&#233;primande.
Related: Reprimanded; reprimanding.


reprimand (n.)

1630s, from French r&eacute;primande (16c.), from Middle French reprimende reproof, from Latin
reprimenda that is to be repressed (as in reprimenda culpa fault to be checked), fem. singular of
reprimendus, gerundive of reprimere reprove (see repress). Spelling influenced in French by mander
to summon.


rebuke (n.)

early 15c., a reproof, reprimand, from rebuke (v.).


go off (v.)

of firearms, etc., 1570s; meaning depart is c.1600; that of reprimand is from 1941 (originally with
at, since c.2000 more often with on).


talking-to (n.)

a reprimand, 1871, from euphemistic use of verbal phrase talk to (see talk (v.)).


carpet (v.)

to cover with a carpet, 1620s, from carpet (n.). Meaning call to reprimand is from 1840. Related:
Carpeted; carpeting.


pan (v.1)

to wash gravel or sand in a pan in search of gold, 1839, from pan (n.); thus to pan out turn out,
succeed (1868) is a figurative use of this (literal sense from 1849). The meaning criticize severely
is from 1911, probably from the notion in contemporary slang expressions such as on the pan under
reprimand or criticism (1923). Related: Panned; panning.


reprehension (n.)

late 14c., from Old French reprehension (12c.) or directly from Latin reprehensionem (nominative
reprehensio) blame, a censure, reprimand, literally a taking again, noun of action from past
participle stem of reprehendere (see reprehend).


slap (n.)

mid-15c., probably of imitative origin, similar to Low German slappe, German Schlappe. Figurative
meaning insult, reprimand is attested from 1736. Slap-happy (1936) originally meant punch-drunk.
Slap on the wrist very mild punishment dates from 1914.


school (v.1)

to educate; to reprimand, to discipline, mid-15c., from school (n.1). Related: Schooled; schooling.


bawl (v.)

mid-15c., to howl like a dog, from Old Norse baula to low like a cow, and/or Medieval Latin baulare
to bark like a dog, both echoic. Meaning to shout loudly attested from 1590s. To bawl (someone) out
reprimand loudly is 1908, American English. Related: Bawled; bawling.


blame (v.)

c.1200, find fault with; c.1300, lay blame on, from Old French blasmer (12c., Modern French
bl&acirc;mer) to rebuke, reprimand, condemn, criticize, from Vulgar Latin *blastemare, from Late
Latin blasphemare revile, reproach (see blaspheme). Replaced Old English witan with long i. Related:
Blamed; blaming.


rebuke (v.)

early 14c., to reprimand, reprove; chide, scold, from Anglo-French rebuker to repel, beat back, Old
French rebuchier, from re- back (see re-) + buschier to strike, chop wood, from busche (French
bÃ&fnof;Â»che) wood, from Proto-Germanic *busk- (see bush (n.)). Related: Rebuked; rebuking.


ream (v.)

to enlarge a hole, 1815, probably a southwest England dialectal survival from Middle English reme to
make room, open up, from Old English ryman widen, extend, enlarge, from Proto-Germanic *rumijan
(cognates: Old Saxon rumian, Old Norse ryma, Old Frisian rema, Old High German rumen to make room,
widen), from *rumaz spacious (see room (n.)). Slang meaning to cheat, swindle first recorded 1914;
anal sex sense is from 1942. To ream (someone) out scold, reprimand is recorded from 1950.


carpet (n.)

late 13c., coarse cloth; mid-14c., tablecloth, bedspread; from Old French carpite heavy decorated
cloth, carpet, from Medieval Latin or Old Italian carpita thick woolen cloth, probably from Latin
carpere to card, pluck, probably so called because it was made from unraveled, shreded, plucked
fabric; from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)). Meaning shifted 15c. to floor
coverings.    From 16c.-19c. as an adjective often with a tinge of contempt, when used of men (as in
carpet-knight, 1570s) by association with luxury, ladies' boudoirs, and drawing rooms. On the carpet
summoned for reprimand is 1900, U.S. colloquial (but compare carpet (v.) call (someone) to be
reprimanded, 1823, British servants' slang). To sweep or push something under the carpet in the
figurative sense is first recorded 1953.


tick (v.)

early 13c., to touch or pat, perhaps from an Old English verb corresponding to tick (n.2), and
perhaps ultimately echoic. Compare Old High German zeckon to pluck, Dutch tikken to pat, Norwegian
tikke touch lightly. Meaning make a ticking sound is from 1721. Related: Ticked; ticking.    To tick
(someone) off is from 1915, originally to reprimand, scold. The verbal phrase tick off was in use in
several senses at the time: as what a telegraph instrument does when it types out a message (1873),
as what a clock does in marking the passage of time (1777), to enumerate on one's fingers (1899),
and in accountancy, etc., make a mark beside an item on a sheet with a pencil, etc., often
indicating a sale (by 1881, from tick (n.2) in sense small mark or dot). This last might be the
direct source of the phrase, perhaps via World War I military bureaucratic sense of being marked off
from a list as dismissed or ineligible. Meaning to annoy is recorded by 1971.


tell (v.)

Old English tellan to reckon, calculate, number, compute; consider, think, esteem, account (past
tense tealde, past participle teald), from Proto-Germanic *taljan to mention in order (cognates: Old
Saxon tellian tell, Old Norse telja to count, number; to tell, say, Old Frisian tella to count; to
tell, Middle Dutch and Dutch tellen, Old Saxon talon to count, reckon, Danish tale to speak, Old
High German zalon, German z&auml;hlen to count, reckon), from PIE root *del- (2) to count, reckon
(see tale).    Meaning to narrate, announce, relate in English is from c.1000; that of to make known
by speech or writing, announce is from early 12c. Sense of to reveal or disclose is from c.1400;
that of to act as an informer, to 'peach'  is recorded from 1901. Meaning to order (someone to do
something) is from 1590s. To tell (someone) off reprimand is from 1919.    Original sense in teller
and phrase to tell time. For sense evolution, compare French conter to count, raconter to recount;
Italian contare, Spanish contar to count, recount, narrate; German z&auml;hlen to count,
erz&auml;hlen to recount, narrate. Klein also compares Hebrew saphar he counted, sipper he told.


