residue (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French residu (14c.), from Latin residuum a remainder, that which is left behind,
noun use of neuter of adjective residuus remaining, left over, from residere remain behind (see
reside).


grappa (n.)

brandy distilled from the residue of wine-making, 1893, from Italian grappa, literally grapes (see
grape).


grounds (n.)

residue at the bottom of a liquid, mid-14c., perhaps from past tense of grind (v.); for other
senses, see ground (n.).


coke (n.1)

residue of fuel, 1690s, northern English dialect, perhaps a variant of Middle English colke core,
charcoal (c.1400), itself possibly related to -colc, an Old English word for pit, which perhaps
would give it a sense of what is left in the pit after a fire.


reliquiae (n.)

remains, 1650s, Latin plural of reliquus remainder, residue, noun use of adjective meaning that is
left, remaining, left over, related to relinquere (perfective reliqui) to leave behind (see
relinquish).


residual (adj.)

1560s, from residue + -al (1), or from French r&#233;siduel, from Latin residuum.


residual (n.)

1550s, in mathematics, from residual (adj.) or from residue + -al (2). Residuals royalties attested
by 1960.


tapioca (n.)

1640s, tipiaca, from Portuguese or Spanish tapioca, from Tupi (Brazil) tipioca juice of a pressed
cassava, from tipi residue, dregs + og, ok to squeeze out (from roots of the cassava plant).


crap (v.)

defecate, 1846, from one of a cluster of words generally applied to things cast off or discarded
(such as weeds growing among corn (early 15c.), residue from renderings (late 15c.), underworld
slang for money (18c.), and in Shropshire, dregs of beer or ale), all probably from Middle English
crappe grain that was trodden underfoot in a barn, chaff (mid-15c.), from Middle French crape
siftings, from Old French crappe, from Medieval Latin crappa, crapinum chaff.  Related: Crapped;
crapping.    Despite folk etymology insistence, not from Thomas Crapper (1837-1910) who was,
however, a busy plumber and may have had some minor role in the development of modern toilets. The
name Crapper is a northern form of Cropper (attested from 1221), an occupational surname, obviously,
but the exact reference is unclear. Crap (v.) as a variant of crop (v.) was noted early 19c, as a
peculiarity of speech in Scotland and the U.S. Southwest (Arkansas, etc.).    Draw out yere sword,
thou vile South'ron!  Red wat wi' blude o' my kin!  That sword it crapped the bonniest flower  E'er
lifted its head to the sun!   [Allan Cunningham (1784-1842), The Young Maxwell]


