retort (n.1)

act of retorting, c.1600, from retort (v.).


retort (n.2)

vessel used in chemistry for distilling or effecting decomposition by the aid of heat, c.1600, from
Middle French retorte, from Medieval Latin *retorta a retort, a vessel with a bent neck, literally a
thing bent or twisted, from past participle stem of Latin retorquere (see retort (v.)).


retort (v.)

1550s, make return in kind (especially of an injury), from Old French retort and directly from Latin
retortus, past participle of retorquere turn back, twist back, throw back, from re- back (see re-) +
torquere to twist (see torque (n.)). Applied to exchanges of jest or sarcasm by c.1600, hence say or
utter sharply and aggressively in reply (1620s). Related: Retorted; retorting.


retortion (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin retortionem (nominative retortio), noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin retorquere (see retort (v.)).


zing (n.)

1911, high pitched sound, of echoic origin. Slang meaning energy, zest is attested from 1918. Verb
is from 1920; meaning to deliver a stinging witticism or retort is by 1975.


nertz (interj.)

1932, originally American English college slang, colloquial or euphemistic pronunciation of nuts as
a slang retort of defiance or dismissal (1931).


comeback (n.)

verbal retort, 1889, from come + back (adj.). Meaning recovery, return to former position or
condition after retirement or loss is attested from 1908, American English.


backtalk (n.)

also back-talk, impertinent retort, 1858, originally often used in literary attempts at low Irish
idiom, from back (adj.) + talk (n.).


pigsney (n.)

(obsolete), late 14c., endearing form of address to a girl or woman, apparently from Middle English
pigges eye, literally pig's eye, with excrescent -n- from min eye, an eye, etc. See OED for
explanation of why this might have been felt as a compliment. In a pig's eye! as an adverse retort
is recorded from 1872.


objection (n.)

late 14c., from Old French objeccion reply, retort (12c.) and directly from Late Latin obiectionem
(nominative obiectio), a throwing or putting before, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin obicere to oppose (see object (n.)).


funny (adj.)

humorous, 1756, from fun + -y (2). Meaning strange, odd is 1806, said to be originally U.S.
Southern. The two senses of the word led to the retort question funny ha-ha or funny peculiar, which
is attested from 1916. Related: Funnier; funniest. Funny farm mental hospital is slang from 1962.
Funny bone elbow end of the humerus is 1826; funnies newspaper comic strips is from 1852.


riposte (n.)

1707, a quick thrust after parrying a lunge, a fencing term, from French riposte, by dissimilation
from risposte (17c.), from Italian risposta a reply, noun use of fem. past participle of rispondere
to respond, from Latin respondere (see respond). Sense of sharp retort; quick, sharp reply, is first
attested 1865. As a verb, 1851.


Walker

surname, early 13c., probably an agent noun from walk (v.) in the sense to full cloth. preserves the
cloth-fulling sense (walker with this meaning is attested from c.1300). Walker or Hookey Walker was
a common slang retort of incredulity in early and mid-19c. London, for which Various problematic
explanations have been offered [Century Dictionary].    Is it? said Scrooge. Go and buy it.    Walk-
ER! exclaimed the boy.  No, no, said Scrooge. I am in earnest (etc.)  [Dickens, A Christmas Carol]


quit (v.)

c.1200, to repay, discharge (a debt, etc.), from Old French quiter clear, establish one's innocence;
also transitive, release, let go, relinquish, abandon (12c.), from quite (see quit (adj.)).
Meaning to reward, give reward is mid-13c., that of take revenge; to answer, retort and to acquit
oneself are late 14c. From c.1300 as to acquit (of a charge), declare not guilty. Sense of leave,
depart is attested from c.1400; that of stop (doing something) is from 1640s. Meaning to give up,
relinquish is from mid-15c. Related: Quitted; quitting. Quitting time is from 1835.


esprit (n.)

1590s, from Middle French esprit spirit, mind, from Old French espirit, from Latin spiritus spirit
(see spirit (n.)). For initial e-, see e-. Esprit de corps first recorded 1780. French also has the
excellent phrase esprit de l'escalier, literally spirit of the staircase, defined in OED as, a
retort or remark that occurs to a person after the opportunity to make it has passed. It also has
espirit fort, a strong-minded person, one independent of current prejudices, especially a
freethinker in religion.


nuts (adj.)

crazy, 1846, from earlier be nutts upon be very fond of (1785), which is possibly from nuts (plural
noun) any source of pleasure (1610s), from nut (q.v.). Sense influenced probably by metaphoric
application of nut to head (1846, as in to be off one's nut be insane, 1860). Nuts as a derisive
retort is attested from 1931.    Connection with the slang testicle sense has tended to nudge it
toward taboo. On the N.B.C. network, it is forbidden to call any character a nut; you have to call
him a screwball. [New Yorker, Dec. 23, 1950] Please eliminate the expression 'nuts to you' from
Egbert's speech. [Request from the Hays Office regarding the script of The Bank Dick, 1940] This
desire for avoidance accounts for the euphemism nerts (c.1925).


up (adv.)

Old English up, uppe, from Proto-Germanic *upp- up (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon up up, upward,
Old Norse upp; Danish, Dutch op; Old High German uf, German auf up; Gothic iup up, upward, uf on,
upon, under; Old High German oba, German ob over, above, on, upon), from PIE root *upo up from below
(cognates: Sanskrit upa near, under, up to, on, Greek hypo under, below, Latin sub under; see sub-).
As a preposition, to a higher place from c.1500; also along, through (1510s), toward (1590s). Often
used elliptically for go up, come up, rise up, etc. Up the river in jail first recorded 1891,
originally in reference to Sing Sing, which is up the Hudson from New York City. To drive someone up
the wall (1951) is from the notion of the behavior of lunatics or caged animals. Insulting retort up
yours (scil. ass) attested by late 19c.


marine (n.)

14c., seacoast; see marine (adj.). Meaning collective shipping of a country is from 1660s. Meaning
soldier who serves on a ship is from 1670s, a separate borrowing from French marine, from the French
adjective. Phrase tell that to the marines (1806) originally was the first half of a retort
expressing skepticism:    Upon my soul, sir, answered the lieutenant, when I thought she scorned my
passion, I wept like a child.    Belay there! cried the captain; you may tell that to the marines,
but I'll be d----d if the sailors will believe it. [John Moore, The Post-Captain; or, the Wooden
Walls Well Manned, 1805]    The book, a rollicking sea romance/adventure novel, was popular in its
day and the remark is a recurring punch line in it (repeated at least four times). It was written by
naval veteran John Davis (1774-1854) but published under the name John Moore. Walsh records that,
The marines are among the 'jolly' jack-tars a proverbially gullible lot, capable of swallowing any
yarn, in size varying from a yawl-boat to a full-rigged frigate.


tough (adj.)

Old English toh strong and firm in texture, tenacious, sticky, from Proto-Germanic *tanhu-
(cognates: Middle Low German tege, Middle Dutch taey, Dutch taai, Old High German zach, German
z&auml;h), which Watkins suggests is from PIE *denk- to bite, from the notion of holding fast. See
rough for spelling change.    From c.1200 as strong, powerful; c.1300 as not tender or fragile;
early 14c. as difficult to chew, also hard to endure. Figurative sense of steadfast is mid-14c.;
that of hard to do, trying, laborious is from 1610s. Verb tough it endure the experience is first
recorded 1830, American English. Tough guy attested from 1901. Tough-minded first recorded 1907 in
William James. Tough luck first recorded 1912; tough shit, dismissive retort to a complaint, is from
1946.


register (n.1)

late 14c., from Old French registre (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin registrum, alteration of
Late Latin regesta list, matters recorded, noun use of Latin regesta, neuter plural of regestus,
past participle of regerere to record; retort, literally to carry back, bring back from re- back
(see re-) + gerere carry, bear (see gest).    Also borrowed in Dutch, German, Swedish, Danish. Some
senses influenced by association with Latin regere to rule. Meaning in printing, exact alignment of
presswork is from 1680s. Musical sense is from 1811, compass or range of a voice or instrument,
hence series of tones of the same quality (produced by a voice or instrument). Sense device by which
data is automatically recorded is 1830, from the verb; hence Cash register (1875).


fudge (v.)

put together clumsily or dishonestly, 1610s, perhaps an alteration of fadge make suit, fit (1570s),
of unknown origin. As an interjection meaning lies, nonsense from 1766; the noun meaning nonsense is
1791. It could be a natural extension from the verb. But Farmer suggests provincial French fuche,
feuche, an exclamation of contempt from Low German futsch = begone.  The traditional English story
traces fudge in this sense to a sailor's retort to anything considered lies or nonsense, from
Captain Fudge, who always brought home his owners a good cargo of lies [Isaac Disraeli, 1791, citing
a pamphlet from 1700]. It seems there really was a late 17c. Captain Fudge, called Lying Fudge, and
perhaps his name reinforced this form of fadge in the sense of contrive without the necessary
materials. The surname is from Fuche, a pet form of the masc. proper name Fulcher, from Germanic and
meaning literally people-army.


