revoke (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French revoquer (13c.), from Latin revocare rescind, call back, from re- back
(see re-) + vocare to call (see voice (n.)). Related: Revoked; revoking.


revocation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French revocacion or directly from Latin revocationem (nominative revocatio) a
calling back, recalling, noun of action from past participle stem of revocare (see revoke).


revocable (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French revocable or directly from Latin revocabilis that may be revoked, from
revocare (see revoke). Alternative revokable attested from 1580s.


irrevocable (adj.)

also irrevokable, late 14c., from Latin irrevocabilis that cannot be recalled, unalterable, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + revocabilis (see revoke). Related:
Irrevocably.


retract (v.)

early 15c., to draw (something) back, from Old French retracter (14c.) and directly from Latin
retractus, past participle of retrahere to draw back (see retraction). Sense of to revoke, recant,
take back is attested from 1540s, probably a back-formation from retraction. Related: Retracted;
retracting.


recall (v.)

1580s, to bring back by calling upon, from re- back, again + call (v.); in some cases a loan-
translation of Middle French rappeler (see repeal (v.)) or Latin revocare (see revoke). Sense of
bring back to memory is from 1610s. Related: Recalled; recalling.


retraction (n.)

late 14c., withdrawal of an opinion, from Latin retractionem (nominative retractio) a drawing back,
hesitation, refusal, noun of action from past participle stem of retractare revoke, cancel, from re-
back (see re-) + tractere draw violently, frequentative of trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)).
Originally the title of a book by St. Augustine correcting his former writings. Meaning recantation
of opinion with admission of error is from 1540s.


recant (v.)

1530s, from Latin recantare recall, revoke, from re- back (see re-) + cantare to chant (see chant
(v.)). A word from the Reformation. Loan-translation of Greek palinoidein recant, from palin back +
oeidein to sing. Related: Recanted; recanting.


repeal (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French repeler, Old French rapeler call back, call in, call after, revoke
(Modern French rappeler), from re- back (see re-) + apeler to call (see appeal (v.)). Related:
Repealed; repealing.


release (v.)

c.1300, to withdraw, revoke (a decree, etc.), cancel, lift; remit, from Old French relaissier,
relesser to relinquish, quit, let go, leave behind, abandon, acquit, variant of relacher release,
relax, from Latin relaxare loosen, stretch out (see relax), source also of Spanish relajar, Italian
relassare.    Meaning alleviate, ease is mid-14c., as is sense of free from (duty, etc.); exonerate.
From late 14c. as grant remission, forgive; set free from imprisonment, military service, etc. Also
give up, relinquish, surrender. In law, c.1400, to grant a release of property. Of press reports,
attested from 1904; of motion pictures, from 1912; of music recordings, from 1962. As a euphemism
for to dismiss, fire from a job it is attested in American English since 1904. Related: Released;
releasing.


reclaim (v.)

early 14c., call back a hawk to the glove, from Old French reclamer to call upon, invoke; claim;
seduce; to call back a hawk (12c.) and directly from Latin reclamare cry out against, contradict,
protest, appeal, from re- opposite, against (see re-) + clamare cry out (see claim (v.)).    Call
back a hawk, hence to make tame (mid-15c.), subdue, reduce to obedience, make amenable to control
(late 14c.). In many Middle English uses with no sense of return or reciprocation. Meaning revoke (a
grant, gift, etc.) is from late 15c. That of recall (someone) from an erring course to a proper
state is mid-15c. Sense of get back by effort might reflect influence of claim. Meaning bring waste
land into useful condition fit for cultivation first attested 1764, probably on notion of reduce to
obedience. Related: Reclaimed; reclaiming.


