rig (v.)

late 15c., originally nautical, to fit with sails, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare
Danish, Norwegian rigge to equip, Swedish rigga to rig, harness), though these may be from English;
perhaps ultimately from PIE *reig- to bind. Slang meaning to pre-arrange or tamper with results is
attested from 1938, perhaps a different word, from rig (n.) a trick, swindle, scheme (1775), earlier
sport, banter, ridicule (1725), of unknown origin. Also there is rig (v.) ransack from 1560s,
likewise of unknown origin. Related: Rigged; rigging.


rig (n.)

distinctive arrangement of sails, masts, etc. on a ship, 1822, from rig (v.). Extended to costume,
clothing outfit (1843); horse-drawn vehicle (1831), which led to sense of truck, bus, etc. (1851);
and apparatus for well-sinking (1875).


Rig veda

1776, from Sanskrit rigveda, from rg- praise, hymn, spoken stanza, literally brightness, from PIE
*erkw- to radiate, beam; praise + veda knowledge, from PIE *weid-o-, from root *weid- to know, see
(see vision (n.)). A thousand hymns, orally transmitted, probably dating from before 1000 B.C.E.
Related: Rig-vedic.


rigatoni (n.)

short, hollow, fluted tubes of pasta, 1930, from Italian rigatooni, plural of rigato, past
participle of rigare to draw a line, to make fluting, from riga line; something cut out, from a
Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *rigon- (see row (n.1)), from PIE *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(see riparian).


Rigel

bright star in Orion, 1590s, from Arabic Rijl Jauzah al Yusra the Left Leg of the Central One, from
rijl foot.


rigging (n.)

late 15c., action of fitting (a ship) with ropes, etc.; 1590s as ropes that work the sails of a
ship, verbal noun from rig (v.).


right (adj.1)

morally correct, Old English riht just, good, fair; proper, fitting; straight, not bent, direct,
erect, from Proto-Germanic *rekhtaz (cognates: Old Frisian riucht right, Old Saxon reht, Middle
Dutch and Dutch recht, Old High German reht, German recht, Old Norse rettr, Gothic raihts), from PIE
root *reg- move in a straight line, also to rule, to lead straight, to put right (see regal;
cognates: Greek orektos stretched out, upright; Latin rectus straight, right; Old Persian rasta-
straight, right, ar&#353;ta- rectitude; Old Irish recht law; Welsh rhaith, Breton reiz just,
righteous, wise).    Compare slang straight (adj.1) honest, morally upright, and Latin rectus right,
literally straight, Lithuanian teisus right, true, literally straight. Greek dikaios just (in the
moral and legal sense) is from dike custom. As an emphatic, meaning you are right, it is recorded
from 1580s; use as a question meaning am I not right? is from 1961. The sense in right whale is
justly entitled to the name. Right stuff best human ingredients is from 1848, popularized by Tom
Wolfe's 1979 book about the first astronauts. Right of way is attested from 1767. Right angle is
from late 14c.


right (adj.2)

opposite of left, early 12c., riht, from Old English riht, which did not have this sense but meant
good, proper, fitting, straight (see right (adj.1)). The notion is of the right hand as the correct
hand. The usual Old English word for this was swi&thorn;ra, literally stronger.  The history of
words for 'right' and 'left' shows that they were used primarily with reference to the hands [Buck].
Similar sense evolution in Dutch recht, German recht right (not left), from Old High German reht,
which meant only straight, just.    The usual PIE root (*dek-) is represented by Latin dexter (see
dexterity). Other derivations on a similar pattern to English right are French droit, from Latin
directus straight; Lithuanian labas, literally good; and Slavic words (Bohemian pravy, Polish prawy,
Russian pravyj) from Old Church Slavonic pravu, literally straight, from PIE *pro-, from root *per-
(1) forward, through (see per).    The political sense of conservative is first recorded 1794
(adj.), 1825 (n.), a translation of French Droit the Right, Conservative Party in the French
National Assembly (1789; see left (adj.)).


right (v.)

Old English rihtan to straighten, rule, set up, set right, amend; guide, govern; restore, replace,
from riht (adj.); see right (adj.1). Compare Old Norse retta to straighten, Old Saxon rihtian, Old
Frisian riuchta, German richten, Gothic garaihtjan. Related: Righted; righting.


right (n.)

Old English riht (West Saxon, Kentish), reht (Anglian), that which is morally right, duty,
obligation, also rule of conduct; law of a land; also what someone deserves; a just claim, what is
due; correctness, truth; a legal entitlement, a privilege, from the root of right (adj.1). Meaning
the right (as opposed to the left) is from mid-13c.; political use from 1825. From early 14c. as a
right action, a good deed. Meaning a blow with the right fist is from 1898. The phrase to rights at
once, straightway is 1660s, from sense in a proper manner (Middle English).


right (adv.)

Old English rehte, rihte in a straight or direct manner, from right (adj.1). Right on! as an
exclamation of approval first recorded 1925 in black slang, popularized mid-1960s by Black Panther
movement.


right hand (n.)

Old English rihthand; see right (adj.2) + hand (n.). Figurative for indispensable person, 1520s;
right-hand man first attested 1660s. Right-handed attested from late 14c.


right wing (n.)

1570s of armies; from 1882 in football; 1905 in the political sense (compare left wing). Right-
winger attested by 1919 in U.S. politics, 1895 in sports.


right-minded (adj.)

1580s, from right (adj.) + minded.


righteous (adj.)

early 16c. alteration of rightwise, from Old English rihtwis, from riht (see right) + wis wise, way,
manner (see wise (adj.)). Suffix altered by influence of courteous, etc. Meaning genuine, excellent
is 1942 in jazz slang. Related: Righteously.


righteousness (n.)

Old English rehtwisnisse; see righteous + -ness.


rightful (adj.)

Old English rihtful; see right (adj.1) + -ful. Related: Rightfully; rightfulness.


rightly (adv.)

Old English rihtlice justly, virtuously; properly, regularly, correctly; see right (adj.1) + -ly
(2).


righty (n.)

right-handed person, 1949, from right (adj.2) + -y (3).


rigid (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin rigidus hard, stiff, rough, severe, from rigere be stiff, from PIE *reig-
stretch (tight), bind tightly, make fast (cognates: Old Irish riag torture, Middle High German ric
band, string). Related: Rigidly.


rigidity (n.)

1620s, from Latin rigiditas stiffness, from rigidus (see rigid).


rigmarole (n.)

1736, a long, rambling discourse, apparently from an altered, Kentish colloquial survival of ragman
roll long list or catalogue (1520s), in Middle English a long roll of verses descriptive of personal
characters, used in a medieval game of chance called Rageman, perhaps from Anglo-French Ragemon le
bon Ragemon the good, which was the heading on one set of the verses, referring to a character by
that name. Sense transferred to foolish activity or commotion by 1939.


rigor (n.)

late 14c., from Old French rigor strength, hardness (13c., Modern French rigueur), from Latin
rigorem (nominative rigor) numbness, stiffness, hardness, firmness; roughness, rudeness, from rigere
be stiff (see rigid).


rigor mortis

stiffening of the body caused by contraction of muscles after death, 1837, from Latin rigor
stiffness (see rigor) + mortis, genitive of mors death (see mortal).


rigorous (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French rigorous (13c., Modern French rigoureux), from Medieval Latin rigorosus,
from Latin rigor (see rigor). Related: Rigorously.


rigour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of rigor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


aboriginal (adj.)

1660s, first, earliest, especially in reference to inhabitants of lands colonized by Europeans, from
aborigines (see aborigine) + -al (1); specific Australian sense is from 1820. The noun is attested
from 1767. Related: Aboriginally.


aborigine (n.)

1858, mistaken singular of aborigines (1540s; the correct singular is aboriginal), from Latin
Aborigines the first ancestors of the Romans; the first inhabitants (especially of Latium), possibly
a tribal name, or from ab origine, literally from the beginning. Extended 1789 to natives of other
countries which Europeans have colonized. Australian slang shortening Abo attested from 1922.


affright (v.)

1580s, a late construction from a- (1) + fright (v.), probably on model of earlier past participle
adjective affright struck with sudden fear (metathesized from Old English afyrht). Related:
Affrighted; affrighting.


allright

see alright.


alright

frequent spelling of all right, attested from 1893.There are no such forms as all-right, or
allright, or alright, though even the last, if seldom allowed by the compositors to appear in print,
is often seen ... in MS. [Fowler]


aright (adv.)

in a correct way, Old English ariht, from a- (1) of + right (adj.).


Auriga

northern constellation, from Latin auriga a charioteer, driver, from aureae bridle of a horse (from
os, genitive oris, mouth; see oral) + agere set in motion, drive, lead (see act (n.)).


birthright (n.)

also birth-right, 1530s, from birth (n.) + right (n.). Used as an adjective from 1650s, especially
by Quakers.


brig (n.)

1720, colloquial shortening of brigantine (q.v.). Apparently such vessels being used for prison
ships upon retirement from active duty led to extended meaning a jail, first recorded 1852.


brigade (n.)

subdivision of an army, 1630s, from French brigade body of soldiers (14c.), from Italian brigata
troop, crowd, gang, from brigare brawl, fight, from briga strife, quarrel, perhaps of Celtic
(compare Gaelic brigh, Welsh bri power) or Germanic origin.


brigadier (n.)

1670s, officer in command of a brigade, from French brigadier, from brigade (see brigade).


brigand (n.)

c.1400, lightly armed foot soldier, from Old French brigand (14c.), from Italian brigante trooper,
skirmisher, foot soldier, from brigare (see brigade). Sense of one who lives by pillaging is from
early 15c., reflecting the lack of distinction between professional mercenary armies and armed,
organized criminals.


brigantine (n.)

small two-masted ship, 1520s, from Middle French brigandin (15c.), from Italian brigantino, perhaps
skirmishing vessel, pirate ship, from brigante skirmisher, pirate, brigand from brigare fight (see
brigade).


bright (adj.)

Old English bryht, by metathesis from beorht bright; splendid; clear-sounding; beautiful; divine,
from Proto-Germanic *berhta- bright (cognates: Old Saxon berht, Old Norse bjartr, Old High German
beraht, Gothic bairhts bright), from PIE root *bhereg- to gleam, white (cognates: Sanskrit bhrajate
shines, glitters, Lithuanian breksta to dawn, Welsh berth bright, beautiful). Meaning quick-witted
is from 1741.


Bright&#039;s disease

chronic nephritis, 1831, so called for English physician Richard Bright (1789-1858), who in 1827
first described it.


brighten (v.)

Old English *beorhtnian to make bright (see bright (adj.) + -en (1)). Intransitive sense, to become
brighter, attested from c.1300. Figurative use from 1590s. Related: Brightened; brightening.


brightness (n.)

Old English beorhtnes brightness, clearness, splendor, beauty; see bright + -ness.


budgerigar (n.)

1847, from Native Australian, said to mean good cockatoo, from budgeri good + gar cockatoo.


Cantabrigian (adj.)

pertaining to Cambridge, 1540s, from Medieval Latin Cantabrigia (see Cambridge) + -an.


cartwright (n.)

carpenter who makes carts, early 15c. (late 13c. as a surname), from cart (n.) + wright (n.).


civil rights (n.)

1721, American English; specifically of black U.S. citizens from 1866.


copyright (n.)

the right to make or sell copies, 1735, from copy + right (n.). As a verb, from 1806 (implied in
past participle adjective copyrighted).


corrigendum (n.)

1850, from Latin corrigendum (plural corrigenda) that which is to be corrected, neuter gerundive of
corrigere to correct (see correct (v.)).


corrigible (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French corrigible, from Medieval Latin corrigibilis that which can be
corrected, from Latin corrigere (see correct). Related: Corrigibility.


