rip (v.)

tear apart, c.1400, probably of North Sea Germanic origin (compare Flemish rippen strip off roughly,
Frisian rippe to tear, rip) or else from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish reppa, Danish rippe
to tear, rip). In either case, from Proto-Germanic *rupjan-, from PIE root *reup-, *reub- to snatch.
Meaning to slash open is from 1570s. Related: Ripped; ripping.    In garments we rip along the line
at which they were sewed; we tear the texture of the cloth. ... Rend implies great force or
violence. [Century Dictionary]    Meaning to move with slashing force (1798) is the sense in let her
rip, American English colloquial phrase attested from 1853. The noun is attested from 1711. The
parachutist's rip cord (1911) originally was a device in ballooning to open a panel and release air.


rip (n.1)

rough water, 1775, perhaps a special use of rip (v.). Originally of seas; application to rivers is
from 1828.


rip (n.2)

thing of little value, 1815, earlier inferior or worn-out horse (1778), perhaps altered from slang
rep (1747) man of loose character; vicious, reckless and worthless person, which itself is perhaps
short for reprobate (n.).


Rip Van Winkle

person out of touch with current conditions, 1829, from name of character in Washington Irving's
Sketch Book (1819-20).


rip-off (n.)

an act of fraud, a swindle, 1969, from verbal phrase rip off to steal or rob (c.1967) in U.S. black
slang, from rip (v.) + off (adv.). Rip was prison slang for to steal since 1904, and was also used
in this sense in 12c. Meaning an exploitative imitation, a plagiarism is from 1971. Related: Ripped-
off.


rip-rap (n.)

also riprap, loose stone thrown down in water or soft ground as foundation, 1822, American English,
perhaps connected with earlier nautical word rip-rap meaning stretch of rippling water (often caused
by underwater elevations), 1660s, probably of imitative origin (compare riprap a sharp blow, 1570s).


rip-saw (n.)

a hand saw, the teeth of which have more rake and less set than a cross-cut saw, used for cutting
wood in the direction of the grain, 1846, from rip (n.) split timber (see rip (v.) + saw (n.1)).


rip-tide (n.)

also riptide, 1862, from rip (n.1) + tide (n.). It is a current not a tide, and the attempt to
correct it to rip current dates from 1936.


riparian (adj.)

of or pertaining to river banks, 1849, with -an + Latin riparius of a river bank, from riparia
shore, later used in reference to the stream flowing between the banks, from ripa (steep) bank of a
river, shore, probably literally break (and indicating the drop off from ground level to the stream
bed), or else that which is cut out by the river, from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(cognates: Greek ereipia ruins, eripne slope, precipice; Old Norse rifa break, to tear apart; Danish
rift breach, Middle High German rif riverbank, seashore; English riven, rift).


ripe (adj.)

Old English ripe ready for reaping, fit for eating, mature, from West Germanic *ripijaz (cognates:
Old Saxon ripi, Middle Dutch ripe, Dutch rijp, Old High German rifi, German reif); related to Old
English repan to reap (see reap). Meaning ready for some action or effect is from 1590s. Related:
Ripely; ripeness.


ripen (v.)

to grow ripe, 1560s, from ripe + -en (1). Related: Ripened; ripening. Earlier, the verb was simply
ripe, from late Old English ripian, from the adjective.


riposte (n.)

1707, a quick thrust after parrying a lunge, a fencing term, from French riposte, by dissimilation
from risposte (17c.), from Italian risposta a reply, noun use of fem. past participle of rispondere
to respond, from Latin respondere (see respond). Sense of sharp retort; quick, sharp reply, is first
attested 1865. As a verb, 1851.


ripper (n.)

1610s, agent noun from rip (v.). Meaning killer who mutilates his victims (1890) is from Jack the
Ripper, notorious London murderer, whose nickname contains a pun on ripper in sense of tool for
ripping old slates, etc. (1823) and the slang meaning excellent person or thing, a 'ripping' fellow
(1838), from ripping excellent, splendid.


ripping (adj.)

cutting, 1714, present participle adjective from rip (v.). Slange meaning Very fast, rapid os from
1826, hence further slang development excellent, splendid (1846.). Related: Rippingly.


ripple (v.)

early 15c., to crease; 1660s, to present a ruffled surface, of unknown origin, perhaps a
frequentative of rip (v.). Transitive sense cause to ripple is from 1786. Related: Rippled;
rippling.


ripple (n.)

very small wave, 1798, from earlier meaning stretch of shallow, rippling water (1755), from ripple
(v.). Meaning mark or movement suggestive of a ripple is from 1843. Meaning ice cream streaked with
colored syrup first attested 1939, so called from its appearance. As the name of a brand of
inexpensive wine sold by E&J; Gallo Winery, from 1960 to 1984. Ripple effect is from 1950.


riproaring (adj.)

1834, altered from riproarious (1821), from rip (v.) tear apart + uproarious; see uproar.


ripsnorter (n.)

something of exceptional strength, 1840, probably from rip (v.) + snort (v.).


ascription (n.)

1590s, action of adding in writing; c.1600, attribution of authorship or origin, from Latin
ascriptionem (nominative ascriptio) an addition in writing, noun of action from past participle stem
of ascribere (see ascribe).


candy-striper (n.)

young female volunteer nurse at a hospital, by 1962, so called from the pink-striped design of her
uniform, similar to patterns on peppermint candy.


cantrip (n.)

magical spell, 1719, a Scottish word of uncertain origin; despite much speculation it is unclear
even where the word is divided, whether the second element is rope (perhaps a reference to knotted
cords as magical devices) or trappa a step or some other thing.


centripetal (adj.)

1709, from Modern Latin, coined 1687 by Sir Isaac Newton (who wrote in Latin), from Latin centri-
alternative comb. form of centrum center (see center (n.)) + petere to make for, go to; seek, strive
after (see petition (n.)). Centripetal force is Newton's vim ... centripetam.


ceriph (n.)

lines at the top or bottom of a letter; see sans-serif.


circumscription (n.)

1530s, from Latin circumscriptionem (nominative circumscriptio) an encircling; fact of being held to
set limits, noun of action from past participle stem of circumscribere (see circumscribe).
Figurative sense of setting limits of meaning is earliest in English.


conscript (n.)

1800, perhaps a back-formation (influenced by French adjective conscrit) from conscription.


conscript (v.)

1813, American English, from conscript (n.). A word from the militia drafts in the War of 1812.
Popularized (or unpopularized) during U.S. Civil War, when both sides resorted to it in 1862.
Related: Conscripted; conscripting.


conscript (adj.)

1530s, from Latin conscriptus, past participle of conscribere to draw up, list, literally to write
together (see conscription).


conscription (n.)

late 14c., a putting in writing, from Middle French conscription, from Latin conscriptionem
(nominative conscriptio) a drawing up of a list, enrollment, a levying of soldiers, from conscribere
to enroll, from com- with (see com-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)).    Meaning enlistment of
soldiers is from 1520s; the sense compulsory enlistment for military service (1800) is traceable to
the French Republic act of Sept. 5, 1798. Technically, a conscription is the enrollment of a fixed
number by lot, with options of providing a substitute.


Crip (n.)

member of a major U.S. street gang, founded in South Central Los Angeles 1971, the name supposedly
originally was cribs, partly a reference to the youth of most of the original members, and when they
began carrying pimp canes it was altered to Crip, which has been attested in U.S. slang as a
shortening of cripple (n.) since 1918.


cripple (n.)

Old English crypel, related to cryppan to crook, bend, from Proto-Germanic *krupilaz (cognates: Old
Frisian kreppel, Middle Dutch cropel, German kr&uuml;ppel, Old Norse kryppill). Possibly also
related to Old English creopan to creep (creopere, literally creeper, was another Old English word
for crippled person).


cripple (v.)

mid-13c., to move slowly, from cripple (n.). Meaning make a cripple of, lame is from early 14c.
Related: Crippled; crippling.


description (n.)

late 14c., from Old French description (12c.) and directly from Latin descriptionem (nominative
descriptio) representation, description, copy, noun of action from past participle stem of
describere write down, transcribe, copy, sketch, from de- down (see de-) + scribere write (see
script (n.)).


descriptive (adj.)

1751, from Late Latin descriptivus, from descript-, past participle stem of describere (see
description). Related: Descriptively; descriptiveness.


drip (n.)

mid-15c., from drip (v.). The slang meaning stupid, feeble, or dull person is first recorded 1932,
perhaps from earlier American English slang sense nonsense (1919).


drip (v.)

c.1300, perhaps from Middle Danish drippe, from Proto-Germanic *drup- (cognates: Dutch druipen,
German triefen), from PIE root *dhreu-. Related to droop and drop. Old English had cognate drypan to
let drop, dropian fall in drops, and dreopan to drop. Related: Dripped; dripping.


drippy (adj.)

1817, from drip + -y (2). Meaning sloppily sentimental is 1944, from the slang sense.


filmstrip (n.)

1930, from film (n.) + strip (n.).


frippery (n.)

1560s, old clothes, cast-off garments, from Middle French friperie old clothes, an old clothes shop,
from Old French freperie, feuperie old rags, rubbish (13c.), from frepe, feupe fringe; rags, old
clothes, from Late Latin faluppa chip, splinter, straw, fiber. The notion is of things worn down,
clothes rubbed to rags. The ironic meaning finery (but with overtones of tawdriness) dates from
1630s.


grip (v.)

Old English grippan to grip, seize, obtain (class I strong verb; past tense grap, past participle
gripen), from West Germanic *gripjan (cognates: Old High German gripfen to rob, Old English gripan
to seize; see gripe). Related: Gripped; gripping. French gripper to seize, griffe claw are Germanic
loan-words.


grip (n.)

fusion of Old English gripe grasp, clutch and gripa handful, sheaf (see grip (v.)). Meaning stage
hand is from 1888, from their work shifting scenery.


gripe (v.)

Old English gripan grasp at, lay hold, attack, take, seek to get hold of, from Proto-Germanic
*gripan (cognates: Old Saxon gripan, Old Norse gripa, Dutch grijpen, Gothic greipan, Old High German
grifan, German greifen to seize), from PIE root *ghreib- to grip (cognates: Lithuanian griebiu to
seize). Figurative sense of complain, grouse is first attested 1932, probably from earlier meaning
gripping pain in the bowels (c.1600; compare bellyache). Related: Griped; griping.


gripe (n.)

late 14c., from gripe (v.). Figurative sense by 1934.


grippe (n.)

1776, probably from French grippe influenza, originally seizure, verbal noun from gripper to grasp,
hook, of Frankish origin, from Proto-Germanic *gripanan (see grip (v.), gripe). Supposedly in
reference to constriction of the throat felt by sufferers; the word spread through European
languages after the influenza epidemic during the Russian occupation of Prussia in the Seven Years'
War (c.1760), and Russian chirpu, said to be imitative of the sound of the cough, is sometimes said
to be the origin or inspiration for the word.


gripping (adj.)

grasping the emotions, 1896, figurative use of present participle adjective from grip (v.).


handgrip (n.)

Old English handgripe; see hand (n.) + grip (n.).


horripilation (n.)

from Late Latin horripilationem (nominative horripilatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of horripilare, from stem of horrere to bristle (see horror) + pilus hair (see pile (n.3)).


imperscriptable (adj.)

unrecorded, without written authority, 1832, used only with right. From assimilated form of Latin
in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + perscribere to write down.


imprescriptible (adj.)

inalienable, not subject to prescription, 1560s, French imprescriptible (16c.) or a native formation
from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + Latin praescriptus, past participle of
praescribere to write beforehand (see prescribe). Usually with right. Alternative imprescribable is
attested from 1887.


indescript (adj.)

undescribed, 1854, from in- (1) not, opposite of + Latin descriptus, past participle of describere
(see describe).


inscription (n.)

late 14c., from Latin inscriptionem (nominative inscriptio) a writing upon, inscription, noun of
action from past participle stem of inscribere inscribe, to write on or in anything, from in- in
(see in- (2)) + scribere to write (see script (n.)).


