rococo (adj.)

1836, old-fashioned, from French rococo (19c.), apparently a humorous alteration of rocaille
shellwork, pebble-work from Middle French roche rock, from Vulgar Latin *rocca stone. Specifically
of furniture or architecture of the time of Louis Quatorze and Louis Quinze, from 1841. If this is
correct, the reference is to the excessive use of shell designs in this lavish style. For
differentiation, see baroque. The general sense of tastelessly florid or ornate is from 1844.
Much of the painting, engraving, porcelain-work, etc., of the time has ... a real decorative charm,
though not of a very high order in art. Hence rococo is used attributively in contempt to note
anything feebly pretentious and tasteless in art or literature. [Century Dictionary, 1902]


baroque (adj.)

1765, from French baroque (15c.) irregular, from Portuguese barroco imperfect pearl, of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to Spanish berruca a wart.This style in decorations got the epithet of
Barroque taste, derived from a word signifying pearls and teeth of unequal size. [Fuseli's
translation of Winkelmann, 1765]Klein suggests the name may be from Italian painter Federigo Barocci
(1528-1612), a founder of the style. How to tell baroque from rococo, according to Fowler: The
characteristics of baroque are grandeur, pomposity, and weight; those of rococo are inconsequence,
grace, and lightness. But the two terms often used without distinction for styles featuring odd and
excessive ornamentation.


polka (n.)

1844, from French polka, German Polka, probably from Czech polka, the dance, literally Polish woman
(Polish Polka), fem. of Polak a Pole. The word might also be an alteration of Czech pulka half, for
the half-steps of Bohemian peasant dances. Or it could be a merger of the two. The dance was in
vogue first in Prague, 1835; it reached London by the spring of 1842.   Vous n'en &#234;tes encore
qu'au galop, vieil arri&#233;r&#233;, et nous en sommes &#224; la polka! Oui, c'est la polka que
nous avons dans&#233;e &#224; ce fameux bal Valenlino. Vous demandez ce que c'est que la polka,
homme de l ann&#233;e derni&#232;re! La contredanse a v&#233;cu; le galop, rococo; la valse &#224;
deux temps, dans le troisi&#232;me dessous; il n'y a plus que la polka, la sublime, l'enivrante
polka, dont les salons raffolent, que les femmes de la haute, les banqui&#233;res les plus cossues
et les comtesses les plus choenosophoses &#233;tudient jour et nuit. [La France Dramatique, Paris,
1841]    As a verb by 1846 (polk also was tried).


