rue (v.)

feel regret, Old English hreowan make sorry, distress, grieve (class II strong verb; past tense
hreaw, past participle hrowen), from Proto-Germanic *khrewan (cognates: Old Frisian riowa, Middle
Dutch rouwen, Old Dutch hrewan, German reuen to sadden, cause repentance); in part, blended with Old
English weak verb hreowian feel pain or sorrow, and perhaps influenced by Old Norse hryggja make
sad, both from Proto-Germanic *khruwjan, all from PIE root *kreue- (2) to push, strike (see
anacrusis). Related: Rued; ruing.


rue (n.1)

perennial evergreen shrub, late 14c., from Old French rue (13c.), earlier rude, from Latin ruta rue,
probably from Greek rhyte, of uncertain etymology, originally a Peloponnesian word. The bitter taste
of its leaves led to many punning allusions to rue (n.2.).


rue (n.2)

sorrow, repentance, Old English hreow grief, repentance, sorrow, regret, penitence, common Germanic
(Frisian rou, Middle Dutch rou, Dutch rouw, Old High German (h)riuwa, German reue), related to the
root of rue (v.).


rue (n.3)

French for street, from Vulgar Latin *ruga (source also of Old Italian ruga), properly a furrow,
then in Medieval Latin a path, street (see rough (adj.)).


rueful (adj.)

early 13c., rewfulle, reowfule, from rue (n.2) + -ful. Related: Ruefulness.


ruefully (adv.)

early 13c., reufulike; see rueful + -ly (2).


accrue (v.)

mid-15c., from Old French acreue growth, increase, what has grown, fem. of acreu, past participle of
acreistre (Modern French accro&icirc;tre) to increase, from Latin accrescere (see accretion).
Related: Accrued; accruing. Apparently a verb from a French noun because there is no English verb to
go with it until much later, unless the record is defective.


congruence (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin congruentia agreement, harmony, congruity, from congruentem (nominative
congruens), present participle of congruere to come together (see congruent). Related: Congruency.


congruent (adj.)

early 15c., suitable, proper, from Latin congruentem (nominative congruens) agreeing, fit, suitable,
present participle of congruere, literally to come together, agree, correspond with, from com- with
(see com-) + a lost verb *gruere, *ruere fall, rush, perhaps from PIE *ghrei- to rub, grind (see
chrism). Geometry sense attested by 1706.


construe (v.)

late 14c., from Late Latin construere to relate grammatically, in classical Latin to build up, pile
together (see construction); also see construct (v.), which is a later acquisition of the same word.
Related: Construed; construing; construal.


cruel (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French cruel (12c.), earlier crudel, from Latin crudelis rude, unfeeling;
cruel, hard-hearted, related to crudus rough, raw, bloody (see crude). Related: Cruelly.


cruelty (n.)

early 13c., from Old French crualt&eacute; (12c., Modern French cruaut&eacute;), from Latin
crudelitatem (nominative crudelitas) cruelty, from crudelis (see cruel).


cruet (n.)

small glass bottle for vinegar, oil, etc., c.1300, Anglo-French diminutive of Old French crue an
earthen pot, from Frankish *kruka or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German kruog);
related to crock.


gruel (n.)

late 12c., meal or flour made of beans, lentils, etc., from Old French gruel fine meal, from
Frankish *grut (cognate with Middle Dutch grute coarse meal, malt; Middle High German gruz grain),
from PIE *ghreu- to rub, grind (see grit). Meaning thin porridge or soup is late 14c.


gruelling (adj.)

also grueling, exhausting, punishing, 1891, from late 18c. slang get one's gruel receive one's
punishment, from gruel.


gruesome (adj.)

1560s, with -some (1) + Middle English gruen feel horror, shudder (c.1300); not recorded in Old
English or Norse, possibly from Middle Dutch gruwen or Middle Low German gruwen shudder with fear
(compare German grausam cruel), or from a Scandinavian source (such as Danish grusom cruel, grue to
dread, though others hold that these are Low German loan-words). One of the many Scottish words
popularized in England by Scott's novels.


imbrue (v.)

early 15c., to soak, steep; mid-15c., to stain, soil, from Old French embreuvere to moisten, a
metathesis of embeuvrer, from em- (see im-) + -bevrer, ultimately from Latin bibere to drink (see
imbibe). Or perhaps from Old French embroue soiled, ultimately from boue mud, dirt.


incongruence (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin incongruentia incongruity, from incongruentem (nominative incongruens)
incongruous, inconsistent, from in- not (see in- (1)) + congruens (see congruent).


incongruency (n.)

c.1600, from incongruent + -cy.


incongruent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin incongruentem (nominative incongruens), from in- not (see in- (1)) + congruens
(see congruent). Related: Incongruently.


misconstrue (v.)

late 14c., to put a wrong construction on (words or deeds), from mis- (1) + construe. Related:
Misconstrued; misconstruing.


sprue (n.)

piece of metal (later plastic) attached to a cast object, 1875, earlier (1849) channel through which
metal is poured into a mold; of unknown origin.


true (adj.)

Old English triewe (West Saxon), treowe (Mercian) faithful, trustworthy, honest, steady in adhering
to promises, friends, etc., from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- having or characterized by good faith
(cognates: Old Frisian triuwi, Dutch getrouw, Old High German gatriuwu, German treu, Old Norse
tryggr, Danish tryg, Gothic triggws faithful, trusty), from PIE *drew-o-, a suffixed form of the
root *deru-/*dreu- be firm, solid, steadfast (cognates: Lithuanian drutas firm, Welsh drud, Old
Irish dron strong, Welsh derw true, Old Irish derb sure), with specialized sense wood, tree and
derivatives referring to objects made of wood (see tree (n.)).    Sense of consistent with fact
first recorded c.1200; that of real, genuine, not counterfeit is from late 14c.; that of conformable
to a certain standard (as true north) is from c.1550. Of artifacts, accurately fitted or shaped it
is recorded from late 15c. True-love (n.) is Old English treowlufu. True-born (adj.) first attested
1590s. True-false (adj.) as a type of test question is recorded from 1923. To come true (of dreams,
etc.) is from 1819.


true (v.)

make true in position, form, or adjustment, 1841, from true (adj.) in the sense agreeing with a
certain standard. Related: Trued; truing.


untrue (adj.)

Old English untreowe unfaithful (of persons), from un- (1) not + true (adj.). Similar formation in
Middle Dutch ongetrouwe, Middle Low German ungetruwe, Old High German ungitriuwi, Old Norse utryggr.
Meaning contrary to facts is attested from c.1300.


