sap (n.1)

liquid in a plant, Old English s&aelig;pm from Proto-Germanic *sapam (cognates: Middle Low German,
Middle Dutch, Dutch sap, Old High German saf, German Saft juice), from PIE root *sab- juice, fluid
(cognates: Sanskrit sabar- sap, milk, nectar, Latin sapere to taste, Irish sug, Russian soku sap,
Lithuanian sakas tree-gum). As a verb meaning To drain the sap from, 1725.


sap (n.2)

simpleton, 1815, originally especially in Scottish and English schoolboy slang, probably from
earlier sapskull (1735), saphead (1798), from sap as a shortened form of sapwood soft wood between
the inner bark and the heartwood (late 14c.), from sap (n.1) + wood (n.); so called because it
conducts the sap; compare sappy.


sap (v.1)

dig a trench toward the enemy's position, 1590s, from Middle French saper, from sappe spade, from
Late Latin sappa spade (source also of Italian zappa, Spanish zapa spade). Extended sense weaken or
destroy insidiously is from 1755, probably influenced by the verb form of sap (n.1), on the notion
of draining the vital sap from. Related: Sapped; sapping.


sap (v.2)

hit with a sap, 1926, from sap (n.3). Related: Sapped; sapping.


sap (n.3)

club, stick for hitting, 1899, from shortening of sapwood (see sap (n.2)) or sapling.


sapid (adj.)

1630s, from Latin sapidus savory, having a taste, from sapere (see sapient). Its opposite is
insipid.


sapience (n.)

late 14c., wisdom, understanding, from Old French sapience, from Latin sapientia good taste, good
sense, discernment; intelligence, wisdom, from sapiens (see sapient).


sapient (adj.)

wise, late 15c. (early 15c. as a surname), from Old French sapient, from Latin sapientem (nominative
sapiens), present participle of sapere to taste, have taste, be wise, from PIE root *sep- (1) to
taste, perceive (cognates: Old Saxon an-sebban to perceive, remark, Old High German antseffen, Old
English sefa mind, understanding, insight).


sapling (n.)

early 14c., from sap (n.1) + diminutive suffix -ling. This probably is the source of American
English slang sap (n.3) club, short staff (1899) and the verb sap (v.2) to hit (someone) with a sap
(1926).


saponification (n.)

1801, from French saponification, from saponifier, from Modern Latin saponificare, from sapon- soap
(see soap (n.)) + -ficare, from Latin facere to make, do (see factitious).


saponify (v.)

1821, from French saponifier (see saponification). Related: Saponified; saponifying.


sapper (n.)

1620s, in a military context, soldier employed in building fortifications, agent noun from sap
(v.1).


Sapphic (adj.)

c.1500, of or pertaining to Sappho, from French saphique, from Latin Sapphicus, from Greek Sapphikos
of Sappho, in reference to Sappho, poetess of the isle of Lesbos c.600 B.C.E. Especially in
reference to her characteristic meter; sense of pertaining to sexual relations between women is from
1890s (compare lesbian).


sapphire (n.)

precious stone next in hardness to a diamond, mid-13c., from Old French saphir (12c.) and directly
from Latin sapphirus (source also of Spanish zafir, Italian zaffiro), from Greek sappheiros blue
stone (the gem meant apparently was not the one that now has the name, but perhaps rather lapis
lazuli, the modern sapphire being perhaps signified by Greek hyakinthos), from a Semitic source
(compare Hebrew sappir sapphire), but probably not ultimately from Semitic. Some linguists propose
an origin in Sanskrit sanipriya, a dark precious stone (perhaps sapphire or emerald), literally
sacred to Saturn, from Sani Saturn + priyah precious. In Renaissance lapidaries, it was said to cure
anger and stupidity. As an adjective from early 15c. Related: Sapphiric; sapphirine.


Sapphism (n.)

homosexual relations between women, 1890; see Sapphic + -ism.


sappy (adj.)

full of sap, Late Old English s&aelig;pig, from s&aelig;p (see sap (n.1)). Figurative sense of
foolishly sentimental (1660s) may have developed from an intermediate sense of wet, sodden (late
15c.). Earlier, now obsolete, figurative senses were full of vitality (1550s) and immature (1620s).


saprophyte (n.)

bacteria or fungus that grows on decaying organic matter, 1867, from French, from Greek sapros
putrid + phyton plant (see phyto-). Related: Saprophytism.


saprophytic (adj.)

1872; see saprophyte + -ic.


asap

see a.s.a.p.


Chesapeake

from an Algonquian language, perhaps literally great shellfish bay. Early spellings include
Chesepiooc and Chesupioc.


disappear (v.)

early 15c., disaperen, from dis- do the opposite of + appear. Earlier was disparish (early 15c.),
from French disparaiss-, stem of dispara&icirc;tre. Related: Disappeared; disappearing; disappears.
Slang disappearing act is originally of magic shows; in figurative sense of getting away first
attested 1913.


disappearance (n.)

1712; see disappear + -ance.


disappoint (v.)

early 15c., dispossess of appointed office, from Middle French desappointer (14c.) undo the
appointment, remove from office, from des- (see dis-) + appointer appoint (see appoint).    Modern
sense of to frustrate expectations (late 15c.) is from secondary meaning of fail to keep an
appointment. Related: Disappointed; disappointing.


disappointed (adj.)

1550s, past participle adjective from disappoint. Related: Disappointedly.


disappointment (n.)

1610s, fact of disappointing; see disappoint + -ment. Meaning state or feeling of being disappointed
is from 1756. Meaning a thing that disappoints is from 1756.


disapprobation (n.)

1640s; see dis- + approbation.


disapproval (n.)

1660s; see disapprove + -al (2).


disapprove (v.)

late 15c., disprove; as the reverse of approve it is first attested 1640s. See dis- + approve.
Related: Disapproved; disapproving.


Homo sapiens (n.)

1802, in William Turton's translation of Linn&aelig;us, coined in Modern Latin from Latin homo man
(technically male human, but in logical and scholastic writing human being; see homunculus) +
sapiens, present participle of sapere be wise (see sapient). Used since in various Latin or pseudo-
Latin combinations intended to emphasize some aspect of humanity, as in Henri Bergson's Homo faber
man the tool-maker, in L'Evolution Cr&eacute;atrice (1907). Homo as a genus of the order Primates is
first recorded 1797.


Jehosaphat

biblical name (II Sam. viii:16), used as a mild expletive in American English from 1857.


misapplication (n.)

c.1600, from mis- (1) + application.


misapprehend (v.)

1640s, from mis- (1) + apprehend. Related: Misapprehended; misapprehending.


misapprehension (n.)

1620s; from mis- (1) + apprehension. Related: Misapprehensive.


misappropriate (v.)

1803, from mis- (1) + appropriate (v.). Related: Misappropriated; misappropriating.


misappropriation (n.)

1746; from mis- (1) + appropriation.


sarsaparilla (n.)

tropical American plant, 1570s, from Spanish zarzaparrilla, from zarza bramble (from Arabic sharas
thorny plant or Basque sartzia bramble) + parrilla, diminutive of parra vine, which is of unknown
origin. Hence, also, a medicinal preparation of sarsaparilla (1570s). In 16c.-17c. the dried roots
were held to be efficient in treatment of syphilis.


sousaphone (n.)

1903, named for U.S. bandleader and composer John Philip Sousa (1854-1932).  The first sousaphone
was made by C.G. Conn in 1899 expressly for Sousa's band and its bell opened directly upward. The
present bell-front type was first made in 1908. [International Cyclopedia of Music, 1939]


