sarcasm (n.)

1570s, sarcasmus, from Late Latin sarcasmus, from late Greek sarkasmos a sneer, jest, taunt,
mockery, from sarkazein to speak bitterly, sneer, literally to strip off the flesh, from sarx
(genitive sarkos) flesh, properly piece of meat, from PIE root *twerk- to cut (cognates: Avestan
thwares to cut). Current form of the English word is from 1610s. For nuances of usage, see humor.


cut (n.)

1520s, gash, incision, from cut (v.); meaning piece cut off is from 1590s; sense of a wounding
sarcasm is from 1560s.


solon (n.)

legislator, 1620s, from Greek Solon, name of early lawgiver of Athens, one of the seven sages.
Often, especially in U.S., applied (with perhaps a whiff of sarcasm) by journalists to Congressmen,
township supervisors, etc. It also is a useful short headline word.


Momus (n.)

humorously disagreeable person, 1560s, from Latin, from Greek Momos, nme of the god of ridicule and
sarcasm (Greek momos, literally blame, ridicule, disgrace, of unknown origin); also used in English
as personification of fault-finding and captious criticism.


mockery (n.)

early 15c., from Old French moquerie sneering, mockery, sarcasm (13c.), from moquer (see mock (v.)).


sarcastic (adj.)

1690s, from sarcasm, perhaps on the model of enthusiastic. Related: Sarcastical (1640s);
sarcastically.


sarco-

before vowels sarc-, word-forming element meaning flesh, fleshy, of the flesh, from Latinized form
of Greek sark-, comb. form of sarx flesh (see sarcasm).


sarcoma (n.)

1650s, fleshy excrescence, Medical Latin, from Greek sarkoma fleshy substance (Galen), from sarkoun
to produce flesh, grow fleshy, from sarx (genitive sarkos) flesh (see sarcasm) + -oma. Meaning
harmful tumor of the connective tissue first recorded 1804.


anasarca (n.)

subcutaneous dropsy, late 14c., medical Latin, from Greek ana up, throughout (see ana-) + sarx
(genitive sarkos) flesh (see sarcasm). Abbreviation of Greek phrase hydrops ana sarka dropsy
throughout the flesh.


not

negative particle, mid-13c., unstressed variant of noht, naht in no way (see naught). As an
interjection to negate what was said before or reveal it as sarcasm, it is first attested 1900;
popularized 1989 by Wayne's World sketches on Saturday Night Live TV show. To not know X from Y
(one's ass from one's elbow, shit from Shinola, etc.) was a construction first attested c.1930.
Double negative construction not un- was derided by Orwell, but is persistent and ancient in
English, popular with Milton and the Anglo-Saxon poets.


retort (v.)

1550s, make return in kind (especially of an injury), from Old French retort and directly from Latin
retortus, past participle of retorquere turn back, twist back, throw back, from re- back (see re-) +
torquere to twist (see torque (n.)). Applied to exchanges of jest or sarcasm by c.1600, hence say or
utter sharply and aggressively in reply (1620s). Related: Retorted; retorting.


cynic (n.)

mid-16c., in reference to the ancient philosophy, from Greek kynikos a follower of Antisthenes,
literally dog-like, from kyon (genitive kynos) dog (see canine). Supposedly from the sneering
sarcasm of the philosophers, but more likely from Kynosarge Gray Dog, name of the gymnasium outside
ancient Athens (for the use of those who were not pure Athenians) where the founder, Antisthenes (a
pupil of Socrates), taught. Diogenes was the most famous. Popular association even in ancient times
was dog-like (Lucian has kyniskos a little cynic, literally puppy). Meaning sneering sarcastic
person is from 1590s.


sarcophagus (n.)

c.1600, type of stone used for coffins, from Latin sarcophagus, from Greek sarkophagos limestone
used for coffins, literally flesh-eating, in reference to the supposed action of this type of
limestone (quarried near Assos in Troas, hence the Latin lapis Assius) in quickly decomposing the
body, from sarx (genitive sarkos) flesh (see sarcasm) + phagein to eat (see -phagous). Related:
Sarcophagal.    The stone sense was the earliest in English; meaning stone coffin, often with
inscriptions or decorative carvings is recorded from 1705. The Latin word, shortened in Vulgar Latin
to *sarcus, is the source of French cercueil, German Sarg coffin, Dutch zerk tombstone.


choke (v.)

c.1300, transitive, to strangle; late 14c., to make to suffocate, of persons as well as swallowed
objects, a shortening of acheken (c.1200), from Old English aceocian to choke, suffocate (with
intensive a-), probably from root of ceoke jaw, cheek (see cheek (n.)).    Intransitive sense from
c.1400. Meaning gasp for breath is from early 15c. Figurative use from c.1400, in early use often
with reference to weeds stifling the growth of useful plants (a Biblical image). Meaning to fail in
the clutch is attested by 1976, American English. Related: Choked; choking. Choke-cherry (1785)
supposedly so called for its astringent qualities. Johnson also has choke-pear Any aspersion or
sarcasm, by which another person is put to silence. Choked up overcome with emotion and unable to
speak is attested by 1896. The baseball batting sense is by 1907.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


