satire (v.)

1905, from satire (n.). Related: Satired; satiring.


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


satirical (adj.)

1520s, from Late Latin satiricus, from Latin satira satire, poetic medley (see satire (n.)) + -al
(1). Related: Satirically.


Rabelaisian (adj.)

1817, from French author Fran&ccedil;ois Rabelais (c.1490-1553), whose writings are distinguished by
exuberance of imagination and language combined with extravagance and coarseness of humor and
satire. [OED]


John Bull

Englishman who exemplifies the national character, 1772, from name of a character representing the
English nation in Arbuthnot's satire History of John Bull (1712).


Biedermeier

1854, from German, from Gottlieb Biedermeier, name of a fictitious writer of stodgy poems (invented
by Ludwig Eichrodt as a satire on bourgeois taste); the name generally applied to styles prevalent
in Germany 1815-48; also conventional, bourgeois.


skit (n.)

piece of light satire or caricature, 1820, from earlier sense a satirical remark or reflection
(1727), originally (1570s) a vain, frivolous, or wanton girl (originally Scottish, now archaic),
related to verb meaning to shy or be skittish, caper, frolic (1610s), perhaps from Old Norse skjuta
to shoot, move quickly (see skittish).


satiric (adj.)

c.1500, from French satirique, from Late Latin satiricus, from satira (see satire (n.)). Earlier
(late 14c.) as a noun meaning a writer of satires.


satirist (n.)

1580s; see satire (n.) + -ist.


satirize (v.)

c.1600, from French satiriser (see satire (n.)). Related: Satirized; satirizing.


tweedledum (n.)

paired with tweedledee to signify two things or persons nearly alike, differing in name, 1725,
coined by English poet John Byrom (1692-1767) in his satire On the Feud Between Handel and
Bononcini, a couple of competing musicians, from tweedle to sing, to whistle (1680s), of imitative
origin. The -dum and -dee perhaps suggest low and high sounds respectively.


lampoon (n.)

A personal satire; abuse; censure written not to reform but to vex [Johnson], 1640s, from French
lampon (17c.), of unknown origin, said by French etymologists to be from lampons let us drink,
popular refrain for scurrilous 17c. songs, from lamper to drink, guzzle, a nasalized form of laper
to lap, from a Germanic source akin to lap (v.). Also see -oon.


Fescennine (adj.)

vulgar, obscene, scurrilous, from Latin Fescenninus (versus), a rude form of dramatic or satiric
verse, from Fescennia, city in Etruria, noted for such productions.    The Fescennine Songs were the
origin of the Satire, the only important species of literature not derived from the Greeks, and
altogether peculiar to Italy. These Fescennine Songs were rude dialogues, in which the country
people assailed and ridiculed one another in extempore verses, and which were introduced as an
amusement in various festivals. [William Smith, A Smaller History of Rome, London, 1870]


scathe (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse ska&eth;a to hurt, harm, damage, injure, from Proto-Germanic *skath-
(cognates: Old English scea&thorn;ian to hurt, injure, Old Saxon skathon, Old Frisian skethia,
Middle Dutch scaden, Dutch schaden, Old High German scadon, German schaden, Gothic sca&thorn;jan to
injure, damage), from PIE root *sket- to injure. Only cognate outside Germanic seems to be in Greek
a-skethes unharmed, unscathed.    It survives mostly in its negative form, unscathed, and in
figurative meaning sear with invective or satire (1852, usually as scathing) which developed from
the sense of scar, scorch used by Milton in Paradise Lost i.613 (1667).


optimism (n.)

1759 (in translations of Voltaire), from French optimisme (1737), from Modern Latin optimum, used by
Gottfried Leibniz (in Th&eacute;odic&eacute;e, 1710) to mean the greatest good, from Latin optimus
the best (see optimum). The doctrine holds that the actual world is the best of all possible worlds,
in which the creator accomplishes the most good at the cost of the least evil.En termes de l'art, il
l'appelle la raison du meilleur ou plus savamment encore, et Theologiquement autant que
G&eacute;om&eacute;triquement, le syst&ecirc;me de l'Optimum, ou l'Optimisme. [M&eacute;moires de
Tr&eacute;voux, Feb. 1737]Launched out of philosophical jargon and into currency by Voltaire's
satire on it in Candide. General sense of belief that good ultimately will prevail in the world
first attested 1841 in Emerson; meaning tendency to take a hopeful view of things first recorded
1819 in Shelley.


knothead (n.)

stupid person, by 1899, American English, from knot (n.) + head (n.). Joe Knothead is the name of a
character in an 1857 blackface satire publication. And a local history from Massachusetts published
in 1879 describes an old-time character known as knot-head because [d]uring the hottest days of
summer ... he worked bare-headed in the sun ....   Knothead also was used as a term in cattle and
sheep raising, defined in 1922 as a type of poorly bred, stunted northern cattle, about the size of
yearlings, but with heavy horns indicating that they are older. It turns up, however, in an 1849
petition to the Ohio Legislature, recommending a certain person for a court position, in part
because he is a knot-head, which the report of the petition notes is a term of praise for a judge
because they are asked to untangle knotty legal questions, but which phrase, it adds, is believed
not to be in use among gentlemen in the north part of the State. [Appendix to the Journal of the
Ohio House of Representatives, Session of 1848-9]


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


