satisfied (adj.)

1816, gratified, past participle adjective from satisfy.


content (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French contenter, from content (adj.) satisfied, from Latin contentus
contained, satisfied, past participle of continere (see contain). Sense evolved through contained,
restrained, to satisfied, as the contented person's desires are bound by what he or she already has.
Related: Contented; contentedly.


content (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French content, satisfied, from Latin contentus contained, satisfied, past
participle of continere (see contain). Related:  Contently (largely superseded by contentedly).


pleased (adj.)

satisfied, contented, late 14c., past participle adjective from please (v.).


gruntle (v.)

1938, in gruntled pleased, satisfied, a back-formation from disgruntled. The original verb (early
15c.) meant to utter a little or low grunt.


galumph (v.)

to prance about in a self-satisfied manner, 1872, coined by Lewis Carroll in Jabberwocky, apparently
by blending gallop and triumph. Related: Galumphing.


perfectionist (n.)

1650s, from perfection + -ist. Originally theological, one who believes moral perfection may be
attained in earthly existence; sense of one satisfied only with the highest standards is from 1934.
Related: Perfectionism.


unsatisfied (adj.)

early 15c., from un- (1) not + satisfied (adj.).


self-satisfaction (n.)

1739, from self- + satisfaction. Related: Self-satisfied (1734).


escrow (n.)

1590s, from Anglo-French escrowe, from Old French escroue scrap, roll of parchment, from a Germanic
source akin to Old High German scrot a scrap, shred, a piece cut off (see shred (n.)). Originally a
deed delivered to a third person until a future condition is satisfied; sense of deposit held in
trust or security is from 1888.


satiate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin satiatus, past participle of satiare fill full, satisfy, from satis enough,
from PIE root *sa- to satisfy (cognates: Gothic sa&thorn;s satiated, Old English s&aelig;d
satisfied; see sad). Related: Satiated; satiating.


thankful (adj.)

Old English &thorn;ancful satisfied, grateful, also thoughtful, ingenious, clever; see thank + -ful.
Related: Thankfully; thankfulness. Thankfully in the sense thankful to say is attested by 1966, but
deplored by purists (compare hopefully).


insatiable (adj.)

early 15c., insaciable, from Old French insaciable (13c.), or directly from Late Latin insatiabilis
not to be satisfied, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + satiabilis, from satiare (see
satiate). Related: Insatiably.


smug (adj.)

1550s, trim, neat, spruce, smart, possibly an alteration of Low German smuk trim, neat, from Middle
Low German sm&uuml;cken to adorn (originally to dress, secondary sense of words meaning to creep or
slip into), from the same source as smock. The meaning having a self-satisfied air is from 1701, an
extension of the sense of smooth, sleek (1580s), which was commonly used of attractive women and
girls. Related: Smugly; smugness.


acquiesce (v.)

1610s, from Middle French acquiescer (16c.), from Latin acquiescere to become quiet, remain at rest,
thus be satisfied with, from ad- to (see ad-) + quiescere to become quiet, from quies (genitive
quietis) rest, quiet (see quiet (n.)). Related: Acquiesced; acquiescing.


satisfy (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French satisfier, from Old French satisfaire pay, repay, make reparation
(14c., Modern French satisfaire), from Latin satisfacere discharge fully, comply with, make amends,
literally do enough, from satis enough (from PIE root *sa- to satisfy; see sad) + facere perform
(see factitious). Related: Satisfied; satisfying.


wish (v.)

Old English wyscan to wish, cherish a desire, from Proto-Germanic *wunsk- (cognates: Old Norse
&#339;skja, Danish &oslash;nske, Swedish &ouml;nska, Middle Dutch wonscen, Dutch wensen, Old High
German wunsken, German wunschen to wish), from PIE *wen- (1) to strive after, wish, desire, be
satisfied (cognates: Sanskrit vanati he desires, loves, wins, Latin venus love, sexual desire,
loveliness, venerari to worship; see Venus). Related: Wished; wishing. Wishing well as an enchanted
water hole attested by 1819.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


