scale (v.3)

weigh in scales, 1690s, from scale (n.2). Earlier to compare, estimate (c.1600). Meaning measure or
regulate by a scale is from 1798, from scale (n.3); that of weigh out in proper quantities is from
1841. Scale down reduce proportionately is attested from 1887. Scale factor is from 1948. Related:
Scaled; scaling.


scale (n.3)

series of registering marks to measure by; marks laid down to determine distance along a line, late
14c., from Latin scala ladder, staircase (see scale (v.1)). Meaning succession or series of steps is
from c.1600; that of standard for estimation (large scale, small scale, etc.) is from 1620s. Musical
sense (1590s), and the meaning proportion of a representation to the actual object (1660s) are via
Italian scala, from Latin scala.


scale (n.2)

weighing instrument, early 15c.; earlier pan of a balance (late 14c.); earlier still drinking cup
(c.1200), from Old Norse skal bowl, drinking cup, in plural, weighing scale from a noun derivative
of Proto-Germanic *sk&aelig;la split, divide (cognates: Old Norse skel shell, Old English scealu,
Old Saxon skala a bowl (to drink from), Old High German scala, German Schale a bowl, dish, cup,
Middle Dutch scale, Dutch schaal drinking cup, bowl, shell, scale of a balance), from PIE root
*skel- (1) to cut (see scale (n.1)).    The connecting sense seems to be of half of a bivalve
(split) shell used as a drinking cup or a pan for weighing. But according to Paulus Diaconus the
drinking cup sense originated from a supposed custom of making goblets from skulls (see skull).
Related: Scales. This, as a name for the zodiac constellation Libra, is attested in English from
1630s.


scale (n.1)

skin plates on fish or snakes, c.1300, from Old French escale cup, scale, shell pod, husk (12c.,
Modern French &eacute;cale) scale, husk, from Frankish *skala or some other Germanic source, from
Proto-Germanic *sk&aelig;lo split, divide (cognates: Dutch schaal a scale, husk, Old High German
scala shell, Gothic skalja tile, Old English scealu shell, husk), from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut,
cleave, split (cognates: Latin culter knife, scalpere to cut, scrape; Old Church Slavonic skolika
mussel, shell, Russian skala rind, bark, Lithuanian skelti split, Old English scell shell, scalu
drinking cup, bowl, scale of a balance).    In reference to humans, as a condition of certain skin
diseases, it is attested from c.1400. As what falls from one's eye when blindness ends (usually
figurative), it echoes Acts ix:18 (Latin tanquam squam&aelig;, Greek hosei lepides).


scale (v.2)

remove the scales of (a fish, etc.), c.1400, from scale (n.1). Intransitive sense to come off in
scales is from 1520s. Related: Scaled; scaling.


scale (v.1)

to climb by or as by a ladder, late 14c., from scale (n.) a ladder, from Latin scala ladder, flight
of stairs, from *scansla, from stem of scandere to climb (see scan (v.)). Related: Scaled; scaling.


scale-pan (n.)

1830, from scale (n.2) + pan (n.).


scalene (adj.)

having unequal sides, 1680s, from Late Latin scalenus, from Greek skalenos uneven, unequal, odd
(numbered), as a noun, triangle with unequal sides, from skallein chop, hoe, from PIE *(s)kel- (1)
to cut (see scale (n.1)).


gamut (n.)

1520s, originally, lowest note in the medieval musical scale, in the system of notation devised by
Guido d'Arezzo, contraction of Medieval Latin gamma ut, from gamma, the Greek letter, indicating a
note below A, + ut, the low note on the six-note musical scale that took names from corresponding
syllables in a Latin hymn for St. John the Baptist's Day:<b>Ut</b> queant laxis <b>re</b>sonare
fibris  <b>Mi</b>ra gestorum <b>fa</b>muli tuorum  <b>Sol</b>ve polluti <b>la</b>bii reatum,etc.
Gamut came to be used for the whole musical scale; the figurative sense of entire scale or range of
anything is first recorded 1620s. When the modern octave scale was set early 16c., si was added,
changed to ti in Britain and U.S. to keep the syllables as different from each other as possible. Ut
later was replaced by more sonorous do (n.). See also solmisation.


Fahrenheit

temperature scale, 1753, named for Gabriel Daniel Fahrenheit (1686-1736), Prussian physicist who
proposed the scale in 1714. The zero in it is arbitrary, based on the lowest temperature observed by
him in the winter of 1709. An abstract surname meaning literally experience.


keynote (n.)

also key-note, lowest note of a musical scale, basis of a scale, 1776, from key (n.1) in sense of
musical scale + note (n.). Figurative sense of leading idea is from 1783; keynote address is 1905,
American English.


upscale (adj.)

1966, at the higher end of a scale, superior, a commercial word, from up (adv.) + scale (v.3).


Mercalli

in reference to Mercalli scale, 1900, named for Italian geologist Giuseppe Mercalli (1850-1914), who
invented it (I Terremoti della Liguria e del Piemonte, Naples, 1897). It was a modification of the
Rossi-Forel scale (1883).


scalable (adj.)

1570s, able to be climbed; see scale (v.1) + -able. From 1936 as able to be graded by scale.
Related: Scalably; scalability.


squamous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin squamosus covered with scales, scaly, from squama scale, perhaps related to
squalus foul, filthy (see squalid). Middle English had squame a scale (late 14c.), from Old French
esquame, from Latin squama. Alternative form squamose attested from 1660s.


leper (n.)

one afflicted with leprosy, late 14c., from Late Latin lepra, from Greek lepra leprosy, from fem. of
lepros (adj.) scaly, from leops a scale, related to lepein to peel, from lopos a peel, from PIE root
*lep- to peel, scale (see leaf (n.)). Originally the word for the disease itself (mid-13c.); because
of the -er ending it came to mean person with leprosy, so leprosy was coined 16c. from adjective
leprous.


fa

fourth note in Guidonian scale; see gamut.


balance (n.)

early 13c., apparatus for weighing, from Old French balance (12c.) balance, scales for weighing,
also in the figurative sense; from Medieval Latin bilancia, from Late Latin bilanx, from Latin
(libra) bilanx (scale) having two pans, possibly from Latin bis twice + lanx dish, plate, scale of a
balance. The accounting sense is from 1580s; the meaning general harmony between parts is from 1732;
sense of physical equipoise is from 1660s. Balance of power in the geopolitical sense is from 1701.
Many figurative uses (such as hang in the balance, late 14c.), are from Middle English image of the
scales in the hands of personified Justice, Fortune, Fate, etc.


Brobdingnag

(not *brobdignag), 1727, Swift's name in Gulliver's Travels for imaginary country where everything
was on a gigantic scale.


Richter scale

1938, devised by U.S. seismologist Charles Francis Richter (1900-1985).


one-horse (adj.)

small-scale, petty 1853, American English, colloquial, in reference to towns so small they only had
one horse.


Celsius

1850, for Swedish astronomer Anders Celsius (1701-1744) inventor of the centigrade scale in 1742.


Beaufort scale

to measure wind velocity, developed 1806 by Francis Beaufort (1774-1857), surveyor and hydrologist.


Kelvin

unit of absolute temperature scale, 1911, in honor of British physicist Sir William Thompson, Lord
Kelvin (1824-1907).


shell (n.)

Old English sciell, scill, Anglian scell seashell, eggshell, related to Old English scealu shell,
husk, from Proto-Germanic *skaljo piece cut off; shell; scale (cognates: West Frisian skyl peel,
rind, Middle Low German schelle pod, rind, egg shell, Gothic skalja tile), with the shared notion of
covering that splits off, from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut, cleave (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
skolika shell, Russian skala bark, rind; see scale (n.1)). Italian scaglia chip is from Germanic.
Sense of mere exterior is from 1650s; that of hollow framework is from 1791. Meaning structure for a
band or orchestra is attested from 1938. Military use (1640s) was first of hand grenades, in
reference to the metal case in which the gunpowder and shot were mixed; the notion is of a hollow
object filled with explosives. Hence shell shock, first recorded 1915. Shell game a swindle is from
1890, from a version of three-card monte played with a pea and walnut shells.


la

musical note (sixth note of the diatonic scale), early 14c., see gamut. It represents the initial
syllable of Latin labii of the lips.


stanine (n.)

nine-point scale for test scores, introduced by the U.S. Air Force in 1942, from sta(ndard) + nine.


downscale (v.)

1945, American English, from down (adv.) + scale (v.). From 1966 as an adjective.


Libra (n.)

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin libra, literally pound, balance, from
Mediterranean base *lithra- a scale. Nativized in Old Norse as skala-merki.


ramp (n.1)

1778, slope, from French rampe, back-formation from Old French verb ramper to climb, scale, mount;
see ramp (v.). Meaning road on or off a major highway is from 1952, American English.


scalar (adj.)

resembling a ladder, 1650s, from Latin scalaris of or pertaining to a ladder, from scalae (plural)
ladder, steps, flight of steps (see scale (n.2)). Mathematical sense first recorded 1846.


ti

seventh note of the musical scale, 1842, earlier te (1839), replacing si to avoid confusion with so,
sol (see gamut).


sol-fa (n.)

syllables used in solmization taken collectively, 1540s, from Italian, from Medieval Latin sol and
fa, two notes of the musical scale (see gamut). As a verb from 1560s; compare solfeggio use the sol-
fa system (1774), from Italian solfeggiare.


mediant (n.)

third note of the diatonic scale, 1753, from Italian mediante, from Late Latin mediantem (nominative
medians) dividing in the middle, present participle of mediare to be in the middle (see medial
(adj.)). So called from being midway between the tonic and the dominant.


diorama (n.)

1823 as a type of picture-viewing device, from French diorama (1822), from Greek di- through (see
dia-) + orama that which is seen, a sight (see panorama). Meaning small-scale replica of a scene,
etc. is from 1902.


do (n.)

first (and last) note of the diatonic scale, by 1754, from do, used as a substitution for ut (see
gamut) for sonority's sake, first in Italy and Germany. U.S. slang do-re-mi money is from 1920s,
probably a pun on dough in its slang sense of cash.


projection (n.)

late 15c., in alchemy, transmutation by casting a powder on molten metal; 1550s in the
cartographical sense drawing of a map or chart according to scale, from Middle French projection,
from Latin proiectionem (nominative proiectio), from past participle stem of proicere (see project
(n.)). From 1590s as action of projecting.


shuffleboard (n.)

1530s, shovillaborde shovel board, an unexplained alteration of shove-board (1520s), from shove (v.)
+ board (n.1). Originally a tabletop game (c.1600), the large-scale version (1877) was invented for
play on ocean liners.


scaly (adj.)

also scaley, late 14c., from scale (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Scaliness.


solmization (n.)

act of using certain syllables to name tones of a music scale, 1730, from French solmisation, from
solmiser, from sol + mi, two of the syllables so used (see gamut).


scalpel (n.)

1742, from Latin scalpellum a surgical knife, diminutive of scalprum knife, chisel, tool for
scraping or cutting, from scalpere to carve, cut, related to sculpere to carve, from PIE root
*(s)kel- to cut, cleave (see scale (n.1)).


sculpture (n.)

late 14c., from Latin sculptura sculpture, from past participle stem of sculpere to carve, engrave,
back-formation from compounds such as exculpere, from scalpere to carve, cut, from PIE root *(s)kel-
(1) to cut, cleave (see scale (n.1)).


mode (n.1)

manner, late 14c., kind of musical scale, from Latin modus measure, extent, quantity; proper
measure, rhythm, song; a way, manner, fashion, style (in Late Latin also mood in grammar and logic),
from PIE root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take appropriate measures (see medical).
Meaning manner in which a thing is done first recorded 1660s.


coulter (n.)

Old English culter, from Latin culter a knife, iron blade in a plowshare, from PIE root *(s)kel- to
cut (see scale (n.1)). As a surname (13c.), probably from Coulter in Lancashire.


bass (adj.)

late 14c., of things, low, not high, from Late Latin bassus short, low (see base (adj.)). Meaning
low in social scale or rank is recorded from late 14c. Of voices and music notes, from mid-15c.
(technically, ranging from the E flat below the bass stave to the F above it), infuenced by Italian
basso. Meaning lowest part of a harmonized musical composition is from mid-15c. Meaning bass-viol is
from 1702; that of double-bass is from 1927.


basin (n.)

large shallow vessel or dish, c.1200, from Old French bacin (11c., Modern French bassin), from
Vulgar Latin *baccinum, from *bacca water vessel, perhaps originally Gaulish. Meaning large-scale
artificial water-holding landscape feature is from 1712. Geological sense of tract of country
drained by one river or draining into one sea is from 1830.


scalp (n.)

mid-14c., top of the head (including hair), presumably from a Scandinavian source (though exact
cognates are wanting) related to Old Norse skalli a bald head, skalpr sheath, scabbard,from the
source of scale (n.1). French scalpe, German, Danish, Swedish skalp are from English. Meaning head
skin and hair as proof of death or a victory trophy is from c.1600.


rampant (adj.)

late 14c., standing on the hind legs (as a heraldic lion often does), thus, also, fierce, ravenous
(late 14c.), from Old French rampant, present participle of ramper to climb, scale, mount (see
rampage (v.)). Sense of growing without check (in running rampant), first recorded 1610s, probably
is via the notion of fierce disposition or else preserves the older French sense.


cutlass (n.)

1590s, from Middle French coutelas (16c.), probably from Italian coltellaccio large knife (with
augmentative suffix -accio), from coltello knife, from Latin cultellus small knife, diminutive of
culter knife, plowshare, from PIE *kel-tro-, from root *(s)kel- to cut (see scale (n.1)).


diatonic (adj.)

c.1600, from French diatonique, from Latin diatonicus, from Greek diatonikos, from diatonos
extending; pertaining to the diatonic scale, from dia- (see dia-) + teinein to stretch (see tenet).


