scanty (adj.)

1650s, meager, barely sufficient for use; 1701, too small, limited in scope, from scant + -y (2).
Related: Scantiness (1560s). Scanties (n.) underwear (especially for women) attested from 1928.


exiguous (adj.)

scanty, 1650s, from Latin exiguus small, petty, paltry, scanty in measure or number, from exigere
(see exact (v.)).


care (n.)

Old English caru, cearu sorrow, anxiety, grief, also burdens of mind; serious mental attention, from
Proto-Germanic *karo (cognates: Old Saxon kara sorrow; Old High German chara wail, lament; Gothic
kara sorrow, trouble, care; German Karfreitag Good Friday), from PIE root *gar- cry out, call,
scream (cognates: Irish gairm shout, cry, call; see garrulous).    Different sense evolution in
related Dutch karig scanty, frugal, German karg stingy, scanty. The sense development in English is
from cry to lamentation to grief. Meaning charge, oversight, protection is attested c.1400, the
sense in care of in addressing. To take care of take in hand, do is from 1580s.


oligo-

before vowels olig-, word-forming element meaning few, the few, from comb. form of Greek oligos few,
scanty, small, little, in plural, the few; of uncertain origin.


skimpy (adj.)

1842, from skimp (adj.) scanty (1775), which perhaps ultimately is from an early 18c. alteration of
scrimp or a variant of scamp (v.). Related: Skimpiness.


scantily (adv.)

1774; see scanty + -ly (2).


steno-

before vowels sten-, word-forming element meaning narrow, from comb. form of Greek stenos narrow,
strait, as a noun straits of the sea, narrow strip of land, also metaphorically, close, confined;
scanty, petty, from PIE *sten- narrow.


modicum (n.)

small quantity or portion, late 15c., Scottish, from Latin modicum a little, noun use of neuter of
modicus moderate, having a proper measure; ordinary, scanty, small, few, from modus measure, manner
(see mode (n.1)).


manometer (n.)

1730, from French manom&egrave;tre (1706), said to have been coined by French mathematician Pierre
Varignon (1654-1722) from Greek manos thin, rare; loose in texture, porous; scanty, few (see mono-)
+ -m&egrave;tre (see -meter). Related: Manometric.


pittance (n.)

c.1200, pious donation to a religious house or order to provide extra food; the extra food provided,
also a small portion, scanty rations, from Old French pitance pity, mercy, compassion; refreshment,
nourishment; portion of food allowed a monk or poor person by a pious bequest, apparently literally
pity, from piti&eacute; (see pity). Meaning small amount, portion first recorded 1560s.


scarce (adj.)

c.1300, restricted in quantity, from Old North French scars scanty, scarce (Old French eschars,
Modern French &#233;chars) from Vulgar Latin *scarsus, from *escarpsus, from *excarpere pluck out,
from classical Latin excerpere pluck out (see excerpt). As an adverb early 14c. from the adjective.
Phrase to make oneself scarce go away first attested 1771, noted as a current cant phrase. Related:
Scarcely.


poor (adj.)

c.1200, lacking money or resources, destitute; needy, indigent; small, scanty, from Old French povre
poor, wretched, dispossessed; inadequate; weak, thin (Modern French pauvre), from Latin pauper poor,
not wealthy, from pre-Latin *pau-paros producing little; getting little, a compound from the roots
of paucus little (see paucity) and parare to produce, bring forth (see pare).    Replaced Old
English earm. Figuratively from early 14c. Meaning of inferior quality is from c.1300. Of inhabited
places from c.1300; of soil, etc., from late 14c. The poor boy sandwich, made of simple but filling
ingredients, was invented and named in New Orleans in 1921. To poor mouth deny one's advantages is
from 1965 (to make a poor mouth whine is Scottish dialect from 1822). Slang poor man's ________ the
cheaper alternative to _______, is from 1854.


thin (adj.)

Old English &thorn;ynne narrow, lean, scanty, not dense; fluid, tenuous; weak, poor, from Proto-
Germanic *thunni thin (cognates: West Frisian ten, Middle Low German dunne, Middle Dutch dunne,
Dutch dun, Old High German dunni, German d&uuml;nn, Old Norse &thorn;unnr, Swedish tunn, Danish
tynd), from PIE *tnu- stretched, stretched out (hence thin), from root *ten- to stretch (cognates:
Latin tenuis thin, slender; see tenet).    These our actors ... were all Spirits, and Are melted
into Ayre, into thin Ayre. [Shakespeare, The Tempest, IV.i.150, 1610]    Loose or sparse, hence
easily seen through, with figurative extensions. Related: Thinly; thinness. Thin-skinned is attested
from 1590s; the figurative sense of touchy is from 1670s.


bikini (n.)

low-waisted two-piece women's bathing suit, 1948, from French coinage, 1947, named for U.S. A-bomb
test of June 1946 on Bikini, Marshall Islands atoll, locally Pikinni and said to derive from pik
surface and ni coconut, but this is uncertain. Various explanations for the swimsuit name have been
suggested, none convincingly, the best being an analogy of the explosive force of the bomb and the
impact of the bathing suit style on men's libidos (compare c.1900 British slang assassin an
ornamental bow worn on the female breast, so called because it was very killing).Bikini, ce mot
cinglant comme l'explosion m&ecirc;me ... correspondant au niveau du v&ecirc;tement de plage
&agrave; on an&eacute;antissement de la surface v&ecirc;tue; &agrave; une minimisation extr&ecirc;me
de la pudeur. [Le Monde, 1947]  As a style of scanty briefs, from 1960. Variant trikini (1967), with
separate bra cups held on by Velcro, falsely presumes a compound in bi-.


