1530, goat sent into the wilderness on the Day of Atonement, symbolic bearer of the sins of the
people, coined by Tyndale from <a href=/index.php?term=scape&amp;allowed_in_frame=0
class=crossreference>scape</a> (n.) + <a href=/index.php?term=goat&amp;allowed_in_frame=0
class=crossreference>goat</a> to translate Latin caper emissarius, itself a translation in Vulgate
of Hebrew 'azazel (Lev. xvi:8,10,26), which was read as 'ez ozel goat that departs, but which others
hold to be the proper name of a devil or demon in Jewish mythology (sometimes identified with
Canaanite deity Aziz).  <br /><br />  Jerome's reading also was followed by Martin Luther (der
ledige Bock), Symmachus (tragos aperkhomenos), and others (compare French bouc &eacute;missaire),
but the question of who, or what (or even where) is meant by 'azazel is a vexed one. The Revised
Version (1884) simply restores Azazel. But the old translation has its modern defenders:
<blockquote> Azazel is an active participle or participial noun, derived ultimately from azal
(connected with the Arabic word azala, and meaning removed), but immediately from the reduplicate
form of that verb, azazal. The reduplication of the consonants of the root in Hebrew and Arabic
gives the force of repetition, so that while azal means removed, azalzal means removed by a
repetition of acts. Azalzel or azazel, therefore, means one who removes by a series of acts. ... The
interpretation is founded on sound etymological grounds, it suits the context wherever the word
occurs, it is consistent with the remaining ceremonial of the Day of Atonement, and it accords with
the otherwise known religious beliefs and symbolical practices of the Israelites. [Rev. F. Meyrick,
Leviticus, London, 1882]  </blockquote>  Meaning one who is blamed or punished for the mistakes or
sins of others first recorded 1824; the verb is attested from 1943. Related: Scapegoated;
scapegoating.   For the formation, compare <a href=/index.php?term=scapegrace&amp;allowed_in_frame=0
class=crossreference>scapegrace</a>, also scape-gallows one who deserves hanging.

