scrap (v.1)

to make into scrap, 1883 (of old locomotives), from scrap (n.1). Related: Scrapped; scrapping.


scrap (n.2)

fight, 1846, possibly a variant of scrape (n.1) on the notion of an abrasive encounter. Weekley and
OED suggest obsolete colloquial scrap scheme, villainy, vile intention (1670s).


scrap (v.2)

to fight, brawl, box, 1867, colloquial, from scrap (n.2). Related: Scrapped; scrapping.


scrap (n.1)

small piece, late 14c., from Old Norse skrap scraps, trifles, from skrapa to scrape, scratch, cut
(see scrape (v.)). Meaning remains of metal produced after rolling or casting is from 1790. Scrap
iron first recorded 1794.


scrappy (adj.)

consisting of scraps, 1837, from scrap (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning inclined to fight (1895) is from
scrap (v.2). Related: Scrappily; scrappiness.


scrapyard (n.)

also scrap-yard, 1875, from scrap (n.1) + yard (n.1).


scrapbook (n.)

also scrap-book, 1821, from scrap (n.1) + book (n.). As a verb, by 1879. Related: Scrapbooked;
scrapbooking.


scrap-heap (n.)

1803, from scrap (n.1) + heap (n.).


scrapper (n.)

pugilist, 1874, agent noun from scrap (v.2). Later used generally of anyone or anything that tends
to put up a fight.


scrapple (n.)

scraps of pork and cornmeal seasoned, boiled, and pressed into large cakes, 1850, probably a
diminutive form of scrap (n.1). Noted especially, and perhaps originally, as a regional favorite
dish in and around Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.


escrow (n.)

1590s, from Anglo-French escrowe, from Old French escroue scrap, roll of parchment, from a Germanic
source akin to Old High German scrot a scrap, shred, a piece cut off (see shred (n.)). Originally a
deed delivered to a third person until a future condition is satisfied; sense of deposit held in
trust or security is from 1888.


mitrailleuse (n.)

kind of machine gun, from French mitrailleuse (19c.), from Old French mitaille (14c.) small coins,
hence old iron, scrap iron, then grapeshot; originally a diminutive of mite a small coin (see mite
(n.2)). For sense development it should be borne in mind that orig. guns used to be loaded with
scrap iron [Klein].


scroll (n.)

c.1400, roll of parchment or paper, altered (by association with rolle roll) from scrowe (c.1200),
from Anglo-French escrowe, Old French escroe scrap, roll of parchment, from Frankish *skroda shred
or a similar Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *skrauth- (cognates: Old English screada piece cut
off, cutting, scrap; see shred (n.)). As an ornament on furniture or in architecture, from 1610s.


shred (n.)

Old English screade piece cut off, cutting, scrap, from Proto-Germanic *skrauth- (cognates: Old
Frisian skred a cutting, clipping, Middle Dutch schroode shred, Middle Low German schrot piece cut
off, Old High German scrot, scrap, shred, a cutting, piece cut off, German Schrot log, block, small
shot, Old Norse skrydda shriveled skin), from PIE *skreu- to cut; cutting tool, extension of root
*(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).


blotter (n.)

1590s, thing for drying wet spots, agent noun from blot (v.). Meaning bad writer is from c.1600.
Sense of day book is from 1670s, and the word was applied early 19c. to rough drafts, scrap books,
notebooks, and draft account books. Hence the police jargon sense arrest record sheet, recorded from
1887.


chiffonier (n.)

piece of furniture with drawers for women's needlework, cloth, etc., 1806, from French chiffonnier,
a transferred use, literally rag gatherer, from chiffon, diminutive of chiffe rag, piece of cloth,
scrap, flimsy stuff (see chiffon).


riffraff (n.)

also riff-raff, late 15c., from earlier rif and raf one and all, everybody, every scrap, also
sweepings, refuse (mid-14c.), from Old French rif et raf, from rifler to spoil, strip (see rifle
(v.)). Second element from raffler carry off, related to rafle plundering, or from raffer to snatch,
to sweep together (see raffle (n.)).


junk (v.)

1803, to cut off in lumps, from junk (n.1). The meaning to throw away as trash, to scrap is from
1908. Related: Junked; junking.    New settlers (who should always be here as early in the spring as
possible) begin to cut down the wood where they intend to erect their first house. As the trees are
cut the branches are to be lopped off, and the trunks cut into lengths of 12 or 14 feet. This
operation they call junking them; if they are not junked before fire is applied, they are much worse
to junk afterwards. [letter dated Charlotte Town, Nov. 29, 1820, in A Series of Letters Descriptive
of Prince Edward Island, 1822]


lacerate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin laceratus, past participle of lacerare tear to pieces, mangle, figuratively,
to slander, censure, abuse, from lacer torn, mangled, from PIE root *lek- to rend, tear (cognates:
Greek lakis tatter, rag, lakizein to tear to pieces; Russian lochma rag, tatter, scrap; Albanian
l'akur naked). Related: Lacerated; lacerating.


retail (n.)

early 15c., sale of commodities in small quantities or parcels or at second hand (opposed to
wholesale), from Old French retail piece cut off, shred, scrap, paring (Modern French retaille),
from retaillier (see retail (v.)). The notion of the English word is a selling by the piece. This
sense is not in French, however, and comes perhaps from cognate Italian ritaglio, which does have
that sense. As an adjective, of or pertaining to sale at retail, c.1600.


lean (adj.)

thin, spare, with little flesh or fat, c.1200, from Old English hl&aelig;ne lean, thin, possibly
from hl&aelig;nan cause to lean or bend, from Proto-Germanic *khlainijan, which would connect it to
Old English hleonian (see lean (v.)). But perhaps rather, according to OED, from a PIE *qloinio-
(with cognates in Lithuanian klynas scrap, fragment, Lettish kleins feeble). Extended and figurative
senses from early 14c. The noun meaning lean animals or persons is from c.1200, from the adjective.


rag (n.)

scrap of cloth, early 14c., probably from Old Norse r&#246;gg shaggy tuft, earlier raggw-, or
possibly from Old Danish rag (see rug), or a back-formation from ragged, It also may represent an
unrecorded Old English cognate of Old Norse r&#246;gg. In any case, from Proto-Germanic *rawwa-,
from PIE root *reue- (2) to smash, knock down, tear up, uproot (see rough (adj.)).    As an
insulting term for newspaper, magazine it dates from 1734; slang for tampon, sanitary napkin is
attested from 1930s (on the rag menstruating is from 1948). Rags personal clothing is from 1855
(singular), American English. Rags-to-riches rise from poverty to wealth is attested by 1896. Rag-
picker is from 1860; rag-shop from 1829.


