seasoned (adj.)

mid-15c., flavored, spiced, past participle adjective from season (v.). Meaning fit for use is from
1540s; that of acclimatized, accustomed is from 1640s.


scrapple (n.)

scraps of pork and cornmeal seasoned, boiled, and pressed into large cakes, 1850, probably a
diminutive form of scrap (n.1). Noted especially, and perhaps originally, as a regional favorite
dish in and around Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.


stuffing (n.)

1520s, material used for filling a cushion; 1530s, seasoned mixture used to stuff fowls before
cooking, verbal noun from stuff (v.) in the sense fill the inside of a bird before cooking (late
14c.).


pepperoni (n.)

beef and pork sausage seasoned with pepper, 1919, American English, from Italian peperone chilli,
from pepe (see pepper (n.)).


warhorse (n.)

also war-horse, 1650s, powerful horse ridden into war, from war (n.) + horse (n.). Figurative sense
of seasoned veteran of anything is attested from 1837. In reference to women perceived as tough, by
1921.


sausage (n.)

mid-15c., sawsyge, from Old North French saussiche (Modern French saucisse), from Vulgar Latin
*salsica sausage, from salsicus seasoned with salt, from Latin salsus salted (see sauce).


ragout (n.)

highly seasoned meat and vegetable stew, 1650s, from French rago&#251;t (mid-17c.), from Middle
French rago&#251;ter awaken the appetite, from Old French re- back (see re-) + &agrave; to +
go&#251;t taste, from Latin gustum (nominative gustus); see gusto.


gravy (n.)

late 14c. (early 14c. in Anglo-French), from Old French gran&eacute; (with -n- misread for -u- --
the character used for -v- in medial positions in words in medieval manuscripts) sauce, stew,
probably originally properly grained, seasoned, from Latin granum grain, seed (see corn (n.1)). See
discussion in OED. Meaning money easily acquired first attested 1910; gravy train (1927) was
originally railroad slang for a short haul that paid well.


salmagundi (n.)

1670s, from French salmigondis (16c.), originally seasoned salt meats (compare French salmis salted
meats), from Middle French salmigondin (16c.), of uncertain origin; Watkins derives it from Latin
sal salt + condire to season, flavor. Probably related to or influenced by Old French salemine
hodgepodge of meats or fish cooked in wine, which was borrowed in Middle English as salomene (early
14c.). Figurative sense of mixture of various ingredients is from 1761; it was the title of
Washington Irving's satirical publication (1807-08). In dialect, salmon-gundy, solomon-gundy..


salad (n.)

late 14c., from Old French salade (14c.), from Vulgar Latin *salata, literally salted, short for
herba salata salted vegetables (vegetables seasoned with brine, a popular Roman dish), from fem.
past participle of *salare to salt, from Latin sal (genitive salis) salt (see salt (n.)).    Dutch
salade, German Salat, Swedish salat, Russian salat are from Romanic languages. Salad days time of
youthful inexperience (perhaps on notion of green) is first recorded 1606 in Shakespeare and
probably owes its survival, if not its existence, to him. Salad bar first attested 1940, American
English.


