secular (adj.)

c.1300, living in the world, not belonging to a religious order, also belonging to the state, from
Old French seculer (Modern French s&#233;culier), from Late Latin saecularis worldly, secular,
pertaining to a generation or age, from Latin saecularis of an age, occurring once in an age, from
saeculum age, span of time, generation.    According to Watkins, this is probably from PIE *sai-
tlo-, with instrumental element *-tlo- + *sai- to bind, tie (see sinew), extended metaphorically to
successive human generations as links in the chain of life. Another theory connects it with words
for seed, from PIE root *se- to sow (see sow (v.), and compare Gothic mana-se&thorn;s mankind,
world, literally seed of men).    Used in ecclesiastical writing like Greek aion of this world (see
cosmos). It is source of French si&egrave;cle. Ancient Roman ludi saeculares was a three-day, day-
and-night celebration coming once in an age (120 years). In English, in reference to humanism and
the exclusion of belief in God from matters of ethics and morality, from 1850s.


secularization (n.)

1706, conversion to secular purposes, in reference to Church property; see secularize + -ation.
General use by 1863.


secularism (n.)

doctrine that morality should be based on the well-being of man in the present life, without regard
to religious belief or a hereafter, 1846, from secular + -ism.


secularize (v.)

1610s, of property, offices, etc., from secular + -ize. From 1711 as to become worldly; from 1846 of
education, social institutions, etc. Related: Secularized; secularizing.


dark ages

1739, any benighted time in history, period of ignorance; specific focus on the centuries from the
fall of Rome to the revival of secular literature is from 1830s.


B.C.E.

initialism (acronym) for Before Common Era or Before Christian Era, 1881; see C.E. A secular
alternative to B.C.


folky (adj.)

characteristic of the common people, 1914, from folk + -y (2). Old English had folcisc popular,
secular, common.


dharma (n.)

1796, in secular sense, caste custom, right behavior; in Buddhism and Hinduism, moral law, from
Sanskrit, law, right, justice, related to dharayati holds, and cognate with Latin firmus, all from
PIE root *dher- (2) to hold firmly, support (see firm (adj.)).


terran (adj.)

of or pertaining to the planet Earth, 1881, in science fiction writing, from Latin terra (see
terrain). Also used as a noun meaning inhabitant of the Earth (1953). An earlier form, terrene was
used in Middle English in sense of belonging to this world, earthly, secular, temporal (c.1300),
later, of the Earth as a planet (1630s).


patronage (n.)

late 14c., right of presenting a qualified person to a church benefice, from Old French patronage
(14c.) from patron (see patron). Secular sense of action of giving influential support is from
1550s. General sense of power to give jobs or favors is from 1769; meaning regular business of
customers is 1804.


summoner (n.)

petty officer who cites persons to appear in court, secular or ecclesiastical, early 14c. (mid-13c.
as a surname), from Anglo-French sumenour, Old French somoneor, from Medieval Latin summonitorem,
from past participle stem of summonere (see summon). Contracted form sumner is from mid-14c.


activity (n.)

c.1400, active or secular life, from Old French activit&eacute;, from Medieval Latin activitatem
(nominative activitas), a word in Scholastic philosophy, from Latin activus (see active). Meaning
state of being active, briskness, liveliness recorded from 1520s; that of capacity for acting on
matter is from 1540s.


consistory (n.)

c.1300, secular tribunal, from Old North French consistorie (Old French consistoire, 12c.) and
directly from Late Latin consistorium waiting room, meeting place of the imperial council, from
Latin consistere (see consist). Meaning Church council is from early 14c.


lay (adj.)

uneducated; non-clerical, early 14c., from Old French lai secular, not of the clergy (Modern French
laÃ¯que), from Late Latin laicus, from Greek laikos of the people, from laos people, of unknown
origin. In Middle English, contrasted with learned, a sense revived 1810 for non-expert.


worldly (adj.)

Old English woruldlic earthly, secular, from the roots of world and like (adj.). A common Germanic
compound (Old Frisian wraldlik, Old Saxon weroldlik, Middle Dutch wereldlik, German weltlich, Old
Norse veraldligr). Worldly-wise is recorded from c.1400.


fin de siecle (adj.)

1890, from French fin de si&egrave;cle end of century, phrase used as an adjective. At the time it
meant modern; now it means from the 1890s. App. first in title of a comedy, Paris fin de
si&egrave;cle, produced at the Gymnase, Feb. 1890 [Weekley]. French si&egrave;cle century, age is
from Latin saeculum (see secular).


psalter (n.)

the Book of Psalms, Old English saltere, psaltere, from Church Latin psalterium the songs of David,
in secular Latin, stringed instrument played by twanging, from Greek psalterion stringed instrument,
psaltery, harp, from psallein to pluck, play on a stringed instrument (see psalm).


vestry (n.)

mid-15c., probably from Anglo-French *vesterie, from Old French vestiaire room for vestments,
dressing room (12c.), from Latin vestarium wardrobe, noun use of neuter of vestiarius (adj.) of
clothes, from vestis garment (see vest (v.)). Often also a meeting room for the transaction of
parish business, and retained in non-liturgical churches as the name of a separate room used for
Sunday school, prayer meetings, etc., hence transferred secular use (as in vestryman, 1610s).


dean (n.)

early 14c., from Old French deien (12c., Modern French doyen), from Late Latin decanus head of a
group of 10 monks in a monastery, from earlier secular meaning commander of 10 soldiers (which was
extended to civil administrators in the late empire), from Greek dekanos, from deka ten (see ten).
Replaced Old English teo&eth;ingealdor. College sense is from 1570s (in Latin from late 13c.).


parliament (n.)

c.1300, consultation; formal conference, assembly, from Old French parlement (11c.), originally a
speaking, talk, from parler to speak (see parley (n.)); spelling altered c.1400 to conform with
Medieval Latin parliamentum.    Anglo-Latin parliamentum is attested from early 13c. Specific sense
representative assembly of England or Ireland emerged by mid-14c. from general meaning a conference
of the secular and/or ecclesiastical aristocracy summoned by a monarch.


procession (n.)

late Old English, act of marching or proceeding, from Old French procession procession (religious or
secular), 11c., and directly from Late Latin processionem (nominative processio) religious
procession, in classical Latin a marching onward, a going forward, advance, noun of action from past
participle stem of procedere (see proceed).


temporal (adj.)

late 14c., worldly, secular; also terrestrial, earthly; temporary, lasting only for a time, from Old
French temporal earthly, and directly from from Latin temporalis of a time, but for a time,
temporary, from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season, proper time or season, of unknown origin.
Related: Temporally.


profane (adj.)

mid-15c., un-ecclesiastical, secular, from Old French profane (12c.) and directly from Latin
profanus unholy, not consecrated, according to Barnhart from pro fano not admitted into the temple
(with the initiates), literally out in front of the temple, from pro- before (see pro-) + fano,
ablative of fanum temple (see feast (n.)). Sense of unholy, polluted is recorded from c.1500.
Related: Profanely.


hymnal (n.)

c.1500, imnale, himnale, from Medieval Latin hymnale, from ymnus, from Latin hymnus (see hymn). As
an adjective, attested from 1640s. Hymnal measure, a quatrain, usually iambic, alternately rhymed,
is so called for being the preferred verse form for English hymns (such as Amazing Grace), but it
has been popular in English secular poetry as well, though it almost always suggests the hymn,
directly or ironically [Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University, 1986].


mystery (n.2)

handicraft, trade, art (archaic), late 14c., from Medieval Latin misterium, alteration of Latin
ministerium service, occupation, office, ministry (see ministry), influenced in form by Medieval
Latin mysterium (see mystery (n.1)) and in sense by maistrie mastery. Now only in mystery play, in
reference to the medieval performances, which often were staged by members of craft guilds. The two
senses of mystery formed a common pun in (secular) Tudor theater.


devotion (n.)

early 13c., from Old French devocion devotion, piety, from Latin devotionem (nominative devotio),
noun of action from past participle stem of devovere dedicate by a vow, sacrifice oneself, promise
solemnly, from de- down, away (see de-) + vovere to vow, from votum vow (see vow (n.)).    In
ancient Latin, act of consecrating by a vow, also loyalty, fealty, allegiance; in Church Latin,
devotion to God, piety. This was the original sense in English; the etymological sense, including
secular situations, returned 16c. via Italian and French.


world war (n.)

attested by 1898 as a speculation.    If through fear of entangling alliances the United States
should return the Philippines to Spain, Mr. Page asserted that the predatory nations would swoop
down upon them and a world war would result. [New York Times, Dec. 16, 1898]    Applied to the first
one almost as soon as it began in 1914 (England has Thrown Lot with France in World War -- headline,
Pittsburgh Press, Aug. 2, 1914). World War I coined 1939, replacing Great War as the most common
name for it; First World War, World War II, and Second World War all also are from 1939. Old English
had woruldgewinn, woruldgefeoht, both of which might be translated world war, but with world in the
sense of earthly, secular.


canon (n.1)

church law, Old English canon, from Old French canon or directly from Late Latin canon Church law,
in classical Latin, measuring line, rule, from Greek kanon any straight rod or bar; rule; standard
of excellence, perhaps from kanna reed (see cane (n.)). Taken in ecclesiastical sense for decree of
the Church. General sense of standard of judging is from c.1600. Harold Bloom writes that The
secular canon, with the word meaning a catalog of approved authors, does not actually begin until
the middle of the eighteenth century .... [The Western Canon, 1994]. Related: Canonicity.


regular (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French reguler ecclesiastical (Modern French r*#233;gulier), from Late Latin
regularis containing rules for guidance, from Latin regula rule, from PIE *reg- move in a straight
line (see regal).    Earliest sense was of religious orders (the opposite of secular). Extended from
late 16c. to shapes, etc., that followed predictable or uniform patterns; sense of normal is from
1630s; meaning real, genuine is from 1821. Old English borrowed Latin regula and nativized it as
regol rule, regulation, canon, law, standard, pattern; hence regolsticca ruler (instrument);
regollic (adj.) canonical, regular.


mundane (adj.)

mid-15c., of this world, from Old French mondain of this world, worldly, earthly, secular; also
pure, clean; noble, generous (12c.), from Late Latin mundanus belonging to the world (as distinct
from the Church), in classical Latin a citizen of the world, cosmopolite, from mundus universe,
world, literally clean, elegant; used as a translation of Greek khosmos (see cosmos) in its
Pythagorean sense of the physical universe (the original sense of the Greek word was orderly
arrangement). Latin mundus also was used of a woman's ornaments, dress, and is related to the
adjective mundus clean, elegant (used of women's dress, etc.). Related: Mundanely.


Sunday (n.)

first day of the week, Old English sunnand&aelig;g (Northumbrian sunnad&aelig;g), literally day of
the sun, from sunnan, oblique case of sunne sun (see sun (n.)) + d&aelig;g day (see day). A Germanic
loan-translation of Latin dies solis day of the sun, which is itself a loan-translation of Greek
hemera heliou. Compare Old Saxon sunnun dag, Old Frisian sunnandei, Old Norse sunnundagr, Dutch
zondag, German Sonntag Sunday.    In European Christian cultures outside Germanic often with a name
meaning the Lord's Day (Latin Dominica). Sunday-school dates from 1783 (originally for secular
instruction); Sunday clothes is from 1640s. Sunday driver is from 1925.


clerk (n.)

man ordained in the ministry, c.1200, from Old English cleric and Old French clerc clergyman,
priest; scholar, student, both from Church Latin clericus a priest, noun use of adjective meaning
priestly, belonging to the clerus (see cleric).    Modern bureaucratic usage is a reminder of the
dark ages when clergy alone could read and write and were employed for that skill by secular
authorities. In late Old English the word can mean king's scribe; keeper of accounts; by c.1200
clerk took on a secondary sense in Middle English (as the cognate word did in Old French) of anyone
who can read or write. This led to the sense assistant in a business (c.1500), originally a keeper
of accounts, later, especially in American English, a retail salesman (1790). Related: Clerkship.


order (n.)

early 13c., body of persons living under a religious discipline, from Old French ordre position,
estate; rule, regulation; religious order (11c.), from earlier ordene, from Latin ordinem
(nominative ordo) row, rank, series, arrangement, originally a row of threads in a loom, from Italic
root *ord- to arrange, arrangement (source of ordiri to begin to weave; compare primordial), of
unknown origin.    Meaning a rank in the (secular) community is first recorded c.1300; meaning
command, directive is first recorded 1540s, from the notion of to keep in order. Military and
honorary orders grew our of the fraternities of Crusader knights. Business and commerce sense is
attested from 1837. In natural history, as a classification of living things, it is first recorded
1760. Meaning condition of a community which is under the rule of law is from late 15c.    Phrase in
order to (1650s) preserves etymological notion of sequence. The word reflects a medieval notion: a
system of parts subject to certain uniform, established ranks or proportions, and was used of
everything from architecture to angels. Old English expressed many of the same ideas with
endebyrdnes. In short order without delay is from 1834, American English; order of battle is from
1769.


