sentimentalize (v.)

1764, intransitive, indulge in sentiments, from sentimental + -ize. Meaning to make sentimental
(transitive) is from 1813. Related: Sentimentalized; sentimentalizing.    Think on these things, and
let S______ go to Lincoln sessions by himself, and talk classically with country justices. In the
meantime we will philosophize and sentimentalize;--the last word is a bright invention of the moment
in which it was written, for yours or Dr. Johnson's service .... [Laurence Sterne, letter to William
Combe, Esq., dated Aug. 5, 1764, published 1787]


sentimentalism (n.)

1801, from sentimental + -ism.


sentimentalist (n.)

1768, from sentimental + -ist.


sentimentality (n.)

1768, from sentimental + -ity.


sentimental (adj.)

1749, pertaining to or characterized by sentiment, from sentiment + -al (1). At first without
pejorative connotations; meaning having too much sentiment, apt to be swayed by prejudice had
emerged by 1793 (implied in sentimentalist). Related: Sentimentally.


namby-pamby (adj.)

weakly sentimental, insipidly pretty, 1745, from satiric nickname of English poet Ambrose Philips
(1674-1749) mocking his sentimental pastorals addressed to infant members of the nobility. Used
first in 1726 in a farce credited to Carey. Related: Namby-pambical.


drippy (adj.)

1817, from drip + -y (2). Meaning sloppily sentimental is 1944, from the slang sense.


icky (adj.)

1935, American English, probably from icky-boo (c.1920) sickly, nauseated, probably baby talk
elaboration of sick. Originally a swing lover's term for more sentimental jazz music; in general use
from 1938.


sob (n.)

late 14c., from sob (v.). Sob story is from 1913. Sob sister female journalist who writes
sentimental stories or advice columns is from 1912.


soppy (adj.)

very wet, 1823, from sop + -y (2). Meaning sentimental first recorded 1918. Related: Soppiness.


mushy (adj.)

soft, pulpy, 1839; sentimental, 1870; from mush (n.) + -y (2). Mush (n.) in a transferred sense of
sentimentality is attested from 1908.


unsentimental (adj.)

1752, from un- (1) not + sentimental (adj.). Related: Unsentimentally.


spoony (adj.)

1812, soft, silly, weak-minded; by 1836 as foolishly sentimental, with -y (2) + spoon (n.) in a
slang sense silly person, simpleton (1799), a figurative use of the eating utensil word, perhaps
based on the notion of shallowness. Related: Spoonily; spooniness.


spoon (v.)

1715, to dish out with a spoon, from spoon (n.). The meaning court, flirt sentimentally is first
recorded 1831, a back-formation from spoony (adj.) soft, silly, weak-minded, foolishly sentimental.
Related: Spooned; spooning.


mawkish (adj.)

1660s, sickly, nauseated, from Middle English mawke maggot (see maggot). Sense of sickly sentimental
is first recorded 1702. Related: Mawkishly; mawkishness.


lackadaisical (adj.)

1768 (Sterne), from interjection lackadaisy alas, alack (1748), an alteration of lack-a-day (1690s),
from alack the day (1590s). Hence, given to crying 'lack-a-day,' vapidly sentimental. Sense probably
altered by influence of lax. Related: Lackadaisically.


weepy (adj.)

1825, from weep + -y (2). Related: Weepily; weepiness. Weepie (n.) sentimental film is from 1928.


sappy (adj.)

full of sap, Late Old English s&aelig;pig, from s&aelig;p (see sap (n.1)). Figurative sense of
foolishly sentimental (1660s) may have developed from an intermediate sense of wet, sodden (late
15c.). Earlier, now obsolete, figurative senses were full of vitality (1550s) and immature (1620s).


slop (n.)

c.1400, mudhole, probably from Old English -sloppe dung (in plant name cusloppe, literally cow
dung), related to slyppe slime (see slip (v.)). Meaning semiliquid food first recorded 1650s; that
of refuse liquid of any kind, household liquid waste (usually slops) is from 1815. Meaning affected
or sentimental material is from 1866.


corny (adj.)

1570s, full of corn, pertaining to corn, from corn (n.1) + -y (2). Chaucer used it of ale (late
14c.), perhaps to mean malty. American English slang old-fashioned, sentimental is from 1932 (first
attested in Melody Maker), perhaps originally something appealing to country folk (corn-fed in the
same sense is attested from 1929). Related: Cornily; corniness.


sticky (adj.)

1727, adhesive, inclined to stick, from stick (v.) + -y (2). An Old English word for this was
clibbor. First recorded 1864 in the sense of sentimental; of situations, 1915 with the meaning
difficult. Of weather, hot and humid, from 1895. Sticky wicket is 1952, from British slang, in
reference to cricket. Related: Stickily; stickiness.


celadon (n.)

pale grayish-green, 1768, from French C&eacute;ladon, name of a character in the romance of
l'Astr&eacute;e by Honor&eacute; d'Urf&eacute; (1610); an insipidly sentimental lover who wore
bright green clothes, he is named in turn after Greek Keladon, a character in Ovid's Metamorphoses,
whose name is said to mean sounding with din or clamor. The mineral celadonite (1868) is so called
for its color.


Spenserian (adj.)

1817, from Edmund Spenser (c.1552-1599), Elizabethan poet (for the origin of the surname, see
Spencer). Spenserian stanza, which he employed in the Faerie Queen, consists of eight decasyllabic
lines and a final Alexandrine, with rhyme scheme ab ab bc bcc.    The measure soon ceases to be
Spenser's except in its mere anatomy of rhyme-arrangement [Elton, Survey of English Literature
1770-1880, 1920]; it is the meter in Butler's Hudibras, Scott's Lady of the Lake, and notably the
Childe Harold of Byron, who found (quoting Beattie) that it allowed him to be either droll or
pathetic, descriptive or sentimental, tender or satirical, as the humour strikes me; for, if I
mistake not, the measure which I have adopted admits equally of all these kinds of composition.


treacle (n.)

mid-14c., medicinal compound, antidote for poison, from Old French triacle antidote, cure for snake-
bite (c.1200), from Vulgar Latin *triacula, from Latin theriaca, from Greek theriake (antidotos)
antidote for poisonous wild animals, from fem. of theriakos of a wild animal, from therion wild
animal, diminutive of ther (genitive theros) wild animal, from PIE root *ghwer- wild (see fierce).
Sense of molasses is first recorded 1690s (the connection may be from the use of molasses as a
laxative, or its use to disguise the bad taste of medicine); that of anything too sweet or
sentimental is from 1771. Related: Treacly.


grouch (n.)

ill-tempered person, 1896, earlier state of irritable glumness (1890, in expressions such as to have
a grouch on), U.S. college student slang, of uncertain origin, possibly from grutching complaint,
grumbling (see grutch).     The Grouch, on the other Hand, gave a correct Imitation of a Bear with a
Sore Toe. His Conversation was largely made up of Grunts. He carried a Facial Expression that
frightened little Children in Street Cars and took all the Starch out of sentimental Young Ladies.
He seemed perpetually to carry the Hoof-Marks of a horrible Nightmare. [George Ade, People You Know,
1902]    The verb is 1916, from the noun. Related: Grouched; grouching. Grouch bag purse for
carrying hidden money (1908) is the source of the nickname of U.S. comedian Julius Groucho Marx
(1890-1977), who supposedly carried his money in one to poker games.


masher (n.)

thing that mashes, c.1500, agent noun from mash (v.). Meaning would-be lady-killer is from 1875,
American English, perhaps in use from 1860, probably from mash (v.) on notion either of pressing
one's attentions, or of crushing someone else's emotions (compare crush).    He was, to use a
Western expression, a 'regular heart-smasher among the women; and it may not be improper to state,
just here, that no one had a more exalted opinion of his capabilities in that line than the
aforesaid 'Jo' himself. [Harper's New Monthly Magazine, March 1861]   <hr />   He had a weakness to
be considered a regular masher of female hearts and a very wicked young man with the fair sex
generally, but there was not a well-authenticated instance of his ever having broken a heart in his
life, nor likely to be one. [Gilbert A. Pierce, Zachariah, The Congressman, Chicago, 1880]    Also
in use late 19c were mash (n.) a romantic fixation, crush (1884); mash (v.) excite sentimental
admiration (1882); mash-note love letter (1890).


sweet (adj.)

Old English swete pleasing to the senses, mind or feelings; having a pleasant disposition, from
Proto-Germanic *swotja- (cognates: Old Saxon swoti, Old Frisian swet, Swedish s&ouml;t, Danish
s&oslash;d, Middle Dutch soete, Dutch zoet, Old High German swuozi, German s&uuml;&szlig;), from PIE
root *swad- sweet, pleasant (Sanskrit svadus sweet; Greek hedys sweet, pleasant, agreeable, hedone
pleasure; Latin suavis pleasant (not especially of taste), suadere to advise, properly to make
something pleasant to). Words for sweet in Indo-European languages typically are used for other
sense as well and in general for pleasing.    Then come kiss me, sweet-and-twenty!   Youth's a stuff
will not endure.  [Twelfth Night]     Also being in a sound or wholesome state (mid-13c.), and, of
water, fresh, not salt (late Old English). As an intensifier from 1958. Sweet in bed (c.1300) was
the equivalent of modern good in bed. To be sweet on someone is first recorded 1690s. Sweet sixteen
first recorded 1767. Sweet dreams as a parting to one going to sleep is attested from 1898, short
for sweet dreams to you, etc. Sweet-and-sour in cookery is from 1723 and not originally of oriental
food. Sweet nothings sentimental trivialities is from 1900. Sweet spot is from 1976, first in
reference to tennis rackets. Sweet corn is from 1640s.


cunt (n.)

female intercrural foramen, or, as some 18c. writers refer to it, the monosyllable, Middle English
cunte female genitalia, by early 14c. (in Hendyng's Proverbs -- &#658;eve &#254;i cunte to
cunni[n]g, And crave affetir wedding), akin to Old Norse kunta, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, and
Middle Low German kunte, from Proto-Germanic *kunton, of uncertain origin. Some suggest a link with
Latin cuneus wedge, others to PIE root *geu- hollow place, still others to PIE *gwen-, root of queen
and Greek gyne woman.    The form is similar to Latin cunnus female pudenda (also, vulgarly, a
woman), which is likewise of disputed origin, perhaps literally gash, slit, from PIE *sker- (1) to
cut, or literally sheath, from PIE *kut-no-, from root *(s)keu- to conceal, hide.   Hec vulva: a
cunt. Hic cunnus: idem est. [from Londesborough Illustrated Nominale, c.1500, in Anglo-Saxon and Old
English Vocabularies, eds. Wright and W&#252;lcker, vol. 1, 1884]    First known reference in
English apparently is in a compound, Oxford street name Gropecuntlane cited from c.1230 (and
attested through late 14c.) in Place-Names of Oxfordshire (Gelling &amp; Stenton, 1953), presumably
a haunt of prostitutes. Used in medical writing c.1400, but avoided in public speech since 15c.;
considered obscene since 17c.    in Middle English also conte, counte, and sometimes queinte,
queynte (for this, see q). Chaucer used quaint and queynte in Canterbury Tales (late 14c.), and
Andrew Marvell might be punning on quaint in To His Coy Mistress (1650).    What eyleth yow to
grucche thus and grone? Is it for ye wolde haue my queynte allone? [Wife of Bath's Tale]    Under
MONOSYLLABLE Farmer lists 552 synonyms from English slang and literature before launching into
another 5 pages of them in French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. [A sampling: Botany
Bay, chum, coffee-shop, cookie, End of the Sentimental Journey, fancy bit, Fumbler's Hall,
funniment, goatmilker, heaven, hell, Itching Jenny, jelly-bag, Low Countries, nature's tufted
treasure, parenthesis, penwiper, prick-skinner, seminary, tickle-toby, undeniable, wonderful lamp,
and aphrodisaical tennis court. Dutch cognate de kont means a bottom, an arse, but Dutch also has
attractive poetic slang ways of expressing this part, such as liefdesgrot, literally cave of love,
and vleesroos rose of flesh.     Alternative form cunny is attested from c.1720 but is certainly
much earlier and forced a change in the pronunciation of coney (q.v.), but it was good for a pun
while coney was still the common word for rabbit: A pox upon your Christian cockatrices! They cry,
like poulterers' wives, 'No money, no coney.'  [Philip Massinger: The Virgin-Martyr, Act I, Scene 1,
1622]


