sentinel (n.)

1570s, from Middle French sentinelle (16c.), from Italian sentinella a sentinel. OED says No
convincing etymology of the It. word has been proposed, but perhaps (via a notion of perceive,
watch), from sentire to hear, from Latin sentire feel, perceive by the senses (see sense (n.)).


rounder (n.)

1620s, a sentinel, agent noun from round (n.) on notion of one who makes the rounds. Sense of
chronic drunkard or criminal is from 1854, on notion of one who is habitually in and out of jails or
bars. Rounders, a baseball-like game, attested from 1828.


watchman (n.)

also watch-man, c.1400, guard, sentinel, lookout (late 12c. as a surname), figuratively guardian,
protector (mid-15c.), from watch (n.) + man (n.). Also person characterized by wakefulness (mid-
15c.).


vedette (n.)

mounted sentinel placed in advance of an outpost, 1680s, from French vedette (16c.), from Italian
(Florentine) vedetta watch tower, peep hole, probably from vedere to see, from Latin videre to see
(see vision).


sentry (n.)

1610s, originally watchtower; perhaps a shortened variant of sentinel, which had a variant form
centrinel (1590s); or perhaps worn down from sanctuary, on notion of shelter for a watchman. Meaning
military guard posted around a camp is first attested 1630s. Sentry-box is from 1728.


qui vive

1726, in on the qui vive on the alert, from French qui voulez-vous qui vive? sentinel's challenge,
whom do you wish to live, literally (long) live who? In other words, whose side are you on? (The
answer might be Vive la France, Vive le roi, etc.).


round (n.)

early 14c., a spherical body, from round (adj.) and Old French roond. Compare Dutch rond, Danish and
Swedish rund, German runde, all nouns from adjectives. Meaning large round piece of beef is recorded
from 1650s. Theatrical sense (in phrase in the round) is recorded from 1944. Sense of circuit
performed by a sentinel is from 1590s; that of recurring course of time is from 1710. Meaning song
sung by two or more, beginning at different times is from 1520s. Golfing sense attested from 1775.
Meaning quantity of liquor served to a company at one time is from 1630s; that of single bout in a
fight or boxing match is from 1812; single discharge of a firearm is from 1725. Sense of recurring
session of meetings or negotiations is from 1964.


soldier (n.)

c.1300, souder, from Old French soudier, soldier one who serves in the army for pay, from Medieval
Latin soldarius a soldier (source also of Spanish soldado, Italian soldato), literally one having
pay, from Late Latin soldum, extended sense of accusative of Latin solidus, name of a Roman gold
coin (see solidus).    The -l- has been regular in English since mid-14c., in imitation of Latin.
Willie and Joe always say sojer in the Bill Mauldin cartoons, and this seems to mirror 16c.-17c.
spellings sojar, soger, sojour. Modern French soldat is borrowed from Italian and displaced the
older French word; one of many military (and other) terms picked up during the Italian Wars in early
16c.; such as alert, arsenal, colonel, infantrie, sentinel.


station (n.)

late 13c., place which one normally occupies, from Old French stacion, estacion site, location;
station of the Cross; stop, standstill, from Latin stationem (nominative statio) a standing,
standing firm; a post, job, position; military post; a watch, guard, sentinel; anchorage, port
(related to stare to stand), from PIE *ste-ti-, suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Meaning each of a number of holy places visited in succession by pilgrims is from late 14c., as in
Station of the Cross (1550s). Meaning fixed uniform distance in surveying is from 1570s. Sense of
status, rank is from c.1600. Meaning military post in English is from c.1600. The meaning place
where people are stationed for some special purpose (as in polling station) is first recorded 1823.
Radio station is from 1912; station break, pause in broadcasting to give the local station a chance
to identify itself, is from 1942.    The meaning regular stopping place is first recorded 1797, in
reference to coach routes; applied to railroads 1830. Station-master is from 1836. Station wagon in
the automobile sense is first recorded 1929, from earlier use for a horse-drawn conveyance that took
passengers to and from railroad stations (1894). Station house police station is attested from 1836.


watch (n.)

Old English w&aelig;cce a watching, state of being or remaining awake, wakefulness; also act or
practice of refraining from sleep for devotional or penitential purposes; from w&aelig;ccan (see
watch (v.)). From c.1200 as one of the periods into which the night is divided, in reference to
ancient times translating Latin vigilia, Greek phylake, Hebrew ashmoreth.    The Hebrews divided the
night into three watches, the Greeks usually into four (sometimes five), the Romans (followed by the
Jews in New Testament times) into four. [OED]   <hr />   On &#254;is niht be&#240; fowuer niht
wecches: Biforen euen &#254;e bilimpe&#240; to children; Mid-niht &#240;e bilimpe&#240; to
frumberdligges; hanecrau &#254;e bilimpe&#240; &#254;owuene men; morgewile to alde men. [Trinity
Homilies, c.1200]     From mid-13c. as a shift of guard duty; an assignment as municipal watchman;
late 13c. as person or group obligated to patrol a town (especially at night) to keep order, etc.
Also in Middle English, the practice of remaining awake at night for purposes of debauchery and
dissipation; hence wacches of wodnesse late-night revels and debauchery. The alliterative
combination watch and ward preserves the old distinction of watch for night-time municipal patrols
and ward for guarding by day; in combination, they meant continuous vigilance.    Military sense of
military guard, sentinel is from late 14c. General sense of careful observation, watchfulness,
vigilance is from late 14c.; to keep watch is from late 14c. Meaning period of time in which a
division of a ship's crew remains on deck is from 1580s. The meaning small timepiece is from 1580s,
developing from that of a clock to wake up sleepers (mid-15c.).


