shack (n.)

1878, American English and Canadian English, of unknown origin, perhaps from Mexican Spanish jacal,
from Nahuatl (Aztecan) xacalli wooden hut. Or perhaps a back-formation from dialectal English
shackly shaky, rickety (1843), a derivative of shack, a dialectal variant of shake (v.). Another
theory derives shack from ramshackle.    Slang meaning house attested by 1910. In early radio
enthusiast slang, it was the word for a room or office set aside for wireless use, 1919, perhaps
from earlier U.S. Navy use (1917). As a verb, 1891 in the U.S. West in reference to men who hole up
for the winter; from 1927 as to put up for the night; phrase shack up cohabit first recorded 1935
(in Zora Neale Hurston).


shag (v.2)

in baseball, to go after and catch (fly balls), by 1913, of uncertain origin. Century Dictionary has
it as a secondary sense of a shag (v.) to rove about as a stroller or beggar (1851), which is
perhaps from shack (n.) disreputable fellow (1680s), short for shake-rag, an old term for a beggar.


radio (n.)

wireless transmission of voice signals with radio waves, 1907, abstracted from earlier combinations
such as radio-receiver (1903), radiophone (1881), radio-telegraphy (1898), from radio- as a comb.
form of Latin radius beam. Use for radio receiver is first attested 1913; sense of sound
broadcasting as a medium is from 1913.    It is not a dream, but a probability that the radio will
demolish blocs, cut the strings of red tape, actuate the voice back home, dismantle politics and
entrench the nation's executive in a position of power unlike that within the grasp of any executive
in the world's history. [The Reading Eagle, Reading, Pa., U.S.A., March 16, 1924]   Wireless
remained more widespread until World War II, when military preference for radio turned the tables.
As an adjective by 1912, by radio transmission; meaning controlled by radio from 1974. Radio _______
radio station or service from _______ is recorded from 1920. A radio shack (1946) was a small
building housing radio equipment.


house (n.)

Old English hus dwelling, shelter, house, from Proto-Germanic *husan (cognates: Old Norse, Old
Frisian hus, Dutch huis, German Haus), of unknown origin, perhaps connected to the root of hide (v.)
[OED]. In Gothic only in gudhus temple, literally god-house; the usual word for house in Gothic
being razn.    Meaning family, including ancestors and descendants, especially if noble is from
c.1000. The legislative sense (1540s) is transferred from the building in which the body meets.
Meaning audience in a theater is from 1660s (transferred from the theater itself, playhouse); as a
dance club DJ music style, probably from the Warehouse, a Chicago nightclub where the style is said
to have originated. Zodiac sense is first attested late 14c. To play house is from 1871; as
suggestive of have sex, shack up, 1968. House arrest first attested 1936. On the house free is from
1889.And the Prophet Isaiah the sonne of Amos came to him, and saide vnto him, Thus saith the Lord,
Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not liue. [2 Kings xx:1, version of 1611]


