sham (n.)

1670s, a trick, a hoax, a fraud, also as a verb and an adjective, of uncertain origin; the words
burst into use in 1677. Perhaps from sham, a northern dialectal variant of shame (n.); a derivation
OED finds not impossible. Sense of something meant to be mistaken for something else is from 1728.
The meaning false front in pillow-sham (1721) is from the notion of counterfeit. Related: Shammed;
shamming; shammer. Shamateur amateur sportsman who acts like a professional is from 1896.


flam (n.)

1630s, sham story, fabrication (n.); also to deceive by flattery (v.); see flim-flam.


snide (adj.)

1859, thieves' slang, counterfeit, sham, bad, spurious, of unknown origin. Of persons, cunning,
sharp, from 1883. Sense of sneering is first attested 1933, perhaps via sense of hypocrisy,
malicious gossip (1902). Related: Sneeringly.


prevaricator (n.)

c.1400, from Old French prevaricator and directly from Latin praevaricator sham accuser; unfaithful
advocate, agent noun from past participle stem of praevaricari (see prevaricate).


Potemkin

in reference to Grigory Aleksandrovich Potemkin (1739-1791), favorite of Catherine II of Russia,
especially in reference to the sham villages supposedly erected under his orders for the
empress√¢&euro;&trade; tour of Crimea (1787) to create an impression of prosperity and progress. The
silent film Battleship Potemkin dates from 1925, depicting (with elaboration) events of 1905 and the
mutiny of a Russian battleship named for the Tsarist minister.


Wardour-street (n.)

affected pseudo-archaic diction of historical novels, 1888, from street in London lined with shops
selling imitation-antique furniture.    This is not literary English of any date; this is Wardour-
Street Early English -- a perfectly modern article with a sham appearance of the real antique about
it. [A. Ballantyne, Wardour-Street English, Longman's Magazine, October, 1888]


feint (v.)

c.1300, feinten, to deceive, pretend, also become feeble or exhausted; to lack spirit or courage,
from feint (adj.); see feint (n.). Compare Old French feintir be slow, delay. Sense of to make a
sham attack is first attested 1833. Related: Feinted; feinting.


prevaricate (v.)

1580s, to transgress, a back formation from prevarication, or else from Latin praevaricatus, past
participle of praevaricari to make a sham accusation, deviate, literally walk crookedly; in Church
Latin, to transgress (see prevarication). Meaning to speak evasively is from 1630s. Related:
Prevaricated; prevaricating.


sciamachy (n.)

fighting with shadows, shadow-boxing 1620s, from Greek skiamakhia shadow-fighting, a sham fight but
perhaps literally fighting in the shade (i.e., in school; ancient teachers taught in shaded public
places such as porches and groves), from skia shade, shadow (see shine (v.)) + makhe battle (see
-machy).


feint (n.)

1670s, a false show, a pretended blow, from French feinte a feint, sham, abstract noun from Old
French feint (13c.) false, deceitful, originally fem. past participle of feindre (see feign).
Borrowed late 13c. as adjective, but now obsolete in that sense. Also as a noun in Middle English
with sense false-heartedness (early 14c.), also bodily weakness (c.1400).


spurious (adj.)

1590s, born out of wedlock, from Latin spurius illegitimate, false (source also of Italian spurio,
Spanish espurio), from spurius (n.) illegitimate child, probably from Etruscan spural public. Sense
of having an irregular origin, not properly constituted is from c.1600; that of false, sham is from
1610s; of writing, etc., not proceeding from the source pretended, 1620s. Related: Spuriously;
spuriousness.


Tripoli

both the Libyan capital and the Lebanese port city represent Greek tri- three (see tri-) + polis
town (see polis). In Libya, Tripolis was the name of a Phoenician colony consisting of Oea (which
grew into modern Tripoli), Leptis Magna, and Sabratha. Arabic distinguishes them as Tarabulus ash-
sham (Syrian Tripoli) and Tarabulus al-garb (Western Tripoli).


malinger (v.)

1820, from French malingrer to suffer, perhaps also pretend to be ill, from malingre ailing, sickly
(13c.), of uncertain origin, possibly a blend of mingre sickly, miserable and malade ill. Mingre is
itself a blend of maigre meager + haingre sick, haggard, possibly from Germanic (compare Middle High
German hager thin). The sense evolution may be through notion of beggars with sham sores. Related:
Malingered; malingering; malingerer (1785).


pseudo-

often before vowels pseud-, word-forming element meaning false; feigned; erroneous; in appearance
only; resembling, from Greek pseudo-, comb. form of pseudes false, lying; falsely; deceived, or
pseudos falsehood, untruth, a lie, both from pseudein to deceive, cheat by lies.    Productive in
compound formation in ancient Greek (such as pseudodidaskalos false teacher, pseudokyon a sham
cynic, pseudologia a false speech, pseudoparthenos pretended virgin), it began to be used with
native words in Middle English.


non-

prefix meaning not, lack of, or sham, 14c., from Anglo-French noun-, from Old French non-, from
Latin non not, by no means, not at all, not a, from Old Latin noenum not one (*ne oinom, from PIE
*ne not + *oi-no-; see one). In some cases perhaps from Middle English non not (adj.), from Old
English nan (see not).


prevarication (n.)

late 14c., divergence from a right course, transgression, from Old French prevaricacion breaking of
God's laws, disobedience (to the Faith) (12c., Modern French pr&#233;varication) and directly from
Latin praevaricationem (nominative praevaricatio) duplicity, collusion, a stepping out of line (of
duty or behavior), noun of action from past participle stem of praevaricari to make a sham
accusation, deviate, literally walk crookedly, in Church Latin, to transgress, from prae before (see
pre-) + varicare to straddle, from varicus straddling, from varus bowlegged, knock-kneed (see
varus). Meaning evasion, quibbling is attested from 1650s.


hocus-pocus

1620s, Hocas Pocas, common name of a magician or juggler, a sham-Latin invocation used in tricks,
probably based on a perversion of the sacramental blessing from the Mass, Hoc est corpus meum This
is my body. The first to make this speculation on its origin apparently was English prelate John
Tillotson (1630-1694).I will speak of one man ... that went about in King James his time ... who
called himself, the Kings Majesties most excellent Hocus Pocus, and so was called, because that at
the playing of every Trick, he used to say, Hocus pocus, tontus tabantus, vade celeriter jubeo, a
dark composure of words, to blinde the eyes of the beholders, to make his Trick pass the more
currantly without discovery. [Thomas Ady, A Candle in the Dark, 1655]


straw (n.)

Old English streaw (rare) stems or stalks of certain species of grains, apparently literally that
which is scattered or strewn, related to streowian (see strew), from Proto-Germanic *strawam that
which is scattered (cognates: Old Norse stra, Danish straa, Swedish str&#229;, Old Saxon stro, Old
Frisian stre, Old Dutch, Old High German stro, Dutch stroo, German Stroh straw), from PIE *stere- to
spread (see structure (n.)). The notion perhaps is of dried grain stalks strewn on a floor as
carpeting or bedding.    As a type of what is trifling or unimportant, attested from late 13c.
Meaning hollow tube through which a drink is sucked is recorded from 1851. To draw straws as a means
of deciding something is recorded from 1779 (the custom probably is older). As an adjective, made of
straw, mid-15c.; hence false, sham. Straw poll is from 1932; earlier straw vote (1866). Straw hat
first attested mid-15c. To clutch (or grasp or catch) at straws (1748) is what a drowning man
proverbially would do. The last straw (1836 apart from the full phrase) is from the proverbial
image: it is the last straw that breaks the camel's back (or, less often, the mare's, the horse's,
or the elephant's), an image in use in English by 1755.    Let it not, however, be inferred that
taxation cannot be pushed too far : it is, as the Oriental proverb says, the last straw that
overloads the camel ; a small addition, if ill-timed, may overturn the whole. [The Scots Magazine,
April 1799]


