shoot (n.1)

young branch of a tree or plant, mid-15c., from shoot (v.). Also heavy, sudden rush of water
(1610s); artificial channel for water running down (1707); conduit for coal, etc. (1844).


shoot (n.2)

1530s, an act of shooting; 1852 as a shooting match or party, from shoot (v.).


shoot-out (n.)

1953; expression shoot it out is from 1912; see shoot (v.) + out (adv.).


shoot (v.)

Old English sceotan to hurl missiles, cast; strike, hit, push; run, rush; send forth swiftly; wound
with missiles (class II strong verb; past tense sceat, past participle scoten), from Proto-Germanic
*skeutanan (cognates: Old Saxon skiotan, Old Norse skjota to shoot with (a weapon); shoot, launch,
push, shove quickly, Old Frisian skiata, Middle Dutch skieten, Dutch schieten, Old High German
skiozan, German schie&szlig;en), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project
(cognates: Sanskrit skundate hastens, makes haste, Old Church Slavonic iskydati to throw out,
Lithuanian skudrus quick, nimble).    In reference to pool playing, from 1926. Meaning to strive
(for) is from 1967, American English. Sense of descend (a river) quickly is from 1610s. Meaning to
inject by means of a hypodermic needle is attested from 1914. Meaning photograph (especially a
movie) is from 1890. As an interjection, an arbitrary euphemistic alteration of shit, it is recorded
from 1934. Shoot the breeze chat first recorded 1941. Shoot-'em-up (adj.) in reference to violent
entertainment (Western movies, etc.) is from 1942. Shoot to kill first attested 1867. Shoot the cat
to vomit is from 1785. To shoot the moon originally meant depart by night with ones goods to escape
back rent (1829).    O, 'tis cash makes such crowds to the gin shops roam, And 'tis cash often
causes a rumpus at home ;  'Tis when short of cash people oft shoot the moon ;  And 'tis cash always
keeps our pipes in tune.  Cash! cash! &amp;c.;  [The Melodist and Mirthful Olio, An Elegant
Collection of the Most Popular Songs, vol. IV, London, 1829]


shooting (n.)

Old English scotung, verbal noun from shoot (v.). Sports sense from 1885; film camera sense by 1920.
Shooting gallery is from 1836; shooting match is from 1750. Shooting star first recorded 1590s
(shoot (v.) with reference to meteors is from late 13c.).


shooter (n.)

Old English sceotere one who shoots, agent noun from shoot (v.). As a type of gun from 1812; as a
small alcoholic drink, 1971. Shootee is attested from 1837.


shootist (n.)

1864, from shoot (v.) + -ist.


skeet (n.)

form of trapshooting, 1926, a name chosen as a very old form of our present word 'shoot.'  Perhaps
Old Norse skotja to shoot (see shoot (v.)) was intended.


sprig (n.)

shoot, twig or spray of a plant, shrub, c.1400, probably related to Old English spr&aelig;c shoot,
twig, of obscure origin.


skittish (adj.)

early 15c., very lively, frivolous, perhaps from Scandinavian base *skyt- (stem of Old Norse skjota
to shoot, launch, move quickly), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see
shoot (v.)). Sense of shy, nervous, apt to run first recorded c.1500, of horses. Related:
Skittishly; skittishness.


scut (n.1)

short, erect tail (of a rabbit, hare, deer, etc.), 1520s; earlier a hare (mid-15c.), perhaps from
Old Norse skjota to shoot (with a weapon), launch, push, shove quickly (compare Norwegian skudda to
shove, push), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot (v.)).


undershoot (v.)

1660s, to shoot too low, from under + shoot (v.). In reference to aircraft or pilots, recorded from
1918. Undershot as a type of water wheel is recorded from c.1600.


skite (n.)

contemptible person, 1790, Scottish and Northern, earlier sudden stroke or blow (1785), perhaps from
Old Norse skyt-, from skjota to shoot (see shoot (v.)). Compare Old Norse skita to shit, which might
have had some influence.


scoot (v.)

1758, run, fly, make off, perhaps originally nautical slang; 1805, flow or gush out with force
(Scottish), of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skjota to
shoot, related to shoot (v.). Related: Scooted; scooting. As a noun from 1864.


overshoot (v.)

mid-14c., to shoot, run, or pass beyond (a point or limit), over- + shoot (v.). Related: Overshot;
overshooting.


stolon (n.)

a shoot, sucker, c.1600, from Latin stolonem (nominative stolo) a shoot, branch, sucker, cognate
with Greek stele standing block, stelekhos trunk, stem, log; from PIE root *stel- to put, stand (see
stall (n.1)).


browse (v.)

mid-15c., feed on buds, from Middle French brouster, from Old French broster to sprout, bud, from
brost young shoot, twig, probably from Proto-Germanic *brust- bud, shoot, from PIE *bhreus- to
swell, sprout (see breast (n.)). Lost its final -t in English on the mistaken notion that the letter
was a past participle inflection. Figurative extension to peruse (books) is 1870s, American English.
Related: Browsed; browsing.


chute (n.1)

1725, American English, fall of water (earlier shoot, 1610s), from French chute fall, from Old
French cheoite a fall, fem. past participle of cheoir to fall, from Latin cadere (see case (n.1)).
Meaning inclined tube, trough is from 1804; that of narrow passage for cattle, etc. first recorded
1881. In North America, absorbing some senses of similar-sounding shoot (n.1).


scion (n.)

c.1300, a shoot or twig, especially one for grafting, from Old French sion, cion descendant; shoot,
twig; offspring (12c., Modern French scion, Picard chion), of uncertain origin. OED rejects
derivation from Old French scier to saw. Perhaps a diminutive from Frankish *kid-, from Proto-
Germanic *kidon-, from PIE *geie- to sprout, split, open (see chink (n.1)). Figurative use is
attested from 1580s in English; meaning an heir, a descendant is from 1814, from the family tree
image.


shut (v.)

Old English scyttan to put (a bolt) in place so as to fasten a door or gate, bolt, shut to;
discharge, pay off, from West Germanic *skutjan (cognates: Old Frisian schetta, Middle Dutch
schutten to shut, shut up, obstruct), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot (v.)).
Related: Shutting.    Meaning to close by folding or bringing together is from mid-14c. Meaning
prevent ingress and egress is from mid-14c. Sense of to set (someone) free (from) (c.1500) is
obsolete except in dialectal phrases such as to get shut of. To shut (one's) mouth desist from
speaking is recorded from mid-14c.


sharpshooter (n.)

also sharp-shooter, 1800; see sharp (adj.) + shoot (v.). A translation of German Scharfsch&uuml;tze,
from scharf (adj.) sharp + sch&uuml;tze shooter, from schie&#223;en to shoot. Related:
Sharpshooting.


shuttle (n.)

Old English scytel a dart, arrow, from Proto-Germanic *skutilaz (cognates: Old Norse skutill
harpoon), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see shoot (v.)). The original
sense in English is obsolete; the weaving instrument so called (mid-14c.) from being shot across the
threads. Sense of train that runs back and forth is first recorded 1895, from image of the weaver's
instrument's back-and-forth movement over the warp; extended to aircraft 1942, to spacecraft 1969.
In some other languages, the weaving instrument takes its name from its resemblance to a boat (Latin
navicula, French navette, German weberschiff).


spire (n.)

Old English spir a sprout, shoot, spike, blade, tapering stalk of grass, from Proto-Germanic *spiraz
(cognates: Old Norse spira a stalk, slender tree, Dutch spier shoot, blade of grass, Middle Low
German spir a small point or top), from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike (n.1)). Meaning tapering
top of a tower or steeple first recorded 1590s (a sense attested in Middle Low German since late
14c. and also found in the Scandinavian cognates).


scot-free (adj.)

Old English scotfreo exempt from royal tax, from scot royal tax, from Old Norse skot contribution,
literally a shooting, shot; thing shot, missile, from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot
(v.); the Old Norse verb form, skjota, has a secondary sense of transfer to another; pay) + freo
(see free (adj.)). First element related to Old English sceotan to pay, contribute, Dutch schot,
German Scho&szlig; tax, contribution. French &eacute;cot share (Old French escot) is from Germanic.


bine (n.)

climbing stem, flexible shoot of a shrub, 1727, from a dialectal form of bind (n.).


shotten (adj.)

having shot its spawn, and accordingly of inferior value, mid-15c., past participle adjective from
shoot (v.). Originally of fish; applied to persons, with sense of exhausted by sickness, from 1590s.


shot (adj.)

early 15c., past participle adjective from from shoot (v.). Meaning wounded or killed by a bullet or
other projectile is from 1837. Figurative sense ruined, worn out is from 1833.


sheet (n.1)

Old English sciete (West Saxon), scete (Mercian) cloth, covering, towel, shroud, from Proto-Germanic
*skautjon-, from *skauta- project (cognates: Old Norse skaut, Gothic skauts seam, hem of a garment;
Dutch schoot; German Scho&szlig; bosom, lap), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see
shoot (v.)).    Sense of piece of paper first recorded c.1500; that of any broad, flat surface (of
metal, open water, etc.) is from 1590s. Of falling rain from 1690s. Meaning a newspaper is first
recorded 1749. Sheet lightning is attested from 1794; sheet music is from 1857. Between the sheets
in bed (usually with sexual overtones) is attested from 1590s; to be white as a sheet is from 1751.
The first element in sheet-anchor (late 15c.) appears to be a different word, of unknown origin.


plunk (v.)

1805, to pluck a stringed instrument; 1808 in sense of drop down abruptly; 1888 as to hit, wound,
shoot. Probably of imitative origin in all cases. Related: Plunked; plunking.


shute (n.)

1790, channel, trough, dialectal combination of chute and shoot (n.1).


surculation (n.)

act of pruning, 1660s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin surculare chear of shoots
or twigs, from surculus tender young shoot, twig, sprout, sucker.


spray (n.1)

small branch, mid-13c., of uncertain origin. Perhaps related to Old English spr&aelig;c shoot, twig
(see sprig), and compare Danish sprag in same sense.


troubleshoot (v.)

also trouble-shoot, 1918 (implied in troubleshooting), probably a back-formation from
troubleshooter.


offshoot (n.)

1670s, in figurative sense, of family trees; 1801 in general sense of a derivative; 1814 in literal
sense, in reference to plants. From off + shoot (n.).


troubleshooter (n.)

also trouble-shooter, 1898, originally one who works on telegraph or telephone lines. From trouble
(n.) + agent noun from shoot (v.).


snipe (v.)

shoot from a hidden place, 1773 (among British soldiers in India), in reference to hunting snipe as
game, from snipe (n.). Figurative use from 1892. Related: Sniped; sniping.


clade (n.)

group of organisms evolved from a common ancestor, 1957, from Greek klados young branch, offshoot of
a plant, shoot broken off, from PIE *kele-, possibly from root *kel- (1) to strike, cut (see holt).


gun (v.)

to shoot with a gun, 1620s, from gun (n.); the sense of to accelerate an engine is from 1930, from
earlier phrase to give (something) the gun. Related: Gunned; gunning.


shot (n.)

Old English scot, sceot a shot, a shooting, an act of shooting; that which is discharged in
shooting, what is shot forth; darting, rapid motion, from Proto-Germanic *skutan (cognates: Old
Norse skutr, Old Frisian skete, Middle Dutch scote, German Schu&szlig; a shot), related to sceotan
to shoot (see shoot (v.)).    Meaning discharge of a bow, missile, also is from related Old English
gesceot. Extended to other projectiles in Middle English, and to sports (hockey, basketball, etc.)
1868. Another original meaning, payment (perhaps literally money thrown down) is preserved in scot-
free. Throwing down might also have led to the meaning a drink, first attested 1670s, the more
precise meaning small drink of straight liquor by 1928 (shot glass by 1955). Camera view sense is
from 1958. Sense of hypodermic injection first attested 1904; figurative phrase shot in the arm
stimulant first recorded 1922. Meaning try, attempt is from 1756; sense of remark meant to wound is
recorded from 1841. Meaning an expert in shooting is from 1780. To call the shots control events,
make decisions is American English, 1922, perhaps from sport shooting. Shot in the dark uninformed
guess is from 1885. Big shot important person is from 1861.


kneecap (n.)

1650s, a covering or protection for the knee, from knee (n.) + cap (n.). Meaning bone in front of
the knee joint is from 1869; the verb in the underworld sense of to shoot (someone) in the knee as
punishment is attested by 1975. Related: Kneecapped.


skit (n.)

piece of light satire or caricature, 1820, from earlier sense a satirical remark or reflection
(1727), originally (1570s) a vain, frivolous, or wanton girl (originally Scottish, now archaic),
related to verb meaning to shy or be skittish, caper, frolic (1610s), perhaps from Old Norse skjuta
to shoot, move quickly (see skittish).


fusillade (n.)

simultaneous discharge of firearms, 1801, from French fusillade, from fusiller to shoot, from fusil
musket (see fusilier). As a verb from 1816.


blastema (n.)

1849, Modern Latin, from Greek blastema offspring, offshoot, from stem of blastanein to shoot forth,
from blastos sprout, germ, of unknown origin. Related: Blastemal.


broccoli (n.)

1690s, from Italian broccoli, plural of broccolo a sprout, cabbage sprout, diminutive of brocco
shoot, protruding tooth, small nail (see brocade (n.)).


skitter (v.)

to run rapidly, 1845, frequentative of skite to dart, run quickly (1721), perhaps from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse skjota to shoot, launch, move quickly, avoid (a blow);
Norwegian dialectal skutla glide rapidly); see skittish. As a noun from 1905.


Cloris

fem. proper name, from Chloris, Latin form of Greek Khloris, goddess of flowers (later identified
with Roman Flora), literally greenness, freshness, poetic fem. of khloros greenish-yellow, fresh,
related to khloe young green shoot (see Chloe).


thallium (n.)

rare metallic element, 1861, Modern Latin, from Greek thallos young shoot, green branch (see
thallus) + element name ending -ium. So called by its discoverer, Sir William Crookes (1832-1919),
from the green line in its spectrum by which he detected it. Related: Thallic.


pullulate (v.)

1610s, from Latin pullulatus, past participle of pullulare put forth, grow, sprout, shoot up, come
forth, from pullulus, diminutive of pullus young animal (see foal (n.)). Related: Pullulated;
pullulating.


bloodshot (adj.)

also blood-shot, 1550s, short for bloodshotten (c.1500), from blood (n.) + old past participle of
shoot.


sitting (n.)

early 13c., verbal noun from sit (v.). Meaning a meeting of a body is from c.1400. Meaning interval
during which one sits (for some purpose, especially to have one's portrait taken) is from 1706.
Sitting-room first recorded 1771. Slang sitting duck easy target first recorded 1944; literal sense
is from 1867 (it is considered not sporting to shoot at one).


