shove (n.)

c.1300; see shove (v.).


shove (v.)

Old English scufan push away, thrust, push with violence (class II strong verb; past tense sceaf,
past participle scoven), from Proto-Germanic *skeub-, *skub- (cognates: Old Norse skufa, Old Frisian
skuva, Dutch schuiven, Old High German scioban, German schieben to push, thrust, Gothic af-skiuban),
from PIE root *skeubh- to shove (cognates: scuffle, shuffle, shovel; likely cognates outside
Germanic include Lithuanian skubti to make haste, skubinti to hasten). Related: Shoved; shoving.
Replaced by push in all but colloquial and nautical usage. Shove off leave (1844) is from boating.
Shove the queer (1859) was an old expression for to counterfeit money. Shove it had an earlier sense
of depart before it became a rude synonym for stick it (by 1941) with implied destination.


shovel (n.)

Old English scofl, sceofol shovel, related to scufan (see shove (v.)), from Proto-Germanic *skublo
(cognates: Old Saxon skufla, Swedish skovel, Middle Low German schufle, Middle Dutch shuffel, Dutch
schoffel, Old High German scuvala, German Schaufel). Shovel-ready, with reference to construction
projects, is attested by 2006.


scuff (v.)

1768, to walk (through or over something) without raising the feet, from Scottish, probably from a
Scandinavian source related to Old Norse skufa, skyfa to shove, push aside, from PIE *skeubh- to
shove (see shove (v.)). Meaning injure the surface of is from 1897. Related: Scuffed; scuffing. As a
noun from 1824.


shuffleboard (n.)

1530s, shovillaborde shovel board, an unexplained alteration of shove-board (1520s), from shove (v.)
+ board (n.1). Originally a tabletop game (c.1600), the large-scale version (1877) was invented for
play on ocean liners.


scut (n.1)

short, erect tail (of a rabbit, hare, deer, etc.), 1520s; earlier a hare (mid-15c.), perhaps from
Old Norse skjota to shoot (with a weapon), launch, push, shove quickly (compare Norwegian skudda to
shove, push), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot (v.)).


scoff (v.)

mid-14c., jest, make light of something; mid-15c., make fun of, mock, from the noun meaning
contemptuous ridicule (c.1300), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skaup, skop mockery,
ridicule, Middle Danish skof jest, mockery; perhaps from Proto-Germanic *skub-, *skuf- (cognates:
Old English scop poet, Old High German scoph fiction, sport, jest, derision), from PIE *skeubh- to
shove (see shove (v.)).


shtup (v.)

annoy, 1952; have sexual intercourse with, 1967; from Yiddish, literally push, shove, related to
dialectal German stupfen to nudge, jog.


push (n.)

1560s, from push (v.). Phrase push comes to shove is from 1936.


putt (v.)

1510s, Scottish, to push, shove, a special use and pronunciation of put (v.). Golfing sense is from
1743. Meaning to throw (a stone, as a demonstration of strength) is from 1724; this also is the putt
in shot putting. Related: Putted; putting.


urge (v.)

1550s, from Latin urgere to press hard, push forward, force, drive, compel, stimulate, from PIE root
*wreg- to push, shove, drive (cognates: Lithuanian verziu tie, fasten, squeeze, vargas need,
distress, vergas slave; Old Church Slavonic vragu enemy; Gothic wrikan persecute, Old English wrecan
drive, hunt, pursue). Related: Urged; urging.


butt (v.)

hit with the head, c.1200, from Anglo-French buter, from Old French boter to push, shove, knock; to
thrust against, from Frankish or another Germanic source (compare Old Norse bauta, Low German boten
to strike, beat), from Proto-Germanic *butan, from PIE root *bhau- to strike (see batter (v.)).
Related: Butted; butting. To butt in rudely intrude is American English, attested from 1900.


stagger (v.)

mid-15c., walk unsteadily, reel (intransitive), altered from stakeren (early 14c.), from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Danish stagra, Old Norse stakra to push, shove, cause to reel, also
to stumble, stagger, perhaps literally hit with a stick, from Proto-Germanic *stakon- a stake, from
PIE *steg- (1) pole, stick. Cognate with Dutch staggelen to stagger, German staggeln to stammer.
Transitive sense of bewilder, amaze first recorded 1550s; that of arrange in a zig-zag pattern is
from 1856. Related: Staggered; staggering.


shuffle (v.)

1530s, put together hastily, probably from Middle English shovelen to move with dragging feet,
itself probably a frequentative form of shoven (see shove (v.)). Or perhaps from Low German
schuffeln to walk clumsily, deal dishonestly.    Of playing cards, first recorded 1560s. Meaning
walk slowly without lifting the feet is from 1570s. Meaning push along gradually is from 1560s.
Meaning move from one place to another is from 1690s. Meaning do a shuffle dance is from 1818.
Related: Shuffled; shuffling. Shuffle off get rid of, dispose of is from Shakespeare (1601).


scoop (v.)

mid-14c., to bail out, from scoop (n.) and from Low German scheppen to draw water, from Proto-
Germanic *skuppon (cognates: Old Saxon skeppian, Dutch scheppen, Old High German scaphan, German
sch&#246;pfen to scoop, ladle out), from PIE root *skeubh- (cognates: Old English sceofl shovel, Old
Saxon skufla; see shove (v.)). In the journalistic sense from 1884. Related: Scooped; scooping.


rack (n.3)

clouds driven before the wind, c.1300, also rush of wind, collision, crash, originally a northern
word, possibly from Old English racu cloud (or an unrecorded Scandinavian cognate of it), reinforced
by Old Norse rek wreckage, jetsam, or by influence of Old English wr&aelig;c something driven; from
Proto-Germanic *wrakaz, from PIE root *wreg- to push, shove, drive (see urge (v.)). Often confused
with wrack (n.), especially in phrase rack and ruin (1590s). The distinction is that rack is driven
clouds; wrack is seaweed cast up on shore.


hustle (v.)

1680s, to shake to and fro (especially of money in a cap, as part of a game called hustle-cap),
metathesized from Dutch hutselen, husseln to shake, to toss, frequentative of hutsen, variant of
hotsen to shake. The stems hot-, hut- appear in a number of formations in both High and Low German
dialects, all implying a shaking movement [OED]. Related: Hustled; hustling. Meaning push roughly,
shove first recorded 1751. That of hurry, move quickly is from 1812.    The key-note and countersign
of life in these cities [of the U.S. West] is the word hustle. We have caught it in the East. but we
use it humorously, just as we once used the Southern word skedaddle, but out West the word hustle is
not only a serious term, it is the most serious in the language. [Julian Ralph, Our Great West,
N.Y., 1893]    Sense of to get in a quick, illegal manner is 1840 in American English; that of to
sell goods aggressively is 1887.


wreak (v.)

Old English wrecan avenge, originally to drive, drive out, punish (class V strong verb; past tense
wr&aelig;c, past participle wrecen), from Proto-Germanic *wrekan (cognates: Old Saxon wrekan, Old
Norse reka, Old Frisian wreka, Middle Dutch wreken to drive, push, compel, pursue, throw, Old High
German rehhan, German r&auml;chen to avenge, Gothic wrikan to persecute), from PIE root *wreg- to
push, shove, drive, track down (see urge (v.)). Meaning inflict or take vengeance, with on, is
recorded from late 15c.; that of inflict or cause (damage or destruction) is attested from 1817.
Compare wrack (v.). Related: Wreaked; wreaking.


wrack (n.)

late 14c., wrecked ship, shipwreck, probably from Middle Dutch wrak wreck, from Proto-Germanic
*wrakaz-, from root *wreg- to push, shove drive (see wreak). The root sense perhaps is that which is
cast ashore. Sense perhaps influenced by Old English wr&aelig;c misery, punishment, and wrecan to
punish, drive out (source of modern wreak). The meaning damage, disaster, destruction (in wrack and
ruin) is from c.1400, from the Old English word, but conformed in spelling to this one. Sense of
seaweed, etc., cast up on shore is recorded from 1510s, probably an alteration of wreck (n.) in this
sense (mid-15c.). Wrack, wreck, rack and wretch were utterly tangled in spelling and somewhat in
sense in Middle and early modern English.


shoot (v.)

Old English sceotan to hurl missiles, cast; strike, hit, push; run, rush; send forth swiftly; wound
with missiles (class II strong verb; past tense sceat, past participle scoten), from Proto-Germanic
*skeutanan (cognates: Old Saxon skiotan, Old Norse skjota to shoot with (a weapon); shoot, launch,
push, shove quickly, Old Frisian skiata, Middle Dutch skieten, Dutch schieten, Old High German
skiozan, German schie&szlig;en), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project
(cognates: Sanskrit skundate hastens, makes haste, Old Church Slavonic iskydati to throw out,
Lithuanian skudrus quick, nimble).    In reference to pool playing, from 1926. Meaning to strive
(for) is from 1967, American English. Sense of descend (a river) quickly is from 1610s. Meaning to
inject by means of a hypodermic needle is attested from 1914. Meaning photograph (especially a
movie) is from 1890. As an interjection, an arbitrary euphemistic alteration of shit, it is recorded
from 1934. Shoot the breeze chat first recorded 1941. Shoot-'em-up (adj.) in reference to violent
entertainment (Western movies, etc.) is from 1942. Shoot to kill first attested 1867. Shoot the cat
to vomit is from 1785. To shoot the moon originally meant depart by night with ones goods to escape
back rent (1829).    O, 'tis cash makes such crowds to the gin shops roam, And 'tis cash often
causes a rumpus at home ;  'Tis when short of cash people oft shoot the moon ;  And 'tis cash always
keeps our pipes in tune.  Cash! cash! &amp;c.;  [The Melodist and Mirthful Olio, An Elegant
Collection of the Most Popular Songs, vol. IV, London, 1829]


