shuffle (n.)

1620s, an evasion, trick; 1640s, a wavering or undecided course of behavior meant to deceive; from
shuffle (v.). Meaning a slow, heavy, irregular manner of moving is from 1847; that of a dance in
which the feet are shuffled is from 1640s. Meaning a change in the order of playing-cards is from
1650s. Phrase lost in the shuffle is from 1930.


shuffle (v.)

1530s, put together hastily, probably from Middle English shovelen to move with dragging feet,
itself probably a frequentative form of shoven (see shove (v.)). Or perhaps from Low German
schuffeln to walk clumsily, deal dishonestly.    Of playing cards, first recorded 1560s. Meaning
walk slowly without lifting the feet is from 1570s. Meaning push along gradually is from 1560s.
Meaning move from one place to another is from 1690s. Meaning do a shuffle dance is from 1818.
Related: Shuffled; shuffling. Shuffle off get rid of, dispose of is from Shakespeare (1601).


shuffler (n.)

shifty person, 1620s, agent noun from shuffle (v.).


reshuffle (v.)

1816 of cards; 1890 of organizations; from re- back, again + shuffle (v.). Related: Reshuffled;
reshuffling. As a noun from 1861.


riffle (v.)

1754, to make choppy water, American English, perhaps a variant of ruffle make rough. The word
meaning shuffle (cards) is first recorded 1894, probably echoic; hence that of skim, leaf through
quickly (of papers, etc.) is from 1922. Related: Riffled; riffling.


flip-flop (n.)

also flip flop, thong sandal, by 1972, imitative of the sound of walking in them (flip-flap had been
used in various echoic senses, mostly echoic, since 1520s); sense of complete reversal of direction
dates from 1900.   Flip-flaps, a peculiar rollicking dance indulged in by costermongers, better
described as the double shuffle; originally a kind of somersault. [Hotten's Slang Dictionary, 1864]


trick (n.)

early 15c., a cheat, a mean ruse, from Old North French trique trick, deceit, treachery, cheating,
from trikier to deceive, to cheat, variant of Old French trichier to cheat, trick, deceive, of
uncertain origin, probably from Vulgar Latin *triccare, from Latin tricari be evasive, shuffle, from
tric&aelig; trifles, nonsense, a tangle of difficulties, of unknown origin.    Meaning a roguish
prank is recorded from 1580s; sense of the art of doing something is first attested 1610s. Meaning
prostitute's client is first attested 1915; earlier it was U.S. slang for a robbery (1865). To do
the trick accomplish one's purpose is from 1812; to miss a trick fail to take advantage of
opportunity is from 1889; from 1872 in reference to playing the card-game of whist, which might be
the original literal sense. Trick-or-treat is recorded from 1942. Trick question is from 1907.


shove (v.)

Old English scufan push away, thrust, push with violence (class II strong verb; past tense sceaf,
past participle scoven), from Proto-Germanic *skeub-, *skub- (cognates: Old Norse skufa, Old Frisian
skuva, Dutch schuiven, Old High German scioban, German schieben to push, thrust, Gothic af-skiuban),
from PIE root *skeubh- to shove (cognates: scuffle, shuffle, shovel; likely cognates outside
Germanic include Lithuanian skubti to make haste, skubinti to hasten). Related: Shoved; shoving.
Replaced by push in all but colloquial and nautical usage. Shove off leave (1844) is from boating.
Shove the queer (1859) was an old expression for to counterfeit money. Shove it had an earlier sense
of depart before it became a rude synonym for stick it (by 1941) with implied destination.


hoedown (n.)

noisy dance, 1841, apparently originally the name of a specific dance, perhaps from perceived
parallel of dance motions to those of farm chores, hence from hoe (n.).    The step of every negro
dance that was ever known, was called into requisition and admirably executed. They performed the
double shuffle, the Virginny break-down, the Kentucky heeltap, the pigeon wing, the back balance
lick, the Arkansas hoe down, with unbounded applause and irresistible effect. [Scouting Expeditions
of McCulloch's Texas Rangers, 1848]    Hoe corn, hill tobacco is noted as a line in the chorus of a
slave song in 1838, and Washington Irving writes of a dance called hoe corn and dig potatoes in
1807.    The same precedence is repeated until all the merchandise is disposed of, the table is then
banished the room, and the whole party hoe it down in straight fours and set dances, till the hour
when ghosts wandering here and there, troop home to church-yards. This is what we kintra folk call a
strauss. [Der Teufelskerl. A Tale of German Pennsylvania, in Burton's Gentleman's Magazine, January
1840]


