singular (adj.)

mid-14c., alone, apart; being a unit; special, unsurpassed, from Old French singuler personal
particular; distinctive; singular in number (12c., Modern French singulier) or directly from Latin
singularis single, solitary, one by one, one at a time; peculiar, remarkable, from singulus (see
single (adj.)). Meaning remarkably good, unusual, rare, separated from others (by excellence),
uncommon is from c.1400 in English; this also was a common meaning of Latin singularis.


singularly (adv.)

late 14c., exclusively, alone, solely; uniquely; individually; in an unusual way, especially, from
singular + -ly (2).


singularity (n.)

c.1400, unusual behavior, also singleness of aim or purpose, from Old French singulerte peculiarity
(12c., Modern French singularit&eacute;) or directly from Late Latin singularitatem (nominative
singularitas) a being alone, from singularis (see singular (adj.)). Meaning fact of being different
from others is c.1500. Mathematical sense of point at which a function takes an infinite value is
from 1893. Astronomical use is from 1965.


morituri te salutant

Latin, literally those about to die salute you, words addressed to emperor by gladiators upon
entering the arena. Third person singular is moriturus te salutat, first person singular is
moriturus te saluto.


experto crede

Latin (Aeneid, xi.283), take it from one who knows; from dative singular of expertus (see expert
(adj.)) + imperative singular of credere (see credo).


&#039;s

suffix forming the possessive singular case of most Modern English nouns; its use gradually was
extended in Middle English from Old English -es, the most common genitive inflection of masculine
and neuter nouns (such as d&aelig;g day, genitive d&aelig;ges day's).    Old English also had
genitives in -e, -re, -an, as well as mutation-genitives (boc book, plural bec), and the -es form
never was used in plural (where -a, -ra, -na prevailed), thus avoiding the verbal ambiguity of words
like kings'.    In Middle English, both the possessive singular and the common plural forms were
regularly spelled es, and when the e was dropped in pronunciation and from the written word, the
habit grew up of writing an apostrophe in place of the lost e in the possessive singular to
distinguish it from the plural. Later the apostrophe, which had come to be looked upon as the sign
of the possessive, was carried over into the plural, but was written after the s to differentiate
that form from the possessive singular. By a process of popular interpretation, the 's was supposed
to be a contraction for his, and in some cases the his was actually restored. [Samuel C. Earle, et
al, Sentences and their Elements, New York: Macmillan, 1911]    As a suffix forming some adverbs, it
represents the genitive singular ending of Old English masculine and neuter nouns and some
adjectives.


aborigine (n.)

1858, mistaken singular of aborigines (1540s; the correct singular is aboriginal), from Latin
Aborigines the first ancestors of the Romans; the first inhabitants (especially of Latium), possibly
a tribal name, or from ab origine, literally from the beginning. Extended 1789 to natives of other
countries which Europeans have colonized. Australian slang shortening Abo attested from 1922.


agenda (n.)

1650s, from Latin agenda, literally things to be done, neuter plural of agendus, gerundive of agere
to do (see act (n.)). Originally theological (opposed to matters of belief), sense of items of
business to be done at a meeting first attested 1882. If a singular is required (=one item of the
agenda) it is now agendum, the former singular agend being obsolete [Fowler].


phase (n.)

1705, phase of the moon, back-formed as a singular from Modern Latin phases, plural of phasis, from
Greek phasis appearance (of a star), phase (of the moon), from stem of phainein to show, to make
appear (see phantasm). Latin singular phasis was used in English from 1660. Non-lunar application is
first attested 1841. Meaning temporary difficult period (especially of adolescents) is attested from
1913.


were (v.)

Old English w&aelig;ron (past plural indicative of wesan) and w&aelig;re (second person singular
past indicative); see was. The forms illustrate Verner's Law (named for Danish linguist Karl Verner,
1875), which predicts the s to z sound shift, and rhotacism, which changed z to r. Wast (second
person singular) was formed 1500s on analogy of be/beest, displacing were. An intermediate form,
wert, was used in literature 17c.-18c., before were reclaimed the job.


be (v.)

Old English beon, beom, bion be, exist, come to be, become, happen, from Proto-Germanic *biju- I am,
I will be. This b-root is from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, grow, come into being, and in addition
to the words in English it yielded German present first and second person singular (bin, bist, from
Old High German bim I am, bist thou art), Latin perfective tenses of esse (fui I was, etc.), Old
Church Slavonic byti be, Greek phu- become, Old Irish bi'u I am, Lithuanian bu'ti to be, Russian
byt' to be, etc. It also is behind Sanskrit bhavah becoming, bhavati becomes, happens, bhumih earth,
world.     The modern verb to be in its entirety represents the merger of two once-distinct verbs,
the b-root represented by be and the am/was verb, which was itself a conglomerate. Roger Lass (Old
English) describes the verb as a collection of semantically related paradigm fragments, while
Weekley calls it an accidental conglomeration from the different Old English dial[ect]s. It is the
most irregular verb in Modern English and the most common. Collective in all Germanic languages, it
has eight different forms in Modern English:   BE (infinitive, subjunctive, imperative)  AM (present
1st person singular)  ARE (present 2nd person singular and all plural)  IS (present 3rd person
singular)  WAS (past 1st and 3rd persons singular)  WERE (past 2nd person singular, all plural;
subjunctive)  BEING (progressive &amp; present participle; gerund)  BEEN (perfect participle).
The paradigm in Old English was:<table width=400 bgcolor=#CCFFFF cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4
border=1><tr><td> </td><td>SING.</td><td>PL.</td></tr><tr><td>1st pres.</td><td>ic eomic
beo</td><td>we sind(on)we beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pres.</td><td>&thorn;u eart&thorn;u
bist</td><td>ge sind(on)ge beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pres.</td><td>he ishe bi&eth;</td><td>hie
sind(on)hie beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>1st pret.</td><td>ic w&aelig;s</td><td>we
w&aelig;ron</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pret.</td><td>&thorn;u w&aelig;re</td><td>ge
waeron</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pret.</td><td>heo w&aelig;s</td><td>hie w&aelig;ron</td></tr><tr><td>1st
pret. subj.</td><td>ic w&aelig;re</td><td>we w&aelig;ren</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pret.
subj.</td><td>&thorn;u w&aelig;re</td><td>ge w&aelig;ren</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pret.
subj.</td><td>Egcfer&eth; w&aelig;re</td><td>hie w&aelig;ren</td></tr></table>The b-root had no past
tense in Old English, but often served as future tense of am/was. In 13c. it took the place of the
infinitive, participle and imperative forms of am/was. Later its plural forms (we beth, ye ben, they
be) became standard in Middle English and it made inroads into the singular (I be, thou beest, he
beth), but forms of are claimed this turf in the 1500s and replaced be in the plural. For the origin
and evolution of the am/was branches of this tangle, see am and was.    That but this blow Might be
the be all, and the end all. [Macbeth I.vii.5]


eave (n.)

1570s, from Southwest Midlands dialectal eovese (singular), from Old English efes edge of a roof,
also edge of a forest, from Proto-Germanic *ubaswa-/*ubiswa (cognates: Old Frisian ose eaves, Old
High German obasa porch, hall, roof, German Obsen, Old Norse ups, Gothic ubizwa porch; German oben
above), from the root of over. Treated as plural and a new singular form eave emerged 16c.


marvel (n.)

c.1300, miracle, also wonderful story or legend, from Old French merveille a wonder, surprise,
miracle, from Vulgar Latin *miribilia (also source of Spanish maravilla, Portuguese maravilha,
Italian maraviglia), altered from Latin mirabilia wonderful things, from neuter plural of mirabilis
wonderful, marvelous, extraordinary; strange, singular, from mirari to wonder at, from mirus
wonderful (see smile). A neuter plural treated in Vulgar Latin as a feminine singular. Related:
Marvels.


assets (n.)

1530s, sufficient estate, from Anglo-French asetz (singular), from Old French assez (11c.)
sufficiency, satisfaction; compensation, noun use of adverb meaning enough, sufficiently; very much,
a great deal, from Vulgar Latin *ad satis to sufficiency, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + satis enough
(see sad).    Beginning as a legal term, sufficient estate (to satisfy debts and legacies), it
passed into general use; meaning any property that theoretically can be converted to ready money is
from 1580s. Asset is a 19c. artificial singular. Asset stripping attested from 1972.


phenomena (n.)

plural of phenomenon. Sometimes also erroneously used as a singular.


arcanum (n.)

proper singular form of arcana.


datum (n.)

proper Latin singular of data (q.v.).


nare (n.)

nostril, late 14c., singular of nares.


jakes (n.)

a privy, mid-15c., genitive singular of jack (n.).


annal (n.)

rare singular of annals (q.v.).


bacterium (n.)

c.1848, singular of bacteria (q.v.).


bicep (n.)

false singular of biceps (q.v.).


billiard

singular of billiards, used only in combinations.


buttock (n.)

late 13c., singular of buttocks (q.v.).


didst

archaic 2nd person singular past indicative of do (q.v.).


hath (v.)

archaic third person singular present indicative of have.


hast (v.)

archaic second person singular present indicative of have.


breech (n.)

back part of a gun or firearm, 1570s, from singular of breeches (q.v.).


bollock (n.)

singular of bollocks (q.v.).


mitochondrion (n.)

singular of mitochondria.


gallow

singular of gallows.


graffito (n.)

singular of graffiti (q.v.).


thee (pron.)

Old English &thorn;e (accusative and dative singular of &thorn;u thou), from Proto-Germanic *theke
(cognates: Old Frisian thi, Middle Dutch di, Old High German dih, German dich, Old Norse &thorn;ik,
Norwegian deg, Gothic &thorn;uk), from PIE *tege-, accusative of root *tu-, second person singular
pronoun (see thou). The verb meaning to use the pronoun 'thee' to someone is recorded from 1662, in
connection with the rise of Quakerism.    In Middle English, people began to use plural forms in all
cases, at first as a sign of respect to superiors, then as a courtesy to equals. By the 1600s, the
singular forms had come to represent familiarity and lack of status, and fell from use except in the
case of a few dialects, notably in the north of England. People in Lancashire north of the
Rossendale Forest and Yorkshire formerly were noted for use of the singular second person pronouns
tha (nom.) and thee (acc.). For religious reasons (Christian equality of persons, but also justified
as grammatically correct), the Quakers also retained the familiar forms.    Thou and Thee was a sore
cut to proud flesh and them that sought self-honour, who, though they would say it to God and
Christ, could not endure to have it said to themselves. So that we were often beaten and abused, and
sometimes in danger of our lives, for using those words to some proud men, who would say, What! you
ill-bred clown, do you Thou me? as though Christian breeding consisted in saying You to one; which
is contrary to all their grammar and teaching books, by which they instructed their youth. [George
Fox's journal, 1661]   <hr />   While the Quakers originally adopted thee and thou on account of
their grammatical correctness, they soon fell into the careless habit of using thee, the objective,
instead of thou, the nominative. Common illustrations are: How does thee do? or Will thee, etc.
[George Fox Tucker, A Quaker Home, Boston, 1891]


Magus (n.)

member of the ancient Persian priestly caste, late 14c., singular of magi (q.v.).


likes (n.)

predilections, preferences, 1851, plural of like (n.); earlier used in singular in this sense (early
15c.).


metaphysics (n.)

1560s, plural of Middle English metaphisik, methaphesik (late 14c.), branch of speculation which
deals with the first causes of things, from Medieval Latin metaphysica, neuter plural of Medieval
Greek (ta) metaphysika, from Greek ta meta ta physika the (works) after the Physics, title of the 13
treatises which traditionally were arranged after those on physics and natural sciences in
Aristotle's writings. The name was given c.70 B.C.E. by Andronicus of Rhodes, and was a reference to
the customary ordering of the books, but it was misinterpreted by Latin writers as meaning the
science of what is beyond the physical. See meta- + physics. The word originally was used in English
in the singular; plural form predominated after 17c., but singular made a comeback late 19c. in
certain usages under German influence.


spectacles (n.)

glass lenses to help a person's sight, early 15c., from plural of spectacle. Earlier in singular
form (late 14c.).


incunabulum (n.)

1861, singular of incunabula; taken up (originally in German) as a word for any book printed late
15c., in the infancy of the printer's art.


exit (n.)

1530s, from Latin exit he or she goes out, third person singular present indicative of exire go out,
from ex- out (see ex-) + ire to go (see ion). Also from Latin exitus a leaving, a going out, noun of
action from exire. Originally in English a Latin stage direction (late 15c.); sense of door for
leaving is 1786. Meaning departure (originally from the stage) is from 1580s. The verb is c.1600,
from the noun; it ought to be left to stage directions and the clunky jargon of police reports.
Related: Exited; exiting.  Those who neither know Latin nor read plays are apt to forget or not know
that this is a singular verb with plural exeunt. [Fowler]


clevis (n.)

U-shaped iron bar with holes for a bolt or pin, used as a fastener, 1590s, of unknown origin,
perhaps from the root of cleave (v.2). Also uncertain is whether it is originally a plural or a
singular.


mathematic (n.)

late 14c. as singular noun, replaced by early 17c. by mathematics, from Latin mathematica (plural),
from Greek mathematike tekhne mathematical science, feminine singular of mathematikos (adj.)
relating to mathematics, scientific, astronomical; disposed to learn, from mathema (genitive
mathematos) science, knowledge, mathematical knowledge; a lesson, literally that which is learnt;
related to manthanein to learn, from PIE root *mendh- to learn (cognates: Greek menthere to care,
Lithuanian mandras wide-awake, Old Church Slavonic madru wise, sage, Gothic mundonsis to look at,
German munter awake, lively). As an adjective, 1540s, from French math&#233;matique or directly from
Latin mathematicus.


dare (v.)

from first and third person singular of Old English durran to brave danger, dare; venture, presume,
from Proto-Germanic *ders- (cognates: Old Norse dearr, Old High German giturran, Gothic gadaursan),
from PIE *dhers- to dare, be courageous (cognates: Sanskrit dadharsha to be bold; Old Persian
dar&#353;- to dare; Greek thrasys bold; Old Church Slavonic druzate to be bold, dare; Lithuanian
dristi to dare, drasus courageous).    An Old English irregular preterite-present verb: darr,
dearst, dear were first, second and third person singular present indicative; mostly regularized
16c., though past tense dorste survived as durst, but is now dying, persisting mainly in northern
English dialect. Meaning to challenge or defy (someone) is first recorded 1570s.


toto

Latin ablative singular (masc. and neuter) of totus whole, entire (see total (adj.)).


Taliban (n.)

Sunni fundamentalist movement begun in Afghanistan, Pashto plural of Arabic t&#257;lib student; so
called because it originated among students in Pakistani religious schools. Group formed c.1993.
Often incorrectly treated as singular in English.


loquitur

stage direction, he or she speaks, Latin, third person present indicative singular of loqui to talk
(see locution).


cometh (v.)

obsolete or poetic 2nd and 3rd person singular of come, from Old English cyme&eth;.


vide

see, Latin imperative singular of videre to see (see vision).


says

third person singular of say (v.), c.1300, eventually replacing saith.


vade

Latin, imperative singular of vadere to go (see vamoose).


plains (n.)

of the American Midwest, 1755 (in singular form from 1680s), see plain (n.). Plains Indian attested
from 1844.


