slap (n.)

mid-15c., probably of imitative origin, similar to Low German slappe, German Schlappe. Figurative
meaning insult, reprimand is attested from 1736. Slap-happy (1936) originally meant punch-drunk.
Slap on the wrist very mild punishment dates from 1914.


slapstick (n.)

also slap-stick, originally (1896) a device consisting of two sticks fastened together so as to slap
loudly when a clown or actor hits somebody with it, or to make a sound-effect offstage; from slap
and stick (n.). As an adjective by 1906. Meaning farcical physical comedy, horseplay (1916) is short
for slapstick comedy or humor.


slap (v.)

late 15c., strike with the open hand, from slap (n.). As an adverb, 1670s, suddenly; 1829, directly.
Related: Slapped; slapping.


slapdash (adv.)

1670s, from slap (v.) + dash (v.). As an adjective, dashing, offhand, careless, from 1792. As a
noun, rough-coat, coarse plaster, from 1796.


slapper (n.)

large or impressive person or thing, 1781, agent noun from slap (v.). Also see whopper.


slapshot (n.)

in ice hockey, 1942, from slap (v.) + shot (n.).


buffet (n.2)

c.1200, blow struck with a fist or weapon, from Old French bufet slap, punch, diminutive of bufe a
blow, slap, punch; puff of wind, figuratively cunning trick, probably echoic of the sound of
something soft being hit.


buffet (v.)

c.1200, to strike with the fist or hand; cuff, box, slap;  from Old French bufeter to strike, slap,
punch, from bufet (see buffet (n.2)). Related: Buffeted; buffeting.


smack (v.2)

to slap a flat surface with the hand, 1835, from smack (n.) in this sense; perhaps influenced by Low
German smacken to strike, throw, which is likely of imitative origin (compare Swedish smak slap,
Middle Low German smacken, Frisian smakke, Dutch smakken to fling down, Lithuanian smagiu to strike,
knock down, whip).


spat (n.1)

petty quarrel, 1804, American English, of unknown origin; perhaps somehow imitative (compare spat
smack, slap, attested from 1823).


flap (n.)

mid-14c., flappe a blow, slap, probably imitative of the sound of striking. Meaning something that
hangs down is first recorded 1520s. Sense of motion or noise like a bird's wing is 1774; meaning
disturbance, noisy tumult is 1916, British slang.


buffer (n.)

1835, agent noun from obsolete verb buff make a dull sound when struck (mid-16c.), from Old French
bufe a blow, slap, punch (see buffet (n.2)); hence also something that absorbs a blow.


smack (v.1)

make a sharp noise with the lips, 1550s, probably of imitative origin (see smack (v.2)). With
adverbial force, suddenly, directly, from 1782; extended form smack-dab is attested from 1892,
American English colloquial (slap-dab is from 1886).


slam (v.)

1690s, to beat, slap; 1775 as to shut with force, from slam (n.1). Meaning throw or push with force
is from 1870. Meaning say uncomplimentary things about is from 1916. Related: Slammed; slamming.


lollipop (n.)

1784, lolly-pops sweetmeats, soft candy, perhaps related to loll to dangle (the tongue) + pop
strike, slap. Or the first element may be northern dialectal lolly the tongue. Meaning hard candy on
a stick is from 1920s.


affront (v.)

early 14c., from Old French afronter to face, confront, to slap in the face (13c.), from Late Latin
affrontare to strike against, from Latin ad frontem to the face, from frons (genitive frontis)
forehead (see front (n.)). Related: Affronted; affronting.


coup (n.)

c.1400, from Old French coup, colp a blow, strike (12c.), from Medieval Latin colpus, from Vulgar
Latin colapus, from Latin colaphus a cuff, box on the ear, from Greek kolaphos a blow, slap. Meaning
a sudden decisive act is 1852, short for coup d'etat. In Modern French the word is a workhorse,
describing everything from a pat on the back to a whipping, and is used as well of thunder, gusts of
wind, gunshots, and chess moves.


slam (n.1)

1670s, a severe blow, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian slamre, Swedish slemma
to slam, bang) of imitative origin. Meaning a violent closing of a door is from 1817. Meaning an
insult, put-down is from 1884. Slam-bang recorded by 1806 (also slap-bang, 1785). Slam-dunk is from
1976; early use often in reference to Julius Erving. Slam-dance is attested by 1987 (slam by itself
in this sense is recorded from 1983).


rap (n.)

c.1300, a quick, light blow, stroke, also a fart (late 15c.), native or borrowed from a Scandinavian
source (compare Danish rap, Swedish rapp light blow); either way probably of imitative origin
(compare slap, clap).    Slang meaning rebuke, blame, responsibility is from 1777; specific meaning
criminal indictment (as in rap sheet, 1960) is from 1903. To beat the rap is from 1927. Meaning
music with improvised words first in New York City slang, 1979 (see rap (v.2)).


punch (n.3)

a quick blow with the fist, by 1570s, probably from punch (v.). In early use also of blows with the
foot or jabs with a staff or club. Originally especially of blows that sink in to some degree (...
whom he unmercifully bruises and batters from head to foot: here a slap in the chaps, there a black
eye, now a punch in the stomach, and then a kick on the breech, Monthly Review, 1763). Figurative
sense of forceful, vigorous quality is recorded from 1911. To beat (someone) to the punch in the
figurative sense is from 1915, a metaphor from boxing (attested by 1913). Punch line (also punch-
line) is from 1915 (originally in popular-song writing); punch-drunk is from 1915 (alternative form
slug-nutty is from 1933).


sleep (n.)

Old English sl&aelig;p sleep, sleepiness, inactivity, from Proto-Germanic *slepaz, from the root of
sleep (v.); compare cognate Old Saxon slap, Old Frisian slep, Middle Dutch sl&aelig;p, Dutch slaap,
Old High German slaf, German Schlaf, Gothic sleps.    Personified in English from late 14c., on
model of Latin Somnus), Greek Hypnos. Figurative use for repose of death was in Old English; to put
(an animal) to sleep kill painlessly is recorded from 1923 (a similar imagery is in cemetery). Sleep
deprivation attested from 1906. Sleep-walker somnambulist is attested from 1747; sleep-walking is
from 1840. To be able to do something in (one's) sleep easily is recorded from 1953.


