sleek (v.)

make sleek, mid-15c., a variant of slick (v.). Related: Sleeked; sleeking.


sleek (adj.)

1580s, variant of Middle English slike (see slick (adj.)). Originally of healthy-looking animal
hair; applied to persons 1630s, with sense of plump and smooth-skinned. Figurative meaning slick,
fawning, flattering is from 1590s.


slick (adj.)

early 14c., smooth, glossy, sleek (of skin or hair); sense of clever in deception is first recorded
1590s; that of first-class, excellent is from 1833. Related: Slickly; slickness.


smarmy (adj.)

smooth and sleek (1909); ingratiating, unctuous, 1924, from smarm + -y (2). Related: Smarmily;
smarminess.


smug (adj.)

1550s, trim, neat, spruce, smart, possibly an alteration of Low German smuk trim, neat, from Middle
Low German sm&uuml;cken to adorn (originally to dress, secondary sense of words meaning to creep or
slip into), from the same source as smock. The meaning having a self-satisfied air is from 1701, an
extension of the sense of smooth, sleek (1580s), which was commonly used of attractive women and
girls. Related: Smugly; smugness.


slick (v.)

Old English -slician (in nigslicod newly made sleek), from Proto-Germanic *slikojan, from base
*slikaz (cognates: Old Norse slikr smooth, Old High German slihhan to glide, German schleichen to
creep, crawl, sneak, Dutch slijk mud, mire), from PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from root
*(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)). Related: Slicked; slicking.


slight (adj.)

early 14c., flat, smooth; hairless, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse slettr
smooth, sleek, from Proto-Germanic *slikhtaz (cognates: Old Saxon slicht; Low German slicht smooth,
plain common; Old English -sliht level, attested in eor&eth;slihtes level with the ground; Old
Frisian sliucht smooth, slight, Middle Dutch sleht even, plain, Old High German sleht, Gothic
slaihts smooth), probably from a collateral form of PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from
root *(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)).    Sense evolution probably is from smooth (c.1300), to slim,
slender; of light texture, hence not good or strong; insubstantial, trifling, inferior,
insignificant (early 14c.). Meaning small in amount is from 1520s. Sense of German cognate schlecht
developed from smooth, plain, simple to bad, mean, base, and as it did it was replaced in the
original senses by schlicht, a back-formation from schlichten to smooth, to plane, a derivative of
schlecht in the old sense [Klein].


