smart aleck (n.)

1865, of unknown origin, perhaps in reference to Aleck Hoag, notorious pimp, thief, and confidence
man in New York City in early 1840s [Barnhart]. See smart (adj.). Related: Smart-alecky.


smart money (n.)

money bet by those in the know, 1926, from smart (adj.). The same phrase earlier meant money paid to
sailors, soldiers, workers, etc., who have been disabled while on the job (1690s), from a noun
derivative of smart (v.). Also money paid to obtain the discharge of a recruit (1760), hence money
paid to escape some unpleasant situation (1818). Sometimes in legal use, damages in excess of injury
done.


smart-arse

see smart-ass.


smart (adj.)

late Old English smeart painful, severe, stinging; causing a sharp pain, related to smeortan (see
smart (v.)). Meaning executed with force and vigor is from c.1300. Meaning quick, active, clever is
attested from c.1300, from the notion of cutting wit, words, etc., or else keen in bargaining.
Meaning trim in attire first attested 1718, ascending from the kitchen to the drawing-room c.1880
[Weekley]. For sense evolution, compare sharp (adj.).    In reference to devices, the sense of
behaving as though guided by intelligence (as in smart bomb) first attested 1972. Smarts good sense,
intelligence, is first recorded 1968. Smart cookie is from 1948.


smarten (v.)

to make smart, to spruce up, to improve appearance, 1786, from smart (adj.) in its sense of spruce,
trim + -en (1). Related: Smartened; smartening.


smart-ass

also smartass, 1960 (adj.), 1962 (n.), from smart (adj.) + ass (n.2).


smart (n.)

sharp pain, c.1200, from sharp (adj.). Cognate with Middle Dutch smerte, Dutch smart, Old High
German smerzo, German Schmerz pain.


smartness (n.)

c.1300, severity, from smart (adj.) + -ness. From 1752 as trimness, 1800 as cleverness.


smartly (adv.)

early 13c., vigorously, from smart (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning handsomely is from 1836.


smarty (n.)

would-be witty or clever person, 1854, from smart (n.) + -y (3). Extended form smarty-pants first
attested 1939.


smartmouth (n.)

1968, from smart (adj.) + mouth (n.).


smart (v.)

Old English smeortan be painful, from Proto-Germanic *smarta- (cognates: Middle Dutch smerten, Dutch
smarten, Old High German smerzan, German schmerzen to pain, originally to bite), from PIE *smerd-
pain, an extension of the root *mer- (2) to rub; to harm (cognates: Greek smerdnos terrible,
dreadful, Sanskrit mardayati grinds, rubs, crushes, Latin mordere to bite). Related: Smarted;
smarting.


spruce (adj.)

neat, smart in dress and appearance, dapper, brisk, 1580s, from spruce leather (mid-15c.; see spruce
(n.)), a type of leather imported from Prussia in the 1400s and 1500s which was used in England to
make a popular style of jerkin that was considered smart-looking.


nifty (adj.)

smart, stylish, 1868, of unknown origin, perhaps theatrical slang, first attested in a poem by Bret
Harte, who said it was a shortened, altered form of magnificat. Related: Niftily; niftiness.


toff (n.)

lower-class London slang for stylish dresser, man of the smart set, 1851, said by OED to be probably
an alteration of tuft, formerly an Oxford University term for a nobleman or gentleman-commoner
(1755), in reference to the gold ornamental tassel worn on the caps of undergraduates at Oxford and
Cambridge whose fathers were peers with votes in the House of Lords.


smack (n.2)

smart, sharp sound made by the lips, 1560s, from smack (v.1). Meaning a loud kiss is recorded from
c.1600. Meaning sharp sound made by hitting something with the flat of the hand is from c.1746.


brainiac (n.)

very smart person, 1982, U.S. slang, from brain (n.) + ending from ENIAC, etc. Brainiac also was the
name of a comic book villain in the Superman series and a do-it-yourself computer building kit, both
from the late 1950s, and the word may bear traces of either or both of these.


trig (adj.)

smart, trim, c.1200, from Old Norse tryggr firm, trusty, true, from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- (see
true (adj.)). A Scottish and northern word only until 19c. Related: Trigness.


mordacious (adj.)

given to biting, 1640s (originally figurative), from Latin mordac-, stem of mordax, from mordere to
bite, perhaps from PIE root mer- (2) to rub, harm (see smart (v.)). Related: Mordacity.


outsmart (v.)

to prove too clever for, 1926, from out + smart (adj.). Related: Outsmarted; outsmarting.


snappy (adj.)

quick, energetic, 1825, from snap (v.) + -y (2). Meaning clever, smart is from 1871; that of neat
and stylishly elegant is from 1881. Related: Snappily; snappiness. Command make it snappy attested
from 1910.


natty (adj.)

1785, neat, smart, originally slang, perhaps an altered form of 16c. nettie neat, natty, from Middle
English net pure, fine, elegant (see neat). Related: Nattily.


street-wise (adj.)

1951, from street + wise (adj.) smart, savvy.


weltschmerz (n.)

pessimism about life, 1872 (1863 as a German word in English), from German Weltschmerz, coined 1810
by Jean Paul Richter, from Welt world (see world) + Schmerz pain (see smart (n.)). Popularized in
German by Heine.


perk (v.)

late 14c., to make oneself trim or smart, perhaps from Old North French perquer to perch (Modern
French percher; see perch (n.1)), on notion of a bird preening its plumage. Sense of raise oneself
briskly is first attested 1520s; perk up recover liveliness is from 1650s. Related: Perked; perking.


smug (adj.)

1550s, trim, neat, spruce, smart, possibly an alteration of Low German smuk trim, neat, from Middle
Low German sm&uuml;cken to adorn (originally to dress, secondary sense of words meaning to creep or
slip into), from the same source as smock. The meaning having a self-satisfied air is from 1701, an
extension of the sense of smooth, sleek (1580s), which was commonly used of attractive women and
girls. Related: Smugly; smugness.


commentator (n.)

late 14c., writer of commentaries, agent noun in Latin form from comment or commentary (Latin
commentator meant inventor, author). Middle English also had a noun commentate, attested from early
15c. Meaning writer of notes or expository comments is from 1640s; sense of one who gives commentary
(originally in sports) is from 1928.    Well, Jem, what is a commentator?[]--Why, was Jem's reply, I
suppose it must be the commonest of all taturs. [Smart Sayings of Bright Children, collected by
Howard Paul, 1886]


mordant (adj.)

late 15c., caustic (of words, speech), from Middle French mordant, literally biting, present
participle of mordre to bite, from Latin mordere to bite, bite into; nip, sting; figuratively to
pain, cause hurt, perhaps from PIE root mer- (2) to rub away, harm (see smart (v.)). Related:
Mordantly. The noun sense in dyeing is first recorded 1791; the adjective in this sense is from
1902. Related: Mordancy; mordantly.


rakish (adj.)

1706, debauched, disreputable, from rake (n.2) + -ish. Related: Rakishly; rakishness.    The meaning
smart, jaunty, dashing (1824) is said to be a different word, probably from rake slant, slope
(1620s), used especially in reference to a ship's hull or sails, of uncertain origin, perhaps from
Scandinavian (compare Old Swedish raka project, reach; Danish rage protrude, project) related to Old
English reccan stretch. The piratical craft of former times were distinguished for their rakish
build [Century Dictionary].


dock (v.)

cut an animal's tail, late 14c., from dok (n.) fleshy part of an animal's tail (mid-14c.), related
to Old English -docca muscle, from Proto-Germanic *dokko something round, bundle (cognates: Old
Norse dokka bundle, girl, Danish dukke doll, German Docke small column, bundle, doll, smart girl).
Meaning to reduce (someone's) pay for some infraction is first recorded 1822. Related: Docked;
docking.


Christmas (n.)

late Old English Cristes m&aelig;sse, from Christ (and retaining the original vowel sound) + mass
(n.2).    Written as one word from mid-14c. As a verb from 1590s. Father Christmas first attested in
a carol attributed to Richard Smart, Rector of Plymtree (Devon) from 1435-77. Christmas tree in
modern sense first attested 1835 in American English, from German Weihnachtsbaum. Christmas cards
first designed 1843, popular by 1860s. Christmas Eve is Middle English Cristenmesse Even (c.1300).


honorable (adj.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), from Old French honorable, from Latin honorabilis that procures
honor, estimable, honorable, from honorare to honor (see honor (n.)). Related: Honorably.    Now,
George, you must divide the cake honorably with your brother Charlie.--George: What is 'honorably,'
mother? It means that you must give him the largest piece.--George: Then, mother, I should rather
Charlie would cut it. [Smart Sayings of Bright Children, collected by Howard Paul, 1886]


pungent (adj.)

1590s, sharp, poignant (of pain or grief), from Latin pungentem (nominative pungens), present
participle of pungere to prick, pierce, sting, figuratively, to vex, grieve, trouble, afflict,
related to pugnus fist (see pugnacious). Meaning having powerful odor or taste first recorded 1660s.
Literal sense sharp, pointed (c.1600) is very rare in English, mostly limited to botany. Middle
English and early Modern English also had a now-obsolete verb punge to prick, pierce; to smart,
cause to sting, from Latin pungere. Related: Pungently.


sorry (adj.)

Old English sarig distressed, grieved, full of sorrow (not found in the physical sense of sore),
from Proto-Germanic *sairiga- painful (cognates: Old Saxon serag, Middle Dutch seerigh sore; sad,
sorry, Dutch zeerig sore, full of sores, Old High German serag, Swedish s&#229;rig sore, full of
sores), from *sairaz pain (physical and mental); related to *saira- suffering, sick, ill (see sore
(adj.)). Meaning wretched, worthless, poor first recorded mid-13c. Spelling shift from -a- to -o- by
influence of sorrow. Apologetic sense (short for I'm sorry) is attested from 1834; phrase sorry
about that popularized 1960s by U.S. TV show Get Smart. Related: Sorrily; sorriness.


card (n.1)

c.1400, playing card, from Middle French carte (14c.), from Latin charta leaf of paper, tablet, from
Greek khartes layer of papyrus, probably from Egyptian. Form influenced after 14c. by Italian carta
(see chart (n.)).    Sense of playing cards also is oldest in French. Sense in English extended by
1590s to similar small, flat, stiff bits of paper. Meaning printed ornamental greetings for special
occasions is from 1869. Application to clever or original persons (1836, originally with an
adjective, as in smart card) is from the playing-card sense, via expressions such as sure card an
expedient certain to attain an object (c.1560).   Card table is from 1713. Card-sharper is 1859.
House of cards in the figurative sense is from 1640s, first attested in Milton. To have a card up
(one's) sleeve is 1898; to play the _______ card is from 1886, originally the Orange card, meaning
appeal to Northern Irish Protestant sentiment (for political advantage).


quiz (n.)

brief examination of a student on some subject, 1852, perhaps from quiz (v.), or from slang quiz odd
person (1782, perhaps originally university slang), via the notion of schoolboy prank or joke played
at the expense of a person deemed a quiz (a noun sense attested frequently 1840s).    A Quiz, in the
common acceptation of the word, signifies one who thinks, speaks, or acts differently from the rest
of the world in general. But, as manners and opinions are as various as mankind, it will be
difficult to say who shall be termed a Quiz, and who shall not: each person indiscriminately
applying the name of Quiz to every one who differs from himself .... [The London Magazine, November,
1783]     According to OED, the anecdote that credits this word to a bet by the Dublin theater-
manager Daly or Daley that he could coin a word is regarded by authorities as doubtful and the first
record of it appears to be in 1836 (in Smart's Walker Remodelled; the story is omitted in the
edition of 1840).    The word Quiz is a sort of a kind of a word  That people apply to some being
absurd;  One who seems, as t'were oddly your fancy to strike  In a sort of a fashion you somehow
don't like  A mixture of odd, and of queer, and all that  Which one hates, just, you know, as some
folks hate a cat;  A comical, whimsical, strange, droll -- that is,  You know what I mean; 'tis --
in short, -- 'tis a quiz!    [from Etymology of Quiz, Charles Dibdin, 1842]


little (adj.)

Old English lytel not large, not much; short in distance or time; unimportant, also used in late Old
English as a noun, small piece; a short time, from Proto-Germanic *lutilla- (cognates: Old Saxon
luttil, Dutch luttel, Old High German luzzil, German l&uuml;tzel, Gothic leitils little), perhaps
originally a diminutive of the root of Old English lyt little, few, from PIE *leud- small. Often
synonymous with small, but capable of emotional implications which small is not [OED].    Phrase the
little woman wife attested from 1795. Little people the faeries is from 1726; as children, it is
attested from 1752; as ordinary people (opposed to the great), it is attested from 1827. Little Neck
clams (1884) are so called for Little Neck, Long Island, a neck of land on the island's North Shore.
Little by little is from late 15c. (litylle be litille). Little green men space aliens is from 1950.
Little black dress is from 1939.    At the beginning of summer, smart women who stay in town like to
wear sheer little black dresses. Because most little black dresses look alike, retailers struggle
each year to find something which will make them seem new. [Life, June 13, 1939]   Little Orphan
Annie originally was (as Little Orphant Annie) the character in James Whitcomb Riley's 1885 poem,
originally titled Elf Child. The U.S. newspaper comic strip created by Harold Gray (1894-1968)
debuted in 1924 in the New York Daily News.    LITTLE Orphant Annie's come to our house to stay,
An' wash the cups an' saucers up, an' brush the crumbs away,  An' shoo the chickens off the porch,
an' dust the hearth, an' sweep,  An' make the fire, an' bake the bread, an' earn her board-an'-keep;
An' all us other childern, when the supper-things is done,  We set around the kitchen fire an' has
the mostest fun  A-list'nin' to the witch-tales 'at Annie tells about,  An' the Gobble-uns 'at gits
you  Ef you  Don't  Watch  Out!  [Riley, Elf Child]


