snow (n.)

Old English snaw snow, that which falls as snow; a fall of snow; a snowstorm, from Proto-Germanic
*snaiwaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German sneo, Old Frisian and Middle Low German sne,
Middle Dutch snee, Dutch sneeuw, German Schnee, Old Norse snjor, Gothic snaiws snow), from PIE root
*sniegwh- snow; to snow (cognates: Greek nipha, Latin nix (genitive nivis), Old Irish snechta, Irish
sneachd, Welsh nyf, Lithuanian sniegas, Old Prussian snaygis, Old Church Slavonic snegu, Russian
snieg', Slovak sneh snow). The cognate in Sanskrit, snihyati, came to mean he gets wet. As slang for
cocaine it is attested from 1914.


snowbird (n.)

also snow-bird, from 1680s in reference to various types of birds associated with snow, from snow
(n.) + bird (n.1). From 1923 in reference to northern U.S. workers who went to the South in the
winter months to work; by 1979 in reference to tourists.


snow (v.)

c.1300, from the noun, replacing Old English sniwan, which would have yielded modern snew (which
existed as a parallel form until 17c. and, in Yorkshire, even later), from the root of snow (n.).
The Old English verb is cognate with Middle Dutch sneuuwen, Dutch sneeuwen, Old Norse snjova,
Swedish sn&#246;ga.  Also &thorn;ikke as snow &thorn;at snew,  Or al so hail &thorn;at stormes blew.
[Robert Mannyng of Brunne, transl. Wace's Chronicle, c.1330]    The figurative sense of overwhelm;
surround, cover, and imprison (as deep snows can do to livestock) is 1880, American English, in
phrase to snow (someone) under. Snow job strong, persistent persuasion in a dubious cause is World
War II armed forces slang, probably from the same metaphoric image.


snow-plow (n.)

also snowplow, snow-plough, 1792, first mentioned in a New Hampshire context, from snow (n.) + plow
(n.).


snow-tire (n.)

1952, from snow (n.) + tire (n.). Earlier mud-and-snow tire (1948).


snowfall (n.)

1821, fall of snow, especially a quiet one (as distinguished from a snowstorm), from snow (n.) +
storm (n.). From 1875 as amount that falls at a place in a given time.


Snowdon

mountain in Caernarvonshire, northern Wales, from English snow (n.) + Old English dun hill, mountain
(see down (n.2); presumably translating a former Celtic name. The height is snow-covered much of the
year.


snowman (n.)

also snow-man, 1827, from snow (n.) + man (n.).


snow-blind (adj.)

1748, from snow (n.) + blind (adj.).


snow-goose (n.)

1771, from snow (n.) + goose (n.).


snow-shoe (n.)

also snowshoe, 1670s, from snow (n.) + shoe (n.). Related: Snowshoes.


snow-white (adj.)

Old English snawhwit, from snow (n.) + white (adj.). Similar formation in Dutch sneeuwwit, Middle
Low German snewhit, German schneeweiss, Old Norse sn&#230;hvitr, Swedish sn&#246;hvit, Danish
snehvid. The fairy tale is so-called from 1885, translating German Schneewittchen in Grimm; the
German name used in English by 1858.


snowmobile (n.)

1931, in reference to Admiral Byrd's expedition, from snow (n.) + ending from automobile, etc.


snowdrop (n.)

early flower, 1660s, from snow (n.) + drop (n.).


snowflake (n.)

1734, from snow (n.) + flake (n.).


snowbank (n.)

1779, from snow (n.) + bank (n.2).


snowdrift (n.)

c.1300, from snow (n.) + drift (n.).


snowbound (adj.)

1814, from snow (n.) + bound (adj.1).


snowstorm (n.)

1771, from snow (n.) + storm (n.).


snowball (n.)

c.1400, from snow (n.) + ball (n.1). Similar formation in West Frisian sniebal, Middle Dutch
sneubal, German Schneeball, Danish snebold. Expression snowball's chance (in hell) no chance is
recorded by 1910.


snowy (adj.)

Old English snawig; see snow (n.) + -y (2). Related: Snowiness. Similar formation in Middle Low
German sneig, Old High German snewac, German schneeig, Old Norse sn&#230;ugr, Swedish sn&#246;gig,
Danish sneig.


neve (n.)

field of granular snow, firn, 1843, from French n&eacute;v&eacute; (19c.), probably from Savoyard
n&eacute;vi mass of snow, from Latin nivem (nominative nix) snow (source of French neige), from PIE
root *sneigwh- snow, to snow (see snow (n.)).


chiono-

before vowels chion-, word-forming element meaning snow, from Latinized form of Greek khion snow,
related to kheima, kheimon winter (see hibernation).


fog (n.1)

thick, obscuring mist, 1540s, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Danish fog spray, shower,
snowdrift, Old Norse fok snow flurry, fjuk snow storm. Compare also Old English fuht, Dutch vocht,
German Feucht moist. Figurative phrase in a fog at a loss what to do first recorded c.1600.


Himalaya

from Sanskrit himalayah, literally abode of snow, from hima snow (see hibernation) + alaya abode.
Related: Himalayas; Himalayan.


slush (n.)

1640s, melting snow, snow and water, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian and
Swedish slask slushy ground; obsolete Danish slus sleet), all probably imitative of the sound of
sloshing. Slush fund is first attested 1839, from an earlier sense of slush refuse fat (1756); the
money from the sale of a ship's slush was distributed among the officers, which was the original
sense of the phrase. The extended meaning money collected for bribes and to buy influence is first
recorded 1874, no doubt with suggestions of greasing palms.


drift (n.)

c.1300, literally a being driven (of snow, etc.); not recorded in Old English; either a suffixed
form of drive (v.) (compare thrift/thrive) or borrowed from Old Norse drift snow drift, or Middle
Dutch drift pasturage, drove, flock, both from Proto-Germanic *driftiz (cognates: Danish and Swedish
drift, German Trift), from PIE root *dhreibh- to drive, push (see drive (v.)). Sense of what one is
getting at is from 1520s. Meaning controlled slide of a sports car attested by 1955.


firn (n.)

consolidated snow, the raw material of glaciers, 1853, literally last year's snow,
n&eacute;v&eacute;, from German Firn, from Swiss dialectal firn of last year, from Middle High
German virne old, from Old High German firni, related to Old English fyrn old, Gothic fairns of last
year, from Proto-Germanic *fur-/*for- (see first). The only English relic of a useful word meaning
of last year that was widespread in Indo-European languages. It has cognates in Lithuanian pernai
last year, Greek perysi a year ago, last year, Sanskrit parut of last year.


Tacoma

city in Washington State, U.S., from Lushootseed (Salishan) /tequbed/ snow-covered mountain, in
reference to nearby Mount Rainier.


thaw (n.)

the melting of ice or snow, also spell of weather causing this, c.1400, from thaw (v.). Figurative
sense is from 1590s; specifically relaxation of political harshness or hostility from 1950, an image
from the Cold War.


white-out (n.)

1946 as an extreme snow condition on the U.S. prairie, from white as a verb + out (adv.). From 1977
as a liquid correction for paper.


Lebanon

name of a nation in western Asia, from Semitic root l-b-n white, probably in reference to snow-
capped peaks, or possibly to chalk or limestone cliffs. The Greek name of the island Lemnos is of
Phoenician origin and from the same root.


flurry (n.)

snow squall 1828, American English, with earlier senses of commotion, etc., dating to 1680s; perhaps
imitative, or else from 17c. flurr to scatter, fly with a whirring noise, perhaps from Middle
English flouren to sprinkle, as with flour (late 14c.).


flaw (n.)

early 14c., a flake (of snow), also in Middle English a spark of fire; a splinter, from Old Norse
flaga stone slab, flake (see flagstone); sense of defect, fault first recorded 1580s, first of
character, later (c.1600) of material things; probably via notion of a fragment broken off.


Chian (adj.)

pertaining to the Greek island of Chios, 1630s. The island name is of uncertain origin, perhaps
related to Greek khion snow.


freshet (n.)

1590s, stream flowing into the sea, from fresh (adj.1) in a now obsolete sense of flood, stream of
fresh water (1530s). Old English had fersceta in the same sense. Meaning flood caused by rain or
melting snow is from 1650s.


caribou (n.)

also cariboo, 1660s, from Canadian French caribou, from Micmac (Algonquian) kaleboo or a related
Algonquian name, literally pawer, scratcher, from its kicking snow aside to feed on moss and grass.


Caucasus (n.)

mountain range between Europe and the Middle East, from Latin Caucasus, from Greek kaukasis, said by
Pliny (Natural History, book six, chap. XVII) to be from a Scythian word similar to kroy-khasis,
literally (the mountain) ice-shining, white with snow. But possibly from a Pelasgian root *kau-
meaning mountain.


flurry (v.)

1757 in the commotion sense, from flurry (n.); 1883 in the snow sense. Related: Flurried; flurries;
flurrying.


sleigh (n.)

vehicle mounted on runners for use on ice and snow, 1703, American and Canadian English, from Dutch
slee, shortened from slede (see sled (n.)). As a verb from 1728. Related: Sleighing. Sleigh-ride is
first recorded 1770; sleigh-bells is from c.1780; they originally were used to give warning of the
approach of a sleigh.


sherbet (n.)

c.1600, zerbet, drink made from diluted fruit juice and sugar, and cooled with fresh snow when
possible, from Turkish serbet, from Persian sharbat, from Arabic sharba(t) a drink, from shariba he
drank. Formerly also sherbert. Related to syrup, and compare sorbet.


ounce (n.2)

wildcat, c.1300, from Old French once lynx (13c.), from lonce, with l- mistaken as definite article,
from Vulgar Latin *luncea, from Latin lyncea lynx-like, from lynx (see lynx). Originally the common
lynx, later extended to other wildcats, now mainly used of the mountain-panther or snow leopard of
Asia.


alp (n.)

1590s, any high, snow-capped mountain, from Alps, from French Alpes, from Latin Alpes the Alps,
perhaps from altus high, or albus white or from a Celtic word (according to Servius), or a pre-Indo-
European root. Alps, the European mountain range, attested by that name in English from 1550s.


correspondent (n.)

one who communicates with another by letters, 1620s, from correspondent (adj.). The newspaper sense
is from 1711.    THE life of a newspaper correspondent, as may naturally be supposed, is one of
alternate cloud and sunshine--one day basking in an Andalusian balcony, playing a rubber at the club
on the off-nights of the Opera, being very musical when the handsome Prima Donna sings, and very
light fantastic toeish when the lively Prima Ballerina dances; another day roughing it over the
Balkan, amid sleet and snow, or starving at the tail of an ill-conditioned army, and receiving
bullets instead of billets-doux. [New Monthly Magazine, vol. 95, 1852, p.284]


wah-wah

1926, in jazz slang, in reference to the effect on brass instruments made by manipulating the mute;
of imitative origin. Later also in reference to an electric guitar effect. As an imitation of the
sound of a baby crying, it is recorded from 1938. Wah-wah pedal is recorded from 1969. Compare
Chinook jargon wawa talk, speak, call, ask, sermon, language; Cree (Algonquian) wehwew goose, Lenape
(Algonquian) wava snow goose, all probably of imitative origin.


scree (n.)

pile of debris at the base of a cliff, 1781, back-formation from screes (plural) pebbles, small
stones, from Old Norse skri&eth;a landslide, from skri&eth;a to creep, crawl; of a ship, to sail,
glide, also to slide (on snow-shoes), from Proto-Germanic *skrithanan (cognates: Old English
scri&thorn;an to go, glide, Old Saxon skridan, Dutch schrijden, Old High German scritan, German
schreiten to stride).


hibernation (n.)

1660s, from Latin hibernationem (nominative hibernatio) the action of passing the winter, noun of
action from past participle stem of hibernare to winter, pass the winter, occupy winter quarters;
related to hiems winter, from PIE *gheim- snow, winter (cognates: Sanskrit heman in winter, Hittite
gimmanza, Greek kheima, Old Church Slavonic zima, Lithuanian &#382;iema winter).


precipitation (n.)

late 15c., a casting down (of the evil angels from heaven), also, in alchemy separation of a solid
substance from a solution, from Middle French precipitation (15c.) and directly from Latin
praecipitationem (nominative praecipitatio) act or fact of falling headlong, haste, noun of action
from past participle stem of praecipitare fall, be hasty, from praeceps steep (see precipice).
Meaning sudden haste is c.1500. Meaning act of falling from a height is attested from 1610s.
Meteorological sense of rain, snow, dew, etc. is from 1670s.


chimera (n.)

fabulous monster, late 14c., from Old French chimere or directly from Medieval Latin chimera, from
Latin Chimaera, from Greek khimaira, name of a mythical creature, slain by Bellerophon, with a
lion's head, a goat's body, and a serpent's tail (supposedly personification of snow or winter);
literally year-old she-goat (masc. khimaros), from kheima winter season (see hibernation).
Figurative meaning wild fantasy first recorded 1580s in English (attested 13c. in French).Beestis
clepid chymeres, that han a part of ech beest, and suche ben not, no but oonly in opynyoun. [Wyclif,
Prologue]


flake (n.)

thin, flat piece, early 14c., possibly from Old English *flacca flakes of snow, from Old Norse flak
loose or torn piece (related to Old Norse fla to skin, see flay), from Proto-Germanic *flago-
(cognates: Middle Dutch vlac, Dutch vlak flat, level, Middle High German vlach, German Flocke
flake); from PIE *plak- (1) to be flat, extended form of root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane
(n.1)).


