sociologist (n.)

1843, from sociology + -ist.


meritocracy (n.)

coined 1958 by British sociologist Michael Young (1915-2002) and used in title of his book, The Rise
of the Meritocracy; from merit (n.) + -cracy. Related: Meritocratic.


folkways (n.)

coined 1907 in book of the same name by U.S. sociologist William Graham Sumner (1840-1910), who also
is credited with ethnocentrism, found in the same book. See folk (n.) + way (n.).    Folkways are
habits of the individual and customs of the society which arise from efforts to satisfy needs. ...
Then they become regulative for succeeding generations and take on the character of a social force.
[Sumner, Folkways]


organization (n.)

mid-15c., act of organizing, from Middle French organisation and directly from Medieval Latin
organizationem (nominative organizatio), noun of action from past participle stem of organizare,
from Latin organum instrument, organ (see organ). Meaning system, establishment is from 1873.
Organization man is from title of 1956 book by American sociologist William H. Whyte (1917-1999).
Related: Organizational.


new (adj.)

Old English neowe, niowe, earlier niwe new, fresh, recent, novel, unheard-of, different from the
old; untried, inexperienced, from Proto-Germanic *newjaz (cognates: Old Saxon niuwi, Old Frisian
nie, Middle Dutch nieuwe, Dutch nieuw, Old High German niuwl, German neu, Danish and Swedish ny,
Gothic niujis new), from PIE *newo- new (cognates: Sanskrit navah, Persian nau, Hittite newash,
Greek neos, Lithuanian naujas, Old Church Slavonic novu, Russian novyi, Latin novus, Old Irish nue,
Welsh newydd new).    The adverb is Old English niwe, from the adjective. New math in reference to a
system of teaching mathematics based on investigation and discovery is from 1958. New World (adj.)
to designate phenomena of the Western Hemisphere first attested 1823, in Lord Byron; the noun phrase
is recorded from 1550s. New Deal in the FDR sense attested by 1932. New school in reference to the
more advanced or liberal faction of something is from 1806. New Left (1960) was a coinage of U.S.
political sociologist C. Wright Mills (1916-1962). New light in reference to religions is from
1640s. New frontier, in U.S. politics, reform and social betterment, is from 1934 but associated
with John F. Kennedy's use of it in 1960.


