social (adj.)

late 15c., devoted to or relating to home life; 1560s as living with others, from Middle French
social (14c.) and directly from Latin socialis of companionship, of allies; united, living with
others; of marriage, conjugal, from socius companion, ally, probably originally follower, from PIE
*sokw-yo-, suffixed form of root *sekw- (1) to follow, and thus related to sequi to follow (see
sequel). Compare Old English secg, Old Norse seggr companion, which seem to have been formed on the
same notion). Related: Socially.    Sense of characterized by friendliness or geniality is from
1660s. Meaning living or liking to live with others; companionable, disposed to friendly intercourse
is from 1720s. Meaning of or pertaining to society as a natural condition of human life first
attested 1695, in Locke. Sense of pertaining to fashionable society is from 1873.  Social climber is
from 1893; social work is 1890; social worker 1886. Social drinking first attested 1807. Social
studies as an inclusive term for history, geography, economics, etc., is attested from 1916. Social
security system of state support for needy citizens is attested from 1907 (the Social Security Act
was passed by U.S. Congress in 1935). Social butterfly is from 1867, in figurative reference to
flitting.   Social contract (1763) is from translations of Rousseau. Social Darwinism attested from
1887. Social engineering attested from 1899. Social science is from 1785.  In late 19c. newspapers,
social evil is prostitution. Social justice is attested by 1718; social network by 1971; social
networking by 1984; social media by 2008.


social (n.)

friendly gathering, 1870, from social (adj.). In late 17c. it meant a companion, associate.


socialite (n.)

1928, first in Time magazine, from social (adj.) in the pertaining to high society sense, perhaps as
a play on social light, in imitation of words in -ite (1).


socialize (v.)

1828, to render social, from social (adj.). Meaning to be sociable, to mingle is recorded from 1895.
Meaning to make socialistic is from 1846. Related: Socialized; socializing. The phrasing in
socialized medicine is by 1912.


socialism (n.)

1837, from French socialisme (1832) or formed in English (based on socialist) from social (adj.) +
-ism. Perhaps first in reference to Robert Owen's communes. Pierre Leroux (1797-1871), idealistic
social reformer and Saint-Simonian publicist, expressly claims to be the originator of the word
socialisme [Klein, also see OED discussion]. The word begins to be used in French in the modern
sense c.1835.


sociality (n.)

1640s, from French socialit&eacute; or directly from Latin socialitas fellowship, sociableness, from
socialis (see social (adj.)).


socio-

word-forming element meaning social, of society; social and, also having to do with sociology, from
combining form of Latin socius companion, ally, associate, fellow, sharer (see social (adj.)).
Common in compounds since c.1880.


anti-social (adj.)

also antisocial, 1797, from anti- + social (adj.). First-attested use is in sense of unsociable;
meaning hostile to social order or norms is from 1802.


asocial (adj.)

1883, antagonistic to society or social order, from a- not + social (adj.); also compare antisocial.


classless (adj.)

1874 in the social sense (1863 in reference to class generally), from class (n.) in the social order
sense + -less. As lacking the sophistication of high class, by 1979. Related: Classlessly;
classlessness.


sociology (n.)

the science of social phenomena, 1842, from French sociologie, a hybrid coined 1830 by French
philosopher Isidore Auguste Comte (1798-1857), from Latin socius associate (see social (adj.)) +
Greek-derived suffix -logie (see -logy).


psychosocial (adj.)

also psycho-social, 1891, from psycho- + social (adj.).


MySpace

social networking Web site, founded in late 2003.


chivalry (n.)

c.1300, body or host of knights; knighthood in the feudal social system; bravery in war, warfare as
an art, from Old French chevalerie knighthood, chivalry, nobility, cavalry, art of war, from
chevaler knight, from Medieval Latin caballarius horseman, from Latin caballus nag, pack-horse (see
cavalier). From late 14c. as the nobility as one of the estates of the realm, also as the word for
an ethical code emphasizing honor, valor, generosity and courtly manners. Modern use for social and
moral code of medieval feudalism probably is an 18c. historical revival.


cognitive dissonance (n.)

1957, developed and apparently coined by U.S. social psychologist Leon Festinger (1919-1989).


zouk (n.)

Creole French, party, from zouker engage in unrestrained social activity.


anomie (n.)

absence of accepted social values, 1933, from Durkheim's Suicide (1897); a reborrowing with French
spelling of anomy.


communism (n.)

social system based on collective ownership, 1843, from French communisme (c.1840) from commun (Old
French comun; see common (adj.)) + -isme (see -ism). Originally a theory of society; as name of a
political system, 1850, a translation of German Kommunismus (itself from French), in Marx and
Engels' Manifesto of the Communist Party. Compare communist. In some cases in early and mid-20c., a
term of abuse implying anti-social criminality without regard to political theory.    Each [i.e.
socialism, communism, anarchism] stands for a state of things, or a striving after it, that differs
much from that which we know; &amp; for many of us, especially those who are comfortably at home in
the world as it is, they have consequently come to be the positive, comparative, &amp; superlative,
distinguished not in kind but in degree only, of the terms of abuse applicable to those who would
disturb our peace. [Fowler]


pinko (n.)

1936, derogatory slang form of pink (n.), used of people whose social or political views have a
tendency toward 'red;'  a metaphor that had existed since at least 1837. As an adjective by 1957.


progressive (adj.)

c.1600, characterized by advancement (in action, character, etc.), from progress (n.) + -ive, or
else from French progressif, from past participle stem of Latin progredi. Of taxation, from 1889; of
jazz, from 1947. Meaning characterized by striving for change and innovation, avant-garde, liberal
is from 1908.    In the socio-political sense favoring reform; radically liberal, it emerged in
various British contexts from the 1880s; in the U.S. it was active as a movement in the 1890s and a
generation thereafter, the name being taken again from time to time, most recently by some more
liberal Democrats and other social activists, by c.2000. The noun in the sense one who favors social
and political change in the name of progress is first attested 1865 (originally in Christianity).
Earlier in a like sense were progressionist (1849, adjective; 1884, noun), progressist (1848).
Related: Progressively; progressiveness.


bake (n.)

social gathering at which baked food is served, 1846, American English, from bake (v.).


mixer (n.)

1610s, worker who mixes, agent noun from mix (v.). As a type of machine, from 1876. Meaning
troublemaker attested by 1938; sense of social gathering to mingle and get acquainted dates from
1916.


Wendy

as a woman's given name, apparently coined by James M. Barrie (Peter and Wendy, 1911); it first
registers on the U.S. Social Security list of popular baby names in 1936 and was in the top 40 names
for girls born in the U.S. from 1965 to 1976


laborer (n.)

mid-14c., manual worker, especially an unskilled one, agent noun from labor (v.). Meaning member of
the working class, member of the lowest social rank is from c.1400.


negrification (n.)

1929, in social context, from Negro on model of pacification, etc. Johnson (1755) has the word in
the literal sense act of making black.


caller (n.)

c.1500, one who proclaims, agent noun from call (v.). Meaning one who announces step changes at a
dance is recorded from 1882; one who places a telephone call, 1898. Meaning a social visitor is
attested from 1786.


awkwardness (n.)

1704, lack of grace, from awkward + -ness. Meaning physical clumsiness is attested from c.1770; that
of social embarrassment is from 1788.


facebook (n.)

directory listing names and headshots, by 1983, originally U.S. college students, from face (n.) +
book. The social networking Web site dates from 2004.


motivation (n.)

1873, from motivate + -ion. Psychological use, inner or social stimulus for an action, is from 1904.


entertainment (n.)

1530s, provision for support of a retainer; manner of social behavior, now obsolete, along with
other 16c. senses; from entertain + -ment. Meaning the amusement of someone is from 1610s; that
which entertains is from 1650s; public performance or display meant to amuse is from 1727.


homophile (n.)

1960, from homo- (2) homosexual + -phile. An attempt to coin a word for a homosexual person as part
of a social group, rather than a sexual deviant.


tony (adj.)

of a high tone, affecting social elegance, 1877, American English slang, from tone (n.) + -y (2). It
was the name of a reddish-brown fashion color in the 1920s.


stomp (v.)

1803, variant of stamp. Related: Stomped; stomping. Noun meaning lively social dance is recorded
from 1912 in jazz slang.


sociobiology (n.)

study of the biological basis of social behavior, 1946, from socio- + biology. Related:
Sociobiological.


ethno-

word-forming element meaning race, culture, from Greek ethnos people, nation, class, caste, tribe; a
number of people accustomed to live together (see ethnic). Used to form modern compounds in the
social sciences.


functionalism (n.)

1914 as a term in social sciences; 1930 in architecture; from functional + -ism. Related:
functionalist.


antarchism (n.)

opposition to all social government or control of individuals by law, 1845, from antarchy + -ism.
Related: Antarchist.


priestcraft (n.)

late 15c., business of being a priest, from priest + craft (n.). After rise of Protestantism and the
Enlightenment, it acquired a pejorative sense of arts and devices of ambitious priests for attaining
and holding temporal power and social control (1680s).


Medicaid

1966, U.S. medical assistance program set up by Title XIX of the Social Security Act of 1965. See
medical + aid (n.).


shut-in (n.)

person confined from normal social intercourse, 1904, from the verbal phrase, from shut (v.) + in
(adv.).


unaccomplished (adj.)

1520s, not finished, from un- (1) not + past participle of accomplish (v.). Meaning not furnished
with social or intellectual accomplishments is from 1729 (see accomplished).


aren&#039;t

1794, contraction of are not, originally written are'n't and generally so into early 19c.    If
ain't I? is objected to, surely aren't I? is very much worse. [Lady Grove, The Social Fetich, 1907]


establishment (n.)

late 15c., settled arrangement, also income, property, from establish + -ment. Meaning established
church is from 1731; Sense of place of business is from 1832. Meaning social matrix of ruling people
and institutions is attested occasionally from 1923, current use from 1955.


manners (n.)

external behavior (especially polite behavior) in social intercourse, late 14c., plural of manner.
Under bad manners, as under graver faults, lies very commonly an overestimate of our special
individuality, as distinguished from our generic humanity. [Oliver W. Holmes, The Professor at the
Breakfast Table, 1858]  Earlier it meant moral character (early 13c.).


callithumpian (adj.)

1836, U.S. colloquial, probably a fanciful construction. The English Dialect Dictionary reports
Gallithumpians as a Dorset and Devon word from 1790s for a society of radical social reformers, and
also in reference to noisy disturbers of elections and meetings (1770s). The U.S. reference is most
commonly a band of discordant instruments or bangers on pots and pans, especially to serenade a
newlywed couple to show disapproval of one or the other or the match.


underclass (n.)

subordinate social class, 1894, from under (adj.) + class (n.). A loan-translation of Swedish
underklass.


ethnocentric (adj.)

1900, from ethno- + -centric; a technical term in social sciences until it began to be more widely
used in the second half of the 20th century. Related: Ethnocentricity; ethnocentrism.


polarization (n.)

1812, from polarize + -ation, and in part from French polarisation, noun of action from polariser.
Figuratively from 1871; of social and political groups, accentuation of differences, from 1945.


gesellschaft (n.)

1887, social relationship based on duty to society or an organization, from German Gesellschaft,
from geselle companion + -schaft -ship.


secularize (v.)

1610s, of property, offices, etc., from secular + -ize. From 1711 as to become worldly; from 1846 of
education, social institutions, etc. Related: Secularized; secularizing.


