sonorous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin sonorus resounding, from sonor sound, noise, from sonare to sound (see sonata).
Related: Sonorously; sonorousness. Earlier was sonouse (c.1500), from Medieval Latin sonosus;
sonourse having a pleasing voice (c.1400), from sonor + -y (2).


Sonora

Mexican state, from Spanish sonora sonorous (from Latin sonoros; see sonorous), supposedly so called
in reference to marble deposits there which rang when struck.


rattle (v.)

c.1300 (intransitive), To make a quick sharp noise with frequent repetitions and collisions of
bodies not very sonorous: when bodies are sonorous, it is called jingling [Johnson]. Perhaps in Old
English but not recorded; if not, from Middle Dutch ratelen, probably of imitative origin (compare
German rasseln to rattle, Greek kradao I rattle). Sense of utter smartly and rapidly is late 14c.
Meaning to go along loosely and noisily is from 1550s. Transitive sense is late 14c.; figurative
sense of fluster is first recorded 1869. Related: Rattled; rattling.


clink (n.1)

sharp, ringing sound made by collision of sonorous (especially metallic) bodies, c.1400, from clink
(v.).


sonority (n.)

1620s, from French sonorit&eacute; and directly from Latin sonoritas fullness of sound, from sonorus
(see sonorous).


vocal (adj.)

late 14c., spoken, oral, from Old French vocal (13c.), from Latin vocalis sounding, sonorous,
speaking, as a noun, a vowel, from vox (genitive vocis) voice (see voice (n.)). In reference to
music (as opposed to instrumental), first recorded 1580s; meaning outspoken first attested 1871.
Vocal cords is from 1872; see cord.


gamut (n.)

1520s, originally, lowest note in the medieval musical scale, in the system of notation devised by
Guido d'Arezzo, contraction of Medieval Latin gamma ut, from gamma, the Greek letter, indicating a
note below A, + ut, the low note on the six-note musical scale that took names from corresponding
syllables in a Latin hymn for St. John the Baptist's Day:<b>Ut</b> queant laxis <b>re</b>sonare
fibris  <b>Mi</b>ra gestorum <b>fa</b>muli tuorum  <b>Sol</b>ve polluti <b>la</b>bii reatum,etc.
Gamut came to be used for the whole musical scale; the figurative sense of entire scale or range of
anything is first recorded 1620s. When the modern octave scale was set early 16c., si was added,
changed to ti in Britain and U.S. to keep the syllables as different from each other as possible. Ut
later was replaced by more sonorous do (n.). See also solmisation.


loud (adj.)

Old English hlud noisy, making noise, sonorous, from West Germanic *khluthaz heard (cognates: Old
Frisian and Old Saxon hlud, Middle Dutch luut, Dutch luid, Old High German hlut, German laut loud),
from PIE past participle *klutos- (cognates: Sanskrit srutah, Greek klytos heard of, celebrated,
Armenian lu known, Welsh clod praise), from root *kleu- to hear (see listen).    Application to
colors first recorded 1849. The adverb is from Old English hlude, from Proto-Germanic *khludai
(cognates: Dutch luid, German laut). Paired with clear since at least c.1650.


