sparse (adj.)

1727, from Latin sparsus scattered, past participle of spargere to scatter, spread, from PIE root
*(s)preg- (2) to jerk, scatter (cognates: Sanskrit parjanya- rain, rain god, Avestan fra-sparega
branch, twig, literally that which is jerked off a tree, Old Norse freknur freckles, Swedish
dialectal sprygg brisk, active, Lithuanian sprogti shoot, bud, Old Irish arg a drop). The word is
found earlier in English as a verb, to scatter abroad (16c.). Related: Sparsely; sparseness.


spry (adj.)

1746, active, nimble, vigorous, lively, dialectal, perhaps a shortening and alteration of sprightly
[Barnhart], or from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse spr&aelig;kr, dialectal Swedish sprygg
brisk, active), from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, from PIE root *(s)preg- (2) to jerk, scatter (see
sparse).


mono-

word-forming element meaning one, alone; containing one (atom, etc.), from Greek mono-, comb. form
of monos single, alone, from PIE root *men- small, isolated (cognates: Greek manos rare, sparse,
Armenian manr thin, slender, small, and perhaps English minnow).


intersperse (v.)

1560s, from Latin interspersus strewn, scattered, sprinkled upon, past participle of *interspergere,
from inter- between (see inter-) + spargere to scatter (see sparse). Related: Interspersed;
interspersing.


aspersion (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin aspersionem (nominative aspersio) a sprinkling, noun of action from past
participle stem of aspergere to sprinkle on, from ad- to (see ad-) + spargere sprinkle, strew (see
sparse). Originally in theology, the shedding of Christ's blood. Modern sense of a bespattering with
slander first attested 1590s. To cast aspersions was in Fielding (1749).


disperse (v.)

late 14c., from Latin dispersus, past participle of dispergere to scatter, from dis- apart, in every
direction (see dis-) + spargere to scatter (see sparse). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by
tostregdan. Related: Dispersed; dispersing.


Asperges (n.)

sprinkling ritual of the Catholic church, 1550s, from Late Latin asperges, noun use of 2nd person
singular future indicative of Latin aspergere to scatter, strew upon, sprinkle, from ad to (see ad-)
+ spargere to sprinkle (see sparse). The word is taken from the phrase Asperges me, Domine, hyssopo
et mundabor, from  Psalm 51 (Vulgate), sung during the rite of sprinkling a congregation with holy
water.


rare (adj.1)

unusual, late 14c., thin, airy, porous; mid-15c., few in number and widely separated, sparsely
distributed, seldom found; from Old French rere sparse (14c.), from Latin rarus thinly sown, having
a loose texture; not thick; having intervals between, full of empty spaces, from PIE *ra-ro-, from
root *ere- to separate; adjoin (cognates: Sanskrit rte besides, except, viralah distant, tight,
rare; Old Church Slavonic rediku rare, Old Hittite arha&#353; border, Lithuanian irti to be
dissolved). Few in number, hence, unusual. Related: Rareness. In chemistry, rare earth is from 1818.


sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


thin (adj.)

Old English &thorn;ynne narrow, lean, scanty, not dense; fluid, tenuous; weak, poor, from Proto-
Germanic *thunni thin (cognates: West Frisian ten, Middle Low German dunne, Middle Dutch dunne,
Dutch dun, Old High German dunni, German d&uuml;nn, Old Norse &thorn;unnr, Swedish tunn, Danish
tynd), from PIE *tnu- stretched, stretched out (hence thin), from root *ten- to stretch (cognates:
Latin tenuis thin, slender; see tenet).    These our actors ... were all Spirits, and Are melted
into Ayre, into thin Ayre. [Shakespeare, The Tempest, IV.i.150, 1610]    Loose or sparse, hence
easily seen through, with figurative extensions. Related: Thinly; thinness. Thin-skinned is attested
from 1590s; the figurative sense of touchy is from 1670s.


clear (adj.)

late 13c., bright, from Old French cler clear (of sight and hearing), light, bright, shining; sparse
(12c., Modern French clair), from Latin clarus clear, loud, of sounds; figuratively manifest, plain,
evident, in transferred use, of sights, bright, distinct; also illustrious, famous, glorious (source
of Italian chiaro, Spanish claro), from PIE *kle-ro-, from root *kele- (2) to shout (see claim
(v.)).    The sense evolution involves an identification of the spreading of sound and the spreading
of light (compare English loud, used of colors; German hell clear, bright, shining, of pitch,
distinct, ringing, high). Of complexion, from c.1300; of the weather, from late 14c.; of meanings or
explanations, manifest to the mind, comprehensible, c.1300. (An Old English word for this was
sweotol distinct, clear, evident.) Sense of free from encumbrance, apparently nautical, developed
c.1500. Phrase in the clear attested from 1715. Clear-sighted is from 1580s (clear-eyed is from
1529s); clear-headed is from 1709.


