spruce (n.)

1660s, evergreen tree, fir, from spruse (adj.) made of spruce wood (early 15c.), literally from
Prussia, from Spruce, Sprws (late 14c.), unexplained alterations of Pruce Prussia, from an Old
French form of Prussia.   Spruce seems to have been a generic term for commodities brought to
England by Hanseatic merchants (especially beer, boards and wooden chests, and leather), and the
tree thus was believed to be particular to Prussia, which for a time was figurative in England as a
land of luxuries. Compare spruce (adj.). As a distinct species of fir, from 1731.


spruce (adj.)

neat, smart in dress and appearance, dapper, brisk, 1580s, from spruce leather (mid-15c.; see spruce
(n.)), a type of leather imported from Prussia in the 1400s and 1500s which was used in England to
make a popular style of jerkin that was considered smart-looking.


spruce (v.)

to make trim or neat, 1590s, from spruce (adj.). Related: Spruced; sprucing.


smarten (v.)

to make smart, to spruce up, to improve appearance, 1786, from smart (adj.) in its sense of spruce,
trim + -en (1). Related: Smartened; smartening.


spiff (v.)

make neat or spruce, 1877 (with up or out), probably from spiffy (q.v.). Spiffing excellent was very
popular in 1870s slang.


sprucify (v.)

1610s, from spruce (adj.) + -ify. Related: Sprucified.


fake

attested in London criminal slang as adjective (1775), verb (1812), and noun (1851, of persons
1888), but probably older. A likely source is feague to spruce up by artificial means, from German
fegen polish, sweep, also to clear out, plunder in colloquial use. Much of our early thieves' slang
is Ger. or Du., and dates from the Thirty Years' War [Weekley]. Or it may be from Latin facere to
do. Related: Faked; fakes; faking.


smug (adj.)

1550s, trim, neat, spruce, smart, possibly an alteration of Low German smuk trim, neat, from Middle
Low German sm&uuml;cken to adorn (originally to dress, secondary sense of words meaning to creep or
slip into), from the same source as smock. The meaning having a self-satisfied air is from 1701, an
extension of the sense of smooth, sleek (1580s), which was commonly used of attractive women and
girls. Related: Smugly; smugness.


chew (v.)

Old English ceowan to bite, gnaw, chew, from West Germanic *keuwwan (cognates: Middle Low German
keuwen, Dutch kauwen, Old High German kiuwan, German kauen), from PIE root *gyeu- to chew (cognates:
Old Church Slavonic &#382;ivo to chew, Lithuanian &#382;iaunos jaws, Persian javidan to chew).
Figurative sense of to think over is from late 14c.; to chew the rag discusss some matter is from
1885, apparently originally British army slang. Related: Chewed; chewing. To chew (someone) out
(1948) probably is military slang from World War II. Chewing gum is by 1843, American English,
originally hardened secretions of the spruce tree.


