standstill (n.)

state of cessation of movement, 1702, from stand (v.) + still (adv.). Earlier the notion would have
been expressed simply by stand.


deadlock (n.)

complete standstill, from dead (adj.), in its emphatic use, + lock (n.). First attested 1779 in
Sheridan's play The Critic.


stat (n.)

instrument that keeps something stationary, before 1970, shortened form of Latin statim (adv.)
steadily, regularly; at once, immediately, from status (see state (n.1)). Perhaps originally to a
standstill. As an abbreviation of statistic, from 1961. Related: Stats.


restive (adj.)

early 15c., restyffe not moving forward, from Middle French restif motionless, brought to a
standstill (Modern French r&#233;tif), from rester to remain (see rest (n.2)). Sense of unmanageable
(1680s) evolved via notion of a horse refusing to go forward.


stalemate (n.)

1765, in chess, from stale stalemate (early 15c.) + mate (n.2) checkmate. Middle English stale is
probably from Anglo-French estale standstill (see stall (n.2)). A misnomer, because a stale is not a
mate. In England from the 17th c. to the beginning of the 19th c. the player who received stalemate
won the game [OED]. Figurative sense is recorded from 1885. As a verb from 1765; figurative from
1861.


stall (n.2)

pretense or evasive story to avoid doing something, 1812, from earlier sense thief's assistant
(1590s, also staller), from a variant of stale bird used as a decoy to lure other birds (mid-15c.),
from Anglo-French estale decoy, pigeon used to lure a hawk (13c., compare stool pigeon), literally
standstill, from Old French estal place, stand, stall, from Frankish *stal- position, ultimately
from Germanic and cognate with Old English steall (see stall (n.1)). Compare Old English
st&aelig;lhran decoy reindeer, German stellvogel decoy bird. Figurative sense of deception, means of
allurement is first recorded 1520s. Also see stall (v.2).    The stallers up are gratified with such
part of the gains acquired as the liberality of the knuckling gentlemen may prompt them to bestow.
[J.H. Vaux, Flash Dictionary, 1812]


station (n.)

late 13c., place which one normally occupies, from Old French stacion, estacion site, location;
station of the Cross; stop, standstill, from Latin stationem (nominative statio) a standing,
standing firm; a post, job, position; military post; a watch, guard, sentinel; anchorage, port
(related to stare to stand), from PIE *ste-ti-, suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Meaning each of a number of holy places visited in succession by pilgrims is from late 14c., as in
Station of the Cross (1550s). Meaning fixed uniform distance in surveying is from 1570s. Sense of
status, rank is from c.1600. Meaning military post in English is from c.1600. The meaning place
where people are stationed for some special purpose (as in polling station) is first recorded 1823.
Radio station is from 1912; station break, pause in broadcasting to give the local station a chance
to identify itself, is from 1942.    The meaning regular stopping place is first recorded 1797, in
reference to coach routes; applied to railroads 1830. Station-master is from 1836. Station wagon in
the automobile sense is first recorded 1929, from earlier use for a horse-drawn conveyance that took
passengers to and from railroad stations (1894). Station house police station is attested from 1836.


