start-up (n.)

also startup, 1550s, upstart, from verbal phrase (attested from c.1200 in sense rise up; 1590s as
come suddenly into being); see start (v.) + up (adv.). Meaning action of starting up is from 1845.
See start (v.) + up (adv.).


start (n.)

late 14c., an involuntary movement of the body, a sudden jump, from start (v.). Meaning act of
beginning to move or act is from 1560s. Meaning act of beginning to build a house is from 1946. That
of opportunity at the beginning of a career or course of action is from 1849. Paired with finish
(n.) at least from 1839. False start first attested 1850.


startle (v.)

c.1300, run to and fro (intransitive), frequentative of sterten (see start (v.)). Sense of move
suddenly in surprise or fear first recorded 1520s. Transitive meaning frighten suddenly is from
1590s. The word retains more of the original meaning of start (v.). Related: Startled; startling;
startlingly. As a noun from 1714.


start (v.)

Old English *steortian, *stiertan, Kentish variants of styrtan to leap up (related to starian to
stare), from Proto-Germanic *stert- (cognates: Old Frisian stirta to fall, tumble, Middle Dutch
sterten, Dutch storten to rush, fall, Old High German sturzen, German st&uuml;rzen to hurl, throw,
plunge), of uncertain origin. According to Watkins, the notion is move briskly, move swiftly, and it
is from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff.    From move or spring suddenly, sense evolved by late 14c. to
awaken suddenly, flinch or recoil in alarm, and by 1660s to cause to begin acting or operating.
Meaning begin to move, leave, depart (without implication of suddenness) is from 1821. The
connection probably is from sporting senses (to force an animal from its lair, late 14c.).
Transitive sense of set in motion or action is from 1670s; specifically as to set (machinery) in
action from 1841.    Related: Started; starting. To start something cause trouble is 1915, American
English colloquial. To start over begin again is from 1912. Starting-line in running is from 1855;
starting-block in running first recorded 1937.


starter (n.)

c.1400, stertour instigator; one who starts, agent noun from start (v.). Mechanical sense is from
1875. For starters to begin with is 1873, American English colloquial. Starter home is from 1976;
starter set is from 1946, originally of china.


jumpstart (v.)

also jump-start, to start a car using battery booster cables, by 1970, from jumper wire used to cut
out part of a circuit or close a gap (1901 in telegraphy); see jump + start. Related: Jumpstarted;
jumpstarting. Figurative use by 1975.


upstart (n.)

1550s, one newly risen from a humble position to one of power, importance, or rank, a parvenu, also
start-up, from up (adv.) + start (v.) in the sense of jump, spring, rise. As an adjective from
1560s. Compare the archaic verb upstart to spring to one's feet, attested from c.1300.


restart (v.)

also re-start, 1845, from re- + start (v.). Related: Restarted; restarting. As a noun from 1881.


repartee (n.)

1640s, quick remark, from French repartie an answering blow or thrust (originally a fencing term),
noun use of fem. past participle of Old French repartir to reply promptly, start out again, from re-
back (see re-) + partir to part, depart, start (see part (n.)). In 17c. often spelled reparty (see
-ee). Meaning a series of sharp rejoinders exchanged is from 1680s.


etaoin shrdlu

1931, journalism slang, the sequence of characters you get if you sweep your finger down the two
left-hand columns of Linotype keys, which is what typesetters did when they bungled a line and had
to start it over. It was a signal to cut out the sentence, but sometimes it slipped past harried
compositors and ended up in print.


capriccio (n.)

1690s as a term in music for a kind of free composition, from Italian capriccio sudden start or
motion (see caprice). Earlier it meant prank, trick (1660s); caprice (c.1600).


boot (v.2)

start up a computer, 1975, from bootstrap (v.), a 1958 derived verb from bootstrap (n.) in the
computer sense.


onset (n.)

1530s, attack, assault, from on + set (n.); compare verbal phrase to set (something) on (someone).
Weaker sense of beginning, start first recorded 1560s. Figurative use in reference to a calamity,
disease, etc. is from 1580s.


blanch (v.2)

to start back, turn aside, 1570s, variant of blench. Related: Blanched; blanching.


ascendance (n.)

1742, from ascend + -ance. Properly the act of ascending, but used from the start in English as a
synonym of ascendancy.


clapper (n.)

late 13c., agent noun from clap (v.). Meaning tongue of a bell is from late 14c. Old English had
clipur. Meaning hinged board snapped in front of a camera at the start of filming to synchronize
picture and sound is from 1940.


set off (v.)

verbal phrase; see set (v.) + off (adv.). From 1590s as make prominent by contrast, 1610s as adorn.
Intransitive sense of start on a journey is from 1774. Meaning separate from contect (in typography)
is from 1824; sense of ignite, discharge, cause to explode is from 1810.


redstart (n.)

type of bird, 1560s, from red (adj.1) + start tail, from Old English  steort. Similar formation in
German Rotsterz.


wr-

common Germanic consonantal combination, especially to start words implying twisting or distortion.
Retained in Dutch and Flemish; reduced to -r- in Old High German and Old Norse; represented by vr-
in Danish and Swedish; still spelled -wr- in English, but the -w- ceased to be pronounced
c.1450-1700 except in dialects.


boggle (v.)

1590s, to start with fright (as a startled horse does), from Middle English bugge specter (among
other things, supposed to scare horses at night); see bug (n.); also compare bogey (n.1). The
meaning to raise scruples, hesitate is from 1630s. Related: Boggled; boggling.


quarterback (n.)

in U.S. football, 1876, from quarter (n.) + back (n.); so called from his position on the field at
the start of play, between the halfback and the center. As a verb from 1945. Figurative sense from
1952. Monday morning quarterback is 1932 (n.), 1972 (v.); originally pro football player slang for
sportswriters (U.S. professional football games typically are played on Sundays).


disinhibition (n.)

1927; see dis- + inhibition. From the start it was noted as being, often, inhibition of an
inhibition.


shunt (v.)

early 13c., to shy, start, perhaps from shunen to shun (see shun), and altered by influence of shot
or shut. Meaning to turn aside is from late 14c.; that of move out of the way is from 1706. Adopted
by railways from 1842. Related: Shunted; shunting.


sprint (v.)

1560s, to spring, dart, probably an alteration of sprenten to leap, spring (early 14c.), from a
Scandinavian source such as Old Norse spretta to jump up (cognate with Swedish spritta to start,
startle). Meaning to run a short distance at full speed first recorded 1871. Related: Sprinted;
sprinting.


geisha (n.)

1887, Japanese girl whose profession is to sing and dance to entertain men; hence, loosely,
prostitute, from Japanese, literally person accomplished in the social arts, from gei art,
performance + sha person. Compare almah, and Athenian auletrides flute-girls, female musicians who
entertained guests at a symposium with music at the start of the party and sex at the end of it.


resile (v.)

1520s, draw back, from obsolete French resiler withdraw from an agreement, or directly from Latin
resilire to jump back (see resilience). Meaning spring back, start back, recoil (of material things)
from 1708. Related: Resiled; resiling.


opening (n.)

Old English openung act of opening (a door, mouth, etc.), disclosure, manifestation, verbal noun
from present participle of open (v.). Meaning vacant space, hole, aperture, doorway is attested from
c.1200. Meaning act of opening (a place, to the public) is from late 14c. Sense of action of
beginning (something) is from 1712; meaning first performance of a play is 1855; start of an art
exhibit is from 1905. Sense of opportunity, chance is from 1793.


swarm (v.2)

to leave a hive to start another, also to gather in a swarm, crowd, or throng, late 14c., from swarm
(n.). Compare Dutch zwermen, German schw&#228;rmen, Danish sv&#230;rme. Related: Swarmed; swarming.


kick-off (n.)

also kickoff, kick off, 1857, first kick in a football match, from kick (v.) + off. Figurative sense
of start, beginning event is from 1875.


bolt (v.)

from bolt (n.) in its various senses; from a crossbow arrow's quick flight comes the meaning to
spring, to make a quick start (early 13c.). Via the notion of runaway horses, this came to mean to
leave suddenly (early 19c.). Meaning to gulp down food is from 1794. The meaning to secure by means
of a bolt is from 1580s. Related: Bolted; bolting.


recommence (v.)

late 15c., from Old French recommencier begin again, start afresh (11c.), from re- back, again (see
re-) + commencer (see commence). Related: Recommenced; recommencing.


pacify (v.)

late 15c., appease, allay the anger of (someone), from Middle French pacifier make peace, from Latin
pacificare to make peace; pacify, from pacificus (see pacific). Of countries or regions, to bring to
a condition of calm, c.1500, from the start with suggestions of submission and terrorization.
Related: Pacified; pacifying.


abhor (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin abhorrere shrink back from, have an aversion for, shudder at, from ab- away
(see ab-) + horrere tremble at, shudder, literally to bristle, be shaggy, from PIE *ghers- start
out, stand out, rise to a point, bristle (see horror). Related: Abhorred; abhorring.


baseball (n.)

in the modern sense, 1845, American English, from base (n.) + ball (n.1). Earlier references, such
as in Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey, refer to the game of rounders, of which baseball is a more
elaborate variety. Legendarily invented 1839 by Abner Doubleday in Cooperstown, N.Y. Base was used
for start or finish line of a race from 1690s; and the sense of safe spot found in modern children's
game of tag can be traced to 14c. (the sense in baseball is from 1868).


movement (n.)

late 14c., from Old French movement movement, exercise; start, instigation (Modern French
mouvement), from Medieval Latin movimentum, from Latin movere (see move (v.)). In the musical sense
of major division of a piece it is attested from 1776; in the political/social sense, from 1828.
Related: Movements.


spaniel (n.)

late 13c., as a surname meaning Spaniard; as a name for a breed of dog supposedly of Spanish origin,
late 14c., from Old French (chien) espagneul, literally Spanish (dog), from Vulgar Latin
*Hispaniolus of Spain, diminutive of Latin Hispanus Spanish, Hispanic (see Spaniard). Used
originally to start game; the breed was much-developed in England in 17c. Whether it is actually
originally Spanish is uncertain.


spell (n.2)

1620s, a turn of work in place of another, from spell (v.2); compare Old English gespelia a
substitute. Meaning shifted toward continuous course of work (1706), probably via notion of shift
work (as at sea) where one man or crew regularly spelled another. Hence continuous stretch of
something (weather, etc.), recorded by 1728. Hence also, via the notion in give a spell (1750)
relieve another by taking a turn of work came the sense interval of rest or relaxation (1845), which
took the word to a sense opposite what it had at the start.


strafe (v.)

1915, punish, attack, bomb heavily, picked up by British soldiers from German strafen to punish
(from Proto-Germanic *str&aelig;f-), in slogan Gott strafe England May God punish England, current
in Germany c.1914-16 at the start of World War I. The word used for many kinds of attack at first;
meaning shoot up ground positions from low-flying aircraft emerged as the main sense 1942. Related:
Strafed; strafing.


Orient (n.)

c.1300, the East (originally usually meaning what is now called the Middle East), from Old French
orient east (11c.), from Latin orientem (nominative oriens) the rising sun, the east, part of the
sky where the sun rises, originally rising (adj.), present participle of oriri to rise (see
orchestra). The Orient Express was a train that ran from Paris to Istanbul via Vienna 1883-1961,
from the start associated with espionage and intrigue.


Samhain (n.)

1888, from Irish samhain (Gaelic samhuinn), from Old Irish samain, literally summer's end, from Old
Irish sam summer (see summer (n.1)) + fuin end. Nov. 1, the Celtic festival of the start of winter
and of the new year.


stir-crazy (adj.)

1908, from crazy (adj.) + stir (n.) prison (1851), probably from Start Newgate (1757), prison in
London, later any prison (1823), probably from Romany stardo imprisoned, related to staripen a
prison. According to Barnhart, mid-19c. sturaban, sturbin state prison seem to be transitional
forms.


massage (n.)

1874, from French massage friction of kneading, from masser to massage, possibly from Arabic massa
to touch, feel, handle; if so, probably picked up in Egypt during the Napoleonic campaign there.
Other possibility is that French got it in colonial India from Portuguese amassar knead, a verb from
Latin massa mass, dough (see mass (n.1)). Massage parlor first attested 1894, from the start a
euphemism for house of prostitution.


plover (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French plover, Old French pluvier, earlier plovier (c.1200), from Vulgar Latin
*plovarius, literally belonging to rain, from Latin pluvia rain (water) from pluere to rain, from
PIE root *pleu- to flow (see pluvial). Perhaps so called because the birds' migration arrival
coincides with the start of the rainy season, or from its supposed restlessness when rain
approaches.


epoch (n.)

1610s, epocha, point marking the start of a new period in time (such as the founding of Rome, the
birth of Christ, the Hegira), from Late Latin epocha, from Greek epokhe stoppage, fixed point of
time, from epekhein to pause, take up a position, from epi on (see epi-) + ekhein to hold (see
scheme (n.)). Transferred sense of a period of time is 1620s; geological usage (not a precise
measurement) is from 1802.


commence (v.)

c.1300, from Old French comencier to begin, start (10c., Modern French commencer), from Vulgar Latin
*cominitiare, originally to initiate as priest, consecrate, from Latin com- together (see com-) +
initiare to initiate, from initium (see initial (adj.)). Spelling with double -m- began in French
and was established in English by 1500. Related: Commenced; commencing.


paragraph (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French paragraphe division of text (13c., Old French paragrafe), from
Medieval Latin paragraphus sign for start of a new section of discourse (the sign looked something
like a stylized letter -P-), from Greek paragraphos short stroke in the margin marking a break in
sense, also a passage so marked, literally anything written beside, from paragraphein write by the
side, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + graphein to write (see -graphy).


persecution (n.)

mid-14c., oppression for the holding of a belief or opinion, from Old French persecucion
persecution, damage, affliction, suffering (12c.) and directly from Latin persecutionem (nominative
persecutio), noun of action from past participle stem of persequi follow, pursue, hunt down; proceed
against, prosecute, start a legal action, from per- through (see per) + sequi follow (see sequel).
Psychological persecution complex is recorded from 1961; earlier persecution mania (1892).


launch (v.)

c.1300, to rush, plunge, leap, start forth; to be set into sudden motion, from Old North French
lancher (Old French lancier) to fling, hurl, throw, cast, from Late Latin lanceare wield a lance,
from Latin lancea light spear (see lance (n.)). Sense of set (a boat) afloat first recorded c.1400,
from notion of throwing it out on the water; generalized by 1600 to any sort of beginning. The noun
meaning a leap or a bound is from mid-15c., from the verb. Meaning the liftoff of a missile,
spacecraft, etc. is from 1935. Launch pad attested from 1960.


booby (n.)

1590s, from Spanish bobo stupid person, slow bird (used of various ungainly seabirds), probably from
Latin balbus stammering, from an imitative root (see barbarian).   Booby prize is by 1883: an object
of little value given to the loser of a game; booby trap is 1850, originally a schoolboy prank; the
more lethal sense developed during World War I.    At the end of every session the dominie had the
satirical custom of presenting his tawse as a booby-prize to some idle or stupid lout whom he picked
out as meriting this distinction so that next time they met he might start fresh and fair with new
pair for a new set of classes. [Ascott R. Hope, Dumps, Young England magazine, 1883]


stark-naked (adj.)

1520s, deformed (by influence of stark (adj.)) from Middle English start naked (early 13c.), from
Old English steort tail, rump, from Proto-Germanic *stertaz (cognates: Old Norse stertr, Danish
stjert, Middle Dutch stert, Dutch staart, Old High German sterz, German Sterz), from PIE *sterd-,
extended form of root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong (see stereo-). Hence British slang
starkers naked (1923).


