stealth (n.)

mid-13c., theft, action or practice of stealing, from a probable Old English *st&aelig;l&thorn;,
which is related to stelen (see steal (v.)), from Proto-Germanic *st&aelig;litho (cognates: Old
Norse stul&thorn;r), with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Compare
heal/health, weal/wealth. Sense of secret action developed c.1300, but the word also retained its
etymological sense into 18c. Got a boost as an adjective from stealth fighter, stealth bomber,
radar-evading U.S. military aircraft, activated 1983.


stealthy (adj.)

c.1600, from stealth + -y (2). Related: Stealthily; stealthiness.


growth (n.)

1550s, from grow + -th (2), on model of health, stealth, etc. Compare Old Norse gro&eth;i, from groa
to grow. In this sense, Old English used grownes.


Lethe

river of Hades (whose water when drunk caused forgetfulness of the past), from Greek lethe,
literally forgetfulness, oblivion, related to lethargos forgetful, lathre secretly, by stealth,
lathrios stealthy, lanthanein to be hidden. Cognate with Latin latere to be hidden (see latent).
Related: Lethean.


subterfuge (n.)

1570s, from Middle French subterfuge (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin subterfugium an evasion,
from Latin subterfugere to evade, escape, flee by stealth, from subter beneath, below; in compounds
secretly (from PIE *sup-ter-, suffixed (comparative) form of *(s)up-; see sub-) + fugere flee (see
fugitive).


surprise (n.)

also formerly surprize, late 14c., unexpected attack or capture, from Old French surprise a taking
unawares (13c.), from noun use of past participle of Old French sorprendre to overtake, seize,
invade (12c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + prendre to take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile). Meaning something unexpected first recorded 1590s, that
of feeling of astonishment caused by something unexpected is c.1600. Meaning fancy dish is attested
from 1708.    A Surprize is ... a dish ... which promising little from its first appearance, when
open abounds with all sorts of variety. [W. King, Cookery, 1708]   Surprise party originally was a
stealth military detachment (1826); festive sense is attested by 1857; according to Thornton's
American Glossary, originally a gathering of members of a congregation at the house of their
preacher with the ostensible purpose of contributing provisions, &amp;c.;, for his support, and
sometimes called a donation party. Phrase taken by surprise is attested from 1690s.


cat (n.)

Old English catt (c.700), from West Germanic (c.400-450), from Proto-Germanic *kattuz (cognates: Old
Frisian katte, Old Norse k&ouml;ttr, Dutch kat, Old High German kazza, German Katze), from Late
Latin cattus.    The near-universal European word now, it appeared in Europe as Latin catta
(Martial, c.75 C.E.), Byzantine Greek katta (c.350) and was in general use on the continent by
c.700, replacing Latin feles. Probably ultimately Afro-Asiatic (compare Nubian kadis, Berber
kadiska, both meaning cat). Arabic qitt tomcat may be from the same source. Cats were domestic in
Egypt from c.2000 B.C.E., but not a familiar household animal to classical Greeks and Romans. The
nine lives have been proverbial since at least 1560s.    The Late Latin word also is the source of
Old Irish and Gaelic cat, Welsh kath, Breton kaz, Italian gatto, Spanish gato, French chat (12c.).
Independent, but ultimately from the same source are words in the Slavic group: Old Church Slavonic
kotuka, kotel'a, Bulgarian kotka, Russian ko&#353;ka, Polish kot, along with Lithuanian kate and
non-Indo-European Finnish katti, which is from Lithuanian.    Extended to lions, tigers, etc.
c.1600. As a term of contempt for a woman, from early 13c. Slang sense of prostitute is from at
least c.1400. Slang sense of fellow, guy, is from 1920, originally in U.S. Black English; narrower
sense of jazz enthusiast is recorded from 1931.   Cat's paw (1769, but cat's foot in the same sense,
1590s) refers to old folk tale in which the monkey tricks the cat into pawing chestnuts from a fire;
the monkey gets the nuts, the cat gets a burnt paw. Cat bath hurried or partial cleaning is from
1953. Cat burglar is from 1907, so called for stealth. Cat-witted small-minded, obstinate, and
spiteful (1670s) deserved to survive. For Cat's meow, cat's pajamas, see bee's knees.


