suffocate (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), deprive of air, choke, kill by preventing access of air to the lungs, also
figurative, stifle, smother, extinguish, from Latin suffocatus, past participle of suffocare to
choke (see suffocation). Intransitive use, become choked, stifled, or smothered, is from 1702.
Related: Suffocated; suffocating.


smother (v.)

c.1200, to suffocate with smoke, from smother (n.), earlier smorthre dense, suffocating smoke (late
12c.), from stem of Old English smorian to suffocate, choke, strangle, stifle, cognate with Middle
Dutch smoren, German schmoren; possibly connected to smolder. Meaning to kill by suffocation in any
manner is from 1540s; sense of to extinguish a fire is from 1590s. Sense of stifle, repress is first
recorded 1570s; meaning to cover thickly (with some substance) is from 1590s. Related: Smothered;
smothering.


choke (v.)

c.1300, transitive, to strangle; late 14c., to make to suffocate, of persons as well as swallowed
objects, a shortening of acheken (c.1200), from Old English aceocian to choke, suffocate (with
intensive a-), probably from root of ceoke jaw, cheek (see cheek (n.)).    Intransitive sense from
c.1400. Meaning gasp for breath is from early 15c. Figurative use from c.1400, in early use often
with reference to weeds stifling the growth of useful plants (a Biblical image). Meaning to fail in
the clutch is attested by 1976, American English. Related: Choked; choking. Choke-cherry (1785)
supposedly so called for its astringent qualities. Johnson also has choke-pear Any aspersion or
sarcasm, by which another person is put to silence. Choked up overcome with emotion and unable to
speak is attested by 1896. The baseball batting sense is by 1907.


damp (v.)

late 14c., to suffocate, from damp (n.). Figurative meaning to deaden (the spirits, etc.) attested
by 1540s. Meaning to moisten is recorded from 1670s. Related: Damped; damping.


asphyxiate (v.)

1818, to suffocate (someone or something), from asphyxia + -ate (2). Related: Asphyxiated;
asphyxiating.


stifle (v.)

late 14c., to choke, suffocate, drown, of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Old French
estouffer to stifle, smother (Modern French &#233;touffer), itself of uncertain origin, perhaps from
a Germanic source (compare Old High German stopfon to plug up, stuff). Metaphoric sense is from
1570s. Related: Stifled; stifling.


suffocation (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French suffocation, from Latin suffocationem (nominative suffocatio) a
choking, stifling, noun of action from past participle stem of suffocare suffocate, throttle,
stifle, strangle, originally to narrow up, from sub up (from under) (see sub-) + fauces (plural)
throat, narrow entrance (see faucet).


strangle (v.)

late 13c., from Old French estrangler choke, suffocate, throttle (Modern French &#233;trangler),
from Latin strangulare to choke, stifle, check, constrain, from Greek strangalan to choke, twist,
from strangale a halter, cord, lace, related to strangos twisted, from PIE root *strenk- tight,
narrow; pull tight, twist (see string (n.)). Related: Strangled; strangling.


smolder (v.)

c.1300 (implied in smoldering), to smother, suffocate, related to Middle Dutch smolen, Low German
smelen, Flemish smoel hot, from Proto-Germanic *smel-, *smul-. The intransitive meaning burn and
smoke without flame is first recorded 1520s, fell from use 17c. (though smoldering persisted in
poetry) and was revived 19c. Figurative sense exist in a suppressed state; burn inwardly is from
1810. Related: Smouldered; smolderingly. Middle English also had a noun smolder meaning smoky vapor,
a stifling smoke.


