surge (v.)

1510s, to rise and fall, from surge (n.), or from Middle French surgir rise, ride (as a ship does a
wave), spring up, arrive. Meaning rise high and roll forcefully is from 1560s. Related: Surged;
surging.


surgent (adj.)

rising in waves, 1590s, from Latin surgentem (nominative surgens) rising, present participle of
surgere to rise (see surge (n.)). In psychology from 1933.


surge (n.)

late 15c., fountain, stream, of uncertain origin, probably from Middle French sourge-, stem of
sourdre to rise, swell, from Latin surgere to rise, arise, get up, mount up, ascend; attack,
contraction of surrigere, from assimilated form of sub up from below (see sub-) + regere to keep
straight, guide (see regal). Meaning high, rolling swell of water is from 1520s; figurative sense of
excited rising up (as of feelings) is from 1510s.


splurge (n.)

1828, ostentatious display, American English, of uncertain origin; originally among the class of
words considered characteristic of Western (i.e. Kentucky) dialect. Perhaps a blend of splash and
surge. The meaning extravagant indulgence in spending is first recorded 1928.


kick (n.)

1520s, from kick (v.). Meaning recoil (of a gun) when fired is from 1826. Meaning surge or fit of
pleasure (often as kicks) is from 1941; originally literally, stimulation from liquor or drugs
(1844). The kick the fashion is c.1700.


upsurge (n.)

1916, from up (adv.) + surge (n.).


sord (n.)

flock of mallards, 15c., perhaps from sord (v.) to take flight, from Old French sordre arise, stand
up, from Latin surgere to rise (see surge (n.)).


rush (n.2)

a hasty driving forward, late 14c., from rush (v.). Sense of mass migration of people (especially to
a gold field) is from 1848, American English. Football/rugby sense from 1857. Meaning surge of
pleasure is from 1960s. Rush hour first recorded 1888. Rush order from 1896.


source (n.)

mid-14c., support, base, from Old French sourse a rising, beginning, fountainhead of a river or
stream (12c.), fem. noun taken from past participle of sourdre to rise, spring up, from Latin
surgere to rise (see surge (n.)). Meaning a first cause is from late 14c., as is that of fountain-
head of a river. Meaning written work (later also a person) supplying information or evidence is
from 1788.


resurgent (adj.)

1808, from obsolete verb resurge to rise again (1570s), from Latin resurgere rise again, lift
oneself, be restored, from re- again (see re-) + surgere to rise (see surge).


insurgent (n.)

one who rises in revolt, 1765, from Latin insurgentem (nominative insurgens), present participle of
insurgere rise up, rise against, revolt, from in- against, or perhaps merely intensive, + surgere to
rise (see surge). An obsolete verb insurge to rise in opposition or insurrection is attested from
1530s.


fluctuation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French fluctuation (12c.) or directly from Latin fluctuationem (nominative
fluctuatio) a wavering, vacillation, noun of action from past participle stem of fluctuare to
undulate, to move in waves, from fluctus wave, billow, surge, from past participle of fluere to flow
(see fluent).


sortie (n.)

attack of the besieged upon the besiegers, 1778, from French sortie (16c.), literally a going out,
noun use of fem. past participle of sortir go out, from Vulgar Latin *surctire, from Latin
surrectus, past participle of surgere rise up (see surge (n.)).


storm (n.)

Old English storm violent disturbance of the atmosphere, tempest; onrush, attack, tumult;
disturbance, from Proto-Germanic *sturmaz storm (cognates: Old Norse stormr, Old Saxon, Middle Low
German, Middle Dutch, Dutch storm, Old High German sturm, German Sturm), from PIE *stur-mo-, from
root *(s)twer- (1) to turn, whirl. Old French estour onset, tumult, Italian stormo a fight are
Germanic loan-words. Figurative (non-meteorological) sense was in late Old English.   Storm-wind is
from 1798. Storm-door first recorded 1872; storm-water is from 1847; storm-window is attested from
1824. Storm surge attested from 1872. Adverbial phrase _______ up a storm is from 1946.


spring (n.1)

season following winter, the vernal season, c.1400, earlier springing time (late 14c.), which
replaced Lent, the Old English word. From spring (v.); also see spring (n.3). The notion is of the
spring of the year, when plants begin to rise (as in spring of the leaf, 1520s), from the noun in
its old sense of action or time of rising or springing into existence. It was used of sunrise, the
waxing of the moon, rising tides, etc.; compare 14c. spring of dai sunrise, spring of mone moonrise,
late Old English spring carbuncle, pustule.    Other Germanic languages tend to take words for fore
or early as their roots for the season name (Danish voraar, Dutch voorjaar, literally fore-year;
German Fr&uuml;hling, from Middle High German vrueje early). In 15c. English, the season also was
prime-temps, after Old French prin tans, tamps prim (French printemps, which replaced
primev&egrave;re 16c. as the common word for spring), from Latin tempus primum, literally first
time, first season.   Spring fever is from 1843 as surge of romantic feelings; earlier of a type of
disease or head-cold prevalent in certain places in spring; Old English had lenctenadle. First
record of spring cleaning in the domestic sense is by 1843 (in ancient Persia, the first month,
corresponding to March-April, was Adukanai&#353;a, which apparently means Irrigation-Canal-Cleaning
Month; Kent, p.167). Spring chicken small roasting chicken (usually 11 to 14 weeks) is recorded from
1780; transferred sense of young person first recorded 1906. Baseball spring training attested by
1889, earlier of militias, etc.


