surprise (v.)

also formerly surprize, late 14c., overcome, overpower (of emotions), from the noun or from Anglo-
French surprise, fem. past participle of Old French surprendre (see surprise (n.)). Meaning come
upon unexpectedly is from 1590s; that of strike with astonishment is 1650s.


surprise (n.)

also formerly surprize, late 14c., unexpected attack or capture, from Old French surprise a taking
unawares (13c.), from noun use of past participle of Old French sorprendre to overtake, seize,
invade (12c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + prendre to take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile). Meaning something unexpected first recorded 1590s, that
of feeling of astonishment caused by something unexpected is c.1600. Meaning fancy dish is attested
from 1708.    A Surprize is ... a dish ... which promising little from its first appearance, when
open abounds with all sorts of variety. [W. King, Cookery, 1708]   Surprise party originally was a
stealth military detachment (1826); festive sense is attested by 1857; according to Thornton's
American Glossary, originally a gathering of members of a congregation at the house of their
preacher with the ostensible purpose of contributing provisions, &amp;c.;, for his support, and
sometimes called a donation party. Phrase taken by surprise is attested from 1690s.


surprised (adj.)

1610s, attacked unexpectedly, past participle adjective from surprise (v.). Meaning excited by
something unexpected is from 1882.


supprise (n.)

mid-15c., injury, wrong, outrage, from supprise (v.) overpower, subdue, put down; grieve, afflict
(c.1400), also take unawares, attack unexpectedly (mid-15c.), from Anglo-French supprise, fem. past
participle of supprendre, variant of sorprendre (see surprise (n.)). The noun later also had sense
oppression; surprise attack, but perhaps originally was an alternate form of surprise used in a
specific sense.


ooh

exclamation of pain, surprise, wonder, etc., 1916. Combined with aah from 1953. Ooh-la-la,
exclamation of surprise or appreciation, is attested 1924, from French and suggestive of the
supposed raciness of the French.


bah

exclamation of contempt, 1817, perhaps c.1600, probably from French bah, Old French ba, expressing
surprise, scorn, dismay. Perhaps simply a natural exclamation in such situations; compare Greek
babai!, an exclamation of surprise.


ow (interj.)

14c. as an exclamation of surprise; 1919 as an expression of sudden pain.


heh

mid-15c., originally an exclamation of emotions such as sorrow or surprise. As the sound of a light
laugh, by 1808.


o

interjection of fear, surprise, admiration, etc.; see oh.


whammo

exclamation signifying violence or surprise, 1932, from wham (q.v.).


gramercy

exclamation of thanks or surprise, c.1300, from Old French grant-merci great thanks.


oops

a natural exclamation [OED] of surprise at doing something awkward, but attested only from 1933
(compare whoops).


cowabunga (interj.)

1954, American English, from exclamation of surprise and anger by Chief Thunderthud in The Howdy
Doody Show, 1950s children's TV show; used by surfers 1960s as a shout of triumph, and spread
worldwide 1990 by use in the TV cartoon Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.


surprising (adv.)

1660s, present participle adjective from surprise (v.). Related: Surprisingly.


caramba

exclamation of dismay or surprise, 1835, from Spanish, said to be a euphemism for carajo penis, from
Vulgar Latin *caraculum little arrow.


alack

late 15c., from ah, lack, from lack in Middle English sense of loss, failure, reproach, shame.
Originally an expression of dissatisfaction, later of regret or unpleasant surprise.


yikes

exclamation of alarm or surprise, by 1953; perhaps from yoicks, a call in fox-hunting, attested from
c.1770. Yike a fight is slang attested from 1940, of uncertain connection.


ah

mid-15c., an expression of surprise, delight, disgust or pain in nearly all Indo-European languages,
but not found in Old English (where the equivalent expression was la!), so perhaps from Old French a
ah!, oh! woe!


aha

exclamation of surprise or delighted discovery, late 14c., from ah + ha.They crieden out! ... A ha
the fox! and after him thay ran. [Chaucer]


zounds (interj.)

c.1600, oath of surprise or anger, altered from (by) God's wounds!, in reference to the wounds of
Christ on the Cross. One of the innumerable oaths having reference to Christ's passion [Century
Dictionary]. Compare gadzooks.


ho (interj.)

exclamation of surprise, etc., c.1300; as an exclamation calling attention or demanding silence,
late 14c. Used after the name of a place to which attention is called (as in Westward-Ho) it dates
from 1590s, originally a cry of boatmen, etc., announcing departures for a particular destination.
Ho-ho-ho expressing laughter is recorded from mid-12c.


ha

c.1300, natural expression of surprise, distress, etc.; found in most European languages; in Old
English, Greek, Latin, Old French as ha ha. A ha-ha (1712), from French, was an obstacle
interrupting one's way sharply and disagreeably; so called because it surprizes ... and makes one
cry Ah! Ah! [Alexander Le Blond, The Theory and Practice of Gardening, 1712].


whoa (interj.)

1620s, a cry to call attention from a distance, a variant of who. As a command to stop a horse, it
is attested from 1843, a variant of ho. As an expression of delight or surprise (1980s) it has
gradually superseded wow, which was very popular 1960s.


pooh-pooh (v.)

to dismiss lightly and contemptuously, 1827, a slang reduplication of dismissive expression pooh.
Among the many 19th century theories of the origin of language was the Pooh-pooh theory (1860),
which held that language grew from natural expressions of surprise, joy, pain, or grief.


bitterness (n.)

Old English biternys bitterness, grief; see bitter + -ness. Figurative sense (of feelings, etc.) is
attested earlier than literal sense (of taste), which will surprise no one who reads any amount of
Anglo-Saxon literature.


gee (interj.)

exclamation of surprise, 1895, probably euphemistic for Jesus. Form gee whiz is attested from 1871;
gee whillikens (1851) seems to be the oldest form.


jiminy

exclamation of surprise, 1803, a disguised oath, perhaps for Jesu Domine Jesus Lord. Extended form
jiminy cricket is attested from 1848 and suggests Jesus Christ (compare also Jiminy Christmas,
1890).


indeed (adv.)

early 14c., in dede in fact, in truth, from Old English d&aelig;d (see deed). Written as two words
till c.1600. As an interjection, 1590s; as an expression of surprise or disgust, 1834. Emphatic form
in yes (or no) indeedy attested from 1856, American English.


lo (interj.)

early 13c., from Old English la, exclamation of surprise, grief, or joy; influenced in Middle
English by lo!, short for lok look! imperative of loken to look (see look (v.)). Expression lo and
behold attested by 1779.


bingo (n.)

lotto-like game of chance, 1936; many theories about its origin, none satisfying; the most likely is
bingo! as an exclamation of sudden realization or surprise (attested from 1923). Uncertain
connection to the slang word for brandy (1690s); attested as liquor in American English, 1861.
Thomas Chandler Haliburton (Sam Slick) in The Americans at Home (1854) recounts a story of a
drinking game in which the children's song about the farmer's dog was sung and when it came time to
spell out the name, every participant had to take a letter in turn, and anyone who missed or flubbed
had to drink.


jolt (v.)

1590s, perhaps from Middle English jollen, chollen to knock, to batter (early 15c.), or an
alteration of obsolete jot (v.) to jostle (1520s). Perhaps related to earlier jolt head a big,
stupid head (1530s). Figurative sense of to startle, surprise is from 1872. Related: Jolted;
jolting.


startle (v.)

c.1300, run to and fro (intransitive), frequentative of sterten (see start (v.)). Sense of move
suddenly in surprise or fear first recorded 1520s. Transitive meaning frighten suddenly is from
1590s. The word retains more of the original meaning of start (v.). Related: Startled; startling;
startlingly. As a noun from 1714.


why (adv.)

Old English hwi, instrumental case (indicating for what purpose or by what means) of hw&aelig;t (see
what), from Proto-Germanic adverb *hwi (cognates: Old Saxon hwi, Old Norse hvi), from PIE *kwi-
(source of Greek pei where), locative of *kwo- who (see who). As an interjection of surprise or
emphasis, recorded from 1510s. As a noun, cause, reason from c.1300.


heyday (n.)

late 16c., alteration of heyda (1520s), exclamation of playfulness or surprise, something like
Modern English hurrah, apparently an extended form of Middle English interjection hey or hei (see
hey). Modern sense of stage of greatest vigor first recorded 1751, which altered the spelling on
model of day, with which this word apparently has no etymological connection.


good day

salutation, late 14c., short for have a good day (c.1200). Good morning is c.1400, gode morwene.
Good night, also goodnight, is late 14c.; as an exclamation of surprise, from 1893.


-ize

word-forming element used to make verbs, Middle English -isen, from Old French -iser, from Late
Latin -izare, from Greek -izein.    English picked up the French form, but partially reverted to the
correct Greek -z- spelling from late 16c. In Britain, despite the opposition (at least formerly) of
OED, Encyclopaedia Britannica, the Times of London, and Fowler, -ise remains dominant. Fowler thinks
this is to avoid the difficulty of remembering the short list of common words not from Greek which
must be spelled with an -s- (such as advertise, devise, surprise).


sensation (n.)

1610s, a reaction to external stimulation of the sense organs, from French sensation (14c.) and
directly from Medieval Latin sensationem (nominative sensatio), from Late Latin sensatus endowed
with sense, sensible, from Latin sensus feeling (see sense (n.)). Meaning state of shock, surprise,
in a community first recorded 1779.    The great object of life is sensation -- to feel that we
exist, even though in pain. It is this 'craving void' which drives us to gaming -- to battle, to
travel -- to intemperate, but keenly felt, pursuits of any description, whose principal attraction
is the agitation inseparable from their accomplishment. [Lord Byron, letter, Sept. 6, 1813]


marvel (n.)

c.1300, miracle, also wonderful story or legend, from Old French merveille a wonder, surprise,
miracle, from Vulgar Latin *miribilia (also source of Spanish maravilla, Portuguese maravilha,
Italian maraviglia), altered from Latin mirabilia wonderful things, from neuter plural of mirabilis
wonderful, marvelous, extraordinary; strange, singular, from mirari to wonder at, from mirus
wonderful (see smile). A neuter plural treated in Vulgar Latin as a feminine singular. Related:
Marvels.


well (adv.)

in a satisfactory manner, Old English wel abundantly, very, very much; indeed, to be sure; with good
reason; nearly, for the most part, from Proto-Germanic *welo- (cognates: Old Saxon wela, Old Norse
vel, Old Frisian wel, Dutch wel, Old High German wela, German wohl, Gothic waila well), from PIE
root *wel- (2) to wish, will (cognates: Sanskrit prati varam at will, Old Church Slavonic vole well,
Welsh gwell better, Latin velle to wish, will, Old English willan to wish; see will (v.)).    Also
used in Old English as an interjection and an expression of surprise. The adjective was in Old
English in the sense in good fortune, happy, from the adverb; sense of satisfactory is from late
14c.; agreeable to wish or desire is from mid-15c.; in good health, not ailing is from 1550s. Well-
to-do prosperous is recorded from 1825.


stupid (adj.)

1540s, mentally slow, lacking ordinary activity of mind, dull, inane, from Middle French stupide
(16c.) and directly from Latin stupidus amazed, confounded; dull, foolish, literally struck
senseless, from stupere be stunned, amazed, confounded, from PIE *stupe- hit, from root *(s)teu- (1)
to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). Related: Stupidly; stupidness.    Native words for
this idea include negative compounds with words for wise (Old English unwis, unsnotor, ungleaw),
also dol (see dull (adj.)), and dysig (see dizzy (adj.)). Stupid retained its association with
stupor and its overtones of stunned by surprise, grief, etc. into mid-18c. The difference between
stupid and the less opprobrious foolish roughly parallels that of German t&ouml;richt vs. dumm but
does not exist in most European languages.


what (pron.)

Old English hw&aelig;t, referring to things in abstraction; also why, wherefore; indeed, surely,
truly, from Proto-Germanic pronoun *hwat (cognates: Old Saxon hwat, Old Norse hvat, Danish hvad, Old
Frisian hwet, Dutch wat, Old High German hwaz, German was, Gothic hva what), from PIE *kwod, neuter
singular of *kwos who (see who). Corresponding to Latin quid.    Meaning what did you say? is
recorded from c.1300. As an adjective and adverb, in Old English. As a conjunction in late Old
English. Exclamatory use was in Old English. What the _____ (devil, etc.) as an exclamation of
surprise is from late 14c. As an interrogative expletive at the end of sentences from 1891; common
in affected British speech. Or what as an alternative end to a question is first attested 1766. What
have you anything else one can think of is from 1925. What's up? what is happening? first recorded
1881.     To give one what for is to respond to his remonstrant what for? by further assault
[Weekley]. The phrase is attested from 1873; what for? as introducing a question is from 1760. To
know what is what is from c.1400; I'll tell you what to emphasize what is about to be said is in
Shakespeare.


know (v.)

Old English cnawan (class VII strong verb; past tense cneow, past participle cnawen), to know,
perceive; acknowledge, declare, from Proto-Germanic *knew- (cognates: Old High German bi-chnaan, ir-
chnaan to know), from PIE root *gno- to know (cognates: Old Persian x&#353;nasatiy he shall know;
Old Church Slavonic znati, Russian znat to know; Latin gnoscere; Greek *gno-, as in gignoskein;
Sanskrit jna- know). Once widespread in Germanic, this form is now retained only in English, where
however it has widespread application, covering meanings that require two or more verbs in other
languages (such as German wissen, kennen, erkennen and in part k&ouml;nnen; French conna&icirc;tre,
savoir; Latin novisse, cognoscere; Old Church Slavonic znaja, vemi). The Anglo-Saxons used two
distinct words for this, witan (see wit) and cnawan.    Meaning to have sexual intercourse with is
attested from c.1200, from the Old Testament. To not know one's ass from one's elbow is from 1930.
To know better to have learned from experience is from 1704. You know as a parenthetical filler is
from 1712, but it has roots in 14c. To know too much (to be allowed to live, escape, etc.) is from
1872. As an expression of surprise, what do you know attested by 1914.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


man (n.)

Old English man, mann human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero; servant, vassal, from
Proto-Germanic *manwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Swedish, Dutch, Old High German man, German Mann, Old
Norse ma&eth;r, Danish mand, Gothic manna man), from PIE root *man- (1) man (cognates: Sanskrit
manuh, Avestan manu-, Old Church Slavonic mozi, Russian muzh man, male).    Plural men (German
M&auml;nner) shows effects of i-mutation. Sometimes connected to root *men- to think (see mind),
which would make the ground sense of man one who has intelligence, but not all linguists accept
this. Liberman, for instance, writes, Most probably man 'human being' is a secularized divine name
from Mannus [Tacitus, Germania, chap. 2], believed to be the progenitor of the human race.    So I
am as he that seythe, `Come hyddr John, my man.' [1473]    Sense of adult male is late (c.1000); Old
English used wer and wif to distinguish the sexes, but wer began to disappear late 13c. and was
replaced by man. Universal sense of the word remains in mankind and manslaughter. Similarly, Latin
had homo human being and vir adult male human being, but they merged in Vulgar Latin, with homo
extended to both senses. A like evolution took place in Slavic languages, and in some of them the
word has narrowed to mean husband. PIE had two stems: *uiHro freeman (source of Sanskrit vira-,
Lithuanian vyras, Latin vir, Old Irish fer, Gothic wair) and *hner man, a title more of honor than
*uiHro (source of Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner, Greek aner).    MANTRAP, a woman's
commodity. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   Man also was in Old English as
an indefinite pronoun, one, people, they. The chess pieces so called from c.1400. As an interjection
of surprise or emphasis, first recorded c.1400, but especially popular from early 20c. Man-about-
town is from 1734; the Man the boss is from 1918. To be man or mouse be brave or be timid is from
1540s. Men's Liberation first attested 1970.At the kinges court, my brother, Ech man for himself.
[Chaucer, Knight's Tale, c.1386]


