synthetic (adj.)

1690s, as a term in logic, deductive, from French synth&eacute;tique (17c.) and directly from Modern
Latin syntheticus, from Greek synthetikos skilled in putting together, constructive, from synthetos
put together, constructed, compounded, past participle of syntithenai to put together (see
synthesis). From 1874 in reference to products or materials made artificially by chemical synthesis;
hence artificial (1930). As a noun, synthetic material, from 1934. Related: Synthetical (1620s in
logic).


Kevlar

registered trademark (DuPont) for a synthetic fiber developed there c.1965.


Orlon

proprietary name (Du Pont) of synthetic textile fiber, 1948, an invented word (compare nylon).


Spandex (n.)

synthetic fiber, 1959, American English, proprietary name, an arbitrary formation from expand +
commercial suffix -ex.


plastic (n.)

1905, solid substance that can be molded, originally of dental molds, from plastic (adj.). Main
current meaning, synthetic product made from oil derivatives, first recorded 1909, coined by Leo
Baekeland (see bakelite).


Teflon (n.)

commercially important synthetic polymer, 1945, proprietary name registered in U.S. by du Pont, from
chemical name (poly)te(tra)fl(uoroethylene) + arbitrary ending -on; popularized as a coating of non-
stick pans in 1960s; metaphoric extension, especially in reference to U.S. President Ronald Reagan,
is attested from an Aug. 2, 1983, speech on the floor of Congress by Pat Schroeder.


preformed (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin praeformare or else from pre- + formed (see form (v.)). Of plastic and synthetic
products, from 1918.


acetate (n.)

1827, salt formed by combining acetic acid with a base, from Latin acetum vinegar (see acetic) +
chemical suffix -ate (3). As a type of synthetic material, it is attested from 1920, short for
acetate silk, etc.


vinyl (n.)

in modern use, in reference to a plastic or synthetic resin, 1939, short for polyvinyl; not in
widespread use until late 1950s. Slang meaning phonograph record (1976) replaced wax (n.) in that
sense. In chemistry, vinyl was used from 1863 as the name of a univalent radical derived from
ethylene, from Latin vinum wine (see wine (n.)), because ethyl alcohol is the ordinary alcohol
present in wine.


buna (n.)

synthetic rubber made from butadiene, from German Buna, from first elements of butadiene, name of a
hydrocarbon (related to butane; the suffix indicates the presence of two double bonds) + Na,
indicating sodium (from natrium; see sodium).


syn-

word-forming element meaning together with, jointly; alike; at the same time, also sometimes
completive or intensive, from Greek syn (prep.) with, together with, along with, in the company of,
from PIE *ksun- with (cognates: Russian so- with, together, from Old Russian su(n)-). Assimilated to
-l-, reduced to sy- before -s- and -z-, and altered to sym- before -b-, -m- and -p-. Since 1970s
also with a sense of synthetic.


hight (v.)

named, called (archaic), from levelled past participle of Middle English highte, from Old English
hatte I am called (passive of hatan to call, name, command) merged with heht called, active past
tense of the same verb. Hatte was the only survival in Old English of the old Germanic synthetic
passive tense. The word is related to Old Norse heita, Dutch heten, German hei&szlig;en, Gothic
haitan to call, be called, command (see cite).


