talon (n.)

c.1400, talounz claws of a bird or beast, probably originally from Old French talon heel or hinder
part of the foot of a beast, or of a man, or of a shoe; foot-step (12c.), from Medieval Latin
talonem heel, from Latin talus ankle (see talus (n.1)). The extension to birds of prey, and
subsequent stages, are peculiar to English [OED].


ungulate (adj.)

hoofed, 1802, from Late Latin ungulatus hoofed, from ungula hoof, claw, talon, diminutive (in form
but not sense) of unguis nail (see ungual). Ungulata, the order of hoofed mammals, is recorded from
1839.


keloid (n.)

also cheloid, 1854, from French k&eacute;lo&#239;de, from Greek khele crab claw, talon, cloven hoof
+ -oides (see -oid). Related: Keloidal; cheloidal.


chelicerae (n.)

1831, plural of Modern Latin chelicera, from Greek khele claw, talon, cloven hoof, from PIE *ghel-
wo-, from root *ghel-una- jaw, + keras horn (see kerato-). Earlier chelicer (1835), from French
ch&eacute;lic&egrave;re.


chelate (adj.)

having pincer-like claws, 1826 as a term in zoology; 1920 in chemistry, from Modern Latin chela claw
(from Greek khele claw, talon, cloven hoof; see chelicerae) + -ate (2). Related: Chelated;
chelating; chelation.


pounce (n.)

claw of a bird of prey, late 15c., pownse, probably from Old French ponchon lance, javelin; spine,
quill (Modern French poin&ccedil;on; see punch (v.)). So called for being the claws that punch holes
in things. In falconry, the heel claw is a talon, and others are pounces. Meaning an act of jumping
or falling upon is from 1825. In Middle English also the name of a tool for punching holes or
embossing metal (late 14c.).


claw (n.)

Old English clawu, earlier clea, claw, talon, iron hook, from Proto-Germanic *klawo (cognates: Old
Frisian klawe claw, hoe, Middle Dutch klouwe, Dutch klauw, Old High German klawa, German Klaue
claw).   Claw-foot in reference to furniture is from 1823; claw-and-ball attested from 1893. Claw-
hammer attested from 1769.


stallion (n.)

mid-15c., earlier staloun (c.1300), male horse kept for breeding purposes, from Anglo-French
estaloun, Old French estalon stallion, uncastrated male horse (Modern French &#233;talon), from
Frankish *stal, cognate with Old High German stal stable, from Proto-Germanic *stalla- (see stall
(n.1)). The notion is probably of a horse kept in a stable to service mares. Transferred sense of
robustly lascivious man is attested from 1550s.


tell (v.)

Old English tellan to reckon, calculate, number, compute; consider, think, esteem, account (past
tense tealde, past participle teald), from Proto-Germanic *taljan to mention in order (cognates: Old
Saxon tellian tell, Old Norse telja to count, number; to tell, say, Old Frisian tella to count; to
tell, Middle Dutch and Dutch tellen, Old Saxon talon to count, reckon, Danish tale to speak, Old
High German zalon, German z&auml;hlen to count, reckon), from PIE root *del- (2) to count, reckon
(see tale).    Meaning to narrate, announce, relate in English is from c.1000; that of to make known
by speech or writing, announce is from early 12c. Sense of to reveal or disclose is from c.1400;
that of to act as an informer, to 'peach'  is recorded from 1901. Meaning to order (someone to do
something) is from 1590s. To tell (someone) off reprimand is from 1919.    Original sense in teller
and phrase to tell time. For sense evolution, compare French conter to count, raconter to recount;
Italian contare, Spanish contar to count, recount, narrate; German z&auml;hlen to count,
erz&auml;hlen to recount, narrate. Klein also compares Hebrew saphar he counted, sipper he told.


