tenet (n.)

principle, opinion, or dogma maintained as true by a person, sect, school, etc., properly a thing
held (to be true), early 15c., from Latin tenet he holds, third person singular present indicative
of tenere to hold, grasp, keep, have possession, maintain, also reach, gain, acquire, obtain; hold
back, repress, restrain; figuratively hold in mind, take in, understand.    The Latin word is from
PIE root *ten- to stretch (cognates: Sanskrit tantram loom, tanoti stretches, lasts; Persian tar
string; Lithuanian tankus compact, i.e. tightened; Greek teinein to stretch, tasis a stretching,
tension, tenos sinew, tetanos stiff, rigid, tonos string, hence sound, pitch; Latin tendere to
stretch, tenuis thin, rare, fine; Old Church Slavonic tento cord; Old English &thorn;ynne thin).
Connecting notion between stretch and hold is cause to maintain. The modern sense is probably
because tenet was used in Medieval Latin to introduce a statement of doctrine.


dogma (n.)

c.1600 (in plural dogmata), from Latin dogma philosophical tenet, from Greek dogma (genitive
dogmatos) opinion, tenet, literally that which one thinks is true, from dokein to seem good, think
(see decent). Treated in 17c.-18c. as a Greek word in English.


hypotonia (n.)

1876, medical Latin, from hypo- + Greek tonos tone (see tenet).


tensor (n.)

muscle that stretches or tightens a part, 1704, Modern Latin agent noun from tens-, past participle
stem of Latin tendere to stretch (see tenet).


tenesmus (n.)

a straining (to void the contents of the bowels), 1520s, medical Latin, from Greek tenesmos a
straining, from teinein to stretch (see tenet).


tensile (adj.)

1620s, stretchable, from Modern Latin tensilis capable of being stretched, from Latin tensus, past
participle of tendere to stretch (see tenet). Meaning pertaining to tension is from 1841.


tense (adj.)

stretched tight, 1660s, from Latin tensus, past participle of tendere to stretch, extend (see
tenet). Figurative sense of in a state of nervous tension is first recorded 1821. Related: Tensely;
tenseness.


tenon (n.)

projection inserted to make a joint, late 14c., from Middle French tenon a tenon, from Old French
tenir to hold (see tenet). As a verb from 1590s.


tend (v.1)

to incline, to move in a certain direction, early 14c., from Old French tendre stretch out, hold
forth, hand over, offer (11c.), from Latin tendere to stretch, extend, make tense; aim, direct;
direct oneself, hold a course (see tenet).


tenter (n.)

c.1300, wooden framework for stretching cloth, of uncertain origin, probably via Old French (but the
evolution of the ending is obscure), and ultimately from Latin tentorium tent made of stretched
skins, from tentus stretched, variant past participle of tendere to stretch (see tenet).


tonic (adj.)

1640s, relating to or characterized by muscular tension, from Greek tonikos of stretching, from
tonos a stretching (see tenet). The meaning maintaining the healthy firmness of tissues is recorded
from 1680s, first extended 1756 to having the property of restoring to health. Related: Tonical
(1580s).


neoteny (n.)

retention of juvenile characteristics in adult life, 1901, from German neotenie (1884), from Greek
neos young (see new) + teinein to extend (see tenet).


tantra (n.)

type of Hindu religious book, 1799, from Sanskrit tantram, literally loom, warp, hence,
figuratively, groundwork, system, doctrine, from tan to stretch, extend, from PIE root *ten- to
stretch, extend (see tenet).


tendency (n.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin tendentia inclination, leaning, from Latin tendens, present participle of
tendere to stretch, extend, aim (see tenet). Earlier in same sense was tendaunce (mid-15c.), from
Old French tendance.


isotonic (adj.)

1828, from Greek isotonos of level pitch; equally stretched, from iso- (see iso-) + tonos (see
tenet).


tetanus (n.)

infectious disease, late 14c., from Latin tetanus tetanus, from Greek tetanos tetanus, muscular
spasm, literally a stretching, tension, from teinein to stretch (see tenet); so called because the
disease is characterized by violent spasms and stiffness of the muscles [Barnhart]. Related:
Tetanoid (adj.).


catatonia (n.)

1888, from medical Latin catatonia; replacing katatonia (1880s), which was formed directly from
Greek kata- down (see cata-) + tonos tone (see tenet).


hypotenuse (n.)

1570s, from Late Latin hypotenusa, from Greek hypoteinousa stretching under (the right angle), fem.
present participle of hypoteinein, from hypo- under (see sub-) + teinein to stretch (see tenet).
Formerly often erroneously hypothenuse.


tenable (adj.)

capable of being held or maintained, 1570s, from Middle French tenable, from Old French (12c.), from
tenir to hold, from Latin tenere to hold, keep (see tenet).


tenacity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French t&eacute;nacit&eacute; (14c.) and directly from Latin tenacitas an
act of holding fast, from tenax (genitive tenacis) holding fast, gripping, clingy; firm, steadfast,
from tenere to hold (see tenet).


pertain (v.)

early 14c., from Old French partenir to belong to and directly from Latin pertinere to reach,
stretch; relate, have reference to; belong, be the right of; be applicable, from per- through (see
per) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Related: Pertained; pertaining.


ostensible (adj.)

1762, capable of being shown, presentable, from French ostensible, from Latin ostens-, past
participle stem of ostendere to show, expose to view; to stretch out, spread before; exhibit,
display, from ob in front of (see ob-) + tendere to stretch (see tenet). Meaning apparent, professed
is from 1771.


diatonic (adj.)

c.1600, from French diatonique, from Latin diatonicus, from Greek diatonikos, from diatonos
extending; pertaining to the diatonic scale, from dia- (see dia-) + teinein to stretch (see tenet).


peritoneum (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin peritonaeum, from Greek peritonaion abdominal membrane, literally part
stretched over, noun use of neuter of peritonaios stretched over, from peri- around (see peri-) +
teinein to stretch (see tenet). Related: Peritoneal.


distend (v.)

c.1400, from Latin distendere to swell or stretch out, extend, from dis- apart (see dis-) + tendere
to stretch (see tenet). Related: Distended; distending.


contain (v.)

late 13c., from Old French contein-, stem of contenir, from Latin continere (transitive) to hold
together, enclose, from com- together (see com-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Related: Containable.


contend (v.)

mid-15c., from Old French contendre, from Latin contendere to stretch out, strive after, from com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + tendere to stretch (see tenet). Related: Contended; contending.


telangiectasia (n.)

1831, Modern Latin, from Greek telos end (see tele-), + angeion vessel (see angio-), + ektasis a
stretching out, extension, dilation, from ek (see ex-) + tasis a stretching, tension, intensity (see
tenet).


tenant (n.)

early 14c., person who holds lands by title or by lease, from Anglo-French tenaunt (late 13c.), Old
French tenant possessor; feudal tenant (12c.), noun use of present participle of tenir to hold, from
Latin tenere hold, keep, grasp (see tenet). Related: Tenancy. Tenant-farmer attested from 1748.


portend (v.)

early 15c., from Latin portendere foretell, reveal; point out, indicate, originally to stretch
forward, from por- (variant of pro-; see pro-) forth, forward + tendere to stretch, extend (see
tenet). Related: Portended; portending.


tender (v.)

to offer formally, 1540s, from Middle French tendre to offer, hold forth (11c.), from Latin tendere
to stretch, extend (see tenet). The retention of the ending of the French infinitive is unusual (see
render (v.) for another example). The noun meaning formal offer for acceptance is from 1540s;
specific sense of money that may be legally offered as payment is from 1740; hence legal tender
currency.


subtend (v.)

1560s, from Latin subtendere to stretch underneath, from sub under (see sub-) + tendere to stretch
(see tenet). Related: Subtended; subtending.


extenuate (v.)

1520s, from Latin extenuatus, past participle of extenuare lessen, make small, reduce, diminish,
from ex- out (see ex-) + tenuare make thin, from tenuis thin (see tenet). Related: Extenuated;
extenuating. Extenuating circumstances attested from 1660s.


monotony (n.)

1706, originally in transferred sense of wearisome, tiresome, from French monotonie (1670s), from
Greek monotonia sameness of tone, monotony, from monotonos monotonous, of one tone, from monos
single, alone (see mono-) + tonos tone (see tenet). Literal sense of sameness of tone or pitch in
English is from 1724.


tent (n.)

c.1300, portable shelter of skins or coarse cloth stretched over poles, from Old French tente tent,
hanging, tapestry (12c.), from Medieval Latin tenta a tent, literally something stretched out, noun
use of fem. singular of Latin tentus stretched, variant past participle of tendere to stretch (see
tenet). The notion is of stretching hides over a framework. Tent caterpillar first recorded 1854, so
called from the tent-like silken webs in which they live gregariously.


tendon (n.)

1540s, from Medieval Latin tendonem (nominative tendo), altered (by influence of Latin tendere to
stretch) from Late Latin tenon, from Greek tenon (genitive tenontos) tendon, sinew, from PIE *ten-
on- something stretched, from root *ten- to stretch (see tenet).


tenuous (adj.)

1590s, thin, unsubstantial, irregularly formed from Latin tenuis thin, drawn out, meager, slim,
slender, figuratively trifling, insignificant, poor, low in rank, from PIE root *ten- to stretch
(cognates: Sanskrit tanuh thin, literally stretched out; see tenet) + -ous. The correct form with
respect to the Latin is tenuious. The figurative sense of having slight importance, not substantial
is found from 1817 in English. Related: Tenuously; tenuousness.


tenure (n.)

early 15c., holding of a tenement, from Anglo-French and Old French tenure a tenure, estate in land
(13c.), from Old French tenir to hold, from Vulgar Latin *tenire, from Latin tenere to hold (see
tenet). The sense of condition or fact of holding a status, position, or occupation is first
attested 1590s. Meaning guaranteed tenure of office (usually at a university or school) is recorded
from 1957. Related: Tenured (1961).


obtain (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French obtenir acquire, obtain (14c.), from Latin obtinere hold, hold fast,
take hold of, get possession of, acquire, from ob to (though perhaps intensive in this case; see
ob-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Related: Obtained; obtaining.


detente (n.)

1908 as a political term, a borrowing of French d&eacute;tente loosening, slackening (used in the
Middle Ages for the catch of a crossbow), from Vulgar Latin detendita, fem. past participle of Latin
detendere loosen, release, from de- from, away (see de-) + tendere stretch (see tenet). The
reference is to a relaxing in a political situation. The French word was earlier borrowed as detent
(1680s) catch which regulates the strike in a clock.


tension (n.)

1530s, a stretched condition, from Middle French tension (16c.) or directly from Latin tensionem
(nominative tensio) a stretching (in Medieval Latin a struggle, contest), noun of state from tensus,
past participle of tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- stretch (see tenet). The sense of nervous
strain is first recorded 1763. The meaning stress along lines of electromotive force (as in high-
tension wires) is recorded from 1785.


baritone (n.)

c.1600, from Italian baritono, from Greek barytonos deep-toned, deep-sounding, from barys heavy,
deep, also, of sound, strong, deep, bass (see grave (adj.)) + tonos tone (see tenet). Technically,
ranging from lower A in bass clef to lower F in treble clef. Meaning singer having a baritone voice
is from 1821. As a type of brass band instrument, it is attested from 1949.


detain (v.)

early 15c., deteynen, from Old French detenir to hold off, keep back (12c.), from Latin detinere
hold off, keep back, from de- from, away (see de-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Modern spelling is
17c., from influence of contain, retain, etc. Related: Detained; detaining.


sustain (v.)

c.1300, give support to, from stem of Old French sostenir hold up, bear; suffer, endure (13c.), from
Latin sustinere hold up, hold upright; furnish with means of support; bear, undergo, endure, from
sub up from below (see sub-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning continue, keep up (an action,
etc.) is from early 14c. Sense of endure without failing or yielding is from c.1400. Related:
Sustained; sustaining.


attenuate (v.)

to make thin, to make less, 1520s, from Latin attenuatus enfeebled, weak, past participle of
attenuare to make thin, lessen, diminish, from ad- to (see ad-) + tenuare make thin, from tenuis
thin (see tenet). Related: Attenuated; attenuating. Earlier was Middle English attenuen to make thin
(in consistency), early 15c.


attend (v.)

c.1300, to direct one's mind or energies, from Old French atendre (12c., Modern French attendre) to
expect, wait for, pay attention, and directly from Latin attendere give heed to, literally to
stretch toward, from ad- to (see ad-) + tendere stretch (see tenet). The notion is of stretching
one's mind toward something. Sense of take care of, wait upon is from early 14c. Meaning to pay
attention is early 15c.; that of to be in attendance is mid-15c. Related: Attended; attending.


abstain (v.)

late 14c., to withhold oneself, from Old French abstenir (14c.), earlier astenir (13c.) hold
(oneself) back, refrain, abstain (from), practice abstinence, from Latin abstinere withhold, keep
back, keep off, from ab(s)- from, away from (see ab-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Specifically of
liquor, late 14c. Of voting, 1796. Related: Abstained; abstaining.


entertain (v.)

late 15c., to keep up, maintain, to keep (someone) in a certain frame of mind, from Middle French
entretenir (12c.), from Old French entretenir hold together, stick together, support, from entre-
among (from Latin inter; see inter-) + tenir to hold (from Latin tenere; see tenet).    Sense of
have a guest is late 15c.; that of amuse is 1620s. Meaning to allow (something) to consideration (of
opinions, notions, etc.) is 1610s. Related: Entertained; entertaining.


maintain (v.)

mid-13c., to practice habitually, from Anglo-French meintenir (Old French maintenir, 12c.) keep (a
wife), sustain; persevere in, practice continually, from Latin manu tenere hold in the hand, from
manu, ablative of manus hand (see manual) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning to carry on, keep up
is from mid-14c.; that of to keep oneself, to support is from late 14c. Sense of to defend in speech
is from mid-14c. Related: Maintained; maintaining; maintains.


retain (v.)

late 14c., hold back, restrain; c.1400, continue keeping, keep possession of, from Old French
retenir keep, retain; take into feudal service; hold back; remember (12c.), from Latin retinere hold
back, keep back, detain, restrain, from re- back (see re-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning
keep (another) attached to one's person, keep in service is from mid-15c.; specifically of lawyers
from 1540s. Meaning keep in the mind is from c.1500. Related: Retained; retaining.


