tither (n.)

late 14c., one who pays a tithe, agent noun from tithe (v.). As one who exacts a tithe, 1590s.


tithe (v.)

Old English teo&thorn;ian to pay one-tenth, from the root of tithe (n.). As to impose a payment of a
tenth, late 14c. Related: Tithed; tithing.


tithe (n.)

a tenth part (originally of produce) due as support of the clergy, c.1200, from Old English
teogo&thorn;a (Anglian), teo&thorn;a (West Saxon) tenth, from Proto-Germanic *teguntha, from PIE
*dekmto-, from *dekm ten (see ten). Retained in ecclesiastical sense while the form was replaced in
ordinal use by tenth.


decimation (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin decimationem (nominative decimatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin decimare the removal or destruction of one-tenth, from decem ten (see ten). Earliest
sense in English was of a tithe; punishment sense is from 1580s; transferred sense of much
destruction, severe loss recorded from 1680s.


tenth (adj.)

mid-12c., ten&eth;e; see ten + -th (1). Replacing Old English teo&eth;a (West Saxon), tei&eth;a
(Northumbrian), which is preserved in tithe. Compare Old Saxon tehando, Old Frisian tegotha, Dutch
tiende, Old High German zehanto, German zehnte, Gothic taihunda. As a noun from c.1200.


dime (n.)

chosen 1786 as name for U.S. 10 cent coin, from dime a tenth, tithe (late 14c.), from Old French
disme (Modern French d&icirc;me) a tenth part, from Latin decima (pars) tenth (part), from decem ten
(see ten).    The verb meaning to inform (on someone) is 1960s, from the then-cost of a pay phone
call. A dime a dozen almost worthless first recorded 1930. Phrase stop on a dime attested by 1954 (a
dime being the physically smallest unit of U.S. currency).


-ty (1)

suffix representing ten in cardinal numbers that are multiples of 10 (sixty, seventy, etc.), from
Old English -tig, from a Germanic root (cognates: Old Saxon, Dutch -tig, Old Frisian -tich, Old
Norse -tigr, Old High German -zug, German -zig) that existed as a distinct word in Gothic (tigjus)
and Old Norse (tigir) meaning tens, decades. Compare tithe (n.).    English, like many other
Germanic languages, retains traces of a base-12 number system. The most obvious instance is eleven
and twelve which ought to be the first two numbers of the teens series. Their Old English forms,
enleofan and twel(eo)f(an), are more transparent: leave one and leave two.    Old English also had
hund endleofantig for 110 and hund twelftig for 120. One hundred was hund teantig. The -tig
formation ran through 12 cycles, and could have bequeathed us numbers *eleventy (110) and *twelfty
(120) had it endured, but already during the Anglo-Saxon period it was being obscured.    Old Norse
used hundra&eth; for 120 and &thorn;usend for 1,200. Tvauhundra&eth; was 240 and
&thorn;riuhundra&eth; was 360. Older Germanic legal texts distinguished a common hundred (100) from
a great hundred (120). This duodecimal system is perhaps due to contact with Babylonia [Lass, Old
English].


