tottery (adj.)

trembling, unsteady, 1861, from totter + -y (2).


totter (v.)

c.1200, swing to and fro, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal
Norwegian totra to quiver, shake). Meaning stand or walk with shaky, unsteady steps is from c.1600.
Related: Tottered; tottering.


teeter (v.)

1843, to seesaw, alteration of Middle English titter move unsteadily, probably from a Scandinavian
source akin to Old Norse titra to shake, shiver, totter, tremble, from Proto-Germanic *ti-tra-
(cognates: German zittern to tremble). Meaning move unsteadily, be on the edge of imbalance is from
1844. Noun teeter-totter see-saw is attested from 1905 (earlier simply teeter, 1855, and titter-
totter in same sense is from 1520s). Totter (n.) board swing is recorded from late 14c.; see totter
(v.).


toddle (v.)

to run or walk with short, unsteady steps, c.1600, Scottish and northern British, of uncertain
origin, possibly related to totter (1530s); an earlier sense of to toy, play is found c.1500.
Related: Toddled; toddling.


diddle (v.)

to cheat, swindle, 1806, from dialectal duddle, diddle to totter (1630s). Meaning waste time is
recorded from 1825. Meaning to have sex with is from 1879; that of to masturbate (especially of
women) is from 1950s. More or less unrelated meanings that have gathered  around a suggestive sound.
Related: Diddled; diddling.


dodder (v.)

1610s, perhaps from Middle English daderen to quake, tremble (late 15c.), apparently frequentative
of dialectal dade, on a form similar to totter, patter. Related: Doddered; doddering.


weary (adj.)

Old English werig tired, exhausted; miserable, sad, related to worian to wander, totter, from Proto-
Germanic *worigaz (cognates: Old Saxon worig weary, Old High German wuorag intoxicated), of unknown
origin.


tot (n.)

little child, 1725, Scottish, of uncertain origin, perhaps a shortened form of totter, or related to
Old Norse tottr, nickname of a dwarf (compare Swedish tutte little child, Danish tommel-tot little
child, in which the first element means thumb). Tot-lot play ground for young children is recorded
from 1944.


labefaction (n.)

1610s, process of shaking; downfall, noun of action from Latin labefactus, past participle of
labefacere to cause to totter, shake; overthrow, from labi to slip, slide (see lapse (n.)) + facere
to make, do (see factitious). Related: Labefy.


waggle (v.)

late 15c. (implied in waggling), frequentative of wag (v.). Compare Dutch waggelen to waggle, Old
High German wagon to move, shake, German wackeln to totter. Transitive sense from 1590s. Related:
Waggled.


shake-down (n.)

also shakedown, 1730, impromptu bed made upon loose straw, from verbal phrase; see shake (v.) + down
(adv.). Meaning forced contribution (1902) is from the verbal phrase in a slang sense blackmail,
extort (1872). Meaning a thorough search is from 1914; perhaps from the notion of measuring corn.
The oldest use of the verbal phrase shake down is cause to totter and fall (c.1400).


gauche (adj.)

awkward, tactless, 1751 (Chesterfield), from French gauche left (15c., replacing Old French senestre
in that sense), originally awkward, awry, from Middle French gauchir turn aside, swerve, from Proto-
Germanic *wankjan (cognates: Old High German wankon, Old Norse vakka to stagger, totter), from PIE
*weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).


wobble (v.)

1650s, wabble, probably from Low German wabbeln to wobble; cognate with Old Norse vafla hover about,
totter, related to vafra move unsteadily, from Proto-Germanic *wab- to move back and forth, perhaps
from PIE *webh- to weave (see waver). Form with -o- is from 1851. Related: Wobbled; wobbling. The
noun is attested from 1690s.


merry-go-round (n.)

1729, from merry (adj.) + go (v.) + round. Figurative use by 1838. Merry-totter (mid-15c.) was a
Middle English name for a swing or see-saw. Also compare merry-go-down strong ale (c.1500); merry-
go-sorry a mix of joy and sorrow (1590s).


wince (v.)

c.1300, wincen; mid-13c. winchen, to recoil suddenly, from Anglo-French *wenchir, Old North French
*wenchier (Old French guenchir) to turn aside, avoid, from Frankish *wenkjan, from Proto-Germanic
*wankjan (cognates: Old High German wankon to stagger, totter, Old Norse vakka to stray, hover; see
wink (v.)). Originally of horses. Modern form is attested from late 13c. Related: Winced; wincing.


lapwing (n.)

Middle English lappewinke (late 14c.), lapwyngis (early 15c.), folk etymology alteration of Old
English hleapewince, probably literally leaper-winker, from hleapan to leap + wince totter, waver,
move rapidly, related to wincian to wink. Said to be so called from the manner of its flight [OED]
in reference to its irregular flapping manner of flight [Barnhart], but the lapwing also flaps on
the ground pretending to have a broken wing to lure egg-hunters away from its nest, which seems a
more logical explanation. Its Greek name was polyplagktos luring on deceitfully.


loiter (v.)

early 15c., idle one's time, dawdle over work, from Middle Dutch loteren be loose or erratic, shake,
totter like a loose tooth or a sail in a storm; in modern Dutch, leuteren to delay, linger, loiter
over one's work. Probably cognate with Old English lutian lurk, and related to Old English loddere
beggar; Old High German lotar empty, vain, luzen lurk; German Lotterbube vagabond, rascal, lauschen
eavesdrop; Gothic luton mislead; Old English ly&eth;re base, bad, wicked. Related: Loitered;
loitering.


wink (v.)

Old English wincian to blink, wink, close one's eyes quickly, from Proto-Germanic *wink- (cognates:
Dutch winken, Old High German winkan move sideways, stagger; nod, German winken to wave, wink), a
gradational variant of the root of Old High German wankon to stagger, totter, Old Norse vakka to
stray, hover, from PIE root *weng- to bend, curve. The meaning close an eye as a hint or signal is
first recorded c.1100; that of close one's eyes (to fault or irregularity) first attested late 15c.
Related: Winked; winking.


labor (n.)

c.1300, a task, a project; later exertion of the body; trouble, difficulty, hardship (late 14c.),
from Old French labor labor, toil, work, exertion, task (12c., Modern French labeur), from Latin
laborem (nominative labor) labor, toil, exertion; hardship, pain, fatigue; a work, a product of
labor, of uncertain origin, perhaps originally from the notion of tottering under a burden, and
related to labere to totter.    Meaning body of laborers considered as a class (usually contrasted
to capitalists) is from 1839. Sense of physical exertions of childbirth is 1590s, earlier labour of
birthe (early 15c.), a sense also found in Old French, and compare French en travail in (childbirth)
suffering (see travail). Labor Day first marked 1882 in New York City.


swank (adj.)

stylish, classy, posh, 1913, from earlier noun or verb; A midland and s.w. dial. word taken into
general slang use at the beginning of the 20th cent. [OED]; compare swank (n.) ostentatious
behavior, noted in 1854 as a Northampton word; swank (v.), from 1809 as to strut, behave
ostentatiously. Perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *swank-, from PIE *sweng(w)-, a Germanic root
meaning to swing, turn, toss (cognates: Middle High German swanken to sway, totter, turn, swing, Old
High German swingan to swing; see swing (v.)). Perhaps the notion is of swinging the body
ostentatiously (compare swagger).    A separate word-thread derives from Old English swancor pliant,
bending, and from this comes swanky (n.) active or clever young fellow (c.1500).


