translucent (adj.)

1590s, from Latin translucentem (nominative translucens), present participle of translucere to shine
through, from trans- through (see trans-) + lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Related:
Translucently.


alabaster (n.)

translucent whitish kind of gypsum used for vases, ornaments, and busts, late 14c., from Old French
alabastre (12c., Modern French alb&acirc;tre), from Latin alabaster colored rock used to make boxes
and vessels for unguents, from Greek alabastros (earlier albatos) vase for perfumes, perhaps from
Egyptian 'a-labaste vessel of the goddess Bast. Used figuratively for whiteness and smoothness from
1570s. The spelling in 16-17th c. is almost always alablaster ... [OED].


talc (n.)

1580s, talke, from Middle French talc (16c.), probably from Spanish talco and Medieval Latin talcus,
also talcum talc (ealy 14c.), both from Arabic talq, from Persian talk talc. It was applied by the
Arab and medieval writers to various transparent, translucent and shining minerals such as talc
proper, mica, selenite, etc. [Flood]. Related: Talcoid; talcose; talcous.


pellucid (adj.)

transparent, translucent, 1610s, from Latin pellucidus transparent, from pellucere shine through,
from per- through (see per) + lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Related: Pellucidly; pellucidity.


lantern (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French lanterne lamp, lantern, light (12c.), from Latin lanterna lantern, lamp,
torch, altered (by influence of Latin lucerna lamp) from Greek lampter torch, from lampein to shine
(see lamp). Variant lanthorn (16c.-19c.) was folk etymology based on the common use of horn as a
translucent cover. Lantern-jaws hollow, long cheeks is from a resemblance noted since at least mid-
14c.


sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


