trekkie (n.)

1888, South African, party of trekkers (see trek). Meaning fan of the television program 'Star Trek'
attested by 1976.


trek

1849 (n.) a stage of a journey by ox wagon; 1850 (v.), to travel or migrate by ox wagon, from
Afrikaans trek, from Dutch trekken to march, journey, originally to draw, pull, from Middle Dutch
trecken (cognate with Middle Low German trecken, Old High German trechan to draw). Especially in
reference to the Groot Trek (1835 and after) of more than 10,000 Boers, who, discontented with the
English colonial authorities, left Cape Colony and went north and north-east. In general use as a
noun by 1941. Related: Trekked; trekking.


trekker (n.)

one who treks, 1851, agent noun from trek (v.).


borg (n.)

fictional hostile alien hive-race in the Star Trek series, noted for assimilating defeated rivals,
first introduced in The Next Generation TV series (debut fall 1987). Their catchphrase is resistance
is futile.


track (n.)

late 15c., footprint, mark left by anything, from Old French trac track of horses, trace (mid-15c.),
possibly from a Germanic source (compare Middle Low German treck, Dutch trek drawing, pulling; see
trek). Meaning lines of rails for drawing trains is from 1805. Meaning branch of athletics involving
a running track is recorded from 1905. Meaning single recorded item is from 1904, originally in
reference to phonograph records. Meaning mark on skin from repeated drug injection is first attested
1964.   Track record (1955) is a figurative use from racing, performance history of an individual
car, runner, horse, etc. (1907, but the phrase was more common in sense fastest speed recorded at a
particular track). To make tracks move quickly is American English colloquial first recorded 1835;
to cover (one's) tracks in the figurative sense first attested 1898; to keep track of  something is
attested from 1883. American English wrong side of the tracks bad part of town is by 1901. Track
lighting attested from 1970.


trigger (n.)

device by means of which a catch or spring is released and a mechanism set in action, 1650s, earlier
tricker (1620s), from Dutch trekker trigger, from trekken to pull (see trek). Tricker was the usual
form in English until c.1750. Trigger-happy is attested from 1943.


Spock

half-alien character in the Star Trek U.S. entertainment franchise, developed and named 1964 by
series creator Gene Roddenberry, who later said he was searching for an alien-sounding word and not
thinking of U.S. physician and child-care specialist Benjamin M. Spock (1903-1998), whose name is of
Dutch origin. The doctor wrote the enormously popular Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care
(1946) and is the source of the first element in Spock-marked (1967), defined in OED as (Adversely)
affected by an upbringing held to be in accordance with the principles of Dr. Spock ....


warp (n.)

threads running lengthwise in a fabric, Old English wearp, from Proto-Germanic *warpo- (cognates:
Middle Low German warp, Old High German warf warp, Old Norse varp cast of a net), from PIE *werp- to
turn, bend (see warp (v.)). The warp of fabric is that across which the woof is thrown. Applied in
20c. astrophysics to the fabric of space-time, popularized in noun phrase warp speed by 1960s TV
series Star Trek.


walk (n.)

c.1200, a tossing, rolling; mid-13c., an act of walking, a going on foot; late 14c., a stroll, also
a path, a walkway; from walk (v.). The meaning broad path in a garden is from 1530s. Meaning
particular manner of walking is from 1650s. Meaning manner of action, way of living is from 1580s;
hence walk of life (1733). Meaning range or sphere of activity is from 1759. Sports sense of base on
balls is recorded from 1905; to win in a walk (1854) is from horse racing (see walk-over). As a type
of sponsored group trek as a fund-raising event, by 1971 (walk-a-thon is from 1963).


