tribune (n.)

late 14c., title of an official in ancient Rome, from Latin tribunus magistrate (specifically one of
the officers appointed to protect the rights and interests of the plebeians from the patricians),
originally head of a tribe (in the Roman sense), from tribus (see tribe). Also raised platform
(1762), from Italian tribuna, from Medieval Latin tribuna, from Latin tribunal in its classical
sense platform for the seats of magistrates in ancient Rome.


veto (n.)

1620s, from Latin veto, literally I forbid, first person singular present indicative of vetare
forbid, prohibit, oppose, hinder, of unknown origin. In ancient Rome, the technical term for protest
interposed by a tribune of the people against any measure of the Senate or of the magistrates
[Lewis].


bleeding (n.)

late 14c., a flowing out of blood; mid-15c. as a drawing out of blood; verbal noun formed after
earlier present participle adjective (early 13c.) of bleed. Figurative use is from 1796. As a
euphemism for bloody, from 1858. In U.S. history, Bleeding Kansas, in reference to the slavery
disputes in that territory 1854-60, is attested from 1856, said to have been first used by the New
York Tribune.


milquetoast (n.)

timid, meek person, 1938, from Caspar Milquetoast, character created by U.S. newspaper cartoonist
H.T. Webster (1885-1952) in the strip The Timid Soul, which ran from 1924 in the New York World and
later the Herald Tribune. By 1930 the name was being referenced as a type of the meek man. The form
seems to be milktoast with an added French twist; also see milksop.


tribunal (n.)

early 15c., a judgement seat, from Old French tribunal justice seat, judgement seat (13c.) and
directly from Latin tribunal platform for the seat of magistrates, elevation, embankment, from
tribunus official in ancient Rome, magistrate, literally head of a tribe (see tribune). Hence, a
court of justice or judicial assembly (1580s).


limey (n.)

1888, Australian, New Zealand, and South African slang for English immigrant; U.S. use is attested
from 1918, originally British sailor, British warship, short for lime-juicer (1857), in derisive
reference to the British Navy's policy (begun 1795) of issuing lime (n.2) juice on ships to prevent
scurvy among sailors. In U.S., extended to any Englishman by 1924.Midway Signs Limey Prof to Dope
Yank Talk [Chicago Tribune headline, Oct. 18, 1924]


copperhead (n.)

Trigonocephalus contortrix, 1775, American English, so called for color markings between its eyes;
see copper + head (n.). Poisonous sneak snakes (because they bite without warning), the name is said
to have been first used in reference to Northerners suspected of Southern sympathies in Greeley's
New York Tribune, July 20, 1861. Charles H. Coleman, The Use of the Term 'Copperhead' During the
Civil War [Mississippi Valley Historical Review 25 (1938), p.263] traces it to an anonymous letter
against Ohio anti-war Democrats in the Cincinnati Commercial newspaper in the summer of 1861. It
seems not to have been in widespread use until summer 1862.


fashion (n.)

c.1300, shape, manner, mode, from Old French fa&ccedil;on (12c.) face, appearance; construction,
pattern, design; thing done; beauty; manner, characteristic feature, from Latin factionem
(nominative factio) group of people acting together, literally a making or doing, from facere to
make (see factitious).    Sense of prevailing custom is from late 15c.; that of style of attire is
from 1520s.  To call a fashion wearable is the kiss of death. No new fashion worth its salt is
wearable. [Eugenia Sheppard, New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 13, 1960] Fashion plate (1851) originally
was full-page picture in a popular magazine showing the prevailing or latest style of dress, in
reference to the typographic plate from which it was printed. Transfered sense of well-dressed
person had emerged by 1920s.


