trigger (n.)

device by means of which a catch or spring is released and a mechanism set in action, 1650s, earlier
tricker (1620s), from Dutch trekker trigger, from trekken to pull (see trek). Tricker was the usual
form in English until c.1750. Trigger-happy is attested from 1943.


trigger (v.)

1930, from trigger (n.). Related: Triggered; triggering.


hair-trigger (n.)

1830, originally a secondary trigger in a firearm which sprung free a mechanism (hair) which, when
set, allowed the main trigger (n.) to be released by very slight force. Figurative use by 1841.


spark (v.)

c.1200, to emit sparks, from spark (n.). Meaning to affect by an electrical spark is from 1889.
Figurative meaning stimulate, to trigger first attested 1912. Meaning to play the gallant, to court
is from the 17c. secondary sense of the noun. Related: Sparked; sparking.


cock (n.2)

in various mechanical senses, such as cock of a faucet (early 15c.) is of uncertain connection with
cock (n.1), but German has hahn cock in many of the same senses. The cock of an old matchlock
firearm is 1560s, hence half-cocked with the cock lifted to the first catch, at which position the
trigger does not act (by 1809).


incident (n.)

early 15c., something which occurs casually in connection with something else, from Middle French
incident and directly from Latin incidentem (nominative incidens), present participle of incidere
happen, befall, from in- on + -cidere, comb. form of cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). Sense of an
occurrence viewed as a separate circumstance is from mid-15c. Meaning event that might trigger a
crisis or political unrest first attested 1913.


clef (n.)

1570s in a musical sense, character on a staff to indicate its name and pitch, from Middle French
clef (12c.) key, musical clef, trigger, from a figurative or transferred use of classical Latin
clavis, which had only the literally sense key (see slot (n.2)). In the Middle Ages, the Latin word
was used in the Guidonian system for the lowest note of a scale, which is its basis (see keynote).
The most common is the treble, violin, or G-clef, which crosses on the second line of the staff,
denoting that as the G above middle C on the piano.


safety (n.)

early 14c., from Old French sauvete safety, safeguard; salvation; security, surety, earlier salvetet
(11c., Modern French sauvet&#233;), from Medieval Latin salvitatem (nominative salvitas) safety,
from Latin salvus (see safe (adj.)). Meaning trigger-lock on a gun is attested from 1881.    As a
North American football position, first recorded 1931. As a type of score against one's own team,
1881. Safety-valve, which diminishes the risk of explosion, is from 1797; figurative sense recorded
from 1818. Safety-net in literal sense (in machinery) by 1916, later of aerial circus performances
(1920s); figurative use by 1950. Safety-first as an accident-prevention slogan first recorded 1873.


