turmoil (n.)

1520s, of uncertain origin, perhaps an alteration of Middle French tremouille mill hopper, in
reference to the hopper's constant motion to and fro, from Latin trimodia vessel containing three
modii, from modius, a Roman dry measure, related to modus measure. Attested earlier in English as a
verb (1510s), though this now is obsolete.


turbid (adj.)

1620s, from Latin turbidus muddy, full of confusion, from turbare to confuse, bewilder, from turba
turmoil, crowd, probably from Greek tyrbe turmoil, tumult, disorder, from PIE *(s)twer- (1) to turn,
whirl (see storm (n.)). Related: Turbidly; turbidness.


clonus (n.)

violent muscular spasms, 1817, from Modern Latin, from Greek klonos turmoil, any violent motion;
confusion, tumult, press of battle, from PIE *kel- to drive, set in motion. Related: Clonic;
clonicity.


turbulent (adj.)

early 15c., disorderly, tumultuous, unruly (of persons), from Middle French turbulent (12c.), from
Latin turbulentus full of commotion, restless, disturbed, boisterous, stormy, figuratively troubled,
confused, from turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). In reference to weather, from 1570s. Related:
Turbulently.


battle (n.)

c.1300, from Old French bataille battle, single combat, also inner turmoil, harsh circumstances;
army, body of soldiers, from Late Latin battualia exercise of soldiers and gladiators in fighting
and fencing, from Latin battuere to beat, to strike (see batter (v.)). Phrase battle royal fight
involving several combatants is from 1670s.


trouble (n.)

c.1200, agitation of the mind, emotional turmoil, from Old French truble, torble trouble,
disturbance (12c.), from trubler/torbler (see trouble (v.)). From early 15c. as a concern, a cause
for worry; 1590s as something that causes trouble. Meaning unpleasant relations with the authorities
is from 1550s. Related: Troubles (1510s). Trouble and strife as rhyming slang for wife is recorded
from 1908.


turbine (n.)

1838, from French turbine (19c.), from Latin turbinem (nominative turbo) spinning top, eddy,
whirlwind, that which whirls, related to turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). Originally applied to a
wheel spinning on a vertical axis driven by falling water. Turbo in reference to gas turbine engines
is attested from 1904.


manhandle (v.)

mid-15c., wield a tool, also, late 15c., to attack (an enemy), from man (n.) + handle (v.). Nautical
meaning to move by force of men (without levers or tackle) is attested from 1834, and is the source
of the slang meaning to handle roughly (1865).    [T]he two Canalers rushed into the uproar, and
sought to drag their man out of it toward the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined with them in
this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of harm's way, the valiant captain
danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious
scoundrel, and smoke him along to the quarter-deck. [Melville, The Town-Ho's Story, Harper's
magazine, October 1851]


perturb (v.)

late 14c., from Old French perturber disturb, confuse (14c.) and directly from Latin perturbare to
confuse, disorder, disturb, especially of states of the mind, from per- through (see per) + turbare
disturb, confuse, from turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). Related: Perturbed; perturbing.


disturb (v.)

c.1300, to stop or hinder, from Old French destorber (Old North French distourber) and directly from
Latin disturbare throw into disorder, from dis- completely (see dis-) + turbare to disorder,
disturb, from turba turmoil (see turbid).    Meaning to frighten is late 13c.; that of to stir up,
agitate is c.1300. Related: Disturbed; disturbing; disturbingly. Middle English also had distourbler
(n.) one who disturbs or incites (late 14c.).


toil (n.1)

hard work, c.1300, originally turmoil, contention, dispute, from Anglo-French toil (13c.), from
toiler agitate, stir up, entangle, writhe about, from Old French toeillier drag about, make dirty
(12c.), usually said to be from Latin tudiculare crush with a small hammer, from tudicula mill for
crushing olives, instrument for crushing, from Latin tudes hammer, from PIE *tud-, variant of
*(s)teu- to push, stroke, knock, beat (see obtuse). Sense of hard work, labor (1590s) is from the
related verb (see toil (v.)).


