validate (v.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin validatus, past participle of validare to make valid, from validus (see
valid). Related: Validated; validating.


valid (adj.)

1570s, having force in law, legally binding, from Middle French valide (16c.), from Latin validus
strong, effective, powerful, active, from valere be strong (see valiant). The meaning sufficiently
supported by facts or authority, well-grounded is first recorded 1640s.


validity (n.)

1540s, from Middle French validit&eacute; or directly from Late Latin validitatem (nominative
validitas) strength, from Latin validus (see valid).


available (adj.)

mid-15c., beneficial, also valid, effective, capable of producing the desired effect, from avail +
-able. Meaning at one's disposal, capable of being made use of is recorded from 1827.


testate (adj.)

having left a valid will, late 15c., from Latin testatus public, manifest, published, past
participle of testari make a will, be witness to, declare (see testament).


sanction (v.)

1778, confirm by sanction, make valid or binding; 1797 as to permit authoritatively; from sanction
(n.). Seemingly contradictory meaning impose a penalty on is from 1956 but is rooted in an old
legalistic sense of the noun. Related: Sanctioned; sanctioning.


fingerprint (n.)

1834, from finger (n.) + print (n.). Proposed as a means of identification from c.1892.
Admissibility as evidence as valid proof of guilt in murder trials in U.S. upheld in 1912. From 1905
as a verb. Related: Fingerprinted; fingerprinting.


veritable (adj.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French and Old French veritable true, real, truthful, valid (in law), from
verit&eacute; (see verity) + -able. Probably lost mid-17c. and reborrowed or revived after 1830.
Related: Veritably.


admit (v.)

late 14c., let in, from Latin admittere to allow to enter, let in, let come, give access, from ad-
to (see ad-) + mittere let go, send (see mission). Sense of to concede as valid or true is first
recorded early 15c. Related: Admitted; Admitting.


usual (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French usuel current, in currency (of money), valid (13c.) and directly from
Late Latin usualis ordinary, from Latin usus custom (see use (v.)). The usual suspects is from a
line delivered by Claude Rains (as a French police inspector) in Casablanca (1942).


ratify (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French ratifier (13c.), from Medieval Latin ratificare confirm, approve,
literally fix by reckoning, from Latin ratus fixed by calculation; determined; approved; certain,
sure; valid (past participle adjective from reri to reckon, think; see reason (v.)) + root of facere
to make (see factitious). Related: Ratified; ratifying.


invalid (adj.1)

not strong, infirm, 1640s, from Latin invalidus not strong, infirm, weak, feeble, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + validus strong (see valid). Specific meaning infirm from sickness, disease, or injury is
from 1640s.


blue laws

1781, severe Puritanical code said to have been enacted 18c. in New Haven, Connecticut; of uncertain
origin, perhaps from one of the ground senses behind blues, or from notion of coldness. Or perhaps
connected to bluestocking in the sense of puritanically plain or mean (see bluestocking, which is a
different application of the same term; the parliament of 1653 was derisively called the
bluestocking parliament). The common explanation that they were written on blue paper is not
considered valid; pale blue paper was used for many old U.S. legal documents and there would have
been nothing notable about its use in this case.


ballpark (n.)

baseball stadium, 1899, from (base)ball + park (n.). Figurative sense of acceptable range of
approximation first recorded 1954, originally in the jargon of atomic weapons scientists, perhaps
originally referring to area within which a missile was expected to return to earth; the reference
is to broad but reasonably predictable dimensions.    The result, according to the author's
estimate, is a stockpile equivalent to one billion tons of TNT. Assuming this estimate is in the
ball park, clearly there is valid reason for urging candor on the part of our government. [Ralph E.
Lapp, Atomic Candor, in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, October 1954]


solemn (adj.)

mid-14c., performed with due religious ceremony or reverence, sacred, devoted to religious
observances, also, of a vow, etc., made under religious sanction, binding, from Old French solempne
(12c., Modern French solennel) and directly from Latin sollemnis annual, established, religiously
fixed, formal, ceremonial, traditional, perhaps related to sollus whole (see safe (adj.)).    The
explanation that Latin sollemnis was formed from sollus whole + annus year is not considered valid
[Barnhart], but some assimilation via folk-etymology is possible. In Middle English also famous,
important; imposing, grand, hence Chaucer's friar, a ful solempne man. Meaning marked by seriousness
or earnestness is from late 14c.; sense of fitted to inspire devout reflection is from c.1400.
Related: Solemnly.


allow (v.)

early 14c., allouen, to commend, praise; approve of, be pleased with; appreciate the value of; also,
take into account or give credit for, also, in law and philosophy, recognize, admit as valid (a
privilege, an excuse, a statement, etc.). From late 14c. as sanction or permit; condone; in business
use from early 15c.    The Middle English word is from Anglo-French alouer, Old French aloer,
alloiier (13c.) allot, apportion, bestow, assign, from Latin allocare (see allocate). This word in
Old French was confused and ultimately merged with aloer; alloer to praise, commend, from Latin
allaudare, adlaudare, compound of ad- to (see ad-) + laudare to praise (see laud). From the first
word came the sense preserved in allowance as money granted; from the second came its meaning
permission based on approval.    Between the two primary significations there naturally arose a
variety of uses blending them in the general idea of assign with approval, grant, concede a thing
claimed or urged, admit a thing offered, permit, etc., etc. [OED].    Related: Allowed; allowing.


good (adj.)

Old English god (with a long o) virtuous; desirable; valid; considerable, probably originally having
the right or desirable quality, from Proto-Germanic *gothaz (cognates: Old Norse go&eth;r, Dutch
goed, Old High German guot, German gut, Gothic go&thorn;s), originally fit, adequate, belonging
together, from PIE root *ghedh- to unite, be associated, suitable (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
godu pleasing time, Russian godnyi fit, suitable, Old English g&aelig;drian to gather, to take up
together). As an expression of satisfaction, from early 15c.; of children, well-behaved, by 1690s.
Irregular comparatives (better, best) reflect a widespread pattern, as in Latin bonus, melior,
optimus. Good-for-nothing is from 1711. Good looking is attested from 1780 (good looks by c.1800).
Good sport, of persons, is from 1906; good to go is attested from 1989. The good book the Bible
attested from 1801, originally in missionary literature describing the language of conversion
efforts in American Indian tribes.    Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing. [As You
Like It]    Phrase for good finally, permanently attested from 1711, a shortening of for good and
all (16c.). Middle English had for good ne ylle (early 15c.) for good nor ill, thus under any
circumstance.


yield (v.)

Old English gieldan (West Saxon), geldan (Anglian) to pay, pay for; reward, render; worship, serve,
sacrifice to (class III strong verb; past tense geald, past participle golden), from Proto-Germanic
*geldan pay (cognates: Old Saxon geldan to be worth, Old Norse gjaldo to repay, return, Middle Dutch
ghelden, Dutch gelden to cost, be worth, concern, Old High German geltan, German gelten to be worth,
Gothic fra-gildan to repay, requite).    From PIE *gheldh- to pay, a root found only in Balto-Slavic
and Germanic (and Old Church Slavonic &#382;ledo, Lithuanian geliuoti might be Germanic loan-words).
[T]he only generally surviving senses on the Continent are 'to be worth; to be valid, to concern,
apply to,' which are not represented at all in the English word [OED]; sense development in English
comes via use of this word to translate Latin reddere, French rendre. Sense of give in return for
labor or capital invested is from early 14c. Intransitive sense of give oneself up, submit,
surrender (to a foe) is from c.1300. Related to Middle Low German and Middle Dutch gelt, Dutch geld,
German Geld money. Related: Yielded; yielding.


stand (v.)

Old English standan occupy a place; stand firm; congeal; stay, continue, abide; be valid, be, exist,
take place; oppose, resist attack; stand up, be on one's feet; consist, amount to (class VI strong
verb; past tense stod, past participle standen), from Proto-Germanic *sta-n-d- (cognates: Old Norse
standa, Old Saxon and Gothic standan, Old High German stantan, parallel with simpler forms, such as
Swedish st&#229;, Dutch staan, German stehen [see discussion in OED]), from PIE root *sta- to stand
(see stet).    Sense of to exist, be present is attested from c.1300. Meaning encounter without
flinching is from 1590s; weaker sense of put up with is from 1620s. Meaning to submit (to chances,
etc.) is from c.1700. Meaning to pay for as a treat is from 1821. Meaning become a candidate for
office is from 1550s. Nautical sense of hold a course at sea is from 1620s. Meaning to be so high
when standing is from 1831.   Stand back keep (one's) distance is from c.1400. Phrase stand pat is
from poker (1882), earlier simply stand (1824 in other card games). To stand down is from 1680s,
originally of witnesses in court; in the military sense of come off duty it is first recorded 1916.
To let (something) stand is from c.1200. To stand for is c.1300 as count for; early 14c. as be
considered in lieu of; late 14c. as represent by way of sign; sense of tolerate first recorded
1620s. Phrase stands to reason (1620) is from earlier stands (is constant) with reason.


soda (n.)

late 15c., sodium carbonate, an alkaline substance extracted from certain ashes (now made
artificially), from Italian sida (or Medieval Latin soda) a kind of saltwort, from which soda was
obtained, of uncertain origin. Perhaps it is from a Catalan sosa, attested from late 13c., of
uncertain origin. Proposed Arabic sources in a name of a variety of saltwort have not been attested
and that theory is no longer considered valid. Another theory, considered far-fetched in some
quarters, traces it to Medieval Latin sodanum a headache remedy, ultimately from Arabic suda
splitting headache.    Soda is found naturally in alkaline lakes, in deposits where such lakes have
dried, and from ash produced by burning various seaside plants. A major trading commodity in the
medieval Mediterranean, since commercial manufacture of it began in France in late 18c., these other
sources have been abandoned. Washing soda (sodium carbonate) is commonly distinguished from baking
soda (sodium bicarbonate). A soda-cracker (1863) has baking soda as an ingredient.     The meaning
carbonated water is first recorded 1834, a shortening of soda water (1802) water into which carbonic
acid has been forced under pressure. It rarely contains soda in any form; but the name originally
applied when sodium carbonate was contained in it has been retained [Century Dictionary, 1902].
Since 19c. typically flavored and sweetened with syrups.  First record of soda pop is from 1863, and
the most frequent modern use of the word is as a shortening of this or other terms for flavored,
sweetened soda water. Compare pop (n.1). Soda fountain is from 1824; soda jerk first attested 1915
(soda-jerker is from 1883). Colloquial pronunciation sody is represented in print from 1900 (U.S.
Midwestern).


