vaporizer (n.)

1846, agent noun from vaporize.


vaporize (v.)

1630s, to smoke (tobacco), from vapor + -ize. Later convert into vapor, cause to become vapor
(1803), and spray with fine mist (1900). Intransitive sense become vaporous is from 1828. Related:
Vaporized; vaporizing. An earlier verb was simply vapor (c.1400, transitive and intransitive), from
Latin vaporare.


vaporization (n.)

also vaporisation, 1788, noun of action from vaporize. In same sense Middle English had vaporacioun
(late 14c.).


-or

word-forming element making nouns of quality, state, or condition, from Middle English -our, from
Old French -our (Modern French -eur), from Latin -orem (nominative -or), a suffix added to pp.
verbal stems. Also in some cases from Latin -atorem (nominative -ator).    In U.S., via Noah
Webster, -or is nearly universal (but not in glamour, curious, generous), while in Britain -our is
used in most cases (but with many exceptions: author, error, senator, ancestor, horror etc.). The
-our form predominated after c.1300, but Mencken reports that the first three folios of
Shakespeare's plays used both spellings indiscriminately and with equal frequency; only in the
Fourth Folio of 1685 does -our become consistent.    A partial revival of -or on the Latin model
took place from 16c. (governour began to lose its -u- 16c. and it was gone by 19c.), and also among
phonetic spellers in both England and America (John Wesley wrote that -or was a fashionable
impropriety in England in 1791).    Webster criticized the habit of deleting -u- in -our words in
his first speller (A Grammatical Institute of the English Language, commonly called the Blue-Black
Speller) in 1783. His own deletion of the -u- began with the revision of 1804, and was enshrined in
the influential Comprehensive Dictionary of the English Language (1806), which also established in
the U.S. -ic for British -ick and -er for -re, along with many other attempts at reformed spelling
which never caught on (such as masheen for machine). His attempt to justify them on the grounds of
etymology and the custom of great writers does not hold up.    Fowler notes the British drop the -u-
when forming adjectives ending in -orous (humorous) and derivatives in -ation and -ize, in which
cases the Latin origin is respected (such as vaporize). When the Americans began to consistently
spell it one way, however, the British reflexively hardened their insistence on the other. The
American abolition of -our in such words as honour and favour has probably retarded rather than
quickened English progress in the same direction. [Fowler]


