vie (v.)

1560s, to bet, make a bet, (literally make a vie, the noun attested from 1530s in cards), especially
in card-playing, to wager the value of one's hand against an opponent's, shortened form of Middle
English envie make a challenge, from Old French envier compete (against), provoke; invite, summon,
subpoena; in gambling, put down a stake, up the bet; from Latin invitare to invite, also to summon,
challenge (see invitation). Sense of to contend (with) in rivalry in English is from 1560s; that of
to contend, compete, strive for superiority is from c.1600.


Vienna

capital of Austria, Latin Vindobona, from Gaulish vindo- white, from Celtic *vindo- (cognates: Old
Irish find, Welsh gwyn white; see Gwendolyn) + bona foundation, fort. The white might be a reference
to the river flowing through it. Related: Viennese.


Viet Cong (n.)

the communist guerilla force in Vietnam 1954-1976, also Vietcong, 1957, from Vietnamese, in full
Vi&#234;t Nam Cong San, literally Vietnamese communist.


Viet Minh (n.)

also Vietminh, 1945, name of the independence movement in French Indo-China 1941-50, in full
Vi&#234;t Nam D&#244;c-L&#226;p D&#244;ng-Minh Vietnamese Independence League.


Vietnam

country in Southeast Asia, from Vietnamese Viet, the people's name + nam south. Division into North
and South lasted from 1954 to 1976. Vietnam War attested by 1963.


Vietnamese

1947 (adjective and noun), from Vietnam + -ese.


Vietnamization (n.)

1957, from Vietnam + -ization.


view (n.)

early 15c., formal inspection or survey (of land); mid-15c., visual perception, from Anglo-French
vewe view, Old French veue light, brightness; look, appearance; eyesight, vision, noun use of fem.
past participle of veoir to see, from Latin videre to see (see vision). Sense of manner of regarding
something attested from early 15c. Meaning sight or prospect of a landscape, etc. is recorded from
c.1600.


view (v.)

1520s, inspect, examine, from view (n.). From 1765 as to regard in a certain way; from 1935 as to
watch television. Related: Viewed; viewing.


viewer (n.)

early 15c., civic official responsible for surveying property, agent noun from view (v.). Meaning
watcher of television first recorded 1935, in place of earlier suggestion looker-in (1927).


viewing (n.)

1540s, inspection, verbal noun from view (v.). From 1944 as last presentation of a dead body before
the funeral (earlier viewing (of) the remains, 1920); from 1959 as the watching of television.


viewpoint (n.)

1856, of mental positions; 1858 in a physical sense, from view + point (n.).


B movie (n.)

by 1939, usually said to be so called from being the second, or supporting, film in a double
feature. Some film industry sources say it was so called for being the second of the two films major
studios generally made in a year, and the one cast with less headline talent and released with less
promotion. And early usage varies with grade-B movie, suggesting a perceived association with
quality.


clavier (n.)

1708, keyboard, from French clavier, originally a key-bearer, from Latin clavis key (see slot
(n.2)). The French word also is the source of German Klavier, Dutch klavier, Danish klaver, etc. The
German word is the direct source of the name of the musical instrument, a sense attested from 1845
in English.


Genevieve

fem. proper name, from French Genevi&egrave;ve, from Late Latin Genovefa, probably of Celtic origin.


interview (n.)

1510s, face-to-face meeting, formal conference, from Middle French entrevue, verbal noun from
s'entrevoir to see each other, visit each other briefly, have a glimpse of, from entre- between (see
inter-) + Old French voir to see (from Latin videre; see vision). Modern French interview is from
English. Journalistic sense is first attested 1869 in American English.The 'interview,' as at
present managed, is generally the joint product of some humbug of a hack politician and another
humbug of a newspaper reporter. [The Nation, Jan. 28, 1869]


interview (v.)

to have a personal meeting, 1540s, from interview (n.). Related: Interviewed; interviewing.


interviewee (n.)

1884, from interview (v.) + -ee.


interviewer (n.)

1869, agent noun from interview (v.).


movie (n.)

1912 (perhaps 1908), shortened form of moving picture in the cinematographic sense (1896). As an
adjective from 1913. Movie star attested from 1913. Another early name for it was photoplay.


movies (n.)

moving pictures, 1912, see movie.


overview (n.)

survey, summary, 1934, American English, from over- + view (n.). In 17c. it meant inspection,
supervision, but this became obsolete.


point of view (n.)

position from which a thing is viewed, 1727, translating French point de vue, a loan-translation of
Latin punctum visus. Figurative use is from 1760. The Latin phrase was translated into German as
Gesichtspunkt.


preview (v.)

c.1600, to see beforehand, from pre- + view (v.). Meaning to show (a film, etc.) before its public
opening is from 1928. Related: Previewed; previewing.


preview (n.)

a foretaste, 1880, from preview (v.); specifically a showing of a book, film, etc. before public
release from 1920.


purview (n.)

mid-15c., body of a statute, from Anglo-French purveuest it is provided, or purveu que provided that
(late 13c.), clauses that introduced statutes in old legal documents, from Anglo-French purveu, Old
French porveu (Modern French pourvu) provided, past participle of porveoir to provide, from Latin
providere make ready (see provide). Sense of scope, extent is first recorded 1788 in Federalist
(Madison). Modern sense and spelling influenced by view (n.).


re-view (n.)

a second or repeated viewing, from re- + view (n.).


review (n.)

mid-15c., an inspection of military forces, from Middle French reveue a reviewing, review, noun use
of fem. past participle of reveeir to see again, go to see again, from Latin revidere, from re-
again (see re-) + videre to see (see vision). Sense of process of going over again is from 1560s;
that of a view of the past, a retrospective survey is from c.1600. Meaning general examination or
criticism of a recent work is first attested 1640s.


review (v.)

1570s, examine again, from re- + view (v.). Meaning look back on is from 1751; that of consider or
discuss critically is from 1781. Related: Reviewed; reviewing.


reviewer (n.)

1610s, one who reviews (in any sense), agent noun from review (v.). Specifically, one who critically
examines and passes judgment on new publications or productions; a writer of reviews is from 1650s.


Riviera (n.)

Mediterranean seacoast around Genoa, 1630s, from Italian riviera, literally bank, shore (see river).
In extended use, the coast from Marseilles to La Spezia, which became popular 19c. as a winter
resort. Thence adopted (sometimes ironically) in reference to areas of other countries, as in
American Riviera (Florida, 1887); English Riviera (Devonshire coast, 1882).


servient (adj.)

1640s, from Latin servientem subordinate, present participle of servire be a servant, be a slave
(see serve (v.)).


serviette (n.)

table napkin, late 15c., from Middle French serviette napkin, towel (14c.), of uncertain origin,
perhaps from past participle of servir to serve (see serve (v.)). Primarily Scottish at first; re-
introduced from French 1818.


skivvies (n.)

underwear, 1932, nautical slang, of unknown origin. An earlier skivvy/skivey was London slang for
female domestic servant (1902).


soviet (n.)

1917, from Russian sovet governing council, literally council, from Old Russian suvetu assembly,
from su with (from *su(n)- with, together, from PIE *ksun- with) + vetu counsel. The whole is a
loan-translation of Greek symboulion council of advisers. As an adjective from 1918.


Soviet Union

informal name of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; in use in U.S. newspapers by October 1919.


subservience (n.)

1670s, from subservient + -ence. Related: Subserviency (1620s).


subservient (adj.)

1630s, useful, serviceable, from Latin subservientem (nominative subserviens), present participle of
subservire assist, serve, come to the help of, lend support, from sub under (see sub-) + servire
serve (see serve (v.)). The meaning slavishly obedient is first recorded 1794. Related:
Subserviently.


worldview (n.)

also world-view, 1858, from world + view (n.); translating German weltanschauung.


