visionary (adj.)

able to see visions, 1650s (earlier perceived in a vision, 1640s), from vision + -ary. Meaning
impractical is attested from 1727. The noun is attested from 1702, from the adjective; originally
one who indulges in impractical fantasies.


utopian (adj.)

1550s, with reference to More's fictional country; 1610s as extravagantly ideal, impossibly
visionary, from utopia + -an. As a noun meaning visionary idealist it is recorded by 1832 (also in
this sense was utopiast, 1845).


unreal (adj.)

c.1600, not real, from un- (1) not + real (adj.). Meaning impractical, visionary is by 1660s. Slang
sense of wonderful, great is first recorded 1965.    Unreal City,  Under the brown fog of a winter
dawn,      A crowd flowed over London Bridge, so many,        I had not thought death had undone so
many.  [Eliot, The Waste Land, 1922]


Manichaeism (n.)

1550s, the religion of the Manichees (late 14c.) a Gnostic Christian sect named for its founder,
Mani (Latin Manich&aelig;us), c.215-275, Syriac-speaking apostle from a Jesus cult in Mesopotamia in
240s, who taught a universal religion. Vegetarian and visionary, they saw particles of light and
goodness trapped in evil matter and regarded Satan as co-eternal with God. The universe was a scene
of struggle between good and evil. The sect was characterized by dualism and a double-standard of
perfectionist elects and a larger group of fellow travelers who would require several reincarnations
before their particles of light would be liberated.


air (n.1)

c.1300, invisible gases that make up the atmosphere, from Old French air atmosphere, breeze, weather
(12c.), from Latin aerem (nominative aer) air, lower atmosphere, sky, from Greek aer (genitive
aeros) air (related to aenai to blow, breathe), of unknown origin, possibly from a base *awer- and
thus related to aeirein to raise and arteria windpipe, artery (see aorta) on notion of lifting, that
which rises. In Homer mostly thick air, mist; later air as one of the four elements.    Words for
air in Indo-European languages tend to be associated with wind, brightness, sky. In English, air
replaced native lyft, luft (see loft (n.)). To be in the air in general awareness is from 1875; up
in the air uncertain, doubtful is from 1752. To build castles in the air is from 1590s (in 17c.
English had airmonger one preoccupied with visionary projects). Broadcasting sense (as in on the
air) first recorded 1927. To give (someone) the air dismiss is from 1900. Air pollution is attested
by 1870.


