warren (n.)

late 14c., piece of land enclosed for breeding beasts and fowls, from Anglo-French and Old North
French warenne (Old French garenne) game park, hunting reserve, possibly from Gaulish *varenna
enclosed area, related to *varros post. More likely from the present participle of Old North French
warir (Old French garir) defend, keep, from Proto-Germanic *war- to protect, guard (see warrant
(n.)). Later especially piece of land for breeding of rabbits (c.1400), which led to the transferred
sense of cluster of densely populated living spaces (1640s).


Tay-Sachs

fatal inherited disorder, 1907, named in German (1901) by German neurologist Henryk Higier
(1866-1942) from names of British ophthalmologist Warren Tay (1843-1927) and U.S. physician and
neurologist Warren Sachs (1858-1944) who had independently described it in 1881 and 1887
respectively.


Avis

U.S. car rental company, according to company history, founded 1946 at Willow Run Airport in Detroit
by Warren Avis.


normalcy (n.)

1857, mathematical condition of being at right angles, from normal + -cy. Associated since c.1920
with U.S. president Warren G. Harding and derided as an example of his incompetent speaking style.
Previously used mostly in the mathematical sense. The word prefered by purists for a normal
situation is normality (1849).


vivarium (n.)

c.1600, game park, from Latin vivarium enclosure for live game, park, warren, preserve, fish pond,
noun use of neuter singular of vivarius pertaining to living creatures, from vivus alive, living
(see vivid). Meaning glass bowl for studying living creatures is from 1853.


Comstockery (n.)

1905, from Anthony Comstock (1844-1915), founder of New York Society for the Suppression of Vice
(1873) and self-appointed crusader against immorality, + -ery. Coined by George Bernard Shaw after
Comstock objected to Mrs. Warren's Profession. Comstockery is the world's standing joke at the
expense of the United States [Shaw, New York Times, Sept. 26, 1905]. The Comstock lode, silver vein
in Nevada, was discovered 1859 and first worked by U.S. prospector H.T.P. Comstock (1820-1870).


bloviate (v.)

1857, American English, a Midwestern word for to talk aimlessly and boastingly; to indulge in 'high
falutin', according to Farmer (1890), who seems to have been the only British lexicographer to
notice it. He says it was based on blow (v.) on the model of deviate, etc.    It seems to have been
felt as outdated slang already by late 19c. (It was a leasure for him to hear the Doctor talk, or,
as it was inelegantly expressed in the phrase of the period, 'bloviate' .... [Overland Monthly, San
Francisco, 1872, describing a scene from 1860]), but it enjoyed a revival early 1920s during the
presidency of Warren G. Harding, who wrote a notoriously ornate and incomprehensible prose (e.e.
cummings eulogized him as The only man, woman or child who wrote a simple declarative sentence with
seven grammatical errors) at which time the word took on its connection with political speech; it
faded again thereafter, but, with its derivative, bloviation, it enjoyed a revival in the 2000 U.S.
election season that continued through the era of blogging.


chestnut (n.)

1560s, from chesten nut (1510s), with superfluous nut (n.) + Middle English chasteine, from Old
French chastain (12c., Modern French ch&acirc;taigne), from Latin castanea chestnut, chestnut tree,
from Greek kastaneia, which the Greeks thought meant either nut from Castanea in Pontus, or nut from
Castana in Thessaly, but probably both places are named for the trees, not the other way around, and
the word is borrowed from a language of Asia Minor (compare Armenian kask chestnut, kaskeni chestnut
tree). In reference to the dark reddish-brown color, 1650s. Applied to the horse-chestnut by 1832.
Slang sense of venerable joke or story is from 1885, explained 1888 by Joseph Jefferson (see
Lippincott's Monthly Magazine, January 1888) as probably abstracted from the 1816 melodrama The
Broken Sword by William Dimond where an oft-repeated story involving a chestnut tree figures in an
exchange between the characters Captain Zavior and Pablo:   Zav. Let me see--ay! it is exactly six
years since that peace being restored to Spain, and my ship paid off, my kind brother offered me a
snug hammock in the dwelling of my forefathers. I mounted a mule at Barcelona and trotted away for
my native mountains. At the dawn of the fourth day's journey, I entered the wood of Collares, when,
suddenly, from the thick boughs of a cork-tree--   Pab. [Jumping up.] A chesnut, Captain, a chesnut!
Zav. Bah, you booby! I say, a cork!   Pab. And I swear, a chesnut. Captain, this is the twenty-
seventh time 1 have heard you relate this story, and you invariably said, a chesnut, till now.
Jefferson traced the connection through William Warren, the veteran comedian of Boston who often
played Pablo in the melodrama.


