weatherman (n.)

one who observes the weather, 1869, from weather (n.) + man (n.). Weather-prophet is from 1784 as
barometer; 1827 as person who predicts the weather.    Clerk of the Weather, I deplore  That all thy
greatness is no more,  As should a gentle bard;  That Nature, or that Nature's law  When you
politely called for thaw,  Gave frost was rather hard.  [from Consolatory Address to Mr. Murphy, the
Weather Prophet, Colburn's New Monthly Magazine, 1838]


weather (n.)

Old English weder air, sky; breeze, storm, tempest, from Proto-Germanic *wedram wind, weather
(cognates: Old Saxon wedar, Old Norse ve&eth;r, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, Dutch weder, Old High
German wetar, German Wetter storm, wind, weather), from PIE *we-dhro-, weather (cognates: Lithuanian
vetra storm, Old Church Slavonic vedro good weather), from root *we- to blow (see wind (n.1)).
Alteration of -d- to -th- begins late 15c., though such pronunciation may be older (see father
(n.)).    In nautical use, as an adjective, toward the wind (opposed to lee). Greek had words for
good weather (aithria, eudia) and words for storm and winter, but no generic word for weather until
kairos (literally time) began to be used as such in Byzantine times. Latin tempestas weather (see
tempest) also originally meant time; and words for time also came to mean weather in Irish (aimsir),
Serbo-Croatian (vrijeme), Polish (czas), etc. Weather-report is from 1863. Weather-breeder fine,
serene day which precedes and seems to prepare a storm is from 1650s.


weather (v.)

come through safely, 1650s, from weather (n.). The notion is of a ship riding out a storm. Sense of
wear away by exposure is from 1757. Related: Weathered; weathering. Old English verb wederian meant
exhibit a change of weather.


weather-cast (n.)

also weathercast, 1866, from weather (n.) + ending from forecast (n.).


weather-beaten (adj.)

1520s, from weather (n.) + beaten.


weather-vane (n.)

also weathervane, mid-15c., wederfane; see weather (n.) + vane. Weathercock also is mid-15c.
(wedurkoke).


weatherize (v.)

1946, from weather (n.) + -ize. Related: Weatherized; weatherizing.


wither (v.)

1530s, alteration of Middle English wydderen dry up, shrivel (late 14c.), intransitive, apparently a
differentiated and special use of wederen to expose to weather (see weather (v.)). Compare German
verwittern to become weather-beaten, from Witter weather. Transitive sense from 1550s. Related:
Withered; withering; witheringly.


tempest (n.)

violent storm, late 13c., from Old French tempeste storm; commotion, battle; epidemic, plague
(11c.), from Vulgar Latin *tempesta, from Latin tempestas a storm; weather, season, time, point in
time, season, period, also commotion, disturbance, related to tempus time, season (see temporal).
Sense evolution is from period of time to period of weather, to bad weather to storm. Words for
weather originally were words for time in languages from Russia to Brittany. Figurative sense of
violent commotion in English is recorded from early 14c. Tempest in a teapot attested from 1818; the
image in other forms is older, such as storm in a creambowl (1670s).


sun-wake (n.)

rays of the setting sun reflected on water, 1891, from sun (n.) + wake (n.). Sailors' tradition says
a narrow wake means good weather the following day and bad weather follows a broad wake.


overcast (adj.)

c.1300, of weather, past participle adjective from verb overcast (early 13c.), to overthrow, also to
cover, to overspread as with a garment, usually of weather, from over- + cast (v.).


aloof (adj.)

1530s, from a- (1) + Middle English loof weather gage, also windward direction, probably from Dutch
loef (Middle Dutch lof) the weather side of a ship. Originally a nautical order to keep the ship's
head to the wind, thus to stay clear of a lee-shore or some other quarter; hence the figurative
sense of at a distance, apart (1580s). Related: Aloofly; aloofness.


Indian summer (n.)

spell of warm weather after the first frost,  first recorded 1778, American English, perhaps so
called because it was first noted in regions inhabited by Indians, or because the Indians first
described it to the Europeans. No evidence connects it with the color of fall leaves or a season of
Indian attacks on settlements. It is the American version of British All-Hallows summer, French
&eacute;t&eacute; de la Saint-Martin (feast day Nov. 11), etc. Also colloquial was St. Luke's summer
(or little summer), period of warm weather occurring about St. Luke's day (Oct. 18).


clemency (n.)

1550s, mildness or gentleness shown in exercise of authority, from Latin clementia calmness,
gentleness, from clemens calm, mild, related to clinare to lean (see lean (v.)) + participial suffix
-menos (also in alumnus). For sense evolution, compare inclined in secondary meaning disposed
favorably. Earlier in same sense was clemence (late 15c.).    Meaning mildness of weather or climate
is 1660s (a sense also in Latin); clement (adj.) is older in both senses, late 15c. and 1620s
respectively, but now is used only in negation and only of the weather.


clear (v.)

late 14c., to fill with light, from clear (adj.). Of weather, from late 14c. Meaning make clear in
the mind is mid-15c., as is sense of to remove what clouds. Meaning to prove innocent is from late
15c. Meaning get rid of is from 1530s.    Meaning to free from entanglement is from 1590s; that of
pass without entanglement is from 1630s. Meaning to leap clear over is first attested 1791. Meaning
get approval for (a proposal, etc.) is from 1944; meaning establish as suitable for national
security work is from 1948. Related: Cleared; clearing.    To clear (one's) throat is from 1881;
earlier clear (one's) voice (1701). To clear out depart, leave (1825), perhaps is from the notion of
ships satisfying customs, harbor regulations, etc., then setting sail. To clear up is from 1620s, of
weather; 1690s as make clear to the mind. Clear the decks is what is done on a ship before it moves.


fair (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;ger beautiful, lovely, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *fagraz (cognates: Old
Saxon fagar, Old Norse fagr, Old High German fagar beautiful, Gothic fagrs fit), perhaps from PIE
*pek- (1) to make pretty (cognates: Lithuanian puo&#353;iu I decorate).    The meaning in reference
to weather (c.1200) preserves the original sense (opposed to foul). Sense of light-complexioned
(1550s) reflects tastes in beauty; sense of free from bias (mid-14c.) evolved from another early
meaning, morally pure, unblemished (late 12c.). The sporting senses (fair ball, fair catch etc.)
began in 1856. Fair play is from 1590s; fair and square is from c.1600. Fair-haired in the
figurative sense of darling, favorite is from 1909. First record of fair-weather friends is from
1736.


thaw (n.)

the melting of ice or snow, also spell of weather causing this, c.1400, from thaw (v.). Figurative
sense is from 1590s; specifically relaxation of political harshness or hostility from 1950, an image
from the Cold War.


sweltering (adj.)

oppressively hot (of weather, seasons), 1590s, present participle adjective from swelter (v.).
Related: Swelteringly.


heat (n.)

Old English h&aelig;tu, h&aelig;to heat, warmth; fervor ardor, from Proto-Germanic *haita- heat
(cognates: Old Saxon hittia, Old Norse hiti, Old Frisian hete, German hitze heat, Gothic heito
fever), from PIE *kaid-, from root *kai- heat. The same root is the source of Old English hat hot
and h&aelig;&eth;a hot weather (see hot).    Meaning a single course in a race, especially a horse
race, is from 1660s, perhaps from earlier figurative sense of violent action; a single intense
effort (late 14c.), or meaning run given to a horse to prepare for a race (1570s). This later
expanded to division of a race or contest when there are too many contestants to run at once, the
winners of each heat then competing in a final race. Meaning sexual excitement in animals is from
1768. Meaning trouble with the police attested by 1920. Heat wave period of excessive hot weather
first attested 1890; earlier in reference to solar cycles.


brooding (n.)

action of incubating, c.1400, verbal noun from brood (v.). Figuratively (of weather, etc.) from
1805; of mental fixations by 1873. Related: Broodingly.


nip (n.2)

a pinch; a sharp bite, 1540s, from nip (v.). Meaning a chill in the weather is from 1610s, probably
so called for its effect on vegetation. Nip and tuck a close thing is recorded from 1832, perhaps
from sailing or tailoring.


forecast (n.)

early 15c., probably from forecast (v.); earliest sense was forethought, prudence; meaning
conjectured estimate of a future course is from 1670s. A Middle English word for weather forecasting
was aeromancy.


advisory (adj.)

1778; see advise + -ory. The noun meaning weather warning is from 1931.


riding (n.1)

c.1300, verbal noun from ride (v.). Meaning teasing, annoying is from 1927. Riding-hood, worn by
women when riding or exposed to weather, is from mid-15c.


unseasonable (adj.)

mid-15c., inopportune, from un- (1) not + seasonable (adj.). In reference to weather, not
appropriate to the time of year, it is recorded from 1510s. Related: Unseasonably.


leeward (adj.)

1660s, situated away from the wind, on the opposite of the weather side of the ship; from lee +
-ward.


exposure (n.)

c.1600, public exhibition, from expose (v.) + -ure. Sense of situation with regard to sun or weather
is from 1660s. Photographic sense is from 1839. Indecent exposure attested by 1825.


seaworthy (adj.)

1807, in fit condition to encounter heavy weather at sea, from sea + worthy. Related: Seaworthiness.
Old English had s&aelig;rof hardy at sea.


untimely (adj.)

1530s, coming before the proper or usual time, from un- (1) not + timely (adj.). Similar formation
in Middle Danish utimelig, of weather, etc. Old English had untidlic unseasonable. Related:
Untimeliness.


inclement (adj.)

1660s, from French incl&eacute;ment and directly from Latin inclementem (nominative inclemens)
harsh, unmerciful, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + clementem mild, placid.
Limitation to weather is curious [Weekley].


bonanza (n.)

1844, American English, from Spanish bonanza a rich lode, originally fair weather at sea,
prosperity, from Vulgar Latin *bonacia, from Latin bonus good (see bene-).


turbulent (adj.)

early 15c., disorderly, tumultuous, unruly (of persons), from Middle French turbulent (12c.), from
Latin turbulentus full of commotion, restless, disturbed, boisterous, stormy, figuratively troubled,
confused, from turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). In reference to weather, from 1570s. Related:
Turbulently.


serene (adj.)

mid-15c., clear, calm, from Latin serenus peaceful, calm, clear (of weather), figuratively cheerful,
glad, tranquil, of uncertain origin; perhaps from a suffixed variant of PIE *ksero- dry, source of
Greek xeros dry (see xerasia). In English, applied to persons since 1630s. Related: Serenely.


clement (adj.)

mid-15c., mild, of persons (attested from early 13c. as a surname), from Old French clement, from
Latin clementem (nominative clemens) mild, placid, gentle (see clemency). Of weather, 1620s. Taken
as a name by several early popes and popular in England as a masculine given name from mid-12c.,
also in fem. form Clemence.


prognostication (n.)

late 14c., from Old French pronosticacion (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin *prognosticationem
(nominative prognosticatio), noun of action from past participle stem of prognosticare foretell,
from Latin prognostica sign to forecast weather, from neuter plural of Greek prognostikos
foreknowing, from progignoskein (see prognosis).


meteorology (n.)

science of the atmosphere, weather forecasting, 1610s, from French m&eacute;t&eacute;orologie and
directly from Greek meteorologia treatise on celestial phenomena, discussion of high things, from
meteoron, literally thing high up (see meteor), + -logia treatment of (see -logy).


gale (n.)

storm at sea, 1540s, from gaile wind, origin uncertain, perhaps from Old Norse gol breeze, or Old
Danish gal bad, furious (often used of weather), from Old Norse galinn bewitched. Or perhaps it is
from Old English galan to sing (the second element in nightingale), or giellan to yell. In technical
meteorological use, a wind between 32 and 63 miles per hour.


sticky (adj.)

1727, adhesive, inclined to stick, from stick (v.) + -y (2). An Old English word for this was
clibbor. First recorded 1864 in the sense of sentimental; of situations, 1915 with the meaning
difficult. Of weather, hot and humid, from 1895. Sticky wicket is 1952, from British slang, in
reference to cricket. Related: Stickily; stickiness.


sultry (adj.)

1590s, oppressively hot, close and moist (of weather), ultimately from swelter + alteration of -y
(2), either as a contraction of sweltry or from obsolete verb sulter to swelter (1580s), alteration
of swelter. Figurative sense of hot with lust is attested from 1704; of women, lascivious, sensual,
arousing desire it is recorded from 1940. Related: Sultriness.


snug (adj.)

1590s, compact, trim (of a ship), especially protected from the weather, perhaps from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse snoggr short-haired, Old Swedish snygg, Old Danish sn&oslash;g neat, tidy,
perhaps from PIE *kes- (1) to scratch (see xyster). Sense of in a state of ease or comfort first
recorded 1620s. Meaning fit closely is first found 1838. Expression snug as a bug in a rug attested
by 1769; earlier snug as a bee in a box (1706).


variable (adj.)

late 14c., of persons, apt to change, fickle, from Old French variable various, changeable, fickle,
from Late Latin variabilis changeable, from variare to change (see vary). Of weather, seasons, etc.,
attested from late 15c.; of stars, from 1788.


serenity (n.)

1530s, of weather, 1590s, of persons, from Middle French s&eacute;r&eacute;nit&eacute;, from Latin
serenitatem (nominative serenitas) clearness, serenity, from serenus (see serene). Earliest use
(mid-15c.) was as a title of honor for kings, probably from the similar use of Latin serenitas,
applied to Roman emperors, later popes.


Hyades

star cluster in constellation Taurus, late 14c., from Greek Hyades, popularly explained as rain-
bringers (from hyein to rain), because wet weather supposedly began coincidentally with their
heliacal rising, but in fact probably from hys swine (the popular Latin word for them was Suculae
little pigs). Grimm (Teutonic Mythology) lists the Anglo-Saxon glosses of Hyades as Raedgastran,
Raedgasnan, Redgaesrum.


wash-out (n.)

also washout, 1877, act of washing out (a drain, etc.), from verbal phrase; see wash (v.) + out
(adv.). From 1873 as excavation of a roadbed, etc., by erosion is from 1873. Meaning a disappointing
failure is from 1902, from verbal phrase wash out obliterate, cancel (something written in ink),
attested from 1570s. Hence also the colloquial sense of to call off (an event) due to bad weather,
etc. (1917). Of colored material, washed-out faded is from 1837.


moderate (adj.)

late 14c., originally of weather and other physical conditions, from Latin moderatus within bounds,
observing moderation; figuratively modest, restrained, past participle of moderari to regulate,
mitigate, restrain, temper, set a measure, keep (something) within measure, related to modus
measure, from PIE *med-es-, from base *med- (see medical (adj.)). The notion is keeping within due
measure. In English, of persons from early 15c.; of opinions from 1640s; of prices from 1904.
Related: Moderateness.


spell (n.2)

1620s, a turn of work in place of another, from spell (v.2); compare Old English gespelia a
substitute. Meaning shifted toward continuous course of work (1706), probably via notion of shift
work (as at sea) where one man or crew regularly spelled another. Hence continuous stretch of
something (weather, etc.), recorded by 1728. Hence also, via the notion in give a spell (1750)
relieve another by taking a turn of work came the sense interval of rest or relaxation (1845), which
took the word to a sense opposite what it had at the start.


almanac (n.)

late 14c., attested in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c., via Old French almanach or Medieval Latin
almanachus, of uncertain origin. It is sometimes said to be from a Spanish-Arabic al-manakh
calendar, almanac, but possibly ultimately from Late Greek almenichiakon calendar, which is said to
be of Coptic origin.    This word has been the subject of much speculation. Originally a book of
permanent tables of astronomical data; one-year versions, combined with ecclesiastical calendars,
date from 16c.; astrological and weather predictions appear in 16-17th c.; the 'useful statistics'
are a modern feature [OED].


tense (n.)

form of a verb showing time of an action or state, early 14c., tens time, also tense of a verb (late
14c.), from Old French tens time, period of time, era; occasion, opportunity; weather (11c., Modern
French temps), from Latin tempus a portion of time (also source of Spanish tiempo, Italian tempo;
see temporal).


imbrication (n.)

1640s, from French imbrication, from Latin imbricare to cover with tiles, from imbricem (nominative
imbrex) curved roof tile used to draw off rain, from imber (genitive imbris) rain, from PIE *ombh-
ro- rain (cognates: Sanskrit abhra cloud, thunder-cloud, rainy weather, Greek ombros rain), from
root *nebh- moist, water (see nebula).


asperity (n.)

c.1200, asprete hardship, harshness of feelings, a figurative use, from Old French asperit&eacute;
difficulty, painful situation, harsh treatment (12c., Modern French &acirc;pret&eacute;), from Latin
asperitatem (nominative asperitas) roughness, from asper rough, harsh, of unknown origin; in Latin
used also of sour wine, bad weather, and hard times. Figurative meaning harshness of feeling in
English is attested from early 15c.


