whim (n.)

1640s, play on words, pun, shortened from whimwham fanciful object (q.v.). Meaning caprice, fancy,
sudden turn or inclination of the mind first recorded 1690s, probably a shortened form of whimsy.


caprice (n.)

sudden change of mind, 1660s, from French caprice whim (16c.), from Italian capriccio whim,
originally a shivering, possibly from capro goat, with reference to frisking, from Latin capreolus
wild goat (see cab). But another theory connects the Italian word with capo head + riccio curl,
frizzled, literally hedgehog (from Latin ericius). The notion in this case would be of the hair
standing on end in horror, hence the person shivering in fear.


conundrum (n.)

1590s, Oxford University slang for pedant, also whim, etc., later (1790) riddle, puzzle. Also
spelled quonundrum. The sort of ponderous pseudo-Latin word that was once the height of humor in
learned circles.


fancy (n.)

mid-15c., contraction of fantasy, it took the older and longer word's sense of inclination, whim,
desire. Meaning fans of an amusement or sport, collectively is attested by 1735, especially (though
not originally) of the prize ring. The adjective is recorded from mid-18c.


crotchety (adj.)

1825, from crotchet whim or fancy + -y (2). But the sense evolution is obscure.


tic (n.)

twitching of a facial muscle, 1822, often a shortening of tic douloureux severe facial neuralgia,
literally painful twitch (1798), from French tic a twitching disease of horses (17c.), of unknown
origin. Klein suggests an imitative origin; Diez compare it to Italian ticchio whim, caprice,
ridiculous habit, itself of unknown origin.


merkin (n.)

female pudenda, 1530s, apparently a variant of malkin in its sense of mop. Meaning artificial vagina
or 'counterfeit hair for a woman's privy parts'  is attested from 1610s. According to The Oxford
Companion to the Body, the custom of wearing merkins dates from mid-15c., was associated with
prostitutes, and was to disguise a want of pubic hair, shaved off either to exterminate body lice or
evidence of venereal disease.  This put a strange Whim in his Head; which was, to get the hairy
circle of [a prostitute's] Merkin .... This he dry'd well, and comb'd out, and then return'd to the
Cardinall, telling him, he had brought St. Peter's Beard. [Alexander Smith, A Complete History of
the Lives and Robberies of the most notorious Highwaymen, 1714]


maggot (n.)

late 15c., probably an unexplained variant of Middle English ma&eth;ek, from Old English ma&eth;a
maggot, grub, from Proto-Germanic *mathon (cognates: Old Norse ma&eth;kr, Old Saxon matho, Middle
Dutch, Dutch made, Old High German mado, German Made, Gothic ma&thorn;a maggot). Figurative use
whim, fancy, crotchet is 1620s, from the notion of a maggot in the brain.


lunatic (adj.)

late 13c., affected with periodic insanity, dependent on the changes of the moon, from Old French
lunatique, lunage insane, or directly from Late Latin lunaticus moon-struck, from Latin luna moon
(see Luna). Compare Old English monseoc lunatic, literally moon-sick; Middle High German lune humor,
temper, mood, whim, fancy (German Laune), from Latin luna. Compare also New Testament Greek
seleniazomai be epileptic, from selene moon. Lunatic fringe (1913) apparently was coined by U.S.
politician Theodore Roosevelt.    Then, among the wise and high-minded people who in self-respecting
and genuine fashion strive earnestly for peace, there are foolish fanatics always to be found in
such a movement and always discrediting it -- the men who form the lunatic fringe in all reform
movements. [Theodore Roosevelt, autobiography, 1913].    Earlier it was a term for a type of
hairstyle worn over the forehead (1877). Lunatic soup (1933) was Australian slang for alcoholic
drink.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


