withhold (v.)

c.1200, from with- back, away (see with) + holden to hold (see hold (v.)); probably a loan-
translation of Latin retinere to withhold. Related: Withheld; withholding. Past participle form
withholden was still used 19c.


abstain (v.)

late 14c., to withhold oneself, from Old French abstenir (14c.), earlier astenir (13c.) hold
(oneself) back, refrain, abstain (from), practice abstinence, from Latin abstinere withhold, keep
back, keep off, from ab(s)- from, away from (see ab-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Specifically of
liquor, late 14c. Of voting, 1796. Related: Abstained; abstaining.


reserve (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French reserver set aside, withhold (12c.) and directly from Latin reservare keep
back, save up; retain, preserve, from re- back (see re-) + servare to keep, save, preserve, protect
(see observe). Meaning to book is from 1935. Related: Reserved; reserving.


deny (v.)

early 14c., from Old French denoiir deny, repudiate, withhold, from Latin denegare to deny, reject,
refuse (source of Italian dinegarre, Spanish denegar), from de- away (see de-) + negare refuse, say
'no,'  from Old Latin nec not, from Italic base *nek- not, from PIE root *ne- no, not (see un-).
Related: Denied; denying.


subtract (v.)

1530s, withdraw, withhold, take away, deduct, a back-formation from subtraction (q.v.), or else from
Latin subtractus, past participle of subtrahere take away, draw off. Related: Subtracted;
subtracting. Mathematical calculation sense is from 1550s. Earlier verb form was subtraien (early
15c. in the mathematical sense), which is directly from the Latin verb.    Here he teches &thorn;e
Craft how &thorn;ou schalt know, whan &thorn;ou hast subtrayd, whe&thorn;er &thorn;ou hast wel ydo
or no. [Craft of Numbering, c.1425]


sit (v.)

Old English sittan to occupy a seat, be seated, sit down, seat oneself; remain, continue; settle,
encamp, occupy; lie in wait; besiege (class V strong verb; past tense s&aelig;t, past participle
seten), from Proto-Germanic *setjan (cognates: Old Saxon sittian, Old Norse sitja, Danish sidde, Old
Frisian sitta, Middle Dutch sitten, Dutch zitten, Old High German sizzan, German sitzen, Gothic
sitan), from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    With past tense sat, formerly also set,
now restricted to dialect, and sate, now archaic; and past participle sat, formerly sitten. In
reference to a legislative assembly, from 1510s. Meaning to baby-sit is recorded from 1966.    To
sit back be inactive is from 1943. To sit on one's hands was originally to withhold applause (1926);
later, to do nothing (1959). To sit around be idle, do nothing is 1915, American English. To sit out
not take part is from 1650s. Sitting pretty is from 1916.


with (prep.)

Old English wi&eth; against, opposite, from, toward, by, near, a shortened form related to
wi&eth;er, from Proto-Germanic *withro- against (cognates: Old Saxon withar against, Old Norse
vi&eth;r against, with, toward, at, Middle Dutch, Dutch weder, Dutch weer again, Gothic wi&thorn;ra
against, opposite), from PIE *wi-tero-, literally more apart, suffixed form of root *wi- separation
(cognates: Sanskrit vi, Avestan vi- asunder, Sanskrit vitaram further, farther, Old Church Slavonic
vutoru other, second).    Sense shifted in Middle English to denote association, combination, and
union, partly by influence of Old Norse vidh, and also perhaps by Latin cum with (as in pugnare cum
fight with). In this sense, it replaced Old English mid with, which survives only as a prefix (as in
midwife). Original sense of against, in opposition is retained in compounds such as withhold,
withdraw, withstand. Often treated as a conjunction by ungrammatical writers and used where and
would be correct. First record of with child pregnant is recorded from c.1200. With it cool is black
slang, recorded by 1931. French avec with was originally avoc, from Vulgar Latin *abhoc, from apud
hoc, literally with this.


