wrinkle (n.)

fold or crease in the extenal body, late 14c.; in cloth or clothing from early 15c., probably from
wrinkle (v.). Meaning defect, problem first recorded 1640s; that of idea, device, notion (especially
a new one) is from 1817.


wrinkle (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), probably from stem of Old English gewrinclod wrinkled, crooked, winding,
past participle of gewrinclian to wind, crease, from perfective prefix ge- + -wrinclian to wind,
from Proto-Germanic *wrankjan (see wrench (v.)). Intransitive sense from 1610s. Related: Wrinkled;
wrinkling.


flounce (n.)

wide ruffle, 1713, from Middle English frounce pleat, wrinkle, fold (late 14c.), from Old French
fronce line, wrinkle; pucker, crease, fold, from Frankish *hrunkjan to wrinkle, from Proto-Germanic
*hrunk-. Influenced in form by flounce (v.).


rumple (v.)

c.1600, possibly a variant of rimple to wrinkle (c.1400), from Old English hrympel wrinkle (possibly
influenced by Middle Dutch rumpelen), related to Old English hrimpan to fold, wrinkle (see ramp
(v.)). Related: Rumpled; rumpling. As a noun from c.1500.


frump (n.)

cross, unstylish person 1817, perhaps from frumple (v.) to wrinkle (late 14c.), from Middle Dutch
verrompelen to wrinkle (see frumpy).


corrugate (v.)

1620s; implied earlier as a past participle adjective (early 15c.), from Latin corrugatus, past
participle of corrugare to wrinkle very much, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + rugare to
wrinkle, of unknown origin.


ramp (v.)

c.1300, to climb; to stand on the hind legs (of animals), from Old French ramper to climb, scale,
mount (12c., in Modern French to creep, crawl), perhaps from Frankish *rampon to contract oneself
(compare Old High German rimpfan to wrinkle, Old English hrimpan to fold, wrinkle), via notion of
the bodily contraction involved in climbing [Klein], from Proto-Germanic *hrimp- to contract
oneself. Related: Ramped; ramping.


rough (adj.)

Old English ruh rough, coarse (of cloth); hairy, shaggy; untrimmed, uncultivated, from West Germanic
*rukhwaz shaggy, hairy, rough (cognates: Middle Dutch ruuch, Dutch ruig, Old High German ruher,
German rauh), from Proto-Germanic *rukhaz, from PIE *reue- (2) to smash, knock down, tear out, dig
up (cognates: Sanskrit ruksah rough; Latin ruga wrinkle, ruere to rush, fall violently, collapse,
ruina a collapse; Lithuanian raukas wrinkle, rukti to shrink).    The original -gh- sound was
guttural, as in Scottish loch. Sense of approximate is first recorded c.1600. Of places, riotous,
disorderly, characterized by violent action, 1863. Rough draft is from 1690s. Rough-and-ready is
from 1810, originally military; rough-and-tumble (1810) is from a style of free-fighting.


wrinkly (adj.)

early 15c. (in reference to the penis), from wrinkle (n.) + -y (2). As teen slang noun for old
person, from 1972 (old being relative; a British reference from 1982 applies it to people in their
40s).


purse (v.)

c.1300, put in a purse; c.1600 as draw together and wrinkle (as the strings of a money bag), from
purse (n.). Related: Pursed; pursing.


ruffle (v.)

early 14c., to disturb the smoothness of, perhaps from Old Norse hrufla to scratch, or Low German
ruffelen to wrinkle, curl, both of unknown origin. Meaning disarrange (hair or feathers) first
recorded late 15c.; sense of annoy, distract is from 1650s. Related: Ruffled; ruffling.


rugae (n.)

plural of ruga (1775), from Latin ruga a wrinkle in the face, from PIE *rug-, variant of *reue- (2)
to smash, knock down, tear up, dig up, uproot (see rough (adj.)).


arroyo (n.)

watercourse, dry streambed, 1845, a California word, from American Spanish, in Spanish, rivulet,
small stream, from Latin arrugia shaft or pit in a gold mine, apparently a compound of ad- to (see
ad-) + ruga a wrinkle (see rough (adj.)).


shrivel (v.)

1560s (implied in shriveled), of unknown origin, not found in Middle English; perhaps from a
Scandinavian source (compare Swedish skryvla to wrinkle, to shrivel), perhaps ultimately connected
with shrimp (n.) and shrink (v.). Related: Shriveled; shriveling.


sulcus (n.)

plural sulci, fissure between convolutions of the brain, 1833, from medical use of Latin sulcus
furrow, trench, ditch, wrinkle, apparently literally the result of plowing, from PIE *selk- to pull,
draw (cognates: Greek holkos furrow, Old English sulh plow, Lithuanian velku I draw).


frumpy (adj.)

1746, cross-tempered, from frump (n.) bad temper (1660s) and an earlier verb meaning to mock,
browbeat (1550s), of obscure origin, perhaps imitative of a sneer or derisive snort. Sense of sour-
looking, unfashionable is from 1825, but this may be a shortening of frumple to wrinkle, crumple
(late 14c.), from Middle Dutch verrompelen, from ver- completely + rompelen to rumple. Related:
Frumps. See also frump.


rifle (v.1)

to plunder, early 14c. (implied in rifling), from Old French rifler strip, filch, plunder, peel off
(skin or bark), fleece, literally to graze, scratch (12c.), probably from a Germanic source (compare
Old English geriflian to wrinkle, Old High German riffilon to tear by rubbing, Old Norse rifa to
tear, break). Related: Rifled; rifling.


crow (n.)

Old English crawe, imitative of bird's cry. Phrase eat crow is perhaps based on the notion that the
bird is edible when boiled but hardly agreeable; first attested 1851, American English, but said to
date to War of 1812 (Walter Etecroue turns up 1361 in the Calendar of Letter Books of the City of
London). Crow's foot wrinkle around the corner of the eye is late 14c. Phrase as the crow flies
first recorded 1800.


mole (n.1)

spot on skin, Old English mal spot, mark, blemish, especially on cloth or linen, from Proto-Germanic
*mailan spot, mark (cognates: Old High German meil, German Mal, Gothic mail wrinkle), from PIE root
*mai- to stain, defile (cognates: Greek miainein to stain, defile, see miasma). Specifically of dark
marks on human skin from late 14c.


