zoologist (n.)

1660s, from zoology + -ist.


Lamarckian (adj.)

1846, pertaining to French botanist and zoologist J.B.P. Lamarck (1744-1829), especially his view
that the process of evolution includes the inheritance of acquired characteristics.


cephalization (n.)

1864, coined by U.S. zoologist James D. Dana (1813-1895) from Greek kephale head (see cephalo-) on
model of specialization, etc.


ammonite (n.)

cephalopod mollusk, 1758, from French (Breyn, 1732), better established [Century Dictionary] by
French zoologist Jean Guillaume Brugui&egrave;re (c.1750-1798) in 1789, from Medieval Latin (cornu)
Ammonis horn of Ammon, the Egyptian god of life and reproduction, who was depicted with ram's horns,
which the fossils resemble. The resemblance also was noted in ancient times.


centrosome (n.)

1889, from German centrosoma (1888), coined by German zoologist Theodor Boveri (1862-1915), from
centro- (see center (n.)) + -some (3)).


Arthropoda (n.)

1870, Modern Latin, literally those with jointed feet, coined 1845 by German zoologist Karl Theodor
Ernst von Siebold (1804-1885) from Greek arthron a joint (see arthro-) + podos genitive of pous foot
(see foot (n.)).


ecology (n.)

1873, branch of science dealing with the relationship of living things to their environments, coined
by German zoologist Ernst Haeckel (1834-1919) as Okologie, from Greek oikos house, dwelling place,
habitation (see villa) + -logia study of (see -logy). In use with reference to anti-pollution
activities from 1960s.


Protozoa (n.)

1828, from Modern Latin Protozoa, coined 1818 by German zoologist Georg August Goldfuss (1782-1848)
from Greek protos first (see proto-) + zoia, plural of zoion animal (see zoo). Originally including
sponges and corals; current sense is from 1845. Related: Protozoon (aingular); Protozoan.


lemur (n.)

nocturnal Madagascar mammal, 1795, coined by Linnaeus, from Latin lemures (plural) spirits of the
dead in Roman mythology.     The oldest usage of lemur for a primate that we are aware of is in
Linnaeus's catalog of the Museum of King Adolf Frederick of Sweden (Tattersall, 1982); .... In this
work, he explained his use of the name lemur thus: Lemures dixi  hos, quod noctu imprimis
obambulant, hominibus quodanmodo similes, &amp; lento passu vagantur [I call them lemurs, because
they go around mainly by night, in a certain way similar to humans, and roam with a slow pace]
[Dunkel, Alexander R., et al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur
names, part 1, in Lemur News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.65]   Lemuria (1864) was the name given by
English zoologist P.L. Sclater (1829-1913) to a hypothetical ancient continent connecting Africa and
Southeastern Asia (and including Madagascar), which was hypothesized to explain phenomena now
accounted for by continental drift. Earlier it was the name of the Roman feast of the Lemures.


