-ability

word-forming element expressing ability, fitness, or capacity, from Latin -abilitas, forming nouns
from adjectives ending in -abilis (see -able). Not etymologically related to ability, though
popularly connected with it.


-able

word-forming element expressing ability, capacity, fitness, from French, from Latin -ibilis,
-abilis, forming adjectives from verbs, from PIE *-tro-, a suffix used to form nouns of instrument.
In Latin, infinitives in -are took -abilis, others -ibilis; in English, -able tends to be used with
native (and other non-Latin) words, -ible with words of obvious Latin origin (but there are
exceptions). The Latin suffix is not etymologically connected with able, but it long has been
popularly associated with it, and this has contributed to its survival as a living suffix. It is
related to the second syllable of rudder and saddle.


-acea

word-forming element denoting orders and classes in zoology, from Latin -acea, neuter plural of
-aceus belonging to, of the nature of (enlarged from adjectival suffix -ax, genitive -acis); neuter
plural because of a presumed animalia, a neuter plural noun. Thus, crustacea shellfish are
*crustacea animalia crusty animals. In botany, the suffix is -aceae, from the fem. plural of -aceus,
with reference to Latin plantae, which is a fem. plural.


-aceous

word-forming element denoting belonging to, of the nature of, from Latin -aceus, enlarged form of
adjectival suffix -ax (genitive -acis); see -acea. Especially in biology, pertaining to X order of
plants or animals.


-acious

adjectival word-forming element meaning given to, inclined to, abounding in, from Latin -aci-
(nominative -ax), noun ending used with verbal stems, + -ous.


-ad

word-forming element denoting collective numerals (Olympiad), plant families, and names of poems,
from Greek -as (genitive -ados), a suffix forming fem. nouns; also used in fem. patronymics (Dryad,
Naiad, also, in plural, Pleiades, Hyades).


-ade

word-forming element denoting an action or product of an action, from Latin -ata (source of French
-ade, Spanish -ada, Italian -ata), fem. pp. ending used in forming nouns. A living prefix in French,
from which many words have come into English (such as lemonade). Latin -atus, past participle suffix
of verbs of the 1st conjugation also became -ade in French (Spanish -ado, Italian -ato) and came to
be used as a suffix denoting persons or groups participating in an action (such as brigade,
desperado).


-ado

in commando, desperado, tornado, and other words of Spanish and Portuguese origin, person or group
participating in an action, from Latin -atus, past participle suffix of verbs of the first
conjugation (see -ade).


-ae

occasional plural suffix of words ending in -a, most of which, in English, are from Latin nominative
fem. singular nouns, which in Latin form their plurals in -ae. But plurals in -s were established
early in English for many of them (such as idea, arena) and many have crossed over since. Now it is
not possible to insist on purity one way or the other without breeding monsters.


-age

word-forming element in nouns of act, process, function, condition, from Old French and French -age,
from Late Latin -aticum belonging to, related to, originally neuter adjectival suffix, from Latin
-atus, pp. suffix of verbs of the first conjugation.


-aholic

word-forming element abstracted from alcoholic; first in sugarholic (1965), foodoholic (sic., 1965);
later in workaholic (1968), golfaholic (1971), chocoholic (1971), and shopaholic (1984).


-al (1)

suffix forming adjectives from nouns or other adjectives, of, like, related to, pertaining to,
Middle English -al, -el, from French or directly from Latin -alis (see -al (2)).


-al (2)

suffix forming nouns of action from verbs, mostly from Latin and French, meaning act of ______ing
(such as survival, referral), Middle English -aille, from French feminine singular -aille, from
Latin -alia, neuter plural of adjective suffix -alis, also used in English as a noun suffix.
Nativized in English and used with Germanic verbs (as in bestowal, betrothal).


-al (3)

word-forming element in chemistry to indicate presence of an aldehyde group (from aldehyde). The
suffix also is commonly used in forming the names of drugs, often narcotics (such as barbital), a
tendency that apparently began in German and might have been suggested by chloral (n.).


-algia

word-forming element denoting pain, from Greek algos pain, algein to feel pain, of unknown origin.
Related to alegein to care about, originally to feel pain.


-amide

also amide, in chemical use, 1850, word-forming element denoting a compound obtained by replacing
one hydrogen atom in ammonia with an element or radical, from French amide, from ammonia + -ide.


-an

word-forming element meaning pertaining to, from Latin -anus, in some cases via French -ain, -en.


-ana

or ana, word-forming element denoting collection of sayings, gossip, etc. connected with a person or
place, early 18c., originally the neuter plural ending of Latin adjectives ending in -anus
pertaining to, from PIE adjectival suffix *-no-.


-ance

word-forming element attached to verbs to form abstract nouns of process or fact (convergence from
converge), or of state or quality (absence from absent); ultimately from Latin -antia and -entia,
which depended on the vowel in the stem word.    As Old French evolved from Latin, these were
leveled to -ance, but later French borrowings from Latin (some of them subsequently passed to
English) used the appropriate Latin form of the ending, as did words borrowed by English directly
from Latin (diligence, absence).    English thus inherited a confused mass of words from French and
further confused it since c.1500 by restoring -ence selectively in some forms of these words to
conform with Latin. Thus dependant, but independence, etc.


-ancy

word-forming element denoting quality or state, from Latin -antia, forming abstract nouns on pp.
adjectives in -antem, appearing in English mostly in words borrowed directly from Latin (those
passing through French usually have -ance or -ence; see -ance).


-ane

word-forming element in chemical use, indicating a chain of carbon atoms with no double bonds,
proposed 1866 by German chemist August Wilhelm von Hofmann (1818-1892) to go with -ene, -ine (2),
-one.


-ant

agent or instrumental suffix, from Old French and French -ant, from Latin -antem, accusative of
-ans, present participle suffix of many Latin verbs.


-ar

word-formation element meaning pertaining to, of the nature of, from Latin -arem, -aris of the kind
of, belonging to, a secondary form of -alis, dissimilated for used after syllables with an -l- (such
as insularis for *insulalis, stellaris for *stellalis).


-arch

word-forming element meaning a ruler, from Greek arkhos leader, chief, ruler, from arkhe beginning,
origin, first place (see archon).


-archy

word-forming element meaning rule, from Latin -archia, from Greek -arkhia rule, from arkhos leader,
chief, ruler, from arkhe beginning, origin, first place (see archon).


-ard

also -art, from Old French -ard, -art, from German -hard, -hart hardy, forming the second element in
many personal names, often used as an intensifier, but in Middle High German and Dutch used as a
pejorative element in common nouns, and thus passing into Middle English in bastard, coward,
blaffard (one who stammers), etc. It thus became a living element in English, as in buzzard,
drunkard.


-ary

adjective and noun suffix, in most cases from Latin -arius, -aria, -arium connected with, pertaining
to; the man engaged in, from PIE relational adjective suffix *-yo- of or belonging to. It appears in
words borrowed from Latin in Middle English. In later borrowings from Latin to French, it became
-aire and passed into Middle English as -arie, subsequently -ary.


-ase

word-forming element used in naming enzymes, from ending of diastase.


-ast

agential suffix, cognate with -ist, from French -ast, from Latin -asta, from Greek -astes.


-aster

word-forming element expressing incomplete resemblance (such as poetaster), usually diminutive and
deprecatory, from Latin, from Greek -aster, suffix originally forming nouns from verbs ending in
-azein, later generalized as a pejorative suffix, as in Greek patraster he who plays the father.


-ate (1)

word-forming element used in forming nouns from Latin words ending in -atus, -atum (such as estate,
primate, senate). Those that came to English via Old and Middle French often arrived with -at, but
an -e was added after c.1400 to indicate the long vowel.    The suffix also can mark adjectives,
formed from Latin past participals in -atus, -ata (such as desolate, moderate, separate), again,
they often were adopted in Middle English as -at, with an -e appended after c.1400.


-ate (2)

verbal suffix for Latin verbs in -are, identical with -ate (1). Old English commonly made verbs from
adjectives by adding a verbal ending to the word (such as gnornian be sad, mourn, gnorn sad,
depressed), but as the inflections wore off English words in late Old and early Middle English,
there came to be no difference between the adjective and the verb in dry, empty, warm, etc. Thus
accustomed to the identity of adjectival and verbal forms of a word, the English, when they began to
expand their Latin-based vocabulary after c.1500, simply made verbs from Latin past-participial
adjectives without changing their form (such as aggravate, substantiate) and it became the custom
that Latin verbs were anglicized from their past participle stems.


-ate (3)

in chemistry, word-forming element used to form the names of salts from acids in -ic; from Latin
-atus, -atum, suffix used in forming adjectives and thence nouns; identical with -ate (1).    The
substance formed, for example, by the action of acetic acid (vinegar) on lead was described in the
18th century as plumbum acetatum, i.e. acetated lead. Acetatum was then taken as a noun meaning the
acetated (product), i.e. acetate. [W.E. Flood, The Origins of Chemical Names, London, 1963]


-athon

also -thon, word-forming element denoting prolonged activity and usually some measure of endurance,
abstracted from marathon. E.g. walkathon (1931), skatathon (1933); talkathon (1948); telethon
(1949).


-ation

word-forming element for making nouns of action; see -ion.


-ative

word-forming element meaning of or related to; tending to, from Latin -ativus.


a (1)

indefinite article, mid-12c., a variation of Old English an (see an) in which the -n- began to
disappear before consonants, a process mostly complete by mid-14c. The -n- also was retained before
words beginning with a sounded -h- until c.1600; it still is retained by many writers before
unaccented syllables in h- or (e)u-, but is now no longer normally spoken as such. The -n- also
lingered (especially in southern England dialect) before -w- and -y- through 15c.


a (2)

as in twice a day, etc., from Old English an on, in this case on each. The sense was extended from
time to measure, price, place, etc. The habit of tacking a onto a gerund (as in a-hunting we will
go) died out 18c.


a capella

1876, earlier alla capella (1847), from Italian, in the manner of the chapel, literally according to
the chapel, from cappella chapel (see chapel). Originally in reference to older church music
(pre-1600) which was written for unaccompanied voices; applied 20c. to unaccompanied vocal music
generally.


a deux

French, &agrave; deux, literally for two (see deuce).


a la

from French &agrave; la, in the manner of; used in English in French terms from fashion or cookery
since late 16c.; used in native formations with English words or names from c.1800 (first attested
in Jane Austen).


a la carte

1826, from French &agrave; la carte, literally by the card (see card (n.)); in other words, ordered
by separate items. Distinguished from a table d'h&ocirc;te, meal served at a fixed, inclusive price.


a la mode

1640s, from French &agrave; la mode (15c.), literally in the fashion (see mode (n.2)). In 17c.,
sometimes nativized as all-a-mode. Cookery sense of a dessert served with ice cream is 1903,
American English.


a posteriori

Latin, literally from what comes after (see posterior).


a priori

1710, from cause to effect (a logical term, in reference to reasoning), Latin, literally from what
comes first, from priori, ablative of prior first (see prior (adj.)). Used loosely for in accordance
with previous knowledge (1834).


A&amp;P

U.S. grocery chain, originally The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, founded 1859 by George
Huntington Hartford and George Gilman.


a- (1)

in native (derived from Old English) words, it most commonly represents Old English an on (see a
(2)), as in alive, asleep, abroad, afoot, etc., forming adjectives and adverbs from nouns; but it
also can be Middle English of, as in anew, abreast (1590s); or a reduced form of Old English past
participle prefix ge-, as in aware; or the Old English intensive a-, as in arise, awake, ashame,
marking a verb as momentary, a single event. In words from Romanic languages, often it represents
Latin ad- to, at.[I]t naturally happened that all these a- prefixes were at length confusedly lumped
together in idea, and the resultant a- looked upon as vaguely intensive, rhetorical, euphonic, or
even archaic, and wholly otiose. [OED]


a- (2)

prefix meaning not, from Latin a-, short for ab away from (as in avert), or its cognate, Greek a-,
short for apo away from, from, both cognate with Sanskrit apa away from, Gothic af, Old English of
(see apo-).


a- (3)

prefix meaning not, from Greek a-, an- not, from PIE root *ne not (see un-).


A-1

in figurative sense of first-rate, 1837, in Dickens; from Lloyd's of London designation for ships in
first-class condition (with the letter referring to the condition of the ship and the number to that
of the stores).


A-frame

type of framework shaped like the letter A, 1909; in building construction, attested from 1932.


A-line (adj.)

descriptive of a dress or skirt flared in shape of a letter A, 1955, in reference to the designs of
Christian Dior (1905-1957).


A-list (adj.)

in celebrity sense, 1984, from A in the sense of first, best (as in A-1) + list (n.).


A-OK

1961, said to be an abbreviation of all (systems) OK; popularized in the jargon of U.S. astronauts.
See OK.


A.A.

also AA, abbreviation of Alcoholics Anonymous, attested by 1941, American English. The group name
was the title of a book published in 1938 by the founder, Bill W.


A.A.A.

also AAA, abbreviation of American Automobile Association, attested 1902, American English, the year
the organization was founded.


A.D.

1570s, from Latin Anno Domini Year of the Lord. First put forth by Dionysius Exiguus in 527 or 533
C.E., but at first used only for Church business. Introduced in Italy in 7c., France (partially) in
8c. In England, first found in a charter of 680 C.E. Ordained for all ecclesiastical documents in
England by the Council of Chelsea, July 27, 816.    The resistance to it in part might have come
because Dionysius chose 754 A.U.C. as the birth year of Jesus, while many early Christians would
have thought it was 750 A.U.C. [See John J. Bond, Handy-Book of Rules and Tables for Verifying Dates
With the Christian Era, 4th ed., London: George Bell &amp; Sons, 1889] A.C., for Anno Christi, also
was common 17c.


a.k.a.

also aka, initialism (acronym) for also known as; attested in legal documents from at least 1936.


a.m.

in hours, 1762, abbreviation of Latin ante meridiem before noon.


a.m.

also AM, type of radio wave broadcast; see amplitude.


A.P.R.

also APR, abbreviation of annual percentage rate, attested from 1979, American English.


a.s.a.p.

also asap, pronounced either as a word or as four letters; from initial letters of phrase as soon as
possible, 1955, originally U.S. Army jargon.


A.V.

abbreviation of Authorized Version (of the English Bible, 1611) attested from 1868.


aardvark (n.)

1833, from Afrikaans Dutch aardvark, literally earth-pig (the animal burrows), from aard earth (see
earth) + vark pig, cognate with Old High German farah (source of German Ferkel young pig, sucking
pig, a diminutive form), Old English fearh (see farrow).


Aaron

masc. proper name, in the Old Testament the brother of Moses, from Hebrew Aharon, probably of
Egyptian origin. The Arabic form is Harun. Aaron's beard as a type of herb is from 1540s.


ab initio

c.1600, Latin, literally from the beginning, from oblique case of initium entrance, beginning,
related to verb inire to go into, enter upon, begin (see initial).


ab-

word-forming element meaning away, from, from off, down; from Latin ab-, ab off, away from, from PIE
root *apo- (see apo-). Reduced to a- before -m-, -p-, or -v-; sometimes abs- before -c- or -t-.


aback (adv.)

c.1200, from Old English on b&aelig;c at or on the back; see back (n.). Now surviving mainly in
taken aback, originally a nautical expression in reference to a vessel's square sails when a sudden
change of wind flattens them back against the masts and stops the forward motion of the ship (1754).
The figurative sense is first recorded 1840.


abacus (n.)

late 14c., sand table for drawing, calculating, etc., from Latin abacus, from Greek abax (genitive
abakos) counting table, from Hebrew abaq dust, from root a-b-q to fly off. Originally a drawing
board covered with dust or sand that could be written on to do mathematical equations. Specific
reference to a counting frame is 17c. or later.


Abaddon

late 14c., used in Rev. ix:11 of the angel of the bottomless pit, and by Milton of the pit itself,
from Hebrew Abhaddon destruction, from abhadh he perished. The Greek form was Apollyon.


abaft (adv.)

in or at the back part of a ship (opposed to forward), 1590s, from Middle English on baft (Old
English on b&aelig;ftan) backwards. The second component is itself a compound of be by (see by) and
&aelig;ftan aft (see aft). The word has been saved by the sailors (the stern being the after part of
a vessel), the rest of the language having left it in Middle English.


abalienate (v.)

1550s, from Latin abalienatus, past participle of abalienare to remove, literally to make alien,
from ab- (see ab-) + alienare (see alienate). Related: Abalienated; abalienating.


abalienation (n.)

1650s, from Latin abalienationem (nominative abalienatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of abalienare (see abalienate).


abalone (n.)

type of marine shell, 1850, American English, from Spanish abulon from Costanoan (a California
coastal Indian language family) aluan red abalone.


abandon (v.)

late 14c., to give up, surrender (oneself or something), give over utterly; to yield (oneself)
utterly (to religion, fornication, etc.), from Old French abandoner (12c.), from adverbial phrase
&agrave; bandon at will, at discretion, from &agrave; at, to (see ad-) + bandon power, jurisdiction,
from Latin bannum, proclamation, from a Frankish word related to ban (v.).   Mettre sa forest
&agrave; bandon was a feudal law phrase in the 13th cent. = mettre sa for&ecirc;t &agrave;
permission, i.e. to open it freely to any one for pasture or to cut wood in; hence the later sense
of giving up one's rights for a time, letting go, leaving, abandoning. [Auguste Brachet, An
Etymological Dictionary of the French Language, transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]
Etymologically, the word carries a sense of put someone under someone else's control. Meaning to
give up absolutely is from late 14c. Related: Abandoned; abandoning.


abandon (n.)

a letting loose, surrender to natural impulses, 1822, from a sense in French abandon (see abandon
(v.). Borrowed earlier (c.1400) from French in a sense (someone's) control; and compare Middle
English adverbial phrase at abandon, i.e. recklessly, attested from late 14c.


abandoned (adj.)

self-devoted to some purpose (usually evil), late 14c., past participle adjective from abandon (v.).


abandonment (n.)

1610s, from French abandonnement, from abandonner (see abandon (v.)).


abase (v.)

late 14c., abaishen, from Old French abaissier diminish, make lower in value or status (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *ad bassiare bring lower, from Late Latin bassus thick, fat, low; from the same source
as base (adj.) and altered 16c. in English by influence of it, which made it an exception to the
rule that Old French verbs with stem -iss- enter English as -ish. Related: Abased; abasing.


abasement (n.)

early 15c., embarrassment, dread, fear, from abase + -ment. Sense of action of lowering in price is
mid-15c.; action of lowering in rank is 1560s; condition of being abased is from 1610s.


abash (v.)

perplex, embarrass, early 15c., earlier lose one's composure, be upset (late 14c.), from Old French
esbaiss-, present stem of esbaer gape with astonishment, from es out (see ex-) + ba(y)er to be open,
gape, from Latin *batare to yawn, gape, from root *bat, possibly imitative of yawning. Related:
Abashed; abashing. Bashful is a 16c. derivative.


abate (v.)

put an end to (c.1300); to grow less, diminish in power or influence (early 14c.), from Old French
abattre beat down, cast down, from Vulgar Latin *abbatere, from Latin ad to (see ad-) + battuere to
beat (see batter (v.)). Secondary sense of to fell, slaughter is in abatis and abattoir. Related:
Abated; abating.


abatement (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French abatement, from abattre (see abate).


abatis (n.)

defense made of felled trees, 1766, from French abatis, literally things thrown down, from Old
French abateis, from abattre to beat down, throw down (see abate).


abattoir (n.)

slaughterhouse for cows, 1820, from French abattre to beat down (see abate) + suffix -oir,
corresponding to Latin -orium (see -ory).


ABBA

Swedish pop music group formed 1972, the name dates from 1973 and is an acronym from the first names
of the four band members: Anni-Frid Lyngstad, Bj&ouml;rn Ulvaeus, Benny Andersson, Agnetha
F&auml;ltskog.


Abba

title of honor, from Latin abba, from Greek abba, from Aramaic abba the father, my father, emphatic
of abh father.


Abbassid

dynasty of caliphs of Baghdad (750-1258) claiming descent from Abbas (566-652), uncle of Muhammad.
For his name, see abbot.


abbe (n.)

1520s, title given in France to every one who wears an ecclesiastical dress, especially one having
no assigned ecclesiastical duty, from French abb&eacute;, from Late Latin abbatem, accusative of
abbas (see abbot).


abbess (n.)

c.1300, abbese, from Old French abbesse, from Late Latin abbatissa, fem. of abbas (see abbot).
Replaced earlier abbotess.


abbey (n.)

mid-13c., convent headed by an abbot or abbess, from Anglo-French abbeie, Old French aba&#239;e,
from Late Latin abbatia, from abbas (genitive abbatis); see abbot.


abbot (n.)

Old English abbod abbot, from Latin abbatem (nominative abbas), from Greek abbas, from Aramaic abba,
title of honor, literally the father, my father, emphatic state of abh father. The Latin fem.
abbatissa is root of abbess.


abbreviate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin abbreviatus, past participle of abbreviare to shorten (see abbreviation). Also
sometimes 15c. abbrevy, from Middle French abrevier (14c.), from Latin abbreviare. Related:
Abbreviated; abbreviating.


abbreviation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French abr&eacute;viation (15c.), from Late Latin abbreviationem (nominative
abbreviatio), noun of action from past participle stem of abbreviare make brief, from Latin ad to
(see ad-) + breviare shorten, from brevis short, low, little, shallow (see brief (adj.)).


ABC (n.)

the alphabet, late 13c., abece. Sense rudiments or fundamentals (of a subject) is from late 14c.
From 1944 (in a Billboard headline) as a shortening of American Broadcasting Company. Related: ABCs.


Abderian laughter (n.)

from Abdera, in Thrace, whose citizens were proverbial as rustic simpletons who would laugh at
anything or anyone they didn't understand (making their town the Hellenic equivalent of Gotham).


abdicate (v.)

1540s, to disown, disinherit (children), from Latin abdicatus, past participle of abdicare to
disown, disavow, reject (specifically abdicare magistratu renounce office), from ab- away (see ab-)
+ dicare proclaim, from stem of dicere to speak, to say (see diction). Meaning divest oneself of
office first recorded 1610s. Related: Abdicated; abdicating.


abdication (n.)

1550s, a disowning, from Latin abdicationem (nominative abdicatio) renunciation, abdication, noun of
action from past participle stem of abdicare (see abdicate); sense of resignation of sovereignty is
from 1680s.


abdomen (n.)

1540s, belly fat, from Latin abdomen belly, of unknown origin, perhaps from abdere conceal, with a
sense of concealment of the viscera, or else what is concealed by proper dress. De Vaan, however,
finds this derivation unfounded. Purely anatomical sense is from 1610s. Zoological sense of
posterior division of the bodies of arthropods first recorded 1788.


abdominal (adj.)

1550s, from medical Latin abdominalis, from abdomen (genitive abdominis); see abdomen.


abdominals (n.)

short for abdominal muscles, attested by 1980; see abdominal.


abduce (v.)

to draw away by persuasion, 1530s, from Latin abductus, past participle of abducere to lead away
(see abduction). Related: Abduced; abducing.


abducent (adj.)

1713, from Latin abducentem (nominative abducens), present participle of abducere to lead away (see
abduction).


abduct (v.)

to kidnap, 1834, probably a back-formation from abduction; also see abduce. Related: Abducted;
abducting.


abduction (n.)

1620s, a leading away, from Latin abductionem (nominative abductio), noun of action from past
participle stem of abducere to lead away, take away (often by force), from ab- away (see ab-) +
ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). The illegal activity so called from 1768; before that the word also
was a term in surgery and logic. In the Mercian hymns, Latin abductione is glossed by Old English
wi&eth;laednisse.


abeam (adv.)

at right angles to the keel, c.1836, nautical, literally on beam; see a- (1) + beam (n.).


abecedary (n.)

primer, alphabet table, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin abecedarium an ABC book, neuter of adjective
abecedarius, used as a noun, from the first four letters of the Latin alphabet. Abecedarian (adj.)
is attested from 1660s.


abed (adv.)

Old English on bedde in bed, from a- (1) + bed (n.). As one word from 17c.


Abel

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, second son of Adam and Eve, from Hebrew Hebhel, literally
breath, also vanity.


Abenaki

see Abnaki.


aberrant (adj.)

1798, originally in natural history, from Latin aberrantem (nominative aberrans), present participle
of aberrare to wander away, go astray (see aberration).


aberration (n.)

1590s, a wandering, straying, from Latin aberrationem (nominative aberratio) a wandering, noun of
action from past participle stem of aberrare to wander out of the way, lose the way, go astray, from
ab- away (see ab-) + errare to wander (see err). Meaning deviation from the normal type first
attested 1846.


abet (v.)

late 14c. (implied in abetting), from Old French abeter to bait, to harass with dogs, literally to
cause to bite, from a- to (see ad-) + beter to bait, from a Germanic source, perhaps Low Franconian
betan incite, or Old Norse beita cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitjan, from PIE root *bheid-
to split (see fissure). Related: Abetted; abetting.


abeyance (n.)

1520s, from Anglo-French abeiance suspension, also expectation (especially in a lawsuit), from Old
French abeance aspiration, desire, noun of condition of abeer aspire after, gape from &agrave; at
(see ad-) + ba(y)er be open, from Latin *batare to yawn, gape (see abash).    Originally in French a
legal term, condition of a person in expectation or hope of receiving property; it turned around in
English law to mean condition of property temporarily without an owner (1650s). Root baer is also
the source of English bay (n.2) recessed space, as in bay window.


abhor (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin abhorrere shrink back from, have an aversion for, shudder at, from ab- away
(see ab-) + horrere tremble at, shudder, literally to bristle, be shaggy, from PIE *ghers- start
out, stand out, rise to a point, bristle (see horror). Related: Abhorred; abhorring.


abhorrence (n.)

1650s; see abhorrent + -ence.


abhorrent (adj.)

1610s, in a position or condition to recoil, usually with from; from Latin abhorentem (nominative
abhorrens), present participle of abhorrere; see abhor. Meaning repugnant is from 1650s. Earlier was
abhorrable (late 15c.).


abidance (n.)

1640s, from abide + -ance.


abide (v.)

Old English abidan, gebidan remain, wait, delay, remain behind, from ge- completive prefix (denoting
onward motion; see a- (1)) + bidan bide, remain, wait, dwell (see bide). Originally intransitive
(with genitive of the object: we abidon his we waited for him); transitive sense emerged in Middle
English. Meaning to put up with (now usually negative) first recorded 1520s. Related: Abided;
abiding. The historical conjugation is abide, abode, abidden, but the modern formation is now
generally weak.


abiding (adj.)

late 14c., enduring, present participle adjective from abide (v.).


Abigail

fem. proper name, in Old Testament, Abigail the Carmelitess, a wife of David, from Hebrew Abhigayil,
literally my father is rejoicing, from abh father + gil to rejoice. Used in general sense of lady's
maid (1660s) from character of that name in Beaumont &amp; Fletcher's The Scornful Lady. The waiting
maid association perhaps begins with I Sam. xxv, where David's wife often calls herself a handmaid.
Her male counterpart was Andrew.


ability (n.)

late 14c., from Old French ablet&eacute; expert at handling (something), from Latin habilitatem
(nominative habilitas) aptitude, noun of quality from habilis easy to manage, handy (see able). One
case where a Latin silent -h- failed to make a return in English (despite efforts of 16c.-17c.
scholars); see H.


abiotic (adj.)

without life, 1870, from a- (3) + biotic.


Abitur (n.)

German final secondary school exam, 1863, short for abiturium, from Modern Latin abitorire to wish
to leave, desiderative of Latin abire (neuter plural abitum) to go away, from ab- away (see ab-) +
ire to go (see ion).


abject (adj.)

early 15c., cast off, rejected, from Latin abiectus, past participle of abicere to throw away, cast
off; degrade, humble, lower, from ab- away, off (see ab-) + iacere to throw (past participle iactus;
see jet (v.)). Figurative sense of downcast, brought low first attested 1510s. Related: Abjectly;
abjectness.


abjection (n.)

early 15c., from Old French abjection (14c.), from Latin abjectionem (nominative abjectio)
dejection, despondency, literally a throwing away, noun of action from past participle stem of
abicere (see abject).


abjuration (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin abjurationem (nominative abjuratio) a denying on oath, noun of action from past
participle stem of abjurare (see abjure).


abjure (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French abjurer or directly from Latin abiurare deny on oath, from ab- away
(see ab-) + iurare to swear, related to ius (genitive iuris) law (see jurist). Related: Abjured;
abjuring.


ablation (n.)

early 15c., from Latin ablationem (nominative ablatio), a taking away, noun of action from past
participle stem of auferre to carry away, from ab- off (see ab-) + ferre (past participle latum; see
oblate) to bear.


ablative (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French ablatif, from Latin (casus) ablativus (case) of removal, expressing
direction from a place or time, coined by Julius Caesar from ablatus taken away, past participle of
auferre carrying away, from ab- away (see ab-) + irregular verb ferre (past participle latum; see
oblate) to carry, to bear (see infer). The Latin case of adverbial relation, typically expressing
the notion away from, or the source or place of an action.


ablaut (n.)

systematic vowel alteration in the root of a word to indicate shades of meaning or tense, a
characteristic of Indo-European languages, 1849, from German Ablaut, literally off-sound, coined by
J.P. Zweigel in 1568 from ab off + Laut sound, tone, from Old High German hlut (see listen).
Popularized by Jacob Grimm.


ablaze (adv.)

late 14c., from a on (see a- (1)) + blaze (n.).


able (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French (h)able (14c.), from Latin habilem, habilis easily handled, apt, verbal
adjective from habere to hold (see habit). Easy to be held, hence fit for a purpose. The silent h-
was dropped in English and resisted academic attempts to restore it 16c.-17c., but some derivatives
(such as habiliment, habilitate) acquired it via French.Able-whackets - A popular sea-game with
cards, in which the loser is beaten over the palms of the hands with a handkerchief tightly twisted
like a rope. Very popular with horny-fisted sailors. [Smyth, Sailor's Word-Book, 1867]


able-bodied (adj.)

1620s; see able + body.


ablution (n.)

ritual washing, late 14c., from Latin ablutionem (nominative ablutio), noun of action from past
participle stem of abluere to wash off, from ab- off (see ab-) + luere wash, related to lavere (see
lave).


ABM (n.)

1963, initialism (acronym) for anti-ballistic missile.


Abnaki

also Abenaki, Algonquian people and language of northern New England and eastern Canada, 1721, from
French abenaqui, from the people's name, East Abenaki wapanahki, literally person of the dawn-land,
hence easterners.


abnegate (v.)

1650s, from Latin abnegatus, past participle of abnegare to refuse, deny (see abnegation). Related:
Abnegated; abnegating.


abnegation (n.)

late 14c., a negative assertion, c.1500 as self-denial, from Latin abnegationem (nominative
abnegatio) refusal, denial, noun of action from past participle stem of abnegare to refuse, deny,
from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + negare to deny (see deny).


Abner

masc. proper name, name of Saul's commander in the Old Testament, from Hebrew Abhner, literally my
father is light, from abh father + ner light.


abnormal (adj.)

1835, displaced older abnormous (1742) and rival anormal (1835) under influence of Latin abnormis
deviating from a rule, from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + norma rule (see norm). The older forms
were via Old French anormal (13c.), from Medieval Latin anormalos, from Greek anomalos, from an- not
+ homalos, from homos same. The Greek word was altered in Latin by association with norma. Related:
Abnormally.


abnormality (n.)

quality of being abnormal, 1854; abnormal feature or quality, 1859, from abnormal + -ity. Earlier as
abnormity (1731).


aboard (adv.)

late 14c., probably in most cases from Old French &agrave; bord, from &agrave; on + bord board, from
Frankish *bord or a similar Germanic source (see board (n.2)); the boarding or sides of a vessel
extended to the ship itself. The usual Middle English expression was within shippes borde. The call
all aboard! as a warning to passengers is attested from 1838.


abode (n.)

mid-13c., action of waiting, verbal noun identical with Old English abad, past participle of abiden
to abide (see abide), used as a verbal noun. The present-to-preterite vowel change is consistent
with an Old English class I strong verb (ride/rode, etc.). Meaning habitual residence is first
attested 1570s.


abolish (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French aboliss-, present participle stem of abolir to abolish (15c.), from
Latin abolere destroy, cause to die out, retard the growth of, perhaps from ab- from (see ab-) +
adolere to grow, from PIE *ol-eye-, causative of root *al- to grow, nourish (see old), and perhaps
formed as an antonym to adolere. But the Latin word rather could be from a root in common with Greek
ollymi, apollymi destroy. Tucker writes that there has been a confusion of forms in Latin, based on
similar roots, one meaning to grow, the other to destroy. Application to persons and concrete
objects has long been obsolete. Related: Abolished; abolishing.


abolition (n.)

1520s, from Middle French abolition or directly from Latin abolitionem (nominative abolitio) an
abolition, noun of action from past participle stem of abolere destroy (see abolish). Specific
application to opposition to the black slave trade as a political question is first attested 1788.


abolitionism (n.)

1790, in the anti-slavery sense, from abolition + -ism.


abolitionist (n.)

1792, originally in reference to the slave trade, from abolition + -ist. In Britain, applied 20c. to
advocates of ending capital punishment.


abominable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French abominable (12c.) and directly from Late Latin abominabilis deserving
abhorrence, from stem of Latin abominari deplore as an evil omen (see abomination). Sometimes
misdivided in earlier centuries as a bominable. Also often abhominable 14c.-17c. Related:
Abominably.


abominable snowman (n.)

1921, translating Tibetan meetaoh kangmi.


abominate (v.)

1640s, back-formation from abomination or from Latin abominatus, past participle of abominari (see
abomination). Related: Abominated; abominating.


abomination (n.)

early 14c., abominable thing or action; late 14c., feeling of disgust, hatred, loathing, from Old
French abominacion abomination, horror, repugnance, disgust (13c.), from Latin abominationem
(nominative abominatio) abomination, noun of action from past participle stem of abominari shun as
an ill omen, from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + omin-, stem of omen (see omen). Meaning intensified
by folk etymology derivation from Latin ab homine away from man, thus beastly.    Doubtless, the
life of an Irregular is hard; but the interests of the Greater Number require that it shall be hard.
If a man with a triangular front and a polygonal back were allowed to exist and to propagate a still
more Irregular posterity, what would become of the arts of life? Are the houses and doors and
churches in Flatland to be altered in order to accommodate such monsters? [Edwin Abbot, Flatland: A
Romance of Many Dimensions, 1885]


aboriginal (adj.)

1660s, first, earliest, especially in reference to inhabitants of lands colonized by Europeans, from
aborigines (see aborigine) + -al (1); specific Australian sense is from 1820. The noun is attested
from 1767. Related: Aboriginally.


aborigine (n.)

1858, mistaken singular of aborigines (1540s; the correct singular is aboriginal), from Latin
Aborigines the first ancestors of the Romans; the first inhabitants (especially of Latium), possibly
a tribal name, or from ab origine, literally from the beginning. Extended 1789 to natives of other
countries which Europeans have colonized. Australian slang shortening Abo attested from 1922.


aborning (adv.)

1893, American English, from a- (1) + born + -ing (2).


abort (v.)

1570s, to miscarry, from Latin abortus, past participle of aboriri to miscarry (see abortive); 1610s
as to deliberately terminate anything, but especially a pregnancy, which seems to be the literal
sense. Transitive meaning to cause a woman to miscarry is recorded from 1933. Related: Aborted;
aborting.


abortifacient (n.)

1875, noun and adjective, from Latin abortus (see abortive) + facientem making, related to facere do
(see factitious). An earlier word for this in the noun sense was abortive (1640s).


abortion (n.)

1540s, originally of both deliberate and unintended miscarriages; from Latin abortionem (nominative
abortio) miscarriage; abortion, noun of action from past participle stem of aboriri (see abortive).
Earlier noun in English was simple abort (early 15c.) miscarriage. In 19c. some effort was made to
distinguish abortion expulsion of the fetus between 6 weeks and 6 months from miscarriage (the same
within 6 weeks of conception) and premature labor (delivery after 6 months but before due time). The
deliberate miscarriage was criminal abortion. This broke down late 19c. as abortion came to be used
principally for intentional miscarriages, probably via phrases such as procure an abortion.
Foeticide (n.) appears 1823 as a forensic medical term for deliberate premature fatal expulsion of
the fetus; also compare prolicide. Abortion was a taboo word for much of early 20c., disguised in
print as criminal operation (U.S.) or illegal operation (U.K.), and replaced by miscarriage in film
versions of novels.


abortionist (n.)

1872, from abortion + -ist.


abortive (adj.)

late 14c., born prematurely or dead, from Latin abortivus pertaining to miscarriage; causing
abortion, from abort-, past participle stem of aboriri disappear, miscarry, from ab- amiss (see ab-)
+ oriri appear, be born, arise (see orchestra); the compound word used in Latin for deaths,
miscarriages, sunsets, etc. The Latin verb for to produce an abortion was abigo, literally to drive
away. Not originally used to imply forced or deliberate miscarriage; from 14c.-18c. stillborn
children or domestic animals were said to be abortive. Also see abortion. Related: Abortiveness.


abound (v.)

early 14c., from Old French abonder to abound, be abundant, come together in great numbers (12c.),
from Latin abundare overflow, run over, from Latin ab- off (see ab-) + undare rise in a wave, from
unda water, wave (see water (n.1)). Related: Abounded; abounding.


abounding (adj.)

1630s, present participle adjective from abound; originally affluent; sense of overflowing is
recorded by 1680s.


about (adv.)

Old English abutan, earlier onbutan on the outside of, from on (see on) + be by (see by) + utan
outside, from ut (see out (adv.)). By 13c. it had forced out Old English ymbe, ymbutan for meaning
in the neighborhood of. Abouts, with adverbial genitive, still found in hereabouts, etc., probably
is a northern dialectal form. About face as a military command (short for right about face) is first
attested 1861, American English.


above (adv.)

Old English abufan, earlier onbufan, from on (see on) + bufan over, compound of be by (see by) +
ufan over/high, from Proto-Germanic *ufan- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German oban, German oben),
from PIE root *upo (see up (adv.)). Meaning in addition first corded 1590s.


aboveboard (adj.)

1610s, from above and board (n.1). A figurative expression borrowed from gamesters, who, when they
put their hands under the table, are changing their cards. [Johnson]


abovementioned (adj.)

1707, from above and past tense of mention. Above-named is recorded from c.1600.


abracadabra

magical formula, 1690s, from Latin (Q. Severus Sammonicus, 2c.), from Late Greek Abraxas, cabalistic
or gnostic name for the supreme god, and thus a word of power. It was written out in a triangle
shape and worn around the neck to ward off sickness, etc. Another magical word, from a mid-15c.
writing, was ananizapta.


abrade (v.)

1670s, from Latin abradere to scrape off (see abrasion). Related: Abraded; abrading.


Abraham

masc. proper name, name of the first of the patriarchs in the Old Testament, from Hebrew Abraham
father of a multitude, from abh father + *raham (cognate with Arabic ruham multitude); the name he
altered from Abram high father, from second element ram high, exalted. Related: Abrahamic.


abrasion (n.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin abrasionem (nominative abrasio) a scraping, noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin abradere to scrape away, shave off, from ab- off (see ab-) + radere to
scrape (see raze).


abrasive (n.)

an abrasive substance, 1853, from abrasive (adj.).


abrasive (adj.)

1805, from Latin abras-, past participle stem of abradere (see abrasion) + -ive. Figurative sense of
tending to provoke anger is first recorded 1925. Related: Abrasively; abrasiveness.


abraxas

Cabalistic word, 1738, of uncertain origin.


abreast (adv.)

mid-15c., on brest, from a- (1) + breast (n.); the notion is of with breasts in line. To keep
abreast in figurative sense of stay up-to-date is from 1650s.


abridge (v.)

c.1300, abreggen, to make shorter, to condense, from Old French abregier abridge, diminish, shorten,
from Late Latin abbreviare make short (see abbreviate). The sound development from Latin -vi- to
French -dg- is paralleled in assuage (from assuavidare) and deluge (from diluvium). Related:
Abridged; abridging.


abridgement (n.)

late 15c., from Old French abregement shortening, abbreviation, from abregier (see abridge).


abroad (adv.)

mid-13c., widely apart, from Old English on brede, which meant something like at wide (see broad
(adj.)). The sense out of doors, away from home (late 14c.) led to the main modern sense of out of
one's country, overseas (mid-15c.).


abrogate (v.)

1520s, from Latin abrogatus, past participle of abrogare to annul, repeal (a law), from ab- away
(see ab-) + rogare propose a law, request (see rogation). Form abrogen, from Old French abroger, is
recorded from early 15c. Related: Abrogated; abrogating.


abrogation (n.)

1530s, from Latin abrogationem (nominative abrogatio) repeal of a law, noun of action from past
participle stem of abrogare (see abrogate).


abrupt (adj.)

1580s, from Latin abruptus broken off, precipitous, disconnected, past participle of abrumpere break
off, from ab- off (see ab-) + rumpere break (see rupture (n.)). Related: Abruptly; abruptness.


abs (n.)

colloquial shortening of abdominals, by 1992.


abs-

form of ab- before -c-, -q- or -t-.


Absalom

masc. proper name, King David's son in the Old Testament, often used figuratively for favorite son,
from Hebrew Abhshalom, literally father is peace, from abh father + shalom peace.


abscess (n.)

1610s, from Latin abscessus an abscess (Celsus), literally a going away, from stem of abscedere
withdraw, from ab- away (see ab-) + cedere to go (see cede). The notion is that humors go from the
body through the pus in the swelling.


abscessed (adj.)

1846, in medicine, from abscess (n.).


abscind (v.)

1650s, from Latin abscindere to cut off (see abscissa). Related: Abscinded; abscinding.


abscissa (n.)

1690s, from Latin abscissa (linea) (a line) cut off, from fem. past participle of abscindere to cut
off, from ab- off, away (see ab-) + scindere to cut (see shed (v.)).


abscission (n.)

removal or cutting away, early 15c., from Latin abscissionem (nominative abscissio) a cutting off,
noun of action from past participle stem of abscindere (see abscissa).


abscond (v.)

1560s, from Middle French abscondre and directly from Latin abscondere to hide, conceal, put out of
sight, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) + condere put together, store, from com- together (see com-) +
dere put, from PIE *dhe- to put, place, make (see factitious). The notion is of to hide oneself,
especially to escape debt or the law. Related: Absconded; absconder; absconding.


absence (n.)

late 14c., from Old French absence (14c.), from Latin absentia, noun of state from absentem
(nominative absens), present participle of abesse be away from, be absent, from ab- away (see ab-) +
esse to be (see essence).    Absence makes the heart grow fonder  [Thomas Haynes Bayly (1797-1839)
Isle of Beauty]


absent (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle French absent (Old French ausent), from Latin absentem (nominative absens),
present participle of abesse be away from, be absent (see absence). Related: Absently; absentness.


absent (v.)

to keep away (from), c.1400, from Middle French absenter, from Late Latin absentare cause to be
away, from Latin absentem (see absent (adj.)). Related: Absented; absenting.


absent (prep.)

in the absence of, 1944, principally from U.S. legal use, from absent (v.).


absentee (n.)

1530s, from absent (v.) + -ee.


absenteeism (n.)

1829, from absentee + -ism; originally in reference to landlords, especially in Ireland (absentee in
this sense is in Johnson's dictionary); reference to pupils or workers is from 1922.


absentminded (adj.)

also absent-minded, preoccupied, 1810, from absent + minded. Related: Absentmindedly;
absentmindedness.


absinthe (n.)

also absinth, alcoholic liqueur distilled from wine mixed with wormwood (Artemisia Absinthium),
1842, from French absinthe, essence of wormwood, from Latin absinthum wormwood, from Greek
apsinthion, perhaps from Persian (compare Persian aspand, of the same meaning). The plant so called
in English from c.1500 (Old English used the word in the Latin form).


absit omen

Latin, literally may this omen be absent.


absolute (adj.)

late 14c., unrestricted; complete, perfect; also not relative to something else (mid-15c.), from
Middle French absolut (14c., Old French asolu, Modern French absolu), from Latin absolutus, past
participle of absolvere to set free, make separate (see absolve).    Most of the current senses also
were in the Latin word. Sense evolution was detached, disengaged, thus perfect, pure. Meaning
despotic (1610s) is from notion of absolute in position. Absolute monarchy is recorded from 1735
(absolute king is recorded from 1610s); scientific absolute magnitude (1902), absolute value (1907)
are from early 20c. In metaphysics, the absolute that which is absolute is from 1809.


absolute zero (n.)

the idea dates back to 1702 and its general value was guessed to within a few degrees soon
thereafter, but not precisely discovered until Lord Kelvin's work in 1848. It was known by many
names, such as infinite cold, absolute cold, natural zero of temperature; the term absolute zero was
among them by 1806.


absolutely (adv.)

late 14c., unconditionally, completely, from absolute (adj.) + -ly (2). From mid-15c. as without
reference to anything else, not relatively; meaning to the utmost degree emerged by mid-16c. As a
colloquial emphatic in American English, it is attested from 1892.


absolution (n.)

remission, forgiveness, c.1200, from Old French absolucion, earlier assolucion, from Latin
absolutionem (nominative absolutio) completion, acquittal, noun of action from past participle stem
of absolvere to absolve (see absolve). Originally of sins; in general use from c.1400.


absolutism (n.)

1753 in theology; 1830 in politics, in which sense it was first used by British reformer and
parliamentarian Maj. Gen. Thomas Perronet Thompson (1783-1869). See absolute and   -ism.


absolutist (n.)

1830, from absolute + -ist. From 1837 as an adjective.


absolve (v.)

early 15c., from Latin absolvere set free, loosen, acquit, from ab- from (see ab-) + solvere loosen
(see solve). Related: Absolved; absolving.


absorb (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French absorber (Old French assorbir, 13c.), from Latin absorbere to swallow
up, from ab- from (see ab-) + sorbere suck in, from PIE root *srebh- to suck, absorb (cognates:
Armenian arbi I drank, Greek rhopheo to sup greedily up, gulp down, Lithuanian srebiu to drink
greedily). Figurative meaning to completely grip (one's) attention is from 1763. Related: Absorbed;
absorbing.


absorbency (n.)

1762, noun of state from absorbent; see -cy.


absorbent

1718, adjective and noun, from Latin absorbentem (nominative absorbens), present participle of
absorbere (see absorb).


absorption (n.)

1590s, from Latin absorptionem (nominative absorptio), noun of action from past participle stem of
absorbere (see absorb).


absquatulate (v.)

1837, Facetious U.S. coinage [Weekley], perhaps based on a mock-Latin negation of squat to settle.
Said to have been used by the U.S. Western character Nimrod Wildfire in the play The Kentuckian, as
re-written by British author William B. Bernard and staged in London in 1833. Related:
Absquatulated; absquatulating.


abstain (v.)

late 14c., to withhold oneself, from Old French abstenir (14c.), earlier astenir (13c.) hold
(oneself) back, refrain, abstain (from), practice abstinence, from Latin abstinere withhold, keep
back, keep off, from ab(s)- from, away from (see ab-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Specifically of
liquor, late 14c. Of voting, 1796. Related: Abstained; abstaining.


abstainer (n.)

mid-15c., one who practices self-denial, agent noun from abstain.


abstemious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin abstemius sober, temperate, from ab(s)- from (see ab-) + stem of temetum strong
drink, related to temulentus drunken. Technically, of liquor, but extended in Latin to temperance in
living generally. Related: Abstemiously; abstemiousness.


abstention (n.)

1520s, from Middle French abstention (Old French astencion), from Late Latin abstentionem
(nominative abstentio) the act of retaining, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
abstinere keep back, keep off, hold off (see abstain).


abstinence (n.)

mid-14c., forbearance in indulgence of the appetites, from Old French abstinence (earlier
astenance), from Latin abstinentia abstinence, starvation; self-restraint, integrity, noun of
quality from abstinentem (nominative abstinens), present participle of abstinere (see abstain).
Specifically of sexual appetites from mid-14c., but also in Middle English of food, fighting,
luxury.


abstinent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French abstinent (earlier astenant) moderate, abstemious, modest, from Latin
abstinentem (nominative abstinens) temperate, moderate, present participle of abstinere to refrain
from (see abstain).


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


abstract (n.)

abridgement or summary of a document, mid-15c., from abstract (adj.). The general sense of a smaller
quantity containing the virtue or power of a greater [Johnson] is recorded from 1560s.


abstract (v.)

1540s, from Latin abstractus or else from the adjective abstract. Related: Abstracted; abstracting,
abstractedly.


abstraction (n.)

c.1400, a withdrawal from worldly affairs, asceticism, from Old French abstraction (14c.), from
Latin abstractionem (nominative abstractio), noun of action from past participle stem of abstrahere
(see abstract (adj.)). Meaning idea of something that has no actual existence is from 1640s.


abstractly (adv.)

late 14c., by itself, absolutely, from abstract (adj.) + -ly (2).


abstruse (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French abstrus (16c.) or directly from Latin abstrusus hidden, concealed, secret,
past participle of abstrudere conceal, literally to thrust away, from ab- away (see ab-) + trudere
to thrust, push (see extrusion). Related: Abstrusely; abstruseness.


absurd (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French absurde (16c.), from Latin absurdus out of tune; foolish (see absurdity).
The main modern sense (also present in Latin) is a figurative one, out of harmony with reason or
propriety. Related: Absurdly; absurdness.


absurdity (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French absurdit&eacute;, from Late Latin absurditatem (nominative absurditas)
dissonance, incongruity, noun of state from Latin absurdus out of tune; figuratively incongruous,
silly, senseless, from ab-, intensive prefix, + surdus dull, deaf, mute (see susurration).


abundance (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French abondance and directly from Latin abundantia fullness, plenty, noun of
state from abundantem (nominative abundans), present participle of abundare to overflow (see
abound).


abundant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French abundant and directly from Latin abundantem (nominative abundans)
overflowing, present participle of abundare to overflow (see abound). Related: Abundantly.


abuse (v.)

early 15c., to misuse, misapply, from Middle French abuser, from Vulgar Latin *abusare, from Latin
abusus an abusing, using up, past participle of abuti use up, also misuse, from ab- away (see ab-) +
uti use (see use). Of sexual situations from early 15c., but originally incest, homosexuality,
prostitution, etc.; meaning to misuse sexually, ravish is from 1550s. Specifically of drugs, from
1968. Related: Abused; abusing.


abuse (n.)

mid-15c., improper practice, from Old French abus (14c.), from Latin abusus (see abuse (v.)).
Earlier in Middle English was abusion wicked act or practice, shameful thing, violation of decency
(early 14c.), an insult (mid-14c.).


abuser (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from abuse (v.).


abusive (adj.)

1530s (implied in abusively), originally improper, from Middle French abusif, from Latin abusivus,
from abus-, past participle stem of abuti (see abuse (v.)). Meaning full of abuse is from 1580s.
Abuseful was used 17c., and Shakespeare has abusious (Taming of the Shrew, 1594). Related:
Abusiveness.


abut (v.)

mid-13c., to end at, to border on, from Old French aboter join end to end, touch upon (13c.), from
&agrave; to (see ad-) + bout end (see butt (n.3)). Related: Abutted; abutting.


abutment (n.)

1640s, from abut + -ment. Originally any junction; the architectural usage is attested from 1793
(the notion is of the meeting-place of the arches of a bridge, etc.).


abuzz (adv.)

1859, from a- (1) + buzz. First recorded in Dickens.


abysm (n.)

bottomless gulf, greatest depths, now chiefly poetic, c.1300, from Old French abisme (Modern French
ab&icirc;me), from Vulgar Latin *abyssimus (source of Spanish and Portuguese abismo), which
represents either a superlative of Latin abyssus or a formation on analogy of Greek-derived words in
-ismus; see abyss.


abysmal (adj.)

1650s, formed in English from abysm + -al (1). Weakened sense of extremely bad is first recorded
1904, perhaps from abysmal ignorance (suggestive of its depth), an expression attested from 1847.
Related: Abysmally.


abyss (n.)

late 14c., earlier abime (c.1300, from a form in Old French), from Late Latin abyssus bottomless
pit, from Greek abyssos (limne) bottomless (pool), from a- without (see a- (2)) + byssos bottom,
possibly related to bathos depth.


abyssal (adj.)

1690s, used especially of the zone of ocean water below 300 fathoms, from abyss + -al (1). Though
the 19th century, abysmal was more common in oceanography.


Abyssinia (n.)

old name for Ethiopia, 1630s, from Modern Latin Abyssinia, from Arabic Habasah, the name for the
region, said to be from Amharic hbsh mixed, in reference to the different races dwelling there. In
1920s-30s popular as a slang pun for I'll be seeing you. Related: Abyssinian.


AC

abbreviation of air conditioning, by 1966.


AC/DC (adj.)

electronics abbreviation of alternating current/direct current, by 1898. As slang for bisexual,
1959, said to have been in use orally from c.1940; the notion is of working both ways.


acacia (n.)

1540s, from Latin acacia, from Greek akakia thorny Egyptian tree, perhaps related to Greek ake
point, thorn, from PIE root *ak- sharp (see acrid). Or perhaps a Hellenization of some Egyptian
word. From late 14c. in English as the name of a type of gum used as an astringent, etc.


Academe (n.)

The Academy, 1580s, from phrase groves of Academe, translating Horace's silvas Academi (see
academy); general sense of the world of universities and scholarship is attested from 1849. With
lower-case letter, academia in the sense of academic community is from 1956.   <b>Academe</b>
properly means Academus (a Greek hero); &amp; its use as a poetic variant for academy, though
sanctioned by Shakespeare, Tennyson &amp; Lowell, is a mistake; the grove of A., however, (Milton)
means rightly The Academy. [Fowler]


academic (adj.)

1580s, relating to an academy, also collegiate, scholarly, from Latin academicus of the Academy,
from academia (see academy). Meaning theoretical, not practical, not leading to a decision (such as
university debates or classroom legal exercises) is from 1886. Academic freedom is attested from
1901. Related: Academically.


academy (n.)

late 15c., the classical Academy, from French Acad&eacute;mie, from Latin Academia, from Greek
Akademeia grove of Akademos, a legendary Athenian of the Trojan War tales (his name apparently means
of a silent district), whose estate, six stadia from Athens, was the enclosure where Plato taught
his school.   The A[cademy], the Garden, the Lyceum, the Porch, the Tub, are names used for the five
chief schools of Greek philosophy, their founders, adherents, &amp; doctrines: the A., Plato, the
Platonists &amp; Platonism; the Garden, Epicurus, the Epicureans, &amp; Epicureanism; the Lyceum,
Aristotle, the Aristotelians, &amp; Aristotelianism; the Porch, Zeno, the Stoics, &amp; Stoicism;
the Tub, Antisthenes, the Cynics, &amp; Cynicism. [Fowler]    Sense broadened 16c. into any school
or training place. Academy awards (1941) so called for their distributor, the Academy of Motion
Picture Arts and Sciences.


Acadian

1705, from Acadia, Latinized form of Acadie, French name of Nova Scotia, probably from Archadia, the
name given to the region by Verrazano in 1520s, from Greek Arkadia, emblematic in pastoral poetry of
a place of rural peace (see Arcadian); the name may have been suggested to Europeans by the native
Micmac (Algonquian) word akadie fertile land. The Acadians, expelled by the English in 1755, settled
in large numbers in Louisiana (see Cajun, which is a corruption of Acadian).


acanthus (n.)

1660s, from Latin acanthus, from Greek akanthos, from ake point, thorn (see acrid) + anthos flower
(see anther). So called for its large spiny leaves. A conventionalized form of the leaf is used in
Corinthian capitals.


Acapulco

in full, Acapulco de Juarez, resort town in western Mexico, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) acapulco place of
the large canes, from aca(tl) cane (plant) + -pul large + -co place. Acapulco gold as the name of a
local grade of potent marijuana is attested from 1965.


accede (v.)

early 15c., from Latin accedere approach, enter upon, from ad- to (see ad-) + cedere go, move (see
cede). Latin ad- usually became ac- before k sounds. Related: Acceded; acceding.


accelerant (n.)

1854, from Latin accelerantem (nominative accelerans), present participle of accelerare (see
accelerate). As an adjective from 1890.


accelerate (v.)

1520s, from Latin acceleratus, past participle of accelerare to hasten, to quicken, from ad- to (see
ad-) + celerare hasten, from celer swift (see celerity). Related: Accelerated; accelerating.


acceleration (n.)

1530s, from Latin accelerationem (nominative acceleratio) a hastening, noun of action from past
participle stem of accelerare (see accelerate).


accelerator (n.)

1610s, from Latin accelerator, agent noun from accelerare (see accelerate). Motor vehicle sense is
from 1900.


accent (n.)

late 14c., particular mode of pronunciation, from Middle French accent, from Old French acent
(13c.), from Latin accentus song added to speech, from ad- to (see ad-) + cantus a singing, past
participle of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Loan-translation of Greek prosoidia, from pros- to +
oide song, which apparently described the pitch scheme in Greek verse. The decorating sense of
something that emphasizes or highlights is from 1972.


accent (v.)

to pronounce with accent or stress, 1520s, from Middle French accenter, from Old French acenter,
from accent (see accent (n.)). Related: Accented; accenting.


accentuate (v.)

1731, from Medieval Latin accentuatus, past participle of accentuare to accent, from Latin accentus
(see accent (n.)). Originally to pronounce with an accent; meaning emphasize is recorded from 1865.
You've got to accentuate the positive  Eliminate the negative  Latch on to the affirmative  Don't
mess with Mister In-Between  [Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive, 1944, music by Harold Arlen, lyrics by
Johnny Mercer]    Related: Accentuated; accentuating.


accentuation (n.)

1690s, from Medieval Latin accentuationem (nominative accentuatio) intoning, chanting, noun of
action from past participle stem of accentuare (see accentuate).


accept (v.)

late 14c., to take what is offered, from Old French accepter (14c.) or directly from Latin acceptare
take or receive willingly, frequentative of accipere receive, from ad- to (see ad-) + capere to take
(see capable). Related: Accepted; accepting.


acceptability (n.)

1660s, from Late Latin acceptabilitas, from Latin acceptabilis (see acceptable).


acceptable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French acceptable, from Latin acceptabilis worthy of acceptance, from acceptare
(see accept). Related: Acceptably.


acceptance (n.)

1570s, from Middle French acceptance, from accepter (see accept). Earlier in same sense was
acceptation (late 14c.).


access (n.)

early 14c., an attack of fever, from Old French acces onslaught, attack; onset (of an illness)
(14c.), from Latin accessus a coming to, an approach, noun use of past participle of accedere
approach (see accede). The later senses are directly from Latin. Meaning an entrance is from c.1600.
Meaning habit or power of getting into the presence of (someone or something) is from late 14c.


access (v.)

1962, originally in computing, from access (n.). Related: Accessed; accessing.


accessibility (n.)

c.1800, from accessible + -ity.


accessible (adj.)

c.1400, affording access, from Middle French accessible, from Late Latin accessibilis, verbal
adjective from Latin accessus a coming near, approach (see access (n.)). Meaning easy to reach is
from 1640s; Of art or writing, able to be readily understood, 1961 (a term not needed in the years
before writing or art often deliberately was made not so).


accession (n.)

act of coming to a position, especially of a throne, 1640s, from Latin accessionem (nominative
accessio) a going to, joining, increase, noun of action from past participle stem of accedere (see
accede).


accessorize (v.)

1939, from accessory + -ize. Related: Accessorized; accessorizing.


accessory (n.)

also accessary, early 15c. as a legal term in the criminal sense of one aiding in a crime; also that
which is subordinate to something else, from Late Latin accessorius, from accessor, agent noun from
accedere (see access (n.)). Attested from 1896 as woman's smaller articles of dress, hence
accessorize.


accessory (adj.)

1550s, subordinate, from Late Latin accessorius, from accessor, agent noun from accedere (see access
(n.)). Meaning aiding in crime is from c.1600.


accidence (n.)

late 14c., in philosophy, non-essential or incidental characteristic, also part of grammar dealing
with inflection (mid-15c.), in some cases a misspelling of accidents, or else directly from Latin
accidentia (used as a term in grammar by Quintilian), neuter plural of accidens, present participle
of accidere (see accident). The grammar sense is because they change in accordance with use.


accident (n.)

late 14c., an occurrence, incident, event, from Old French accident (12c.), from Latin accidentem
(nominative accidens), present participle of accidere happen, fall out, fall upon, from ad- to (see
ad-) + cadere fall (see case (n.1)). Meaning grew from something that happens, an event, to
something that happens by chance, then mishap. Philosophical sense non-essential characteristic of a
thing is late 14c. Meaning unplanned child is attested by 1932.


accidental (adj.)

late 14c., non-essential, from Old French accidentel or directly from Medieval Latin accidentalis,
from Latin accidentem (see accident). Meaning outside the normal course of nature is from early
15c.; that of coming by chance is from 1570s.


accidental (n.)

late 14c., non-essential quality, from accidental (adj.). The musical sense is from 1868.


accidentally (adv.)

late 14c., non-essentially, also unnaturally, from accidental + -ly (2). Meaning unintentionally is
recorded from 1580s; phrase accidentally on purpose is recorded from 1862.


acclaim (n.)

act of acclaiming, 1667 (in Milton), from acclaim (v.).


acclaim (v.)

early 14c., to lay claim to, from Latin acclamare to cry out at (see acclamation); the meaning to
applaud is recorded by 1630s. Related: Acclaimed; acclaiming.


acclamation (n.)

1540s, from Latin acclamationem (nominative acclamatio) a calling, exclamation, shout of approval,
noun of action from past participle stem of acclamare shout approval or disapproval of, cry out at,
from ad- toward (see ad-) + clamare cry out (see claim (v.)). As a method of voting en masse, by
1801, probably from the French Revolution.


acclimate (v.)

1792, from French acclimater, verb formed from &agrave; to (see ad-) + climat (see climate).
Related: Acclimated; acclimating. The extended form acclimatize is now more common.


acclimation (n.)

1826, noun of action from acclimate.


acclimatize (v.)

1836; see acclimate + -ize; a more recent formation than acclimate and replacing it in many uses.
Related: Acclimatized; acclimatizing.


acclivity (n.)

1610s, from Latin acclivitatem (nominative acclivitas) an ascending direction, an upward steepness,
from acclivis mounting upwards, ascending, from ad- up (see ad-) + clivus hill, a slope, from PIE
*klei-wo-, suffixed form of *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)).


accolade (n.)

1620s, from French accolade (16c.), from Proven&ccedil;al acolada or Italian accollata, ultimately
from noun use of a fem. past participle from Vulgar Latin *accollare to embrace around the neck,
from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + collum neck (see collar (n.)).    The original sense is of an embrace
about the neck or the tapping of a sword on the shoulders to confer knighthood. Extended meaning
praise, award is from 1852. Also see -ade. Earlier was accoll (mid-14c.), from Old French acolee an
embrace, kiss, especially that given to a new-made knight, from verb acoler. The French noun in the
16c. was transformed to accolade, with the foreign suffix.


accommodate (v.)

1530s, from Latin accomodatus suitable, past participle of accomodare make fit, adapt, fit one thing
to another, from ad- to (see ad-) + commodare make fit, from commodus fit (see commode). Related:
Accommodated; accommodating.


accommodating (adj.)

obliging, 1771, present participle adjective from accommodate.


accommodation (n.)

room and provisions, lodging, c.1600, now usually plural (accommodations) and chiefly U.S.; from
French accommodation, from Latin accommodationem (nominative accommodatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of accommodare (see accommodate). Meaning appliance, anything which affords aid is
from 1610s; that of act of accommodating is from 1640s.


accommodations (n.)

lodgings and entertainment, see accommodation.


accompaniment (n.)

1744, from French accompagnement (13c.), from accompagner (see accompany). Musical sense is
earliest.


accompanist (n.)

performer who takes the accompanying part in music, 1833, from accompany + -ist. Fowler prefers
accompanyist.


accompany (v.)

early 15c., to be in company with, from Middle French accompagner, from Old French acompaignier
(12c.) take as a companion, from &agrave; to (see ad-) + compaignier, from compaign (see companion).
Related: Accompanied; accompanying.


accomplice (n.)

1580s (earlier complice, late 15c.), from Old French complice a confederate, from Late Latin
complicem (nominative complex) partner, confederate, from Latin complicare fold together (see
complicate). With parasitic a- on model of accomplish, etc., or perhaps by assimilation of
indefinite article in phrase a complice.


accomplish (v.)

late 14c., from Old French acompliss-, present participle stem of acomplir to fulfill, fill up,
complete (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *accomplere, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + complere fill up (see
complete (adj.)). Related: Accomplished; accomplishing.


accomplished (adj.)

late 15c., perfect as a result of training, past participle adjective from accomplish (v.). Meaning
completed is from late 14c.


accomplishment (n.)

early 15c., performance of a task; state of completion, from Old French acomplissement action of
accomplishing, from acomplir (see accomplish). Meaning thing completed and that of something that
completes someone and fits him or her for society are from c.1600.


accord (v.)

early 12c., from Old French acorder (12c.) reconcile, agree, be in harmony, from Vulgar Latin
*accordare make agree, literally be of one heart, bring heart to heart, from Latin ad- to (see ad-)
+ cor (genitive cordis) heart (see heart). Related: Accorded; according.


accord (n.)

late 13c., accourd, from Old French acord agreement, a back-formation from acorder (see accord
(v.)).


accordance (n.)

c.1300, compliance; early 14c., agreement, concurrence, from Old French acordance agreeing,
reconciliation, harmony, noun of action from acorder (see accord). Of things, conformity,
compatibility, harmony, late 14c. Phrase in accordance with is attested from c.1810 (in Middle
English, in accordance of was the usual form).


according

c.1300, matching, similar, correponding, present participle adjective and adverb from accord (v.).
Meanings conforming (to), compliant, in agreement; consistent, harmonious; suitable, appropriate are
from late 14c. According to referring to, literally in a manner agreeing with is attested from mid-
15c.


accordingly (adv.)

mid-14c., in agreement with, from according + -ly (2). From mid-15c. as properly; adequately;
meaning in agreement with logic or expectation is recorded 1680s.


accordion (n.)

1831, from German Akkordion, from Akkord musical chord, concord of sounds, be in tune (compare
Italian accordare to attune an instrument); ultimately from same source as English accord (v.), with
suffix on analogy of clarion, etc. Invented 1829 by piano-maker Cyrill Demian (1772-1847) of Vienna.


accost (v.)

1570s, from Middle French accoster move up to, from Italian accostare or directly from Late Latin
accostare come up to the side, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + costa rib, side (see coast (n.)). The
original notion is of fleets of warships attacking an enemy's coast. Related: Accosted; accosting.


accouchement (n.)

1803, from French accouchement, noun of action from accoucher (see accoucheur).


accoucheur (n.)

1759, midwife (properly, male midwife), from French accoucheur (Jules Cl&eacute;ment, later 17c.),
agent noun from accoucher to go to childbed, be delivered (13c.) originally simply to lie down
(12c.), from Old French culcher to lie, from Latin collocare, from com- with (see com-) + locare to
place (see locate). The fem. is accoucheuse (1847).


account (n.)

c.1300, reckoning of money received and paid, from Old French acont account, reckoning, terminal
payment, from a to (see ad-) + cont counting, reckoning of money to be paid, from Late Latin
computus a calculation, from Latin computare calculate (see compute).    Meaning sum of (one's)
money in a bank is from 1833. Sense of narration is first attested 1610s. Plural accounts used as a
collective or singular in phrases such as to give accounts (of something), is from mid-13c. Phrase
by all accounts is attested from 1798.


account (v.)

c.1300, to count, enumerate, from Old French aconter to count, render account (Modern French
conter), from a to (see ad-) + conter to count, tell (see count (v.)). Meaning to reckon for money
given or received, render a reckoning, is from late 14c.; sense of to explain (c.1710) is from
notion of answer for money held in trust. Transferred sense of value is from late 14c. Related:
Accounted; accounting.


accountability (n.)

1770, from accountable + -ity. Earlier was accountableness (1660s).


accountable (adj.)

answerable, literally liable to be called to account, c.1400 (mid-14c. in Anglo-French); see account
(v.) + -able. Related: Accountably.


accountancy (n.)

1854, from accountant + -cy.


accountant (n.)

mid-15c., accounting officer, one who renders accounts, from Old French acuntant (Modern French
accomptant), from present participle of accompter (see account (v.)). Sense of professional maker of
accounts is recorded from 1530s. The word also was an adjective in Middle English, accountable;
liable to render accounts (early 15c.).


accounting (n.)

reckoning of numbers, late 14c., verbal noun from account (v.). Phrase no accounting for tastes
(1823) translates Latin de gustibus non est disputandum.


accouter (v.)

also accoutre, 1590s, from French acoutrer, earlier acostrer (13c.) arrange, dispose, put on
(clothing), originally sew up, from Vulgar Latin accosturare to sew together, sew up, from Latin ad-
to (see ad-) + *consutura a sewing together, from Latin consutus, past participle of consuere to sew
together, from con- (see com-) + suere to sew (see suture). Related: Accoutered; accoutred;
accoutering; accoutring.


accoutrements (n.)

1540s, from Middle French accoustrement (Modern French accoutrement), from accoustrer probably from
Old French acostrer arrange, originally sew up (see accouter)


accredit (v.)

1610s, from French accr&eacute;diter, from &agrave; to (see ad-) + cr&eacute;diter to credit
(someone with a sum), from cr&eacute;dit credit (see credit (n.)). Related: Accredited; accrediting.


accreditation (n.)

1806, noun of action from accredit.


accredited (adj.)

furnished with credentials, 1630s, past participle adjective from accredit (v.).


accretion (n.)

1610s, from Latin accretionem (nominative accretio) an increasing, a growing larger (as of the
waxing moon), noun of action from past participle stem of accrescere, from ad- to (see ad-) +
crescere grow (see crescent).


accrual (n.)

1782, from accrue + -al (2).


accrue (v.)

mid-15c., from Old French acreue growth, increase, what has grown, fem. of acreu, past participle of
acreistre (Modern French accro&icirc;tre) to increase, from Latin accrescere (see accretion).
Related: Accrued; accruing. Apparently a verb from a French noun because there is no English verb to
go with it until much later, unless the record is defective.


acculturate (v.)

1934, back-formation from acculturation. Related: Acculturated; acculturating.


acculturation (n.)

the adoption and assimilation of an alien culture, 1880, from ad- to + culture (n.) + -ation.


accumulate (v.)

1520s, from Latin accumulatus, past participle of accumulare to heap up (see accumulation). Related:
Accumulated; accumulating.


accumulated (adj.)

past participle adjective from accumulate (v.). It drove out accumulate (adj.) in this sense (except
in poetic use) by c.1700.


accumulation (n.)

late 15c., from Latin accumulationem (nominative accumulatio) a heaping up, noun of action from past
participle stem of accumulare to heap up, amass, from ad- in addition (see ad-) + cumulare heap up,
from cumulus heap (see cumulus).


accuracy (n.)

1660s, from accurate + -cy.


accurate (adj.)

1610s, done with care, from Latin accuratus prepared with care, exact, elaborate, past participle of
accurare take care of, from ad- to (see ad-) + curare take care of (see cure). The notion of doing
something carefully led to that of being exact (1650s). Related: Accurately; accurateness.


accursed (adj.)

also accurst, early 13c., acursede lying under a curse, past participle adjective from obsolete verb
acursen pronounce a curse upon, excommunicate (late 12c.), from a- intensive prefix + cursein (see
curse (v.)). The extra -c- is 15c., mistaken Latinism. Weakened sense of worthy of a curse is from
1590s. Related: Accursedly; accursedness.


accusation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French acusacion or directly from Latin accusationem (nominative accusatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of accusare (see accuse).


accusative (n.)

grammatical case whose primary function is to express destination or goal of motion, mid-15c., from
Anglo-French accusatif, Old French acusatif, or directly from Latin (casus) accusativus (case) of
accusing, from accusatus, past participle of accusare (see accuse).    Translating Greek ptosis
aitiatike case of that which is caused, on similarity of Greek aitiasthai accuse. Greek aitia is the
root of both, and means both cause and accusation, hence the confusion of the Romans. A more correct
translation would have been casus causativus. Typically the case of the direct object, but also
sometimes denoting motion towards. Nouns and adjectives in French, Spanish, and Italian, languages
from which English has borrowed heavily, generally were formed from the accusative case of a Latin
word.


accusatory (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin accusatorius, from accusare (see accuse).


accuse (v.)

c.1300, charge (with an offense, etc.), impugn, blame, from Old French acuser to accuse, indict,
reproach, blame (13c.), earlier announce, report, disclose (12c.), or directly from Latin accusare
to call to account, from ad- against (see ad-) + causari give as a cause or motive, from causa
reason (see cause (n.)). Related: Accused; accusing; accusingly.


accused (n.)

person charged with a crime, 1590s, from past participle of accuse (v.).


accustom (v.)

early 15c., from Old French acostumer (12c., Modern French accoutumer), from &agrave; to (see ad-) +
costume (see costume (n.)). Related: Accustomed; accustoming.


accustomed (adj.)

late 15c., made customary, habitual, past participle adjective from accustom (v.).


ace (n.)

c.1300, one at dice, from Old French as one at dice, from Latin as a unit, one, a whole, unity; also
the name of a small Roman coin (originally one pound of copper; reduced by depreciation to half an
ounce [Lewis]), perhaps originally Etruscan and related to Greek eis one (from PIE *sem- one, as
one), or directly from the Greek word.    In English, it meant the side of the die with only one
mark before it meant the playing card with one pip (1530s). Because this was the lowest roll at
dice, ace was used metaphorically in Middle English for bad luck or something of no value; but as
the ace is often the highest playing card, the extended senses based on excellence, good quality
arose 18c. as card-playing became popular. Ace in the hole in the figurative sense of concealed
advantage is attested from 1904, from crooked stud poker deals.    Meaning outstanding pilot dates
from 1917 (technically, in World War I aviators' jargon, one who has brought down 10 enemy planes,
though originally in reference to 5 shot down), from French l'ace (1915), which, according to Bruce
Robertson (ed.) Air Aces of the 1914-1918 War was used in prewar French sporting publications for
top of the deck boxers, cyclists, etc. Sports meaning of point scored (1819) led to that of
unreturnable serve (1889).


ace (v.)

to score (in sports), 1923, from ace (n.). This led in turn to the extended student slang sense of
get high marks (1959). Related: Aced; acing.


Aceldama

late 14c., potter's field near Jerusalem purchased with the blood-money given to Judas Iscariot,
literally place of bloodshed, from Greek Akeldama, from an Aramaic phrase akin to Syriac haqal dema
the field of blood.


acephalous (adj.)

headless, 1731, from French ac&eacute;phale + -ous, or directly from Late Latin acephalus, from
Greek akephalos, from a- not + kephale head (see cephalo-).


acerbic (adj.)

1865, originally, and usually, figurative: sour, harsh, severe (of speech, manners, etc.), from
Latin acerbus harsh to the taste, sharp, bitter, sour (see acerbity) + -ic.


acerbity (n.)

1570s, from Middle French acerbit&eacute;, from Latin acerbitatem (nominative acerbitas) harshness,
sharpness, bitterness, from acerbus bitter to taste, sharp, sour, tart (related to acer sharp;
compare Latin superbus haughty, from super above), from Proto-Italic *akro-po- sharp, from PIE *ak-
sharp (see acrid). Earliest use in English is figurative, of sharp and bitter persons. Of tastes,
from 1610s.


acetaminophen (n.)

U.S. name for para-acetylaminophenol, 1960, composed of syllables from the chemical name; in
Britain, the same substance is paracetamol.


acetate (n.)

1827, salt formed by combining acetic acid with a base, from Latin acetum vinegar (see acetic) +
chemical suffix -ate (3). As a type of synthetic material, it is attested from 1920, short for
acetate silk, etc.


acetic (adj.)

1808, from French ac&eacute;tique pertaining to vinegar, from Latin acetum vinegar (properly vinum
acetum wine turned sour; see vinegar), originally past participle of acere be sour, related to acer
sharp (see acrid).


aceto-

before vowels acet-, word-forming element from comb. form of acetic and generally indicating
compounds from or related to acetic acid.


acetone (n.)

colorless volatile liquid, 1839, literally a derivative of acetic acid, from Latin acetum vinegar
(see acetic) + Greek-based chemical suffix -one, which owes its use in chemistry to this word.


acetylene (n.)

gaseous hydrocarbon, 1864, from French ac&#233;tyl&#232;ne, coined by French chemist Marcelin-
Pierre-Eug&egrave;ne Berthelot (1823-1907) from chemical ending -ene + acetyl, which was coined from
acetic in 1839 by German chemist Justus von Liebig; see acetic. Liebig's coinage was in reference to
a different radical; acetyl was transferred to its current sense in 1850s, but Berthelot's coinage
was based on the original use of acetyl.    The name <b>acetylene</b> is an unfortunate one as the
hydrocarbon is not directly related to the modern acetyl radical and the molecule ... contains a
triple bond, not a double bond which the suffix -ene (q.v.) implies. [Flood, Origins of Chemical
Names, 1963]


ach (interj.)

aspirated form of ah; in English often used to represent German or Celtic speech.


Achates

armor-bearer and faithful friend of Aeneas in the Aeneid, hence sometimes used figuratively for
faithful friend. The name is from Greek akhates agate (see agate).


ache (v.)

Old English acan to ache, suffer pain, from Proto-Germanic *akanan, perhaps from a PIE root *ag-es-
fault, guilt, represented also in Sanskrit and Greek, perhaps imitative of groaning. The verb was
pronounced ake, the noun ache (as in speak/speech) but while the noun changed pronunciation to
conform to the verb, the spelling of both was changed to ache c.1700 on a false assumption of a
Greek origin (specifically Greek akhos pain, distress, which is rather a distant relation of awe
(n.)). Related: Ached; aching.


ache (n.)

early 15c., &aelig;che, from Old English &aelig;ce, from Proto-Germanic *akiz, from same source as
ache (v.).


Acheron

1580s, fabled river of the Lower World in Greek mythology. The name perhaps means marsh-like
(compare Greek akherousai marshlike water); the derivation from Greek akhos woe is considered folk
etymology.


achieve (v.)

early 14c., from Old French achever (12c.) to finish, accomplish, complete, from phrase &agrave;
chef (venir) at an end, finished, or Vulgar Latin *accapare, from Late Latin ad caput (venire); both
the French and Late Latin phrases meaning literally to come to a head, from stem of Latin caput head
(see capitulum).    The Lat. caput, towards the end of the Empire, and in Merov[ingian] times, took
the sense of an end, whence the phrase ad caput venire, in the sense of to come to an end ....
Venire ad caput naturally produced the Fr. phrase venir &agrave; chef = venir &agrave; bout. ...
From this chief, O.Fr. form of chef (q.v.) in sense of term, end, comes the Fr. compd. achever =
venir &agrave; chef, to end, finish. [Auguste Brachet, An Etymological Dictionary of the French
Language, transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]    Related: Achieved; achieving.


achievement (n.)

late 15c., act of completing (something), from Middle French ach&egrave;vement a finishing, noun of
action from Old French achever (see achieve). Meaning thing achieved is recorded from 1590s.


Achilles

Greek hero of the Trojan War stories, son of Thetis and Peleus, his name is perhaps a compound of
akhos pain, grief (see awe) + laos the people, a people (see lay (adj.)); or else it is from a pre-
Greek language.


Achilles tendon

from Modern Latin tendo Achillis, first used by German surgeon Heister and so-called in reference to
the one vulnerable spot of the great Greek hero Achilles, whose mother held him by the heel when she
dipped him in the River Styx to render him invulnerable (though this story is not in Homer and not
found before 1c. C.E.). Earlier Achilles' sinew, from Modern Latin chorda Achillis, coined 1693 by
Dutch anatomist Philip Verheyden when dissecting his own amputated leg. Hence figurative use of heel
of Achillies for vulnerable spot (1810).


achromatic (adj.)

1766, from Greek akhromatos colorless, from a-, privative prefix (see a- (3)), + khromat-, comb.
form of khroma color (see chroma) + -ic.


achtung

German word used to command attention, from German achtung, from acht (n.) attention, care, heed,
consideration, achten (v.) pay attention to, regard, esteem, respect, from Old High German ahton pay
attention to, a general Germanic word akin to Old English eahtian to estimate, esteem, consider,
praise, but with no living native descendants in English.


achy (adj.)

1875, first recorded in George Eliot's letters, from ache + -y (2). Middle English had akeful
painful (early 15c.). Related: Achily; achiness.


acid (adj.)

1620s, of the taste of vinegar, from French acide (16c.) or directly from Latin acidus sour, sharp,
adjective of state from acere to be sour, from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (see acrid). Figurative
use from 1775; applied to intense colors from 1916. Acid test is American English, 1892, from the
frontier days, when gold was distinguished from similar metals by application of nitric acid. Acid
rain is first recorded 1859 in reference to England.


acid (n.)

1690s, from acid (adj.). Slang meaning LSD-25 first recorded 1966 (see LSD).    When I was on acid I
would see things that looked like beams of light, and I would hear things that sounded an awful lot
like car horns. [Mitch Hedberg, 1968-2005, U.S. stand-up comic]   Acid rock (type played by or
listen to by people using LSD) is also from 1966; acid house dance music style is 1988, probably
from acid in the hallucinogenic sense + house dance club DJ music style.


acidic (adj.)

1877, originally in geology; see acid (n.) + -ic.


acidity (n.)

1610s, from French acidit&eacute; (26c.) or directly from Latin aciditatem (nominative aciditas),
noun of quality from Latin acidus (see acid (adj.)).


acidophilus (adj.)

1920, used of milk fermented by acidophilic bacteria, from acidophil (1900), a hybrid word, from
Latin acidus acidic (see acid (adj.)) + Greek philos loving (see -phile); the bacteria so called
because they stain easily with an acid dye.


acidulous (adj.)

1769, sub-acidic, used figuratively for sour-tempered; from Latin acidulus slightly sour, a
diminutive of acidus (see acid (adj.)).


ack

British oral code for letter A in wireless and telephone communication, 1898; hence ack-ack anti-
aircraft (gun, fire, etc.).


ack-ack

1939, representing A.A., the military abbreviation for anti-aircraft (see ack).


acknowledge (v.)

1550s, a blend of Middle English aknow (from Old English oncnawan understand, from on + cnawan
recognize; see know) and Middle English knowlechen admit, acknowledge (c.1200; see knowledge). In
the merger, a parasitic -c- slipped in, so that while the kn- became a simple n sound (as in know),
the -c- stepped up to preserve, in this word, the ancient kn- sound. Related: Acknowledged;
acknowledging.


acknowledgement (n.)

1590s, act of acknowledging, from acknowledge + -ment. An early instance of -ment added to an orig.
Eng. vb. [OED]. Meaning token of due recognition is recorded from 1610s.


acknowledgment (n.)

alternative form of acknowledgement. OED deems it a spelling more in accordance with Eng. values of
letters.


acme (n.)

highest point, 1560s, from Greek akme (highest) point, edge; peak of anything, from PIE root *ak-
sharp (see acrid). Written in Greek letters until c.1620. The U.S. grocery store chain was founded
1891 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.


acne (n.)

1813, from Modern Latin, from aknas, a 6c. Latin clerical misreading of Greek akmas, accusative
plural of akme point (see acme). The pointed pimples are the source of the medical use.


acolyte (n.)

early 14c., inferior officer in the church, from Old French acolite or directly from Medieval Latin
acolytus (Late Latin acoluthos), from Greek akolouthos following, attending on, literally having one
way, from a- together with, copulative prefix, + keleuthose a way, road, path, track, from PIE
*qeleu- (cognates: Lithuanian kelias way). In late Old English as a Latin word.


acomia (n.)

baldness, Modern Latin, from Greek akomos hairless, from a-, privative prefix (see a- (3)) + kome
hair (see comet).


aconite (n.)

poisonous plant (also known as monkshood and wolf's bane), 1570s, from French aconit, from Latin
aconitum, from Greek akoniton, of unknown origin.


acorn (n.)

Old English &aelig;cern nut, common Germanic (cognates: Old Norse akarn, Dutch aker, Low German
ecker acorn, German Ecker, Gothic akran fruit), originally the mast of any forest tree, and
ultimately related (via notion of fruit of the open or unenclosed land) to Old English &aelig;cer
open land, Gothic akrs field, Old French aigrun fruits and vegetables (from a Germanic source); see
acre.    The sense gradually restricted in Low German, Scandinavian, and English to the most
important of the forest produce for feeding swine, the mast of the oak tree. Spelling changed
15c.-16c. by folk etymology association with oak (Old English ac) and corn (n.1).


acoustic (adj.)

c.1600, from French acoustique, from Greek akoustikos pertaining to hearing, from akoustos heard,
audible, verbal adjective from akouein to hear, probably from copulative prefix a- + koein to mark,
perceive, hear, from PIE *kous- to hear, perhaps from root *(s)keu- to notice, observe (see caveat).
Acoustic guitar (as opposed to electric) attested by 1958. Related: Acoustical; acoustically.


acoustics (n.)

1680s, science of sound, from acoustic (also see -ics). Meaning acoustic properties of a building,
etc., attested from 1885.


acquaint (v.)

early 13c., from Old French acointier make known, make acquaintance of, from Vulgar Latin
accognitare to make known, from Latin accognitus acquainted with, past participle of accognoscere
know well, from ad- to (see ad-) + cognitus, past participle of cogniscere come to know, from com-
with (see com-) + gnoscere know (see notice). Originally reflexive, to make oneself known; sense of
to gain for oneself personal knowledge of is from early 14c. Related: Acquainted; acquainting.


acquaintance (n.)

c.1300, state of being acquainted; late 14c., person with whom one is acquainted; also personal
knowledge; from Old French acointance acquaintance, friendship, familiarity, noun of action from
acointer (see acquaint). Acquaintant (17c.), would have been better in the person known sense but is
now obsolete.


acquainted (adj.)

early 13c., personally known; past participle adjective from acquaint (v.). Of skills, situations,
etc., from late 15c.    I have been one acquainted with the night.  I have walked out in rain
â&euro;&rdquo;- and back in rain.  I have outwalked the furthest city light.  [Robert Frost, from
Acquainted with the Night]


acquiesce (v.)

1610s, from Middle French acquiescer (16c.), from Latin acquiescere to become quiet, remain at rest,
thus be satisfied with, from ad- to (see ad-) + quiescere to become quiet, from quies (genitive
quietis) rest, quiet (see quiet (n.)). Related: Acquiesced; acquiescing.


acquiescence (n.)

1630s, act of acquiescing, from French acquiescence, noun of action from acquiescer (see acquiesce).
Meaning silent consent is recorded from 1640s.


acquiescent (adj.)

1690s (implied in acquiescently), from Latin acquiescentem (nominative acquiescens), present
participle of acquiescere (see acquiesce).


acquire (v.)

mid-15c., acqueren, from Old French aquerre acquire, gain, earn, procure, from Vulgar Latin
*acquaerere, from Latin acquirere to seek in addition to (see acquisition). Reborrowed in current
form from Latin c.1600. Related: Acquired; acquiring.


acquired (adj.)

c.1600, gained by effort, past participle adjective from acquire. Of diseases, occurring after
birth, thus not dependent on heredity, 1842 (opposed to congenital). Acquired taste is attested from
1734.


acquisition (n.)

late 14c., act of obtaining, from Old French acquisicion (13c.) or directly from Latin acquisitionem
(nominative acquisitio), noun of action from past participle stem of acquirere get in addition,
accumulate, from ad- extra (see ad-) + quaerere to seek to obtain (see query (v.)). Meaning thing
obtained is from late 15c. The vowel change of -ae- to -i- in Latin is due to a Latin phonetic rule
involving unaccented syllables in compounds.


acquisitive (adj.)

1630s, owned through acquisition, from Latin acquisit-, past participle stem of acquirere (see
acquisition) + -ive. Meaning given to acquisition, avaricious is from 1826 (implied in
acquisitiveness). Related: Acquisitively (1590s).


acquit (v.)

early 13c., to satisfy a debt (either for oneself or on behalf of another), from Old French aquiter
pay, pay up, settle a claim (12c.), from &agrave; to (see ad-) + quite free, clear (see quit
(adj.)). Meanings set free from charges and to discharge one's duty both recorded from late 14c.
Related: Acquitted; acquitting.


acquittal (n.)

early 15c., payment of debt or retribution; see acquit + -al (2). Sense of a release from debt or
obligation is from mid-15c.; that of freeing from charge or offense (by legal process) is from
1530s.


acquitted (adj.)

freed, exonerated, 1670s, past participle adjective from acquit (v.). Formerly in this sense was
acquit (late 14c.), perhaps on analogy of pps. such as hit.


acre (n.)

Old English &aelig;cer tilled field, open land, from Proto-Germanic *akraz field, pasture (cognates:
Old Norse akr, Old Saxon akkar, Old Frisian ekker, Middle Dutch acker, Dutch akker, Old High German
achar, German acker, Gothic akrs), from PIE *agro- field (cognates: Latin ager field, land, Greek
agros, Sanskrit ajras plain, open country).    Originally in English without reference to dimension;
in late Old English the amount of land a yoke of oxen could plow in a day, afterward defined by
statute as a piece 40 poles by 4, or an equivalent shape (5 Edw. I, 31 Edw. III, 24 Hen. VIII).
Original sense retained in God's acre churchyard.


acrid (adj.)

1712, formed irregularly from Latin acer (fem. acris) sharp, pungent, bitter, eager, fierce, from
PIE *akri- sharp, from root *ak- be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce (cognates: Oscan akrid
(ablative singular) sharply; Greek akis sharp point, akros at the farthest point, highest,
outermost, akantha thorn, akme summit, edge; also oxys sharp, bitter; Sanskrit acri- corner, edge,
acani- point of an arrow, asrih edge; Lithuanian a&#353;muo sharpness, akstis sharp stick; Old
Lithuanian a&#353;tras, Lithuanian a&#353;trus sharp; Old Church Slavonic ostru, Russian &#243;stryj
sharp; Old Irish er high; Welsh ochr edge, corner, border; Old Norse eggja goad; Old English ecg
sword). The -id suffix probably is in imitation of acid. Acrious (1670s) is a correct formation, but
seldom seen.


acrimonious (adj.)

1610s, acrid, from French acrimonieux, from Medieval Latin acrimoniosus, from Latin acrimonia (see
acrimony). Of dispositions, debates, etc., from 1775. Related: Acrimoniously; acrimoniousness.


acrimony (n.)

1540s, quality of being acrid, from Middle French acrimonie or directly from Latin acrimonia
sharpness, pungency of taste, figuratively acrimony, severity, energy, from acer sharp (fem. acris,
neuter acre; see acrid) + -monia suffix of action, state, condition. Figurative extension to
sharpness of temper is first recorded 1610s.


acro-

word-forming element meaning highest, topmost, at the extremities, before vowels, acr-, from Greek
akro- pertaining to an end, extreme, comb. form of akros at the end, at the top (see acrid).


acrobat (n.)

1825, from French acrobate (14c.), tightrope-walker, and directly from Greek akrobates rope dancer,
gymnastic performer, related to akrobatos going on tip-toe, climbing up high, from akros topmost, at
the point end (see acrid) + stem of bainein walk, go (see come).


acrobatic (adj.)

1848; see acrobat + -ic. Related: Acrobatically.


acrobatics (n.)

1859, from acrobatic; also see -ics. Also acrobatism (1864). In early 20c. acrobacy (from French
acrobacie) sometimes was used.


acromegaly (n.)

gigantism due to activity of pituitary after normal growth has ceased, 1886, from French
acrom&eacute;galie, from medical Latin acromegalia, from Greek akron extremity (see acrid) + megas
great (fem. megale; see mickle). Said in contemporary literature to have been coined 1885 by French
physician Dr. Pierre Marie.


acronym (n.)

word formed from the first letters of a series of words, 1943, American English coinage from acro- +
-onym name (abstracted from homonym; see name (n.)). But for cabalistic esoterica and acrostic
poetry, the practice was practically <b>non-existent before 20c.</b> For distinction of usage, see
initialism.


acrophobe (n.)

one suffering from acrophobia, 1895, from acrophobia; also see -phobe.


acrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of heights, 1887, medical Latin, from Greek akros at the end, the top (see acrid) +
-phobia fear. Coined by Italian physician Dr. Andrea Verga in a paper describing the condition, from
which Verga himself suffered.    In this paper, read somewhat over a year ago at the congress of
alienists at Pavia, the author makes confession of his own extreme dread of high places. Though
fearless of the contagion of cholera, he has palpitations on mounting a step-ladder, finds it
unpleasant to ride on the top of a coach or to look out of even a first-story window, and has never
used an elevator. [American Journal of Psychology, Nov. 1888, abstract of Verga's report]


acropolis (n.)

1660s, from Greek akropolis citadel (especially that of Athens), from akros highest, upper (see
acrid) + polis city (see polis).


across (adv.)

early 14c., acros, earlier a-croiz (c.1300), from Anglo-French an cros in a crossed position,
literally on cross (see cross (n.)). Prepositional meaning from one side to another is first
recorded 1590s; meaning on the other side (as a result of crossing) is from 1750. Phrase across the
board originally is from horse-racing, in reference to a bet of the same amount of money on a horse
to win, place, or show.


acrostic (n.)

short poem in which the initial letters of the lines, taken in order, spell a word or phrase, 1580s,
from Medieval Latin acrostichis, from Greek akrostikhis, from akros at the end, outermost (see
acrid) + stikhos line of verse, literally row (see stair).


acrylic (adj.)

1855, of or containing acryl, name of a radical from acrolein (1843), the name of a liquid in onions
and garlic that makes eyes tear, from Latin acer sharp (see acrid) + olere to smell (see odor) + -in
(see -ine (2)). With adjectival suffix + -ic. Modern senses often short for acrylic fiber, acrylic
resin, etc.


act (n.)

late 14c., a thing done, from Old French acte (official) document, and directly from Latin actus a
doing, a driving, impulse; a part in a play, act, and actum a thing done, originally a legal term,
both from agere to do, set in motion, drive, urge, chase, stir up, from PIE root *ag- to drive, draw
out or forth, move (cognates: Greek agein to lead, guide, drive, carry off, agon assembly, contest
in the games, agogos leader; Sanskrit ajati drives, ajirah moving, active; Old Norse aka to drive;
Middle Irish ag battle).    Theatrical (part of a play, 1510s) and legislative (early 15c.) senses
of the word also were in Latin. Meaning display of exaggerated behavior is from 1928. In the act in
the process is from 1590s, perhaps originally from the 16c. sense of the act as sexual intercourse.
Act of God uncontrollable natural force recorded by 1726.    An act of God is an accident which
arises from a cause which operates without interference or aid from man (1 Pars. on Cont. 635); the
loss arising wherefrom cannot be guarded against by the ordinary exertions of human skill and
prudence so as to prevent its effect. [William Wait, General Principles of the Law, Albany, 1879]


act (v.)

mid-15c., to act upon or adjudicate a legal case; 1590s in the theatrical sense, from Latin actus,
past participle of agere (see act (n.)). To act up be unruly is from 1903. To act out behave anti-
socially (1974) is from psychiatric sense of expressing one's unconscious impulses or desires.
Related: Acted; acting.


Actaeon

in Greek mythology, the name of the hunter who discovered Artemis bathing and was changed by her to
a stag and torn to death by his hounds. The name is of unknown origin. Sometimes used figuratively
in 17c. for a cuckold (because of his horns).


acting (adj.)

1590s, putting forth activity, present participle adjective from act (v.). Meaning performing
temporary duties is from 1797.


acting (n.)

c.1600, performance of deeds; 1660s, performance of plays; verbal noun from present participle of
act (v.). Acting out in psychology is from 1945.


actinium (n.)

radioactive element discovered in 1899, from Greek actin-, comb. form of aktis (genitive aktinos)
ray, radiance (see actino-) + chemical suffix -ium.


actino-

before vowels actin-, word-forming element meaning pertaining to rays, from Greek aktis (genitive
aktinos) ray, radiance; perhaps cognate with Sanskrit aktuh light, ray, Gothic uhtwo dawn, daybreak,
Lithuanian anksti early.


action (n.)

mid-14c., cause or grounds for a lawsuit, from Anglo-French accioun, Old French accion (12c.)
action, lawsuit, case, from Latin actionem (nominative actio) a putting in motion; a performing,
doing, noun of action from past participle stem of agere to do (see act (v.)). Sense of something
done, an act, deed is late 14c. Meaning fighting is from c.1600. As a film director's command, it is
attested from 1923. Meaning excitement is recorded from 1968. Phrase actions speak louder than words
is attested from 1731.


actionable (adj.)

1590s; from action + -able.


activate (v.)

1620s; see active + -ate (2). Related: Activated; activating.


activation (n.)

1906, noun of action from activate (v.).


active (adj.)

mid-14c., given to worldly activity (opposed to contemplative or monastic), from Old French actif
(12c.) or directly from Latin activus, from actus (see act (n.)). As capable of acting (opposed to
passive), from late 14c. Meaning energetic, lively is from 1590s; that of working, effective, in
operation is from 1640s. Active voice is recorded from 1765 (grammatical use of active dates from
mid-15c.).


actively (adv.)

c.1400, secularly, from active + -ly (2). Meaning vigorously is early 15c.


activism (n.)

1920 in the political sense; see activist + -ism. Earlier (1907) it was used in reference to a
philosophical theory.


activist (n.)

one who advocates a doctrine of direct action, 1915; from active + -ist. Originally in reference to
political forces in Sweden advocating abandonment of neutrality in World War I and active support
for the Central Powers.


activities (n.)

in schoolwork sense, 1923, American English, from activity.


activity (n.)

c.1400, active or secular life, from Old French activit&eacute;, from Medieval Latin activitatem
(nominative activitas), a word in Scholastic philosophy, from Latin activus (see active). Meaning
state of being active, briskness, liveliness recorded from 1520s; that of capacity for acting on
matter is from 1540s.


actor (n.)

late 14c., an overseer, guardian, steward, from Latin actor an agent or doer, also theatrical
player, from past participle stem of agere (see act (n.)). Mid-15c. as a doer, maker, also a
plaintiff. Sense of one who performs in plays is 1580s, originally applied to both men and women.


actress (n.)

1580s, female who does something; see actor + -ess; stage sense is from 1700. Sometimes French
actrice was used.


Acts

short for Acts of the Apostles in New Testament, from 1530s.


actual (adj.)

early 14c., pertaining to an action, from Old French actuel now existing, up to date (13c.), from
Late Latin actualis active, pertaining to action, adjectival form of Latin actus (see act (n.)). The
broader sense of real, existing (as opposed to potential, ideal, etc.) is from late 14c.


actuality (n.)

late 14c., power, efficacy, from Old French actualite and directly from Medieval Latin actualitatem
(nominative actualitas), from Late Latin actualis (see actual). A Latin loan-translation of Greek
energeia. Meaning state of being real is from 1670s (actualities existing conditions is from 1660s).
Mod. use of actuality in the sense of realism, contact with the contemporary, is due to Fr.
actualit&eacute;, from actuel, which does not mean actual, real, but now existing, up to date.
[Weekley]


actualization (n.)

1824, noun of action from actualize.


actualize (v.)

1810, first attested in Coleridge, from actual + -ize. Related: Actualized; actualizing.


actually (adv.)

early 15c., in fact, in reality (as opposed to in possibility), from actual + -ly (2). Meaning
actively, vigorously is from mid-15c.; that of at this time, at present is from 1660s. As an
intensive added to a statement and suggesting as a matter of fact, really, in truth it is attested
from 1762.


actuarial (adj.)

1853, from actuary + -al (1). Related: Actuarially.


actuary (n.)

1550s, registrar, clerk, from Latin actuarius copyist, account-keeper, from actus public business
(see act (n.)). Modern insurance office meaning first recorded 1849.


actuate (v.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin actuatus, past participle of actuare, from Latin actus (see act (n.)).
Related: Actuated; actuating.


acuity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French acuit&eacute; (16c.) or directly from Medieval Latin acuitatem
(nominative acuitas) sharpness, from Latin acuere to sharpen, related to acus needle, acuere to
sharpen, from PIE root *ak- rise to a point, be sharp (see acrid).


acumen (n.)

1530s, from Latin acumen a point, sting, hence mental sharpness, shrewdness, from acuere to sharpen
(see acuity).


acupressure (n.)

1859, from Latin acus needle (see acuity) + pressure (n.).


acupuncture (n.)

1680s, pricking with a needle to ease pain, from Latin acus needle (see acuity) + puncture. The verb
is first recorded 1972.


acupuncturist (n.)

1843, from acupuncture + -ist.


acute (adj.)

late 14c., originally of fevers and diseases, coming and going quickly (opposed to a chronic), from
Latin acutus sharp, pointed, figuratively shrill, penetrating; intelligent, cunning, past participle
of acuere sharpen (see acuity). Meaning sharp, irritating is from early 15c. Meaning intense is from
1727. Related: Acutely; acuteness.


ad (n.)

1841, shortened form of advertisement. Long resisted by those in the trade, and according to Mencken
(1945) denounced by William C. D'Arcy (president of Associated Advertising Clubs of the World) as
the language of bootblacks, ... beneath the dignity of men of the advertising profession.


ad hoc

Latin, literally for this (specific purpose).


ad hominem

c.1600, Latin, literally to a man, from ad to (see ad-) + hominem, accusative of homo man (see
homunculus).


ad infinitum

Latin, literally to infinity from ad to (see ad-) + infinitum infinity, neuter of adjective
infinitus endless (see infinite).


ad lib

1811, shortened from Latin ad libitum at one's pleasure, as much as one likes (c.1600), from  ad to
(see ad-) + libitum, accusative of libere to please (see libido). First recorded as one word 1919
(v.), 1925 (n.).


ad nauseam

to a sickening extent, Latin, literally to sickness, from ad to (see ad-) + nauseam, accusative of
nausea (see nausea).


ad valorem

type of customs duties, 1711, Modern Latin, (in proportion) to the value, from ad to (see ad-) +
Late Latin valorem, accusative of valor value (see value (n.)).


ad-

word-forming element expressing direction toward or in addition to, from Latin ad to, toward in
space or time; with regard to, in relation to, as a prefix, sometimes merely emphatic, from PIE *ad-
to, near, at (cognate with Old English &aelig;t; see at). Simplified to a- before sc-, sp- and st-;
modified to ac- before many consonants and then re-spelled af-, ag-, al-, etc., in conformity with
the following consonant (as in affection, aggression). In Old French, reduced to a- in all cases (an
evolution already underway in Merovingian Latin), but written forms in French were refashioned after
Latin in 14c. and English did likewise 15c. in words it had picked up from Old French. In many cases
pronunciation followed the shift.


Ada

fem. proper name, from Hebrew Adha, literally ornament.


adage (n.)

brief, familiar proverb, 1540s, Middle French adage, from Latin adagium adage, proverb, apparently
from adagio, from ad- to (see ad-) + *agi-, root of aio I say, from PIE *ag- to speak. But Tucker
thinks the second element is rather ago set in motion, drive, urge.


adagio (adv.)

c.1746, in music, slowly, leisurely and gracefully, Italian, from ad agio, from ad to, at (see ad-)
+ agio leisure, from Vulgar Latin adiacens, present participle of adiacere to lie at, to lie near
(compare adjacent). In noun sense of a slow movement, first attested 1784.


Adam

masc. proper name, Biblical name of the first man, progenitor of the human race, from Hebrew adam
man, literally (the one formed from the) ground (Hebrew adamah ground); compare Latin homo man,
humanus human, humus earth, ground, soil. To not know (someone) from Adam not know him at all is
first recorded 1784.


Adam&#039;s apple (n.)

1731, corresponding to Latin pomum Adami, perhaps an inexact translation of Hebrew tappuah haadam,
literally man's swelling, from ha-adam the man + tappuah anything swollen. The reference is to the
legend that a piece of the forbidden fruit (commonly believed to be an apple) that Eve gave Adam
stuck in his throat. The term is mentioned in early 15c. as the name of an actual oriental and
Mediterranean fruit, a variety of lime with an indentation fancied to resemble the marks of Adam's
teeth.


adamant (adj.)

late 14c., hard, unbreakable, from adamant (n.). Figurative sense of unshakeable first recorded
1670s. Related: Adamantly; adamance.


adamant (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French adamant and directly from Latin adamantem (nominative adamas) adamant,
hardest iron, steel, also figuratively, of character, from Greek adamas (genitive adamantos)
unbreakable, inflexible metaphoric of anything unalterable, also the name of a hypothetical hardest
material, perhaps literally invincible, from a- not + daman to conquer, to tame (see tame (adj.)),
or else a word of foreign origin altered to conform to Greek.    Applied in antiquity to a metal
resembling gold (Plato), white sapphire, magnet (by Ovid, perhaps via confusion with Latin adamare
to love passionately), steel, emery stone, and especially diamond (see diamond). The name has thus
always been of indefinite and fluctuating sense [Century Dictionary]. The word was in Old English as
a&eth;amans a very hard stone.


adamantine (adj.)

c.1200, from Latin adamantinus hard as steel, inflexible, from Greek adamantinos, from adamas (see
adamant (n.)).


Adamite (n.)

human being, descendant of Adam the Biblical first man, 1630s, from Adam + -ite (1). Used from 1620s
in reference to sects or groups that practice nudism, in reference to the state of Adam before the
Fall.


adapt (v.)

early 15c. (implied in adapted) to fit (something, for some purpose), from Middle French adapter
(14c.), from Latin adaptare adjust, from ad- to (see ad-) + aptare join, from aptus fitted (see
apt). Meaning to undergo modification so as to fit new circumstances (intransitive) is from 1956.
Related: Adapting.


adaptability (n.)

1660s, from adapt + -ability.


adaptable (adj.)

1800, from adapt + -able.


adaptation (n.)

c.1600, action of adapting, from French adaptation, from Late Latin adaptationem (nominative
adaptatio), noun of action from past participle stem of adaptare (see adapt). Meaning condition of
being adapted is from 1670s. Sense of modification of a thing to suit new conditions is from 1790.
Biological sense first recorded 1859 in Darwin's writings.


adapter (n.)

1801, agent noun from adapt. Electrical engineering sense from 1907.


add (v.)

late 14c., to join or unite (something to something else), from Latin addere add to, join, attach,
place upon, from ad- to (see ad-) + -dere comb. form meaning to put, place, from dare to give (see
date (n.1)). Meaning to do sums, do addition also is from late 14c. Related: Added; adding. To add
up make sense is from 1942.


add-on (n.)

additional component, 1941, from add (v.) + on.


added (adj.)

additional, c.1600, past participle adjective from add (v.).


addendum (n.)

1794, literally something added, from Latin addendum, neuter of addendus that which is to be added,
gerundive of addere (see add (v.)). Classical plural form is addenda.


adder (n.)

Old English n&aelig;ddre a snake, serpent, viper, from Proto-Germanic *n&aelig;dro a snake
(cognates: Old Norse na&eth;ra, Middle Dutch nadre, Old High German natra, German Natter, Gothic
nadrs), from PIE root *netr- (cognates: Latin natrix water snake, probably by folk-association with
nare to swim; Old Irish nathir, Welsh neidr adder).    The modern form represents a faulty
separation 14c.-16c. into an adder, for which see also apron, auger, nickname, humble pie, umpire.
Nedder is still a northern English dialect form. Folklore connection with deafness is via Psalm
lviii:1-5. The adder is said to stop up its ears to avoid hearing the snake charmer called in to
drive it away. Adderbolt (late 15c.) was a former name for dragonfly.


addict (v.)

1530s (implied in addicted), from Latin addictus, past participle of addicere to deliver, award,
yield; give assent, make over, sell, figuratively to devote, consecrate; sacrifice, sell out, betray
from ad- to (see ad-) + dicere say, declare (see diction), but also adjudge, allot. Earlier in
English as an adjective, delivered, devoted (1520s). Related: Addicted; addicting.


addict (n.)

1909, in reference to morphine, from addict (v.).


addicted (adj.)

1530s, delivered over by judicial sentence; past participle adjective from addict (v.). Modern sense
of dependent is short for self-addicted to give over or award (oneself) to someone or some practice
(1560s; exact phrase from c.1600); specialization to narcotics dependency is from c.1910.


addiction (n.)

c.1600, tendency, of habits, pursuits, etc.; 1640s as state of being self-addicted, from Latin
addictionem (nominative addictio) an awarding, a devoting, noun of action from past participle stem
of addicere (see addict (v.)). Earliest sense was less severe: inclination, penchant, but this has
become obsolete. In main modern sense it is first attested 1906, in reference to opium (there is an
isolated instance from 1779, with reference to tobacco).


addictive (adj.)

1815, a word in chemistry and medicine; 1939 in the narcotics sense, from addict (v.) + -ive.
Related: Addictively; addictiveness.


addition (n.)

late 14c., action of adding numbers; c.1400, that which is added, from Old French adition increase,
augmentation (13c.), from Latin additionem (nominative additio) an adding to, addition, noun of
action from past participle stem of addere (see add). Phrase in addition to also is from 1680s.


additional (adj.)

1640s, from addition + -al (1). Related: Additionally.


additive (adj.)

1690s, tending to be added, from Latin additivus added, annexed, from past participle stem of addere
(see addition).


additive (n.)

something that is added to a chemical solution or food product, 1945, from additive (adj.).


addle (v.)

1712, from addle (n.) urine, liquid filth, from Old English adela mud, mire, liquid manure (cognate
with Old Swedish adel urine, Middle Low German adel, Dutch aal puddle).    Used in noun phrase addle
egg (mid-13c.) egg that does not hatch, rotten egg, literally urine egg, a loan-translation of Latin
ovum urinum, which is itself an erroneous loan-translation of Greek ourion oon putrid egg, literally
wind egg, from ourios of the wind (confused by Roman writers with ourios of urine, from ouron
urine). Because of this usage, from c.1600 the noun in English was taken as an adjective meaning
putrid, and thence given a figurative extension to empty, vain, idle, also confused, muddled,
unsound (1706). The verb followed a like course. Related: Addled; addling.


address (v.)

early 14c., to guide or direct, from Old French adrecier go straight toward; straighten, set right;
point, direct (13c.), from Vulgar Latin *addirectiare make straight, from Latin ad to (see ad-) +
*directiare, from Latin directus straight, direct (see direct (v.)). Late 14c. as to set in order,
repair, correct. Meaning to write as a destination on a written message is from mid-15c. Meaning to
direct spoken words (to someone) is from late 15c. Related: Addressed; addressing.


address (n.)

1530s, dutiful or courteous approach, from address (v.) and from French adresse. Sense of formal
speech is from 1751. Sense of superscription of a letter is from 1712 and led to the meaning place
of residence (1888).


addressee (n.)

1810; see address (v.) + -ee.


adduce (v.)

early 15c., from Latin adducere lead to, bring to, bring along, from ad- to (see ad-) + ducere to
lead (see duke (n.)). Related: Adduced; adducing.


Adelaide

fem. proper name, from French Ad&eacute;laide, from a Germanic source similar to Old High German
Adalhaid, from adal noble family (see atheling) + German heit state, rank, related to Old English
-had person, degree, state, nature (see -hood). The first element affixed to French fem. ending -ine
gave Adeline.


Adeline

fem. proper name, from French, of Germanic origin, literally noble (see Adelaide).


Adelphia

district of London, so called because it was laid out by four brothers of a family named Adam, from
Greek adelphos brother, literally from the same womb, from copulative prefix a- together with +
delphys womb, perhaps related to dolphin. The district was the site of a popular theater
c.1882-1900, which gave its name to a style of performance.


Aden

place in southern Arabia, ultimately from Akkadian edinnu plain, which some think also is the root
of Biblical Eden.


adenine (n.)

crystaline base, 1885, coined by German physiologist/chemist Albrecht Kossel (1853-1927) from Greek
aden gland (see inguinal) + chemical suffix -ine (2). So called because it was derived from the
pancreas of an ox.


adenoid (adj.)

1839, gland-like, medical Latin adenoideus, from Greek adenoeides, from aden (genitive adenos) gland
(see inguinal) + eidos form (see -oid). Adenoids adenoid growths attested by 1856.


adenoidal (adj.)

1852, from adenoid (gland) (see adenoid) + -al (1).


adept (adj.)

1690s, completely skilled from Latin adeptus having reached, attained, past participle of adipisci
to come up with, arrive at, figuratively to attain to, acquire, from ad- to (see ad-) + apisci
grasp, attain, related to aptus fitted (see apt). Related: Adeptly.


adept (n.)

an expert, especially one who is skilled in the secrets of anything, 1660s, from Latin adeptus (see
adept (adj.)). The Latin adjective was used as a noun in this sense in Medieval Latin among
alchemists.


adequate (adj.)

1610s, from Latin adaequatus equalized, past participle of adaequare to make equal to, from ad- to
(see ad-) + aequare make level, from aequus (see equal (adj.)). The sense is of being equal to what
is required. Related: Adequateness.


adequately (adv.)

1620s, from adequate + -ly (2); originally a term in logic in reference to correspondence of ideas
and objects. Meaning suitably is recorded from 1680s.


adhere (v.)

1590s, from Middle French adh&eacute;rer (15c.) or directly from Latin adhaerare to stick to (see
adherent (adj.)). Originally often of persons, to cleave to a leader, cause, party, etc. (compare
adherent (n.), which still often retains this sense). Related: Adhered; adhering.


adherence (n.)

mid-15c., attachment to a person, support, from Middle French adh&eacute;rence, from Latin
adhaerentia, noun of action from adhaerentem (nominative adhaerens), present participle of adhaerare
(see adherent (adj.)).


adherent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French adherent or directly from Latin adhaerentem (nominative adhaerens),
present participle of adhaerere stick to, from ad- to (see ad-) + haerere to stick (see hesitation).


adherent (n.)

follower, associate, supporter, early 15c., from Old French adherent or directly from Latin
adhaerentem (see adherent (adj.)). Meaning adhesive substance is from 1912.


adhesion (n.)

1620s, from French adh&eacute;sion or directly from Latin adhaesionem (nominative adhaesio) a
sticking to, noun of action from past participle stem of adhaerare (see adherent (adj.)).   Adhesion
is generally used in the material, and adherence in the metaphysical sense. [Johnson]


adhesive (adj.)

1660s, from French adh&eacute;sif, formed in French from Latin adhaes-, past participle stem of
adhaere (see adherent (adj.)).


adhesive (n.)

1881, from adhesive (adj.). Originally of postage stamps (adhesive stamp is attested from 1840). Of
substances that cause to adhere by 1900.


adiabatic (adj.)

1838, from Greek adiabatos not to be passed through, from a- not + dia through (see dia-) + batos
passable, from bainein to go (see come).


adieu

late 14c., adewe, from French adieu, from phrase a dieu (vous) commant I commend (you) to God, from
a to (see ad) + dieu God, from Latin deum, accusative of deus god, from PIE *deiwos (see Zeus).
Originally said to the party left; farewell was to the party setting forth.


adios

1837, American English, from Spanish adios, from phrase a dios vos acomiendo I commend you to God
(see adieu).


adipose (adj.)

1743, from Modern Latin adiposus fatty, from Latin adipem (nominative adeps, genitive adipis) soft
fat of animals, fat, lard, from Greek aleipha unguent, fat, related to lipos grease, fat (see leave
(v.)). Change of -l- to -d- prob. due to Umbrian influence [Klein]. But it could as well be a native
Italic formation from the same roots,  *ad-leip-a sticking onto.


Adirondack (adj.)

1906, in reference to a type of lawn or deck chair said to have been designed in 1903 by a Thomas
Lee, owner of the Westport Mountain Spring, a resort in the Adirondack region of New York State, and
commercially manufactured the following year, but said originally to have been called Westport chair
after the town where it was first made. Adirondack Mountains is a back-formation from Adirondacks,
treated as a plural noun but really from Mohawk (Iroquoian) adiro:daks tree-eaters, a name applied
to neighboring Algonquian tribes, in which the -s is an imperfective affix.


adit (n.)

entrance, c.1600, from Latin aditus approach, entrance, a going to or drawing near, from past
participle stem of adire to approach, from ad- to (see ad-) + ire to go, from PIE root *ei- to go
(see ion).


adjacent (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin adiacentem (nominative adiacens) lying at, present participle of adiacere lie
at, border upon, lie near, from ad- to (see ad-) + iacere to lie, rest, literally to throw (see jet
(v.)), with notion of to cast (oneself) down.


adjectival (adj.)

1797, from adjective + -al (1).


adjective

late 14c., as an adjective, adjectival, in noun adjective, from Old French adjectif (14c.), from
Latin adjectivum that is added to (the noun), neuter of adjectivus added, from past participle of
adicere to throw or place (a thing) near, from ad- to (see ad-) + comb. form of iacere to throw (see
jet (v.)). Also as a noun from late 14c. In 19c. Britain, the word itself often was a euphemism for
the taboo adjective bloody.They ... slept until it was cool enough to go out with their 'Towny,'
whose vocabulary contained less than six hundred words, and the Adjective. [Kipling, Soldiers Three,
1888]


adjoin (v.)

c.1300, unite, ally from Old French ajoin- stem of ajoindre join together, unite, from Latin
adiungere fasten on, harness, join to, from ad- to (see ad-) + iungere to bind together (see
jugular). Meaning be contiguous with, be adjacent to is from late 14c. Related: Adjoined; adjoining.


adjourn (v.)

early 14c., ajournen, assign a day (for convening or reconvening), from Old French ajourner (12c.)
meet (at an appointed time), from the phrase &agrave; jorn to a stated day (&agrave; to + journ day,
from Latin diurnus daily; see diurnal).    The sense is to set a date for a re-meeting. Meaning to
close a meeting (with or without intention to reconvene) is from early 15c. Meaning to go in a body
to another place (1640s) is colloquial. The -d- was added 16c. but is unwarranted, as the compound
is not from Latin. Related: Adjourned; adjourning.


adjournment (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French ajornement daybreak, dawn; summons (to appear in court), from ajorner (see
adjourn).


adjudge (v.)

late 14c., to make a judicial decision, from Old French ajugier to judge, pass judgment on, from
Latin adiudicare grant or award as a judge, from ad- to (see ad-) + iudicare to judge, which is
related to iudicem (see judge (v.)). Sense of have an opinion is from c.1400. Related: Adjudged;
adjudging.


adjudicate (v.)

1700, from Latin adiudicatus, past participle of adiudicare (see adjudge). Related: Adjudicated;
adjudicating.


adjudication (n.)

1690s, from French adjudication or directly from Late Latin adiudicationem (nominative adiudicatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of adiudicare (see adjudge).


adjudicative (adj.)

1809; see adjudicate + -ive. Perhaps modeled on French adjudicatif.


adjudicator (n.)

1804, agent noun in Latin form from adjudicate.


adjunct (n.)

1580s, from Latin adiunctus closely connected, joined, united (as a noun, a characteristic,
essential attribute), past participle of adiungere join to (see adjoin).


adjunct (adj.)

1590s, from Latin adiunctus closely connected, joined, united, past participle of adiungere join to
(see adjoin). Adjunct professor is 1826, American English.


adjuration (n.)

late 14c., exorcism, from Late Latin adjurationem (nominative adjuratio) a swearing to, noun of
action from past participle stem of adjurare (see adjure). Originally a term in exorcism (with
conjuration). General sense is from 17c.


adjure (v.)

late 14c., to bind by oath; to question under oath, from Latin adiurare confirm by oath, add an
oath, to swear to in addition, in Late Latin to put (someone) to an oath, from ad- to (see ad-) +
iurare swear, from ius (genitive iuris) law (see jurist). Related: Adjured; adjuring.


adjust (v.)

late 14c., ajusten, to correct, remedy; reborrowed by c.1600 in sense arrange, settle, compose, from
Middle French adjuster, Old French ajouter to join (12c.), from Late Latin adiuxtare to bring near,
from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + iuxta next, related to iungere to join (see jugular).    Influenced by
folk etymology derivation from Latin iustus just, equitable, fair. Meaning to arrange (something) so
as to conform with (a standard or another thing) is from 1660s. Insurance sense is from 1755.
Meaning to get used to first recorded 1924. Related: Adjusted; adjusting.


adjustable (adj.)

1775, from adjust + -able. Related: Adjustably; adjustability.


adjuster (n.)

1670s, agent noun in English form from adjust. Insurance sense is from 1830.


adjustment (n.)

1640s, from French ajustement or else a native formation from adjust (v.) + -ment.


adjustor (n.)

1857, of certain muscles, agent noun in Latin form from adjust (v.).


adjutant (n.)

military officer who assists superior officers, c.1600, from Latin adiutantem (nominative adiutans),
present participle of adiutare to give help to, help zealously, serve, frequentative of adiuvare
(past participle adiutus) help, assist, aid, support, from ad- to (see ad-) + iuvare to help, give
strength, support, perhaps from same root as iuvenis young person (see young).


administer (v.)

late 14c., administren, aministren to manage as a steward, from Old French amenistrer help, aid, be
of service to (12c., Modern French administrer, the -d- restored 16c.), and directly from Latin
administrare to help, assist; manage, control, guide, superintend; rule, direct, from ad- to (see
ad-) + ministrare serve (see minister (v.)). Used of medicine, etc., to give, from 1540s. Related:
Administered; administering.


administrate (v.)

1630s, from Latin administratus, past participle of administrare (see administer). In modern use a
back-formation from administration. Related: Administrated; administrating.


administration (n.)

mid-14c., act of giving or dispensing; late 14c., management, act of administering, from Latin
administrationem (nominative administratio) aid, help, cooperation; direction, management, noun of
action from past participle stem of administrare (see administer).    Early 15c. as management of a
deceased person's estate. Meaning the government is attested from 1731 in British usage. Meaning a
U.S. president's period in office is first recorded 1796 in writings of George Washington.


administrative (adj.)

1731, from Latin administrativus, from past participle stem of administrare (see administer).
Related: Administratively.


administrator (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French administrateur or directly from Latin administrator a manager,
conductor, agent noun from past participle stem of administrare (see administer). Estate sense is
earliest. For ending, see -er.


admirable (adj.)

mid-15c., worthy of admiration, from Middle French admirable (Old French amirable), from Latin
admirabilis admirable, wonderful, from admirari to admire (see admiration). In early years it also
carried a stronger sense of awe-inspiring.


admirably (adv.)

1590s, from admirable + -ly (2).


admiral (n.)

c.1200, Saracen commander or chieftain, from Old French amirail (12c.) Saracen military commander;
any military commander, ultimately from medieval Arabic amir military commander, probably via
Medieval Latin use of the word for Muslim military leader. Meaning highest-ranking naval officer in
English is from early 15c. The extension of the word's meaning from commander on land to commander
at sea likely began in 12c. Sicily with Medieval Latin amiratus and then spread to the continent,
but the word also continued to mean Muslim military commander in Europe in the Middle Ages.    The
intrusive -d- probably is from influence of Latin ad-mirabilis (see admire). Italian form
almiraglio, Spanish almirante are from confusion with Arabic words in al-. As a type of butterfly,
from 1720, possibly a corruption of admirable.


admiralty (n.)

naval branch of the English executive, early 15c., admiralte, from Old French amiralte, from amirail
(see admiral).


admiration (n.)

early 15c., wonder, from Middle French admiration (14c.) or directly from Latin admirationem
(nominative admiratio) a wondering at, admiration, noun of state from past participle stem of
admirari admire, from ad- at (see ad-) + mirari to wonder, from mirus wonderful (see miracle). The
sense has weakened steadily since 16c.


admire (v.)

early 15c. (implied in admired), from Middle French admirer (Old French amirer, 14c.), or directly
from Latin admirari to wonder at (see admiration). Related: Admiring; admiringly.


admirer (n.)

c.1600, agent noun from admire (v.). In common speech, a lover [Johnson], a sense recorded from
1704.


admissibility (n.)

1763, from admissible + -ity.


admissible (adj.)

1610s, from Middle French admissible, from past participle stem of Latin admittere (see admit).
Legal sense is recorded from 1849.


admission (n.)

early 15c., acceptance, reception, approval, from Latin admissionem (nominative admissio) a letting
in, noun of action from past participle stem of admittere (see admit). Meaning an acknowledging is
from 1530s. Sense of a literal act of letting in is from 1620s. As short for admission price, by
1792.


admit (v.)

late 14c., let in, from Latin admittere to allow to enter, let in, let come, give access, from ad-
to (see ad-) + mittere let go, send (see mission). Sense of to concede as valid or true is first
recorded early 15c. Related: Admitted; Admitting.


admittance (n.)

1580s, the action of admitting, formed in English from admit + -ance (if from Latin, it would have
been *admittence; French uses acc&egrave;s in this sense). Used formerly in senses where admission
now prevails. Admissure was used in this sense from mid-15c.


admittedly (adv.)

1780, from past participle of admit + -ly (2).


admixture (n.)

c.1600, with -ure, from admix (1530s), a back-formation from admixt (early 15c.), from Latin
admixtus mixed with, past participle of admiscere to add to by mingling, mix with, from ad- to (see
ad-) + miscere to mix (see mix). In Middle English admixt was mistaken as a past participle of a
(then) non-existent *admix. Earlier in this sense was admixtion (late 14c.).


admonish (v.)

mid-14c., amonesten remind, urge, exhort, warn, give warning, from Old French amonester (12c.) urge,
encourage, warn, from Vulgar Latin *admonestare, from Latin admonere bring to mind, remind, suggest;
also warn, advise, urge, from ad- to (see ad-) + monere advise, warn (see monitor (n.)).    The -d-
was restored on Latin model. The ending was influenced by words in -ish (such as astonish, abolish).
Related: Admonished; admonishing.


admonition (n.)

late 14c., amonicioun reminding, instruction, from Old French amonicion admonition, exhortation,
from Latin admonitionem (nominative admonitio), noun of action from past participle stem of admonere
(see admonish). Meaning warning is early 15c. The -d- was restored in English 17c.


admonitory (adj.)

1590s, from Late Latin admonitorius, from Latin admonitus, past participle of admonere (see
admonish).


ado (n.)

late 14c., conflict, fighting; difficulty, trouble, compounded from at do, dialectal in Norse
influenced areas of England for to do, as some Scandinavian languages used at with infinitive of a
verb where Modern English uses to. For sense development, compare to-do. Meaning fuss is from early
15c. Also used in Middle English for dealings, traffic, and sexual intercourse (both c.1400).


adobe (n.)

1739, American English, from Spanish adobe, from oral form of Arabic al-tob the brick, from Coptic
tube brick, a word found in hieroglyphics.


adolescence (n.)

age following childhood (especially the period from the 15th to the 21st year), early 15c., from
Middle French adolescence (14c.), from Latin adolescentia youth, noun of state from adolescentem
(see adolescent (n.)).


adolescent (n.)

mid-15c., youth, young man, from Middle French adolescent (15c.) or directly from Latin adolescentem
(nominative adolescens) growing, near maturity, youthful, present participle of adolescere grow up,
come to maturity, ripen, from ad- to (see ad-) + alescere be nourished, hence, increase, grow up,
inchoative of alere to nourish (see old). Adolesce was a back-formed verb used early 20c. by H.G.
Wells, G.B. Shaw, Louis MacNeice, but it seems not to have taken.


adolescent (adj.)

1785, from Latin adolescentem (nominative adolescens) growing, near maturity, youthful, present
participle of adolescere grow up, come to maturity, ripen (see adolescent (n.)).


Adolph

masc. proper name, from Old High German Athalwolf noble wolf, from athal noble (see atheling) + wolf
(see wolf (n.)). The -ph is from the Latinized form of the name.


Adonai

Old Testament word for God, late 14c., from Medieval Latin, from Hebrew, literally my lord, from
adon (see Adonis) + suffix of 1st person.


Adonis (n.)

a beau, 1620s, from Greek Adonis, name of the youth beloved by Aphrodite, from Phoenician adon lord,
probably originally ruler, from base a-d-n to judge, rule. Adonai is the Hebrew cognate.


adopt (v.)

c.1500, a back-formation from adoption or else from Middle French adopter or directly from Latin
adoptare take by choice, choose for oneself, select, choose (especially a child). Originally in
English also of friends, fathers, citizens, etc. Sense of to legally take as one's own child and
that of to embrace, espouse a practice, method, etc. are from c.1600. Related: Adopted; adopting.


adoption (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French adopcion or directly from Latin adoptionem (nominative adoptio), noun of
action from past participle stem of adoptare chose for oneself, take by choice, select, adopt,
especially to take into a family, adopt as a child, from ad- to (see ad-) + optare choose, wish,
desire (see option (n.)).


adoptive (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French adoptif, from Latin adoptivus pertaining to adoption, from stem of
adoptere (see adopt).


adorable (adj.)

1610s, from French adorable, from Latin adorabilis worthy of worship, from adorare (see adore).
Weakened sense of delightful, charming is recorded from 1710. Related: Adorably; adorableness.


adoration (n.)

1540s, from Middle French adoration, from Latin adorationem (nominative adoratio) worship,
adoration, noun of action from past participle stem of adorare; see adore, the original sense of
which is preserved in this word.


adore (v.)

late 14c., aouren, to worship, pay divine honors to, bow down before, from Old French aorer to
adore, worship, praise (10c.), from Latin adorare speak to formally, beseech, ask in prayer, in Late
Latin to worship, from ad- to (see ad-) + orare speak formally, pray (see orator). Meaning to honor
very highly is attested from 1590s; weakened sense of to be very fond of emerged by 1880s. Related:
Adored; adoring.


adoring (adj.)

1650s, worshipping, present participle adjective from adore. Related: Adoringly.


adorn (v.)

late 14c., to decorate, embellish, also be an ornament to, from Old French aorner to order, arrange,
dispose, equip; adorn, from Latin adornare equip, provide, embellish, from ad- to (see ad-) + ornare
prepare, furnish, adorn, fit out, from stem of ordo order (see order (n.)). The -d- was reinserted
by French scribes 14c., in English from late 15c. Related: Adorned; adorning.


adornment (n.)

late 14c., act of adorning; also a thing which adorns; from Old French aornement ornament,
decoration, from aorner (see adorn).


Adrastea

nemesis, daughter of Zeus, distributor of rewards and punishments, from Greek Adrasteia, literally
she from whom there is no escape, from adrastos not running away, from privative prefix a- + stem of
drasmos a running away, related to dromos course (see dromedary).


adrenal (adj.)

of or near the kidneys, 1866, Modern Latin, from ad- + renalis of the kidneys, from Latin renes
kidneys. Adrenal gland is from 1875.


adrenaline (n.)

also Adrenalin (trademark name), coined 1901 by Japanese chemist Jokichi Takamine (1853-1922), who
discovered it, from Modern Latin adrenal (see adrenal) + chemical suffix -ine (2). Adrenaline rush
was in use c.1970.


Adrian

masc. proper name, from Latin Adrianus/Hadrianus, literally of the Adriatic (see Adriatic).


Adriatic

sea east of Italy, from Latin Adriaticus, from town of Atria (modern Atri) in Picenum, once a
seaport but now more than 12 miles inland. The name is perhaps from atra, neuter of atrum black,
hence the black city; or else it represents Illyrian adur water, sea.


adrift (adv.)

1620s, from a- (1) on + drift. Figurative use by 1680s.


adroit (adj.)

1650s, dexterous, originally rightly, from French adroit, from phrase &agrave; droit according to
right, from Old French &agrave; to (see ad-) + droit right, from Late Latin directum right, justice,
accusative of Latin directus straight (see direct (v.)). Related: Adroitly; adroitness.


adsorb (v.)

1882, transitive (intransitive use attested from 1919), back-formation from adsorption condensation
of gases on the surfaces of solids (1882), coined in German from ad- + -sorption, abstracted from
absorption. See absorb. Related: Adsorbent; adsorption.


adulate (v.)

1777, back-formation from adulation.


adulation (n.)

late 14c., insincere praise, from Old French adulacion, from Latin adulationem (nominative adulatio)
a fawning; flattery, cringing courtesy, noun of action from past participle stem of aduliari to
flatter, from ad- to (see ad-) + ulos tail, from PIE *ul- the tail (cognates: Sanskrit valah tail,
Lithuanian valai horsehair of the tail). The original notion is to wag the tail like a fawning dog
(compare Greek sainein to wag the tail, also to flatter; see also wheedle).


adult (adj.)

1530s (but not common until mid-17c.), from Latin adultus grown up, mature, adult, ripe, past
participle of adolescere grow up, mature (see adolescent). As a euphemism for pornographic, it dates
to 1958 and does no honor to the word.


adult (n.)

adult person, 1650s, from adult (adj.).


adulterate (v.)

1530s, back-formation from adulteration, or else from Latin adulteratus, past participle of
adulterare to falsify, corrupt, also to commit adultery. Earlier verb was adulter (late 14c.).
Related: Adulterated; adulterating.


adulteration (n.)

c.1500, from Latin adulterationem (nominative adulteratio), noun of action from past participle stem
of adulterare corrupt, falsify; debauch; commit adultery, from ad- to (see ad-) + alterare to alter
(see alter).


adulterer (n.)

early 15c., earlier avouter (c.1300), avoutrer (late 14c.), agent noun from obsolete verb adulter
commit adultery; adulterate (late 14c.), from Latin adulterare to corrupt (see adulteration).


adulteress (n.)

late 14c., avoutresse, agent noun in fem. form from obsolete verb adulter (see adulterer).


adulterous (adj.)

c.1400, avoutrious addicted to adultery, from obsolete verb adulter (see adulterer) + -ous.


adultery (n.)

voluntary violation of the marriage bed, c.1300, avoutrie, from Old French avouterie (12c.), noun of
condition from avoutre, from Latin adulterare to corrupt (see adulteration). Modern spelling, with
the re-inserted -d-, is from early 15c. (see ad-).    In Middle English, also sex between husband
and wife for recreational purposes; idolatry, perversion, heresy. Classified as single adultery
(with an unmarried person) and double adultery (with a married person). Old English word was
&aelig;wbryce breach of law(ful marriage) (compare German Ehebruch). Adultery Dune in Arizona
corresponds to Navajo sei adilehe adultery sand, where illicit lovers met privately.


adulthood (n.)

1850, from adult + -hood.


adumbrate (v.)

to outline, to sketch, 1580s, from Latin adumbratus sketched, shadowed in outline, past participle
of adumbrare to represent (a thing) in outline (see adumbration). Meaning to overshadow is 1660s.
Related: Adumbrated; adumbrating.


adumbration (n.)

1530s, from Latin adumbrationem (nominative adumbratio) a sketch in shadow, sketch, outline, noun of
action from past participle stem of adumbrare to cast a shadow, overshadow, represent (a thing) in
outline, from ad- to (see ad-) + umbrare to cast in shadow, from PIE *andho- blind, dark (see
umbrage).


advance (v.)

mid-13c., avauncen, transitive, improve (something), further the development of, from Old French
avancier move forward (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *abanteare (source of Italian avanzare, Spanish
avanzar), from Late Latin abante from before, composed of ab- from (see ab-) + ante before, in front
of, against (see ante).    The -d- was inserted 16c. on mistaken notion that initial a- was from
Latin ad-. From c.1300 as to promote; intransitive sense is mid-14c., move forward. Meaning to give
money before it is legally due is first attested 1670s. Related: Advanced; advancing. The adjective
(in advance warning, etc.) is recorded from 1843.


advance (n.)

c.1300, boasting, ostentation, from advance (v.). Early 15c. as advancement in rank, wealth, etc.
Advances amorous overtures is from 1706.


advanced (adj.)

1530s, far ahead in the course of actions or ideas, past participle adjective from advance (v.). Of
studies, from 1790. Military use is from 1795. In late 19c. used especially in reference to views on
women's equality.


advancement (n.)

c.1300, avauncement, a raising to a higher rank, from Old French avancement advancement, profit,
advance payment, from avancer (see advance (v.)). Of money, from 1640s.


advantage (n.)

early 14c., avantage, position of being in advance of another, from Old French avantage advantage,
profit, superiority, from avant before, probably via an unrecorded Late Latin *abantaticum, from
Latin abante (see advance).    The -d- is a 16c. intrusion on the analogy of Latin ad- words.
Meaning a favoring circumstance (the opposite of disadvantage) is from late 15c. Tennis score sense
is from 1640s, first recorded in writings of John Milton, of all people. Phrase to take advantage of
is first attested late 14c.


advantageous (adj.)

1590s, formed in English from advantage, or else from French avantageux (15c.), from avantage (see
advantage). Related: Advantageously; advantageousness.


advent (n.)

important arrival, 1742, an extended sense of  Advent season before Christmas (Old English), from
Latin adventus a coming, approach, arrival, in Church Latin the coming of the Savior, from past
participle stem of advenire arrive, come to, from ad- to (see ad-) + venire to come (see venue). In
English, also sometimes extended to the Pentecost.


Adventist (n.)

one of a religious denomination that believes in or looks for the early second coming of Christ,
1843; see advent + -ist. Church Latin adventus was applied to the coming of the Savior, both the
first or the anticipated second, hence Adventist was a name applied to millenarian sects, especially
and originally the Millerites (U.S.).


adventitious (adj.)

of the nature of an addition from without, c.1600, from Medieval Latin adventitius coming from
abroad, extraneous, a corruption of Latin adventicius foreign, strange, accidental, from advent-
past participle stem of advenire arrive (see advent). Related: Adventitiously; adventitiousness.


adventure (n.)

c.1200, auenture that which happens by chance, fortune, luck, from Old French aventure (11c.)
chance, accident, occurrence, event, happening, from Latin adventura (res) (a thing) about to
happen, from adventurus, future participle of advenire to come to, reach, arrive at, from ad- to
(see ad-) + venire to come (see venue).    Meaning developed through risk/danger (a trial of one's
chances), c.1300, and perilous undertaking (late 14c.) and thence to a novel or exciting incident
(1560s). Earlier it also meant a wonder, a miracle; accounts of marvelous things (13c.). The -d- was
restored 15c.-16c. Venture is a 15c. variant.


adventure (v.)

c.1300, to risk the loss of, from adventure (n.). Meaning to take a chance is early 14c. Related:
Adventured; adventuring.


adventurer (n.)

late 15c., one who plays at games of chance, agent noun from adventure (v.). Meaning one who seeks
adventures is from 1660s.


adventuresome (adj.)

1731, from adventure + -some (1).


adventurous (adj.)

mid-14c., hazardous (also occurring by chance, late 14c.), from Old French aventuros chance,
accidental, fortuitous; of persons, devoted to adventure (Modern French aventureux), from aventure
(see adventure (n.)). Sense evolution is through rash, risk-taking (c.1400), daring, fond of
adventure (mid-15c.).


adverb (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin adverbium adverb, literally that which is added to a verb, from ad- to
(see ad-) + verbum verb, word (see verb). Coined by Flavius Sosipater Charisius as a translation of
Greek epirrhema adverb, from epi- upon, on + rhema verb.


adverbial (adj.)

1610s, pertaining to adverbs; earlier it meant fond of using adverbs (1590s), from Late Latin
adverbialis, from adverbium (see adverb). Related: Adverbially (mid-15c.).


adversarial (adj.)

by 1892, from adversary + -al (1). Probably coined to avoid confusion which might arise with use of
adversary (adj.), which is attested from late 14c. Related: Adversarially.


adversary (n.)

mid-14c., aduersere, from Anglo-French adverser (13c.), Old French adversaire adversary, opponent,
enemy, or directly from Latin adversarius opponent, adversary, rival, noun use of adjective meaning
opposite, hostile, contrary, literally turned toward one, from adversus turned against (see
adverse). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by wi&eth;erbroca.


adverse (adj.)

late 14c., contrary, opposing, from Old French avers (13c., Modern French adverse) antagonistic,
unfriendly, contrary, foreign (as in gent avers infidel race), from Latin adversus turned against,
turned toward, fronting, facing, figuratively hostile, adverse, unfavorable, past participle of
advertere, from ad- to (see ad-) + vertere to turn (see versus). Related: Adversely.


adversity (n.)

c.1200, aduersite misfortune, hardship, difficulty, from Old French aversit&eacute; adversity,
calamity, misfortune; hostility, wickedness, malice (Modern French adversit&eacute;), from Latin
adversitatem (nominative adversitas) opposition, from adversus (see adverse).


advert (n.)

colloquial shortening of advertisement, attested by 1860.


advert (v.)

mid-15c., averten to turn (something) aside, from Middle French avertir (12c.), from Late Latin
advertere (see advertise). The -d- added 16c. on the Latin model. Related: Adverted; adverting.


advertise (v.)

early 15c., to take notice of, from Middle French advertiss-, present participle stem of a(d)vertir
to warn (12c.), from Latin advertere turn toward, from ad- toward (see ad-) + vertere to turn (see
versus).    Sense shifted to to give notice to others, warn (late 15c.) by influence of
advertisement; specific meaning to call attention to goods for sale, rewards, etc. had emerged by
late 18c. Original meaning remains in the verb advert to give attention to. Related: Advertised;
advertising.


advertised (adj.)

late 15c., informed; 1780s, publicly announced, past participle adjective from advertise.


advertisement (n.)

early 15c., written statement calling attention to something, public notice (of anything, but often
of a sale); from Middle French avertissement, from stem of avertir (see advertise). Meaning public
notice (usually paid), the main modern sense, emerged 1580s and was fully developed by 18c.


advertiser (n.)

1560s, agent noun from advertise (v.).


advice (n.)

late 13c., auys opinion, from Old French avis opinion, view, judgment, idea (13c.), from phrase
&ccedil;o m'est &agrave; vis it seems to me, or from Vulgar Latin *mi est visum in my view,
ultimately from Latin visum, neuter past participle of videre to see (see vision).    The
unhistorical -d- was introduced in English 15c., on model of Latin words in ad-. Substitution of -c-
for -s- is 18c., to preserve the breath sound and to distinguish from advise. Meaning opinion given
as to action, counsel is from late 14c.


advisability (n.)

1778 (in a letter from George Washington at Valley Forge), from advisable + -ity.


advisable (adj.)

1640s, from advise (v.) + -able.


advise (v.)

late 13c., avisen to view, consider, from Old French aviser deliberate, reflect, consider (13c.),
from avis opinion (see advice). Meaning to give counsel to is late 14c. Related: Advised; advising.


advisement (n.)

early 14c., avisement examination, inspection, observation, from Old French avisement consideration,
reflection, from aviser (see advise). Meaning advice, counsel is from c.1400, as is that of
consultation, conference.


adviser (n.)

1610s, agent noun from advise (v.). Meaning military person sent to help a government or army in a
foreign country is recorded from 1915. Alternative form, Latinate advisor, is perhaps a back-
formation from advisory.


advisory (adj.)

1778; see advise + -ory. The noun meaning weather warning is from 1931.


advocacy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French avocacie (14c.), from Medieval Latin advocatia, noun of state from Latin
advocatus (see advocate (n.)).


advocate (n.)

mid-14c., one whose profession is to plead cases in a court of justice, a technical term from Roman
law, from Old French avocat barrister, advocate, spokesman, from Latin advocatus one called to aid;
a pleader, advocate, noun use of past participle of advocare to call (as witness or advisor) from
ad- to (see ad-) + vocare to call, related to vocem (see voice (n.)). Also in Middle English as one
who intercedes for another, and protector, champion, patron. Feminine forms advocatess, advocatrice
were in use in 15c.


advocate (v.)

1640s, from advocate (n.). Related: Advocated; advocating; advocation.


adware (n.)

2000 (earlier as the name of a software company), from ad (n.) + -ware, abstracted from software,
etc.


adze (n.)

also adz, cutting tool resembling an axe, but with a curved blade at a right-angle to the handle,
used for dressing timber, 18c. spelling modification of ads, addes, from Middle English adese, adse,
from Old English adesa adze, hatchet, of unknown origin. Adze has been monosyllabic only since the
seventeenth century. The word has no cognates, though it resembles the names of the adz and the
hammer in many languages [Liberman, 2008]. Perhaps somehow related to Old French aisse, Latin ascia
axe (see axe).


ae

see &aelig;. As a word, it can represent Old English &aelig; law, especially law of nature or God's
law; hence legal custom, marriage.


Aegean

sea between Greece and Asia Minor, 1570s, traditionally named for Aegeus, father of Theseus, who
threw himself to his death in it when he thought his son had perished; but perhaps from Greek aiges
waves, a word of unknown origin.


aegis (n.)

protection, 1793, from Latin aegis, from Greek Aigis, the name of the shield of Zeus, said by
Herodotus to be related to aix (genitive aigos) goat, from PIE *aig- goat (cognates: Sanskrit ajah,
Lithuanian ozys he-goat), as the shield was of goatskin. Athene's aigis was a short goat-skin cloak,
covered with scales, set with a gorgon's head, and fringed with snakes. The exact use and purpose of
it is not now clear.    The goatskin would be worn with the two forelegs tied in front of the
wearer's breast, or possibly with the head passed through an opening made at the neck, by the
removal of the animal's head. [F. Warre Cornish, ed., Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities,
London, 1898]


aegrotat (n.)

certificate that a student is ill, Latin, literally he is sick, third person singular of aegrotare
to be sick, from aeger sick.


Aeneas

hero of the &AElig;neid, son of Anchises and Aphrodite, Latin, from Greek Aineias, of unknown
origin, perhaps literally praise-worthy, from ainos tale, story, saying, praise (related to enigma);
or perhaps related to ainos horrible, terrible. The Aeneid (late 15c. in English) is literally of or
pertaining to Aeneas, from French En&eacute;ide, Latin &AElig;neida.


Aeolian (adj.)

c.1600, of the wind, from Latin &AElig;olus god of the winds, from Greek Aiolos, from aiolos quickly
moving. &AElig;olian harp first recorded 1791. The ancient district of Aiolis in Asia Minor was said
to have been named for the wind god, hence &AElig;olian also refers to one branch of the ancient
Greek people.


Aeolus

see Aeolian.


aeon (n.)

1640s; see eon.


aerate (v.)

1794, from Latin aer (genitive aeris; see air (n.1)) + verbal suffix -ate (2). Related: Aerated;
aerating.


aeration (n.)

1570s, from French a&eacute;ration, from a&eacute;rer (v.), from Latin aer (see air (n.1)). In some
cases, from aerate.


aerial (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin aerius airy, aerial, lofty, high (from Greek aerios of the air, pertaining to
air, from aer air; see air (n.1)) + adjectival suffix -al (1).


aerial (n.)

1902 (short for aerial antenna, etc.); see aerial (adj.).


aerie (n.)

eagle's nest, 1580s (attested in Anglo-Latin from early 13c.), from Old French aire nest, Medieval
Latin area nest of a bird of prey (12c.), perhaps from Latin area level ground, garden bed
[Littr&eacute;], though some doubt this [Klein]. Another theory connects it to atrium. Formerly
misspelled eyrie (1660s) on the mistaken assumption that it derived from Middle English ey egg.


aero-

word-forming element meaning air, atmosphere; aircraft; gases, from Greek aero-, comb. form of aer
(genitive aeros) air, lower atmosphere (see air (n.1)).


aerobatics (n.)

aircraft tricks, trick flying, 1914, from aero- + ending from acrobat (also see -ics). Earlier
(1879) it meant the art of constructing and using airships; aerial navigation; aeronautics.


aerobic (adj.)

living only in the presence of oxygen, 1875, (after French a&eacute;robie, coined 1863 by Louis
Pasteur) from Greek aero- air (see aero-) + bios life (see bio-).


aerobics (n.)

method of exercise and a fad in early 1980s, American English, coined 1968 by Kenneth H. Cooper,
U.S. physician, from aerobic (also see -ics) on the notion of activities which require modest oxygen
intake and thus can be maintained.


aerodonetics (n.)

science of gliding, 1907, from Greek aero- air (see aero-) + stem of donein to shake, drive about.
Also see -ics.


aerodrome (n.)

1902, from aero- on analogy of hippodrome. Earlier (1891) a name for a flying machine.


aerodynamic (adj.)

also aero-dynamic, 1847; see aero- + dynamic (adj.). Compare German aerodynamische (1835), French
a&eacute;rodynamique.


aerodynamics (n.)

1837, from aero- air + dynamics.


aerofoil (n.)

1907, from aero- + foil (n.).


aeronautics (n.)

1824, from aeronautic (1784), from French a&eacute;ronautique, from a&eacute;ro- (see aero-) +
nautique of ships, from Latin nauticus, from Greek nautikos (see nautical). Originally of balloons.
Also see -ics. Aeronaut balloonist is from 1784.


aerophyte (n.)

1840, perhaps via French aerophyte, from aero- + -phyte plant.


aeroplane (n.)

1866, from French a&eacute;roplane (1855), from Greek aero- air (see air (n.1)) + stem of French
planer to soar, from Latin planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)). Originally in reference to surfaces
(such as the protective shell casings of beetles' wings); meaning heavier than air flying machine
first attested 1873, probably an independent English coinage (see airplane).


aerosol (n.)

1919, from aero- air + first syllable in solution. A term in physics; modern commercial application
is from 1940s.


aerospace (adj.)

1958, American English, from aero- atmosphere + (outer) space (n.).


Aeschylus

Greek Aiskhylos, Athenian soldier, poet, and playwright, Father of Tragedy (525-456 B.C.E.).


Aesir (n.)

chief gods of Scandinavian religion, from Old Norse plural of ass god, related to Old English os,
Gothic ans god (see Asgard).


Aesop

Greek Aisopos, semi-legendary 6c. B.C.E. fablist.


Aesopic (adj.)

1927, in reference to Soviet literary censorship: obscure or ambiguous writing, often allegorical,
which disguises dissent, from Aesop + -ic. The term (Russian ezopovskii, 1875) arose under the Tsars
and the style was used by Russian communists. Once they took power the word was applied by them as a
charge against their own dissidents.


aesthete (n.)

1878, in vogue 1881, from Greek aisthetes one who perceives, from stem of aisthanesthai to perceive,
to feel (see aesthetic).    I want to be an aesthete,  And with the aesthetes stand;  A sunflower on
my forehead,  And a lily in my hand.  [Puck, Oct. 5, 1881]


aesthetic (n.)

1798, from German &Auml;sthetisch or French esth&eacute;tique, both from Greek aisthetikos
sensitive, perceptive, from aisthanesthai to perceive (by the senses or by the mind), to feel, from
PIE *awis-dh-yo-, from root *au- to perceive (see audience).  Popularized in English by translation
of Immanuel Kant, and used originally in the classically correct sense the science which treats of
the conditions of sensuous perception. Kant had tried to correct the term after Alexander Baumgarten
had taken it in German to mean criticism of taste (1750s), but Baumgarten's sense attained
popularity in English c.1830s (despite scholarly resistance) and removed the word from any
philosophical base. Walter Pater used it (1868) to describe the late 19c. movement that advocated
art for art's sake, which further blurred the sense. As an adjective by 1803. Related:
Aesthetically.


aestheticism (n.)

1855, from aesthetic + -ism.


aesthetics (n.)

1803, from aesthetic (also see -ics).


aet.

aged, abbreviation of Latin aetatis of the age of, genitive singular of aetas age (see age (n.)).


aetio-

word-forming element used in chemistry and indicating a fundamental degradation product of a complex
organic compound [Flood], from Latinized comb. form of Greek aitia a cause, an origin (see
etiology).


afanc (n.)

cattle-devouring aquatic monster in Celtic countries, from Celtic *abankos water-creature, from *ab-
water (cognates: Welsh afon, Breton aven river, Latin amnis stream, river, which is of Italo-Celtic
origin).


afar (adv.)

contraction of Middle English of feor (late 12c.), on ferr (c.1300), from Old English feor far (see
far); the a- representing both of and on compounds (which meant the same thing). Spelled afer in
14c.


afeared (adj.)

Old English af&aelig;red, past participle of now-obsolete afear (Old English af&aelig;ran) to
terrify, from a- (1) + root of fear. Used frequently by Shakespeare, but supplanted in literary
English after 1700 by afraid (q.v.). It still survives in popular and colloquial speech.


affability (n.)

late 15c., from Old French affabilit&eacute; (14c.), noun of quality from affable (see affable).


affable (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French afable (14c.), from Latin affabilis approachable, courteous, kind,
friendly, literally who can be (easily) spoken to, from affari to speak to, from ad- to (see ad-) +
fari to speak (see fame (n.)). Related: Affably.


affair (n.)

c.1300, what one has to do, from Anglo-French afere, Old French afaire (12c., Modern French affaire)
business, event; rank, estate, from the infinitive phrase &agrave; faire to do, from Latin ad to
(see ad-) + facere to do, make (see factitious).    A Northern word originally, brought into general
use and given a French spelling by Caxton (15c.). General sense of vague proceedings (in romance,
war, etc.) first attested 1702. Meaning an affair of the heart; a passionate episode is from French
affaire de coeur (itself attested in English from 1809); to have an affair with someone in this
sense is by 1726, earlier have an affair of love:    'Tis manife&#383;tly contrary to the Law of
Nature, that one Woman &#383;hould cohabit or have an Affair of Love with more than one Man at the
&#383;ame time. [Pufendorf's Law of Nature and Nations, transl. J. Spavan, London, 1716]   <hr />
Thus, in our dialect, a vicious man is a man of pleasure, a sharper is one that plays the whole
game, a lady is said to have an affair, a gentleman to be a gallant, a rogue in business to be one
that knows the world. By this means, we have no such things as sots, debauchees, whores, rogues, or
the like, in the beau monde, who may enjoy their vices without incurring disagreeable appellations.
[George Berkeley, Alciphron or the Minute Philosopher, 1732]


affairs (n.)

ordinary business, late 15c., plural of affair (n.).


affect (n.)

late 14c., mental state, from Latin noun use of affectus furnished, supplied, endowed, figuratively
disposed, constituted, inclined, past participle of afficere to do; treat, use, manage, handle; act
on; have influence on, do something to, a verb of broad meaning, from ad- to (see ad-) + facere
(past participle factus) do (see factitious). Perhaps obsolete except in psychology. Related:
Affects.


affect (v.2)

to make a pretense of, 1660s, earlier to assume the character of (someone) (1590s); originally in
English to aim at, aspire to, desire (early 15c.), from Middle French affecter (15c.), from Latin
affectare to strive after, aim at, frequentative of afficere (past participle affectus) to do
something to, act on (see affect (n.)). Related: Affected; affecting.


affect (v.1)

to make an impression on, 1630s; earlier to attack (c.1600), act upon, infect (early 15c.), from
affect (n.). Related: Affected; affecting.


affectation (n.)

studied display, 1540s, from French affectation (16c.) or directly from Latin affectationem
(nominative affectatio) a striving after, a claiming, noun of action from past participle stem of
affectare to strive for (see affect (v.2)).


affected (adj.)

past participle adjective from affect (v.2); 1530s in the now-obsolete sense favorably disposed
(preserved in disaffected); meaning artificially displayed is recorded from 1580s.


affection (n.)

early 13c., an emotion of the mind, passion, lust as opposed to reason, from Old French afection
(12c.) emotion, inclination, disposition; love, attraction, enthusiasm, from Latin affectionem
(nominative affectio) a relation, disposition; a temporary state; a frame, constitution, noun of
state from past participle stem of afficere to do something to, act on (see affect (n.)). Sense
developed from disposition to good disposition toward (late 14c.). Related: Affections.


affectionate (adj.)

1580s, fond, loving, from affection + -ate (1). Early, now mostly obsolete, senses included inclined
(1530s), prejudiced (1530s), passionate (1540s), earnest (c.1600). Other forms also used in the main
modern sense of the word included affectious (1580s), affectuous (mid-15c.).


affectionately (adv.)

1580s, from affectionate + -ly (2).


affiance (v.)

1520s, to promise, from Old French afiancier to pledge, promise, give one's word, from afiance (n.)
confidence, trust, from afier to trust, from Late Latin affidare, from ad- to (see ad-) + fidare to
trust, from fidus (see affidavit). From mid-16c. especially to promise in marriage. Related:
Affianced; affiancing.


affidavit (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin affidavit, literally he has stated on oath, third person singular
perfective of affidare to trust, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + fidare to trust, from fidus faithful,
from fides faith (see faith). So called from being the first word of sworn statements.


affiliate (adj.)

1858, from affiliate (v.).


affiliate (n.)

1846, from affiliate (v.).


affiliate (v.)

1761, from Latin affiliatus, past participle of affiliare to adopt (see affiliation). Outside legal
use, always figurative. Related: Affiliated; affiliating.


affiliation (n.)

1751, adoption, from French affiliation, from Medieval Latin affiliationem (nominative affiliatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of Latin affiliare to adopt a son, from ad- to (see ad-) +
filius son (see filial). Figurative sense of adoption by a society, of branches first recorded 1799
(affiliate in this sense is from 1761).


affinity (n.)

c.1300, relation by marriage (as opposed to consanguinity), from Old French afinit&eacute; (12c.),
from Latin affinitatem (nominative affinitas) neighborhood, relationship by marriage, noun of state
from affinis adjacent, also kin by marriage, literally bordering on, from ad- to (see ad-) + finis a
border, an end (see finish (v.)). Used figuratively since c.1600 of structural relationships in
chemistry, philology, etc. Meaning natural attraction (as though by family) is from 1610s.


affirm (v.)

c.1300, from Old French afermier (Modern French affirmer) affirm, confirm; strengthen, consolidate,
from Latin affirmare to make steady, strengthen, figuratively confirm, corroborate, from ad- to (see
ad-) + firmare strengthen, make firm, from firmus strong (see firm (adj.)). Spelling refashioned
16c. in French and English on Latin model. Related: Affirmed; affirming.


affirmation (n.)

early 15c., assertion that something is true, from Old French afermacion (14c.), from Latin
affirmationem (nominative affirmatio) an affirmation, solid assurance, noun of action from past
participle stem of affirmare (see affirm). In law, as the Quaker alternative to oath-taking, it is
attested from 1690s.


affirmative (adj.)

answering 'yes,' mid-15c., from use in logic; from Middle French affirmatif (13c.), from Latin
affirmativus, from affirmat-, past participle stem of affirmare (see affirm). As a noun from early
15c. Affirmative action positive or corrective effort by employers to prevent discrimination in
hiring or promotion is attested from 1935 with regard to labor unions; specific racial sense is from
1961; now often used more generally in reference to hiring quotas, etc.


affirmatively (adv.)

mid-15c., from affirmative + -ly (2).


affix (v.)

1530s, from Medieval Latin affixare, frequentative of Latin affigere (past participle affixus)
fasten to, attach, from ad- to (see ad-) + figere fasten (see fix (v.)).    First used by Scottish
writers and perhaps from Middle French affixer, a temporarily re-Latinized spelling of Old French
afichier (Modern French afficher). Related: Affixed; affixing.


affix (n.)

1610s, from affix (v.).


afflatus (n.)

miraculous communication of supernatural knowledge, 1660s, from Latin afflatus a breathing upon,
blast, from past participle of afflare to blow upon, from ad- to (see ad-) + flare to blow (see blow
(v.1)).


afflict (v.)

late 14c., to cast down, from Old French aflicter, from Latin afflictare to damage, harass, torment,
frequentative of affligere (past participle afflictus) to dash down, overthrow, from ad- to (see
ad-) + fligere (past participle flictus) to strike, from PIE root *bhlig- to strike (cognates: Greek
phlibein to press, crush, Czech blizna scar, Welsh blif catapult). Transferred meaning of trouble,
distress, is first recorded 1530s. Related: Afflicted; afflicting.


afflicted (n.)

person or persons in constant suffering of body or mind, 1650s, noun use of past participle
adjective from afflict.


affliction (n.)

c.1300, from Old French afliction (11c.), from Latin afflictionem   (nominative afflictio), noun of
action from past participle stem of affligere (see afflict).


affluence (n.)

mid-14c., a plentiful flowing, an abundance, from Old French affluence, from Latin affluentia a
flowing to, figuratively affluence, abundance, noun of state from affluentem (nominative affluens)
flowing toward, abounding, rich, copious (see affluent). Sense of wealth attested from c.1600, from
notion of a plentiful flow (of the gifts of fortune).


affluent (adj.)

mid-15c., flowing, from Middle French affluent (14c.) or directly from Latin affluentem (nominative
affluens) flowing toward, abounding, rich, copious, present participle of affluere flow toward, from
ad- to (see ad-) + fluere to flow (see fluent).


afford (v.)

Old English gefor&eth;ian to put forth, contribute; further, advance; carry out, accomplish, from
ge- completive prefix (see a- (1)) + for&eth;ian to further, from for&eth; forward, onward (see
forth).    Change of -th- to -d- took place late 16c. (and also transformed burthen and murther into
their modern forms). Prefix shift to af- took place 16c. under mistaken belief that it was a Latin
word in ad-. Notion of accomplish (late Old English) gradually became manage to buy or maintain;
have enough money (to do something) (1833). Older sense is preserved in afford (one) an opportunity.
Related: Afforded; affording.


affordable (adj.)

1866, from afford + -able. Related: Affordability; affordably.


affray (n.)

c.1300, state of alarm produced by a sudden disturbance, from Old French effrei, esfrei disturbance,
fright, from esfreer (v.) to worry, concern, trouble, disturb, from Vulgar Latin *exfridare,
literally to take out of peace, from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) + Frankish *frithu peace, from
Proto-Germanic *frithuz peace, consideration, forbearance (cognates: Old Saxon frithu, Old English
fri&eth;u, Old High German fridu peace, truce), from PIE root *pri- to be friendly, love (see free
(adj.)). Meaning breach of the peace, riotous fight in public is from late 15c. Related verb afrey
(early 14c.) survives almost exclusively in its past participle, afraid (q.v.).


affricative (n.)

1879, perhaps via German, from Latin affricat-, past participle stem of affricare rub against, from
ad- (see ad-) + fricare to rub (see friction).


affright (v.)

1580s, a late construction from a- (1) + fright (v.), probably on model of earlier past participle
adjective affright struck with sudden fear (metathesized from Old English afyrht). Related:
Affrighted; affrighting.


affront (v.)

early 14c., from Old French afronter to face, confront, to slap in the face (13c.), from Late Latin
affrontare to strike against, from Latin ad frontem to the face, from frons (genitive frontis)
forehead (see front (n.)). Related: Affronted; affronting.


affront (n.)

1590s, from affront (v.).


Afghan

name of the people of Afghanistan, technically only correctly applied to the Durani Afghans; Old
Afghan chronicles trace the name to an Afghana, son of Jeremiah, sone of Israelite King Saul, from
whom they claimed descent, but this is a legend. The name is first attested in Arabic in al-'Utbi's
History of Sultan Mahmud written c.1030 C.E. and was in use in India from 13c. Attested from 1833 as
a type of blanket or wrap (in full, Afghan shawl); 1973 as a style of sheepskin coat; 1877 as a type
of carpet; 1895 as a breed of hunting dog.


aficionado (n.)

1845, from Spanish aficionado amateur, specifically devotee of bullfighting, literally fond of, from
afici&oacute;n affection, from Latin affectionem (see affection). Most sources derive this word from
the Spanish verb aficionar but the verb does not appear in Spanish before 1555, and the word
aficionado is recorded in the 1400's [Barnhart]. In English, originally of devotees of bullfighting;
in general use by 1882.


afield (adv.)

1590s, contraction of Middle English in felde, from Old English on felda in the field (especially of
battle), from a- on (see a- (1)) + field (n.). Meaning away from home is attested by early 15c.


afire (adj.)

c.1200, afure, from a- on (see a- (1)) + fire (n.). Figurative use by late 14c.


aflame (adj.)

1550s, from a- on (see a- (1)) + flame (n.). Figurative use by 1856.


afloat (adj.)

Old English aflote, on flot, from a- on (see a- (1)) + float (v.).


aflush (adj.)

blushing, 1880, from a- (1) + flush (v.).


aflutter (adj.)

1830, from a- (1) + flutter (v.).


afoot (adj.)

c.1200, afote, from a- on (see a- (1)) + foot (n.). Figurative sense of in active operation is from
1601 (Julius Caesar).


afore (adv.)

Old English onforan before, at the beginning of, in front of, from phrase on foran, from on (prep.)
+ foran (adv.) in front, dative of for.    In some cases probably it represents Old English
&aelig;tforan at-fore. Once the literary equivalent of before, now it has mostly been replaced by
that word except in nautical use and in combinations such as aforesaid and aforethought.


aforementioned (adj.)

1580s, from afore + p.p. of mention. Afore-written is from mid-15c.


aforesaid (adj.)

late 14c., from afore + said.


aforethought (adj.)

1580s, from afore + past tense of think. Apparently an English loan-translation of Old French
legalese word prepense (see prepense) in malice prepense malice aforethought (Coke).


aforetime (adv.)

early 15c., before the present, in the past, from afore + time (n.).


afoul (adv.)

1809, originally nautical, in collision or entanglement, from a- (1) + foul (adj.). From 1833 in
general sense of in violent or hostile conflict, mainly in phrases such as run afoul of.


afraid (adj.)

early 14c., originally past participle of afray frighten, from Anglo-French afrayer, from Old French
esfreer (see affray (n.)). A rare case of an English adjective that never stands before a noun.
Because it was used in A.V. Bible, it acquired independent standing and thrived while affray faded,
chasing out the once more common afeared. Sense in I'm afraid I regret to say, I suspect (without
implication of fear) is first recorded 1590s.Her blue affrayed eyes wide open shone [Keats, The Eve
of St. Agnes, 1820]


afresh (adv.)

c.1500, perhaps on analogy of anew [see note in OED], from a- (1) + fresh.


Afric (adj.)

1580s, from Latin Africus (see Africa).


Africa

Latin Africa (terra) African land, Libya, the Carthaginian territory, fem. of Africus, from Afer an
African. Originally only in reference to the region around modern Tunisia, it gradually was extended
to the whole continent. Derivation from Arabic afar dust, earth is tempting, but the early date
seems to argue against it. The Middle English word was Affrike.


African (n.)

Old English Africanas (plural), from Latin Africanus (adj.), from Africa (see Africa). Used of white
residents of Africa from 1815. Used of black residents of the U.S. from late 18c., when it
especially meant one actually brought from Africa, and sometimes was contrasted to native-born
Negro. As an adjective, by 1560s; from 1789 as of or pertaining to black Americans.


African-American

there are isolated instances from at least 1863, but the modern use is a re-invention first attested
1969 (in reference to the African-American Teachers Association) which became the preferred term in
some circles for U.S. black (noun or adjective) by the late 1980s. Mencken, 1921, reports
Aframerican is now very commonly used in the Negro press.  Afro-American is attested in 1853, in
freemen's publications in Canada. Africo-American was common in abolitionist and colonization
society writings early 19c. (from 1817 as a noun, 1826 as an adjective).


Afrikaans (n.)

Germanic language of South Africa, the Dutch language as spoken in South Africa, 1892, from Dutch
Afrikaansch Africanish (see Afrikander). Also known as South African Dutch.


Afrikander (n.)

1822, South African native of Dutch descent, from Dutch Afrikaner African, with intrusive -d- on
analogy of Hollander, Englander, etc. (Afrikaner is attested from 1824).


Afro (n.)

full, bushy hairstyle as worn by some blacks, 1938, from Afro-. As a general adjective for black
styles of clothing, music, etc., it is attested from 1966.


Afro-

word-forming element meaning African, from Latin Afr-, stem of Afer, Afri African (see Africa), or
directly from African.


aft (adv.)

Old English &aelig;ftan from behind, behind, farthest back, from superlative of Old English
&aelig;f, af, of away, away from, off (see of). The Germanic superlative suffix *-ta corresponds to
PIE *-to (compare Greek protos first, superlative of pro before). Now purely nautical.


after (prep.)

Old English &aelig;fter after, next, throughout, following in time, later, from Old English of off
(see of) + -ter, a comparative suffix; thus the original meaning was more away, farther off. Compare
Old Norse eptir after, Old High German aftar, Gothic aftra behind. Cognate with Greek apotero
farther off.   After hours after regular working hours is from 1861. Afterwit wisdom that comes too
late is attested from c.1500 but seems to have fallen from use, despite being more needed now than
ever. After you as an expression in yielding precedence is recorded by 1650.


after-dinner (adj.)

1730, from after + dinner.


afterbirth (n.)

also after-birth, 1580s, from after + birth.


afterglow (n.)

also after-glow, 1829, from after + glow (n.).


afterlife (n.)

1590s, a future life (especially after resurrection), from after + life.


aftermarket (adj.)

1940, American English, of automobile parts, from after + market.


aftermath (n.)

1520s, originally a second crop of grass grown after the first had been harvested, from after +
-math, a dialectal word, from Old English m&aelig;&eth; a mowing, cutting of grass (see math (n.2)).
Figurative sense by 1650s. Compare French regain aftermath, from re- + Old French gain, gaain grass
which grows in meadows that have been mown, from a Germanic source similar to Old High German weida
grass, pasture


afternoon (n.)

c.1300, from after + noon. In 15c.-16c., the form was at afternoon; from c.1600 it has been in the
afternoon. Middle English also had aftermete afternoon, part of the day following the noon meal,
mid-14c.


aftershock (n.)

also after-shock, 1894, from after + shock (n.1).


afterthought (n.)

1660s, from after + thought.


afterward (adv.)

Old English &aelig;ftanweard, from &aelig;ftan after (see aft) + -weard suffix indicating direction
(see -ward); nautical use as aftward, then expanded by influence of after; variant afterwards shows
adverbial genitive.


afterwards (adv.)

c.1300, from afterward (q.v.) + adverbial genitive -s; originally a Northern form.


afterword (n.)

1890, a Saxonist subsitute for  epilogue; from after + word (n.).


ag (n.)

abbreviation of agriculture, attested from 1918, American English.


aga (n.)

title of rank, especially in Turkey, c.1600, from Turkish agha chief, master, lord, related to East
Turk. agha elder brother.


again (adv.)

late Old English agan, from earlier ongean toward, opposite, against, in exchange for, from on on
(see on) + -gegn against, toward, compounded for a sense of lined up facing, opposite, and in the
opposite direction, returning. For -gegn, compare Old Norse gegn straight, direct; Danish igen
against; Old Frisian jen, Old High German gegin, German gegen against, toward, entgegen against, in
opposition to.    In Old English, eft was the main word for again (see eftsoons), but this often was
strengthened by ongean, which became the principal word by 13c. Norse influence is responsible for
the hard -g-. Differentiated from against 16c. in southern writers, again becoming an adverb only,
and against taking over as preposition and conjunction, but again clung to all senses in northern
and Scottish dialect (where against was not adopted).


against (adv.)

early 12c., agenes in opposition to, a southern variant of agen again (see again), with adverbial
genitive. The parasitic -t turned up mid-14c. and was standard by early 16c., perhaps from influence
of superlatives.


Agamemnon

king of Mycenae, leader of the Greeks in the Trojan War, his name perhaps represents Greek Aga-
medmon, literally ruling mightily, from agan very much + medon ruler (see meditation).


agape (n.)

c.1600, from Greek agape brotherly love, charity, from agapan greet with affection, love, of unknown
origin. Agape was used by early Christians for their love feast held in connection with the Lord's
Supper. In modern use, often in simpler sense of Christian love (1856, frequently opposed to eros as
carnal or sensual love).


agape (adv.)

1660s, from a- (1) + gape (v.).


agate (n.)

1560s, from Middle French agathe (16c.), from Latin achates, from Greek akhates, the name of a river
in Sicily where the stones were found (Pliny). But the river could as easily be named for the stone.
The earlier English form of the word, achate (early 13c.), was directly from Latin. Figurative sense
of a diminutive person (c.1600) is from the now-obsolete meaning small figures cut in agates for
seals, preserved in typographer's agate (1838), the U.S. name of the 5.5-point font called in Great
Britain ruby. Meaning toy marble made of glass resembling agate is from 1843 (colloquially called an
aggie).


Agatha

fem. proper name, from Latin, from Greek Agathe, fem. of agathos good, of unknown origin. Never a
popular name in U.S., and all but unused there since 1940.


agathism (n.)

the doctrine that all things tend toward the good, 1830, from agathist + -ism.


agathist (n.)

1816, from Greek agathos good (see Agatha) + -ist.    Doctor Kearney, who formerly, with so much
reputation, delivered lectures in this place on the history of Rome, observed to me once, that he
was not an optimist, but an agathist; that he believed that every thing tended to good, but did not
think himself competent to determine what was absolutely the best. The distinction is important, and
seems to be fatal to the system of Optimism. [George Miller, Lectures on the Philosophy of Modern
History, Dublin, 1816]


agave (n.)

American aloe plant, 1797, from Latin Agave, from Greek Agaue, proper name in mythology (mother of
Pentheus), from agauos noble, perhaps from agasthai wonder at, from gaiein to rejoice, exult, with
intensive prefix a-. The name seems to have been taken generically by botanists, the plant perhaps
so called for its stately flower stem.


age (n.)

late 13c., long but indefinite period in human history, from Old French aage (11c., Modern French
&acirc;ge) age; life, lifetime, lifespan; maturity, earlier edage, from Vulgar Latin *aetaticum
(source of Spanish edad, Italian eta, Portuguese idade age), from Latin aetatem (nominative aetas),
period of life, age, lifetime, years, from aevum lifetime, eternity, age, from PIE root *aiw- vital
force, life, long life, eternity (see eon). Meaning time something has lived, particular length or
stage of life is from early 14c. Used especially for old age since early 14c. Expelled native eld.


age (v.)

to grow old, late 14c., from age (n.). Meaning to make old is early 15c. Related: Aged; aging.


age-group (n.)

1904, originally a term in the science of demographics, from age (n.) + group (n.).


age-old (adj.)

1896, from age (n.) + old.


aged (adj.)

having lived long, mid-15c., past participle adjective from age (v.). Meaning having been allowed to
get old (of cheese, etc.) is by 1873. Meaning of the age of is from 1630s. Aged Parent is from Great
Expectations (1860-61).


ageism (n.)

discrimination against people based on age, coined 1969 by U.S. gerontologist Dr. Robert N. Butler,
from age + -ism, on pattern of racism, sexism. Related: Ageist.


ageless (adj.)

1650s, from age + -less. Related: Agelessly; agelessness.


agency (n.)

1650s, active operation, from Medieval Latin agentia, noun of state from Latin agentem (nominative
agens) effective, powerful, present participle of agere (see act (n.)). Meaning establishment where
business is done for another first recorded 1861.


agenda (n.)

1650s, from Latin agenda, literally things to be done, neuter plural of agendus, gerundive of agere
to do (see act (n.)). Originally theological (opposed to matters of belief), sense of items of
business to be done at a meeting first attested 1882. If a singular is required (=one item of the
agenda) it is now agendum, the former singular agend being obsolete [Fowler].


agent (n.)

late 15c., one who acts, from Latin agentem (nominative agens) effective, powerful, present
participle of agere to set in motion, drive, lead, conduct (see act (n.)). Meaning any natural force
or substance which produces a phenomenon is from 1550s. Meaning deputy, representative is from
1590s. Sense of spy, secret agent is attested by 1916.


agent (adj.)

1610s, from agent (n.).


Agent Orange (n.)

powerful defoliant used by U.S. military in the Vietnam War, attested from 1971, said to have been
used from 1961; so called from the color strip on the side of the container, which distinguished it
from Agent Blue, Agent White, etc., other herbicides used by the U.S. military. Banned from April
1970.


aggie (n.1)

college student studying agriculture, by 1880, American English college slang, from agriculture +
-ie.


aggie (n.2)

type of toy marble, by 1905, American English, colloquial shortening of agate (q.v.).    Excited
groups gather about rude circles scratched in the mud, and there is talk of pureys, and reals, and
aggies, and commies, and fen dubs! There is a rich click about the bulging pockets of the boys, and
every so often in school time something drops on the floor and rolls noisily across the room. When
Miss Daniels asks: Who did that? the boys all look so astonished. Who did what pray tell? [McClure's
Magazine, May 1905]


agglomerate (v.)

1680s, from Latin agglomeratus, past participle of agglomerare to wind or add onto a ball, from ad-
to (see ad-) + glomerare wind up in a ball, from glomus (genitive glomeris) ball of yarn, from PIE
root *glem-. Related: Agglomerated; agglomerating.


agglomeration (n.)

1774, action of collecting in a mass, from Latin agglomerationem (nominative agglomeratio), noun of
action from past participle stem of agglomerare (see agglomerate). In reference to a mass so formed,
it is recorded from 1833.


agglutinate (v.)

1580s (from 1540s as a past participle adjective), from Latin agglutinatus, past participle of
agglutinare (see agglutination). Related: Agglutinated; agglutinating.


agglutination (n.)

1540s, from Latin agglutinationem (nominative agglutinatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of agglutinare fasten with glue, from ad- to (see ad-) + glutinare to glue, from gluten glue,
from PIE *glei- (see glue (n.)). Philological sense first recorded 1650s, in agglutinative.


agglutinative (adj.)

1630s, in a medical sense, from Latin agglutinat-, past participle stem of agglutinare (see
agglutination). Philological sense is from 1650s.


aggrandisement (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of aggrandizement. See -ize.


aggrandize (v.)

1630s, to make larger, increase, from French agrandiss-, present participle stem of agrandir to
augment (16c.), ultimately from Latin ad to (see ad-) + grandire to make great, from grandis (see
grand (adj.)). The double -g- spelling in English is by analogy with Latin words in ad-. Related:
Aggrandized; aggrandizing.


aggrandizement (n.)

1650s, from French agrandissement, noun of action from agrandir (see aggrandize).


aggravate (v.)

1520s, make heavy, burden down, from past participle adjective aggravate burdened; threatened (late
15c.), from Latin aggravatus, past participle of aggravare to render more troublesome, literally to
make heavy (see aggravation). Earlier in this sense was aggrege (late 14c.). Meaning to make a bad
thing worse is from 1590s; that of exasperate, annoy is from 1610s.    To aggravate has properly
only one meaning -- to make (an evil) worse or more serious. [Fowler]    Related: Aggravated;
aggravating. Phrase aggravating circumstances is recorded from 1790.


aggravated (adj.)

1540s, increased, magnified, past participle adjective from aggravate. Meaning irritated is from
1610s; that of made worse is from 1630s. The earlier adjective was simply aggravate (late 15c.).


aggravation (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French aggravation, from Late Latin aggravationem (nominative aggravatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of Latin aggravare make heavier, figuratively to embarrass
further, increase in oppressiveness, from ad to (see ad-) + gravare weigh down, from gravis heavy
(see grave (adj.)). Oldest sense is increasing in gravity or seriousness; that of irritation is from
1610s.


aggregate (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin aggregatus associated, literally united in a flock, past participle of aggregare
add to (a flock), lead to a flock, bring together (in a flock), from ad- to (see ad-) + gregare herd
(see gregarious).


aggregate (v.)

c.1400, from Latin aggregatum, neuter past participle of aggregare (see aggregate (adj.)). Related:
Aggregated; aggregating.


aggregate (n.)

number of persons, things, etc., regarded as a unit, early 15c., from noun use of Latin adjective
aggregatum, neuter of aggregatus (see aggregate (adj.)).


aggregation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French agr&eacute;gation or directly from Medieval Latin aggregationem
(nominative aggregatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin aggregare (see aggregate
(adj.)).


aggress (v.)

attack, 1714, back-formation from aggression, but used earlier with a sense of approach (1570s) and
in this sense from French aggresser, from Late Latin aggressare, frequentative of Latin aggredi to
approach, attack. Related: Aggressed; aggressing.


aggression (n.)

1610s, unprovoked attack, from French aggression (16c.), from Latin aggressionem (nominative
aggressio) a going to, an attack, noun of action from past participle stem of aggredi to approach;
attack, from ad- to (see ad-) + gradi (past participle gressus) to step, from gradus a step (see
grade (n.)). Psychological sense of hostile or destructive behavior first recorded 1912 in A.A.
Brill's translation of Freud.


aggressive (adj.)

1791, from Latin aggress-, past participle stem of aggredi (see aggression) + -ive. In psychological
use from 1913, first in translations of Freud. Related: Aggressively; aggressiveness.


aggressor (n.)

1670s, from Latin aggressor, agent noun from aggredi (see aggression).


aggrieve (v.)

early 14c., from Old French agrever make worse; become worse, from Latin aggravare make heavier (see
aggravation). Related: Aggrieved; aggrieving.


aggrieved (adj.)

oppressed in spirit, mid-14c., past participle adjective from aggrieve. The legal sense of injured
or wronged in one's rights is from 1580s.


aghast (adj.)

c.1300, agast, terrified, past participle of Middle English agasten to frighten (c.1200), from a-
intensive prefix + Old English g&aelig;stan to terrify, from g&aelig;st spirit, ghost (see ghost).
The -gh- spelling appeared early 15c. in Scottish and is possibly a Flemish influence, or after
ghost, etc. It became general after 1700.


agile (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French agile (14c.) and directly from Latin agilis nimble, quick, from agere to
move, drive (see act (n.)). Related: Agilely.


agility (n.)

early 15c., from Old French agilit&eacute; (14c.), from Latin agilitatem (nominative agilitas)
mobility, nimbleness, quickness, from agilis, from agere to move (see act (n.)).


agism (n.)

alternative spelling of ageism.


agitate (v.)

1580s, to disturb, from Latin agitatus, past participle of agitare to put in constant motion, drive
onward, impel, frequentative of agere to move, drive (see agitation). Literal sense of move to and
fro, shake is from 1590s. Related: Agitated; agitating.


agitated (adj.)

1610s, set in motion, past participle adjective from agitate (v.). Meaning disturbed is from 1650s;
that of disturbed in mind is from 1756. Meaning kept constantly in public view is from 1640s.


agitation (n.)

1560s, mental tossing to and fro, from French agitation, from Latin agitationem (nominative
agitatio) motion, agitation, noun of action from past participle stem of agitare move to and fro,
frequentative of agere in its sense of to drive (see act (n.)).


agitator (n.)

1640s, agent noun from agitate (v.); originally elected representative of the common soldiers in
Cromwell's army, who brought grievances (chiefly over lack of pay) to their officers and Parliament.
Political sense is first recorded 1734, and negative overtones began with its association with Irish
patriots such as Daniel O'Connell (1775-1847). Historically, in American English, often with outside
and referring to people who stir up a supposedly contented class or race. Latin agitator meant a
driver, a charioteer.


agitprop (n.)

also agit-prop, 1938, from Russian agitatsiya agitation (from French agitation; see agitation) +
propaganda, from German (see propaganda).


Aglaia

one of the Graces, Greek, literally splendor, beauty, brightness, from aglaos splendid, beautiful,
bright, of unknown origin.


agleam (adj.)

1854, from a- (1) + gleam.


aglow (adj.)

1817 (in Coleridge), from a- (1) + glow. Figurative sense of flushed with pleasurable excitement is
from 1830.


Agnes

fem. proper name, mid-12c., from Old French Agnes, from Greek Hagne pure, chaste, from fem. of
hagnos holy, from PIE *yag- to worship, reverence (see hagiology). St. Agnes, martyred 303 C.E., is
patron saint of young girls, hence the folk connection of St. Agnes' Eve (Jan. 20-21) with love
divinations. In Middle English, frequently phonetically as Annis, Annys. In U.S., among the top 50
names for girls born between 1887 and 1919.


agnostic (n.)

1870, one who professes that the existence of a First Cause and the essential nature of things are
not and cannot be known [Klein]; coined by T.H. Huxley (1825-1895), supposedly in September 1869,
from Greek agnostos unknown, unknowable, from a- not + gnostos (to be) known (see gnostic).
Sometimes said to be a reference to Paul's mention of the altar to the Unknown God, but according to
Huxley it was coined with reference to the early Church movement known as Gnosticism (see Gnostic).I
... invented what I conceived to be the appropriate title of 'agnostic,' ... antithetic to the
'Gnostic' of Church history who professed to know so much about the very things of which I was
ignorant. [T.H. Huxley, Science and Christian Tradition, 1889]  The adjective is first recorded
1870.


agnosticism (n.)

1870, from agnostic + -ism.    The agnostic does not simply say, I do not know. He goes another
step, and he says, with great emphasis, that you do not know. [Robert G. Ingersoll, Reply to Dr.
Lyman Abbott, 1890]


Agnus Dei

Latin, literally lamb of God.


ago (adj.)

early 14c., shortened form of Old English agan, agone departed, passed away, past participle of an
obsolete verb ago to go forth, formed from a- away (perhaps here used as an intensive prefix) + gan
go (see go (v.)). Agone remains a dialectal variant.


agog (adj., adv.)

in a state of desire; in a state of imagination; heated with the notion of some enjoyment; longing
[Johnson], c.1400, perhaps from Old French en gogues in jest, good humor, joyfulness, from gogue
fun, of unknown origin.


agonist (n.)

1876, in writings on Greek drama, from Greek agonistes, literally combatant in the games (see
agony).


agonize (v.)

1580s, to torture, from Middle French agoniser or directly from Medieval Latin agonizare, from Greek
agonizesthai to contend in the struggle (see agony). Intransitive sense of to suffer physical pain
is recorded from 1660s. That of to worry intensely is from 1853. Related: Agonized; agonizing.


agony (n.)

late 14c., mental suffering (especially that of Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane), from Old French
agonie, agoine anguish, terror, death agony (14c.), and directly from Late Latin agonia, from Greek
agonia a (mental) struggle for victory, originally a struggle for victory in the games, from agon
assembly for a contest, from agein to lead (see act (n.)). Sense of extreme bodily suffering first
recorded c.1600.


agora (n.)

assembly place, 1590s, from Greek agora open space (typically a marketplace), from ageirein to
assemble, from PIE root *ger- to gather (see gregarious).


agoraphobia (n.)

fear of open spaces, 1873, from German Agorophobie, coined 1871 by Berlin psychiatrist Carl Westphal
(1833-1890) from Greek agora open space (see agora) + -phobia fear. Related: Agoraphobe;
agoraphobic.


agrarian (adj.)

1610s, relating to the land, from Middle French loy agrarienne agrarian law, from Latin Lex agraria,
the Roman law for the division of conquered lands, from agrarius of the land, from ager (genitive
agri) a field, from PIE *agro- (cognates: Greek agros field, Gothic akrs, Old English &aelig;cer
field; see acre). Meaning having to do with cultivated land first recorded 1792.


agree (v.)

late 14c., to be to one's liking; also to give consent, from Old French agreer to receive with
favor, take pleasure in (12c.), from phrase a gr&eacute; favorably, of good will, literally to
(one's) liking, from Latin ad to (see ad-) + gratum pleasing, neuter of gratus (see grace (n.)); the
original sense survives best in agreeable. Meaning to be in harmony in opinions is from late 15c.
Related: Agreed; agreeing.


agreeable (adj.)

late 14c., to one's liking, from Old French agreable (12c., Modern French agr&eacute;able) pleasing,
in agreement, consenting, thankful, from agreer to please (see agree). Related: Agreeably. To do the
agreeable (1825) was to act in a courteous manner.


agreeance (n.)

1530s, from Middle French agr&eacute;ance, noun of action from agr&eacute;er (see agree).


agreement (n.)

late 14c., mutual conformity of things; c.1400, mutual understanding (among persons), also (of
things) mutual conformity, from Old French agrement, noun of action from agreer to please (see
agree).


agribusiness (n.)

1955, compound formed from agriculture + business.


agricultural (adj.)

1776, from agriculture + -al (1). Related: Agriculturally; agriculturalist.


agriculture (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin agricultura cultivation of the land, compound of agri cultura cultivation
of land, from agri, genitive of ager a field (see acre) + cultura cultivation (see culture (n.)). In
Old English, the idea was expressed by eor&eth;til&thorn;.


agriology (n.)

study of prehistoric human customs, 1878, from agrio-, from Greek agrios wild, literally living in
the fields, from agros field (see acre) + -logy. Related: Agriologist (n.), 1875.


agro-

word-forming element meaning pertaining to agriculture or cultivation, from Greek agro-, comb. form
of agros field (see acre).


agronomy (n.)

science of land management for crop production, 1814, from French agronomie, from Greek agronomos
overseer of land, from agros field (see acre) + -nomos law or custom, administering, related to
nemein manage (see numismatic). Related: Agronomist; agronomic.


aground (adv.)

late 13c., on the ground, from a- on (see a- (1)) + ground (n.). Of ships and boats, stranded, from
c.1500.


ague (n.)

malarial fever, c.1300, from Old French ague an acute fever, from Medieval Latin (febris) acuta
sharp (fever), fem. of acutus sharp (see acute).


ah

mid-15c., an expression of surprise, delight, disgust or pain in nearly all Indo-European languages,
but not found in Old English (where the equivalent expression was la!), so perhaps from Old French a
ah!, oh! woe!


aha

exclamation of surprise or delighted discovery, late 14c., from ah + ha.They crieden out! ... A ha
the fox! and after him thay ran. [Chaucer]


ahead (adv.)

1620s, at the head, in front, from a- on (see a- (1)) + head (n.). Originally nautical. To be ahead
of (one's) time attested by 1837.


ahem

attention-getting interjection, 1763, lengthened from hem, imitative of clearing the throat.


ahimsa (n.)

1875, from Sanskrit ahimsa, from a without + himsa injury.


ahistoric (adj.)

not historical, lacking in historical background or justification, 1911, from a- (2) not + historic.


ahistorical (adj.)

without reference to or regard for history, 1950, from a- (2) not + historical.


ahoy

1751, from a + hoy, a nautical call used in hauling. The original form of the greeting seems to have
been ho, the ship ahoy!


Ahura Mazda

from Avestan ahura- spirit, lord, from Indo-Iranian *asuras, from suffixed form of PIE root *ansu-
spirit (see Asgard) + Avestan mazda- wise, from PIE *mens-dhe- to set the mind, from root *men- to
think (see mind (n.)).


aid (n.)

early 15c., wartime tax, also help, support, assistance, from Old French aide, earlier aiudha aid,
help, assistance (9c.), from Late Latin adjuta, from fem. past participle of Latin adiuvare (past
participle adiutus) to give help to, from ad- to (see ad-) + iuvare to help (see adjutant). Meaning
thing by which assistance is given is recorded from c.1600. Meaning material help given by one
country to another is from 1940.


aid (v.)

c.1400, to assist, help, from Old French aidier help, assistance, from Latin adiutare, frequentative
of adiuvare (past participle adiutus) give help to (see adjutant). Related: Aided; aiding.


aide (n.)

1777, short for aide-de-camp (1660s), French, literally camp assistant (see aid (n.)).


AIDS (n.)

1982, acronym formed from acquired immune deficiency syndrome. AIDS cocktail attested by 1997, the
thing itself said to have been in use from 1995.


aiglet (n.)

metal tag of a lace, meant to make it easier to thread through the eyelet-holes, but later merely
ornamental, mid-15c., from Middle French aiguillette, diminutive of aiguille needle, from Late Latin
acucula, itself a diminutive of Latin acus needle (see acuity). Compare Italian agucchia, Portuguese
agulha, Spanish aguja needle.


aikido (n.)

Japanese art of self-defense, 1936, literally way of adapting the spirit, from Japanese ai together
+ ki spirit + do way, art, from Chinese tao way.


ail (v.)

c.1300, from Old English eglan to trouble, plague, afflict, from Proto-Germanic *azljaz (cognates:
Old English egle hideous, loathsome, troublesome, painful; Gothic agls shameful, disgraceful,
agli&thorn;a distress, affliction, hardship, us-agljan to oppress, afflict), from PIE *agh-lo-,
suffixed form of root *agh- to be depressed, be afraid. Related: Ailed; ailing; ails.    It is
remarkable, that this word is never used but with some indefinite term, or the word no thing; as
What ails him? ... Thus we never say, a fever ails him. [Johnson]


ailanthus (n.)

tree of heaven, 1807, Modern Latin, from Amboyna (Malay) ailanto tree of the gods; spelling altered
by influence of Greek anthos flower (see anther).


aileron (n.)

1909, from French aileron, altered (by influence of aile wing), from French aleron little wing,
diminutive of Old French ele wing (12c.), from Latin ala wing (see aisle).


ailment (n.)

1706, from ail + -ment.


ailurophile (n.)

cat lover, 1931, from Greek ailouros cat, of unknown origin, + -phile.


ailurophobia (n.)

morbid fear of cats, 1905, from -phobia fear + ailouros cat, of unknown origin. Folk etymology
connects it with aiolos quick-moving + oura tail. Related: Ailurophobe (1914).


aim (v.)

early 14c., to estimate, calculate, also to intend, from Old French aesmer value, rate; count,
estimate, from Latin aestimare appraise (see estimation); current meaning apparently developed from
esteem, to calculate, to calculate with a view to action (c.1400), then to direct a missile, a blow,
etc. (1570s). Related: Aimed; aiming.


aim (n.)

early 14c., target; late 14c., guess; from aim (v.). Meaning action of aiming is from early 15c. (to
take aim, originally make aim); that of thing intended, purpose is from 1620s.


aimless (adj.)

1620s, from aim (n.) + -less. Related: Aimlessly; aimlessness.


ain&#039;t

1706, originally a contraction of am not, and in proper use with that sense until it began to be
used as a generic contraction for are not, is not, etc., in early 19c. Cockney dialect of London;
popularized by representations of this in Dickens, etc., which led to the word being banished from
correct English.


Ainu

people native to northern Japan and far eastern Russia, 1819, from the Ainu self-designation,
literally man, human. Once considered to be Caucasian, based on their appearance; but DNA testing
has disproven this. Their language is an isolate with no known relatives.


air (v.)

to expose to open air, 1520s, from air (n.1). Figurative sense of to expose, make public is from
1610s of objects, 1862 of opinions, grievances, etc. Meaning to broadcast (originally on radio) is
from 1933. Related: Aired; airing.


air (n.1)

c.1300, invisible gases that make up the atmosphere, from Old French air atmosphere, breeze, weather
(12c.), from Latin aerem (nominative aer) air, lower atmosphere, sky, from Greek aer (genitive
aeros) air (related to aenai to blow, breathe), of unknown origin, possibly from a base *awer- and
thus related to aeirein to raise and arteria windpipe, artery (see aorta) on notion of lifting, that
which rises. In Homer mostly thick air, mist; later air as one of the four elements.    Words for
air in Indo-European languages tend to be associated with wind, brightness, sky. In English, air
replaced native lyft, luft (see loft (n.)). To be in the air in general awareness is from 1875; up
in the air uncertain, doubtful is from 1752. To build castles in the air is from 1590s (in 17c.
English had airmonger one preoccupied with visionary projects). Broadcasting sense (as in on the
air) first recorded 1927. To give (someone) the air dismiss is from 1900. Air pollution is attested
by 1870.


air (n.2)

1590s, manner, appearance (as in an air of mystery); 1650s, assumed manner, affected appearance
(especially in phrase put on airs, 1781), from French air look, appearance, mien, bearing, tone (Old
French aire reality, essence, nature, descent, extraction, 12c.; compare debonair), from Latin ager
place, field (see acre) on notion of place of origin.    But some French sources connect this Old
French word with the source of air (n.1), and it also is possible these senses in English developed
from or were influenced by air (n.1); compare sense development of atmosphere and Latin spiritus
breath, breeze, also high spirit, pride, and the extended senses of anima.


air (n.3)

melody, tune, 1580s, from Italian aria (see aria).


air conditioner (n.)

from air (n.1) + agent noun from condition; along with air-conditioning, first attested 1909,
originally an industrial process; main modern use in residences and office buildings is from 1930s.


air force (n.)

1917, from air (n.1) + force (n.); first attested with creation of the Royal Air Force. There was no
United States Air Force until after World War II. The Air Corps was an arm of the U.S. Army. In
1942, the War Department reorganized it and renamed it Army Air Forces. The National Security Act of
1947 created the Department of the Air Force, headed by a Secretary of the Air Force, and the
U.S.A.F.


air freshener (n.)

1949, from air (n.1) + agent noun from freshen.


air mail (n.)

also air-mail, 1913, from air (n.1) + mail (n.1).


air raid (n.)

1914, from air (n.1) + raid (n.); originally in reference to British attacks Sept. 22, 1914, on
Zeppelin bases at Cologne and D&uuml;sseldorf in World War I. The German word is Fliegerangriff
aviator-attack, and if Old English had survived into the 20th century our word instead might be
fleogendeongrype.    One didn't dare to inhale for fear of breathing it in. It was the sound of
eighteen hundred airplanes approaching Hamburg from the south at an unimaginable height. We had
already experienced two hundred or even more air raids, among them some very heavy ones, but this
was something completely new. And yet there was an immediate recognition: this was what everyone had
been waiting for, what had hung for months like a shadow over everything we did, making us weary. It
was the end. [Hans Erich Nossack, Der Untergang, 1942]


airborne (adj.)

1640s, carried through the air, from air (n.1) + borne. Of military units, from 1937.


aircraft (n.)

1851, originally in reference to airships and balloons, from air (n.1) + craft (n.); a term from
boating, as were many early aviation words. Of airplanes from 1907 and since 1930s exclusively of
them. Aircraft carrier is attested from 1919 (H.M.S. Hermes, launched September 1919, was the first
ship to be built from the hull up as an aircraft carrier).


Airedale

type of terrier, 1880, named for Airedale, a district in West Riding, Yorkshire.    Name registered
by Kennel Club (1886), for earlier Bingley (where first bred), or broken-haired terrier. [Weekley]


airfoil (n.)

1922, U.S. form of aerofoil.


airhead (n.)

empty-headed person, 1972, from air (n.1) + head (n.). Earlier as a term in mining (mid-19c.) and as
a military term based on beachhead (1950).


airily (adv.)

1766, from airy with ostentatious air (see air (n.2)) + -ly (2).


airing (n.)

action of exposing to air, c.1600, from present participle of air (v.). Meaning display, public
exposure is from 1870.


airlift (n.)

also air-lift, 1893 as a type of pumping device; 1945 in the sense transportation of supplies by
air, from air (n.1) + lift (n.). As a verb by 1949; popularized in reference to the response to the
West Berlin blockade. Related: Air-lifted; air-lifting.


airline (n.)

also air-line, 1813, beeline, straight line between two points on the earth's surface (as through
the air, rather than over terrain; from 1853 and in later 19c. especially in reference to railways
that ran directly between big cities in the U.S. instead of meandering from town to town in search
of stock subscriptions as early railways typically did), from air (n.1) + line (n.). Meaning public
aircraft transportation company is from 1914.


airplane (n.)

1907, from air (n.1) + plane (n.1); though the original references are British, the word caught on
in American English, where it largely superseded earlier aeroplane (1873 in this sense and still
common in British English). Aircraft airplane also is from 1907. Lord Byron, speculatively, used
air-vessel (1822).


airplay (n.)

1950 in radio sense, from air (n.1) + play.


airport (n.)

1919, from air (n.1) + port (n.1). First reference is to Bader Field, outside Atlantic City, New
Jersey, U.S., which opened in 1910.


airship (n.)

also air-ship, 1888, translating German Luftschiff motor-driver dirigible; see air (n.1) + ship
(n.).


airtight (adj.)

also air-tight, impervious to air, 1760, from air (n.1) + tight. Figurative sense of
incontrovertible (of arguments, alabis, etc.) is from 1929.


airy (adj.)

late 14c., of the air, made of air, from air (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning breezy is attested from 1590s;
that of lively is from 1640s. Sense of vain, unsubstantial is from 1580s. Disparaging airy-fairy is
attested from 1920 (earlier in a sense of delicate or light as a fairy, which is how Tennyson used
it in 1830).


aisle (n.)

late 14c., ele, lateral division of a church (usually separated by a row of pillars), from Old
French ele wing (of a bird or an army), side of a ship (12c., Modern French aile), from Latin ala,
related to axilla wing, upper arm, armpit; wing of an army, from PIE *aks- axis (see axis), via a
suffixed form *aks-la-. The root meaning in turning connects it with axle and axis.    Confused 15c.
with unrelated ile island (perhaps from notion of a detached part of a church), and so it took an
-s- when isle did, c.1700; by 1750 it had acquired an a-, on the model of French cognate aile. The
word also was confused with alley, which gave it the sense of passage between rows of pews or seats
(1731), which was thence extended to railway cars, theaters, etc.


ajar

1718, perhaps from Scottish dialectal a char slightly open, earlier on char (early 16c.), from
Middle English char, from Old English cier a turn.


Ajax

name of two Greek heroes in the Trojan War (Great Ajax, son of Telamon, and Little Ajax, son of
Oileus), Latin, from Greek Aias, perhaps originally the name of an earth-god, from aia earth. The
Elizabethans punned on the name as a jakes a privy.


akimbo

c.1400, in kenebowe, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English phrase in keen bow at a sharp
angle, or from a Scandinavian word akin to Icelandic kengboginn bow-bent, but this seems not to have
been used in this exact sense. Many languages use a teapot metaphor for this, such as French faire
le pot a deux anses to play the pot with two handles.


akin (adj.)

1550s, from phrase of kin; see kin.


Akkadian

1855, from Akkad (Sumerian Agde, Biblical Acca), name of city founded by Sargon I in northern
Babylonia, of unknown origin; applied by modern scholars to the east Semitic language spoken there
(c.2300-2100 B.C.E.) and preserved in cuneiform inscriptions.


al dente

1935, Italian, literally to the tooth, from Latin dent (see tooth).


al fresco

1753, Italian, literally in the fresh (air). Italian al represents a contraction of words from Latin
ad to (see ad-) + ille that. Alfresco also meant painted on plaster that was still fresh or moist
(1764; see fresco).


al Qaeda

alternative Latin alphabet transliteration of Arabic al Qaida (q.v.).


al Qaida

also Al-Qaeda; name of a loosely structured jihadist movement founded c.1989 by Osama bin Laden;
from Arabic, literally the base. A common Arabic term among Muslim radicals from the wider Islamic
world who came to Afghanistan in 1980s and fought alongside local rebels against the Soviets, and
who regarded themselves and their struggle not merely in Afghan terms but as the base or foundation
of a wider jihad and revival in Islam. Used by Bin Laden's mentor, Abdallah Azzam (1941-1989), who
referred to the vanguard which constitutes the strong foundation [al-qaida al-sulbah] for the
expected society. In U.S., the term first turns up in a CIA report in 1996.    Every Muslim, from
the moment they realise the distinction in their hearts, hates Americans, hates Jews, and hates
Christians. This is a part of our belief and our religion. For as long as I can remember, I have
felt tormented and at war, and have felt hatred and animosity for Americans. [Osama bin Laden,
interview aired on Al-Jazeera, December 1998]


Alabama

created and named as a U.S. territory 1817 by a division of Mississippi Territory; ultimately named
for one of the native peoples who lived there, who speak Muskogean. Their name probably is from a
Choctaw term meaning plant-cutters. Related: Alabamian.


alabaster (n.)

translucent whitish kind of gypsum used for vases, ornaments, and busts, late 14c., from Old French
alabastre (12c., Modern French alb&acirc;tre), from Latin alabaster colored rock used to make boxes
and vessels for unguents, from Greek alabastros (earlier albatos) vase for perfumes, perhaps from
Egyptian 'a-labaste vessel of the goddess Bast. Used figuratively for whiteness and smoothness from
1570s. The spelling in 16-17th c. is almost always alablaster ... [OED].


alabastrine (adj.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin alabastrinus, from alabaster (see alabaster).


alack

late 15c., from ah, lack, from lack in Middle English sense of loss, failure, reproach, shame.
Originally an expression of dissatisfaction, later of regret or unpleasant surprise.


alacrity (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin alacritatem (nominative alacritas) liveliness, ardor, eagerness, from alacer
(genitive alacris) cheerful, brisk, lively; of uncertain origin, perhaps cognate with Gothic aljan
zeal, Old English ellen courage, zeal, strength, Old High German ellian.


Aladdin

name of a hero in stories from the Arabian Nights, from Arabic Ala' al Din, literally nobility of
faith.


Alamo

nickname of Franciscan Mission San Antonio de Valeroin (begun 1718, dissolved 1793) in San Antonio,
Texas; American Spanish, literally poplar (in New Spain, also cottonwood), from alno the black
poplar, from Latin alnus alder (see alder).    Perhaps so called in reference to trees growing
nearby (compare Alamogordo, New Mexico, literally big poplar, and Spanish alameda a public walk with
a row of trees on each side); but the popular name seems to date from the period 1803-13, when the
old mission was the base for a Spanish cavalry company from the Mexican town of Alamo de Parras in
Nueva Vizcaya.


Alan

masc. proper name, 1066, from Old Breton Alan, name of a popular Welsh and Breton saint; brought to
England by the large contingent of Bretons who fought alongside William the Conqueror.


alar (adj.)

wing-like, c.1840; of or pertaining to wings, 1847, from Latin alaris, from ala wing, armpit, wing
of an army (source of Spanish ala, French aile), from *axla, originally joint of the wing or arm;
from PIE *aks- (see axis).


Alaric

Visigothic masc. proper name, literally all-ruler, from Proto-Germanic *ala- all (see all) + *rikja
rule (see rich).


alarm (n.)

early 14c., from Old French alarme (14c.), from Italian all'arme to arms! (literally to the arms).
An interjection that came to be used as the word for the call or warning (compare alert). Extended
16c. to any sound to warn of danger or to arouse. Weakened sense of apprehension, unease is from
1833. Variant alarum is due to the rolling -r- in the vocalized form. Sometimes in early years
anglicized as all-arm. Alarm clock is attested from 1690s (as A Larum clock).


alarm (v.)

1580s, from alarm (n.). Related: Alarmed; alarming.


alarmed (adj.)

disturbed by prospects of peril, 1640s, past participle adjective from alarm (v.).


alarmingly (adv.)

1787, from alarming, present participle adjective from alarm (v.), + -ly (2).


alarmist (n.)

one addicted to sounding alarms, 1793, from alarm (n.) + -ist.


alarum (n.)

obsolete and poetic spelling of alarm (n.).


alas

mid-13c., from Old French ha, las (later French h&eacute;las), from ha ah + las unfortunate,
originally tired, weary, from Latin lassus weary (see late). At first an expression of weariness
rather than woe.


Alaska

name first applied 18c. by Russian explorers, from Aleut alaxsxaq, literally the object toward which
the action of the sea is directed [Bright]. Baked Alaska attested by 1896, so called either for its
whiteness or from being cold inside.


Alastor

in Greek tradition, son of Neleus, brother of Nestor, slain by Herakles. The name is perhaps
literally not to forget, from privative prefix a- not + root of lathein to forget (see Lethe), hence
its use figuratively in sense of an avenging spirit. Or else it might be connected with alaomai to
wander, roam, figuratively to be distraught.


alb (n.)

late Old English albe, from Late Latin alba (in tunica alba or vestis alba white vestment), fem. of
albus white, from PIE root *albho- white (cognates: Greek alphos white leprosy, alphiton barley
meal; Old High German albiz, Old English elfet swan, literally the white bird; Old Church Slavonic
and Russian lebedi, Polish &#322;ab&#281;d&#378; swan; Hittite alpash cloud).


albacore (n.)

large variety of tuna, 1570s, from Portuguese albacora, from Arabic al bakara milk cow; the fish so
called for its size.


Albania

Medieval Latin name of the country called by its inhabitants Shqip&#235;ri (literally land of
eagles, from shqiponje eagle), from Medieval Greek Albania, possibly from a pre-IE word *alb hill
(also proposed as the source of Alps) or from the PIE root *albho- white (see alb). Roman Albania
was a land by the Caspian Sea (modern Daghestan); in English Albania was occasionally also a name
for Scotland.


albatross (n.)

1670s, probably from Spanish or Portuguese alcatraz pelican (16c.), perhaps derived from Arabic al-
ghattas sea eagle [Barnhart]; or from Portuguese alcatruz the bucket of a water wheel [OED], from
Arabic al-qadus machine for drawing water, jar (from Greek kados jar), in reference to the pelican's
pouch (compare Arabic saqqa pelican, literally water carrier). Either way, the spelling was
influenced by Latin albus white. The name was extended, through some mistake, by English sailors to
a larger sea-bird (order Tubinares).    Albatrosses were considered good luck by sailors; figurative
sense of burden (1936) is from Coleridge's Rime of the Ancient Mariner (1798) about the bad luck of
a sailor who shoots an albatross and then is forced to wear its corpse as an indication that he, not
the whole ship, offended against the bird. The prison-island of Alcatraz in San Francisco Bay is
named for pelicans that roosted there.


albedo (n.)

ratio of light reflected from a surface, 1859, from Latin albedo, literally whiteness, from albus
white (see alb).


albeit (conj.)

late 14c., a contraction of al be it al(though) it be (that).


Albert

masc. proper name, from German (the French form is Aubert), from Old High German Adalbert, cognate
of Old English &AElig;&thorn;elbeorht Noble-bright (which was sometimes metathesized as
&AElig;&thorn;elbriht, hence the surname Albright). Second element is from Proto-Germanic berhta-
bright, from PIE *bhereg- to shine; bright, white (see bright). It also figures in the names Egbert,
Gilbert, Herbert, Hubert, Lambert. As a kind of watch chain, from 1861 (see Prince Albert).


Alberta

Canadian province, founded in 1882 and named for Princess Louise Caroline Alberta (1848-1939),
fourth daughter of Queen Victoria, wife of the governor general, John Douglas Sutherland Campbell,
Marquess of Lorne. She was named for her father, Prince Albert.


Albigensian

c.1600, relating to the Albigenses, Catharist religious reformers of southern France c.1020-1250,
Medieval Latin Albigenses (12c.), from French Albi, name of the town in Languedoc where they lived
and were first condemned as heretics (1176). The town name is from Roman personal name Albius, from
Latin albus white (see alb).


albinism (n.)

1836; see albino + -ism. Alternative form albinoism is recorded from 1868.


albino (n.)

1777, from Spanish or Portuguese albino, from Latin albus white (see alb). Used by Portuguese of
white-spotted African negroes. Extended 1859 to animals having the same peculiarity. A female albino
formerly was an albiness (1808).


Albion

ancient name of England, Old English, from Latin, sometimes said to be from the non-Indo-European
base *alb mountain, which also is suggested as the source of Latin Alpes Alps, Albania, and Alba, an
Irish name for Scotland. But more likely from Latin albus white (see alb), which would be an apt
description of the chalk cliffs of the island's southern coast.Breoton is garsecges ealond,
&eth;&aelig;t w&aelig;s iu geara Albion haten. [translation of Bede's Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis
Anglorum, c.900 C.E.]Perfidious Albion translates French rhetorical phrase la perfide Albion, said
to have been in use since 16c. but popularized by Napoleon I in the recruiting drive of 1813, a
reference to the supposedly treacherous policies of Britain when dealing with foreign powers.


album (n.)

1650s, from Latin album white color, whiteness, neuter of albus white (see alb). In classical times
a blank tablet on which the Pontifex Maximus registered the principal events of the year; a list of
names. Revived 16c. by German scholars whose custom was to keep an album amicorum of colleagues'
signatures; meaning then expanded into book to collect souvenirs. According to Johnson, a book in
which foreigners have long been accustomed to insert autographs of celebrated people. Photographic
albums first recorded 1859. Meaning long-playing gramophone record is by 1951, because the sleeves
they came in resembled large albums.


albumen (n.)

1590s, white of an egg, from Latin albumen white of an egg, literally whiteness, from albus white
(see alb). The organic substance (which exists nearly pure in egg whites) so called from 1800, also
known as albumin (1869, from French albumine).


albumin

see albumen.


albuminous (adj.)

1791, from albumen + -ous.


Albuquerque

city in New Mexico, U.S., founded 1706 and named for Spanish administrator and viceroy of Mexico
Francisco Fern&aacute;ndez de la Cueva, Duque de Alburquerque (1617-1676); name altered by
association with Portuguese soldier Alfonso de Albuquerque (1453-1515), both named from
Alburquerque, a town in Spain close to the Portuguese border, meaning white oak; ultimately from
Latin albus white and quercus oak.


Alcatraz

see albatross.


Alcestis

wife of Admetus, she offered her life for her husband and was rescued from the Underworld by
Herakles, from Greek Alkestis, literally valiant, courageous, from alke protection, help, strength,
power.


alchemical (adj.)

1580s; see alchemy + -ical.


alchemist (n.)

1510s, from Middle French alquemiste, from Medieval Latin alchimista (see alchemy). Earlier forms
were alchemister (late 14c.), alkanamyer (late 15c.).


alchemy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic
al-kimiya, from Greek khemeioa (found c.300 C.E. in a decree of Diocletian against the old writings
of the Egyptians), all meaning alchemy. Perhaps from an old name for Egypt (Khemia, literally land
of black earth, found in Plutarch), or from Greek khymatos that which is poured out, from khein to
pour, related to khymos juice, sap [Klein, citing W. Muss-Arnolt, calls this folk etymology]. The
word seems to have elements of both origins.Mahn ... concludes, after an elaborate investigation,
that Gr. khymeia was probably the original, being first applied to pharmaceutical chemistry, which
was chiefly concerned with juices or infusions of plants; that the pursuits of the Alexandrian
alchemists were a subsequent development of chemical study, and that the notoriety of these may have
caused the name of the art to be popularly associated with the ancient name of Egypt. [OED]The al-
is the Arabic definite article, the. The art and the name were adopted by the Arabs from
Alexandrians and thence returned to Europe via Spain. Alchemy was the chemistry of the Middle Ages
and early modern times; since c.1600 the word has been applied distinctively to the pursuit of the
transmutation of baser metals into gold, which, along with the search for the universal solvent and
the panacea, were the chief occupations of early chemistry.


alcohol (n.)

1540s (early 15c. as alcofol), fine powder produced by sublimation, from Medieval Latin alcohol
powdered ore of antimony, from Arabic al-kuhul kohl, the fine metallic powder used to darken the
eyelids, from kahala to stain, paint. The al- is the Arabic definite article, the.    Powdered
cosmetic was the earliest sense in English; definition broadened 1670s to any sublimated substance,
the pure spirit of anything, including liquids. Modern sense of intoxicating ingredient in strong
liquor is first recorded 1753, short for alcohol of wine, which was extended to the intoxicating
element in fermented liquors. In organic chemistry, the word was extended 1850 to the class of
compounds of the same type as this.


alcoholic (adj.)

1790, of or pertaining to alcohol; see alcohol + -ic. Meaning caused by drunkenness is attested by
1872; meaning habitually drunk by 1910. Noun sense of one who is addicted to drinking in excess,
chronic drunkard, old rounder is recorded from 1891; earlier alcoholist (1888). Alcoholics Anonymous
founded 1935 in Akron, Ohio, U.S. Alky is first recorded 1844 as a slang shortening of alcoholic
liquor; 1960 in the sense of a drunkard.


alcoholism (n.)

disease of alcohol addiction, 1852, from alcohol + -ism, or else from Modern Latin alcoholismus,
coined in 1852 by Swedish professor of medicine Magnus Huss (1807-1890) to mean what we now would
call alcohol poisoning. In earlier times, alcoholism would have been habitual drunkenness or some
such term.


Alcoran (n.)

older form of Koran, mid-14c., from Old French alcoran, from Arabic al-quran the Koran (see Koran),
with the definite article (al-) taken as part of the name.


alcove (n.)

1670s, vaulted recess, from French alc&ocirc;ve (17c.), from Spanish alcoba, from Arabic al-qobbah
the vaulted chamber, from Semitic base q-b-b to be bent, crooked, vaulted.


Aldebaran

bright star in Taurus, late 14c., from Arabic Al Dabaran the follower (of the Pleiades, which rise
shortly before it does), from dabara he followed.


aldehyde (n.)

first oxidation product of alcohol, 1833, discovered in 1774 by German-born Swedish chemist Carl
Wilhelm Scheele (1742-1786), the name said to have been coined by German chemist Justus von Liebig
(1803-1873) from abbreviation of Modern Latin alcohol dehydrogenatum dehydrogenated alcohol.


alder (n.)

tree related to the birch, Old English alor alder (with intrusive -d- added 14c.; the historical
form aller survived until 18c. in literary English and persists in dialects, such as Lancashire
owler, which is partly from Norse), from Proto-Germanic *aliso (cognates: Old Norse &ouml;lr, Danish
elle, Swedish al, Dutch els, German erle), from *el-, the ancient PIE name of the tree (cognates:
Russian olicha, Polish olcha, Latin alnus, Lithuanian alksnis).


alderman (n.)

Old English aldormonn (Mercian), ealdormann (West Saxon) ruler, prince, chief; chief officer of a
shire, from aldor, ealder patriarch (comparative of ald old; see old) + monn, mann man (see man
(n.)). A relic of the days when the elders were automatically in charge of the clan or tribe, but
already in Old English used for king's viceroys, regardless of age. The word yielded in Old English
to eorl, and after the Norman Conquest to count (n.). Meaning headman of a guild (early 12c.) passed
to magistrate of a city (c.1200) as the guilds became identified with municipal government.


Aldine (n.)

type font, 1837, from Aldus Manutius (1450-1515), Venetian printer who used it in his popular
editions of Greek and Roman classics. His name is a Latinized form of Italian Aldo Manuzio, the
first name short for Teobaldo (see Theobald), and, like so many Italian masc. given names, of
Germanic origin. The device characteristic of Aldine books is a figure of a dolphin on an anchor.


aldosterone (n.)

isolated 1953, named with -one + elements of aldehyde, sterol.


ale (n.)

Old English ealu ale, beer, from Proto-Germanic *aluth- (cognates: Old Saxon alo, Old Norse
&ouml;l), perhaps from PIE root meaning bitter (cognates: Latin alumen alum), or from PIE *alu-t
ale, from root *alu-, which has connotations of sorcery, magic, possession, intoxication. The word
was borrowed from Germanic into Lithuanian (alus) and Old Church Slavonic (olu).  In the fifteenth
century, and until the seventeenth, ale stood for the unhopped fermented malt liquor which had long
been the native drink of these islands. Beer was the hopped malt liquor introduced from the Low
Countires in the fifteenth century and popular first of all in the towns. By the eighteenth century,
however, all malt liquor was hopped and there had been a silent mutation in the meaning of the two
terms. For a time the terms became synonymous, in fact, but local habits of nomenclature still
continued to perpetuate what had been a real difference: 'beer' was the malt liquor which tended to
be found in towns, 'ale' was the term in general use in the country districts. [Peter Mathias, The
Brewing Industry in England, Cambridge University Press, 1959]Meaning festival or merry-meeting at
which much ale was drunk was in Old English (see bridal).


aleatory (adj.)

of uncertain outcome, literally depending on the throw of a die, 1690s, from Latin aleatorius
pertaining to a gamester, from aleator a dice player, from alea a game with dice; chance, hazard,
risk; a die, the dice; perhaps literally a joint-bone, a pivot-bone, and related to axis.


alectryomachy (n.)

cock-fighting, 1650s, from Greek alektryon cock (see alectryomancy) + -machy.


alectryomancy (n.)

divination by means of a cock and grains of corn, 1680s, from Latinized form of Greek alektryon cock
+ manteia oracle (see -mancy). The first element is literally warder-off, fighter, related to
alexein to ward off, drive or keep off (see Alexander, and compare Alekto, name of one of the three
Furies). Perhaps originally a personal name, applied at first to the fighting cock, then to cocks
generally.


alehouse (n.)

also ale-house, Old English eala-huse; see ale + house (n.). An alehouse is distinguished from a
tavern, where they sell wine [Johnson].


Alemanni

name of a Suebic tribe or confederation that settled in Alsace and part of Switzerland (and source
of French Allemand German, a German), from Proto-Germanic *Alamanniz, probably meaning all-man and
denoting a wide alliance of tribes, but perhaps meaning foreign men (compare Allobroges, name of a
Celtic tribe in what is now Savoy, in Latin literally the aliens, in reference to their having
driven out the original inhabitants), in which case the al- is cognate with the first element in
Latin alius the other and English else.


alembic (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French alambic (13c.), via Old Spanish, from Arabic al-anbiq distilling
flask, from Greek ambix cup, of unknown, possibly Semitic, origin. Often spelled limbeck 15c.-17c.


aleph (n.)

Hebrew and Phoenician letter, c.1300, from Semitic languages, pausal form of eleph ox (the character
might have developed from a hieroglyph of an ox's head); also see alphabet.


alert (adv.)

on the watch, 1590s, from French alerte vigilant (17c.), from phrase &agrave; l'erte on the watch,
from Italian all'erta to the height, from erta lookout, high tower, noun use of fem. of erto, past
participle of ergere raise up, from Latin erigere raise (see erect). The adjective is attested from
1610s, the noun from 1803, and the verb from 1868. Related: Alerted; alerting.


alertly (adv.)

1787, from alert + -ly (2).


alertness (n.)

1714, from alert + -ness.


Alethea

fem. proper name, from Greek aletheia truth, truthfulness, from alethes true, literally not
concealing, from privative prefix a- not (see a- (3)) + lethe forgetfulness, oblivion (see latent).


Aleut

native of the Aleutian Islands, 1780, of unknown origin, probably from a native word. First applied
by Russian explorers c.1750, perhaps from Alut, name of a coastal village in Kamchatka [Bright].
Their name for themselves is unangax.


alewife (n.)

herring-like fish of North America, 1630s, named from the word for female tavern keepers (late
14c.), from ale + wife; the fish so called in reference to its large abdomen.


Alexander

masc. proper name, from Latin, from Greek Alexandros defender of men, from alexein to ward off, keep
off, turn (something) away, defend, protect + aner (genitive andros) man (see anthropo-). The first
element is related to Greek alke protection, help, strength, power, courage, alkimos strong; cognate
with Sanskrit raksati protects, Old English ealgian to defend. As a kind of cocktail, it is attested
from 1930.


Alexandrine

in reference to a type of verse line, 1580s (adj.); 1660s (n.), said to be from Old French Roman
d'Alexandre, name of a poem about Alexander the Great that was popular in the Middle Ages, which
used a 12-syllable line of 6 feet (the French heroic verse); it was used in English to vary the
heroic verse of 5 feet. The name also sometimes is said to be from Alexandre de Paris, 13c. French
poet, who used such a line (and who also wrote one of the popular Alexander the Great poems).


Alexis

masc. proper name, from Greek alexis, from alexein to ward off, keep, protect (see Alexander). The
Latin form was Alexius.


alfalfa (n.)

1845, from Spanish alfalfa, earlier alfalfez, from Arabic al-fisfisa fresh fodder.


Alfred

masc. proper name, Old English &AElig;lfr&aelig;d, literally elf-counsel, from &aelig;lf (see elf) +
r&aelig;d counsel, related to read (v.).


alga (n.)

see algae.


algae (n.)

(plural), 1794, from alga (singular), 1550s, from Latin alga seaweed, of uncertain origin, perhaps
from a PIE root meaning to putrefy, rot.


algal (adj.)

1846, see alga + -al (1).


algebra (n.)

1550s, from Medieval Latin algebra, from Arabic al jabr (in vulgar pronunciation, al-jebr [Klein])
reunion of broken parts, as in computation, used 9c. by Baghdad mathematician Abu Ja'far Muhammad
ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi as the title of his famous treatise on equations (Kitab al-Jabr w'al-Muqabala
Rules of Reintegration and Reduction), which also introduced Arabic numerals to the West. The accent
shifted 17c. from second syllable to first. The word was used in English 15c.-16c. to mean bone-
setting, probably from Arab medical men in Spain.


algebraic (adj.)

1660s, from algebra + -ic. Earlier was algebraical (1570s).


Algeria

North African country, named for Algiers, city chosen by the French as its capital when they
colonized it in 1830 + Latinate country suffix -ia. The city name is Arabic al-Jazair, literally the
islands, in reference to four islands formerly off the coast but joined to the mainland since 1525.
A resident of the place formerly was an Algerine (1650s), and the word was practically synonymous
with pirate in English and U.S. usage early 19c.


Algernon

masc. proper name, literally with mustaches, from Old French als gernons, from a les to the, with
the + gernon, variant of grenon mustache, from Vulgar Latin *granonem, from a Germanic source
(compare Old English granu mustache).


Algol

Beta Persei, variable star in the constellation Perseus, late 14c., literally the Demon, from Arabic
al-ghul the demon (see ghoul). It corresponds, in modern representations of the constellation, to
the gorgon's head Perseus is holding, but it probably was so called because it visibly varies in
brightness every three days, which sets it apart from other bright stars. The computer language
(1959) is a contraction of algo(rithmic) l(anguage); see algorithm.


Algonquian

also Algonkian, 1885, an ethnologist's word, modified from Algonquin + -ian. Both forms of the name
have been used as adjectives and nouns. An American-Indian language family spread over a wide area
of northeast and north-central North America, from Nova Scotia (Micmac) to Montana (Cheyenne).


Algonquin

one of an Indian people living near the Ottawa River in Canada, 1620s, from French Algonquin,
perhaps a contraction of Algoumequin, from Micmac algoomeaking at the place of spearing fish and
eels. But Bright suggests Maliseet (Algonquian) el&aelig;gomogwik they are our relatives or allies.
Algonquian (1885) was the name taken by ethnologists to describe a large group of North American
Indian peoples, including this tribe. Algonquin Hotel (59 W. 44th St., Manhattan) opened 1902 and
named by manager Frank Case for the tribe that had lived in that area. A circle of journalists,
authors, critics, and wits began meeting there daily in 1919 and continued through the twenties;
they called themselves The Vicious Circle, but to others they became The Round Table.


algorithm (n.)

1690s, from French algorithme, refashioned (under mistaken connection with Greek arithmos number)
from Old French algorisme the Arabic numeral system (13c.), from Medieval Latin algorismus, a
mangled transliteration of Arabic al-Khwarizmi native of Khwarazm, surname of the mathematician
whose works introduced sophisticated mathematics to the West (see algebra). The earlier form in
Middle English was algorism (early 13c.), from Old French.


algorithmic (adj.)

by 1799, from algorithm + -ic. In reference to symbolic rules or language, by 1881.


Alhambra

palace of the Moorish kings in Granada, Spanish, from Arabic (al kal'at) al hamra the red (castle),
from fem. of ahmuru red. So called for the sun-dried bricks of which its outer walls were built.


alias (adv.)

mid-15c., otherwise called, from Latin alias at another time, in another way, from alius (an)other,
from PIE *al- (1) beyond (cognates: Sanskrit anya other, different, Avestan anya-, Armenian ail,
Greek allos another, Gothic aljis other, Old English elles otherwise, else, Modern English else).


alias (n.)

assumed name, c.1600, from alias (adv.).


alibi (n.)

1743, the plea of having been elsewhere when an action took place, from Latin alibi elsewhere,
somewhere else, locative of alius (an)other (see alias (adv.)). The weakened sense of excuse is
attested since 1912, but technically any proof of innocence that doesn't involve being elsewhere is
an excuse, not an alibi.


Alice

fem. proper name, from Old French Aliz, from Old High German Adalhaid, literally nobility, of noble
kind (see Adelaide). Among the top 20 most popular names for girls born in the U.S. from
c.1880-1920. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland published 1865.


alien (adj.)

mid-14c., strange, foreign, from Old French alien alien, strange, foreign; an alien, stranger,
foreigner, from Latin alienus of or belonging to another, foreign, alien, strange, also, as a noun,
a stranger, foreigner, adjectival form of alius (an)other (see alias (adv.)). Meaning not of the
Earth first recorded 1920. An alien priory (c.1500) is one owing obedience to a mother abbey in a
foreign country.


alien (n.)

foreigner, citizen of a foreign land, from alien (adj.). In the science fiction sense, from 1953.


alienable (adj.)

1610s; see alien (adj.) + -able. Related: Alienability.


alienate (v.)

1540s, make estranged (in feelings or affections), from Latin alienatus, past participle of alienare
to make another's, estrange, from alienus of or belonging to another person or place, from alius
(an)other (see alias (adv.)). Related: Alienated; alienating.


alienation (n.)

transfer of ownership, late 14c., from Old French alienacion and directly from Latin alienationem
(nominative alienatio) a transfer, surrender, noun of action from past participle stem of alienare
(see alienate). It also meant loss or derangement of mental faculties, insanity (late 15c.), hence
alienist. Phrase alienation of affection as a U.S. legal term in divorce cases for falling in love
with someone else dates to 1861.


alienist (n.)

one who treats mental illness, 'mad doctor,'  1864, from French ali&eacute;niste, from alienation in
the sense of insanity, loss of mental faculty, a sense attested in English from late 15c. (see
alienate).


alight (v.)

to descend, dismount, Old English alihtan, originally to lighten, take off, take away, from a- down,
aside (see a- (1)) + lihtan get off, make light (see light (v.)). The notion is of getting down off
a horse or vehicle, thus lightening it. Of aircraft (originally balloons) from 1786. Related:
Alighted; alighting.


alight (adj.)

on fire, early 15c., apparently from Middle English aliht, past participle of alihton (Old English
on-lihtan) to light up, also to shine upon (see light (n.)).


align (v.)

early 15c., to copulate (of wolves, dogs), literally to range (things) in a line, from Middle French
aligner, from Old French alignier set, lay in line, from &agrave; to (see ad-) + lignier to line,
from Latin lineare, from linea (see line (n.)). Transitive or reflexive sense of to fall into line
is from 1853. International political sense is attested from 1934. No justification for the French
spelling, and aline was an early native form. Related: Aligned; aligning.


alignment (n.)

1790, arrangement in a line, from French alignement, from aligner (see align). Political sense is
from 1933.


alike (adj.)

c.1300, aliche, from Old English gelic and/or onlice similar, from Proto-Germanic *galikam
associated form (cognates: Old Frisian gelik, German gleich, Gothic galeiks, Old Norse glikr; see
like (adj.)).


aliment (n.)

food, late 15c., from Latin alimentum nourishment, in plural, food, provisions, from alere to
nourish (see alimentary).


alimentary (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin alimentarius pertaining to food, from Latin alimentum nourishment, from
alere to nourish, rear, support, maintain, from PIE root *al- to grow, nourish (see old).


alimony (n.)

1650s, nourishment, also allowance to a wife from a husband's estate, or in certain cases of
separation, from Latin alimonia food, support, nourishment, sustenance, from alere to nourish (see
old) + -monia suffix signifying action, state, condition (cognate with Greek -men). Derived form
palimony coined 1979.


Aline

fem. proper name, French, short for Adeline.


Alison

fem. proper name, from French Alison, a diminutive of Alice.


alit

poetic past tense and past participle of alight (v.).


alive (adj.)

c.1200, from Old English on life in living. The fuller form on live was still current 17c. Alive and
kicking alert, vigorous, attested from 1859; The allusion is to a child in the womb after quickening
[Farmer]. Used emphatically, especially with man; as in:    [A]bout a thousand gentlemen having
bought his almanacks for this year, merely to find what he said against me, at every line they read
they would lift up their eyes, and cry out betwixt rage and laughter, they were sure no man alive
ever writ such damned stuff as this. [Jonathan Swift, Bickerstaff's Vindication, 1709]    Thus
abstracted as an expletive, man alive! (1845).


aliveness (n.)

1853, from alive + -ness.


alkahest (n.)

universal solvent sought by alchemists, 1640s, from French alcahest, from Medieval Latin alcahest, a
pseudo-Arabic word coined by Paracelsus (see alchemy).


alkali (n.)

late 14c., soda ash, from Medieval Latin alkali, from Arabic al-qaliy the ashes, burnt ashes (of
saltwort, a plant growing in alkaline soils), from qala to roast in a pan. The modern chemistry
sense is from 1813.


alkaline (adj.)

1670s, pertaining to alkalis, from alkali + -ine (1). Of soils, attested from 1850.


alkaloid (n.)

1831, from alkali (q.v.) + -oid. A general term applied to basic compounds of vegetable origin,
bitter in taste, and having powerful effects on the animal system [Flood]. As an adjective by 1859.


alkanet (n.)

dye material from bugloss plant roots, early 14c., from Spanish alcaneta, diminutive of alcana, from
Arabic al-hinna (see henna). As the name of the plant itself, from 1560s.


all

Old English eall all, every, entire, from Proto-Germanic *alnaz (cognates: Old Frisian, Old High
German al, Old Norse allr, Gothic alls), with no certain connection outside Germanic.
Combinations with all meaning wholly, without limit were common in Old English (such as eall-halig
all-holy, eall-mihtig all-mighty) and the method continued to form new compound words throughout the
history of English. First record of all out to one's full powers is 1880. All-terrain vehicle first
recorded 1968. All clear as a signal of no danger is recorded from 1902. All right, indicative of
approval, is attested from 1953.


all-American

1888, as the name of a barnstorming baseball team composed of players from various teams across the
United States. From all + American.


all-fired (adj.)

1837, U.S. slang euphemism for hell-fired.


all-inclusive (adj.)

1813, from all + inclusive. Related: All-inclusively; all-inclusiveness.


all-over (adj.)

covering every part, 1859, from all + over. All-overish generally, indefinitely indisposed is from
1820.


all-purpose (adj.)

1877, from all + purpose (n.).


all-round (adj.)

1728, from all + round (adj.). All-rounder is from 1855 as a type of men's collar; 1875 as a person
who is good at everything.


all-star (adj.)

1893, originally of theatrical casts, from all + star (n.) in the celebrated person sense. From 1898
in reference to sports teams.


all-time (adj.)

during recorded time, 1910, American English, from all + time (n.). Earlier it had been used in a
sense full-time, of employment, or in opposition to one-time (1883).


Allah

1702, Arabic name for the Supreme Being, from Arabic Allahu, contraction of al-Ilahu, from al the +
Ilah God, related to Hebrew Elohim.


allative (n.)

grammatical case expressing motion towards, 1860, from Latin allatus brought to, used as past
participle of adferre, affere to bring to, from ad- to (see ad-) + latus borne, carried (see oblate
(n.)).


allay (v.)

Old English alecgan to put down, remit, give up, a Germanic compound (cognates: Gothic uslagjan, Old
High German irleccan, German erlegen), from a- down, aside + lecgan to lay (see lay).    Early
Middle English pronunciations of -y- and -g- were not always distinct, and the word was confused in
Middle English with various senses of Romanic-derived alloy and allege, especially the latter in an
obsolete sense of to lighten, from Latin ad- to + levis (see lever).  Amid the overlapping of
meanings that thus arose, there was developed a perplexing network of uses of allay and allege, that
belong entirely to no one of the original vbs., but combine the senses of two or more of them.
[OED]The double -l- is 17c., a mistaken Latinism. Related: Allayed; allaying.


allegation (n.)

early 15c., action of alleging, from Middle French all&eacute;gation, from Latin allegationem
(nominative allegatio) a sending, despatching, noun of action from past participle stem of allegare
(see allege).


allege (v.)

c.1300. It has the form of one French verb and the meaning of another. The form is Anglo-French
aleger, Old French eslegier to clear at law, from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) and litigare bring suit
(see litigate); however eslegier meant acquit, clear of charges in a lawsuit. It somehow acquired
the meaning of French all&eacute;guer, from Latin allegare send for, bring forth, name, produce in
evidence, from ad- to (see ad-) + legare to depute, send (see legate). Related: Alleged; alleging.


alleged (adj.)

mid-15c., quoted, past participle adjective from allege. Attested from 1610s in sense of brought
forth in court; 1670s as asserted but not proved.


allegedly (adv.)

1828, from alleged + -ly (2).


alleger (n.)

1570s, agent noun from allege. The Latinate form, allegator (1680s) rarely was used, for some
reason.


allegiance (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French legaunce loyalty of a liege-man to his lord, from Old French legeance,
from liege (see liege); erroneously associated with Latin ligare to bind; corrupted in spelling by
confusion with the now-obsolete legal term allegeance alleviation. General figurative sense of
recognition of claims to respect or duty is attested from 1732.


allegorical (adj.)

1520s, from French all&eacute;gorique, from Latin allegoricus, from Greek allegorikos (see
allegory). Earlier form was allegoric (late 14c.). Related: Allegorically.


allegory (n.)

late 14c., from Old French allegorie (12c.), from Latin allegoria, from Greek allegoria figurative
language, description of one thing under the image of another, literally a speaking about something
else, from allos another, different (see alias (adv.)) + agoreuein speak openly, speak in the
assembly, from agora assembly (see agora).


allegretto

1740, from Italian allegretto, diminutive of allegro (q.v.).


allegro

1680s as a musical term, from Italian allegro cheerful, gay, from Latin alacrem (nominative alacer)
lively, cheerful, brisk (see alacrity).


allele (n.)

1931, from German allel, abbreviation of allelomorph (1902), coined from Greek allel- one another
(from allos other; see alias (adv.)) + morphe form (see Morpheus).


alleluia

late 14c., from Latin alleluja, from Greek allelouia, from Hebrew hallelu-yah praise Jehovah (see
hallelujah).


allemande (n.)

a German dance, 1775, from French Allemande, fem. of allemand German (see Alemanni). As a move in
country or square dancing, from 1808.


Allen

masc. proper name, variant of Alan (q.v.). In reference to wrench, key, screw, etc. with hexagonal
socket or head, 1913, from the Allen Manufacturing Company of Hartford, Connecticut, U.S.


allergen (n.)

substance causing allergy, 1912, from allergy on model of antigen.


allergic (adj.)

1911, from allergy + -ic; perhaps modeled on French allergique (1906). Figurative use, antipathetic,
repulsed is from 1936.


allergy (n.)

1911, from German Allergie, coined 1906 by  Austrian pediatrician Clemens E. von Pirquet (1874-1929)
from Greek allos other, different, strange (see alias (adv.)) + ergon activity (see organ).


alleviate (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French allevier or directly from Late Latin alleviatus, past participle of
alleviare to lighten, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + levis light in weight (see lever). Related:
Alleviated; alleviating.


alleviation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French aleviacion or directly from Medieval Latin alleviationem (nominative
alleviatio), noun of action from past participle stem of alleviare (see alleviate).


alley (n.)

mid-14c., passage in a house; open passage between buildings; walkway in a garden, from Old French
alee (13c., Modern French all&eacute;e) a path, passage, way, corridor, also a going, from fem. of
ale, past participle of aler to go, which ultimately may be a contraction of Latin ambulare to walk,
or from Gallo-Roman allari, a back-formation from Latin allatus having been brought to [Barnhart].
Compare sense evolution of gate. Applied by c.1500 to long narrow enclosure for playing at bowls,
skittles, etc. Used in place names from c.1500.    The word is applied in American English to what
in London is called a mews, and also is used there especially of a back-lane parallel to a main
street (1729). To be up someone's alley in someone's neighborhood (literally or figuratively) is
from 1931; alley-cat attested by 1890.


alley-way (n.)

1788, from alley + way (n.).


alliance (n.)

c.1300, bond of marriage (between ruling houses or noble families), from Old French aliance (12c.,
Modern French alliance) alliance, bond; marriage, union, from aliier (Modern French allier) combine,
unite (see ally (v.)). As a bond or treaty between rulers, late 14c.


allied (adj.)

c.1300, past participle adjective from ally (v.). Originally of kindred; in reference to a league or
formal treaty, it is first recorded late 14c.


alligator (n.)

1560s, lagarto (modern form attested from 1620s, with excrescent -r as in tater, feller, etc.), a
corruption of Spanish el lagarto (de Indias) the lizard (of the Indies), from Latin lacertus (see
lizard). Alligarter was an early variant. The slang meaning non-playing devotee of swing music is
attested from 1936; the phrase see you later, alligator is from a 1956 song title.


Allison

fem. proper name, a diminutive of Alice (q.v.), via Old French Alison. Popular in U.S. as a girl's
name from 1990s, but all but unknown there before 1946; it was popular in England and Scotland
13c.-17c. As a surname, it could represent Alice's son.


alliterate (v.)

to use alliteration, 1776 (implied in alliterated), back-formation from alliteration, on analogy of
obliterate. Related: Alliterating.


alliteration (n.)

1650s, a begining with the same letter, from Modern Latin alliterationem (nominative alliteratio),
noun of action from past participle stem of alliterare to begin with the same letter, from Latin ad-
to (see ad-) + littera (also litera) letter, script (see letter). Formed on model of obliteration,
etc. Related: Alliterational.


alliterative (adj.)

1764, from alliterate + -ive. Related: Alliteratively.


allo-

word-forming element meaning other, from Greek allo-, comb. form of allos other, different (see
alias (adv.)).


allocate (v.)

1630s, from verbal used of adjective allocate (mid-15c. in legal use), from Medieval Latin allocate
(the common first word of writs authorizing payment), imperative plural of allocare allocate, from
Latin ad- to (see ad-) + locare to place (see locate). Related: Allocated; allocating.


allocation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French allocacion, from Medieval Latin allocationem (nominative allocatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of allocare (see allocate).


allogenic (adj.)

1888, from Greek allogenes of another race, stranger, from allos other, different (see allo-) +
-genes born (see -gen) + -ic.


allograph (n.)

writing made by another person, by 1916 (implied in allographic), from allo- + -graph something
written.


allons

well! French, literally let us go, first person plural imperative of aller to go.


allopath (n.)

1830, back-formation from allopathy.


allopathic (adj.)

1830, from French allopathique (see allopathy). Related: Allopathically.


allopathy (n.)

1842, treatment of disease by remedies that produce effects opposite to the symptoms, from German
Allopathie (Hahnemann), from Greek allos other (see alias (adv.)) + -patheia, suffering, disease,
feeling (see -pathy). The term applied by homeopathists to traditional medicine.


allot (v.)

late 15c., from Old French aloter (Modern French allotir) to divide by lots, to divide into lots,
from &agrave; to (see ad-) + loter lot, a word of Germanic origin (cognates: Gothic hlauts, Old High
German hloz, Old English hlot; see lot). Related: Allotted; allotting.


allotment (n.)

1570s, action of allotting, from Middle French allotement, from Old French aloter (see allot). Or
else a native formation from allot + -ment. Meaning portion assigned to someone or some purpose is
from 1670s.


allotrope (n.)

1847, back-formation from allotropy variation of physical properties without change of substance,
from allo- + -tropy manner (see -trope). Related: Allotropic.


allow (v.)

early 14c., allouen, to commend, praise; approve of, be pleased with; appreciate the value of; also,
take into account or give credit for, also, in law and philosophy, recognize, admit as valid (a
privilege, an excuse, a statement, etc.). From late 14c. as sanction or permit; condone; in business
use from early 15c.    The Middle English word is from Anglo-French alouer, Old French aloer,
alloiier (13c.) allot, apportion, bestow, assign, from Latin allocare (see allocate). This word in
Old French was confused and ultimately merged with aloer; alloer to praise, commend, from Latin
allaudare, adlaudare, compound of ad- to (see ad-) + laudare to praise (see laud). From the first
word came the sense preserved in allowance as money granted; from the second came its meaning
permission based on approval.    Between the two primary significations there naturally arose a
variety of uses blending them in the general idea of assign with approval, grant, concede a thing
claimed or urged, admit a thing offered, permit, etc., etc. [OED].    Related: Allowed; allowing.


allowable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French allouable, from allouer (see allow).


allowance (n.)

late 14c., praise (a sense now obsolete), from Old French aloance allowance, granting, allocation,
from alouer (see allow). Sense of a sum alloted to meet expenses is from c.1400. In accounts,
meaning a sum placed to one's credit is attested from 1520s. To make allowances is literally to add
or deduct a sum from someone's account for some special circumstance. Figurative use of the phrase
is attested from 1670s.


allowed (adj.)

late 14c., praised; mid-15c., assigned as a due share; late 15c., permitted, past participle
adjective from allow.


alloy (n.)

early 14c. relative freedom of a noble metal from alloy or other impurities, from Anglo-French alai,
Old French aloi, from aloiier (see alloy (v.)). Meaning  base metal alloyed with a noble metal is
from c.1400. Modern spelling from late 17c.


alloy (v.)

c.1400, mix with a baser metal, from Old French aloiier assemble, join, from Latin alligare bind to,
tie to, compound of ad- to (see ad-) + ligare to bind (see ligament); hence bind one thing to
another. Related: Alloyed; alloying.


allright

see alright.


allspice (n.)

spice made from the berry of the Jamaican pimento, 1620s, from all + spice (n.), so called because
supposed to combine the flavour of cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves [Weekley].


allude (v.)

1530s, mock, from Middle French alluder or directly from Latin alludere to play, sport, joke, jest,
from ad- to (see ad-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Meaning make an indirect reference, point in
passing is from 1570s. Related: Alluded; alluding.


allure (v.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French alurer, Old French aleurer to attract, captivate; train a falcon to hunt,
from &agrave; to (see ad-) + loirre falconer's lure, from a Frankish word (see lure), perhaps
influenced by French allure gait, way of walking. Related: Allured; alluring. The noun is first
attested 1540s; properly this sense is allurement.


allurement (n.)

1540s, means of alluring; see allure + -ment. Meaning act of alluring is recorded from 1560s.


alluring (n.)

1530s, action of attracting, verbal noun from allure (v.).


alluring (adj.)

appealing to desires, 1570s, present participle adjective from allure (v.). Related: Alluringly.


allusion (n.)

1540s, from Latin allusionem (nominative allusio) a playing with, a reference to, noun of action
from past participle stem of alludere (see allude). An allusion is never an outright or explicit
mention of the person or thing the speaker seems to have in mind.


allusive (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin allus-, past participle stem of alludere (see allude) + -ive. Related:
Allusively; allusiveness.


alluvial (adj.)

1802, from Latin alluvius alluvial (see alluvium) + -al (1).


alluvium (n.)

matter deposited by flowing water, 1660s, from Medieval Latin alluvium, neuter of alluvius washed
against, from Latin alluere wash against, from ad- to, against (see ad-) + -luere, comb. form of
lavere to wash (see lave).


ally (v.)

late 13c., to join in marriage, from Old French alier combine, unite, from a differentiated stem of
aliier (from Latin alligare bind to; see alloy). Meaning to form an alliance, join, associate is
late 14c. Related: allied; allying.


ally (n.)

late 14c., relative, kinsman, from ally (v.); mid-15c. in the sense of one united with another by
treaty or league.


Alma

fem. proper name, from Latin Alma nourishing, fem. of almus; from alere to nourish (see old).


Alma Mater (n.)

late 14c., Latin, literally bountiful mother, a title Romans gave to goddesses, especially Ceres and
Cybele, from alma, fem. of almus nourishing, from alere to nourish (see old) + mater mother (see
mother (n.1)). First used 1710 in sense of one's university or school in reference to British
universities.


almagest (n.)

late 14c., title of a treatise on astronomy by Claudius Ptolemy of Alexandria, extended in Middle
English to other works on astrology or astronomy, from Old French almageste (13c.), from Arabic al
majisti, from al the + Greek megiste the greatest (composition), from fem. of megistos, superlative
of megas great (see mickle). Originally titled in Greek Megale syntaxis tes astronomios Great Work
on Astronomy; Arab translators in their admiration altered this.


almah (n.)

Egyptian dancing-girl, belly-dancer, 1814, perhaps from Arabic almah (fem. adjective), learned,
knowing, from alama to know. Or perhaps from a Semitic root meaning girl (cognates: Hebrew alma a
young girl, a damsel).


almanac (n.)

late 14c., attested in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c., via Old French almanach or Medieval Latin
almanachus, of uncertain origin. It is sometimes said to be from a Spanish-Arabic al-manakh
calendar, almanac, but possibly ultimately from Late Greek almenichiakon calendar, which is said to
be of Coptic origin.    This word has been the subject of much speculation. Originally a book of
permanent tables of astronomical data; one-year versions, combined with ecclesiastical calendars,
date from 16c.; astrological and weather predictions appear in 16-17th c.; the 'useful statistics'
are a modern feature [OED].


almighty (adj.)

Old English &aelig;lmihtig all-powerful, also a by-name of God; compound of &aelig;l (see all) +
mihtig (see mighty); common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon alomahtig, Old High German alamahtic,
German allm&auml;chtig, Old Norse almattigr), perhaps an early Germanic loan-translation of Latin
omnipotens (see omnipotent).The almighty dollar, that great object of universal devotion throughout
our land. [Washington Irving, 1836]  Related: Almightily.


Almohades

12c. Muslim religious power that ruled Spain and North Africa, founded by Mohammed ibn Abdullah, the
name is literally the Unitarians, short for Arabic al-muwahhidun they who profess the unity (of
God), so called for their absolutist monotheism.


almond (n.)

c.1300, from Old French almande, amande, from Vulgar Latin *amendla, *amandula, from Latin amygdala
(plural), from Greek amygdalos an almond tree, of unknown origin, perhaps a Semitic word. Altered in
Medieval Latin by influence of amandus loveable, and acquiring in French an excrescent -l- perhaps
from Spanish almendra almond, which got it via confusion with the Arabic definite article al-, which
formed the beginnings of many Spanish words. Applied to eyes shaped like almonds, especially of
certain Asiatic peoples, from 1870.


almoner (n.)

official distributor of alms on behalf of another, c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), from Old French
almosnier (12c.; Modern French aum&ocirc;nerie), from Vulgar Latin *almosinarius, from Late Latin
elemosinarius (adj.) connected with alms, from eleemosyna alms (see alms).


Almoravides

Muslim Berber horde from the Sahara which founded a dynasty in Morocco (11c.) and conquered much of
Spain and Portugal. The name is Spanish, from Arabic al-Murabitun, literally the monks living in a
fortified convent, from ribat fortified convent.


almost (adv.)

Old English eallm&aelig;st nearly all, for the most part, literally mostly all; see all + most.
Modern form from 15c.


alms (n.)

Old English &aelig;lmesse alms, almsgiving, from Proto-Germanic *alemosna (cognates: Old Saxon
alamosna, Old High German alamuosan, Old Norse &ouml;lmusa), an early borrowing of Vulgar Latin
*alemosyna (source of Old Spanish almosna, Old French almosne, Italian limosina), from Church Latin
eleemosyna (Tertullian, 3c.), from Greek eleemosyne pity, mercy, in Ecclesiastical Greek charity,
alms, from eleemon compassionate, from eleos pity, mercy, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative of
cries for alms. Spelling perversion in Vulgar Latin is perhaps by influence of alimonia.


almshouse (n.)

mid-15c., from alms + house (n.).


aloe (n.)

Old English alewe fragrant resin of an East Indian tree, a Biblical usage, from Latin aloe, from
Greek aloe, translating Hebrew ahalim (plural, perhaps ultimately from a Dravidian language).    The
Greek word probably was chosen for resemblance of sound to the Hebrew, because the Greek and Latin
words referred originally to a genus of plants with spiky flowers and bitter juice, used as a
purgative drug, a sense which appeared in English late 14c. The word was then misapplied to the
American agave plant in 1680s. The true aloe consequently is called aloe vera.


aloft (adv.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse a lopti up above, literally up in the air, from
a in, on + lopt sky, air, atmosphere; loft, upper room (cognates: Gothic luftus, Old High German
luft, Old English lyft air; see loft).


aloha

1798, Hawaiian aloha, Maori aroha, an expression used in greeting or valediction, literally love,
affection, pity. Sometimes aloha 'oe, from 'oe to you.


alone (adj., adv.)

c.1300 contraction of all ane, from Old English all ana unaccompanied, all by oneself, from all all,
wholly (see all) + an one (see one). Similar compounds are found in German (allein) and Dutch
(alleen).


along (prep.)

Old English andlang entire, continuous; extended; all day long; alongside of, from and- opposite,
against (from Proto-Germanic *andi-, *anda-, from PIE *anti against, locative singular of *ant-
front, forehead; see ante) + lang long (see long (adj.)). Sense extended to through the whole length
of.


alongshore (adj.)

1779, from along + shore (n.).


alongside (adv.)

1707, from along + side (n.). A word formed from a phrase. Originally mostly nautical.


aloof (adj.)

1530s, from a- (1) + Middle English loof weather gage, also windward direction, probably from Dutch
loef (Middle Dutch lof) the weather side of a ship. Originally a nautical order to keep the ship's
head to the wind, thus to stay clear of a lee-shore or some other quarter; hence the figurative
sense of at a distance, apart (1580s). Related: Aloofly; aloofness.


aloud (adv.)

late 14c., from a- (1) + loud.


Aloysius

masc. proper name, from Medieval Latin Aloisius, from Old French Loois (see Louis).


alp (n.)

1590s, any high, snow-capped mountain, from Alps, from French Alpes, from Latin Alpes the Alps,
perhaps from altus high, or albus white or from a Celtic word (according to Servius), or a pre-Indo-
European root. Alps, the European mountain range, attested by that name in English from 1550s.


alpaca (n.)

1792, from Spanish alpaca, probably from Aymara allpaca, related to Quechua p'ake yellowish-red. The
al- is perhaps from influence of Arabic definite article (see almond). Attested in English from 1753
in the form pacos.


Alpenstock (n.)

long iron-pointed staff used for hiking in mountains, 1829, German, literally Alpine stick.


alpha (n.)

c.1300, from Latin alpha, from Greek alpha, from Hebrew or Phoenician aleph (see aleph). The Greeks
added -a because Greek words cannot end in most consonants. Sense of beginning of anything is from
late 14c., often paired with omega (last letter in the Greek alphabet) as the end. Sense of first in
a sequence is from 1620s. Alpha male was in use by c.1960 among scientists studying animals; applied
to humans in society from c.1992.


alphabet (n.)

1570s, from Late Latin alphabetum (Tertullian), from Greek alphabetos, from alpha + beta. Alphabet
soup first attested 1907. Words for it in Old English included st&aelig;fr&aelig;w, literally row of
letters, st&aelig;frof array of letters.    It was a wise though a lazy cleric whom Luther mentions
in his Table Talk,--the monk who, instead of reciting his breviary, used to run over the alphabet
and then say, O my God, take this alphabet, and put it together how you will. [William S. Walsh,
Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities, 1892]


alphabetical (adj.)

1560s, from alphabet + -ical. Related: Alphabetically.


alphabetize (v.)

1866, from alphabet + -ize. Related: Alphabetized; alphabetizing.


alphanumeric (adj.)

1912, contracted from alphabet + numeric (see numerical).


Alphonso

masc. proper name, from Spanish Alfonso, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German Adalfuns,
from adal noble; see atheling + funs ready). The Alphonsine tables are named for Alphonso the Wise,
13c. king of Castile.


Alpine (adj.)

of the Alps, early 15c., from Latin Alpinus; see Alp. Earlier was Alpish (1590s).


Alps

see Alp.


already (adv.)

c.1300, compound of all + ready (adj.); literally fully ready. Compare Norwegian, Danish allerede
already. Colloquial use in U.S. as a terminal emphatic (as in enough, already!) is attested from
1903, translating Yiddish shoyn, which is used in same sense. The pattern also is attested in
Pennsylvania German and in South African.


alright

frequent spelling of all right, attested from 1893.There are no such forms as all-right, or
allright, or alright, though even the last, if seldom allowed by the compositors to appear in print,
is often seen ... in MS. [Fowler]


Alsace

region between France and Germany (disputed by them 18c.-19c.), Medieval Latin Alsatia, from Old
High German *Ali-sazzo inhabitant of the other (bank of the Rhine), from Proto-Germanic *alja other
+ Old High German -sazzo inhabitant, literally one who sits. Alsatian was adopted 1917 by the Kennel
Club for German Shepherd dog to avoid the wartime associations of German; the breed has no
connection with Alsace.


also (adv.)

Old English eallswa just as, even as, as if, so as, likewise, compound of all + so. The
demonstrative sense of similarly weakened to in addition to in 12c., replacing eke. The compound has
parallel forms in German also, Dutch alzoo.


also-ran (n.)

1896, originally in reference to horse-races, from also + past tense of run (v.). Probably from the
way non-placing horses were listed in race results.


Altaic

1832 as a linguistic family, from French Alta&#239;que, from Alta&#239;en, from Altai, name of a
mountain range in Asia.


Altair

bright star in the constellation Aquila, 16c., from Arabic Al Nasr al Tair the Flying Eagle, from
tair, participle of tara it flew.


altar (n.)

Old English alter, altar, from Latin altare (plural altaria) high altar, altar for sacrifice to the
great gods, perhaps originally meaning burnt offerings (compare Latin adolere to worship, to offer
sacrifice, to honor by burning sacrifices to), but influenced by Latin altus high. In Middle
English, often auter, from Old French auter. Reintroduced from Latin 1500s. As a symbol of marriage,
by 1820.


alter (v.)

late 14c., to change (something), from Old French alterer change, alter, from Medieval Latin
alterare to change, from Latin alter the other (of the two), from PIE *al- beyond (see alias (adv.))
+ comparative suffix -ter (as in other). Intransitive sense to become otherwise first recorded
1580s. Related: Altered; altering.


alter ego

1530s, from Latin phrase (used by Cicero), a second self, a trusted friend (compare Greek allos
ego); see alter and ego.


alterable (adj.)

1520s, from alter + -able. Related: Alterably; alterability.


alteration (n.)

late 14c., action of altering, from Old French alteracion (14c.) change, alteration, and directly
from Medieval Latin alterationem (nominative alteratio), noun of action from past participle stem of
Late Latin alterare (see alter). Meaning change in character or appearance is from 1530s; that of
change in ready-made clothes to suit a customer's specifications is from 1901. Related: Alterations.


altercate (v.)

1520s, to contend with words, from Latin altercatus, past participle of altercari (see altercation).


altercation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French altercacion (12c.) and directly from Latin altercationem (nominative
altercatio) a dispute, debate, discussion, noun of action from past participle stem of altercari to
dispute (with another), from alter other (see alter).


alternate (adj.)

1510s, from Latin alternatus one after the other, past participle of alternare to do first one thing
then the other; exchange parts, from alternus one after the other, alternate, in turns, reciprocal,
from alter the other (see alter). Alternate means by turns; alternative means offering a choice.
Both imply two kinds or things.


alternate (v.)

1590s, from Latin alternatus, past participle of alternare (see alternate (adj.)). Replaced Middle
English alternen to vary, alternate (early 15c.). Related: Alternated; alternating.


alternate (n.)

1718, that which alternates (with anything else), from alternate (adj.). Meaning a substitute is
first attested 1848.


alternately (adv.)

early 15c., from alternate (adj.) + -ly (2).


alternating (adj.)

1550s, present participle adjective from alternate (v.). Alternating current is recorded from 1839.


alternation (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French alternacion, from Latin alternationem (nominative alternatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of alternare (see alternate (v.)).


alternative (adj.)

1580s, offering one or the other of two, from Medieval Latin alternativus, from Latin alternatus,
past participle of alternare (see alternate (v.)). Meaning purporting to be a superior choice to
what is in general use was current by 1970 (earliest reference is to the media). Alternative energy
is from 1975. Related: Alternatively.


alternative (n.)

1620s, in rhetoric, from Medieval Latin alternativus (see alternative (adj.)). Of courses of action,
from 1814. Of objects, etc., the other of two which may be chosen, by 1838.


alternator (n.)

1878, agent noun in Latin form from alternate (v.).


although (conj.)

early 14c., althagh, compound of all + though, showing once-common emphatic use of all. All though
was originally more emphatic than though, but by 1400 it was practically only a variant of it, and
all having thus lost its independent force, the phrase was written as one word [OED].


altimeter (n.)

1918, from Modern Latin altimeter, from alti- high (from Latin altus; see old) + -meter.


altimetry (n.)

1690s, from Medieval Latin altimetria, from Latin alti- high (see old) + Greek -metria (see -metry).


altitude (n.)

late 14c., from Latin altitudinem (nominative altitudo) height, altitude, from altus high (see old).


alto (n.)

1784, man with an alto voice, from Italian alto (canto), from Latin altus high (see old). Originally
a high man's voice, now more commonly applied to the lower range of women's voices (which is more
strictly the contralto), an extension first recorded in 1881.    The alto in a man is totally
distinct from the contralto in a woman. The tone is utterly different -- the best notes of the one
are certainly not the best notes of the other; and although in certain cases a contralto may sing
with good effect music written for a male alto (e.g. in some oratorios), yet the converse is
scarcely ever true. [How to Sing, 1890]    As a type of saxophone, from 1869.


altogether

early 13c., altogedere, a strengthened form of all (also see together); used in the sense of a whole
from 1660s. The altogether nude is from 1894.


altruism (n .)

1853, unselfishness, opposite of egoism, from French altruisme, coined or popularized 1830 by French
philosopher Auguste Comte (1798-1857), from autrui, from Old French altrui, of or to others, from
Latin alteri, dative of alter other (see alter). Apparently suggested to Comte by French legal
phrase l'autrui, or in full, le bien, le droit d'autrui. The -l- is perhaps a reinsertion from the
Latin word.    There is a fable that when the badger had been stung all over by bees, a bear
consoled him by a rhapsodic account of how he himself had just breakfasted on their honey. The
badger replied peevishly, The stings are in my flesh, and the sweetness is on your muzzle. The bear,
it is said, was surprised at the badger's want of altruism. [George Eliot, Theophrastus Such, 1879]


altruist (n.)

1842, from French; see altruism + -ist.


altruistic (adj.)

1853, from French altruiste (adj.), from altruisme (see altruism) + -ic.


alum (n.)

late 14c., whitish mineral salt used as an astringent, dye, etc., from Old French alum, from Latin
alumen alum, literally bitter salt, cognate with Greek aludoimos bitter and perhaps with English
ale.


aluminium

see aluminum.


aluminum (n.)

1812, coined by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829), from alumina, name given 18c. to
aluminum oxide, from Latin alumen alum (see alum). Davy originally called it alumium (1808), then
amended this to aluminum, which remains the U.S. word, but British editors in 1812 further amended
it to aluminium, the modern preferred British form, to better harmonize with other metallic element
names (sodium, potassium, etc.).Aluminium, for so we shall take the liberty of writing the word, in
preference to aluminum, which has a less classical sound. [Quarterly Review, 1812]


alumna (n.)

see alumnus.


alumnae (n.)

see alumnus.


alumni (n.)

see alumnus.


alumnus (n.)

1640s, from Latin alumnus a pupil, literally foster son, vestigial present passive participle of
alere to nourish (see old), with ending akin to Greek -omenos. Plural is alumni. Fem. is alumna
(1882), fem. plural alumnae.


alveolar (adj.)

pertaining to alveoli, 1799, from Modern Latin alveolus socket of a tooth (see alveolus).


alveolus (n.)

1706, from Latin alveolus a tray, trough, basin; bed of a small river, diminutive of alvus belly,
stomach, paunch, bowels; hold of a ship, from PIE *aulo- hole, cavity (cognates: Greek aulos tube,
pipe, Old Church Slavonic uliji, Lithuanian aulys beehive (hollow trunk), Armenian yli pregnant).


always (adv.)

mid-14c., compound of Old English phrase ealne weg always, quite, perpetually, literally all the
way, with accusative of space or distance, though the oldest recorded usages refer to time; see all
+ way (n.). The adverbial genitive -s appeared early 13c. and is now the standard, though the
variant alway survived into 1800s. OED speculates allway was originally of space or distance, but
already in the oldest Eng. transferred to an extent of time.


Alyssum (n.)

genus name for plants of the mustard family, 1550s, from Latin alysson, from Greek alysson, which is
perhaps the neuter of adjective alyssos curing madness, from privative prefix a- + lyssa madness,
martial rage, fury, rabies, literally wolf-ness, related to lykos wolf (see wolf (n.)).


Alzheimer&#039;s disease

(senium pr&aelig;cox), 1912, title of article by S.C. Fuller published in Journal of Nervous and
Mental Diseases; named for German neurologist Alois Alzheimer (1864-1915). The name was not common
before 1970s; shortened form Alzheimer's first recorded 1954. The surname is from the place name
Alzheim, literally Old Hamlet.


am (v.)

Old English eom to be, to remain, (Mercian eam, Northumbrian am), from PIE *esmi- (cognates: Old
Norse emi, Gothic im, Hittite esmi, Old Church Slavonic jesmi, Lithuanian esmi), from root *es-, the
S-ROOT, which also yielded Greek esti-, Latin est, Sanskrit as-, and German ist.    In Old English
it existed only in present tense, all other forms being expressed in the W-BASE (see were, was).
This cooperative verb is sometimes referred to by linguists as *es-*wes-. Until the distinction
broke down 13c., *es-*wes- tended to express existence, with beon meaning something closer to come
to be (see be).    Old English am had two plural forms: 1. sind/sindon, sie and 2. earon/aron The s-
form (also used in the subjunctive) fell from use in English in the early 13c. (though it continues
in German sind, the 3rd person plural of to be) and was replaced by forms of be, but aron (aren,
arn, are, from Proto-Germanic *ar-, probably a variant of PIE root *es-) continued, and as am and be
merged it encroached on some uses that previously had belonged to be. By the early 1500s it had
established its place in standard English. Art became archaic in the 1800s.


amable (adj.)

friendly, courteous, early 15c., from Old French amable, from Latin amabilem lovely, from amare to
love (see Amy). Related: Amably; amability.


amah (n.)

wet-nurse, 1839, Anglo-Indian, from Portuguese ama nurse, from Medieval Latin amma mother, from PIE
root *am-, forming nursery words.


amain (adv.)

1530s, from main (adj.) by analogy with other words in a- (such as afoot).


amalgam (n.)

c.1400, blend of mercury with another metal; soft mass formed by chemical manipulation, from Old
French amalgame or directly from Medieval Latin amalgama, alloy of mercury (especially with gold or
silver), an alchemists' word, perhaps an alteration of Latin malagma poultice, plaster, probably
from Arabic al-malgham an emollient poultice or unguent for sores (especially warm) [Francis
Johnson, A Dictionary of Persian, Arabic, and English], perhaps from Greek malagma softening
substance, from malassein to soften, from malakos soft.


amalgamate (v.)

1650s, back-formation from amalgamation, or from adjective amalgamate (1640s) from amalgam.
Originally in metallurgy; figurative sense of to unite (races, etc.) is attested from 1802. Related:
Amalgamated; amalgamating. Earlier verb was amalgamen (1540s).


amalgamation (n.)

1610s, noun of action from archaic amalgam (v.) to alloy with mercury (see amalgamate). Figurative,
non-chemical sense of a combining into one uniform whole is attested from 1775.


amalgamize (v.)

1590s, from amalgam + -ize. Related: Amalgamized; amalgamizing.


Amanda

fem. proper name, literally worthy to be loved, fem. of Latin amandus pleasing, gerundive of amare
to love (see Amy). A top 10 list name for girls born in U.S. between 1976 and 1995.


amanuensis (n.)

one who takes dictation, 1610s, from Latin amanuensis adjective used as a noun, from servus a manu
secretary, literally servant from the hand, from a from + manu, ablative of manus hand (see manual
(adj.)).


amaranth (n.)

1610s, from French amarante, from Latin amarantus, from Greek amarantos, name of an unfading flower,
literally everlasting, from a- not + stem of marainein die away, waste away, quench, extinguish,
from PIE *mer- to rub away, harm (see nightmare). In classical use, a poet's word for an imaginary
flower that never fades. It was applied to a genus of ornamental plants 1550s. Ending influenced by
plant names with Greek -anthos flower.


amaranthine (adj.)

1660s, unfading, undying, poetic (apparently coined by Milton), also amarantine; see amaranth. Later
used of a purple color.


Amaretto

Italian almond-flavored liqueur, 1945 (the original brand, Amaretto di Saronno, dates to 1851), from
the Italian word for almond (q.v.), which did not acquire the excrescent -l- of the English word.
Sometimes confused with amoretto. Amoroso (literally lover), a type of sweetened sherry, is attested
from c.1870.


amarillo (n.)

name given to several species of American trees, from Spanish, from Arabic anbari yellow, amber-
colored, from anbar amber (see amber). The city Amarillo in Texas, U.S., may be so called from the
color of the banks of a nearby stream.


amaryllis (n.)

autumn-flowering bulbs, 1794, adopted by Linnaeus from Latin, from Greek Amaryllis, typical name of
a country girl or shepherdess (in Theocritus, Virgil, Ovid, etc.).


amass (v.)

late 15c., to heap up for oneself, from Old French amasser, from &agrave; to (see ad-) + masser (see
mass (n.1)). Related: Amassed; amassing.


amastia (n.)

medical Latin, from Greek amastos without breasts, from privative prefix a- (see a- (3)) + mastos
breast (see masto-) + -ia.


amateur (n.)

1784, one who has a taste for (something), from French amateur lover of, from Latin amatorem
(nominative amator) lover, agent noun from amatus, past participle of amare to love (see Amy).
Meaning dabbler (as opposed to professional) is from 1786. As an adjective, by 1838.


amateurish (adj.)

1863; from amateur + -ish. Related: Amateurishly; amateurishness.


amative (adj.)

1630s, pertaining to love, from Latin amat-, past participle stem of amare to love (see Amy) + -ive.


amatory (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to love (especially sexual love), from Latin amatorius loving, from amatus, past
participle of amare (see Amy).


amaze (v.)

early 13c., amasian stupefy, make crazy, from a-, probably used here as an intensive prefix, +
-masian, related to maze (q.v.). Sense of overwhelm with wonder is from 1580s. Related: Amazed;
amazing.


amazement (n.)

1590s, mental stupefaction, early use of the Latin suffix with a native verb, from amaze + -ment.
Meaning overwhelming wonder is c.1600.


amazing (adj.)

early 15c., stupefactive; 1590s, dreadful; present participle adjective from amaze. Sense of
wonderful is recorded from 1704. Related: Amazingly.


Amazon (n.)

late 14c., from Greek Amazon (mostly in plural Amazones) one of a race of female warriors in
Scythia, probably from an unknown non-Indo-European word, possibly from an Iranian compound *ha-maz-
an- (one) fighting together [Watkins], but in folk etymology long derived from a- without + mazos
breasts, hence the story that the Amazons cut or burned off one breast so they could draw bowstrings
more efficiently.    The river in South America (originally called by the Spanish Rio Santa Maria de
la Mar Dulce) rechristened by Francisco de Orellana, 1541, after an encounter with female warriors
of the Tapuyas (or, as some say, beardless, long-haired male tribesmen; still others hold that the
name is a corruption of a native word in Tupi or Guarani meaning wave).


ambagious (adj.)

1650s, from French ambagieux, from Latin ambagiosus, from ambages circuits, circumlocutions, from
amb- about (see ambi-) + agere to drive (see act (n.)).


ambassador (n.)

late 14c., also embassador, from Middle French ambassadeur, from Old French embassator, via
Proven&ccedil;al or Old Spanish from Latin ambactus a servant, vassal, from Celtic amb(i)actos a
messenger, servant, from PIE *ambhi- about (see ambi-) + *ag- drive, lead (see act (v.)). Compare
embassy. Forms in am- and em- were used indiscriminately 17c.-18c.


ambassadorial (adj.)

1759, from ambassador + -al (1).


amber (n.)

mid-14c., ambergris, perfume made from ambergris, from Old French ambre, from Medieval Latin ambar
ambergris, from Arabic 'anbar ambergris. In Europe, the sense was extended, inexplicably, to fossil
resins from the Baltic (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin; c.1400 in English), which has become the main
sense as the use of ambergris has waned. This formerly was known as white or yellow amber to
distinguish it from ambergris, which word entered English early 15c. from French, which
distinguished the two substances as ambre gris and amber jaune. The classical word for Baltic amber
was electrum (compare electric).


ambergris (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French ambre gris gray amber (see amber), a wax-like substance of ashy
colour, found floating in tropical seas, a morbid secretion from the intestines of the sperm-whale.
Used in perfumery, and formerly in cookery [OED]. Its origin was a mystery in Johnson's day, and he
records nine different theories. King Charles II's favorite dish was said to be eggs and ambergris
[Macauley, History of England]. French gris is from Frankish *gris or some other Germanic source
(cognates: Dutch grijs, Old High German gris; see gray). Praise is like ambergris; a little whiff of
it, by snatches, is very agreeable; but when a man holds a whole lump of it to his nose, it is a
stink and strikes you down. [Pope, c.1720]


ambi-

word-forming element meaning both, on both sides, from Latin ambi- around, round about, from PIE
*ambhi around (cognates: Greek amphi round about; Sanskrit abhitah on both sides, abhi toward, to;
Avestan aibi; Old English ymbe, German um; Gaulish ambi-, Old Irish imb- round about, about; Old
Church Slavonic oba; Lithuanian abu both). The PIE root probably is an ablative plural of *ant-bhi
from both sides, from *ant- front, forehead (see ante).


ambiance (n.)

1923, a reborrowing of the French form of ambience, used in art writing as a term meaning
atmospheric effect of an arrangement (see ambient).


ambidexterity (n.)

1650s, from obsolete adjective ambidexter two-sided, using both hands with equal facility, also
double-dealing, from Medieval Latin ambidexter (see ambidextrous) + -ity.


ambidextrous (adj.)

1640s, with -ous, from ambidexter (adj.) double-dealing (1610s), from French ambidextre or directly
from Latin ambidexter, literally right-handed on both sides, from ambi- both (see ambi-) + dexter
right-handed (see dexterity). Its opposite, ambilevous left-handed on both sides, clumsy (1640s) is
rare. Ambidexter as a noun, one who takes bribes from both sides, is attested from 1530s and is the
earliest form of the word in English; its sense of one who uses both hands equally well appears by
1590s.


Ambien

trade name for prescription medication Zolpidem, registered 1993 in U.S., no doubt suggested by
ambient or words like it in French.


ambience (n.)

1797, from French ambiance (see ambient). Compare ambiance.


ambient (adj.)

1590s, surrounding, encircling, from Latin ambientem (nominative ambiens) going round, present
participle of ambire to go around, from amb- around (see ambi-) + ire go (see ion). The ground sense
of revolving led to encircling, lying all around.


ambiguity (n.)

c.1400, uncertainty, doubt, indecision, hesitation, also from Medieval Latin ambiguitatem
(nominative ambiguitas) double meaning, equivocalness, double sense, noun of state from ambiguus
(see ambiguous).


ambiguous (adj.)

1520s, from Latin ambiguus having double meaning, shifting, changeable, doubtful, adjective derived
from ambigere to dispute about, literally to wander, from ambi- about (see ambi-) + agere drive,
lead, act (see act). Sir Thomas More (1528) seems to have first used it in English, but ambiguity
dates back to c.1400. Related: Ambiguously; ambiguousness.


ambisexual (adj.)

unisex (of clothing), also bisexual, 1912 in the jargon of psychology, from ambi- + sexual. As a
humorous coinage based on ambidextrous, ambisextrous is recorded from 1929.


ambisexuality (n.)

1916, from ambisexual + -ity.


ambit (n.)

late 14c., space surrounding a building or town; precinct; 1590s, a circuit, from Latin ambitus a
going round, past participle of ambire to go round, to go about (see ambient).


ambition (n.)

mid-14c., from Middle French ambition or directly from Latin ambitionem (nominative ambitio) a going
around, especially to solicit votes, hence a striving for favor, courting, flattery; a desire for
honor, thirst for popularity, noun of action from past participle stem of ambire to go around (see
ambient).    Rarely used in the literal sense in English, where it carries the secondary Latin sense
of eager or inordinate desire of honor or preferment. In early use always pejorative, of inordinate
or overreaching desire; ambition was grouped with pride and vainglory.


ambitious (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin ambitiosus going around to canvass for office, from ambitio (see ambition).
Related: Ambitiously.


ambivalence (n.)

simultaneous conflicting feelings, 1924 (1912 as ambivalency), from German Ambivalenz, coined 1910
by Swiss psychologist Eugen Bleuler (1857-1939) on model of German Equivalenz equivalence, etc.,
from Latin ambi- both (see ambi-) + valentia strength, from present participle of valere be strong
(see valiant). A psychological term that by 1929 had taken on a broader literary and general sense.


ambivalent (adj.)

1916, originally a term in psychology; back-formation from ambivalence. In general use by 1929.


ambivert (n.)

person exhibiting features of an extrovert and an introvert, coined by Kimball Young in Source Book
for Social Psychology (1927), from ambi- about, around + Latin vertere, as in introvert. Related:
Ambiversion.


amble (v.)

early 14c., from Old French ambler walk as a horse does, from Latin ambulare to walk, to go about,
take a walk, perhaps a compound of ambi- around (see ambi-) and -ulare, from PIE root *el- to go
(cognates: Greek ale wandering, alaomai wander about; Latvian aluot go around or astray). Until
1590s used only of horses or persons on horseback. Related: Ambled; ambling. As a noun, from late
14c.


ambler (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from amble (v.).


amblosis (n.)

abortion, miscarriage, 1706, Modern Latin, from Greek amblosis abortion, noun of action from
ambloesthai to come to nought. Related: Amblotic.


amblyopia (n.)

1706, weakening of the eyesight, medical Latin, from Greek amblyopia dim-sightedness, noun of action
from amblys dulled, blunt + ops eye (see eye (n.)). Related: Amblyopic.


Ambrose

masc. proper name, from Latin Ambrosius, from Greek ambrosios immortal, belonging to the immortals
(see ambrosia). The Ambrosian Library in Milan is named for Saint Ambrose (d.397), bishop of Milan.


ambrosia (n.)

1550s, favored food or drink of the gods, from Latin ambrosia, from Greek ambrosia food of the gods,
fem. of ambrosios, probably literally of the immortals, from a- not (see a- (3)) + mbrotos, related
to mortos mortal, from PIE *mer- to die (see mortal (adj.)). Applied to certain herbs by Pliny and
Dioscorides; used of various foods for mortals since 1680s (originally of fruit drinks); used
figuratively for anything delightful by 1731.


ambrosial (adj.)

1590s, immortal, divine, from Latin ambrosius, from Greek ambrosios (see ambrosia).


ambrotype (n.)

1855, American English, apparently from Greek ambrotos immortal, imperishable (see ambrosia), with
second element from daguerreotype. A type of photograph on glass with lights given by silver and
shades by a dark background showing through.    This invention consists in an improved process of
taking photographic pictures upon glass, and also of beautifying and preserving the same, which
process I have styled ambrotype. My improved process has reference to the art of taking pictures
photographically on a film of collodion upon the surface of a sheet of glass, the collodion being
suitably prepared for the purpose. By the use of the said process, the beauty and permanency of such
pictures are greatly increased, and I have on this account styled the process ambrotype, from the
Greek word ambrotos, immortal. [Specification of the Patent granted to James A. Cutting, of Boston,
in the United States of America, Photographer, for an Improved Process of taking Photographic
Pictures upon Glass and also of Beautifying and Preserving the same. Dated London, July 26, 1854,
printed in Journal of the Franklin Institute, September 1855]


ambulance (n.)

1798, mobile or field hospital, from French (h&ocirc;pital) ambulant, literally walking (hospital),
from Latin ambulantem (nominative ambulans), present participle of ambulare to walk (see amble).
AMBULANCE, s. f. a moveable hospital. These were houses constructed in a manner so as to be taken to
pieces, and carried from place to place, according to the movements of the army; and served as
receptacles in which the sick and wounded men might be received and attended. [Lexicographica-
Neologica Gallica (The Neological French Dictionary), William Dupr&#233;, London, 1801]    The word
was not common in English until the meaning transferred from field hospital to vehicle for conveying
wounded from field (1854) during the Crimean War. In late 19c. U.S. the word was used dialectally to
mean prairie wagon. Ambulance-chaser as a contemptuous term for a type of lawyer dates from 1897.


ambulant (adj.)

1610s, from Latin ambulantem (nominative ambulans), present participle of ambulare (see amble). Of
diseases, denoting cases in which the patient may be up and around, by 1913.


ambulate (v.)

1620s, from Latin ambulatus, past participle of ambulare to walk (see amble). Related: Ambulated;
ambulating.


ambulation (n.)

1540s, from Latin ambulationem (nominative ambulatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
ambulare (see amble).


ambulatory (adj.)

pertaining to walking; also shifting, not permanent, 1620s, from Latin ambulatorius of or pertaining
to a walker; movable, from ambulator, agent noun from past participle stem of ambulare to walk (see
amble). Middle English had ambulary movable (mid-15c.).


ambulatory (n.)

from Medieval Latin ambulatorium, from Latin ambulatorius movable, from ambulare (see amble).


ambuscade (n.)

1580s, essentially a variant form of ambush (n.), representing a reborrowing of that French word
after it had been Italianized. Ambuscade is from French embuscade (16c.), Gallicized from Italian
imboscata, literally a hiding in the bush, compounded from the same elements as Old French
embuscher. Sometimes in English as ambuscado, with faux Spanish ending of the sort popular in 17c.


ambush (v.)

c.1300, from Old French embuscher (13c., Modern French emb&#251;cher) to lay an ambush, from en- in
+ busch wood, apparently from Frankish *busk bush, woods (see bush (n.)). Related: Ambushed;
ambushing.


ambush (n.)

late 15c., embushe, from the English verb or from Middle French embusche, from Old French embuscher
(see ambush (v.)). Earlier was ambushment (late 14c.). Figurative use by 1590s.


ame damnee (n.)

devoted adherent, toady, 1823, from French &acirc;me damn&eacute;e familiar spirit, literally damned
soul, originally a soul damned by compact with a controlling demon.


Amelia

fem. proper name, of Germanic origin, literally laborious (cognates: Old Norse ama to trouble),
later assimilated with Roman gens name Aemilia.


ameliorate (v.)

1728, perhaps a back-formation from amelioration on pattern of French am&eacute;liorer. The simpler
form meliorate was used in Middle English. Related: Ameliorated; ameliorating.


amelioration (n.)

1650s, from French am&eacute;lioration, from Old French ameillorer (12c.), from a to (see ad-) +
meillior (Modern French me&#236;lleur) to better, from Late Latin meliorare improve, from Latin
melior better, perhaps originally stronger, and related to Greek mala very, very much, from PIE
*mel- strong, great (see multi-).


ameliorative (adj.)

1796, from ameliorate + -ive.


amen

Old English, from Late Latin amen, from Ecclesiastical Greek amen, from Hebrew amen truth, used
adverbially as an expression of agreement (as in Deut. xxvii:26, I Kings i:36; compare Modern
English verily, surely, absolutely in the same sense), from Semitic root a-m-n to be trustworthy,
confirm, support. Used in Old English only at the end of Gospels, otherwise translated as
So&eth;lic! or Swa hit ys, or Sy! As an expression of concurrence after prayers, it is recorded from
early 13c.


amenability (n.)

1761; see amenable + -ity.


amenable (adj.)

1590s, liable, from Anglo-French amenable, Middle French amener answerable (to the law), from
&agrave; to (see ad-) + mener to lead, from Latin minare to drive (cattle) with shouts, variant of
minari threaten (see menace (n.)). Sense of tractable is from 1803, from notion of disposed to
answer or submit to influence. Related: Amenably.


amend (v.)

early 13c., to free from faults, rectify, from Old French amender (12c.), from Latin emendare to
correct, free from fault, from ex- out (see ex-) + menda fault, blemish, from PIE *mend- physical
defect, fault (cognates: Sanskrit minda physical blemish, Old Irish mennar stain, blemish, Welsh
mann sign, mark).    Supplanted in senses of repair, cure by its shortened offspring mend (v.).
Meaning to add to legislation (ostensibly to correct or improve it) is recorded from 1777. Related:
Amended; amending.


amendment (n.)

early 13c., betterment, improvement; c.1300, of persons, correction, reformation, from Old French
amendment, from amender (see amend). Sense expanded to include correction of error in a legal
process (c.1600) and alteration of a writ or bill to remove its faults (1690s).


amends (n.)

early 14c., restitution, collective singular, from Old French amendes fine, penalty, plural of
amende reparation, from amender to amend (see amend).


amenities (n.)

creature comforts of a town, house, etc. 1908, plural of amenity. Latin amoena, plural of amoenus,
also was used as a noun with a sense of pleasant places.


amenity (n.)

late 14c., quality of being pleasant or agreeable, from Old French amenite, from Latin amoenitatem
(nominative amoenitas) delightfulness, pleasantness, from amoenus pleasant, perhaps related to amare
to love (see Amy).


amenorrhea (n.)

1804, Modern Latin, from Greek privative prefix a- not (see a- (3)) + men month (see moon (n.)) +
rhein to flow (see rheum). Related: amenorrheal.


ament (n.)

person born an idiot, 1894, from Latin amentia madness, from amentem mad, from a- away from + mentem
mind (see mind (n.)).


amentia (n.)

mental deficiency, late 14c., from Latin amentia madness, from amentem mad, from a- away from +
mentem mind (see mind (n.)).


Amerasian

1966, noun and adjective, from American + Asian; coined in reference to children fathered by U.S.
servicemen stationed in Asia during the Cold War.


amerce (v.)

1215, earlier amercy, Anglo-French amercier to fine, from merci mercy, grace (see mercy). The legal
phrase estre a merci to be at the mercy of (a tribunal, etc.) was corrupted to estre amerci&eacute;
in an example of how a legalese adverbial phrase can become a verb (see abandon). The sense often
was to fine arbitrarily.   Frans hom ne seit amerciez pour petit forfet. [Magna Charta]    Related:
Amercement; amerciable.


America

1507, in Cartographer Martin Waldseem&uuml;ller's treatise Cosmographiae Introductio, from Modern
Latin Americanus, after Amerigo Vespucci (1454-1512) who made two trips to the New World as a
navigator and claimed to have discovered it. His published works put forward the idea that it was a
new continent, and he was first to call it Novus Mundus New World. Amerigo is more easily Latinized
than Vespucci.    The name Amerigo is Germanic, said to derive from Gothic Amalrich, literally work-
ruler. The Old English form of the name has come down as surnames Emmerich, Emery, etc. The Italian
fem. form merged into Amelia.    Colloquial pronunciation Ameri-kay, not uncommon 19c., goes back to
at least 1643 and a poem that rhymed the word with away. Amerika U.S. society viewed as racist,
fascist, oppressive, etc. first attested 1969; the spelling is German, but may also suggest the KKK.
It is interesting to remember that the song which is essentially Southern -- Dixie -- and that which
is essentially Northern -- Yankee Doodle -- never really had any serious words to them. [The
Bookman, June 1910]   <hr />   FREDONIA, FREDONIAN, FREDE, FREDISH, &amp;c.; &amp;c.;    These
extraordinary words, which have been deservedly ridiculed here as well as in England, were proposed
sometime ago, and countenanced by two or three individuals, as names for the territory and people of
the United States. The general term American is now commonly understood (at least in all places
where the English language is spoken,) to mean an inhabitant of the United States; and is so
employed, except where unusual precision of language is required. [Pickering, 1816]


American

1570s (n.); 1590s (adj.), from Modern Latin Americanus, from America (q.v.); originally in reference
to what now are called Native Americans; the sense of resident of North America of European
(originally British) descent is first recorded 1640s (adj.); 1765 (n.).


American dream

coined 1931 by James Truslow Adams (1878-1949), U.S. writer and popular historian (unrelated to the
Massachusetts Adamses), in Epic of America.    [The American Dream is] that dream of a land in which
life should be better and richer and fuller for everyone, with opportunity for each according to
ability or achievement. It is a difficult dream for the European upper classes to interpret
adequately, and too many of us ourselves have grown weary and mistrustful of it. It is not a dream
of motor cars and high wages merely, but a dream of social order in which each man and each woman
shall be able to attain to the fullest stature of which they are innately capable, and be recognized
by others for what they are, regardless of the fortuitous circumstances of birth or position.
[Adams]    Others have used the term as they will.


Americanism (n.)

1781, in reference to words or phrases distinct from British use, coined by John Witherspoon
(1723-1794), president of Princeton College, from American + -ism. (American English English
language as spoken in the United States is first recorded 1806, in Webster.) Americanism in the
patriotic sense attachment to the U.S. is attested from 1797, first found in the writings of Thomas
Jefferson.    I have been not a little disappointed, and made suspicious of my own judgment, on
seeing the Edinburgh Reviews, the ablest critics of the age, set their faces against the
introduction of new words into the English language; they are particularly apprehensive that the
writers of the United States will adulterate it. Certainly so great growing a population, spread
over such an extent of country, with such a variety of climates, of productions, of arts, must
enlarge their language, to make it answer its purpose of expressing all ideas, the new as well as
the old. [Jefferson to John Waldo, Aug. 16, 1813]


Americanization (n.)

1816, noun of state or action from Americanize.


Americanize (v.)

1797, from American + -ize. Related: Americanized; Americanizing.


Amerind

1899, coined by Maj. John Wesley Powell (1834-1902) at the Bureau of American Ethnology, where he
was director, from American + Indian.


Amerindian (adj.)

1900; see Amerind, of which it is the derived adjective.


Ameslan (n.)

1972, acronym of Ame(rican) S(ign) Lan(guage), known by that name since 1960, but its history goes
back to 1817, evolving from French Sign Language (introduced at American School for the Deaf in
Hartford, Conn.) and indigenous sign languages, especially that of Martha's Vineyard. [See Everyone
Here Spoke Sign Language, Nora Ellen Groce, Harvard University Press, 1985]


amethyst (n.)

violet quartz, late 13c., ametist, from Old French ametiste (Modern French am&eacute;thyste) and
directly from Medieval Latin amatistus, from Latin amethystus, from Greek amethystos amethyst,
literally not intoxicating, from a- not + methyskein make drunk, from methys wine (see mead (n.1));
based on the stone's ancient reputation for preventing drunkenness, which was perhaps sympathetic
magic suggested by its wine-like color. People wore rings made of it before drinking. Spelling
restored from Middle English ametist.


Amex

blend of American Express, trademark registered in U.S. 1950 by American Express Co., originally an
express mail service. Its credit card dates from 1958.


Amharic

principal language of Ethiopia, 1813, from Amhara, name of a central province in Ethiopia.


ami (n.)

14c., friend lover, from Old French amy, ami (see Amy).


amiability (n.)

1807; see amiable + -ity. Amiableness is recorded from 1530s.


amiable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French amiable, from Late Latin amicabilis friendly, from amicus friend, related
to amare to love (see Amy). The form confused in Old French with amable lovable, from Latin amare.
Reborrowed later in proper Latin form as amicable.


amicability (n.)

1650s, see amicable + -ity.


amicable (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin amicabilis friendly, a word in Roman law, from Latin amicus friend,
related to amare to love (see Amy). Also see amiable.


amicably (adv.)

1630s, from amicable + -ly (2).


amicus curiae

1610s, Latin, literally friend of the court; plural is amici curiae. From Latin amicus friend,
related to amare to love (see Amy) + curia court (see curia).


amid (prep.)

late 14c., from amidde (c.1200), from Old English on middan in the middle, from dative singular of
midde mid, middle (see middle); the phrase evidently was felt as in (the) middle and thus followed
by a genitive case, and if this had endured we would follow it today with of. (See amidst for
further evolution along this line).    The same applies to equivalents in Latin (in medio) and Greek
(en meso), both originally adjective phrases which evolved to take the genitive case. But in later
Old English on middan also was treated as a preposition and followed by dative. Used in compounds
from early 13c. (such as amidships, attested from 1690s and retaining the genitive, as the compounds
usually did in early Middle English, suggesting this one is considerably older than the written
record of it.)


amidst (prep.)

a variant of amid (q.v.) with adverbial genitive -s and parasitic -t. Amidde became amyddes (13c.)
and acquired a -t by 1560s, probably by association with superlatives in -st.    There is a tendency
to use amidst more distributively than amid, e.g. of things scattered about, or a thing moving, in
the midst of others. [OED]


amigo (n.)

friend, comrade, often a form of address, 1837, American English (first attested in the phrase
adios, Amigo), from Spanish amigo, literally friend, from Latin amicus friend, related to amare to
love (see Amy).


amine (n.)

compound in which one of the hydrogen atoms of ammonia is replaced by a hydrocarbon radical, 1863,
from ammonia + chemical suffix -ine (2).


amino-

1887, as an element in compound words involving chemicals, from comb. form of amine. Amino acid is
attested from 1898.


amir (n.)

1610s; the same word as emir (q.v.), but generally used of contemporary Indian or Afghan rulers as
opposed to historical ones.


Amish (adj.)

1844, American English, from the name of Jacob Amman, 17c. Swiss Mennonite preacher who founded the
sect. Originally spelled Omish, which reflects the pronunciation in Pennsylvania German dialect. As
a noun, by 1884.


amiss (adv.)

mid-13c., amis off the mark, also out of order, literally on the miss, from a in, on (see a- (1)) +
missen fail to hit (see miss (v.)). To take (something) amiss originally (late 14c.) was to miss the
meaning of (see mistake). Now it means to misinterpret in a bad sense.


amity (n.)

mid-15c., friendly relations, from Old French amitie (13c.); earlier amistie (11c.), from Vulgar
Latin *amicitatem (nominative *amicitas) friendship, corresponding to Latin amicitia, from amicus
(adj.) friendly; related to amare to love (see Amy).


ammeter (n.)

instrument for measuring the strength of electric currents, 1882, from ampere + -meter.


ammo (n.)

1917, shortened form of ammunition.


ammonia (n.)

1799, Modern Latin, coined 1782 by Swedish chemist Torbern Bergman (1735-1784) for gas obtained from
sal ammoniac, salt deposits containing ammonium chloride found near temple of Jupiter Ammon (from
Egyptian God Amun) in Libya, from Greek ammoniakos belonging to Ammon. The shrine was ancient
already in Augustus' day, and the salts were prepared from the sands where the camels waited while
their masters prayed for good omens [Shipley].    There also was a gum form of sal ammoniac, from a
wild plant that grew near the shrine, and across North Africa and Asia. A less likely theory traces
the name to Greek Armeniakon Armenian, because the substance also was found in Armenia. Also known
as spirit of hartshorn and volatile or animal alkali.


ammonite (n.)

cephalopod mollusk, 1758, from French (Breyn, 1732), better established [Century Dictionary] by
French zoologist Jean Guillaume Brugui&egrave;re (c.1750-1798) in 1789, from Medieval Latin (cornu)
Ammonis horn of Ammon, the Egyptian god of life and reproduction, who was depicted with ram's horns,
which the fossils resemble. The resemblance also was noted in ancient times.


ammunition (n.)

1620s, from French soldiers' faulty separation of Middle French la munition into l'ammunition; from
Latin munitionem (nominative munitio) a fortifying (see munition), and at first meaning all military
supplies in general. The mistake in the word perhaps was by influence of French a(d)monition
warning. The error was corrected in French (Modern French munition), but retained in English.


amnesia (n.)

loss of memory, 1786 (as a Greek word in English from 1670s), Modern Latin, coined from Greek
amnesia forgetfulness, from a-, privative prefix, not (see a- (3)) + mimneskesthai to recall, cause
to remember, a reduplicated form related to Greek mnemnon mindful, mneme memory, mnasthai to
remember; from PIE root *men- to think, remember (see mind (n.)).


amnesiac (n.)

one affected by amnesia, 1913, from amnesia (q.v.).


amnesic (adj.)

pertaining to amnesia, 1863; see amnesia + -ic.


amnestic (adj.)

causing loss of memory, 1879, from Greek amnestia oblivion, forgetfulness; see amnesia.


amnesty (n.)

pardon of past offenses, 1570s, from French amnestie intentional overlooking, from Latin amnestia,
from Greek amnestia forgetfulness (of wrong); an amnesty, from a-, privative prefix, not (see a-
(3)), + mnestis remembrance, related to mnaomai I remember (see mind (n.)). As a verb, from 1809.
Amnesty International founded 1961 as Appeal for Amnesty. The name was changed 1963.


amniocentesis (n.)

1958, Modern Latin, from amnion (see amniotic)  + centesis surgical puncture, from Greek kentesis a
pricking, from kentein to prick, related to kontos pole (see center (n.)).


amnion (n.)

1660s, Modern Latin, from Greek amnion membrane around a fetus, said to be originally bowl in which
the blood of victims was caught [Liddell &amp; Scott], which is variously said to be of unknown
origin, from ame bucket, or a diminutive of amnos lamb.


amniotic (adj.)

1822, from Modern Latin amnion (see amnion) + -ic.


amoeba (n.)

1855, from Modern Latin Amoeba, genus name (1841), from Greek amoibe change, related to ameibein to
change, exchange, from PIE *e-meigw-, extended form of root *mei- (1) to change, go, move (see
mutable). So called for its constantly changing shape. Related: Amoebaean; amoebic.


amoebae

classical plural of amoeba; see -ae.


amok (adv.)

in verbal phrase run amok first recorded 1670s, from Malay amuk attacking furiously. Earlier the
word was used as a noun or adjective meaning a frenzied Malay, originally in the Portuguese form
amouco or amuco.There are some of them [the Javanese] who ... go out into the streets, and kill as
many persons as they meet. ... These are called Amuco. [The Book of Duarte Barbosa: An Account of
the Countries Bordering on the Indian Ocean and Their Inhabitants, c.1516, English translation]
Compare amuck.


amole (n.)

1831, from Mexican Spanish amole, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) amolli soap-root.


among (prep.)

early 12c., from Old English onmang, from phrase on gemang in a crowd, from gemengan to mingle (see
mingle). Collective prefix ge- dropped 12c. leaving onmong, amang, among. Compare Old Saxon angimang
among, amid; Old Frisian mong among.


amongst (prep.)

mid-13c., amonges, from among with adverbial genitive. Parasitic -t first attested 16c. (see
amidst). It is well established in the south of England, but not much heard in the north. By similar
evolutions, alongst also existed in Middle English.


amontillado (n.)

a variety of sherry wine, 1825, from Spanish amontillado, from a from (from Latin ad; see ad-) +
Montilla, name of a town in the province of Cordova. Formerly the name of a regional wine, now of a
type of sherry.


amoral (adj.)

ethically indifferent, 1882, a hybrid formed from Greek privative prefix a- not (see a- (3)) +
moral, which is derived from Latin. First used by Robert Louis Stephenson (1850-1894) as a
differentiation from immoral.


amoretto (n.)

1590s, from Italian, literally little love, a diminutive of amore love (see Amy). This word was
variously applied to love sonnets, cupids, etc. Also compare Amaretto.


amorous (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French amorous (Modern French amoureux), from Late Latin amorosum, from amor love,
from amare to love (see Amy). Related: Amorously; amorousness.


amorphous (adj.)

shapeless, 1731, from Modern Latin amorphus, from Greek amorphos without form, shapeless, deformed,
from a- without (see a- (3)) + morphe form (see Morpheus). Related: Amorphously; amorphousness.


amortisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of amortization; see -ize.


amortise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of amortize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Amortised; amortising.


amortization (n.)

1670s, in reference to lands given to religious orders, from Medieval Latin amortizationem
(nominative amortizatio), noun of action from past participle stem of amortizare (see amortize). Of
debts, from 1824.


amortize (v.)

late 14c., from Old French amortiss-, present participle stem of amortir deaden, from Vulgar Latin
*admortire to extinguish, from ad- to (see ad-) + mortus dead, from Latin mors death (see mortal
(adj.)). Originally a legal term for an act of alienating lands. Meaning extinguish a debt (in form
amortization) is attested from 1824. Related: Amortized; amortizing.


Amos

masc. proper name; third of the prophets in the Old Testament; from Greek, from Hebrew Amos,
literally borne (by God).


amount (n.)

1710, from amount (v.).


amount (v.)

late 13c., to go up, rise, mount (a horse), from Old French amonter, from a mont upward, literally
to the mountain, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + montem (nominative mons) mountain (see mount (n.)).
Meaning to rise in number or quality (so as to reach) is from c.1300. Related: Amounted; amounting.


amour (n.)

c.1300, love, from Old French amour, from Latin amorem (nominative amor) love, affection, strong
friendly feeling (it could be used of sons or brothers, but especially of sexual love), from amare
to love (see Amy). The accent shifted 15c.-17c. to the first syllable as the word became nativized,
then shifted back as the naughty or intriguing sense became primary and the word was felt to be a
euphemism.    A common ME word for love, later accented &aacute;mour (cf. enamour). Now with
suggestion of intrigue and treated as a F[rench] word. [Weekley]


amour-propre (n.)

1775, French, sensitive self-love, self-esteem; see amour and proper.   Vanity usually gives the
meaning as well, &amp;, if as well, then better. [Fowler]    The term was in Middle English as
proper love self-love.


amoxycillin (n.)

1971, contracted from amino- + oxy- + ending from penicillin.


Amoy

old name for the island of southeastern China, now known as Xiamen. From 1851 as the name of a
dialect of Chinese.


amp (n.)

1886 as an abbreviation of ampere; 1967 as an abbreviation of amplifier.


amperage (n.)

strength of an electric current, 1889, from ampere on model of voltage.


ampere (n.)

1881, the current that one volt can send through one ohm, from French amp&egrave;re, named for
French physicist Andr&eacute;-Marie Amp&egrave;re (1775-1836). Shortened form amp is attested from
1886.


ampersand (n.)

1837, contraction of and per se and, meaning (the character) '&amp;' by itself is 'and'  (a hybrid
phrase, partly in Latin, partly in English). The symbol is based on the Latin word et and, and comes
from an old Roman system of shorthand signs (ligatures), attested in Pompeiian graffiti, but not (as
sometimes stated) from the Tironian Notes, which was a different form of shorthand, probably
invented by Cicero's companion Marcus Tullius Tiro, which used a different symbol, something like a
reversed capital gamma, to indicate et.    This Tironian symbol was maintained by some medieval
scribes, including Anglo-Saxon chroniclers, who sprinkled their works with a symbol like a numeral 7
to indicate the word and. In old schoolbooks the ampersand was printed at the end of the alphabet
and thus by 1880s had acquired a slang sense of posterior, rear end, hindquarters.


amphetamine (n.)

1938, contracted from alphamethyl-phenethylamine.


amphi-

before a vowel amph-, word-forming element from Greek amphi- both, of both kinds, on both sides,
around, comb. form of amphi round about, around; cognate with Latin ambi- (see ambi-).


amphibian (adj.)

1630s, having two modes of existence, of doubtful nature, from Greek amphibia, neuter plural of
amphibios living a double life, from amphi- of both kinds (see amphi-) + bios life (see bio-).
Formerly used by zoologists to describe all sorts of combined natures (including otters and seals),
the biological sense class of animals between fishes and reptiles that live both on land and in
water and the noun derivative both are first recorded 1835. Amphibia was used in this sense from
c.1600 and has been a zoological classification since c.1819.


amphibious (adj.)

1640s, from Greek amphibios having a double life (see amphibian). Of motor vehicles, from 1915.


amphibrach (n.)

1580s, from Latin amphibrachus, from Greek amphibrakhys, a foot consisting of a long syllable
between two short, literally short at both ends, from amphi- on both sides (see amphi-) + brakhys
short (see brief (adj.)).


Amphictyonic League

1753, one of several ancient Greek confederations of neighboring states, from Greek amphiktionikos,
from amphiktiones neighbors, literally they that dwell round about, from amphi- on both sides (see
amphi-) + second element related to ktizein to create, found, ktoina habitation, township, from PIE
root *tkei- to settle, dwell, be home (see home (n.)).


amphigory (n.)

1809, burlesque nonsense writing or verse, from French amphigouri, of unknown origin, perhaps from
Greek amphi- (see amphi-) + gyros circle, thus circle on both sides, or second element may be from
Greek -agoria speech (compare allegory, category). Related: Amphigoric.


Amphiscians (n.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin Amphiscii, from Greek amphiskioi inhabitants of the tropics, literally
throwing a shadow both ways, from amphi- on both sides (see amphi-) + skia shadow (see shine (v.)).
Inhabitants of torrid zones, so called because they are people whose shadow is sometimes to the
North, and sometimes to the South [Cockerham, 1623].


amphitheater (n.)

late 14c., from Latin amphitheatrum, from Greek amphitheatron double theater, amphitheater, neuter
of amphitheatros with spectators all around, from amphi- on both sides (see amphi-) + theatron
theater (see theater). Classical theaters were semi-circles, thus two together made an amphi-
theater.


amphitheatre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of amphitheater. See -er.


amphora (n.)

early 14c., two-handled vessel for holding wine, oil, etc., from Latin amphora from Greek amphoreus
an amphora, jar, urn, contraction of amphiphoreus, literally two-handled, from amphi- on both sides
(see amphi-) + phoreus bearer, related to pherein to bear (see infer).  Also a liquid measure in the
ancient world, in Greece equal to 9 gallons, in Rome to 6 gallons, 7 pints.


amphoteric (adj.)

neither acid nor alkaline, 1832, from Greek amphoteros each or both of two, variant of amphi-.


ample (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French ample, from Latin amplus large, spacious, related to ampla handle,
grip.


amplification (n.)

1540s, enlargement, from Latin amplificationem (nominative amplificatio) a widening, extending, noun
of action from past participle stem of amplificare (see amplify). Electronics sense is from 1915.


amplifier (n.)

1540s; agent noun from amplify. Electronic sense is from 1914; shortened form amp is from 1967.
Alternative stentorphone (1921) did not catch on.


amplify (v.)

early 15c., to enlarge or expand, from Middle French amplifier, from Latin amplificare to enlarge,
from amplificus splendid, from amplus large (see ample) + the root of facere make, do (see
factitious). Meaning augment in volume or amount is from 1570s. Restriction of use to sound seems to
have emerged in the electronic age, c.1915, in reference to radio technology.


amplitude (n.)

1540s, from Middle French amplitude or directly from Latin amplitudinem (nominative amplitudo) wide
extent, width, from amplus (see ample). Amplitude modulation in reference to radio wave broadcast
(as opposed to frequency modulation) first attested 1921, usually abbreviated a.m.


amply (adv.)

1550s, from ample + -ly (2).


ampoule (n.)

small bottle or flask, especially one used for holy liquids, c.1200, from Old French ampole, from
Latin ampulla small globular flask or bottle, of uncertain origin, perhaps a contracted form of
amphora.


ampul (n.)

sealed container holding a dose of medicine, 1907, from French ampul (1886), from Latin ampulla (see
ampoule). A modern borrowing of the word represented by Middle English ampoule.


ampulla (n.)

late 14c., type of globular ancient Roman vessel; see ampoule.


amputate (v.)

1630s, back-formation from amputation or else from Latin amputatus, past participle of amputare to
cut off, to prune. Related: Amputated; amputating.


amputation (n.)

1610s, a cutting off of tree branches, a pruning, also operation of cutting off a limb, etc., of a
body, from Middle French amputation or directly from Latin amputationem (nominative amputatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of amputare cut off, lop off; cut around, to prune, from am(bi)-
about (see ambi-) + putare to prune, trim (see pave).


amputee (n.)

1910, perhaps on a French model; see amputation + -ee.


Amsterdam

principal city of the Netherlands; the name is a reference to the dam built on the Amstel river.
Prevalence of dam in Dutch place names reflects the geography of Holland.


amt (n.)

territorial division in Denmark and Norway, from Danish amt, from German Amt office, from Old High
German ambaht, of Celtic origin, related to Gallo-Roman ambactus servant (see ambassador).


amtrac (n.)

amphibious assault vehicle, 1944, from amphibious + tractor.


Amtrak

U.S. government-run railway corporation, 1971, contraction of American Track. Also is known as
National Railway Passenger Corp.


amuck (adv.)

17c., variant of amok; treated as a muck by Dryden, Byron, etc., and defended by Fowler, who
considered amok didacticism.


amulet (n.)

mid-15c., amalettys, from Latin amuletum (Pliny) thing worn as a charm against spells, disease,
etc., of uncertain origin, perhaps related to amoliri to avert, to carry away, remove. Not recorded
again in English until c.1600; the 15c. use may be via French.


amuse (v.)

late 15c., to divert the attention, beguile, delude, from Middle French amuser divert, cause to
muse, from a at, to (but here probably a causal prefix) + muser ponder, stare fixedly (see muse
(v.)). Sense of divert from serious business, tickle the fancy of is recorded from 1630s, but
through 18c. the primary meaning was deceive, cheat by first occupying the attention. Bemuse retains
more of the original meaning. Related: Amused; amusing.


amusement (n.)

c.1600, diversion of attention, especially in military actions, from French amusement, noun of
action from amuser (see amuse).    And because all bold and irreverent Speeches touching matters of
high nature, and all malicious and false Reports tending to Sedition, or to the Amusement of Our
People, are punishable ... (etc.) [Charles II, Proclamation of Oct. 26, 1688]  Meaning a pastime,
play, game, anything which pleasantly diverts the attention (from duty, work, etc.) is from 1670s,
originally depreciative; meaning pleasurable diversion attested from 1690s. Amusement hall is from
1862; amusement park first recorded 1897.


amusing (adj.)

c.1600, cheating; present participle adjective from amuse (v.). Sense of interesting is from 1712;
that of pleasantly entertaining, tickling to the fancy is from 1826. Noted late 1920s as a vogue
word. Amusive has been tried in all senses since 18c. and might be useful, but it never caught on.
Related: Amusingly.


Amy

fem. proper name, from Old French Amee, literally beloved, from fem. past participle of amer to
love, from Latin amare, perhaps from PIE *am-a-, suffixed form of root *am-, a Latin and Celtic root
forming various nursery words for mother, aunt, etc. (such as Latin amita aunt).


amygdala (n.)

the tonsils, 1540s (amygdal), from Latin, from Greek amygdale almond (see almond). The anatomical
use is as a direct translation of Arabic al-lauzatani the two tonsils, literally the two almonds, so
called by Arabic physicians for fancied resemblance. From early 15c. as amygdales tonsils; as
almonds from mid-12c.


amyl (n.)

hydrocarbon radical, 1850, from Latin amylum, from Greek amylon fine meal, starch, noun use of
neuter of adjective amylos not ground at the mill, ground by hand, from a-, privative prefix, not +
myle mill (see mill (n.1)). So called because first obtained from the distilled spirits of potato or
grain starch (though it also is obtained from other sources).


amylase (n.)

enzyme which brings about the hydrolysis of starch, 1893, from amyl + chemical suffix -ase.


amyloid (adj.)

starch-like, 1857, coined in German (1839) from Latin amylum (see amyl) + Greek-derived suffix -oid.
The noun is attested from 1872.


amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n.)

by 1881, from French, first word from Greek a-, privative prefix, + mys, myos muscle (see muscle
(n.)) + trophikos feeding, from trophe nourishment (see -trophy). Often known in U.S. as Lou
Gehrig's disease, after the New York Yankees baseball player (1903-1941) who was diagnosed with it
in 1939.


an

indefinite article before words beginning with vowels, 12c., from Old English an (with a long vowel)
one; lone, also used as a prefix an- single, lone; see one for the divergence of that word from
this. Also see a, of which this is the older, fuller form.    In other European languages, identity
between indefinite article and the word for one remains explicit (as in French un, German ein, etc.)
Old English got by without indefinite articles: He was a good man in Old English was he w&aelig;s
god man. Circa 15c., a and an commonly were written as one word with the following noun, which
contributed to the confusion over how such words as newt and umpire ought to be divided (see N).
In Shakespeare, etc., an sometimes is a contraction of as if (a usage first attested c.1300),
especially before it.


an- (1)

privative prefix, from Greek an-, not, without, related to ne- and cognate with Sanskrit an-, Latin
in-, Gothic and Old English un- (see un- (1)).


an- (2)

form of Latin ad- before -n- (see ad-).


ana-

before verbs an-, prefix meaning 1. upward, 2. back, backward, against, 3. again, anew, from Greek
ana- up to, toward, exceedingly, back, against, from ana up, on, upon, throughout, again, cognate
with Old English on, from PIE root *ano- on, upon, above (see on).


anabaptism (n.)

1640s (as a Christian doctrine, with capital A-, from 1570s), from Medieval Latin anabaptismus, from
Late Greek anabaptismos, from ana- up (in place or time), back again, anew (see ana-) + baptismos
baptism (see baptism).


Anabaptist (n.)

1530s, one who baptizes over again, from Modern Latin anabaptista, from Latin anabaptismus second
baptism (used in literal sense from 4c.; see anabaptism).    Originally in English in reference to
sect that practiced adult baptism and arose in Germany 1521. Probably so called because, as a new
faith, they baptized converts who already had been baptized (as infants) in the older Christian
churches. Modern branches only baptize once (adults) and do not actively seek converts. The name
also was applied, usually opprobriously, to Baptists, perhaps due to the multiple immersions of
their baptisms.


anabasis (n.)

1706, from Greek, military expedition, literally a going up (from the coast), especially in
reference to the advance of Cyrus the Younger from near the Aegean coast into Asia, and the
subsequent story of the retreat of the 10,000 narrated by Xenophon (401 B.C.E.), from anabainein to
go up, mount; from ana up (see ana-) + bainein to go (see come).


anabolic (adj.)

pertaining to the process of building up (especially in metabolism), 1876, from Greek anabole that
which is thrown up; a mound, from anaballein to throw or toss up, from ana up, upward (see ana-) +
ballein to throw (see ballistics).


anabolism (n.)

1886; see anabolic + -ism.


anachronism (n.)

1640s, an error in computing time or finding dates, from Latin anachronismus, from Greek
anakhronismos, from anakhronizein refer to wrong time, from ana- against (see ana-) + khronos time
(see chrono-). Meaning something out of harmony with the present first recorded 1816.


anachronistic (adj.)

1775; see anachronism + -istic.


anacoluthon (n.)

want of grammatical sequence; changing constructions in mid-clause, 1706, from Latinized form of
Greek anakoluthon, neuter of anakolouthos inconsequent, from an- not (see an- (1)) + akolouthos
following, from copulative prefix a- + keleuthos way, road, track, path (see celerity).


anaconda (n.)

1768, a name first used in English to name a Ceylonese python, it was applied erroneously to a large
South American boa, called in Brazil sucuriuba. The word is of uncertain origin, and no snake name
like it now is found in Sinhalese or Tamil. One suggestion is that it is a Latinization of Sinhalese
henacandaya whip snake, literally lightning-stem [Barnhart]. Another suggestion is that it
represents Tamil anaikkonda having killed an elephant [OED].


Anacreontic (adj.)

of or in the manner of Anacreon, convivial bard of Greece (literally Up-lord), the celebrated Greek
lyrical poet (560-478 B.C.E.), born at Teos in Ionia. Also in reference to his lyric form (1706) of
a four-line stanza, rhymed alternately, each line with four beats (three trochees and a long
syllable), also convivial and amatory (1801); and an erotic poem celebrating love and wine (1650s).
Francis Scott Key in 1814 set or wrote his poem The Star-Spangled Banner to the melody of To
Anacreon in Heav'n, the drinking song of the popular London gentleman's club called The Anacreontic
Society, whose membership was dedicated to wit, harmony, and the god of wine. The tune is late 18c.
and may be the work of society member and court musician John Stafford Smith (1750-1836).


anacrusis (n.)

unstressed syllable at the beginning of a verse, 1833, Latinized from Greek anakrousis a pushing
back, of a ship, backing water, from anakrouein to push back, stop short, check, from ana- back (see
ana-) + krouein to strike, from PIE *kreue- (2) to push, strike (cognates: Russian krusit,
Lithuanian krusu to smash, shatter, Old Church Slavonic kruchu piece, bit of food, Old English
hreowian feel pain or sorrow, Old Norse hryggja make sad).


anadiplosis (n.)

repetition of an initial word, 1580s, from Latin, from Greek anadiplosis, from anadiploesthai to be
doubled back, to be made double, from ana back (see ana-) + diploun to double, fold over (see
diploma).


anadromous (adj.)

of fish, ascending a river to spawn (as salmon do), 1753, from Latinized form of Greek anadromos
running upward, from ana up, back (see ana-) + dramein to run (see dromedary).


anaemia (n.)

1824, from French medical term (1761), Modern Latin, from Greek anaimia lack of blood, from anaimos
bloodless, from an- without (see an- (1)) + haima blood (see -emia).


anaemic (adj.)

c.1840; see anaemia + -ic. Figurative sense by 1898.


anaerobic (adj.)

capable of living without oxygen, 1879 (as anaerobian; modern form first attested 1884), from French
ana&eacute;robie, coined 1863 by French bacteriologist Louis Pasteur (1822-1895), from Greek an-
without (see an- (1)) + aer air (see air (n.1)) + bios life (see bio-).


anaesthesia (n.)

1721, loss of feeling, Modern Latin, from Greek anaisthesia want of feeling, lack of sensation (to
pleasure or pain), from an- without (see an- (1)) + aisthesis feeling, from PIE root *au- to
perceive (see audience). As a procedure for the prevention of pain in surgical operations, from
1846.


anaesthesiologist (n.)

1943, American English, from anaesthesiology + -ist.


anaesthesiology (n.)

1908, from anaesthesia + -ology.    Anesthesiology. This is the new term adopted by the University
of Illinois defining the science that treats of the means and methods of producing in man or animal
various degrees of insensibility with or without hypnosis. [Medical Herald, January, 1912]


anaesthetic (adj.)

1846, insensible, from Greek anaisthetos insensate, without feeling; senseless, stupid (see
anaesthesia). Noun meaning agent that produces anesthesia first used in modern sense 1848 by
Scottish doctor James Young Simpson (1811-1870), discoverer of the surgical uses of chloroform.


anaesthetist (n.)

1861; see anaesthesia + -ist.


anaesthetize (v.)

1848, from Greek anaisthetos (see anaesthesia) + -ize. Related: Anaesthetized; anaesthetizing.


anagnorisis (n.)

c.1800, from Latin, from Greek anagnorisis recognition, from anagnorizein to recognize.


anagram (n.)

transposition of letters in a word so as to form another, 1580s, from French anagramme or Modern
Latin anagramma (16c.), both from Greek anagrammatizein transpose letters, from ana- up, back (see
ana-) + gramma (genitive grammatos) letter (see grammar). Related: Anagrammatical; anagrammatically.


anal (adj.)

1769, from Modern Latin analis of the anus; see anus. Anal-retentive first attested 1957, in
psychological jargon. Anal sex attested as such from 1966.


analects (n.)

1650s, literary gleanings, from Latinized form of Greek analekta, literally things chosen, neuter
plural of analektos select, choice, verbal adjective of analegein to gather up, collect, from ana-
up (see ana-) + legein to gather, also to choose words, hence to speak (see lecture (n.)).


analemma (n.)

1650s, from Latin analemma the pedestal of a sundial, hence the sundial itself, from Greek analemma
prop, support, from analambanein to receive, take up, restore, from ana- up (see ana-) + lambanein
to take, from PIE root *(s)lagw- to seize, take (cognates: Sanskrit labhate, rabhate seizes; Old
English l&aelig;ccan to seize, grasp; Greek lazomai I take, grasp; Old Church Slavonic leca to
catch, snare; Lithuanian lobis possession, riches).


analeptic (adj.)

1660s, restorative, strengthening (in medicine), from Greek analeptikos restorative, from
analambanein to receive, take up in one's hands (see analemma). Related: Analeptical (1610s).


analgesia (n.)

absence of pain, 1706, medical Latin, from Greek analgesia painlessness, insensibility, from
analgetos without pain, insensible to pain (also unfeeling, ruthless), from an- not (see an- (1)) +
algein to feel pain (see -algia).


analgesic (adj.)

tending to remove pain, 1848, from analgesia + -ic. Alternative form analgetic is preferred by
linguistic purists but is less common in use. The noun meaning an analgesic preparation recorded by
1860.


analgetic

see analgesic.


analog

chiefly U.S. spelling of analogue (q.v.).


analogize (v.)

explain by analogy, 1650s, from French analogiser (17c.) or directly from Greek analogizesthai to
reckon, sum up, from analogia (see analogy). Related: Analogized; analogizing.


analogous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin analogus, from Greek analogos proportionate, according to due proportion (see
analogy).


analogue (n.)

1826, an analogous thing, from French analogue, from Greek analogon (itself used in English from
c.1810), from ana up to (see ana-) + logos account, ratio (see lecture (n.)). Computing sense is
recorded from 1946.


analogy (n.)

1540s (perhaps early 15c.), from Old French analogie or directly from Latin analogia, from Greek
analogia proportion, from ana- upon, according to (see ana-) + logos ratio, also word, speech,
reckoning (see logos). A mathematical term used in a wider sense by Plato.


analyse (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of analyze (q.v.).   <b>Analyse</b> is better than analyze, but
merely as being the one of the two equally indefensible forms that has won. The correct but now
impossible form would be analysize (or analysise), with analysist for existing analyst. [Fowler]


analysis (n.)

1580s, resolution of anything complex into simple elements (opposite of synthesis), from Medieval
Latin analysis (15c.), from Greek analysis a breaking up, a loosening, releasing, noun of action
from analyein unloose, release, set free; to loose a ship from its moorings, in Aristotle, to
analyze, from ana up, throughout (see ana-) + lysis a loosening, from lyein to unfasten (see lose).
Psychological sense is from 1890. Phrase in the final (or last) analysis (1844), translates French
en derni&egrave;re analyse.


analyst (n.)

1650s, mathematician skilled in algebraic geometry, from French analyste a person who analyzes, from
analyser (see analysis). As a short form of psychoanalyst, attested from 1914. Greek analyter meant
a deliverer.


analytic (adj.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin analyticus, from Greek analytikos analytical, from analytos dissolved
(see analysis).


analytical (adj.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin analyticus   (see analytic) + -al (1). Related: Analytically.


analytics (n.)

1590s as a term in logic, from Latin analytica from Greek analytika (see analytic); also see -ics.


analyze (v.)

c.1600, to dissect, from French analyser, from analyse (see analysis). Literature sense is attested
from 1610s; meaning in chemistry dates from 1660s. General sense of to examine closely dates from
1809; psychological sense is from 1909. Related: Analyzed; analyzing.


anamnesis (n.)

recollection, remembrance, 1650s, from Greek anamnesis a calling to mind, remembrance, noun of
action from stem of  anamimneskein to remember, to remind (someone) of (something), make mention of,
from ana back (see ana-) + mimneskesthai (see amnesia). Related: Anamnestic.


anamorphic (adj.)

1904, in geology; see anamorphosis + -ic. Cinematographic use dates from 1954.


anamorphism (n.)

distorted projection or perspective, 1836; see anamorphosis + -ism.


anamorphosis (n.)

distorted projection or drawing that looks normal from a particular angle or with a certain mirror,
1727, from Greek anamorphosis transformation, noun of action from anamorphoein to transform, from
ana up (see ana-) + morphosis, from morphe form (see Morpheus).


ananda (n.)

in Hindu theology, bliss, from Sanskrit ananda- joy, happiness, bliss, from stem of nandati he
rejoices, of unknown origin.


Ananias

liar, a reference to Acts v:3-5.


ananym (n.)

real name written backwards, 1867, from Greek ana back (see ana-) + onyme name (see name (n.)).


anapest (n.)

also anapaest, two short syllables followed by a long one, 1670s, from Latin anapestus, from Greek
anapaistos struck back, rebounding, verbal adjective from anapaiein to strike back, from ana- back
(see ana-) + paiein to strike, from PIE *pau- to cut, strike, stamp (see pave). So called because it
reverses the dactyl.


anapestic (adj.)

1690s, from Latin anapaesticus, from Greek anapaistikos, from anapaistos (see anapest).


anaphase (n.)

1887, coined in German (1884), from Greek ana- (see ana-) + phase (n.).


anaphora (n.)

repetition of a word or phrase in successive clauses, 1580s, from Latin, from Greek anaphora
reference, literally a carrying back, from anapherein to carry back, to bring up, from ana back (see
ana-) + pherein to bear (see infer).


anaphoric (adj.)

1914, coined by Danish linguist Otto Jespersen (1860-1943) in the grammatical sense; see anaphora +
-ic. In the sentence, Here are some apples; take one, the one is anaphoric.


anaphylactic (adj.)

1905, with -ic + medical Latin noun anaphylaxis exaggerated susceptibility, from French anaphylaxie
(1902), from Greek ana- (see ana-) + phylaxis watching, guarding (compare prophylactic).
Anaphylactic shock is attested by 1916.


anaphylaxis (n.)

see anaphylactic.


anarch (n.)

leader of leaderlessness, 1660s, a deliciously paradoxical word used by Milton, Pope, Byron; see
anarchy.


anarchic (adj.)

1755, chaotic, without order or rule, from Greek anarkhos without head or chief (see anarchy) + -ic.
Differentiated from anarchistic (1845) which tends to refer to the political philosophy of
anarchism. An older word in this sense was anarchical (1590s). Anarchial is from 1710; Landor used
anarchal (1824).


anarchism (n.)

1640s; see anarchy + -ism.


anarchist (n.)

1670s; see anarchy + -ist. The word  got a boost into modernity from the French Revolution.


anarchistic (adj.)

1845; see anarchy + -istic. Also see anarchic. Related: Anarchistically.


anarcho-syndicalist

also anarchosyndicalist, 1911, from anarcho-, comb. form of anarchist (adj.) + syndicalist (see
syndicalism). Earlier anarchist syndicalist (1907). Related: Anarcho-syndicalism.


anarchy (n.)

1530s, from French anarchie or directly from Medieval Latin anarchia, from Greek anarkhia lack of a
leader, the state of people without a government (in Athens, used of the Year of Thirty Tyrants, 404
B.C., when there was no archon), noun of state from anarkhos rulerless, from an- without (see an-
(1)) + arkhos leader (see archon).    Either the State for ever, crushing individual and local life,
taking over in all fields of human activity, bringing with it its wars and its domestic struggles
for power, its palace revolutions which only replace one tyrant by another, and inevitably at the
end of this development there is ... death! Or the destruction of States, and new life starting
again in thousands of centers on the principle of the lively initiative of the individual and groups
and that of free agreement. The choice lies with you! [Prince Peter Kropotkin (1842-1921)]


anasarca (n.)

subcutaneous dropsy, late 14c., medical Latin, from Greek ana up, throughout (see ana-) + sarx
(genitive sarkos) flesh (see sarcasm). Abbreviation of Greek phrase hydrops ana sarka dropsy
throughout the flesh.


Anasazi

Name applied by their Navajo neighbors to modern Pueblo peoples of the U.S. southwest, and to
various landscape features associated with them, from Navajo anaasazi ancestors of the enemies. Said
to first have been applied to the ancient Pueblo ruins of southwestern United States in the Mesa
Verde region c.1889 by rancher and trader Richard Wetherill, who began exploration of the sites in
the area; established in archaeological terminology 1927.


Anastasia

fem. proper name, from fem. of Late Latin Anastasius, from Greek Anastasios, from anastasis
resurrection, literally a standing or rising up, from ana up; again (see ana-) + histanai to cause
to stand, to stand up from PIE root *sta- stand (see stet).


anastomosis (n.)

1610s, medical or Modern Latin, from Greek anastomosis outlet, opening, from anastomoein to furnish
with a mouth, from stoma mouth (see stoma). Related: Anastomotic.


anastrophe (n.)

inversion of usual word order, 1570s, from Greek anastrophe a turning back, a turning upside down,
from anastrephein to turn up or back, to turn upside down, from ana back (see ana-) + strephein to
turn (see strophe).


anathema (n.)

1520s, an accursed thing, from Latin anathema an excommunicated person; the curse of
excommunication, from Greek anathema a thing accursed, originally a thing devoted, literally a thing
set up (to the gods), from ana- up (see ana-) + tithenai to put, place (see theme).    Originally
simply a votive offering, by the time it reached Latin the meaning had progressed through thing
devoted to evil, to thing accursed or damned. Later applied to persons and the Divine Curse. Meaning
formal act or formula of consigning to damnation is from 1610s.   Anathema maranatha, taken as an
intensified form, is a misreading of the Syriac maran etha the Lord hath come, which follows
anathema in I Cor. xvi:22, but is not connected with it (see Maranatha).


anathematization (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin anathematizationem (nominative anathematizatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of anathematizare (see anathematize). Earlier was anathemization (1540s).


anathematize (v.)

to pronounce an anathema against, 1560s, from French anath&eacute;matiser (Old French anatemer),
from Latin anathematizare, from Greek anathematizein to devote (to evil), from stem of anathema.
Alternative anathemize (1670s) is less correct and more rare. Related: Anathematized;
anathematizing.


Anatolia

ancient name of Asia Minor, from Medieval Latin Anatolia, from Greek anatole the east, originally
sunrise (which of course happens in the east), literally a rising above (the horizon), from
anatellein to rise, from ana up (see ana-) + tellein to accomplish, perform.


anatomic (adj.)

1712, from Latin anatomicus, from Greek anatomikos relating to anatomy, from anatomia (see anatomy).
Anatomical is older.


anatomical (adj.)

1580s; see anatomy + -ical.


anatomically (adv.)

1640s, from anatomical + -ly (2). Anatomically correct, of dolls and meaning with genitalia, is
attested 1968, perhaps 1967, American English, in reference to Petit Fr&#232;re, an imported French
boy doll.


anatomize (v.)

to dissect, investigate by dissection, early 15c., from Medieval Latin anatomizare or French
anatomiser (16c.), from Greek anatomia (see anatomy). Related: Anatomized; anatomizing.


anatomy (n.)

late 14c., study of the structure of living beings; c.1400, anatomical structures, from Old French
anatomie, from Late Latin anatomia, from Greek anatomia, from anatome dissection, from ana- up (see
ana-) + temnein to cut (see tome). Dissection (1540s), mummy (1580s), and skeleton (1590s) were
primary senses of this word in Shakespeare's day; meaning the science of the structure of organized
bodies predominated from 17c. Often mistakenly divided as an atomy or a natomy.The scyence of the
Nathomy is nedefull and necessarye to the Cyrurgyen [1541]


ancestor (n.)

c.1300, ancestre, antecessour, from Old French ancestre (12c., Modern French anc&ecirc;tre), from
Late Latin antecessor predecessor, literally foregoer, agent noun from past participle stem of Latin
antecedere to precede, from ante- before (see ante) + cedere to go (see cede). Current form from
early 15c. Feminine form ancestress recorded from 1570s.


ancestral (adj.)

1520s, from Old French ancestrel (Anglo-French auncestrel), from ancestre (see ancestor). Related:
Ancestrally.


ancestry (n.)

early 14c., from Old French ancesserie ancestry, ancestors, forefathers, from ancestre (see
ancestor); spelling modified in English by influence of ancestor.


anchor (n.)

Old English ancor, borrowed 9c. from Latin ancora anchor, from or cognate with Greek ankyra anchor,
hook (see ankle). A very early borrowing and said to be the only Latin nautical term used in the
Germanic languages. The -ch- form emerged late 16c., a pedantic imitation of a corrupt spelling of
the Latin word. The figurative sense of that which gives stability or security is from late 14c.
Meaning host or presenter of a TV or radio program is from 1965, short for anchorman.


anchor (v.)

c.1200, from anchor (n.). Related: Anchored; anchoring.


anchorage (n.)

mid-14c., toll or charge for anchoring (see anchor (v.) + -age. Meaning act of dropping anchor,
being at anchor is from 1610s; that of place suitable for anchoring is from 1706. The Alaska city of
Anchorage was founded 1914.


anchoress (n.)

female recluse, nun, late 14c.; see anchorite + -ess.


anchorite (n.)

mid-15c., hermit (especially those of the Eastern deserts), recluse, one who withdraws from the
world for religious reasons, from Medieval Latin anchorita, from Greek anakhoretes, literally one
who has retired, agent noun from anakhorein to retreat, go back, retire, from ana- back (see ana-) +
khorein withdraw, give place, from khoros place, space, free space, room. Replaced Old English
ancer, from Late Latin anchoreta.


anchorman (n.)

last man of a tug-of-war team, 1909, from anchor + man (n.). Later, one who runs last in a relay
race (1934). Transferred sense host or presenter of a TV or radio program is from 1958.


anchovy (n.)

1590s, from Portuguese anchova, from Genoese or Corsican dialect, perhaps ultimately from either
Latin apua small fish (from Greek aphye small fry) [Gamillscheg, Diez], or from Basque anchu dried
fish, from anchuva dry [Klein, citing Mahn].


anchylosis (n.)

stiffness of joints, 1713, from Greek ankylos crooked (see angle (n.)) + -osis.


ancien regime (n.)

1794, from French ancien r&eacute;gime, literally old rule, referring to the government and social
order of France before the Revolution there. See ancient + regime.


ancient (adj.)

mid-14c., auncyen, from Old French ancien old, long-standing, ancient, from Vulgar Latin *anteanus,
literally from before, adjectivization of Latin ante before, in front of, against (from PIE *anti
against, locative singular of *ant- front, forehead; see ante). The parasitic -t dates from 15c. by
influence of words in -ent.    Specifically, in history, belonging to the period before the fall of
the Western Roman Empire (and contrasted with medieval and modern). In English law, from before the
Norman Conquest. Ancient of Days is from Dan. vii:9. Related: Anciently.


ancient (n.)

standard-bearer, 1550s, a corruption of ensign. Archaic, but preserved in Shakespeare's character
Aunchient Pistoll in Henry V.


ancillary (adj.)

1660s, subservient, subordinate, from Latin ancillaris relating to maidservants, diminutive of
ancilla handmaid, fem. diminutive of anculus servant, literally he who bustles about, from root of
ambi- about (see ambi-) + PIE *kwol-o-, from root *kwel- (1) move round, turn about, be much about
(see cycle (n.)).


and (conj.)

Old English and, ond, originally meaning thereupon, next, from Proto-Germanic *unda (cognates: Old
Saxon endi, Old Frisian anda, Middle Dutch ende, Old High German enti, German und, Old Norse enn),
from PIE *en; cognate with Latin ante, Greek anti (see ante). Phrase and how as an exclamation of
emphatic agreement dates from early 1900s.


Andalusia

former name of southern Spain, from Spanish, from Arabic al Andalus, name for the entire peninsula,
from Late Latin *Vandalicia the country of the Vandals, in reference to one of the Germanic tribes
that overran the Western Empire 3c.-4c. and for a time settled in southern Spain. See vandal.


andante

musical direction, moderately slow, 1742, from Italian andante, present participle of andare to go,
from Vulgar Latin ambitare (source of Spanish andar to go), from Latin ambitus, past participle of
ambire to go round, go about (see ambient).


Andes

from Quechua andi high crest.


andiron (n.)

c.1300, from Old French andier, of unknown origin, perhaps from Gaulish *andero- a young bull
(cognates: Welsh anner heifer), which would make sense if they once had bull's heads cast onto them.
Altered by influence of Middle English iren (see iron (n.)).


Andorra

probably from indigenous (Navarrese) andurrial shrub-covered land.


andouille (n.)

type of sausage, c.1600, from French andouille (12c.), from Latin inductilia, neuter plural of
inductilis, from inducere to load or put in (see induct). The original notion was perhaps of the
filling introduced into the sausage.


Andrew

masc. proper name, from Old French Andreu (Modern French Andr&eacute;), from Latin Andreas, from
Greek Andreas, from andreios manly, from aner (genitive andros) man (see anthropo-). Andrew Millar
(1590s) for some forgotten reason became English naval slang for government authority, and
especially the Royal Navy. St. Andrew (feast day Nov. 30) has long been regarded as patron saint of
Scotland. The Andrew's cross (c.1400) supposedly resembles the one St. Andrew was crucified on.


andro-

word-forming element meaning man, male, from Greek andro-, comb. form of aner (genitive andros) man,
male (see anthropo-).


androcentric (adj.)

1887, from andro- + -centric.


androcentricity (n.)

1907; see androcentric + -ity.


androcentrism (n.)

1915; see androcentric + -ism.


androcracy (n.)

rule or supremacy of men, 1883; see andro- + -cracy. Related: Androcratic.


androgen (n.)

male sex hormone, 1936, from andro- + -gen.


androgyne (n.)

hermaphrodite, mid-12c., from Medieval Latin androgyne, from Greek androgyne (see androgynous).


androgynous (adj.)

1620s, from Latin androgynus, from Greek androgynos hermaphrodite, male and female in one; womanish
man; as an adjective (of baths) common to men and women, from andros, genitive of aner male (see
anthropo-) + gyne woman (see queen).


androgyny (n.)

1833; see androgynous.


android (n.)

automaton resembling a human being, 1842, from Modern Latin androides (itself attested as a Latin
word in English from 1727), from Greek andro- human (see andro-) + eides form, shape. Greek androdes
meant like a man, manly; compare also Greek andrias image of a man, statue. Listed as rare in OED
1st edition (1879), popularized from c.1951 by science fiction writers.


Andromache

wife of Hector, Latin Andromache, from Greek Andromakhe, perhaps literally whose husband excells in
fighting, fem. of andromakhos fighting with men; see anthropo- + -machy.


Andromeda

constellation, 1667 (earlier Andromece, mid-15c.); in classical mythology the daughter of Cepheus
and Cassiopeia, from Greek, literally mindful of her husband, from andros, genitive of aner man (see
anthropo-) + medesthai to be mindful of, think on, related to medea (neuter plural) counsels, plans,
devices, cunning (and source of the name Medea).


andron (n.)

men's apartment in a house, from Greek andron, collateral form of andronitis men's apartment, from
aner (genitive andros) man (see anthropo-).


androphobia (n.)

morbid fear of the male sex (sometimes, rather, of the human race or of crowds), 1844, from andro- +
-phobia. Related: Androphobic.


Andy

familiar shortening of masc. proper name Andrew (q.v.).


anear (adv.)

nearly, c.1600, from a- (1) + near.


anecdotage (n.)

anecdotes collectively, 1823, from anecdote + -age. As a jocular coinage meaning garrulous old age
it is recorded from 1835, and led to anecdotard.


anecdotal (adj.)

1794, from anecdote + -al (1). Related: Anecdotally. Anecdotical is attested from 1744.


anecdote (n.)

1670s, secret or private stories, from French anecdote (17c.) or directly from Greek anekdota things
unpublished, neuter plural of anekdotos, from an- not (see an-) + ekdotos published, from ek- out +
didonai to give (see date (n.1)).    Procopius' 6c. Anecdota, unpublished memoirs of Emperor
Justinian full of court gossip, gave the word a sense of revelation of secrets, which decayed in
English to brief, amusing stories (1761).


anechoic (adj.)

1948, in electronics, from an- (1) not + echoic.


anemia (n.)

alternative (chiefly U.S.) spelling of anaemia (q.v.). See ae. As a genus of plants, Modern Latin,
from Greek aneimon unclad, from privative prefix an- (see an- (1)) + eima a dress, garment (see wear
(v.)).


anemic (adj.)

alternative (chiefly U.S.) spelling of anaemic (q.v.). See ae.


anemo-

before vowels anem-, word-forming element meaning wind, from comb. form of Greek anemos (see
anemone).


anemometer (n.)

1727, from anemo- wind + -meter.


anemone (n.)

flowering plant genus, 1550s, from Middle French anemone (16c.) and directly from Latin anemone,
from Greek anemone wind flower, literally daughter of the wind, from anemos wind (cognate with Latin
anima; see animus) + -one feminine patronymic suffix. According to Asa Gray, so called because it
was thought to open only when the wind blows. Klein suggests the flower name perhaps originally is
from Hebrew (compare na'aman, in nit'e na'amanim, literally plants of pleasantness, in Is. xvii:10,
from na'em was pleasant). Applied to a type of sea creature (sea anemone) from 1773.


anencephalic (adj.)

having no brain (biology), 1839, from Greek anenkephalos, from privative prefix an- (see an- (1)) +
enkephalos brain (see encephalitis) + -ic.


anent (prep.)

concerning, about, early 13c., onont on level with, also in the company of, fronting against, from
Old English on efn near to, close by, originally on even (ground) with; the parasitic -t added 12c.
A northern form (in Midlands, anenst, with adverbial genitive), affected by English writers in
Scottish sense of in respect or reference to. Compare German neben near to, by the side of, short
for in eben, from Old High German ebani equality.


anesthesia (n.)

alternative spelling of anaesthesia (q.v.). See ae.


anesthesiologist (n.)

alternative spelling of anaesthesiologist (q.v.). See ae.


anesthesiology (n.)

alternative spelling of anaesthesiology (q.v.). See ae.


anesthetic (adj.)

alternative spelling of anaesthetic (q.v.). See ae.


anesthetist (n.)

alternative spelling of anaesthetist (q.v.). See ae.


anesthetize (v.)

alternative spelling of anaesthetize (q.v.). See ae.


aneuploidy (n.)

abnormal number of chromosomes, 1934, from aneuploid (1931), Modern Latin, coined 1922 by G.
T&auml;ckholm from an- (1) not + euploid, from Greek eu- well, good (see eu-) + -ploid, from ploos
fold (see -plus) + -oid.


aneurism (n.)

the less correct, but more popular, spelling of aneurysm (q.v.), by influence of words in -ism. The
-y- is etymologically correct; the spelling with -i- suggests a meaning nervelessness.


aneurysm (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin aneurisma, from Greek aneurysmos dilation, from aneurynein to
dilate, from ana- up (see ana-) + eurynein widen, from eurys broad, wide, from PIE root *were- (1)
wide, broad (cognates: Sanskrit uruh broad, wide).


anew (adv.)

c.1300, a neue, from Old English of-niowe; see a- (1) + new. One-word form dominant from c.1400.


anext (adv.)

next to, c.1400, from a- (1) + next.


anfractuous (adj.)

full of windings and turnings, 1620s, from Latin anfractuous, from anfractus a winding, a turning,
bending round, from am(bi)- around (see ambi-) + fractus, past participle of frangere to break (see
fraction). Related: Anfractuosity.


angel (n.)

14c. fusion of Old English engel (with hard -g-) and Old French angele, both from Latin angelus,
from Greek angelos messenger, envoy, one that announces, possibly related to angaros mounted
courier, both from an unknown Oriental word (Watkins compares Sanskrit ajira- swift; Klein suggests
Semitic sources). Used in Scriptural translations for Hebrew mal'akh (yehowah) messenger (of
Jehovah), from base l-'-k to send. An Old English word for it was aerendgast, literally errand-
spirit.    Of persons, loving; lovely, by 1590s. The medieval gold coin (a new issue of the noble,
first struck 1465 by Edward VI) was so called for the image of archangel Michael slaying the dragon,
which was stamped on it. It was the coin given to patients who had been touched for the King's Evil.
Angel food cake is from 1881; angel dust phencyclidine is from 1968.


Angela

fem. proper name, Latin fem. of angelus angel (see angel).


Angeleno (n.)

resident or native of Los Angeles, 1888, from American Spanish Angele&ntilde;o, from (Los) Angeles +
-e&ntilde;o, suffix indicating a native or resident. See Los Angeles.


angelfish (n.)

also angel-fish, 1660s, from angel + fish (n.); so called for its wings.


angelic (adj.)

late 15c., pertaining to angels, from Old French angelique angelic (Modern French ang&eacute;lique
(13c.), from Latin angelicus, from Greek angelikos angelic, from angelos (see angel). Meaning angel-
like is from late 14c.; sense of wonderfully pure, sweet is recorded from early 16c. Related:
Angelically.


Angelica

fem. proper name, Latin fem. of angelicus angelic (see angel).


Angelina

fem. proper name, diminutive of Angela.


angelolatry (n.)

worship of angels, 1847, from angel + -latry.


anger (v.)

c.1200, to irritate, annoy, provoke, from Old Norse angra to grieve, vex, distress; to be vexed at,
take offense with, from Proto-Germanic *angus (cognates: Old English enge narrow, painful, Middle
Dutch enghe, Gothic aggwus narrow), from PIE root *angh- tight, painfully constricted, painful
(cognates: Sanskrit amhu- narrow, amhah anguish; Armenian anjuk narrow; Lithuanian ankstas narrow;
Greek ankhein to squeeze, ankhone a strangling; Latin angere to throttle, torment; Old Irish cum-ang
straitness, want). In Middle English, also of physical pain. Meaning excite to wrath, make angry is
from late 14c. Related: Angered; angering.


anger (n.)

mid-13c., distress, suffering; anguish, agony, also hostile attitude, ill will, surliness, from Old
Norse angr distress, grief. sorrow, affliction, from the same root as anger (v.). Sense of rage,
wrath is early 14c. Old Norse also had angr-gapi rash, foolish person; angr-lauss free from care;
angr-lyndi sadness, low spirits.


Angevin

1650s, pertaining to the French province of Anjou, from French Angevin, from Medieval Latin
Andegavinus, from Andegavum Angers, city in France, capital of Anjou (Latin Andegavia, from
Andecavi, Roman name of the Gaulish people who lived here, of unknown origin). In English history,
of the Plantagenet kings (beginning with Henry II) who were descended from Geoffrey, count of Anjou,
and Matilda, daughter of Henry I.


angina (n.)

1570s, from Latin angina infection of the throat, from Greek ankhone a strangling (see anger);
probably influenced in Latin by angere to throttle. Angina pectoris is from 1744, from Latin
pectoris, genitive of pectus chest (see pectoral (adj.)).


angio-

before verbs angi-, word-forming element now usually meaning covered or enclosed by a seed or blood
vessel, from Latinized form of Greek angeion a vessel, receptacle, diminutive of angos chest, box,
of unknown origin.


angiogenesis (n.)

1896, from angio- + genesis.


angiogram (n.)

1933, from angio- + -gram.


angiography (n.)

1731, from angio- + -graphy.


angioma (n.)

1867, medical Latin, from angio- + -oma.


angioplasty (n.)

by 1976, from angio- + -plasty.


angiosperm (n.)

plant with seeds contained in a protective vessel (as distinguished from a gymnosperm), 1853, from
Modern Latin Angiospermae, coined 1690 by German botanist Paul Hermann (1646-1695), from Greek
angeion vessel (see angio-) + spermos, adjective from sperma seed (see sperm). So called because the
seeds in this class of plants are enclosed.


angle (v.1)

to fish with a hook, mid-15c., from Old English angel (n.) angle, hook, fishhook, related to anga
hook, from PIE *ang-/*ank- to bend (see angle (n.)). Compare Old English angul, Old Norse
&ouml;ngull, Old High German angul, German Angel fishhook. Figurative sense is recorded from
1580s.It is but a sory lyfe and an yuell to stand anglynge all day to catche a fewe fisshes. [John
Palsgrave, 1530]  Related: Angled; angling.


angle (n.)

space between intersecting lines, late 14c., from Old French angle angle, corner, and directly from
Latin angulus an angle, corner, a diminutive form from PIE root *ang-/*ank- to bend (cognates: Greek
ankylos bent, crooked, Latin ang(u)ere to compress in a bend, fold, strangle; Old Church Slavonic
aglu corner; Lithuanian anka loop; Sanskrit ankah hook, bent, angam limb; Old English ancleo ankle;
Old High German ango hook). Angle bracket is 1875 in carpentry; 1956 in typography.


Angle

member of a Teutonic tribe, Old English, from Latin Angli the Angles, literally people of Angul (Old
Norse &Ouml;ngull), a region in what is now Holstein, said to be so-called for its hook-like shape
(see angle (n.)). People from the tribe there founded the kingdoms of Mercia, Northumbia, and East
Anglia in 5c. Britain. Their name, rather than that of the Saxons or Jutes, may have become the
common one for the whole group of Germanic tribes because their dialect was the first committed to
writing.


angle (v.2)

to move at an angle, to move diagonally or obliquely, 1741, from angle (n.). Related: Angled;
angling.


angler (n.)

fisher with a hook and line, mid-15c. (c.1300 as a surname); agent noun from angle (v.1).


Anglian

of the Angles, 1726; see Angle. The Old English word was Englisc, but as this came to be used in
reference to the whole Germanic people of Britain, a new word was wanted to describe this one branch
of them.


Anglican (adj.)

1630s, of the reformed Church of England (opposed to Roman), from Medieval Latin Anglicanus, from
Anglicus of the English people, of England (see anglicize). The noun meaning adherent of the
reformed Church of England is first recorded 1797.


Anglicism (n.)

1640s, anglicized language, from Latin Anglicus of the English (see Angle) + -ism. As an instance of
this, from 1781.


anglicization (n.)

1836, noun of action from anglicize; earlier in same sense was anglification (1822), from anglify
(1751).


anglicize (v.)

1710, with -ize + Medieval Latin Anglicus of the English, from Angli the Angles (see Angle).
Related: Anglicized; anglicizing.


Anglo (n.)

American, English-speaking white person, 1941, southwestern U.S., from Anglo-American. Anglo was
used similarly of native, English-speakers in Canada from 1800 and Britain from 1964.


Anglo-

from Medieval Latin Anglo-, comb. form of Angli the English (see Angle).


Anglo-American

1738, from Anglo- + American. Originally often in contrast to German immigrants. In contrast to non-
English neighboring or border people in the U.S. from 1809 (adj.); 1834 (n.). Meaning pertaining to
both England and the United States is from 1812.


Anglo-French (n.)

the French written in England from the Norman Conquest (1066) through the Middle Ages; the
administrative and legal language of England 12c.-17c.; the name is attested from 1887; popularized,
if not coined, by Skeat.


Anglo-Saxon

Old English Angli Saxones (plural), from Latin Anglo-Saxones, in which Anglo- is an adjective, thus
literally English Saxons, as opposed to those of the Continent (now called Old Saxons). Properly in
reference to the Saxons of ancient Wessex, Essex, Middlesex, and Sussex.    I am a suthern man, I
can not geste 'rum, ram, ruf' by letter. [Chaucer, Parson's Prologue and Tale]    After the Norman-
French invasion of 1066, the peoples of the island were distinguished as English and French, but
after a few generations all were English, and Latin-speaking scribes, who knew and cared little
about Germanic history, began to use Anglo-Saxones to refer to the pre-1066 inhabitants and their
descendants. When interest in Old English writing revived c.1586, the word was extended to the
language we now call Old English. It has been used rhetorically for English in an ethnological sense
from 1832, and revisioned as Angle + Saxon.


Anglomania (n.)

1787; see Anglo- + mania. Related: Anglomaniac.


Anglophile (adj.)

1864, in reference to France, from Anglo- + -phile. Both Anglomania (1787) and Anglophobia (1793)
are first attested in writings of Thomas Jefferson.


Anglophobia (n.)

1793, from Anglo- + -phobia. Related: Anglophobe; Anglophobic.


Anglophone (adj.)

English-speaking, 1895, from Anglo- + -phone.


angora (n.)

type of wool, 1810, from Angora, city in central Turkey (ancient Ancyra, modern Ankara), which gave
its name to the goat (1745 in English), and to its silk-like wool, and to a cat whose fur resembles
it (1771 in English). The city name is from the Greek word for anchor, bend (see angle (n.)).


angrily (adv.)

mid-14c., resentful, in anger; ill-temperedly, from angry + -ly (2).


angry (adj.)

late 14c., from anger (n.) + -y (2). Originally full of trouble, vexatious; sense of enraged, irate
also is from late 14c. The Old Norse adjective was ongrfullr sorrowful, and Middle English had
angerful anxious, eager (mid-13c.). The phrase angry young man dates to 1941 but was popularized in
reference to the play Look Back in Anger (produced 1956) though it does not occur in that work.
There are three words in the English language that end in -gry. Two of them are angry and hungry.
What is the third? There is no third (except some extremely obscure ones). Richard Lederer calls
this one of the most outrageous and time-wasting linguistic hoaxes in our nation's history and
traces it to a New York TV quiz show from early 1975.


angst (n.)

1944, from German Angst neurotic fear, anxiety, guilt, remorse, from Old High German angust, from
the root of anger. George Eliot used it (in German) in 1849, and it was popularized in English by
translation of Freud's work, but as a foreign word until 1940s. Old English had a cognate word,
angsumnes anxiety, but it died out.


angstrom (n.)

unit of length equal to one hundred millionth of a centimeter (used to measure wavelengths of
light), 1892, named for Swedish physicist Anders Ã&hellip;ngstr&ouml;m (1814-1874).


anguish (n.)

c.1200, acute bodily or mental suffering, from Old French anguisse, angoisse choking sensation,
distress, anxiety, rage, from Latin angustia (plural angustiae) tightness, straitness, narrowness;
figuratively distress, difficulty, from ang(u)ere to throttle, torment (see anger (v.)).


anguish (v.)

early 14c., intransitive and reflexive; mid-14c., transitive, from Old French anguissier (Modern
French angoisser), from anguisse (see anguish (n.)). Related: Anguished; anguishing.


anguishous (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French angoissos, from angoisse (see anguish (n.)). Related: Anguishously.


angular (adj.)

1590s, from Latin angularis having corners or angles, from angulus (see angle (n.)). Earlier in an
astrological sense, occupying a cardinal point of the zodiac (late 14c.). Angulous having many
corners is from mid-15c.


angularity (n.)

1640s; see angular + -ity.


Angus

masc. proper name, Scottish, related to Irish Aonghus, a compound that may be rendered in English as
one choice. Also the name of a county in Scotland, hence a breed of cattle (1842) associated with
that region.


anhedonia (n.)

inability to feel pleasure, 1897, from French anh&eacute;donie, coined 1896 by French psychologist
Theodule Ribot (1839-1916) as an opposite to analgesia, from Greek an-, privative prefix (see an-
(1)), + hedone pleasure (see hedonist).


anhinga (n.)

American fishing bird (also called the snake-bird), 1769, from a Tupi word which sometimes is said
to mean snake-bird.


anhydrous (adj.)

containing no water, 1819, a modern coinage from Greek an-, privative prefix (see an- (1)), + hydor
water (see water (n.1)). Greek did have anhydros waterless, used of arid lands or corpses that had
not been given proper funeral rites.


ani (n.)

black bird of the cuckoo family, 1829, from Spanish or Portuguese ani, from Tupi.


anigh (adv.)

nearby, c.1200, from a- (1) + nigh.


anil (n.)

West Indian shrub, 1580s, from French or Portuguese anil (see aniline).


aniline (n.)

chemical base used in making colorful dyes, 1843, coined 1841 by German chemist Carl Julius
Fritzsche (1808-1871) and adopted by Hofmann, ultimately from Portuguese anil the indigo shrub, from
Arabic an-nil the indigo, assimilated from al-nil, from Persian nila, ultimately from Sanskrit nili
indigo, from nilah dark blue. With suffix -ine indicating derived substance (see -ine (1); also see
-ine (2) for the later, more precise, use of the suffix in chemistry).


anima (n.)

Jung's term for the inner part of the personality, or the female component of a masculine
personality, 1923, from fem. of Latin animus the rational soul; life; the mental powers,
intelligence (see animus).


anima mundi

1670s, Medieval Latin, literally soul of the world; used by Abelard to render Greek psyche tou
kosmou.


animadversion (n.)

1590s, criticism, blame, also sometimes in early use simply notice, attention (now obsolete), from
Latin animadversionem (nominative animadversio) investigation, inquiry; perception, observation,
noun of action from past participle stem of animadverte to take cognizance of, literally to turn the
mind to, from animum, accusative of animus mind (see animus), + advertere to turn to (see
advertise). The sense of to take notice of as a fault was in Latin; in fact animadverto at times was
a euphemism for to punish with death.


animadvert (v.)

early 15c., to take notice of, from Latin animadvertere to notice, to take cognizance of, also to
censure, blame, punish, literally to turn the mind to (see animadversion). Sense of to criticize,
blame, censure in English is from 1660s. Related: Animadverted; animadverting.


animal (n.)

early 14c. (but rare before c.1600, and not in KJV, 1611), any living creature (including humans),
from Latin animale living being, being which breathes, neuter of animalis animate, living; of the
air, from anima breath, soul; a current of air (see animus, and compare deer). Drove out the older
beast in common usage. Used of brutish humans from 1580s.


animal (adj.)

late 14c., from animal (n.). Animal rights is attested from 1879; animal liberation from 1973.
Animal magnetism originally (1784) referred to mesmerism.


animalcule (n.)

very small animal, especially a microscopic one, 1590s, from Late Latin animalculum, diminutive of
Latin animal (see animal (n.)). Related: Animalcular.


animalism (n.)

the doctrine that man is a mere animal, 1857, from animal + -ism. Earlier, exercise of animal
faculties; physical exercise (1831).


animalistic (adj.)

1877; see animal (n.) + -istic.


animate (v.)

1530s, to fill with boldness or courage, from Latin animatus past participle of animare give breath
to, also to endow with a particular spirit, to give courage to, from anima life, breath (see
animus). Sense of give life to in English attested from 1742. Related: Animated; animating.


animate (adj.)

alive, late 14c., from Latin animatus (see animate (v.)).


animated (adj.)

1530s, alive, past participle adjective from animate (v.). Meaning mentally excited is from 1530s;
full of activity from 1580s. The moving pictures sense is attested from 1895; of cartoons from 1897.
Related: Animatedly.


animation (n.)

1590s, action of imparting life, from Latin animationem (nominative animatio) an animating, noun of
action from past participle stem of animare (see animate (v.)). Meaning vitality is from 1610s.
Cinematographic sense is from 1912.


animator (n.)

1630s, one who enlivens or inspires, from Latin animator, agent noun from animare (see animate
(v.)). Cinematographic sense is from 1919.


anime (n.)

c.1985, Japanese for animation, a term that seems to have arisen in the 1970s, apparently based on
French anim&eacute; animated, lively, roused, from the same root as English animate (adj.). Probably
taken into Japanese from a phrase such as dessin anim&eacute; cartoon, literally animated design,
with the adjective abstracted or mistaken, due to its position, as a noun.   Manga (q.v.) is
Japanese for comic book, graphic novel, but anime largely are based on manga and until 1970s, anime
were known in Japan as manga eiga or TV manga. The two terms are somewhat confused in English.


animism (n.)

1866, reintroduced by English anthropologist Sir Edward Burnett Taylor (1832-1917), who defined it
(1871) as the theory of the universal animation of nature, from Latin anima life, breath, soul (see
animus) + -ism.    Earlier sense was of doctrine that animal life is produced by an immaterial soul
(1832), from German Animismus, coined c.1720 by physicist/chemist Georg Ernst Stahl (1660-1734)
based on the concept of the anima mundi. Animist is attested from 1819, in Stahl's sense; animisic
is first recorded 1871.


animosity (n.)

early 15c., vigor, from Middle French animosit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Latin animositatem
(nominative animositas) boldness, vehemence, from animosus bold, spirited, from animus (see animus).
Sense of hostile feeling is first recorded c.1600, from a secondary sense in Latin (see animus).


animus (n.)

1820, temper (usually in a hostile sense), from Latin animus rational soul, mind, life, mental
powers; courage, desire, related to anima living being, soul, mind, disposition, passion, courage,
anger, spirit, feeling, from PIE root *ane- to blow, to breathe (cognates: Greek anemos wind,
Sanskrit aniti breathes, Old Irish anal, Welsh anadl breath, Old Irish animm soul, Gothic uzanan to
exhale, Old Norse anda to breathe, Old English e&eth;ian to breathe, Old Church Slavonic vonja
smell, breath, Armenian anjn soul). It has no plural. As a term in Jungian psychology for the
masculine component of a feminine personality, it dates from 1923.


anion (n.)

a negatively charged ion, which moves toward the anode (q.v.) during electrolysis, 1834, proposed by
the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English polymath, and published by English physicist Michael
Faraday, from Greek anion (thing) going up, neuter past participle of anienai go up, from ana up
(see ana-) + ienai go (see ion).


anise (n.)

Levantine plant cultivated for its seeds, which were important sources of chemical oils and
flavoring, c.1300, from Old French anis (13c.), from Latin anisum, from Greek anison. By the
Ancients, somewhat confused with dill.


aniseed (n.)

late 14c., a contraction of anise seed (n.).


anisette (n.)

liqueur flavored with aniseed, 1837, from French Anisette de Bordeaux, from diminutive of anis (see
anise).


anisotropic (adj.)

1854; see an- (1) not + isotropic.


anker (n.)

also anchor, liquid measure in North Sea and Baltic trade, early 14c., from Dutch, related to German
Anker, Swedish ankare, Medieval Latin anceria keg, vat, of unknown origin. That of Rotterdam, once
used in England, equaled 10 old wine or 8.5 imperial gallons.


ankh (n.)

tau cross with an oval at the top, Egyptian symbol of life, 1873, from Egyptian ankh, literally
life, soul. Also known as crux ansata.


ankle (n.)

Old English ancleow ankle, from PIE root *ang-/*ank- to bend (see angle (n.)). The modern form seems
to have been influenced by Old Norse &ouml;kkla or Old Frisian ankel, which are immediately from the
Proto-Germanic form of the root (cognates: Middle High German anke joint, German Enke ankle); the
second element in the Old English, Old Norse and Old Frisian forms perhaps suggests claw (compare
Dutch anklaauw), or it may be from influence of cneow knee, or it may be diminutive suffix -el.
Middle English writers distinguished inner ankle projection (hel of the ancle) from the outer (utter
or utward).


anklet (n.)

ring for an ankle, 1810, from ankle, with diminutive suffix -let, after bracelet.


ankylosaurus (n.)

Cretaceous armored dinosaur, 1907, Modern Latin, from Greek ankylos crooked (see angle (n.)) +
-saurus.


ankylosis (n.)

stiffening of joints after injury or surgery, alternative (and more etymological) spelling of
anchylosis (q.v.).


anlage (n.)

basis of a later development (plural anlagen), 1892, from German anlage foundation, basis, from
anlagen (v.) to establish, from an on + legen to lay (see lay (v.)).


Ann

fem. proper name, alternative form of Anna, from Latin Anna, from Greek, from Hebrew Hannah (see
Hannah). In U.S. black slang, white woman, also a black woman who is considered to be acting 'too
white;'  also Miss Ann. She is the spouse of Mr. Charlie.


Anna

fem. proper name, from Latin Anna, from Greek Anna, from Hebrew Hannah, literally grace,
graciousness (see Hannah).


annal (n.)

rare singular of annals (q.v.).


annalist (n.)

one who keeps a chronicle of events by year, 1610s, from French analiste; see annals + -ist.


annalize (v.)

record in annals, 1610s, from annals + -ize. Related: Annalized; annalizing.


annals (n.)

1560s, from Latin annales libri chronicles, literally yearlies, yearly books, noun use of plural of
annalis pertaining to a year, from annus year (see annual (adj.)).


Annam

old alternative name for Vietnam, from Chinese, literally pacified south, the name given to the old
nation of Nam Viet by the Chinese after they conquered it 111 B.C.E. From an peace + nan south. It
was discarded upon restoration of Viet independence in 939 C.E., but it stuck in Western geographies
and was reapplied to the region c.1790 by the French.


Anne

alternative form of the fem. proper name Anna (q.v.). In Christian tradition, the name of the mother
of the Virgin Mary.


anneal (v.)

Old English on&aelig;lan to set on fire, kindle, from on- on + &aelig;lan to burn, bake, from Proto-
Germanic *ailan, probably [Watkins] from PIE *ai- to burn (see ash (n.1)); related to Old English
&aelig;led fire, firebrand, Old Norse eldr, Danish ild fire. Related: Annealed; annealing.


annelid (n.)

segmented worm, 1834, from French ann&eacute;lide, source of the phylum name Annelida, coined in
Modern Latin 1801 by French naturalist J.B.P. Lamarck (1744-1829), from annel&eacute;s ringed ones
(from Latin anulus little ring, a diminutive of anus; see anus) + Greek eidos form, shape (see
-oid).


annex (v.)

late 14c., to connect with, from Old French annexer to join (13c.), from Medieval Latin annexare,
frequentative of Latin annecetere to bind to, from ad- to (see ad-) + nectere to tie, bind (see
nexus). Almost always meaning to join in a subordinate capacity. Of nations or territories, c.1400.
Related: Annexed; annexing.


annex (n.)

1540s, an adjunct, accessory, from French annexe, from annexer (see annex (v.)). Meaning
supplementary building is from 1861.


annexation (n.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin annexiationem (nominative annexatio) action of annexing, noun of action
from past participle stem of annexare (see annex). The Middle English noun form was annexion union;
joining; territory acquired (mid-15c.).


Annie

diminutive of fem. proper name Ann or Anne (see Anna). Annie Oakley (1860-1926) was the famous rifle
markswoman.


annihilate (v.)

1520s, from an obsolete adjective meaning reduced to nothing (late 14c.), originally the past
participle of a verb, anihil, from Old French annichiler (14c.), from Late Latin annihilare to
reduce to nothing, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + nihil nothing (see nil). Related: Annihilated;
annihilating.


annihilation (n.)

1630s, from Middle French annihilation (restored from Old French anichilacion, 14c.), or directly
from Late Latin annihilationem (nominative annihilatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
annihilare (see annihilate).


anniversary (n.)

early 13c., originally especially of the day of a person's death, from Medieval Latin anniversarium,
from Latin anniversarius (adj.) returning annually, from annus (genitive anni) year (see annual
(adj.)) + versus, past participle of vertere to turn (see versus). The adjective came to be used as
a noun in Church Latin as anniversaria (dies) in reference to saints' days. An Old English word for
anniversary (n.) was myndd&#230;g, literally mind-day.


Anno Domini

1570s, Latin, literally in the year of (our) Lord.


annotate (v.)

1733, from Latin annotatus, past participle of annotare to note down (see annotation). Related:
Annotated; annotating. Not in Johnson's Dictionary, but used therein in defining comment. Form
annote is recorded from mid-15c. Related: Annotated; annotating.


annotation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin annotationem (nominative annotatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of annotare to add notes to, from ad- to (see ad-) + notare to note, mark (see note (v.)).


announce (v.)

c.1500, proclaim, make known, from Old French anoncier announce, proclaim (12c., Modern French
annoncer), from Latin annuntiare, adnuntiare to announce, relate, literally to bring news, from ad-
to (see ad-) + nuntiare relate, report, from nuntius messenger (see nuncio). Related: Announced;
announcing.


announcement (n.)

1798, from French announcement, from Old French anoncier (see announce). Or else formed in English
from announce + -ment. Earlier in same sense was announcing.


announcer (n.)

1610s, agent noun from announce. Radio sense is recorded from 1922.


annoy (v.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French anuier, Old French enoiier, anuier to weary, vex, anger; be troublesome
or irksome to, from Late Latin inodiare make loathsome, from Latin (esse) in odio (it is to me)
hateful, ablative of odium hatred (see odium). Earliest form of the word in English was as a noun,
c.1200, feeling of irritation, displeasure, distaste. Related: Annoyed; annoying; annoyingly. Middle
English also had annoyful and annoyous (both late 14c.).


annoyance (n.)

late 14c., act of annoying, from Old French enoiance ill-humor, irritation, from anuiant, present
participle of anuier to be troublesome, annoy, harass (see annoy). Meaning state of being annoyed is
from c.1500. Earlier, annoying was used in the sense of act of offending (c.1300), and a noun annoy
(c.1200) in a sense feeling of irritation, displeasure, distaste.


annoyed (adj.)

vexed, peeved, offended, late 13c., past participle adjective from annoy (v.).


annual (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French annuel (12c.) or directly from Late Latin annualem (nominative annualis),
corresponding to Latin annalis as adjective form of annus year, from PIE *at-no-, from root *at- to
go, on notion of period gone through (cognates: Sanskrit atati goes, wanders, Gothic a&thorn;nam
(dative plural) year, Oscan akno- year, holiday, time of offering). Used of plants since 1710.


annual (n.)

c.1400, originally service commemorating the anniversary of a person's death, from annual (adj.). By
1824 as short for annual plant.


annualize (v.)

in economics and finance, 1904; see annual + -ize. Related: Annualized; annualizing.


annually (adv.)

1590s, from annual (adj.) + -ly (2).


Annuit Coeptis

on the Great Seal of the United States of America, condensed by Charles Thompson, designer of the
seal in its final form, from Latin Juppiter omnipotes, audacibus annue coeptis All-powerful Jupiter
favor (my) daring undertakings, line 625 of book IX of Virgil's Aeneid. The words also appear in
Virgil's Georgics, book I, line 40: Da facilem cursam, atque audacibus annue coeptis Give (me) an
easy course, and favor (my) daring undertakings. Thompson changed the imperative annue to annuit,
the third person singular form of the same verb in either the present tense or the perfect tense.
The motto also lacks a subject.    The motto is often translated as He (God) is favorable to our
undertakings, but this is not the only possible translation. Thomson wrote: The pyramid signifies
Strength and Duration: The Eye over it &amp; Motto allude to the many signal interpositions of
providence in favour of the American cause. The original design (by William Barton) showed the
pyramid and the motto Deo Favente Perennis God favoring through the years.


annuity (n.)

early 15c., a yearly allowance, grant payable in annual installments, from Anglo-French and Old
French annuit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin annuitatem (nominative annuitas), from
Latin annus year (see annual (adj.)). Meaning an investment that entitles one to equal annual
payments is from 1690s.


annul (v.)

late 14c., from Old French anuller (13c.) or directly from Late Latin annullare to make to nothing,
from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + nullum, neuter of nullus nothing (see null). Related: Annulled;
annulling.


annular (adj.)

ring-shaped, 1570s, from French annulaire (16c.) or directly from Latin annularis pertaining to a
ring, from annulus, diminutive of anus ring (see anus). An annular eclipse (1727) is one in which
the dark body of the moon is smaller than the disk of the sun, so that at the height of it the sun
appears as a ring of light. Related: Annularity.


annulment (n.)

late 15c., act of reducing to nothing; see annul + -ment. Meaning act of declaring invalid is
recorded from 1864.


annulus (n.)

1560s, medical, from misspelling of Latin anulus little ring, finger ring, a diminutive of anus (see
anus).


annunciate (v.)

1530s, from past participle adjective annunciate (late 14c.) or directly from Latin annunciatus,
misspelling of annuntiatus, past participle of annuntiare (see announce). In some cases perhaps a
back-formation from annunciation. Related: Annunciated; annunciating.


annunciation (n.)

early 14c., Lady Day, from Anglo-French anunciacioun, Old French anonciacion, from Latin
annuntiationem (nominative annuntiatio), noun of action from past participle stem of annuntiare (see
announce). The Church festival (March 25) commemorating the visit of the angel Gabriel to the Virgin
Mary, foretelling the incarnation. General sense of an announcing is from 1560s. Old English for
Annunciation Day was bodungd&aelig;g.


annus mirabilis (n.)

1667, Latin, literally wonderful year, year of wonders, title of a publication by Dryden, with
reference to 1666, which was a year of calamities in London (plague, fire, war).


anode (n.)

1834, coined from Greek anodos way up, from ana up (see ana-) + hodos way (see cede). Proposed by
the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English polymath, and published by English chemist and
physicist Michael Faraday (1791-1867). So called from the path the electrical current was thought to
take. Related: Anodic.


anodize (v.)

1931, from anode + -ize. Related: Anodized; anodizing.


anodyne (adj.)

1540s, from Medieval Latin anodynus pain-removing, allaying pain, from Latin anodynus painless, from
Greek anodynos free from pain, from an- without (see an- (1)) + odyne pain, a word perhaps from PIE
root *ed- to eat (source of Lithuanian ed&#382;ioti to devour, bite, ed&#382;iotis to suffer pain;
see eat). In old slang, frequently a euphemism for death; as in anodyne necklace hangman's noose.


anoint (v.)

c.1300 (implied in anointing), from Old French enoint smeared on, past participle of enoindre smear
on, from Latin inunguere to anoint, from in- on + unguere to smear (see unguent). Originally in
reference to grease or oil smeared on for medicinal purposes; its use in the Coverdale Bible in
reference to Christ (as in The Lord's Anointed; see chrism) has spiritualized the word. Related:
Anointed; anointing.


anointed (adj.)

late 14c., smeared with oil, past participle adjective from anoint (v.). Noun meaning a consecrated
one (as in Lord's Anointed) is recorded from 1520s.


anole (n.)

or anoli, 1906, from a native name in the Antilles.


anomalo-

word-forming element meaning deviating from the usual, abnormal, from comb. form of Greek anomalos
uneven, irregular (see anomaly).


anomalous (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin anomalus, from Greek anomalos uneven, irregular (see anomaly). Related:
Anomalously; anomalousness.


anomaly (n.)

1570s, from Latin anomalia, from Greek anomalia inequality, noun of quality from anomalos uneven,
irregular, from an-, privative prefix, not (see an- (1)) + homalos even, from homos same (see same).


anomic (adj.)

1950, from French anomique (Durkheim, 1897); see anomie.


anomie (n.)

absence of accepted social values, 1933, from Durkheim's Suicide (1897); a reborrowing with French
spelling of anomy.


anomy (n.)

lawlessness, 1590s, anglicized from French anomie; from Greek anomia lawlessness, noun of quality
from anomos without law, lawless, from a-, privative prefix, without (see an- (1)) + nomos law (see
numismatics).


anon (adv.)

late Old English anon, earlier on an, literally into one, thus continuously; straightway (in one
course), at once; see one. By gradual misuse, soon, in a little while (1520s). A one-word
etymological lesson in the enduring power of procrastination.


anonym (n.)

1812, nameless person, from French anonyme, from Latin anonymus, from Greek anonymos without a name
(see anonymous). Meaning fictitious name is recorded from 1866.


anonymity (n.)

1820; see anonym + -ity. In same sense anonymousness is recorded from 1802.


anonymous (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin anonymus, from Greek anonymos without a name, from an- without (see an- (1))
+ onyma, &AElig;olic dialectal form of onoma name (see name (n.)).


anonymously (adv.)

1728, from anonymous + -ly (2).


Anopheles (n.)

genus of mosquitoes, Modern Latin, coined 1818 by German entomologist Johann Wilhelm Meigen
(1764-1845) from Greek anopheles useless, hurtful, harmful, from an-, privative prefix, (see an-
(1)) + ophelos use, help, advantage (see Ophelia). So called because it conveys malaria.


anorak (n.)

Eskimo's waterproof, hooded jacket, 1924, from Greenland Eskimo anoraq. Applied to Western
imitations of this garment from 1930s. In British slang, socially inept person (Partridge associates
it with a fondness for left-wing politics and pirate radio) by 1983, on the notion that that sort of
person typically wears this sort of coat.


anorectic (adj.)

characterized by lack of appetite, 1832, medical Latin, from Greek anorektos without appetite (see
anorexia). As a noun, attested from 1913.


anorexia (n.)

1590s, lack of appetite, Modern Latin, from Greek anorexia, from an-, privative prefix, without (see
an- (1)) + orexis appetite, desire, from oregein to desire, stretch out (cognate with Latin regere
to keep straight, guide, rule; see regal). In current use, often short for anorexia nervosa.


anorexia nervosa (n.)

emaciation as a result of severe emotional disturbance, coined 1873 by William W. Gull (1816-1890),
who also proposed apepsia hysterica as a name for it. See anorexia.


anorexic (adj.)

1876; see anorexia + -ic. The immediate source or model is perhaps French anorexique. As a noun
meaning person with anorexia nervosa it is attested from 1913.


anosmia (n.)

loss of sense of smell, 1811, Modern Latin, from Greek an-, privative prefix (see an- (1)), +  osme
smell (Doric odme), from *odsme, cognate with Latin odor (see odor).


another (adj.)

early 13c., merger of an other. Old English used simply o&thorn;er. Originally a second of two.
Compound reciprocal pronoun one another is recorded from 1520s.


anoxic (adj.)

1920, Modern Latin, from Greek an-, privative prefix, not, without (see an- (1)) + first two letters
of oxygen + -ic. Anoxia oxygen deficiency is attested from 1931.


Anschauung (n.)

sense-perception, c.1856, from German Anschauung mode of view, literally looking at, from anschauen
to look at, from Middle High German aneschouwen (related to show (v.)). A term in Kantian
philosophy.


anschluss (n.)

1924, from German Anschlu&#223;, connection; addition; junction, literally joining, union, from
anschlie&#223;en to join, annex, from an at, to, toward + schlie&#223;en to shut, close, lock, bolt;
contract (a marriage); see slot (n.2). Specifically the proposal to unite Germany and Austria,
accomplished in 1938.


Anselm

masc. proper name, from Latin Anselmus, from Old High German Ansehelm, literally having a divine
helmet, from ansi god (see Asgard) + helm (see helm (n.2)).


answer (n.)

Old English andswaru an answer, a reply, from and- against (see ante) + -swaru affirmation, from
swerian to swear (see swear), suggesting an original sense of make a sworn statement rebutting a
charge. A common Germanic compound (cognates: Old Saxon antswor, Old Norse andsvar, Old Frisian
ondser, Danish and Swedish ansvar), implying a Proto-Germanic *andswara-. Meaning a reply to a
question, the main modern sense, was present in Old English. Meaning solution of a problem is from
c.1300.


answer (v.)

Old English answarian to answer; see answer (n.). Meaning to respond in antiphony is from early
15c.; that of to be responsible for is early 13c. Related: Answered; answering. The telephone
answering machine is from 1961.


answerable (adj.)

liable to be held responsible, 1540s, from answer (v.) + -able. Less-common meaning able to be
answered is from 1690s.


ant (n.)

c.1500, from Middle English ampte (late 14c.), from Old English &aelig;mette ant, from West Germanic
*amaitjo (cognates: Old High German ameiza, German Ameise) from a compound of bases *ai- off, away +
*mai- cut, from PIE *mai- to cut (cognates: maim). Thus the insect's name is, etymologically, the
biter off.  As &thorn;ycke as ameten crepe&thorn; in an amete hulle [chronicle of Robert of
Gloucester, 1297] Emmet survived into 20c. as an alternative form. White ant termite is from 1729.
To have ants in one's pants be nervous and fidgety is from 1934, made current by a popular song;
antsy embodies the same notion.


antacid

1732, adjective and noun, medical hybrid from anti- + acid.


Antaeus

Libyan giant slain by Herakles, from Greek Antaios, literally opposite, opposed to, hostile, from
anta over against, face to face, related to anti opposite, against (see ante).


antagonise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of antagonize; see -ize. Related: Antagonised; antagonising.


antagonism (n.)

1797, from French antagonisme or directly from late Greek antagonisma, noun of action from
antagonizesthai to struggle against (see antagonist).


antagonist (n.)

1590s, from French antagoniste (16c.) or directly from Late Latin antagonista, from Greek
antagonistes competitor, opponent, rival, agent noun from antagonizesthai to struggle against,
oppose, be a rival, from anti- against (see anti-) + agonizesthai to contend for a prize, from agon
contest (see agony). Originally in battle or sport, extended 1620s to any sphere of human activity.


antagonistic (adj.)

1630s, from antagonist + -ic. Related: Antagonistical (1620s); antagonistically.


antagonize (v.)

1630s, to compete with, from Greek antagonizesthai to struggle against, oppose, be a rival (see
antagonist). Meaning to struggle against continuously is recorded from 1742. Related: Antagonized;
antagonizing.


antalgic (adj.)

1775, from Greek ant-, form of anti- used before vowels (see anti-), + algos pain (see -algia). As a
noun, recorded from 1753.


antaphrodisiac

1742 (adj.), 1753 (n.), used against venereal disease; see anti- + aphrodisiac.


antarchism (n.)

opposition to all social government or control of individuals by law, 1845, from antarchy + -ism.
Related: Antarchist.


antarchy (n.)

opposition to government, 1650s, from anti- + Greek -arkhia (see -archy). Related: Antarchic.


antarctic (adj.)

late 14c., antartyk opposite to the north pole (adj.), also (with capital A) region around the South
pole (n.), from Old French antartique, from Medieval Latin antarcticus, from Greek antarktikos
opposite the north, from anti- opposite (see anti-) + arktikos arctic (see arctic). The first -c-
sound ceased to be pronounced in Medieval Latin and was dropped in Old French. Modern English
spelling, which restores it, dates from 17c.


Antarctica

continent name attributed to Scottish cartographer John George Bartholomew (1860-1920), who used it
on a map published 1887. From antarctic (q.v.). Hypothetical southern continents had been imagined
since antiquity; first sighting of Antarctica by Europeans probably was 1820 (Lazarev and
Bellingshausen). Also compare Antipodes.


Antares

bright star in Scorpio, from Greek Antares, from anti Ares rival of Mars, in reference to its red
color, which resembles that of Mars. See anti- + Ares.


ante

1838 (n.), 1846 (v.), American English poker slang, apparently from Latin ante before, from PIE
*anti- facing opposite, against, with derivatives meaning in front of, before; end (cognates:
Sanskrit antah end, border, boundary, Hittite hanti opposite, Greek anta, anten opposite, anti over
against, opposite, before; Old Lithuanian anta on to; Gothic anda along; Old English and- against;
German ent- along, against), from root *ant- front, forehead.


ante meridiem

1560s, Latin, literally before noon, from ante (see ante) + accusative of meridies midday, noon (see
meridian).


ante-

word-forming element meaning before, in front of; previous, existing beforehand; introductory to,
from Latin ante (prep. and adv.) before, in front of, opposite, used in combinations, from PIE *anti
facing opposite, near, in front of, before (see ante).


anteater (n.)

also ant-eater, 1764, in reference to the South American species; 1868 of the Australian echidna;
from ant + agent noun from eat (v.).


antebellum (adj.)

also ante-bellum, from Latin phrase ante bellum, literally before the war; see ante- +  bellicose.
In U.S., usually in reference to the American Civil War (1861-65); first attested in a June 14,
1862, entry in Mary Chesnut's diary.


antecede (v.)

early 15c., from Latin antecedere to go before (see antecedent). Related: Anteceded; anteceding.


antecedent

late 14c. (n. and adj.), from Old French antecedent (14c.) or directly from Latin antecedentem
(nominative antecedens), present participle of antecedere go before, precede, from ante- before (see
ante) + cedere to yield (see cede). Used as a noun in Latin philosophical writings.


antechamber (n.)

1650s, from French antichambre (16c.), on analogy of Italian anticamera (see ante and chamber).


antedate (v.)

1580s, earlier as noun meaning a backdating, false early date attached to a document or event
(1570s); from Latin ante before (see ante) + date (v.1). Related: Antedated; antedating.


antediluvian (adj.)

before Noah's flood, 1640s, formed from Latin ante- before (see ante) + diluvium a flood (see deluge
(n.)). Coined by English physician Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682). As a noun meaning person who lived
before the Flood, from 1680s.


antelope (n.)

early 15c., from Old French antelop, from Medieval Latin ant(h)alopus (11c.), from Greek antholops
(attested in Eusebius of Antioch, c.336 C.E.), a fabulous animal haunting the banks of the
Euphrates, very savage, hard to catch and having long saw-like horns capable of cutting down trees.
Original sense and language unknown (it looks like Greek flower-eye, as if from anthos + ops, but
that may be a result of Greek folk etymology). A heraldic animal, also known in Medieval Latin as
talopus and calopus, the name was applied c.1600 to a living type of deer-like mammal. In the
western U.S., it is used in reference to the pronghorn.


antemundane (adj.)

existing or happening before the creation of the world, 1731; see ante- + mundane.


antenatal (adj.)

before birth, 1798, from Latin ante before (see ante) + natal.


antenna (n.)

1640s, feeler or horn of an insect, from Latin antenna sail yard, the long yard that sticks up on
some sails, of unknown origin, perhaps from PIE root *temp- to stretch, extend. In the etymological
sense, it is a loan-translation of Aristotle's Greek keraiai horns (of insects). Modern use in
radio, etc., for aerial wire is from 1902. Adjectival forms are antennal (1834), antennary (1836),
antennular (1858).


antennae (n.)

Latinate plural of antenna; see -ae.


antennas (n.)

nativized plural of antenna; see -ae.


antenuptial (adj.)

prior to marriage, 1818, originally of children's births; see ante- + nuptial.


antepartum (adj.)

1908, from Latin phrase ante partum before birth (see postpartum).


antepenult (n.)

1610s; see antepenultimate.


antepenultimate (adj.)

the last but two, 1730, from antepenult (n.), 1610s, abbreviation of Latin antepaenultima (syllaba),
fem. of antepaenultimus, from ante before (see ante) + paenultima, from paen almost + ultima last
(see ultimate).


anterior (adj.)

1610s, Latin, literally former, comparative of ante before (see ante). Related: Anteriority.


anteroom (n.)

also ante-room, 1762, literally a room in front; after French antichambre, Italian anticamera, from
Latin ante before (see ante) + camera (see chamber).


anthem (n.)

Old English ontemn, antefn, a composition (in prose or verse) sung antiphonally, from Late Latin
antefana, from Greek antiphona verse response (see antiphon). Sense evolved to a composition set to
sacred music (late 14c.), then song of praise or gladness (1590s). Used in reference to the English
national song (technically, as OED points out, a hymn) and extended to those of other nations.
Modern spelling is from late 16c., perhaps an attempt to make the word look more Greek.


anthemic (adj.)

of music, felt to resemble an anthem, 1841, from anthem + -ic. In reference to a type of acid, 1859,
so called because isolated from dog-fennel (Anthemis arvensis).


anther (n.)

1550s, medical extract of flowers, from French anth&egrave;re, from Modern Latin anthera a medicine
extracted from a flower, from Greek anthera, fem. of antheros flowery, blooming, from anthos flower,
from PIE root *andh- to bloom (cognates: Sanskrit andhas herb, Armenian and field, Middle Irish
ainder young girl, Welsh anner young cow). Main modern sense attested by 1791.


anthesis (n.)

full bloom, 1835, from Greek anthesis, noun of action from antheein to blossom, from anthos flower,
(see anther).


anthill (n.)

late 13c., from ant + hill.


anthologize (v.)

1889; see anthology + -ize. Related: Anthologized; anthologizing.


anthology (n.)

1630s, collection of poetry, from Latin anthologia, from Greek anthologia collection of small poems
and epigrams by several authors, literally flower-gathering, from anthos a flower (see anther) +
logia collection, collecting, from legein gather (see lecture (n.)). Modern sense (which emerged in
Late Greek) is metaphoric, flowers of verse, small poems by various writers gathered together.


Anthony

masc. proper name, from Latin Antonius, name of a Roman gens (with excrescent -h- probably suggested
by many Greek loan words beginning anth-, such as anthros flower, anthropos man); St. Anthony (4c.),
Egyptian hermit, patron saint of swineherds, to whom one of each litter was usually vowed, hence
Anthony for smallest pig of the litter (1660s; in condensed form tantony pig from 1590s). St.
Anthony's Fire (1520s), popular name for erysipelas, is said to be so called from the tradition that
those who sought his intercession recovered from that distemper during a fatal epidemic in 1089.


anthracite (n.)

non-bituminous coal, 1812, earlier (c.1600) a type of ruby-like gem described by Pliny, from Latin
anthracites bloodstone, semi-precious gem, from Greek anthrakites coal-like, from anthrax (genitive
anthrakos) live coal (see anthrax). Related: Anthractic (adj.).


anthrax (n.)

late 14c., any severe boil or carbuncle, from Latin, from Greek anthrax charcoal, live coal, also
carbuncle, of unknown origin. Specific sense of the malignant disease in sheep and cattle (and
occasionally humans) is from 1876.


anthro-

see anthropo-.


anthropic (adj.)

pertaining to man, 1836, from Greek anthropikos human, from anthropos male human being, man (see
anthropo-). Related: Anthropical (1804).


anthropo-

before a vowel, anthrop-, word-forming element meaning pertaining to man or human beings, from comb.
form of Greek anthropos man, human being (sometimes also including women) from Attic andra (genitive
andros), from Greek aner man (as opposed to a woman, a god, or a boy), from PIE *ner- (2) man, also
vigorous, vital, strong (cognates: Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner).   Anthropos sometimes is
explained as a compound of aner and ops (genitive opos) eye, face; so literally he who has the face
of a man. The change of -d- to -th- is difficult to explain; perhaps it is from some lost dialectal
variant, or the mistaken belief that there was an aspiration sign over the vowel in the second
element (as though *-dhropo-), which mistake might have come about by influence of common verbs such
as horao to see.


anthropocentric (adj.)

regarding man as the center, 1855, from anthropo- + -centric. Related: Anthropocentrically.


anthropocentrism (n.)

1897; see anthropocentric + -ism.


anthropogenic (adj.)

1889, from anthropogeny  + -ic.


anthropogeny (n.)

1833, from anthropo- + geny.


anthropoid (adj.)

manlike, 1835, from Greek anthropoeides like a man, resembling a man; in human form; see anthropo- +
-iod. As a noun, attested from 1832 (the Greek noun in this sense was anthroparion).


anthropolatry (n.)

worship of a human being, 1650s, from Greek anthropos (see anthropo-) + latreia hired labor,
service, worship (see -latry).


anthropological (adj.)

1825, from anthropology + -ical. Related: Anthropologically.


anthropologist (n.)

1798, from anthropology + -ist.


anthropology (n.)

science of the natural history of man, 1590s, originally especially of the relation between
physiology and psychology, from Modern Latin anthropologia or coined independently in English from
anthropo- + -logy. In Aristotle, anthropologos is used literally, as speaking of man.


anthropometric (adj.)

1871, based on French anthropom&#233;trique, from anthropometry measurement of the human body + -ic.


anthropometry (n.)

1839, acquaintance with the dimensions of the parts of the human body, from anthropo- + -metry.
Perhaps modeled on French anthropometrie.


anthropomorphic (adj.)

1806, from anthropomorphous + -ic. Originally in reference to regarding God or gods as having human
form and human characteristics; of animals and other things from 1858; the sect of the
Antropomorfites is mentioned in English from mid-15c. (see anthropomorphite).


anthropomorphism (n.)

1753, attributing of human qualities to a deity; see anthropomorphic + -ism. Of other non-human
things, from 1858. Related: Anthropomorphist (1610s).


anthropomorphite (n.)

mid-15c.; see anthropomorphite + -ist.    The sect of Antropomorfitis, whiche helden that God in his
godhede hath hondis and feet and othere suche membris. [Reginald Pecock, The Repressor of Over Much
Blaming of the Clergy, 1449]    Related: Anthropomorphitism (1660s).


anthropomorphize (v.)

1834; see anthropomorphic + -ize. Related: Anthropomorphized; anthopomorphizing.


anthropomorphous (adj.)

1753, anglicization of Late Latin anthropomorphus having human form, from Greek anthropomorphos,
from anthropos human being (see anthropo-) + morphe form (see morphine).


anthropopathy (n.)

ascribing of human feelings to god, 1640s, from Greek anthropopatheia humanity, literally human
feeling, from anthropo- + -patheia, comb. form of pathos suffering, disease, feeling (see pathos).
Related: Anthropopathic; anthropopathically.


anthropophagy (n.)

cannibalism, 1630s, from French anthropophagie, from Greek anthropophagia an eating of men, from
anthropophagos man-eating; a man-eater, from anthropo- + stem of phagein to eat (see -phagous).
Related: Anthropophagic; anthropophagism.


anti (n.)

as a stand-alone word, attested from 1788, originally in reference to the anti-federalists in U.S.
politics (in the 1830s, of the Anti-Masonic party); as an adjective, from 1857. From anti- in
various usages.


anti-

word-forming element meaning against, opposed to, opposite of, instead, from Old French anti- and
directly from Latin anti-, from Greek anti against, opposite, instead of, also used as a prefix,
from PIE *anti- against, also in front of (see ante). It appears in some words in Middle English but
was not commonly used in word formations until modern times.


anti-aircraft (adj.)

also antiaircraft, 1914, from anti- + aircraft.


Anti-American (adj.)

also antiamerican, 1788 (n.), in reference to British parliamentary policies, from anti- + American.
As an adjective by 1838. Related: Anti-Americanism opposition to what is distinctly American, 1844.


anti-bacterial (adj.)

also antibacterial, 1875, from anti- + bacterial.


anti-choice (adj.)

also antichoice, 1978; see pro-life.


anti-communist (adj.)

1919, from anti- + communist.


anti-imperialist (adj.)

1898, American English, in debates about the Spanish-American War, from anti- + imperialist.
Related: Anti-imperialism.


anti-intellectual

1821 (adj.), from anti- + intellectual. As a noun meaning an anti-intellectual person from 1913.


anti-intellectualism (n.)

1904, from anti- + intellectualism; or in some cases from anti-intellectual + -ism.


anti-macassar (n.)

also antimacassar, 1852, from anti- + macassar oil, proprietary name of a hair tonic advertised as
imported from the district of Macassar on the Indonesian island of Sulawesi. The cloth was laid to
protect chair and sofa fabric from people leaning their oily heads back against it.


anti-Semite (n.)

1881, see anti-Semitism.


anti-Semitic (adj.)

1881, see anti-Semitism.


anti-Semitism (n.)

also antisemitism, 1881, from German Antisemitismus, first used by Wilhelm Marr (1819-1904) German
radical, nationalist and race-agitator, who founded the Antisemiten-Liga in 1879; see anti- +
Semite.    Not etymologically restricted to anti-Jewish theories, actions, or policies, but almost
always used in this sense. Those who object to the inaccuracy of the term might try Hermann Adler's
Judaeophobia (1882). Anti-Semitic (also antisemitic) and anti-Semite (also antisemite) also are from
1881, like anti-Semitism they appear first in English in an article in the Athenaeum of Sept. 31, in
reference to German literature.


anti-social (adj.)

also antisocial, 1797, from anti- + social (adj.). First-attested use is in sense of unsociable;
meaning hostile to social order or norms is from 1802.


anti-war (adj.)

also antiwar, 1857, from anti- + war (n.).


antibiotic (adj.)

1894, destructive to micro-organisms, from French antibiotique (c.1889), from anti- against (see
anti-) + biotique of (microbial) life, from Late Latin bioticus of life (see biotic). As a noun,
first recorded 1941 in works of U.S. microbiologist Selman Waksman (1888-1973), discoverer of
streptomycin. Earlier the adjective was used in a sense not from living organisms in debates over
the origins of certain fossils.


antibody (n.)

substance developed in blood as an antitoxin, 1901, a hybrid formed from anti- against + body.
Probably a translation of German Antik&ouml;rper, condensed from a phrase such as anti-toxischer
K&ouml;rper anti-toxic body (1891).


antic (n.)

1520s, grotesque or comical gesture, from Italian antico antique, from Latin antiquus old (see
antique). Originally (like grotesque) a 16c. Italian word referring to the strange and fantastic
representations on ancient murals unearthed around Rome (especially originally the Baths of Titus,
rediscovered 16c.); later extended to any bizarre thing or behavior, in which sense it first arrived
in English. As an adjective in English from 1580s, grotesque, bizarre.


antichrist (n.)

c.1300, from Late Latin antichristus, from Greek antikhristos [I John ii:18], from anti- against
(see anti-) + khristos (see Christ).


antichristian (adj.)

1530s, pertaining to the antichrist, from antichrist + -ian; as hostile or opposed to to
Christianity or Christians (also anti-Christian), 1580s, from anti- + Christian (adj.).


anticipate (v.)

1530s, to cause to happen sooner, a back-formation from anticipation, or else from Latin
anticipatus, past participle of anticipare take (care of) ahead of time, literally taking into
possession beforehand, from ante before (see ante) + capere to take (see capable).    Later to be
aware of (something) coming at a future time (1640s). Used in the sense of expect, look forward to
since 1749, but anticipate has an element of prepare for, forestall that should prevent its being
used as a synonym for expect. Related: Anticipated; anticipating.


anticipation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin anticipationem (nominative anticipatio) preconception, preconceived notion,
noun of action from past participle stem of anticipare take care of ahead of time (see anticipate).
Meaning action of looking forward to is from 1809.


anticipatory (adj.)

1660s, from anticipate + -ory.


anticlimactic (adj.)

also anti-climactic, 1831; see anticlimax + -ic.


anticlimax (n.)

the addition of a particular which suddenly lowers the effect, 1701, from anti- + climax (n.).


anticline (n.)

1867, earlier anticlinal (1849, by ellipsis from anticlinal fold), from anti- against + Greek
klinein to lean, slope (see lean (v.)). Form assimilated to incline.


anticoagulant

1905, adjective and noun, from anti- + coagulant.


antics (n.)

ludicrous behavior, 1520s; see antic.


anticyclone (n.)

1863, coined by Francis Galton (1822-1911), English polymath, explorer, and meteorologist, from
anti- + cyclone. Related: Anticyclonic.


antidepressant (n.)

1876, from anti- + depressant.


antidisestablishmentarianism (n.)

opposition to disestablishment of the Church of England, 1838, said by Weekley to be first recorded
in Gladstone's Church and State, from dis- + establishment in the sense of the ecclesiastical system
established by law; the Church of England (1731). Hence, establishmentarianism the principle of a
state church, and disestablish (1590s) to deprive (a church) of especial state patronage and support
(first used specifically of Christian churches in 1806), which are married in this word. Rarely used
at all now except in examples of the longest words, amongst which it has been counted at least since
1901.


antidotal (adj.)

1640s, from antidote + -al (1).


antidote (n.)

remedy counteracting poison, 1510s (earlier in English as a Latin word), from Middle French antidot
and directly from Latin antidotum a remedy against poison, from Greek antidoton given as a remedy,
literally given against, verbal adjective of antididonai give in return, from anti- against +
didonai to give (see date (n.1)). Compare Middle English antidotarie treatise on drugs or medicines
(c.1400).


Antietam

place name, eastern U.S., from an Algonquian word perhaps meaning swift water; the name occurrs in
Pennsylvania and Ohio, but the best-known is a creek near Sharpsburg in Washington County, Maryland,
site of a bloody Civil War battle Sept. 17, 1862.


antifebrile

1660s, from anti- + febrile.


antifreeze

also anti-freeze; 1913 (adj.), 1935 as a noun; from anti- + freeze.


antigen (n.)

substance that causes production of an antibody, 1908, from German Antigen, from French
antig&egrave;ne (1899), from anti- (see anti-) + Greek -gen (see -gen).


Antigone

daughter of Oedipus, her name may mean in place of a mother in Greek, from anti- opposite, in place
of (see anti-) + gone womb, childbirth, generation, from root of gignesthai to be born related to
genos race, birth, descent (see genus).


Antigua

Caribbean island, from Spanish fem. of antiguo, literally ancient, antique (see antique); discovered
by Columbus in 1493 and named by him for the church of Santa Maria la Antigua (Old St. Mary's) in
Seville.


antihero (n.)

also anti-hero; 1714, from anti- + hero.


antihistamine (n.)

1933, from anti- + histamine.


antimatter (n.)

also anti-matter, 1953, from anti- + matter (n.).


antimetabole (n.)

1590s, from Greek antimetabole, from anti- opposite (see anti-) + metabole turning about (see
metabolism).


antimony (n.)

brittle metallic element, early 15c., from Old French antimoine and directly from Medieval Latin
antimonium, an alchemist's term (used 11c. by Constantinus Africanus), origin obscure, probably a
Latinization of Greek stimmi powdered antimony, black antimony (a cosmetic used to paint the
eyelids), from some Arabic word (such as al 'othmud), unless the Arabic word is from the Greek or
the Latin is from Arabic; probably ultimately from Egyptian stm powdered antimony. In French folk
etymology, anti-moine monk's bane (from moine).    As the name of a pure element, it is attested in
English from 1788. Its chemical symbol Sb is for Stibium, the Latin name for black antimony, which
word was used also in English for black antimony.


antinode (n.)

1872, from anti- + node.


antinomian (n.)

one who maintains the moral law is not binding on Christians under the law of grace, 1640s, from
Medieval Latin Antinomi, name given to a sect of this sort that arose in Germany in 1535, from Greek
anti- opposite, against (see anti-) + nomos rule, law (see numismatics).


antinomianism (n.)

1640s, from antinomian + -ism.


antinomy (n.)

1590s, contradiction in the laws, from Latin antinomia, from Greek antinomia ambiguity in the law,
from anti- against (see anti-) + nomos law (see numismatics). As a term in logic, from 1802 (Kant).


Antioch

modern Antakya in Turkey, anciently the capital of Syria, founded c.300 B.C.E. by Seleucus I Nictor
and named for his father, Antiochus.


antioxidant

1920 (n.); 1932 (adj.), from anti- + oxidant.


antipasto (n.)

1934, from Italian antipasto, from anti- before (see ante) + pasto food, from Latin pascere to feed
(see pastor). Earlier anglicized as antepast (1590).


antipathetic (adj.)

1630s having an antipathy for, from an adjectival construction from Greek antipathein (see
antipathy). Related: antipathetical (c.1600); antipathetically.


antipathic (adj.)

1830, from French antipathique; see antipathy + -ic. It tends to be used in medicine in place of
antipathetic.


antipathy (n.)

c.1600, from Latin antipathia, from Greek antipatheia, noun of state from antipathes opposed in
feeling, having opposite feeling; in return for suffering; felt mutually, from anti- against (see
anti-) + root of pathos feeling (see pathos).


antiperspirant (adj.)

by 1946, from anti- + perspire + adjectival suffix -ant.


antiphon (n.)

c.1500, a versicle sung responsively, from Middle French antiphone hymn or directly from Medieval
Latin antiphona, from Greek antiphona, from anti- over against (see anti-) + phone voice (see fame
(n.)). A re-adoption of the word which had become anthem in English and lost its original meaning.


antiphonal (adj.)

1719, from antiphon + -al. Related: Antiphonally.


antiphony (n.)

1590s, from Greek antiphonos (see antiphon) + -y (1).


antiphrasis (n.)

1530s, from Latin antiphrasis, from Greek antiphrasis, from antiphrazein to express (something) by
the opposite, from anti- (see anti-) + phrazein to consider, to express (see phrase (n.)).


antipodes (n.)

late 14c., persons who dwell on the opposite side of the globe; 1540s as place on the opposite side
of the earth, from Latin antipodes those who dwell on the opposite side of the earth, from Greek
antipodes, plural of antipous with feet opposite (ours), from anti- opposite (see anti-) + pous foot
(see foot (n.)); thus, people who live on the opposite side of the world.  Yonde in Ethiopia ben the
Antipodes, men that haue theyr fete ayenst our fete. [De Proprietatibus Rerum Bartholomeus Anglicus,
translated by John of Trevisa, 1398]  Not to be confused with antiscii those who live on the same
meridian on opposite side of the equator, whose shadows fall at noon in the opposite direction, from
Greek anti- + skia shadow. Related: Antipodal (adj.); antipodean (1630s, n.; 1650s, adj.).


antipope (n.)

also anti-pope, early 15c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Medieval Latin antipapa, from Greek anti-
against (see anti-) + papa (see pope).


antipyretic

reducing fever; that which reduces fever, 1680s, from anti- + Greek pyretos fever, burning heat,
related to pyr fire (see fire (n.)) + -ic.


antiquarian (n.)

one who studies or is fond of antiquities, c.1600, from Latin antiquarius pertaining to antiquity,
from antiquus (see antique (adj.)) + -an. As an adjective from 1771.


antiquated (adj.)

1620s, past participle adjective from antiquate (1530s) to make old or obsolete, from Latin
antiquatus, past participle of antiquare (see antique (adj.)). An older adjective in the same sense
was antiquate (early 15c.), from Latin.


antiquation (n.)

1640s, from Late Latin antiquationem (nominative antiquatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of antiquare (see antique (adj.)).


antique (adj.)

1530s, aged, venerable, from Middle French antique old (14c.), from Latin antiquus (later anticus)
ancient, former, of olden times; old, long in existence, aged; venerable; old-fashioned, from PIE
*anti in sense of before (see ante) + *okw- appearance (see eye (n.)). Originally pronounced in
English like its parallel antic, but French pronunciation and spelling were adopted from c.1700.


antique (n.)

an old and collectible thing, 1771, from antique (adj.).


antique (v.)

to give an antique appearance to, 1896, from antique (adj.). Related: Antiqued; antiquing.


antiquity (n.)

late 14c., olden times, from Old French antiquitet (11c.; Modern French antiquit&eacute;) olden
times; great age; old age, from Latin antiquitatem (nominative antiquitas) ancient times, antiquity,
venerableness, noun of quality from antiquus (see antique (adj.)). Specific reference to ancient
Greece and Rome is from mid-15c.; meaning quality of being old is from about the same time.
Antiquities relics of ancient days is from 1510s.


antiscorbutic (n.)

also anti-scorbutic, 1690s, from anti- + Modern Latin scorbutus scurvy (see scorbutic). From 1725 as
an adjective.


antiseptic (adj.)

1750, coined from anti- against + septic. Figurative use by 1820. As a noun meaning an antiseptic
substance by 1803.


antistrophe (n.)

c.1600, from Latin, from Greek antistrophe a turning about, a turning back, from antistrephein, from
anti- against (see anti-) + strephein to turn (see strophe).


antitheism (n.)

also anti-theism, 1788; see anti- + theism.


antitheist (n.)

also anti-theist, one opposed to belief in the existence of a god, 1813; see   anti- + theist.
Related: Antitheistic.


antitheses (n.)

plural of antithesis.


antithesis (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin antithesis, from Greek antithesis opposition, resistance, literally a placing
against, also a term in logic and rhetoric, noun of action from antitithenai to set against, oppose,
a term in logic, from anti- against (see anti-) + tithenai to put, place (see theme).


antithetic (adj.)

containing an antithesis, c.1600, from Greek antithetikos setting in opposition, from antithetos
placed in opposition, from antithesis (see antithesis).


antithetical (adj.)

1580s, from Greek antithetikos setting in opposition, from antithetos placed in opposition (see
antithetic) + -al (1). Related: Antithetically.


antitoxic

1860 (n.); 1862 (adj.), from anti- + toxic.


antitoxin (n.)

substance neutralizing poisons, 1892, from anti- + toxin. Coined in 1890 by German bacteriologist
Emil von Behring (1854-1917). Antitoxic in this sense is from 1860.


antitrust (adj.)

also anti-trust, 1890, U.S., from anti- + trust (n.) in the economic monopoly sense.


antitype (n.)

also anti-type, 1610s, from Greek antitypos corresponding in form, literally struck back, responding
as an impression to a die, from anti- (see anti-) + typos a blow, mark (see type (n.)).


antivenin (n.)

1894, from anti- +  venin, from venom + chemical suffix -in (2). Perhaps immediately from French
antivenin.


antivirus (n.)

1903, from anti- + virus.


antler (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French auntiler, Old French antoillier (14c., Modern French andouiller)
antler, perhaps from Gallo-Roman cornu *antoculare horn in front of the eyes, from Latin ante before
(see ante) + ocularis of the eyes (see ocular). This etymology is doubted by some because no similar
word exists in any other Romance language, but compare German Augensprossen antlers, literally eye-
sprouts, for a similar formation.


Antonia

fem. proper name, from Latin Antonia, fem. of Antonius (see Anthony).


Antonine (adj.)

1680s, in reference to Roman emperors Antoninus Pius (ruled 138-161 C.E.) and Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus (161-180).


antonomasia (n.)

use of an epithet for a proper name (or vice versa; as in His Holiness for the name of a pope),
1580s, from Latin, from Greek antonomasia, from antonomazein to name instead, call by a new name,
from anti instead (see anti-) + onomazein to name, from onoma name (see name (n.)).


Antony

masc. proper name, from Latin Antonius, name of a Roman gens (see Anthony).


antonym (n.)

1867, coined to serve as opposite of synonym, from Greek anti- equal to, instead of, opposite (see
anti-) + -onym name (see name (n.)). Perhaps introduced to English in the book Synonyms and Antonyms
(1867) by the Ven. C.J. Smith, M.A.    UNDER the head of Synonyms and Antonyms, Archdeacon Smith
arranges words which form an antithesis to one another. The word antonym is, we believe, a new
formation but useful. [Journal of Sacred Literature, July 1867]     French antonyme (1842), German
antonym (by 1859) are older. The un-Greek alternative counterterm has been left to fade.


antrum (n.)

a cave or cavity, late 14c., medical Latin, from Greek antron cave.


antsy (adj.)

1838, American English, from plural of ant + -y (2); probably reflecting the same image as the slang
expression have ants in (one's) pants be restless and fidgety from a century later. Related:
Antsiness.


Antwerp

port city in Belgium, French Anvers, from a Germanic compound of *anda at + *werpum wharf (see
wharf). Folk etymology connects the first word with hand.


Anubis

jackal-headed god of Egyptian religion, from Greek Anoubis, from Egyptian Anpu.


anuria (n.)

1838, medical Latin, from Greek an-, privative prefix (see an- (1)), + ouron urine (see urine).


anus (n.)

inferior opening of the alimentary canal, 1650s, from Old French anus, from Latin anus ring, anus,
from PIE root *ano- ring. So called for its shape; compare Greek daktylios anus, literally ring (for
the finger), from daktylos finger.


anvil (n.)

Old English anfilt, a Proto-Germanic compound (cognates: Middle Dutch anvilt, Old High German
anafalz, Dutch aanbeeld, Danish ambolt anvil) from *ana- on + *filtan hit (see felt (n.)). The ear
bone so called from 1680s. Anvil Chorus is based on the Gypsy Song that opens Act II of Giuseppe
Verdi's opera Il Trovatore, first performed in Teatro Apollo, Rome, Jan. 19, 1853.


anxiety (n.)

1520s, from Latin anxietatem (nominative anxietas) anguish, anxiety, solicitude, noun of quality
from anxius (see anxious). Psychiatric use dates to 1904. Age of Anxiety is from Auden's poem
(1947). For anxiety, distress, Old English had angsumnes, Middle English anxumnesse.


anxious (adj.)

1620s, from Latin anxius solicitous, uneasy, troubled in mind (also causing anxiety, troublesome),
from angere, anguere choke, squeeze, figuratively torment, cause distress (see anger (v.)). The same
image is in Serbo-Croatian tjeskoba anxiety, literally tightness, narrowness. Related: Anxiously;
anxiousness.


any (adj.)

Old English &aelig;nig any, anyone, literally one-y, from Proto-Germanic *ainagas (cognates: Old
Saxon enig, Old Norse einigr, Old Frisian enich, Dutch enig, German einig), from PIE *oi-no- one,
unique (see one). The -y may have diminutive force here.    Emphatic form any old ______ (British
variant: any bloody ______) is recorded from 1896. At any rate is recorded from 1847. Among the
large family of compounds beginning with any-, anykyn any kind (c.1300) did not survive, and Anywhen
(1831) is rarely used, but OED calls it common in Southern [British] dialects.


anybody (n.)

c.1300, ani-bodi, from any + body. One-word form is attested by 1826. Phrase anybody's game (or
race, etc.) is from 1840.


anyhow (adv.)

1740, from any + how (adv.). Unlike the cases of most other any + (interrogative) compounds, there
is no record of it in Old or Middle English. Emphatic form any old how is recorded from 1900,
American English.


anymore (adv.)

one-word form by 1865, from any + more.


anyone (n.)

Old English, two words, from any + one. Old English also used &aelig;nigmon in this sense. One-word
form from 1844.


anyplace (n.)

1911, from any + place.


anything (n.)

late Old English ani&thorn;ing, from any + thing. But Old English &aelig;nig &thorn;inga apparently
also meant somehow, anyhow (glossing Latin quoquo modo).


anythingarian (n.)

one indifferent to religious creeds, c.1704, originally dismissive, from anything on model of
trinitarian, unitarian, etc.


anytime (adv.)

one-word form by 1854, from any + time (n.).


anyway (adv.)

1560s, any way in any manner; variant any ways (with adverbial genitive) attested from c.1560,
prepositional phrase by any way is from late 14c.; see any + way (n.). One-word form predominated
from 1830s. As an adverbial conjunction, from 1859. Middle English in this sense had ani-gates in
any way, somehow (c.1400).


anyways (adv.)

see anyway.


anywhere (adv.)

late 14c., from any + where. Earlier words in this sense were owhere, oughwhere, aywhere, literally
aught where (see aught (1)).


anywise (adv.)

Old English &aelig;nige wisan, from any + wise (n.). One-word form from c.1200.


Anzac

1915, acronym of Australian and New Zealand Army Corps. First used in reference to the Gallipoli
campaign.


AOL

dominant online service of the late 1990s, initialism (acronym) of America Online, company name from
late 1989.


aorist (n.)

1580s, the simple past tense of Greek verbs, from Greek aoristos (khronos) indefinite (tense), from
privative prefix a- not (see a- (3)) + horistos limited, defined, verbal adjective from horizein to
limit, define, from horos boundary, limit, border (see horizon).


aorta (n.)

1570s, from Medieval Latin aorta, from Greek aorte, term applied by Aristotle to the great artery of
the heart, literally what is hung up, from aeirein to lift, heave, raise, of uncertain origin;
related to the second element in meteor. Used earlier by Hippocrates of the bronchial tubes.
Related: Aortal; aortic.


AP

abbreviation of Associated Press, first recorded 1879; the organization was founded May 1848 as co-
operative news gathering effort among New York City newspaper publishers covering the war with
Mexico.


ap- (2)

patronymic prefix in Welsh names, earlier map son, cognate with Gaelic mac. Since 17c. merged into
surnames (Ap Rhys = Price, Ap Evan = Bevan, etc.).    It is said that a Welshman who evidently was
not willing to be surpassed in length of pedigree, when making out his genealogical tree, wrote near
the middle of his long array of 'aps' -- about this time Adam was born. [Origin and Significance of
our Names, The Chautauquan, Oct. 1887-July 1888]


ap- (1)

form of Latin ad- before words beginning in -p-; see ad-.


apace (adv.)

mid-14c., from a pace, literally at a pace, but usually with a sense of at a good pace, from a- (1)
on + pace (n.).


Apache

1745, from American Spanish (1598), probably from Yavapai (a Yuman language) 'epache people.
Sometimes derived from Zuni apachu enemy (see F.W. Hodge, American Indians, 1907), but this seems to
have been the Zuni name for the Navajo.    French journalistic sense of Parisian gangster or thug
first attested 1902. Apache dance was the World War I-era equivalent of 1990s' brutal slam dancing.
Fenimore Cooper's Indian novels were enormously popular in Europe throughout the 19c., and
comparisons of Cooper's fictional Indian ways in the wilderness and underworld life in European
cities go back to Dumas' Les Mohicans de Paris (1854-1859). It is probably due to the imitations of
Cooper (amounting almost to plagiarisms) by German author Karl May (1842-1912) that Apaches replaced
Mohicans in popular imagination. Also compare Mohawk.


apanage (n.)

see appanage.


apart (adv.)

late 14c., from Old French &agrave; part to the side, from Latin ad to (see ad-) + partem,
accusative of pars a side (see part (n.)).


apartheid (n.)

1947 (policy begun 1948), from Afrikaans apartheid (1929 in a South African socio-political
context), literally separateness, from Dutch apart separate (from French &agrave;part; see apart) +
suffix -heid, cognate of English -hood. The official English synonym was separate development
(1955).Segregation is such an active word that it suggests someone is trying to segregate someone
else. So the word apartheid was introduced. Now it has such a stench in the nostrils of the world,
they are referring to autogenous development. [Alan Paton, New York Times, Oct. 24, 1960]


apartment (n.)

1640s, private rooms for the use of one person within a house, from French appartement (16c.), from
Italian appartimento, literally a separated place, from appartere to separate, from a to (see ad-) +
parte side, place, from Latin partem (see part (n.)). Sense of set of private rooms in a building
entirely of these (the U.S. equivalent of British flat) is first attested 1874.


apathetic (adj.)

1744, from apathy + -ic, on model of pathetic.


apathy (n.)

c.1600, freedom from suffering, from French apathie (16c.), from Latin apathia, from Greek apatheia
freedom from suffering, impassability, want of sensation, from apathes without feeling, without
suffering or having suffered, from a- without (see a- (3)) + pathos emotion, feeling, suffering (see
pathos). Originally a positive quality; sense of indolence of mind, indifference to what should
excite is from c.1733.


APB

also a.p.b., 1960, police jargon initialism (acronym) for all-points bulletin, itself attested by
1953 (perhaps more in the jargon of detective novels than in actual police use).


ape (n.)

Old English apa ape, monkey, from Proto-Germanic *apan (cognates: Old Saxon apo, Old Norse api,
Dutch aap, German affe), perhaps borrowed in Proto-Germanic from Celtic (compare Old Irish apa) or
Slavic (compare Old Bohemian op, Slovak opitza), perhaps ultimately from a non-Indo-European
language.    Apes were noted in medieval times for mimicry of human action, hence, perhaps, the
other figurative use of the word, to mean a fool. To go ape (in emphatic form, go apeshit) go crazy
is 1955, U.S. slang. To lead apes in hell (1570s) was the fancied fate of one who died an old maid.


ape (v.)

to imitate, 1630s, but the notion is implied earlier, as in the phrase play the ape (1570s), Middle
English apeshipe ape-like behavior, simulation (mid-15c.); and the noun sense of one who mimics may
date from early 13c. Related: Aped; aping.


ape-man (n.)

hypothetical missing link, 1879, in a translation of Haeckel, from ape (n.) + man (n.). Man-ape is
attested from 1878. The name Martin Halfape appears in an English roll from 1227.


apercu (n.)

quick impression, sketch, brief survey, 1820s, from French aper&ccedil;u (18c. in this sense), noun
use of past participle of apercevoir to perceive (11c.), from Gallo-Roman *adpercipere, from Latin
ad to (see ad-) + percipere to perceive (see perceive).


aperiodic (adj.)

1874, from a- (2), privative prefix, + periodic.


aperitif (n.)

1894, alcoholic drink taken before a meal to stimulate the appetite, from French ap&eacute;ritif
laxative, laxative liqueur, literally opening, from Latin aperitivus, from aperire to open (see
overt). Compare Middle English apertive (adj.), a medical word meaning capable of opening or
dilating (pores, etc.), early 15c.


apert (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French apert and directly from Latin apertus open, past participle of aperire to
open, uncover (see overt).


aperture (n.)

early 15c., from Latin apertura an opening, from apertus, past participle of aperire to open (see
overt).


apex (n.)

c.1600, from Latin apex summit, peak, tip, top, extreme end; probably related to apere to fasten,
fix, hence the tip of anything (one of the meanings in Latin was small rod at the top of the
flamen's cap), from PIE *ap- to take, reach. Proper plural is apices.


aphasia (n.)

loss of ability to speak, especially as result of brain injury or disorder, 1867, from Modern Latin
aphasia, from Greek aphasia speechlessness, from a- without (see a- (3)) + phasis utterance, from
phanai to speak, related to pheme voice, report, rumor (see fame (n.)).    APHASIA is the term which
has recently been given to the loss of the faculty of articulate language, the organs of phonation
and of articulation, as well as the intelligence, being unimpaired. The pathology of this affection
is at the present time the subject of much discussion in the scientific world; the French Academy
devoted several of their s&#233;ances during the year 1865 to its special elucidation, and the
Medical Journals of France and of our own country have lately contained a good deal of original
matter bearing upon this obscure feature in cerebral pathology. [Frederic Bateman, M.D., Aphasia,
London, 1868]


aphasic

1868 (n.); 1892 (adj.), from aphasia + -ic.


aphelion (n.)

point farthest from the sun (of a celestial body's orbit), 1670s, a Grecianized form of Modern Latin
aphelium, altered by Johannes Kepler based on Greek apo heliou away from the sun, from apo away from
(see apo-) + heliou, genitive of helios sun (see sol). The whole was formed on the model of
Ptolemaic apogaeum (see apogee) to reflect the new helio-centric model of the universe.


aphetic (adj.)

1880, from aphesis (1880), coined by OED editor Sir James A.H. Murray (1837-1915) for gradual and
unintentional loss of a short unaccented vowel at the beginning of a word (as squire from esquire),
from Greek aphienai to let go, to send forth, from apo- from (see apo-) + hienai to send (see jet
(v.)).


aphid (n.)

1884, anglicized from Modern Latin aphides, plural of aphis, coined by Linnaeus (1758), though where
he got it and why he applied it to the plant louse are mysteries. The theory favored by OED as least
improbable is that it derives from the plural of Greek apheides unsparing, lavishly bestowed, in
reference either to the prodigious rate of production of the insects or their voracity. They also
are known as ant-cows.


aphonia (n.)

want of voice, loss of voice, having no sound, 1719, from Modern Latin aphonia, from Greek aphonia
speechlessness, noun of quality from aphonos voiceless, from a-, privative prefix (see a- (3)), +
phone voice (see fame (n.)). Less-common anglicized form aphony is attested from 1827.


aphorism (n.)

1520s (especially in reference to the Aphorisms of Hippocrates), from Middle French aphorisme (14c.,
aufforisme), from Late Latin aphorismus, from Greek aphorismos definition, pithy sentence, from
aphorizein to mark off, divide, from apo- from (see apo-) + horizein to bound (see horizon).    An
aphorism is a short, pithy statement containing a truth of general import; an axiom is a statement
of self-evident truth; a theorem is a demonstrable proposition in science or mathematics; an epigram
is like an aphorism, but lacking in general import. Maxim and saying can be used as synonyms for
aphorism.


aphoristic (adj.)

1753, from Greek aphoristikos (see aphorism). Aphoristically is from 1650s.


aphotic (adj.)

untouched by sunlight, lightless (in reference to deep-sea regions), 1903, Modern Latin, from Greek
a- not, without (see a- (3)) + phos (genitive photos) light, related to phainein to show, to bring
to light (see phantasm) + -ic. Aphotic zone is recorded from 1913.


Aphra

fem. proper name, apparently from a misunderstanding of Hebrew bebheth 'Aphrah in the house of
Aphrah (Mi. i:10), in which Aphrah probably is the name of a town, not a person. [Klein]


aphrodisiac (n.)

1719, from Greek aphrodisiakos inducing sexual desire, from aphrodisios, pertaining to Aphrodite;
sexual pleasure; a temple of Aphrodite, Greek goddess of love and beauty. As an adjective from 1830
(earlier was aphrodisical, 1719)


Aphrodite (n.)

Greek goddess of love and beauty; by the ancients, her name was derived from Greek aphros foam, from
the story of her birth, but perhaps it is ultimately from Phoenician Ashtaroth (Assyrian Ishtar). In
17c. English, pronounced to rhyme with night, right, etc.


apiarist (n.)

1816; see apiary + -ist.


apiary (n.)

1650s, from Latin apiarium beehouse, beehive, neuter of apiarius of bees, from apis bee, a mystery
word unrelated to any similar words in other Indo-European languages. A borrowing from Semitic has
been proposed.


apical (adj.)

of or belonging to an apex, 1828, from Latin apicem, from apex (see apex) + -al (1).


apiece (adv.)

1550s, a contraction of a pece (mid-15c.), originally of coins, objects for sale, etc. (see a (2) +
piece (n.)).


aping (n.)

imitation, mimicry, 1680s, verbal noun from ape (v.).


aplasia (n.)

1885, medical Latin, from Greek a-, privative prefix (see a- (3)), + -plasia.


aplenty (adj.)

1830, originally U.S., from a- (1) + plenty (n.). First attested in writings of J. Fenimore Cooper.


aplomb (n.)

assurance, confidence, 1828, from French aplomb (16c.), literally perpendicularity, from phrase
&agrave; plomb poised upright, balanced, literally on the plumb line, from Latin plumbum (the metal)
lead (see plumb (n.)), of which the weight at the end of the line was made.


apnea (n.)

suspension of breathing, also apnoea, 1719, Modern Latin, from Greek apnoia absence of respiration,
from apnos without breathing, from a- not (see a- (3)) + pnein to breathe (see pneuma).


apneic (adj.)

1883, from apnea + -ic.


apo koinu

Greek, literally in common. Applied to sentences with one subject and two predicates; a formation
rare in modern English, though it occurs more often in Old English. Compare koine.


apo-

before vowels ap-, word-forming element meaning from, away from, separate, free from, from Greek apo
from, away from; after; in descent from, in compounds, from, asunder, away, off; finishing,
completing; ceasing from; back again, from PIE root *apo- off, away (cognates: Sanskrit apa away
from, Avestan apa away from, Latin ab away from, from, Gothic af, Old English of away from).


apocalypse (n.)

late 14c., revelation, disclosure, from Church Latin apocalypsis revelation, from Greek apokalyptein
uncover, disclose, reveal, from apo- from (see apo-) + kalyptein to cover, conceal (see Calypso).
The Christian end-of-the-world story is part of the revelation in John of Patmos' book Apokalypsis
(a title rendered into English as Apocalypse c.1230 and Revelations by Wyclif c.1380).    Its
general sense in Middle English was insight, vision; hallucination; meaning a cataclysmic event is
modern. As agent nouns, apocalypst (1829), apocalypt (1834), and apocalyptist (1835) have been
tried.


apocalyptic (adj.)

1660s, pertaining to the 'Revelation of St. John' in the New Testament, from Greek apokalyptikos,
from apokalyptein  (see apocalypse). Meaning pertaining to the imminent end of the world evolved by
1880s.


Apocrypha

late 14c., neuter plural of Late Latin apocryphus secret, not approved for public reading, from
Greek apokryphos hidden; obscure, thus (books) of unknown authorship (especially those included in
the Septuagint and Vulgate but not originally written in Hebrew and not counted as genuine by the
Jews), from apo- away (see apo-) + kryptein to hide (see crypt). Properly plural (the single would
be Apocryphon or apocryphum), but commonly treated as a collective singular.


apocryphal (adj.)

1580s, of doubtful authenticity, from Apocrypha + -al (1). Middle English had apocrive (late 14c.)
in same sense.


apodal (adj.)

1769, from Greek apous (from apod- footless, from a-, privative prefix, see a- (3), + pous foot; see
foot (n.)) + -al.


apodictic (adj.)

clearly demonstrated, 1650s, from Latin apodicticus, from Greek apodeiktikos, from apodeiktos,
verbal adjective of apodeiknynai to show off, demonstrate, literally to point away from (other
objects, at one), from apo off, away (see apo-) + deiknynai to show (see diction).


apodyterium (n.)

1690s, from Latin apodyterium undressing room (in a bath house), from Greek apodyterion undressing
room, from apodyein to put off, undress, from apo- off (see apo-) + dyein to put on, enter, go in.


apogee (n.)

point at which the moon is farthest from the earth, 1590s, from French apog&eacute;e, from Latin
apogaeum, from Greek apogaion, neuter adjective, away from the earth, a term from Ptolemaic
astronomy, from apo off, away (see apo-) + gaia/ge earth (see Gaia). Adjective forms are apogeal,
apogean.


apolitical (adj.)

1947, from a- not (see a- (3)) + political.


Apollo

Olympian deity, god of music, poetry, medicine, etc., later identified with Helios, the sun god; the
name is a Latin form of Greek Apollon, said to be perhaps related to an obsolete Greek verb meaning
to drive away (evil, etc.) [Klein, citing Usener].


Apollonian (adj.)

1660s, from Apollo (Greek Apollon) + -ian. The Greek adjective was Apollonios. The word also is
attested in English as Apollinarian (1753), Apolline (c.1600).


Apollyon

destroying angel of the bottomless pit (a name sometimes given to the Devil), late 14c., from
present participle of Greek apollyein to destroy utterly (from apo- from, away from + olluein to
destroy); a translation of Hebrew Abaddon (q.v.).


apologetic (adj.)

1640s, vindicatory, from French apolog&eacute;tique, from Latin apologeticus, from Greek
apologetikos defensible, from apologeisthai (see apology). Meaning regretfully acknowledging failure
is from 1855. As a noun, formal defense, from early 15c. Related: Apologetics (c.1753).


apologia (n.)

see apology.


apological (adj.)

c.1600; see apology + -ical.


apologise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of apologize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Apologised;
apologising.


apologist (n.)

1630s, from French apologiste, from apologie (see apology).


apologize (v.)

1590s, to speak in defense of; see apology + -ize. Main modern sense to regretfully acknowledge is
attested by 1725. The Greek equivalent, apologizesthai, meant simply to give an account. Related:
Apologized; apologizing.


apologue (n.)

moral fable, 1550s, from French apologue, from Latin apologus, from Greek apologos, from apo- off,
away from (see apo-) + logos speech (see lecture (n.)). Literally, (that which comes) from a speech.


apology (n.)

early 15c., defense, justification, from Late Latin apologia, from Greek apologia a speech in
defense, from apologeisthai to speak in one's defense, from apologos an account, story, from apo-
from, off (see apo-) + logos speech (see lecture (n.)).    The original English sense of self-
justification yielded a meaning frank expression of regret for wrong done, first recorded 1590s, but
this was not the main sense until 18c. The old sense tends to emerge in Latin form apologia (first
attested in English 1784), especially since J.H. Newman's Apologia pro Vita Sua (1864).


aponeurosis (n.)

1670s, from Latin, from Greek aponeurosis, from aponeuroein, from apo- off, away from (see apo-) +
neuron sinew (see neuro-).


apophatic (adj.)

involving a mention of something one feigns to deny; involving knowledge obtained by negation, 1850,
from Greek apophatikos, from apophasis denial, answer, from apophanai to speak off, from apo- off
(see apo-) + phanai to speak, related to pheme voice (see fame (n.)).


apophthegm (n.)

see apothegm.


apoplectic (adj.)

1610s, involving apoplexy, from French apoplectique (16c.), from Latin apoplecticus, from Greek
apoplektikos disabled by a stroke, crippled, struck dumb, from apoplektos, verbal adjective of
apoplessein (see apoplexy). Meaning showing symptoms of apoplexy (1721) gradually shaded into
enraged, very angry.


apoplexy (n.)

late 14c., sudden fit of paralysis and dizziness, from Old French apoplexie or directly from Late
Latin apoplexia, from Greek apoplexia, from apoplessein to strike down and incapacitate, from apo-
off (see apo-), in this case probably an intensive prefix, + plessein hit (cognates: plague (n.),
also with a root sense of stricken). The Latin translation, sideratio, means disease caused by a
constellation.


aporetic (adj.)

c.1600, from French aporetique, from Greek aporetikos, from aporeein to be at a loss, from aporos
impassable, impracticable, very difficult; hard to deal with; at a loss, from a-, privative prefix
(see a- (3)), + poros passage (see pore (n.)).


aporia (n.)

1580s, from Latin, from Greek aporia, noun of state from aporos (see aporetic).


aposiopesis (n.)

rhetorical artifice wherein the speaker suddenly breaks off in the middle of a sentence, 1570s, from
Latin, from Greek aposiopesis a becoming silent, also as a rhetorical figure, from apo- (see apo-) +
siope silence.


apostasy (n.)

late 14c., renunciation, abandonment or neglect of established religion, from Latin apostasia, from
later Greek apostasia, from apostasis revolt, defection, literally a standing off (see apostate).
General (non-religious) sense is attested from 1570s.


apostate (n.)

mid-14c., one who forsakes his religion or faith, from Old French apostate (Modern French apostat)
and directly from Late Latin apostata, from Greek apostasia defection, desertion, rebellion, from
apostenai to defect, literally to stand off, from apo- away from (see apo-) + stenai to stand. Used
in non-religious situations (politics, etc.) from mid-14c.


apostate (adj.)

late 14c.; see apostate (n.).


apostatize (v.)

1610s, from Late Latin apostatizare, earlier apostatare, from apostata (see apostate). Related:
Apostatized; apostatizing. The past participle form apostazied is attested from late 14c.


apostille (n.)

note, especially on text of the Bible, also apostil, 1520s, from French apostille (15c.), probably
from Medieval Latin postilla, which probably represents Latin post illa, literally after those.


apostle (n.)

Old English apostol messenger, especially the 12 witnesses sent forth by Jesus to preach his Gospel,
from Late Latin apostolus, from Greek apostolos messenger, person sent forth, from apostellein send
away, send forth, from apo- from (see apo-) + stellein in its secondary sense of to send, from PIE
*stel-yo-, suffixed form of root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring to a standing
object or place (see stall (n.1)). Compare epistle.    The current form of the word, predominant
since 16c., is influenced by Old French apostle (12c.), from the same Late Latin source. Figurative
sense of chief advocate of a new principle or system is from 1810. Apostles, short for The Acts and
Epistles of the Apostles, is attested from c.1400.


apostolic (adj.)

early 15c., from French apostolique or directly from Church Latin apostolicus, from Greek
apostolikos, from apostolos (see apostle). Apostolical also is early 15c.


apostrophe (n.)

mark indicating omitted letter, 1580s, from Middle French apostrophe, from Late Latin apostrophus,
from Greek apostrophos (prosoidia) (the accent of) turning away, thus, a mark showing where a letter
has been omitted, from apostrephein avert, turn away, from apo- from (see apo-) + strephein to turn
(see strophe).    In English, the mark often represents loss of -e- in -es, possessive ending. It
was being extended to all possessives, whether they ever had an -e- or not, by 18c. Greek also used
this word for a turning aside of an orator in speech to address some individual, a sense first
recorded in English 1530s.


apothecary (n.)

mid-14c., shopkeeper, especially one who stores, compounds, and sells medicaments, from Old French
apotecaire (13c., Modern French apothicaire), from Late Latin apothecarius storekeeper, from Latin
apotheca storehouse, from Greek apotheke barn, storehouse, literally a place where things are put
away, from apo- away (see apo-) + tithenai to put, to place (see theme). Same root produced French
boutique and Spanish bodega. Cognate compounds produced Sanskrit apadha- concealment, Old Persian
apadana- palace.    Drugs and herbs being among the chief items of non-perishable goods, the meaning
narrowed 17c. to druggist (Apothecaries' Company of London separated from the Grocers' in 1617).
Apothecaries formerly were notorious for the assumed gravity and affectation of knowledge generally
put on by the gentlemen of this profession, who are commonly as superficial in their learning as
they are pedantic in their language [Francis Grose, A Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue,
1796]. Hence, Apothecary's Latin, barbarously mangled, also known as Dog Latin.


apothegm (n.)

pithy saying, 1550s, from Greek apophthegma terse, pointed saying, literally something clearly
spoken, from apophthengesthai to speak one's opinion plainly, from apo- from (see apo-) +
phthengesthai to utter. See aphorism for nuances of usage. Spelling apophthegm, restored by Johnson,
is preferred in England, according to OED.


apotheosis (n.)

1600s, from Late Latin apotheosis deification, from Greek apotheosis, from apotheoun deify, make
(someone) a god, from apo- special use of this prefix, meaning, here, change + theos god (see
theo-).


apotheosize (v.)

1760; see apotheosis + -ize. Related: Apotheosized; apotheosizing. Earlier in same sense was
apotheose (1670s).


apothesis (n.)

1811, from Greek apothesis a laying up in store; a putting aside, noun of action from apotithenai to
lay aside, from apo- off, away (see apo-) + tithenai to put, place (see theme).


apotropaic (adj.)

1883, with -ic + Greek apotropaios averting evil, from apotrepein to turn away, avert, from apo-
off, away (see apo-) + trepein to turn (see trope).


app (n.)

computerese shorthand for application, attested by 1992.


Appalachia

cultural and geographical region of inland Eastern U.S., 1880s, from the Appalachian Mountains,
which are its core. Earlier Appalachia was proposed as a better name for United States of America by
Washington Irving in 1839 (though he preferred Alleghenia) and this may have been the coinage of the
word.    It is a thousand pities that the puny witticisms of a few professional objectors should
have the power to prevent, even for a year, the adoption of a name for our country. At present we
have, clearly, none. There should be no hesitation about Appalachia. In the first place, it is
distinctive. America is not, and can never be made so. We may legislate as much as we please, and
assume for our country whatever name we think right â&euro;&rdquo; but to use it will be no name,
to any purpose for which a name is needed, unless we can take it away from the regions which employ
it at present. South America is America, and will insist upon remaining so. [Edgar Allan Poe, 1846]


Appalachian

in reference to the North American mountain range, c.1600, Mountaynes Apalatsi; written apalachen by
Spanish explorers and originally in reference only to the southern end of the range. Originally the
name of the Apalachee, a Muskogean people of northwestern Florida, perhaps from Apalachee abalahci
other side of the river or Hitchiti (Muskogean) apalwah&#269;i dwelling on one side. Spelling
shifted under influence of adjectives in -ian.


appall (v.)

also appal, early 14c., to fade; c.1400, to grow pale, from Old French apalir become or make pale,
from a- to (see ad-) + palir grow pale, from Latin pallere (see pallor). Meaning cause dismay or
shock, is 1530s. Related: Appalled; appalling.


appalled (adj.)

1570s, enfeebled; c.1600, dismayed; past participle adjective from appall.


appalling (adj.)

1620s, present participle adjective from appall. Colloquial weakened sense of distasteful is
attested from 1919.


Appaloosa

breed of horses favored by Indian tribes in U.S. West, 1849, either from Opelousa in Louisiana or
from Palouse Indians, who lived near the river of that name in Idaho, in which case it probably is a
Nez Perc&eacute; word. Opelousa is perhaps from Choctaw api losa black body; while Palouse is from
Sahaptin palou:s what is standing up in the water.


appanage (n.)

c.1600, from French apanage (13c.), from apaner to endow with means of subsistence, from Medieval
Latin appanare equip with bread, from ad- to (see ad-) + panis bread (see food). Originally,
provisions made for younger children of royalty. The double -p- restored in French 15c.-16c., in
English 17c.


apparat (n.)

administrative machinery of the Communist Party in Russia, 1950, from Russian, from German apparat
apparatus, instrument, from Latin apparatus (see apparatus).


apparatchik (n.)

Communist agent or spy, 1941, originally in writings of Arthur Koestler, from Russian, from apparat
political organization (see apparat). Russian plural is apparatchiki.


apparatus (n.)

1620s, from Latin apparatus tools, implements, equipment; preparation, a preparing, noun of state
from past participle stem of apparare prepare, from ad- to (see ad-) + parare make ready (see pare).


apparel (v.)

mid-13c., to equip (in any way), from Old French apareillier (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
*appariculare. This is either from Latin apparare prepare, make ready (see apparatus), or from
Vulgar Latin *ad-particulare to put things together. The meaning to attire in proper clothing is
from mid-14c. Cognate with Italian aparecchiare, Spanish aparejar, Portuguese aparelhar. Related:
Appareled; apparelled; appareling; apparelling.


apparel (n.)

personal outfit or attire, early 14c., also ship's rigging, from Old French apareil preparation,
from apareillier (see apparel (v.)). Earlier in same sense was apparelment (early 14c.).


apparent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French aparant evident, obvious, visible, from Latin apparentem (nominative
apparens) visible, manifest, present participle of apparere (see appear). First attested in phrase
heir apparent (see heir). Meaning superficial is c.1400. Apparent magnitude in astronomy (how bright
a heavenly body looks from earth, as opposed to absolute magnitude, which is how bright it really
is) is attested from 1875.


apparently (adv.)

late 14c., visibly, openly, from apparent + -ly (2). Meaning evidently is from 1550s; that of to all
appearances (but not necessarily really) is from 1560s; meaning so far as can be judged, seemingly,
is from 1846. A gradual retreat from certainty.


apparition (n.)

c.1500, unclosing (of Heaven), from Anglo-French aparicion, Old French apparition, aparoison (15c.),
used in reference to the Epiphany (revealing of Christ child to the Wise Men), from Late Latin
apparitionem (nominative apparitio) an appearance, also attendants, in classical Latin service,
servants, noun of action from past participle stem of apparere appear (see appear). Meaning ghost
first recorded c.1600; the shade of sense differentiation between appearance and apparition is that
the latter tends to be unexpected or startling.


appeal (v.)

early 14c., originally in legal sense of to call to a higher judge or court, from Anglo-French
apeler to call upon, accuse, Old French apeler make an appeal (11c., Modern French appeler), from
Latin appellare to accost, address, appeal to, summon, name, iterative of appellere to prepare, from
ad- to (see ad-) + pellere to beat, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Related: Appealed; appealing.
Probably a Roman metaphoric extension of a nautical term for driving a ship toward a particular
landing. Popular modern meaning to be attractive or pleasing is quite recent, attested from 1907
(appealing in this sense is from 1891), from the notion of to address oneself in expectation of a
sympathetic response.


appeal (n.)

c.1300, in the legal sense, from Old French apel (Modern French appel), back-formation from apeler
(see appeal (v.)). Meaning call to an authority is from 1620s; that of attractive power attested by
1916.


appealing

mid-15c. as a noun, action of petitioning a higher court or authority, verbal noun from appeal (v.).
Adjectival sense of attractive attested by 1892. Related: Appealingly.


appear (v.)

late 13c., to come into view, from stem of Old French aparoir (12c., Modern French apparoir) appear,
come to light, come forth, from Latin apparere to appear, come in sight, make an appearance, from
ad- to (see ad-) + parere to come forth, be visible. Of persons, present oneself, late 14c. Meaning
seem, have a certain appearance is late 14c. Related: Appeared; appearing.


appearance (n.)

late 14c., visible state or form, figure; mere show, from Anglo-French apparaunce, Old French
aparance appearance, display, pomp (13c.), from Latin apparentia, abstract noun from aparentem, past
participle of apparere (see appear). Meaning semblance is recorded from early 15c.; that of action
of coming into view is mid-15c. Phrase keep up appearances attested from 1760 (save appearances in
same sense is 1711).


appeasable (adj.)

1540s; see appease + -able. Related: Appeasably.


appease (v.)

c.1300 to reconcile, from Anglo-French apeser, Old French apaisier to pacify, make peace, appease,
be reconciled, placate (12c.), from the phrase a paisier bring to peace, from a to (see ad-) + pais,
from Latin pacem (nominative pax) peace (see peace). Related: Appeased; appeasing.


appeasement (n.)

mid-15c., pacification, from Middle French apeisement, Old French apaisement appeasement, calming,
noun of action from apaisier (see appease). First recorded 1919 in international political sense;
not pejorative until failure of Chamberlain's policy toward Germany in 1939 (Methods of appeasement
was Chamberlain's description of his policy).


appeaser (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from appease (v.). Political sense attested from 1940.


appellant (n.)

late 14c., Anglo-French, from Old French apelant, noun use of present participle of apeler, from
Latin appellare (see appeal).


appellate (adj.)

pertaining to appeals, 1726, from Latin appellatus, past participle of appellare (see appeal).
Appellate jurisdiction is in Blackstone (1768).


appellation (n.)

late 15c., action of appealing (to a higher authority), from Old French apelacion (13c.), from Latin
appellationem (nominative appellatio) an addressing, accosting; an appeal; a name, title, noun of
action from past participle stem of appellare (see appeal). Meaning designation, name given to a
person, thing, or class is from mid-15c., from a sense also found in Middle French appeler.


appellative (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin appellativus, from appellat-, past participle stem of appellare (see appeal).
As a noun, attested from 1590s.


appellee (n.)

1530s, from Anglo-French (late 14c.), from Old French apel&eacute; (Modern French appel&eacute;)
accused, defendant, noun use of past participle of appeler to call, address; see appeal + -ee.


append (v.)

late 14c., to belong to as a possession or right, from Old French apendre (13c.) belong, be
dependent (on); attach (oneself) to; hang, hang up, and directly from Latin appendere to cause to
hang (from something), weigh, from ad- to (see ad-) + pendere hang (see pendant).    Meaning to hang
on, attach as a pendant is 1640s; that of attach as an appendix is recorded by 1843. OED says the
original word was obsolete by c.1500, and these later transitive senses represent a reborrowing from
Latin or French. Related: Appended; appending.


appendage (n.)

1640s, from append + -age.


appendectomy (n.)

1891, a hybrid from appendix + -ectomy.


appendices (n.)

proper Latin plural of appendix.


appendicitis (n.)

1886, from Latin stem of appendix + -itis.


appendicular (adj.)

1650s, from Latin appendicula, diminutive of appendix  + -ar.


appendix (n.)

1540s, subjoined addition to a document or book, from Latin appendix an addition, continuation,
something attached, from appendere (see append). Used for small outgrowth of an internal organ from
1610s, especially in reference to the vermiform appendix. This sense perhaps from or influenced by
French appendix, where the term was in use from 1540s.


apperceive (v.)

c.1300, from Old French apercevoir (see apperception). In modern psychological use, a back-formation
from apperception. Related: Apperceived; apperceiving.


apperception (n.)

1753, from French aperception (17c.), from German Apperzeption (or Latin apperceptionem), coined by
German mathematician and philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716) as noun corresponding to
French apercevoir perceive, notice, become aware of (11c., from Latin ad to (see ad-) + percipere;
see perceive) on analogy of Perzeption/percevoir.


appertain (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French apartenir, Old French apartenir (12c.) be related to; be incumbent
upon, from Late Latin appertinere to pertain to, from ad- to, completely (see ad-) + pertinere to
belong to (see pertain). To belong as parts to the whole, or as members to a family or class.
Related: Appertained; appertaining.


appetence (n.)

strong desire, c.1600, from French app&eacute;tence desire, from Latin appetentia longing after
something, noun of state from appetentem (nominative appetens), present participle of appetere, from
ad to (see ad-) + petere to seek, request (see petition (n.)).


appetite (n.)

c.1300, craving for food, from Anglo-French appetit, Old French apetit (13c.) appetite, desire,
eagerness, from Latin appetitus appetite, literally desire toward, from appetitus, past participle
of appetere to long for, desire; strive for, grasp at, from ad- to (see ad-) + petere go to, seek
out (see petition (n.)).    Of other desires or cravings, from late 14c. As an adjective form, OED
lists appetitious (1650s) and appetitual (1610s) as obsolete, but appetitive (1570s) continues.


appetize (v.)

make hungry, 1782 (implied in appetized), irregularly formed (on model of verbs in -ize) from
appetite, or else a back-formation from appetizing.


appetizer (n.)

something taken to whet the appetite, 1820, agent noun from appetize.


appetizing (adj.)

exciting desire or hunger, 1650s, from appetite on model of present participle adjective forms in
-ing.


Appian Way

road between Rome and Capua, so called because it was begun (302 B.C.E.) by the consul Appius
Claudius Caecus.


applaud (v.)

late 15c. (implied in applauding), to express agreement or approval; to praise, from Latin
applaudere to clap the hands in approbation, to approve by clapping hands; to strike upon, beat,
from ad to (see ad-) + plaudere to clap (see plaudit). Sense of express approval of is from 1590s;
that of to clap the hands is from 1590s. Figurative sense arrived in English before literal.
Related: Applauded; applauding.


applause (n.)

early 15c., from Latin applausus, past participle of applaudere approve by clapping hands (see
applaud).


apple (n.)

Old English &aelig;ppel apple; any kind of fruit; fruit in general, from Proto-Germanic *ap(a)laz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch appel, Old Norse eple, Old High German apful, German
Apfel), from PIE *ab(e)l apple (cognates: Gaulish avallo fruit; Old Irish ubull, Lithuanian obuolys,
Old Church Slavonic jabloko apple), but the exact relation and original sense of these is uncertain
(compare melon).  A roted eppel amang &thorn;e holen, make&thorn; rotie &thorn;e yzounde. [Ayenbite
of Inwit, 1340]    In Middle English and as late as 17c., it was a generic term for all fruit other
than berries but including nuts (such as Old English finger&aelig;ppla dates, literally finger-
apples; Middle English appel of paradis banana, c.1400). Hence its grafting onto the unnamed fruit
of the forbidden tree in Genesis. Cucumbers, in one Old English work, are eor&thorn;&aelig;ppla,
literally earth-apples (compare French pomme de terre potato, literally earth-apple; see also
melon). French pomme is from Latin pomum apple; fruit (see Pomona).    As far as the forbidden fruit
is concerned, again, the Quran does not mention it explicitly, but according to traditional
commentaries it was not an apple, as believed by Christians and Jews, but wheat. [The Heart of
Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, 2002]   Apple of Discord (c.1400) was
thrown into the wedding of Thetis and Peleus by Eris (goddess of chaos and discord), who had not
been invited, and inscribed kallisti To the Prettiest One. Paris, elected to choose which goddess
should have it, gave it to Aphrodite, offending Hera and Athene, with consequences of the Trojan
War, etc.   Apple of one's eye (Old English), symbol of what is most cherished, was the pupil,
supposed to be a globular solid body. Apple-polisher one who curries favor first attested 1928 in
student slang. The image of something that upsets the apple cart is attested from 1788. Road apple
horse dropping is from 1942.


apple pie

attested from 1580s, from apple + pie; noted by 1893 as a typical American dish. Apple-pie bed as a
name for a childish prank is recorded from 1781; supposedly from the way of making apple turnovers,
but some think it a folk etymology of French nappe pli&eacute;e folded sheet.


applesauce (n.)

by 1739, American English, from apple + sauce. Slang meaning nonsense is attested from 1921 and was
noted as a vogue word early 1920s. Mencken credits it to cartoonist T.A. (Tad) Dorgan. DAS suggests
the word was thus used because applesauce was cheap fare served in boardinghouses.


applet (n.)

by 1995, a diminutive formation from application.


appliance (n.)

1560s, action of putting into use, from apply + -ance. Meaning instrument, thing applied for a
purpose is from 1590s.


applicability (n.)

1650s, from applicable + -ity.


applicable (adj.)

1560s, pliable, with -able + Latin applicare (see apply). Meaning capable of being applied is from
1650s; earlier in this sense was appliable (mid-15c.).


applicant (n.)

one who applies, late 15c., from Latin applicantem (nominative applicans), present participle of
applicare (see apply).


application (n.)

early 15c., the bringing of something to bear on something else, from Old French aplicacion (14c.),
from Latin applicationem (nominative applicatio) a joining to, an attaching oneself to, noun of
action from past participle stem of applicare (see apply). Meaning sincere hard effort is from
c.1600. Meaning a formal request to be hired for a job or paid position is by 1851.


applied (adj.)

put to practical use, (as opposed to abstract or theoretical), 1650s, from past participle of apply.
Earlier it was used in a sense of folded (c.1500).


applique (n.)

1841, from French appliqu&eacute; work applied or laid on another material, noun use of past
participle of appliquer to apply (12c.), from Latin applicare (see apply).


apply (v.)

late 14c., to put (one's faculties, etc.) to some task or career, late 14c., from Old French
aploiier apply, use, attach (12c., Modern French appliquer), from Latin applicare attach to, join,
connect; figuratively, devote (oneself) to, give attention, from ad- to (see ad-) + plicare fold
(see ply (v.1)). The etymological sense is bring things in contact with one another. Of lotions,
from early 15c. Meaning seek a job by submitting an application for one is from 1851. A by-form
applicate is recorded from 1530s. Related: Applied; applying.


appoint (v.)

late 14c., to decide, resolve; to arrange the time of (a meeting, etc.), from Anglo-French
appointer, Old French apointier make ready, arrange, settle, place (12c.), from apointer duly,
fitly, from phrase &agrave; point to the point, from a- to (see ad-) + point point, from Latin
punctum (see point (n.)). The ground sense is to come to a point (about some matter), therefore
agree, settle. Meaning put (someone) in charge is early 15c. Related: Appointed; appointing.


appointed (adj.)

with qualifying adverb, equipped, furnished, 1530s, from past participle of appoint (v.).


appointee (n.)

1768, after French appoint&eacute;, from apointer (see appoint + -ee).


appointment (n.)

early 15c., an agreement, also a fixing of a date for official business, from Middle French
apointement, from apointer (see appoint). Meaning act of placing in office is attested from 1650s.


Appomattox

eccentric spelling of plural of Appomattoc, name of a local subgroup of the Powhatan (Algonquian)
confederacy in Virginia (first attested as Apamatic, 1607). Site of last battle for Army of Northern
Virginia (CSA) in the American Civil War, and of Lee's surrender to Grant in Wilmer McLean house,
April 9, 1865.


apportion (v.)

1570s, from Middle French apportionner, from Old French aporcioner apportion, share out, from a- to
(see ad-) + portioner to divide into portions, from portion share, portion (see portion). Related:
Apportioned; apportioning.


apportionment (n.)

1620s, from apportion + -ment. Perhaps influenced by French apportionnement.


appose (v.)

to apply (one thing to another), 1590s, either from French apposer (from a to; see ad-, + poser to
place; see pose (v.1)), or else formed in English from Latin apponere (see apposite) on analogy of
compose, expose, etc. In Middle English, an identical word was a variant spelling of oppose.
Related: Apposed; apposing.


apposite (adj.)

1620s, well-put or applied, appropriate, from Latin appositus contiguous, neighboring; figuratively
fit, proper, suitable, past participle of apponere apply to, put near, from ad- near (see ad-) +
ponere to place (see position (n.)).


apposition (n.)

application (of one thing to another), mid-15c., originally in grammatical sense, from Latin
appositionem (nominative appositio), noun of action from past participle stem of apponere to put to
(see apposite). General sense is from 1540s.


appositive (adj.)

1690s, from Latin appositus, past participle of apponere to put to (see apposite) + -ive. As a noun,
from 1847.


appraisal (n.)

setting of a price, by 1784, American English, from appraise + -al (2). Figurative sense, act of
appraising (originally a term of literary criticism) is from 1817.


appraise (v.)

c.1400, to set a value on, from stem of Old French aprisier apraise, set a price on (14c., Modern
French appr&eacute;cier), from Late Latin appretiare value, estimate, from ad- to (see ad-) +
pretium price (see price (n.)). Original English spelling apprize altered by influence of praise.
Related: Appraised; appraising.


appraiser (n.)

early 15c., agent noun from appraise (v.).


appreciable (adj.)

1818 (mid-15c. in sense worthy); from French appr&eacute;ciable and directly from Medieval Latin
appretiabilis, from Late Latin appretiare (see appreciate). Related: Appreciably.


appreciate (v.)

1650s, to esteem or value highly, from Late Latin appretiatus, past participle of appretiare to set
a price to (see appraise). Meaning to rise in value (intransitive) first recorded 1789. Related:
Appreciated; appreciating.


appreciated (adj.)

received with gratitude, by 1831; enhanced in value, 1794; past participle adjective from
appreciate.


appreciation (n.)

c.1600 (with an isolated use from c.1400), from Anglo-French appreciation, noun of action from Old
French appr&eacute;cier (14c.), from Late Latin appretiare estimate the quality of (see appreciate).
Generally with a sense of high estimation from c.1650. Meaning expression of (favorable) estimation
is from 1858; sense of rise in value is from c.1790.


appreciative (adj.)

1650s (implied in appreciatively); see appreciate + -ive. Related: Appreciativeness.


apprehend (v.)

mid-14c., to grasp in the senses or mind, from Old French aprendre (12c.) teach; learn; take, grasp;
acquire, or directly from Latin apprehendere to take hold of, grasp, from ad- to + prehendere to
seize (see prehensile). Metaphoric extension to seize with the mind took place in Latin, and was the
sole sense of cognate Old French aprendre (Modern French apprendre to learn, to be informed about;
also compare apprentice). Original sense returned in English in meaning to seize in the name of the
law, arrest, recorded from 1540s, which use probably was taken directly from Latin. Related:
Apprehended; apprehending.


apprehensible (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin apprehensibilis that can be seized, from apprehens-, past participle stem of
apprehendere (see apprehend).


apprehension (n.)

perception, comprehension, late 14c., from Old French apprehension or directly from Latin
apprehensionem (nominative apprehensio), noun of action from past participle stem of apprehendere
(see apprehend). Sense of seizure on behalf of authority is 1570s; that of anticipation (usually
with dread) is recorded from c.1600.


apprehensive (adj.)

late 14c., capable of perceiving, fitted for mental impression, from Medieval Latin apprehensivus,
from Latin apprehensus, past participle of apprehendere (see apprehend). Meaning fearful of what is
to come is recorded from 1718, via notion of capable of grasping with the mind (c.1600). Related:
Apprehensively; apprehensiveness.


apprentice (n.)

c.1300, from Old French aprentiz someone learning (13c., Modern French apprenti, taking the older
form as a plural), also as an adjective, unskilled, inexperienced, from aprendre (Modern French
apprendre) to learn; to teach, contracted from Latin apprehendere (see apprehend). Shortened form
prentice long was more usual in English.


apprentice (v.)

1630s, from apprentice (n.). Related: Apprenticed; apprenticing.


apprenticeship (n.)

1590s, from apprentice (n.) + -ship. Replaced earlier apprenticehood (late 14c., with -hood).


apprise (v.)

to notify, 1690s, from French appris, past participle of apprendre to inform, teach, literally to
lay hold of (in the mind), another metaphoric meaning of Latin apprehendere (see apprehend).
Related: Apprised; apprising.


apprize (v.)

occasional legalese form of appraise, c.1400. Related: Apprized; apprizing.


approach (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French approcher, Old French aprochier approach, come closer (12c., Modern French
approcher), from Late Latin appropiare go nearer to, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + Late Latin
propiare come nearer, comparative of Latin prope near (see propinquity). Replaced Old English
neahl&aelig;can.


approach (n.)

mid-15c., from approach (v.). Figurative sense of means of handling a problem, etc. is first
attested 1905.


approachable (adj.)

1570s, from approach (v.) + -able. Figurative sense, affable, friendly, is from 1610s. Related:
Approachably; approachability.


approbate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin approbatus, past participle of approbare to assent to (as good), favor (see
approve). Related: Approbated; approbating.


approbation (n.)

late 14c., proven effectiveness, excellence, from Old French aprobacion or directly from Latin
approbationem (nominative approbatio) an approval, noun of action from past participle stem of
approbare (see approve). Meaning approval, endorsement is from early 15c.


appropre (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French aproprier, from Late Latin appropriare (see appropriate (v.)).


appropriate (v.)

early 15c., take possession of, from Late Latin appropriatus, past participle of appropriare,
adpropriare (c.450) to make one's own, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + propriare take as one's own,
from proprius one's own (see proper). Related: Appropriated; appropriating.


appropriate (adj.)

specially suitable, proper, early 15c., from Latin appropriatus, past participle of appropriare (see
appropriate (v.)). Related: Appropriately; appropriateness.


appropriation (n.)

late 14c., taking (something) as private property, from Late Latin appropriationem (nominative
appropriatio) a making one's own, noun of action from past participle stem of appropriare (see
appropriate). Meaning setting aside for some purpose (especially of money) first attested 1789 in
U.S. Constitution.


approval (n.)

1680s, from approve + -al (2). According to OED, Rare bef. 1800; now generally used instead of
approvance (1590s, from French aprovance).


approve (v.)

c.1300, to demonstrate, prove; mid-14c., to attest (something) with authority, from Old French
aprover (Modern French approuver) approve, agree to, from Latin approbare to assent to as good,
regard as good, from ad- to (see ad-) + probare to try, test something (to find if it is good), from
probus honest, genuine (see prove).    The meaning extended late 14c. to to sanction, endorse,
confirm formally then to assent to (something) as good (early 15c.), especially in reference to the
actions of authorities, parliaments, etc. Related: Approved; approving.


approximate (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin approximatus, past participle of approximare to come near to, from ad- to
(see ad-) + proximare come near, from proximus nearest, superlative of prope near (see propinquity).


approximate (v.)

early 15c., to bring or put close, from approximate (adj.). Meaning to come close is from 1789.
Related: Approximated; approximating.


approximately (adv.)

1742, from approximate (adj.) + -ly (2).


approximation (n.)

early 15c., act of coming near or close, noun of action from approximate (v.). Meaning result of
approximating is from 1650s.


appurtenance (n.)

c.1300, right, privilege or possession subsidiary to a principal one, from Anglo-French apurtenance
(12c.), Old French apartenance, present participle of apartenir be related to, from Latin
appertinere to pertain to, from ad- to (see ad-) + pertinere belong to (see pertain).


appurtenances (n.)

apparatus, gear, late 14c.; see appurtenance.


appurtenant (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French apurtenant, Old French apartenant, present participle of apartenir be
related to (see appurtenance).


apraxia (n.)

1877, medical Latin, from German apraxie (H. Steinthal, 1871), from Greek apraxia inaction, from
privative prefix a- (see a- (3)) + praxis a doing, action, business (see praxis).


apricate (v.)

1690s, to bask in the sun, from Latin apricatus, past participle of apricari to bask in the sun,
from apricus exposed (to the sun); perhaps contracted from *apericus, from aperire to open (see
overt). Transitive sense is recorded from 1851.


apricot (n.)

1550s, abrecock, from Catalan abercoc, related to Portuguese albricoque, from Arabic al-birquq,
through Byzantine Greek berikokkia from Latin (malum) praecoquum early-ripening (fruit) (see
precocious). Form assimilated to French abricot.    Latin praecoquis early-ripe, can probably be
attributed to the fact that the fruit was considered a variety of peach that ripened sooner than
other peaches .... [Barnhart]     The older Latin name for it was prunum Armeniacum or malum
Armeniacum, in reference to supposed origin in Armenia. As a color name, first attested 1906.


April

c.1300, aueril, from Old French avril (11c.), from Latin (mensis) Aprilis (month) of Venus, second
month of the ancient Roman calendar, dedicated to the goddess Venus and perhaps based on Apru, an
Etruscan borrowing of Greek Aphrodite. In English in Latin form from mid-12c. Replaced Old English
Eastermona&eth;, which was similarly named for a fertility goddess. Re-spelled in Middle English on
Latin model (apprile first attested late 14c.).


April fool (n.)

1680s; April-gowk (from Old Norse gaukr a cuckoo) is a northern variant. April Fool's Day customs of
sending people on false errands seem to have come to England from France late 17c.; originally All
Fool's Day (1712). In Cumberland, Westmorland and northern parts of Lancashire and Yorkshire,
however, May 1 was the day for hoaxing, and the fool was a May gosling. That custom was first
attested 1791.


apron (n.)

mid-15c., faulty separation (as also in adder, umpire) of a napron (c.1300), from Old French naperon
small table-cloth, diminutive of nappe cloth, from Latin mappa napkin. Napron was still in use as
recently as late 16c. The shift of Latin -m- to -n- was a tendency in Old French (conter from
computare, printemps from primum, natte mat, matting, from matta). Symbolic of wife's business from
1610s. Apron-string tenure was in reference to property held in virtue of one's wife, or during her
lifetime only.Even at his age, he ought not to be always tied to his mother's apron string. [Anne
Bront&#235;, The Tenant of Wildfell Hall, 1848]


apropos (adv.)

1660s, opportunely, from French &agrave; propos to the purpose, from propos thing said in
conversation, talk; purpose, plan, from Latin propositium purpose, past participle of proponere to
set forth, propose (see propound). Meaning as regards is 1761, from French. As an adjective, to the
point or purpose, from 1690s.


apse (n.)

semicircular extension at the end of a church, 1846, from Latin apsis an arch, a vault, from Greek
hapsis (Ionic apsis) loop, arch, originally a fastening, felloe of a wheel, from haptein fasten
together, of unknown origin. The original sense in Greek seems to have been the joining of the arcs
to form a circle, especially in making a wheel. The architectural term is earlier attested in
English in the Latin form (1706).


apsis (n.)

perigree of the moon, perihelion of a planet (plural apsides), 1650s, from Latin apsis arch, vault
(see apse).


apt (adj.)

mid-14c., inclined, disposed; late 14c., suited, fitted, adapted, from Old French ate (13c., Modern
French apte), or directly from Latin aptus fit, suited, adjectival use of past participle of *apere
to attach, join, tie to, from PIE root *ap- (1) to grasp, take, reach (cognates: Sanskrit apnoti he
reaches, Latin apisci to reach after, attain, Hittite epmi I seize). Elliptical sense of becoming,
appropriate is from 1560s.


aptitude (n.)

early 15c., tendency, likelihood, from Middle French aptitude (14c.) or directly from Late Latin
aptitudo (genitive aptitudinis) fitness, noun of quality from Latin aptus joined, fitted (see apt).
Meaning natural capacity to learn is 1540s; that of quality of being fit (for a purpose or position)
is from 1640s.


aptly (adv.)

early 15c., by natural means, from apt + -ly (2).


aptness (n.)

1530s, from apt + -ness.


aqua (n.)

water, late 14c.; see aqua-. Used in late Middle English in combinations to mean decoction, solution
(as in aqua regia, a mix of concentrated acids, literally royal water, so called for its power to
dissolve gold and other noble metals). As the name of a light greenish-blue color, 1936.


aqua fortis (n.)

old name for concentrated nitric acid, c.1600, Latin, literally strong water; see aqua- + fort. So
called for its power of dissolving metals (copper, silver) unaffected by other agents.


aqua vitae (n.)

early 15c., Latin, literally water of life, an alchemical term for unrefined alcohol. Applied to
brandy, whiskey, etc. from 1540s. Compare whiskey, also French eau-de-vie spirits, brandy, literally
water of life.


aqua-

word-forming element meaning water, from Latin aqua water; the sea; rain, cognate with Proto-
Germanic *akhwo, source of Old English ea river, Gothic ahua river, waters, Old Norse &AElig;gir,
name of the sea-god, Old English ieg island; all from PIE *akwa- water (cognates: Sanskrit ap water,
Hittite akwanzi they drink, Lithuanian uppe a river).


aquacade (n.)

aquatic entertainment, 1937, American English, from aqua- + -cade, from cavalcade (q.v.).


aquaculture (n.)

1869, from aqua- + culture (n.).


aqualung (n.)

1950, from aqua- + lung. Developed 1943 by Jacques Cousteau and Emile Gagnan.


aquamarine (n.)

1590s, agmarine, bluish-green type of beryl, from French or Proven&ccedil;al, from Latin aqua marina
sea water, from aqua water (see aqua-) + marina, fem. of marinus of the sea (see marine (adj.)).
Apparently first used as a description of a bluish-green color by John Ruskin, 1846. Abbreviation
aqua is attested from 1936.


aquanaut (n.)

1881, from aqua- + ending from Greek nautes sailor (see naval).


aquarelle (n.)

1855, from French aquarelle (18c.), from Italian acquerella water-color, diminutive of acqua, from
Latin aqua water (see aqua-).


Aquarian (adj.)

1940, in the astrological/New Age sense; see Aquarius + -ian.


aquarium (n.)

1830, noun use of neuter of Latin aquarius pertaining to water, as a noun, water-carrier, genitive
of aqua water (see aqua-). The word existed in Latin, but there it meant drinking place for cattle.
Originally especially for growing aquatic plants; An earlier attempt at a name for fish tank was
marine vivarium.


Aquarius

faint constellation and 11th zodiac sign, late Old English, from Latin aquarius, literally water
carrier, properly an adjective, pertaining to water (see aquarium); a loan-translation of Greek
Hydrokhoos the water-pourer, old Greek name of this constellation.   Aquarians were a former
Christian sect that used water instead of wine at the Lord's Supper. Age of Aquarius (1940) is an
astrological epoch supposed to have begun in the 1960s, embodying the traits of this sign and
characterized by world peace and human brotherhood. The term and the concept probably got a boost in
popular use when An Aquarian Exposition was used as the sub-name of the Woodstock Music &amp; Art
Fair (1969).


aquatic (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French and Old French aquatique (13c.), from Latin aquaticus growing in
water; bringing rain, from aqua water (see aqua-)


aquatint (n.)

1782, engraving made with aqua fortis, from Italian acquatinta, from Latin aqua tincta dyed water;
see aqua- + tinct.


aqueduct (n.)

1530s, from Latin aquaeductus conveyance of water, from aquae, genitive of aqua water (see aqua-), +
ductus a leading, conducting, past participle of ducere to lead (see duke (n.)).


aqueous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin aqua water (see aqua-) on analogy of French aqueux watery (16c., which, however,
is from Late Latin aquosus abounding in water). Or by analogy of Latin terreus earthy, from terra
earth. Aqueous humor is the original use in English.


aquifer (n.)

1897, coined from Latin aqui-, comb. form of aqua water (see aqua-) + -fer bearing, from ferre to
bear (see infer).


aquiline (adj.)

curved like an eagle's beak, 1640s, originally in English in reference to long, hooked noses, from
Latin aquilinus of or like an eagle, from aquila eagle, of uncertain origin, usually explained as
the dark bird; compare aquilus blackish, of the color of darkness.


aquiver (adv.)

1864, from a- (1) + quiver (v.).


Arab (n.)

late 14c. (Arabes, a plural form), from Old French Arabi, from Latin Arabs (accusative Arabem), from
Greek Araps (genitive Arabos), from Arabic 'arab, indigenous name of the people, perhaps literally
inhabitant of the desert and related to Hebrew arabha desert. Meaning homeless little wanderer,
child of the street is from 1848 (originally Arab of the city), in reference to nomadic ways. Arab
League formed in Cairo, March 22, 1945.


arabesque (n.)

1610s, Moorish or Arabic ornamental design, from French arabesque (16c.), from Italian arabesco,
from Arabo Arab, with reference to Moorish architecture. As a ballet pose, first attested 1830.
Musical sense, in reference to an ornamented theme, is from 1864, originally the title given by
Robert Schumann to one of his piano pieces.


Arabia

1711; see Arab + -ia. The older name for the country of Arabia was Araby (late 13c.).


Arabian

c.1300, adjective and noun; see Arab + -ian. As a prized type of horse, it is attested from 1660s.
The Arabian bird was the phoenix.


Arabic (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French Arabique (13c.), from Latin Arabicus Arabic (see Arab). Old English used
Arabisc Arabish. Originally in reference to gum arabic; noun meaning Arabic language is from late
14c.   Arabic numerals (actually Indian) first attested 1727; they were introduced in Europe by
Gerbert of Aurillac (later Pope Sylvester II) after a visit to Islamic Spain in 967-970. A prominent
man of science, he taught in the diocesan school at Reims, but the numbers made little headway
against conservative opposition in the Church until after the Crusades. The earliest depiction of
them in English, in The Crafte of Nombrynge (c.1350) correctly identifies them as teen figurys of
Inde.


arable (adj.)

early 15c., suitable for plowing (as opposed to pasture- or wood-land), from Old French arable
(12c.), from Latin arabilis, from arare to plow, from PIE *are- to plow (cognates: Greek aroun, Old
Church Slavonic orja, Lithuanian ariu to plow; Gothic arjan, Old English erian, Middle Irish airim,
Welsh arddu to plow; Old Norse ar&thorn;r a plow). By late 18c. it replaced native erable, from Old
English erian to plow, from the same PIE source.


arachnid (n.)

a spider, 1869, from French arachnide (1806) or Modern Latin Arachnida, introduced as name for this
class of arthropods 1815 by French biologist Jean Baptiste Pierre Antoine de Monet de Lamarck
(1744-1829), from Greek arakhne (fem.) spider; spider's web, which probably is cognate with Latin
aranea spider, spider's web (borrowed in Old English as renge spider), from aracsna. The Latin word
could be a Greek borrowing or both could be from a common root. An earlier noun form was arachnidian
(1828).


arachnoid (adj.)

cobweb-like, especially of the membrane around the brain and spinal cord, 1789, from Modern Latin
arachnoides, from Greek arakhnoeides cobweb-like, from arakhne cobweb (see arachnid) + -oeides (see
-oid).


arachnologist (n.)

student of spiders, 1806; see arachnid + -ology. Related: Arachnology.


arachnophobia (n.)

1925, from comb. form of arachnid + -phobia fear.


Aragon

medieval Spanish kingdom, named for a river that runs through it, probably from a PIE root meaning
water.


Aramaic

northern branch of Semitic language group, 1834, from biblical land of Aram, roughly corresponding
to modern Syria; probably related to Hebrew and Aramaic rum to be high, thus originally highland.
Aramaic became the lingua franca of the Assyrian empire and later for centuries was the official
language of the Persian kingdom and the daily language of Israel at the time of Christ.


arational (adj.)

not purporting to be governed by laws of reason, 1935; see a- (2) + rational.


arbalest (n.)

crossbow, c.1300, from Old French arbaleste large crossbow with a crank (12c., Modern French
arbal&egrave;te), from Vulgar Latin arbalista, from Late Latin arcuballista catapult, from Latin
arcus bow (see arc (n.)) + ballista machine for throwing projectiles (see ballistic). German
armbrust is from the same French word but mangled by folk etymology.


arbiter (n.)

late 14c., from Old French arbitre or directly from Latin arbiter one who goes somewhere (as witness
or judge), in classical Latin used of spectators and eye-witnesses, in law, he who hears and decides
a case, a judge, umpire, mediator; from ad- to (see ad-) + baetere to come, go. The specific sense
of one chosen by two disputing parties to decide the matter is from 1540s. The earliest form of the
word attested in English is the fem. noun arbitress (mid-14c.) a woman who settles disputes.


arbitrage (n.)

exercise of the function of an arbitrator, late 15c., from Old French arbitrage arbitration,
judgment, from arbitrer to arbitrate, judge, from Late Latin arbitrari, from Latin arbiter (see
arbiter).


arbitrary (adj.)

early 15c., deciding by one's own discretion, from Old French arbitraire (14c.) or directly from
Latin arbitrarius depending on the will, uncertain, from arbiter (see arbiter). The original meaning
gradually descended to capricious and despotic (1640s). Related: Arbitrarily; arbitrariness.


arbitrate (v.)

1580s (arbitrable is recorded from 1530s), to give an authoritative decision, from Latin arbitratus,
past participle of arbitrari be of an opinion, give a decision, from arbiter (see arbiter). Meaning
to act as an arbitrator is from 1610s. Related: Arbitrated; arbitrating. The earlier verb form was
arbitren (early 15c.).


arbitration (n.)

late 14c., absolute decision, from Old French arbitracion, from Latin arbitrationem (nominative
arbitratio) judgment, will, noun of action from past participle stem of arbitrari to be of an
opinion, give a decision, from arbiter (see arbiter). Meaning settlement of a dispute by a third
party is from 1630s.


arbitrator (n.)

early 15c., from Old French arbitratour (13c.), from Latin arbitrator a spectator, hearer, witness,
judge, agent noun from past participle stem of arbitrari, from arbiter (see arbiter). The legal form
of popular arbiter; in modern usage, an arbiter makes decisions of his own accord and is accountable
to no one but himself; an arbitrator (early 15c.) decides issues referred to him by the parties.


arbitrer (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French arbitrour, Old French arbitreor (13c.), from Old French arbitrer (see
arbitrage).


arbor (n.)

c.1300, herber, herb garden, from Old French erbier field, meadow; kitchen garden, from Latin herba
grass, herb (see herb). Later a grassy plot (early 14c., a sense also in Old French), a shaded nook
(mid-14c.). Probably not from Latin arbor tree, though perhaps influenced by its spelling.    The
change from er- to ar- before consonants in Middle English also reflects a pronunciation shift:
compare farm from ferme, harbor from Old English herebeorg.


Arbor Day

the day set aside for the planting of trees, first celebrated 1872 in Nebraska, the brainchild of
U.S. agriculturalist and journalist J. Sterling Morton (1832-1902). From Latin arbor tree, of
unknown origin.


arbor vitae (n.)

type of evergreen shrub, 1660s, name given by French physician and botanist Charles de
L&eacute;cluse (1525-1609), Latin, literally tree of life. Also used in late 18c. rogue's slang as a
cant word for penis.


arboreal (adj.)

1660s, from Latin arboreus pertaining to trees, from arbor tree, of unknown origin, + -al (1).


arboretum (n.)

tree-garden, 1838, from Latin arboretum, literally a place grown with trees, from arbor tree, of
unknown origin, + -etum, suffix used to form the names of gardens and woods.


arborist (n.)

1570s, from Latin arbor tree, of unknown origin, + -ist. In early use probably from French
arboriste.


arbour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of arbor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


arc (n.)

late 14c., originally in reference to the sun's apparent motion in the sky, from Old French arc bow,
arch, vault (12c.), from Latin arcus a bow, arch, from PIE root *arku- bowed, curved (cognates:
Gothic arhvazna arrow, Old English earh, Old Norse &ouml;r; also, via notion of supple, flexible,
Greek arkeuthos, Latvian ercis juniper, Russian rakita, Czech rokyta, Serbo-Croatian rakita brittle
willow). Electrical sense is from 1821.


arc (v.)

1893, in the electrical sense, from arc (n.). Meaning to move in an arc attested by 1954. Related:
Arced; arcing.


arcade (n.)

1731 (as arcado, from 1640s), from Italian arcata arch of a bridge, from arco arc, from Latin arcus
(see arc). Applied to passages formed by a succession of arches, avenues of trees, and ultimately to
any covered avenue, especially one lined with shops (1731) or amusements; hence arcade game (1977).


Arcadia

see Arcadian.


Arcadian

ideally rustic or rural; an idealized rustic, 1580s, from Greek Arkadia, district in the
Peloponnesus, taken by poets as an ideal region of rural felicity, traditionally from Arkas
(genitive Arkadas), son of Zeus, name of the founder and first ruler of Arcadia.


arcana (n.)

hidden things, mysteries, 1590s, a direct adoption of the Latin plural of arcanum a secret, a
mystery, from neuter of adjective arcanus secret, hidden, private, concealed (see arcane).
Occasionally mistaken for a singular and pluralized as arcanas because arcana is far more common
than arcanum.


arcane (adj.)

1540s, from Latin arcanus secret, hidden, private, concealed, from arcere close up, enclose,
contain, from arca chest, box, place for safe-keeping, from PIE *ark- to hold, contain, guard
(cognates: Greek arkos defense, arkein to ward off; Armenian argel obstacle; Lithuanian raktas key,
rakinti to shut, lock).


arcanum (n.)

proper singular form of arcana.


arch (n.)

c.1300, from Old French arche arch of a bridge (12c.), from Latin arcus a bow (see arc). Replaced
native bow (n.1). Originally architectural in English; transferred by early 15c. to anything having
this form (eyebrows, etc.).


arch (adj.)

1540s, chief, principal, from prefix arch-; used in 12c. archangel, etc., but extended to so many
derogatory uses (arch-rogue, arch-knave, etc.) that by mid-17c. it acquired a meaning of roguish,
mischievous, since softened to saucy. Also found in archwife (late 14c.), variously defined as a
wife of a superior order or a dominating woman, virago.


arch (v.)

early 14c., to form an arch (implied in arched); c.1400, to furnish with an arch, from arch (n.).
Related: Arching.


arch-

also archi-, word-forming element meaning chief, principal; extreme, ultra; early, primitive, from
Latinized form of Greek arkh-, arkhi- first, chief, primeval, comb. form of arkhos chief (see
archon).


Archaean (adj.)

of the earliest geological age, 1872, from Greek arkhaios ancient, from arkhe beginning (see
archon).


archaebacteria (n.)

plural of archaebacterium (1977), from archaeo- + bacterium (see bacteria).


archaeo-

before vowels archae-, word-forming element meaning ancient, olden, primitive, primeval, from the
beginning, from Latinized form of Greek arkhaio-, comb. form of arkhaios ancient, from arkhe
beginning (see archon).


archaeoastronomy (n.)

1971, from archaeo- + astronomy.


archaeologist (n.)

1824; see archaeology + -ist.


archaeology (n.)

c.1600, ancient history, from French arch&eacute;ologie (16c.) or directly from Greek arkhaiologia
the study of ancient things; see archaeo- + -ology. Meaning scientific study of ancient peoples
recorded by 1825. Related: Archaeological; archaeologically.


archaeopteryx (n.)

oldest known fossil bird, 1859, Modern Latin, from archaeo- ancient, primitive + Greek pteryx wing
(see pterodactyl).


archaic (adj.)

1810, from or by influence of French archaique (1776), ultimately from Greek arkhaikos old-
fashioned, from arkhaios ancient, from arkhe beginning (see archon). Archaical is attested from
1799.


archaism (n.)

1640s, retention of what is old and obsolete, from Modern Latin archaismus, from Greek arkhaismos,
from arkhaizein to copy the ancients (in language, etc.); see archaic. Meaning an archaic word or
expression is from c.1748.


archangel (n.)

late 12c., from Old French archangel (12c.) or directly from Late Latin archangelus, from Greek
arkhangelos chief angel, from arkh- chief, first (see archon) + angelos (see angel). Replaced Old
English heah encgel.


archangelic (adj.)

mid-15c.; see archangel + -ic.


archbishop (n.)

Old English &aelig;rcebiscop, from Late Latin archiepiscopus, from Greek arkhi- chief (see archon) +
episkopos bishop, literally overseer. Replaced earlier Old English heah biscop (see bishop). The
spelling conformed to Latin from 12c.


archbishopric (n.)

Old English arcebiscoprice, from archbishop + rice realm, dominion, province (see regal).


archdeacon (n.)

Old English arcediacon, from Church Latin archidiaconus, from Ecclesiastical Greek arkhidiakonon
chief deacon; see arch- + deacon.


archdiocese (n.)

1762, from arch- + diocese.


archduchess (n.)

1610s; see arch- + duchess. Also compare archduke.


archduke (n.)

1520s, from Middle French and Old French archeduc, from Merovingian Latin archiducem (c.750); see
arch- + duke (n.). Formerly the title of the rulers of Austrasia, Lorraine, Brabant, and Austria;
later the titular dignity of the sons of the Emperor of Austria. Related: Archducal; archduchy.


archenemy (n.)

also arch-enemy, 1540s, from arch- + enemy.


archeological (adj.)

alternative spelling of archaeological (see archaeology). Also see ae.


archeologist (n.)

alternative spelling of archaeologist. Also see ae.


archeology (n.)

alternative spelling of archaeology. Also see ae.


archer (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French archer, Old French archier archer, bowmaker, from Latin arcarius, from
arcus bow (see arc). Also a 17c. name for the bishop in chess.


archery (n.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French archerye, Old French archerie, from archier archer (see archer).


archetypal (adj.)

1640s, from Latin archetypum (see archetype) + -al (1). Jungian sense is from 1923.


archetype (n.)

original pattern from which copies are made, 1540s [Barnhart] or c.1600 [OED], from Latin
archetypum, from Greek arkhetypon pattern, model, figure on a seal, neuter of adjective arkhetypos
first-moulded, from arkhe- first (see archon) + typos model, type, blow, mark of a blow (see type).
Jungian psychology sense of pervasive idea or image from the collective unconscious is from 1919.


archfiend (n.)

1667, from arch (adj.) + fiend (n.). Originally and typically Satan (arch-foe Satan is from 1610s).
So stretcht out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay. [Paradise Lost, 1667]


Archibald

masc. proper name, from Old High German Erchanbald, literally genuine bold, from erchan genuine +
bald (see bold). Archie, British World War I military slang for German anti-aircraft fire (1915)
supposedly is from black humor of airmen dodging hostile fire and thinking of the refrain of a
popular music hall song, Archibald, certainly not!


archipelago (n.)

c.1500, from Italian arcipelago the Aegean Sea (13c.), from Greek arkhipelagos, from arkhi- chief
(see archon) + pelagos sea (see pelagic). The Aegean Sea being full of island chains, the meaning
was extended in Italian to any sea studded with islands. Klein, noting the absence of arkhipelagos
in ancient or Medieval Greek (the modern word in Greek is borrowed from Italian) believe it is an
Italian mistake for Aigaion pelagos Aegean Sea (Medieval Latin Egeopelagus), or influenced by that
name.


architect (n.)

1550s, from Middle French architecte, from Latin architectus, from Greek arkhitekton master builder,
director of works, from arkhi- chief (see archon) + tekton builder, carpenter (see texture). An Old
English word for it was heahcr&aelig;ftiga high-crafter.


architectonic (adj.)

1670s (architectonical is from c.1600), pertaining to architecture, from Latin architectonicus, from
Greek arkhitektonikos pertaining to a master builder, from arkhitekton (see architect). Metaphysical
sense, pertaining to systematization of knowledge, is from 1801.


architectural (adj.)

1762; see architecture + -al (1). Related: Architecturally.


architecture (n.)

1560s, from Middle French architecture, from Latin architectura, from architectus architect (see
architect).


architrave (n.)

1560s, from Italian architrave, from archi- beginning, origin (see archon) + trave beam, from Latin
trabem (nominative trabs) beam, timber, from PIE *treb- dwelling (see tavern).


archival (adj.)

1800; see archives + -al (1). Related: Archivally.


archive (v.)

1819 (implied in archived), from archives. Related: Archiving.


archives (n.)

c.1600, from French archif (16c.), from Late Latin archivum (singular), from Greek ta arkheia public
records, plural of arkheion town hall, from arkhe government, literally beginning, origin, first
place (see archon).


archivist (n.)

1753, from Medieval Latin or Italian archivista or French archiviste (see archives).


archon (n.)

one of the nine chief magistrates of ancient Athens, 1650s, from Greek arkhon ruler, noun use of
present participle of arkhein to rule, from PIE *arkhein- to begin, rule, command, a Gk. verb of
unknown origin, but showing archaic Indo-European features ... with derivatives arkhe, 'rule,
beginning,' and arkhos, 'ruler'  [Watkins].


archrival (n.)

by 1805, from arch- + rival (n.).


archway (n.)

1802, from arch (n.) + way (n.).


Arctic (adj.)

late 14c., artik, from Old French artique, from Medieval Latin articus, from Latin arcticus, from
Greek arktikos of the north, literally of the (constellation) Bear, from arktos bear; Ursa Major;
the region of the north, the Bear being a northerly constellation. From *rkto-, the usual Indo-
European base for bear (cognates: Avestan aresho, Armenian arj, Albanian ari, Latin ursus, Welsh
arth); see bear (n.) for why the name changed in Germanic. The -c- was restored from 1550s. As a
noun, the Arctic regions, from 1560s.


Arctic Circle

1550s, in reference to a celestial circle, a line around the sky which, in any location, bounds the
stars which   are ever-visible from that latitude (in the Northern Hemisphere, this is focused on
the celestial north pole); the concept goes back to the ancient Greeks, for whom this set of
constellations included most prominently the two bears (arktoi), hence the name for the circle (see
arctic). Of Earth, the circle 66 degrees 32 minutes north of the equator, marking the southern
extremity of the polar day, it is recorded from 1620s.


Arcturus

late 14c., bright star in the constellation Bootes (also used of the whole constellation), from
Latin Arcturus, from Greek Arktouros; anciently associated with the Bear, and its name is Greek for
guardian of the bear. See arctic; second element is from ouros watcher, guardian, ward, from PIE
root *wer- (4) perceive (see ward (n.)).   Arcturus in the Bible (Job ix:9 and xxxviii:32) is a
mistranslation by Jerome (continued in KJV) of Hebrew 'Ayish, which refers to what we see as the
bowl of the Big Dipper. In Israel and Arabia, the seven stars of the Great Bear seem to have been a
bier (the bowl) followed by three mourners. In the Septuagint it was translated as Pleiada, which is
equally incorrect. The double nature of the great bear/wagon (see Big Dipper) has given two
different names to the constellation that follows it: Arktouros bear-ward and bootes the wagoner.


arcuate (adj.)

bent like a bow, 1620s, from Latin arcuatus bow-like, arched, past participle of arcuare to bend
like a bow, from arcus bow (see arc (n.)).


ardency (n.)

1540s, warmth of feeling, desire, from ardent + -cy. A figurative sense, the literal meaning
intensity of heat wasn't attested in English until 1630s.


ardent (adj.)

early 14c., of alcoholic distillates, brandy (ardent spirits), etc., from Old French ardant (13c.)
burning, hot; zealous, from Latin ardentem (nominative ardens) glowing, fiery, hot, ablaze, also
used figuratively of passions, present participle of ardere to burn, from PIE root *as- to burn,
glow from PIE root *as- to burn, glow (cognates: Old English &aelig;sce ashes; see ash (n.1)).
Ardent spirits (late 15c.) so called because they are inflammable, but the term now, if used at all,
probably is felt in the figurative sense. The figurative sense (of burning with passions, desire,
etc.) is from late 14c.; literal sense of burning, parching (c.1400) remains rare. Related:
Ardently.


ardor (n.)

early 15c., heat of passion or desire, from Old French ardure heat, glow; passion (12c.), from Latin
ardorem (nominative ardor) a flame, fire, burning, heat; also of feelings, etc., eagerness, zeal,
from ardere to burn (see ardent). In Middle English, used of base passions; since Milton's time, of
noble ones.


ardour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of ardor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


arduous (adj.)

1530s, hard to accomplish, difficult to do, from Latin arduus high, steep, also figuratively,
difficult, from PIE root *eredh- to grow, high (see ortho-). Literal sense of high, steep, difficult
to climb, attested in English from 1709.


ardurous (adj.)

full of ardor, 1770, a variant of arduous with overtones of amorous, generally useful only to poets
and first attested in Chatterton; perhaps, then, like his works, an instance of faux medievalism.


are (v.)

present plural indicative of be (q.v.), from Old English earun (Mercian), aron (Northumbrian). Also
from Old Norse cognates. In 17c., began to replace be, ben as first person plural present indicative
in standard English. The only non-dialectal survival of be in this sense is the powers that be. But
in southwest England, we be (in Devonshire us be) remains non-standard idiom as a contradictory
positive (You people aren't speaking correct English. Oh, yes we be!).


are (n.)

square unit of 10 meters on each side, 1819, from French, formed 1795 by decree of the French
National Convention, from Latin area vacant piece of ground (see area).


area (n.)

1530s, vacant piece of ground, from Latin area level ground, open space, used of building sites,
playgrounds, threshing floors, etc.; of uncertain origin. Perhaps related to arere to become dry, on
notion of a burned clearing or dry, bare space. The generic sense of amount of surface (whether open
or not) contained within any set of limits is from 1845. Area code in North American telephone
systems is attested from 1959.


areal (adj.)

1670s, from Latin arealis, from area (see area).


aren&#039;t

1794, contraction of are not, originally written are'n't and generally so into early 19c.    If
ain't I? is objected to, surely aren't I? is very much worse. [Lady Grove, The Social Fetich, 1907]


arena (n.)

1620s, place of combat, from Latin harena place of combat, originally sand, sandy place, perhaps
from Etruscan. The central stages of Roman amphitheaters were strewn with sand to soak up the blood.


areola (n.)

colored circle around a nipple, 1706, from Latin areola, literally small area, diminutive of area
(see area). Introduced in this sense 1605 by Swiss anatomist and botanist Caspar Bauhin (1560-1624).


areolas (n.)

nativized plural of areola (q.v.), which has its proper plural in areolae (see -ae).


Areopagite (n.)

member of the Areopagus court, late 14c.; see Areopagus + -ite (1). See Acts xvii:34.


Areopagus

1640s, Greek, Areios pagos the hill of Ares, west of the Acropolis in Athens, where the highest
judicial court sat; second element from pagos rocky hill. Sense extended to any important tribunal.


Ares

Greek god of war, identified by Romans with their Mars; literally injurer, destroyer, from are bane,
ruin, perhaps cognate with Sanskrit irasya ill-will (see ire).


arete (n.1)

sharp crest of a mountain, 1862, from Swiss French ar&#234;te, from Latin arista ear of grain, the
top of an ear, which probably is of Etruscan origin. The figure is of something jagged.


arete (n.2)

important concept in Greek philosophy, virtue, excellence, especially of manly qualities; literally
that which is good. The comparative form is areion, the superlative is aristos (compare
aristocracy).


argent (n.)

c.1300, quicksilver, the metal mercury, from Old French argent (11c.), from Latin argentum silver,
silver work, white money, from PIE *arg-ent- (cognates: Avestan erezata-, Old Persian ardata-,
Armenian arcat, Old Irish argat, Breton arc'hant silver), from root *arg- to shine; white, thus the
shining or white metal, silver (cognates: Greek argos white, arguron silver; Sanskrit arjuna- white,
shining, rajata- silver, Hittite harki- white). Meaning silver, silver coin is early 15c. in
English; the adjective sense silver-colored, late 15c.


Argentina

South American nation, from Latin argentinus of silver (see argent); a Latinized form of (Rio) de la
Plata, from Spanish plata silver.


argentine (adj.)

silver-colored, mid-15c., from Latin argentinus of silver, from argentum (see argent).


Argentine (adj.)

of or from Argentina, 1830 (from 1829 as a noun); Argentinian is from 1845 as a noun; 1858 as an
adjective.


Argive (adj.)

of Argos, hence, especially in Homeric usage, the Greeks, as a byword for Achaean (he describes
Agamemnon as king of Argos), 1520s, from Latin Argivus, from Greek Argeios of Argos.


argle (v.)

1580s to argue obstinately, from argue, perhaps by influence of haggle. Reduplicated form argle-
bargle (sometimes argy-bargy) wrangling is attested from 1872.


Argo

name of the ship in which Jason and his companions sought the Fleece in Colchis, in Greek, literally
The Swift, from argos swift (adj.), an epithet, literally shining, bright (see argent; compare also
Sanskrit cognate rjrah shining, glowing, bright, also swift), because all swift motion causes a kind
of glancing or flickering light [Liddell &amp; Scott].


argon (n.)

chemical element, 1894, Modern Latin, from Greek argon, neuter of argos lazy, idle, not working the
ground, living without labor, from a- without (see a- (3)) + ergon work (see organ). So called by
its discoverers, Baron Rayleigh and Sir William Ramsay, for its inert qualities.


Argonaut (n.)

sailor of the Argo, 1580s (implied in argonautic), from Argo + Greek nautes sailor (see naval).
Adventurers in the California Gold Rush of 1848 were called argonauts (because they sought the
golden fleece) by those who stayed home.


argosy (n.)

1570s, from Italian (nave) Ragusea (vessel) of Ragusa, maritime city on the Dalmatian coast of the
Adriatic (modern Dubrovnik in Croatia). Their large merchant ships brought rich Eastern goods to
16c. England. The city name sometimes was Aragouse or Arragosa in 16c. English.


argot (n.)

1860, from French argot (17c.) the jargon of Paris rogues and thieves, earlier the company of
beggars, from Middle French argot, group of beggars, origin unknown. Gamillscheg suggests a
connection to Old French argoter to cut off the stubs left in pruning, with a connecting sense of to
get a grip on. The best English equivalent is perhaps cant. The German equivalent is Rotwelsch,
literally Red Welsh, but the first element may be connected with Middle High German rot beggar.
Earlier in English was pedlar's French (1520s) language of thieves and vagabonds.


arguable (adj.)

1610s, from argue + -able.


arguably (adv.)

as may be shown by argument, 1890, from arguable + -ly (2).


argue (v.)

c.1300, to make reasoned statements to prove or refute a proposition, from Old French arguer
maintain an opinion or view; harry, reproach, accuse, blame (12c.), from Latin argutare to prattle,
prate, frequentative of arguere make clear, make known, prove, declare, demonstrate, from PIE *argu-
yo-, from root *arg- to shine, be white, bright, clear (see argent). Meaning to oppose, dispute is
from late 14c. Related: Argued; arguing.


arguendo

in the course of argument, 1817, courtroom Latin, from Medieval Latin ablative of arguendum,
gerundive of arguere to argue (see argue).


arguer (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from argue (v.).


argufy (v.)

1751, colloquial, from argue + -fy.


argument (n.)

early 14c., statements and reasoning in support of a proposition, from Old French arguement
reasoning, opinion; accusation, charge (13c.), from Latin argumentum evidence, ground, support,
proof; a logical argument, from arguere to argue (see argue). Sense passed through subject of
contention to a quarrel, a sense formerly attached to argumentation.


argumentation (n.)

mid-15c., presentation of formal arguments, from Old French argumentacion (14c.), from Latin
argumentationem (nominative argumentatio) the bringing forth of a proof, noun of action from past
participle stem of argumentari (see argue). Meaning debate, wrangling, argument back and forth is
from 1530s.


argumentative (adj.)

mid-15c., pertaining to arguments, from Old French argumentatif or directly from Latin argumentat-,
past participle stem of argumentari (see argue) + -ive. Meaning fond of arguing is recorded from
1660s. Related: Argumentatively; argumentativeness.


Argus

hundred-eyed giant of Greek mythology, late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Argos, literally the bright
one, from argos shining, bright (see argent). His epithet was Panoptes all-eyes. After his death,
Hera transferred his eyes to the peacock's tail. Used in figurative sense of very vigilant person.


Argyle (n.)

diamond-shaped pattern of two or more colors in fabric, said to be so called from similarity to
tartans worn by Campbell clan of Argyll, Scotland. The place name is literally land of the Gaels,
from Old Irish airer country. Argyle socks is from 1935.


aria (n.)

from Italian aria, literally air (see air (n.1)).


Arian (adj.)

1530s, pertaining to the doctrines of Arius, priest in Alexandria early 4c., who posed the question
of Christ's nature in terms which appeared to debase the Savior's relation to God (denial of
consubstantiation). Besides taking an abstract view of Christ's nature, he reaffirmed man's capacity
for perfection. The dissention was widespread and split the Church for about a century during a
crucial time.


Arianism (n.)

c.1600, from Arian + -ism.


arid (adj.)

1650s, dry, parched, from French aride (15c.) or directly from Latin aridus dry, arid, parched, from
arere to be dry, from PIE root *as- to burn, glow (see ash (n.1)). Figurative sense of uninteresting
is from 1827. Related: Aridly.


aridity (n.)

1590s, from Middle French aridit&eacute; or directly from Latin ariditatem (nominative ariditas)
dryness, from aridus (see arid). The Latin word was used figuratively of unadorned styles as well as
stingy men.


ariel

1382, in the Wyclif Bible, a word taken untranslated from the Vulgate, from Greek ariel (Sept.),
from Hebrew ariel; in later Bibles, translated as altar.    (Gesenius would here translate fire-
hearth of God, after Arab. arr; elsewhere in O.T. the same word occurs as a man's name, and
appellation of Jerusalem, where it is taken as = lion of God.) Ariel in T. Heywood and Milton is the
name of an angel, in Shakespeare of an Ayrie spirit; in Astron. of one of the satellites of Uranus.
[OED]    As the name of a species of gazelle found in the Middle East, 1832, from Arabic aryil,
variant of ayyil stag.


Aries

zodiac constellation usually identified as the Ram, late Old English, from Latin aires ram (related
to arietare to butt), from a PIE root meaning spring, jump (cognates: Lithuanian erytis, Old Church
Slavonic jarici, Armenian oroj lamb; Greek eriphos, Old Irish heirp kid). Meaning person born under
the sign of Aries is from 1894; they also have been called Arian (1917).


aright (adv.)

in a correct way, Old English ariht, from a- (1) of + right (adj.).


aril (n.)

accessory covering of seeds, 1794, from Modern Latin arillus, from Medieval Latin arilli, Spanish
arillos dried grapes, raisins.


Arimasp (n.)

Latin Arimaspi (plural), from Greek Arimaspoi, mythical race of one-eyed people in Northern Europe
believed in antiquity to have carried off a hoard of gold which was under guardianship of griffins.
The name is said to be Scythian for one-eyed. Related: Arimaspian.


arioso

melodious, in a melodious way, 1742, from Italian aria melody (see aria).


arise (v.)

Old English arisan to get up, rise; spring from, originate; spring up, ascend (cognate with Old
Saxon arisan, Gothic urreisan), from a- (1) of + rise (v.). Mostly replaced by rise except in
reference to circumstances. Related: Arising; arose; arisen.


arisen

past participle of arise (q.v.).


arising (n.)

verbal noun from arise (v.). Replaced in most senses by rising.


aristarchy (n.)

government by the best men, from Greek aristarkhia, from aristos best (see aristocracy) + -arkhia
(see -archy).


aristocracy (n.)

1560s, from Middle French aristocracie (Modern French aristocratie), from Late Latin aristocratia,
from Greek aristokratia government or rule of the best, from aristos best (originally most fitting,
from PIE *ar-isto-, superlative form of *ar- to fit together; see arm (n.1)) + kratos rule, power
(see -cracy).    At first in a literal sense of government by those who are the best citizens;
meaning rule by a privileged class (best-born or best-favored by fortune) is from 1570s and became
paramount 17c. Hence, the meaning patrician order (1650s). In early use contrasted with monarchy;
after French and American revolutions, with democracy.


aristocrat (n.)

1789, from French aristocrate, a word of the Revolution, a back-formation from aristocratie (see
aristocracy).


aristocratic (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to aristocracy, from French aristocratique, from Greek aristokratikos belonging
to the rule of the best, from aristokratia (see aristocracy). Meaning grand, stylish is from 1845.


aristology (n.)

science of dining, 1835, from Greek ariston breakfast (see ere; so called from being the early meal
of the day) + -ology. Related: Aristological.


Aristotelian (adj.)

also Aristotelean, c.1600, of or pertaining to the person or teachings of Greek philosopher
Aristotle (384-322 B.C.E.).


arithmancy (n.)

divination by numbers, 1570s, from Greek arithmos number (see arithmetic) + -manteia divination (see
-mancy).


arithmetic (n.)

mid-13c., arsmetike, from Old French arsmetique (12c.), from Latin arithmetica, from Greek
arithmetike (tekhne) (the) counting (art), fem. of arithmetikos of or for reckoning, arithmetical,
from arithmos number, counting, amount, from PIE root *re(i)- to reason, count (cognates: Old
English, Old High German rim number; Old Irish rim number, dorimu I count; Latin ritus religious
custom; see read).    Originally in English also arsmetrik, on folk etymology from Medieval Latin
ars metrica; spelling corrected early 16c. Replaced native t&aelig;lcr&aelig;ft, literally tell-
craft.


arithmetical (adj.)

1540s; see arithmetic + -al (1). Related: Arithmetically (late 15c.).


arithmocracy (n.)

rule by numerical majority, 1850, from Greek arithmos number, counting, amount (see arithmetic) +
-cracy. Related: Arithmocratic; arithmocratical.


arithmomania (n.)

compulsive desire to count objects and make calculations, 1890, from French arithmomanie, from Greek
arithmos number, counting, amount (see arithmetic) + French -manie (see mania). Related:
Arithmomaniac.


Arizona

1861, originally as the name of a breakaway Confederate region of southern New Mexico; organized
roughly along modern lines as a U.S. territory in 1863. From Spanish Arizonac, probably from a local
name among the O'odham (Piman) people meaning having a little spring. Alternative theory is that it
derives from Basque arizonak good oaks.


ark (n.)

Old English earc, mainly meaning Noah's but also the Ark of the Covenant, from Latin arca large box,
chest (see arcane). Also borrowed in Old High German (arahha, Modern German Arche). From the
Noachian sense comes extended meaning place of refuge (17c.). As the name of a type of ship or boat,
from late 15c. In 19c. U.S., especially a large, flat-bottomed river boat to move produce,
livestock, etc. to market.


Arkansas

organized as a U.S. territory 1819 (admitted as a state 1836), named for the Arkansas River, which
was named for a Siouan tribe.    The spelling of the term represents a French plural, Arcansas, of a
name applied to the Quapaw people who lived on the Arkansas River; their name was also written in
early times as Akancea, Acansea, Acansa (Dickinson, 1995). This was not the name used by the Quapaws
themselves, however. The term /akansa/ was applied to them by Algonquian speakers; this consists of
/a-/, an Algonquian prefix found in the names of ethnic groups, plus /kk&aacute;:ze, a Siouan term
refering to members of the Dhegiha branch of the Siouan family. This stem is also the origin for the
name of the Kansa tribe and of the state of Kansas; thus the placenames Arkansas and Kansas
indirectly have the same origin. [William Bright, Native American Placenames of the United States,
2004]


arm (n.1)

upper limb, Old English earm arm, from Proto-Germanic *armaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish,
Middle Dutch, German arm, Old Norse armr, Old Frisian erm), from PIE root *ar- fit, join (cognates:
Sanskrit irmah arm, Armenian armukn elbow, Old Prussian irmo arm, Greek arthron a joint, Latin armus
shoulder). Arm of the sea was in Old English. Arm-twister powerful persuader is from 1938. Arm-
wrestling is from 1899.    They wenten arme in arme yfere Into the gardyn [Chaucer]


arm (n.2)

weapon, c.1300, armes (plural) weapons of a warrior, from Old French armes (plural), arms, war,
warfare, mid-13c., from Latin arma weapons (including armor), literally tools, implements (of war),
from PIE root *ar- fit, join (see arm (n.1)). The notion seems to be that which is fitted together.
Meaning heraldic insignia (in coat of arms, etc.) is early 14c.; originally they were borne on
shields of fully armed knights or barons.


arm (v.)

to furnish with weapons, c.1200, from Old French armer or directly from Latin armare, from arma (see
arm (n.2)). Related: Armed; arming.


armada (n.)

fleet of warships, 1530s (erroneously, as armado), from Spanish armada an armed force, from Medieval
Latin armata (see army). Especially of the Invincible Armada of Philip II of Spain (1588). Current
form of the word is from 1590s.


armadillo (n.)

1570s, from Spanish armadillo, diminutive of armado armored, from Latin armatus, past participle of
armare to arm (see arm (n.2)). So called for its hard, plated shell.


Armageddon (n.)

a final conflict, 1811, figurative use of name in Rev. xvi:16, place of the great and final
conflict, from Hebrew Har Megiddon Mount of Megiddo, city in central Palestine, site of important
Israeli battles.


armament (n.)

c.1600, munitions of war (especially the great guns on board a man-of-war), also naval force
equipped for war (1690s), from Latin armamentum implement, from Latin armare to arm, furnish with
weapons from arma (see arm (n.2)). Meaning process of equipping for war is from 1813.


armamentarium (n.)

1874, Latin, literally little arsenal, from armamentum   (see armament). Englished as armamentary
(1731).


armature (n.)

c.1400, an armed force, from Latin armatura armor, equipment, from armatus, past participle of
armare to arm, furnish with weapons from arma (see arm (n.2)). Meaning armor is mid-15c.; that of
protective covering of a plant or animal is from 1660s. Electromagnetic sense is from 1835.


armchair (n.)

also arm-chair, 1630s, from arm (n.1) + chair; adjective sense in reference to criticism of matters
in which the critic takes no active part is from 1886.


armed (adj.)

equipped for battle, early 13c., past participle adjective from arm (v.).


Armenian

1590s, a native of Armenia, from Armenia (late 14c. in English), place name traced to 521 C.E., but
of uncertain origin. As the name of the language, by 1718; as an adjective, by 1727.


armilla (n.)

1706, Latin, literally bracelet, armlet, arm ring, from armus shoulder, upper arm (see arm (n.1)).
Related: Armillary.


Arminian

1610s, from Arminius, Latinized form of the name of James Harmensen (1560-1609), Dutch Protestant
theologian who opposed Calvin, especially on the question of predestination. His ideas were
denounced at the Synod of Dort, but nonetheless spread in the Reformed churches.


armistice (n.)

1707, from French armistice (1680s), coined on the model of Latin solstitium (see solstice), etc.,
from Latin arma arms (see arm (n.2)) + -stitium (used only in compounds), from PIE *ste-ti-,
suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).    The word is attested in English from 1660s in
the Latin form armistitium. German Waffenstillstand is a loan-translation from French. Armistice Day
(1919) marked the end of the Great War of 1914-18 on Nov. 11, 1918. In Britain, after World War II,
it merged with Remembrance Day. In U.S., Armistice Day became a national holiday in 1926. In 1954,
to honor World War II and Korean War veterans as well, it was re-dubbed Veterans Day.


armless (adj.)

late 14c., of physical conditions, from arm (n.1) + -less. Meaning without weapons is attested from
1610s (from arm (n.2)), but that sense is more typically expressed by unarmed.


armlet (n.)

1530s, diminutive of arm (n.1).


armoire (n.)

1570s, from French armoire, from Old French armarie (12c.) cupboard, bookcase, reliquary, from Latin
armarium closet, chest, place for implements or tools, from arma gear, tools, arms (see arm (n.2)).
Before being reborrowed from French, the word earlier was in English as ambry (late 14c.).


armor (n.)

c.1300, mail, defensive covering worn in combat, also means of protection, from Old French armeure
weapons, armor (12c.), from Latin armatura arms, equipment, from arma arms, gear (see arm (n.2)).
Figurative use from mid-14c.    Meaning military equipment generally, especially siege engines, is
late 14c. The word might have died with jousting if not for late 19c. transference to metal-shielded
machinery beginning with U.S. Civil War ironclads (first attested in this sense in an 1855 report
from the U.S. Congressional Committee on Naval Affairs).


armor (v.)

mid-15c., from armor (n.). Related: Armored; armoring.


armorer (n.)

late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French armurer, Old French aremurier, from armeure
armor (see armor (n.)).


armorial (adj.)

1570s, from armory + -al (1).


Armorica

ancient name for Brittany, from Gallo-Roman Are-mor-ica, literally before the sea, with a Celtic
prefix meaning before (compare Old Irish ar) + mare sea (see mere (n.)).


armory (n.)

arms and weapons collectively, c.1300; see arm (n.2) + -ory. Meaning place where arms are
manufactured is from mid-15c. Also used in a sense of arsenal (mid-15c.), the science of heraldry
(late 15c.), from Old French armoierie, from armoier to blazon, from Latin arma weapons (see arm
(n.2)).


armour

chiefly British English spelling of armor (q.v.); for suffix, see -or.


armoury (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of armory (q.v.); for suffix, see -or.


armpit (n.)

mid-14c., from arm (n.1) + pit (n.1). Arm-hole (early 14c.) was used in this sense but was obsolete
by 18c. Colloquial armpit of the nation for any locale regarded as ugly and disgusting was in use by
1965.


arms race (n.)

1930, in reference to naval build-ups, from arms (see arm (n.2)) + race (n.1). First used in British
English.


arms-length (n.)

1650s, from arm (n.1) + length. At arm's end is recorded from 1570s.


army (n.)

late 14c., armed expedition, from Old French arm&eacute;e (14c.) armed troop, armed expedition, from
Medieval Latin armata armed force, from Latin armata, fem. of armatus armed, equipped, in arms, past
participle of armare to arm, literally act of arming, related to arma tools, arms (see arm (n.2)).
Originally used of expeditions on sea or land; the specific meaning land force first recorded 1786.
Transferred meaning host, multitude is c.1500.    The Old English words were here (still preserved
in derivatives like harrier), from PIE *kor- people, crowd; and fierd, with an original sense of
expedition, from faran travel. In spite of etymology, in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, here generally
meant invading Vikings and fierd was used for the local militias raised to fight them.


arnica (n.)

plant genus of the borage family, 1753, Modern Latin, of unknown origin. Klein suggests Arabic
arnabiyah, a name of a type of plant, as the ultimate source.


Arnold

masc. proper name, from Old High German Arenwald, literally having the strength of an eagle, from
arn eagle (see erne) + wald power (see wield).


aroint (v.)

intransitive verb, c.1600, used by Shakespeare (only in imperative: begone!), obsolete and of
obscure origin. [T]he subject of numerous conjectures, none of which can be said to have even a
prima facie probability. [OED]


aroma (n.)

early 13c., fragrant substance, from Latin aroma sweet odor, from Greek aroma seasoning, any spice
or sweet herb, of unknown origin. Meaning fragrance is from 1814. A hypercorrect plural is aromata.


aromatherapy (n.)

by 1992, from French aromath&eacute;rapie, attested from 1930s; see aroma + therapy.


aromatic (adj.)

c.1400, aromatyk, from Middle French aromatique (14c.), from Latin aromaticus, from Greek
aromatikos, from aroma (genitive aromatos) seasoning, sweet spice, of unknown origin.


aromatize (v.)

late 15c., from Old French aromatiser (12c.), from Latin aromatizare, from Greek aromatizein to
spice, from aromat-, stem of aroma seasoning, sweet spice (see aroma).


arose (v.)

past tense of arise (v.).


around (adv.)

c.1300, in circumference, from phrase on round. Rare before 1600. In sense of here and there with no
fixed direction it is 1776, American English (properly about). Of time, from 1888. To have been
around gained worldly experience is from 1927, U.S. colloquial.


arousal (n.)

1827, action of arousing, a being awakened from arouse + -al (2). Sexual association is from c.1900.


arouse (v.)

1590s, awaken (transitive), from a- (1) on + rouse. Related: Aroused; arousing.


ARPANET

acronym from Advanced Research Projects Agency Network, set up in 1969 by a branch of the U.S.
Department of Defense in partnership with four universities; acknowledged as the world's first
operational packet switching network and predecessor of the Internet.


arpeggio (n.)

1742, from Italian arpeggio, from arpeggiare to play upon the harp, from arpa harp, which is of
Germanic origin (see harp (n.)). Related: Arpeggiated; arpeggiation.


arr (v.)

to growl like a dog, late 15c., imitative. In classical times, the letter R was called littera
canina the dog letter (Persius).


arrack (n.)

c.1600, probably picked up in India, ultimately from Arabic araq, literally sweat, juice; used of
native liquors in Eastern countries, especially those distilled from fermented sap of coconut palm,
sometimes from rice or molasses.


arrah

supposedly a characteristic Irish expression of emotion or excitement, 1705.


arraign (v.)

late 14c., araynen, to call to account, from Old French araisnier speak to, address; accuse (in a
law court), from Vulgar Latin *arrationare, from Latin adrationare, from ad- to (see ad-) +
*rationare, from ratio argumentation, reckoning, calculation (see ratio). Sense of to call up on a
criminal charge is c.1400. The excrescent -g- is a 16c. overcorrection based on reign, etc. Related:
Arraigned; arraigning.


arraignment (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French araisnement, from araisnier  (see arraign).


arrange (v.)

late 14c., draw up a line of battle, from Old French arengier (12c.), from a- to (see ad-) + rangier
set in a row (Modern French ranger), from rang rank, from Frankish *hring (see rank (n.)).    A rare
word until the meaning generalized to to place things in order c.1780-1800. Musical sense of adapt
for other instruments or voices is from 1808. Related: Arranged; arranging. Arranged marriage
attested from 1854.


arrangement (n.)

1727, from French arrangement, from arranger arrange (see arrange).


arrant (adj.)

late 14c., variant of errant (q.v.); at first merely derogatory, wandering, vagrant; then (1540s)
acquiring a meaning thoroughgoing, downright, notorious.


arras (n.)

pictured tapestry, late 14c., from Anglo-French draps d'arras, from Arras, city in France where
pictured tapestries were made, from Latin Atrebates, name of a tribe of the Belgae who inhabited the
Artois region; probably literally inhabitants, from a Celtic trebu tribe.


array (v.)

early 14c., from stem of Old French areer to put in order, from Vulgar Latin *ar-redare (source of
Italian arredare), from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + Frankish *r&aelig;d- ready or some cognate Germanic
source, from Proto-Germanic *raidjan to place in order (cognates: Gothic garadis, Old English
ger&aelig;de ready; see ready (adj.)). Related: Arrayed; arraying.


array (n.)

mid-14c., order, arrangement, from Anglo-French arrai, Old French aroi, from areer (see array (v.)).


arrear

c.1300, at a disadvantage; mid-14c., in times past; late 14c., in or to the rear; see arrears.
Meaning behind in duties or payments is from 1620s.


arrearage (n.)

unpaid debt, early 14c., from Old French arierage detriment, prejudice (in a legal sense) (Modern
French arr&eacute;rage), from arere behind; see arrears.


arrears (n.)

mid-14c., in times past, from Old French ariere behind, backward, from Vulgar Latin *ad retro, from
Latin ad to (see ad-) + retro behind (see retro-). Meaning balance due dates from early 15c.; phrase
in arrears first recorded 1610s, but in arrearages is from late 14c.


arrest (v.)

to cause to stop, also to detain legally, late 14c., from Old French arester to stay, stop (Modern
French arr&ecirc;ter), from Vulgar Latin *arrestare (source of Italian arrestare, Spanish and
Portuguese arrestar), from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + restare to stop, remain behind, stay back (see
rest (n.2)). Figurative sense of to catch and hold (the attention, etc.) is from 1814.


arrest (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French arest, Old French areste, from arester (see arrest (v.)).


arrested (adj.)

1610s, past participle adjective from arrest (v.). Arrested development is first recorded 1859 in
evolutionary biology.


arresting (n.)

early 15c., action of stopping someone or something, verbal noun from arrest (v.).


arresting (adj.)

striking, that captures the imagination, 1792, present participle adjective from arrest (v.).


arrhythmic (adj.)

1853, without rhythm, in relation to musical sensibility, Modern Latin, from Greek arrhythmos
irregular, unrhythmical, without measure, from a- not (see a- (3)) + rhythmos (see rhythm). Medical
arrhythmia irregularity of pulse is attested from 1888, from Greek noun of action from arrhythmos.
Related: Arrhythmically.


arrival (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French arrivaille, from Old French arriver (see arrive). Arrivage (late 14c.)
also was used.


arrive (v.)

c.1200, reach land, reach the end of a journey by sea, from Anglo-French ariver, Old French ariver
(11c.) to come to land, from Vulgar Latin *arripare to touch the shore, from Latin ad ripam to the
shore, from ad to (see ad-) + ripa shore (see riparian). The original notion is of coming ashore
after a long voyage. Of journeys other than by sea, from late 14c. Sense of to come to a position or
state of mind is from late 14c. Related: Arrived; arriving.


arriviste (n.)

pushy, ambitious person, 1901, from French arriviste, from arriver to arrive (see arrive). The
notion is of a person intent on arriving at success or in society.


arrogance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French arrogance (12c.), from Latin arrogantia, from arrogantem (nominative
arrogans) assuming, overbearing, insolent, present participle of arrogare to claim for oneself,
assume, from ad- to (see ad-) + rogare ask, propose (see rogation).


arrogant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French arrogant (14c.), from Latin arrogantem (nominative arrogans) assuming,
overbearing, insolent, present participle of arrogare (see arrogance). Related: Arrogantly.


arrogate (v.)

1530s, from Latin arrogatus, past participle of arrogare to claim for oneself (see arrogance).
Related: Arrogated; arrogating.


arrogation (n.)

1580s, from Latin arrogationem (nominative arrogatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
arrogare to claim for oneself (see arrogance).


arrondissement (n.)

1807, administrative subdivision of a French department, from French, literally a rounding, from
stem of arrondir to make round, from a- to (see ad-) + rond round (see round (adj.)).


arrow (n.)

early 14c., from Old English arwan, earlier earh arrow, possibly borrowed from Old Norse &ouml;r
(genitive &ouml;rvar), from Proto-Germanic *arkhwo (cognates: Gothic arhwanza), from PIE root *arku-
bow and/or arrow, source of Latin arcus (see arc (n.)). The ground sense would be the thing
belonging to the bow, perhaps a superstitious avoidance of the actual name.    A rare word in Old
English, where more common words for arrow were str&aelig;l (cognate with the word still common in
Slavic, once prevalent in Germanic, too; meaning related to flash, streak) and fla, flan, a North
Germanic word, perhaps originally with the sense of splinter. Str&aelig;l disappeared by 1200; fla
lingered in Scottish until after 1500. Meaning a mark like an arrow in cartography, etc. is from
1834.


arrowhead (n.)

late 15c., from arrow + head (n.). Ancient ones dug up were called elf-arrows (17c.).


arrowroot (n.)

1690s, from arrow + root (n.). So called because it was used to absorb toxins from poison-dart
wounds.


arroyo (n.)

watercourse, dry streambed, 1845, a California word, from American Spanish, in Spanish, rivulet,
small stream, from Latin arrugia shaft or pit in a gold mine, apparently a compound of ad- to (see
ad-) + ruga a wrinkle (see rough (adj.)).


arse (n.)

buttocks, Old English &aelig;rs tail, rump, from Proto-Germanic *arsoz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
High German, Old Norse ars, Middle Dutch &aelig;rs, German Arsch buttock), from PIE root *ors-
buttock, backside (cognates: Greek orros tail, rump, base of the spine, Hittite arrash, Armenian or
buttock, Old Irish err tail). Middle English had arse-winning money obtained by prostitution (late
14c.).


arsehole (n.)

c.1400, arce-hoole; see arse + hole (n.). In Old English, Latin anus was glossed with ears&eth;erl,
literally arse-thrill.


arsenal (n.)

c.1500, dockyard, dock with naval stores, from Italian arzenale, from Arabic dar as-sina'ah
workshop, literally house of manufacture, from dar house + sina'ah art, craft, skill, from sana'a he
made.    Applied by the Venetians to a large wharf in their city, which was the earliest reference
of the English word. Sense of public place for making or storing weapons and ammunition is from
1570s. The London football club (1886) was named for the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, where the original
players worked.


arsenic (n.)

late 14c., from Old French arsenic, from Latin arsenicum, from late Greek arsenikon arsenic
(Dioscorides; Aristotle has it as sandarake), adapted from Syriac (al) zarniqa arsenic, from Middle
Persian zarnik gold-colored (arsenic trisulphide has a lemon-yellow color), from Old Iranian *zarna-
golden, from PIE root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold
(see glass).    The form of the Greek word is folk etymology, literally masculine, from arsen male,
strong, virile (compare arseno-koites lying with men in New Testament) supposedly in reference to
the powerful properties of the substance. The mineral (as opposed to the element) is properly
orpiment, from Latin auri pigmentum, so called because it was used to make golden dyes.


arson (n.)

1670s, from Anglo-French arsoun (late 13c.), Old French arsion, from Late Latin arsionem (nominative
arsio) a burning, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin ardere to burn, from PIE root
*as- to burn, glow (see ash (n.1)). The Old English term was b&aelig;rnet, literally burning; and
Coke has indictment of burning (1640).


arsonist (n.)

1864, from arson + -ist.


arsy-versy (adv.)

backside foremost, 1530s, probably a reduplication from arse, perhaps with suggestions from reverse.


art (n.)

early 13c., skill as a result of learning or practice, from Old French art (10c.), from Latin artem
(nominative ars) work of art; practical skill; a business, craft, from PIE *ar-ti- (cognates:
Sanskrit rtih manner, mode; Greek arti just, artios complete, suitable, artizein to prepare; Latin
artus joint; Armenian arnam make; German art manner, mode), from root *ar- fit together, join (see
arm (n.1)).    In Middle English usually with a sense of skill in scholarship and learning (c.1300),
especially in the seven sciences, or liberal arts. This sense remains in Bachelor of Arts, etc.
Meaning human workmanship (as opposed to nature) is from late 14c. Sense of cunning and trickery
first attested c.1600. Meaning skill in creative arts is first recorded 1610s; especially of
painting, sculpture, etc., from 1660s. Broader sense of the word remains in artless.   Fine arts,
those which appeal to the mind and the imagination first recorded 1767. Expression art for art's
sake (1824) translates French l'art pour l'art. First record of art critic is from 1847. Arts and
crafts decorative design and handcraft first attested in the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society,
founded in London, 1888.    Supreme art is a traditional statement of certain heroic and religious
truths, passed on from age to age, modified by individual genius, but never abandoned. The revolt of
individualism came because the tradition had become degraded, or rather because a spurious copy had
been accepted in its stead. [William Butler Yeats]


art (v.)

second person present indicative of be; Old English eart. Also see are (v.).


art (adj.)

produced with conscious artistry, as opposed to popular or folk, 1890, from art (n.), possibly from
influence of German kunstlied art song. E.g. art film (1960); art rock (1968).


art brut (n.)

art done by prisoners, lunatics, etc., 1955, French, literally raw art (see art (n.) + brute).


art deco

decorative and architectural style of the period 1925-1940, attested from 1966, from French art
d&eacute;coratif, literally decorative art (see decorative); from L'Exposition Internationale des
Arts D&eacute;coratifs et Industriels Modernes, held in Paris 1925.


art nouveau

first recorded 1901, French, literally new art (see novel (adj.)). Called in German Jugendstil.


Artaxerxes

Persian masc. proper name, in classical history, a son of Xerxes II, also a son of Darius, from
Greek Artaxerxes (explained by Herodotus as Great Warrior), from Old Persian Artax&#353;aca,
literally having a kingdom of justice, from arta- justice + x&#353;aca kingdom.


artefact (n.)

older and alternative spelling of artifact (n.). Related: Artefactual; artefactually.


Artemis

Greek goddess of the moon, wild animals, hunting, childbirth, etc.; sister of Apollo; her name is of
unknown origin.


arterial (adj.)

early 15c., from French art&eacute;rial (Modern French art&eacute;riel), from Latin arteria; see
artery.


arterio-

word-forming element meaning arterial, from Latinized comb. form of Greek arteria windpipe; artery
(see artery).


arteriole (n.)

small artery, by 1808, from Modern Latin arteriola, diminutive of arteria (see artery).


arteriosclerosis (n.)

hardening of the arteries, 1885, medical Latin, from arterio- + sclerosis.


artery (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French arterie, Old French artaire (13c.; Modern French art&egrave;re), and
directly from Latin arteria, from Greek arteria windpipe, also an artery, as distinct from a vein;
related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    They were regarded by the ancients as air ducts because
the arteries do not contain blood after death; medieval writers took them for the channels of the
vital spirits, and 16c. senses of artery in English include trachea, windpipe. The word is used in
reference to artery-like systems of major rivers from 1805; of railways from 1850.


artesian (adj.)

1830, from French puits art&eacute;sien wells of Artois, French province where such wells were first
bored 18c. by French engineer Bernard Forest de B&eacute;lidor (1698-1761). The place name is from
Old French Arteis, from Atrebates, a tribe that lived in northwestern Gallia. Compare Arras.


artesian well

see artesian


artful (adj.)

1610s, learned, well-versed in the (liberal) arts, also characterized by technical skill, from art
(n.) + -ful. Meaning skilled in adapting means to ends is from 1739. Related: Artfully; artfulness.


arthralgia (n.)

pain in a joint, 1848, from Greek arthron joint (see arm (n.1)) + -algia.


arthritic (adj.)

mid-14c., artetyk, pertaining to arthritis, also as a noun, from Old French artetique (12c., Modern
French arthritique), corresponding to Latin arthriticus, from Greek arthritikos, from arthron joint
(see arm (n.1)). Spelling gradually restored to Latin form in 17c.


arthritis (n.)

inflammation of a joint, 1540s, from medical Latin arthritis, from Greek (nosos) arthritis (disease)
of the joints, from arthritis, fem. of arthrites (adj.) pertaining to joints (Greek nosos is a fem.
noun), from arthron a joint (see arm (n.1)).


arthro-

word-forming element meaning pertaining to the joints, from Greek arthro- (before vowels arth-),
comb. form of arthron joint, from PIE *ar-dhro-, from *ar- to fit together; see arm (n.1).


arthropod (n.)

1877, from Modern Latin Arthropoda, literally those with jointed feet, biological classification of
the phylum of segmented, legged invertebrates; see Arthropoda.


Arthropoda (n.)

1870, Modern Latin, literally those with jointed feet, coined 1845 by German zoologist Karl Theodor
Ernst von Siebold (1804-1885) from Greek arthron a joint (see arthro-) + podos genitive of pous foot
(see foot (n.)).


arthroscopic (adj.)

1979; see arthroscopy + -ic.


arthroscopy (n.)

by 1977, from arthro- + -scopy.


Arthur

masc. proper name, from Medieval Latin Arthurus/Arturus, from Welsh arth bear, cognate with Greek
arktos, Latin ursus (see Arctic).


Arthurian (adj.)

pertaining to the series of tales of British King Arthur and his knights, 1793, from Arthur + -ian.


artichoke (n.)

1530s, from articiocco, Northern Italian variant of Italian arcicioffo, from Old Spanish alcarchofa,
from Arabic al-hursufa artichoke. The Northern Italian variation probably is from influence of
ciocco stump.    Folk etymology has twisted the word in English; the ending is probably influenced
by choke, and early forms of the word in English include archecokk, hortichock, artychough,
hartichoake. The plant was known in Italy by 1450s, brought to Florence from Naples in 1466, and
introduced in England in the reign of Henry VIII. French artichaut (16c.), German Artischocke (16c.)
both are also from Italian.


article (n.)

c.1200, separate parts of anything written (such as the statements in the Apostles' Creed, the
clauses of a statute or contract), from Old French article (13c.), from Latin articulus, diminutive
of artus a joint (from PIE *ar-tu-, from *ar- to fit together; (see arm (n.1)).    Meaning extended
to a small division, then generalized to item, thing. Older sense preserved in Articles of War
military regulations (1716) and Articles of Confederation (U.S. history). Meaning literary
composition in a journal, etc. (independent, but part of a larger work) first recorded 1712. Meaning
piece of property (clothing, etc.) first attested 1796, originally in rogue's cant.


articular (adj.)

from Latin articularis pertaining to the joints, from articulus (see articulate (v.)).


articulate (v.)

1590s, to divide speech into distinct parts (earlier to formally bring charges against, 1550s), from
Latin articulatus, past participle of articulare to separate into joints, also to utter distinctly,
from articulus joint (see article). Generalized sense of express in words is from 1690s. Literal
sense, to join, to attach by joints, is attested from 1610s. Earlier senses, to set forth in
articles, to bring a charge against (1560s) now are obsolete or nearly so. Related: Articulated;
articulating.


articulate (adj.)

1580s in the speech sense (1570s as formulated in articles), from Latin articulatus (see articulate
(v.)). Literal meaning composed of segments united by joints is from c.1600; the general sense of
speaking accurately is short for articulate-speaking (1829). Related: Articulately.


articulated (adj.)

jointed, 1610s, past participle adjective from articulate (v.). Meaning made distinct is from 1855.


articulation (n.)

early 15c., a joint or joining; setting of bones, from Old French articulation, from Medieval Latin
articulationem (nominative articulatio) separation into joints, noun of action from past participle
stem of articulare to separate (meat) into joints, also to utter distinctly, from articulus,
diminutive of artus joint (see article).


artifact (n.)

1821, artefact, anything made by human art, from Italian artefatto, from Latin arte by skill
(ablative of ars art; see art (n.)) + factum thing made, from facere to make, do (see factitious).
The spelling with -i- is by 1884, by influence of the Latin stem. Archaeological application dates
from 1890.


artifactual (adj.)

also artefactual, 1914, from artifact + -al (1).


artifice (n.)

1530s, workmanship, the making of anything by craft or skill, from Middle French artifice skill,
cunning (14c.), from Latin artificium a profession, trade, employment, craft; making by art, from
artifex (genitive artificis) craftsman, artist, from stem of ars art (see art (n.)) + facere do (see
factitious). Meaning device, trick (the usual modern sense) is from 1650s.


artificer (n.)

late 14c., one who makes by art or skill, agent noun from artifice. Military sense dates from 1758.


artificial (adj.)

late 14c., in the phrase artificial day part of the day from sunrise to sunset, from Old French
artificial, from Latin artificialis of or belonging to art, from artificium (see artifice). Meaning
made by man (opposite of natural) is from early 15c. Applied to things that are not natural, whether
real (artificial light) or not (artificial flowers). Artificial insemination dates from 1897.
Artificial intelligence the science and engineering of making intelligent machines was coined in
1956.


artificially (adv.)

early 15c.; see artificial + -ly (2).


artillerist (n.)

1778; see artillery + -ist.


artillery (n.)

late 14c., warlike munitions, from Anglo-French artillerie, Old French artillerie (14c.), from
artillier to provide with engines of war (13c.), which probably is from Medieval Latin articulum
art, skill, diminutive of Latin ars (genitive artis) art. But some would connect it with Latin
articulum joint, and still others with Old French atillier to equip, altered by influence of arte.
Sense of engines for discharging missiles (catapults, slings, bows, etc.) is from late 15c.; that of
ordnance, large guns is from 1530s.


artisan (n.)

1530s, from Italian artesano, from Vulgar Latin artitianus, from Latin artitus, past participle of
artire to instruct in the arts, from ars (genitive artis) art (see art (n.)). Barnhart reports
Middle French artisan, often listed as the direct source of the English word, is attested too late
to be so.


artisan (adj.)

1859, from artisan (n.).


artist (n.)

1580s, one who cultivates one of the fine arts, from Middle French artiste (14c.), from Italian
artista, from Medieval Latin artista, from Latin ars (see art (n.)).    Originally used especially
of the arts presided over by the Muses (history, poetry, comedy, tragedy, music, dancing,
astronomy), but also used 17c. for one skilled in any art or craft (including professors, surgeons,
craftsmen, cooks). Now especially of one who practices the arts of design or visual arts (a sense
first attested 1747).


artiste (n.)

1819 in English, from 1804 as a French word, from French artiste; a reborrowing of artist, at first
in a foreign context, later used to fill the gap after the sense of artist had become limited toward
the visual arts and especially painting.   Artiste: an admirable word (albeit somewhat Frenchified)
of late applied, with nice discrimination, to every species of exhibitor, from a rope-dancer down to
a mere painter or sculptor. On looking into little Entick (my great authority in these matters), I
find we have already the word artist; but with stupid English perversity, we have hitherto used that
in a much more restricted sense than its newly-imported rival, which it is becoming the excellent
fashion to adopt. [Paul Pry's Journal of a Residence at Little-Pedlington, Philadelphia, 1836]


artistic (adj.)

1753, from French artistique, from artiste (see artist). Native artist-like was recorded from 1711;
artistly from 1754; artistical from 1801. Related: Artistically.


artistry (n.)

artistic ability, 1837, from artist + -ry; as chemistry from chemist, etc.


artless (adj.)

1580s, unskillful, from art (n.) + -less. Later also uncultured (1590s); then unartificial, natural
(1670s) and guileless, ingenuous (1714). Related: Artlessly; artlessness.


artsy (adj.)

pretentiously artistic, 1902, from arts (see art (n.)); originally especially artsy-craftsy, with
reference to the arts and crafts movement; always more or less dismissive or pejorative; artsy-
fartsy was in use by 1971.


artwork (n.)

also art-work, 1877, from art (n.) + work (n.).


arty (adj.)

1901, having artistic pretentions, from art (n.) + -y (2); also see artsy.


arugula (n.)

edible cruciform plant (Eruca sativa) used originally in the Mediterranean region as a salad; the
American English and Australian form of the name is (via Italian immigrants) from dialectal variant
of Italian ruchetta, a diminutive form of ruca-, from Latin eruca, a name of some cabbage-like
plant, from PIE *gher(s)-uka-, from root *ghers- to bristle (see horror).    In England, the usual
name is rocket (see rocket (n.1)), which is from Italian ruchetta via French roquette. It also
sometimes is called hedge mustard.


ARVN

acronym for Army of the Republic of Vietnam, ground military force of South Vietnam, organized 1955.


Aryan

c.1600, as a term in classical history, from Latin Arianus, Ariana, from Greek Aria, Areia, names
applied in classical times to the eastern part of ancient Persia and to its inhabitants. Ancient
Persians used the name in reference to themselves (Old Persian ariya-), hence Iran. Ultimately from
Sanskrit arya- compatriot; in later language noble, of good family.    Also the name Sanskrit-
speaking invaders of India gave themselves in the ancient texts, from which early 19c. European
philologists (Friedrich Schlegel, 1819, who linked the word with German Ehre honor) applied it to
the ancient people we now call Indo-Europeans (suspecting that this is what they called themselves);
this use is attested in English from 1851. The term fell into the hands of racists, and in German
from 1845 it was specifically contrasted to Semitic (Lassen).    German philologist Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900) popularized the term in his writings on comparative linguistics, recommending it as the
name (replacing Indo-European, Indo-Germanic, Caucasian, Jshortened) for the group of related,
inflected languages connected with these peoples, mostly found in Europe but also including Sanskrit
and Persian. Arian was used in this sense from 1839 (and is more philologically correct), but this
spelling caused confusion with Arian, the term in ecclesiastical history.    Gradually replaced in
comparative linguistics c.1900 by Indo-European, except when used to distinguish Indo-European
languages of India from non-Indo-European ones. Used in Nazi ideology to mean member of a Caucasian
Gentile race of Nordic type. As an ethnic designation, however, it is properly limited to Indo-
Iranians (most justly to the latter) and has fallen from general academic use since the Nazi era.


as (adv.)

c.1200, worn-down form of Old English alswa quite so (see also), fully established by c.1400.
Equivalent to so; any distinction in use is purely idiomatic. Related to German als as, than, from
Middle High German also. Phrase as well just as much is recorded from late 15c.; the phrase also can
imply as well as not, as well as anything else. Interjection of incredulity as if! (i.e. as if that
really could happen) is attested from 1995, an exact duplication of Latin quasi.


asafetida (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin asa (Latinized from Persian aza mastic) + foetida, fem. of foetidus
stinking (see fetid).


asafoetida (n.)

alternative spelling of asafetida (q.v.); also see oe.


asap

see a.s.a.p.


asbestine (adj.)

1620s, from Latin asbestinus, from Greek asbestinos, from asbestos (see asbestos).


asbestos (n.)

1650s, earlier albeston, abestus (c.1100), name of a fabulous stone, which, set afire, could not be
extinguished; from Old French abeste, abestos, from Latin asbestos quicklime (which burns when cold
water is poured on it), from Greek asbestos, literally inextinguishable, from a- not (see a- (3)) +
sbestos, verbal adjective from sbennynai to quench, from PIE root *(s)gwes- to quench, extinguish
(cognates: Lithuanian gestu to go out, Old Church Slavonic gaso, Hittite kishtari is being put out).
The Greek word was used by Dioscorides as a noun meaning quicklime. Erroneously applied by Pliny to
an incombustible fibre, which he believed to be vegetable, but which was really the amiantos of the
Greeks [OED]. Meaning mineral capable of being woven into incombustible fabric is from c.1600 in
English; earlier this was called amiant (early 15c.), from Latin amiantus, from Greek amiantos,
literally undefiled (so called because it showed no mark or stain when thrown into fire). Supposed
in the Middle Ages to be salamanders' wool. Prester John, the Emperor of India, and Pope Alexander
III were said to have had robes or tunics made of it.


ascend (v.)

late 14c., from Latin ascendere to climb up, mount, ascend, figuratively to rise, reach, from ad- to
(see ad-) + scandere to climb (see scan (v.)). Also in 15c. used with a sense to mount (a female)
for copulation. Related: Ascended; ascending. An Old English word for it was stigan.


ascendance (n.)

1742, from ascend + -ance. Properly the act of ascending, but used from the start in English as a
synonym of ascendancy.


ascendancy (n.)

1712; see ascendant + -cy.


ascendant (adj.)

late 14c., ascendent, astrological use is earliest, from Middle French ascendant (noun and
adjective) and directly from Latin ascendentem (nominative ascendans), present participle of
ascendere to mount, ascend, go up (see ascend). Sense moving upward, rising is recorded from 1590s.
In the ascendant ruling, dominant (not, as is often thought, rising) is from 1670s.


ascendency (n.)

alternative spelling of ascendancy (see -ance).


ascension (n.)

c.1300, ascent of Christ into Heaven on the 40th day after the Resurrection, from Latin ascensionem
(nominative ascensio) a rising, noun of action from past participle stem of ascendere to mount,
ascend, go up (see ascend). Astronomical sense is recorded late 14c.; meaning action of ascending is
from 1590s. Related: Ascensional.


ascent (n.)

c.1610, action of ascending, from ascend on model of descend/descent; climbing sense is from 1753.


ascertain (v.)

early 15c., to inform, to give assurance, from Anglo-French acerteiner, Old French acertener to
assure, certify (13c.), from a to (see ad-) + certain certain (see certain). Modern meaning of find
out for sure by experiment or investigation is first attested 1794. Related: Ascertained;
ascertaining.


ascertainable (adj.)

1783, from ascertain + -able. Related: Ascertainably.


ascetic (adj.)

1640s, from Greek asketikos rigorously self-disciplined, laborious, from asketes monk, hermit,
earlier one who practices an art or trade, from askein to exercise, train, originally to train for
athletic competition, practice gymnastics, exercise.


ascetic (n.)

one of the early Christians who retired to the desert to live solitary lives of meditation and
prayer, 1670s, from ascetic (adj.).


asceticism (n.)

1640s, from ascetic (adj.) + -ism. Sometimes also ascetism (c.1850).


Ascians (n.)

inhabitants of the torrid zone, who haue the Sunne twice euery yeere in their zenith, and then they
make no shaddowes at all [Nathanael Carpenter, Geographie Delineated forth in Two Bookes, 1635],
from Medieval Latin Ascii, from Greek askioi, from a- not, without, privative prefix (see a- (3)), +
skia shade, shadow (see shine (v.)).


ASCII

1963, initialism (acronym) from American Standard Code for Information Interchange.


ascites (n.)

late 14c., abdominal dropsy, from Latin ascites, from Greek askites (hydrops), literally baglike
dropsy, from askos bag, sac.


ascitic (adj.)

afflicted with ascites, 1680s; see ascites + -ic. Related: Ascitical.


Asclepius

god of medicine, Latin, from Greek Asklepios, of unknown origin.


ascorbic (adj.)

1933 (in ascorbic acid), from a- (2) + scorb(ut)ic of scurvy (from Medieval Latin scorbuticus
scurvy); originally in reference to Vitamin C, which is an anti-scorbutic. The Latin word is perhaps
of German or Dutch origin.


Ascot

village near Windsor, Berkshire; site of fashionable race-meeting. Used attributively for clothes
suitable for the event; especially a type of tie (1908). The town name is literally eastern cottage.


ascribable (adj.)

1670s, from ascribe + -able. Related: Ascribably; ascribability.


ascribe (v.)

mid-14c., ascrive, from Old French ascrivre to inscribe; attribute, impute, from Latin ascribere to
write in, to add to in a writing, from ad- to (see ad-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)).
Spelling restored by 16c. Related: Ascribed; ascribing.


ascription (n.)

1590s, action of adding in writing; c.1600, attribution of authorship or origin, from Latin
ascriptionem (nominative ascriptio) an addition in writing, noun of action from past participle stem
of ascribere (see ascribe).


ascus (n.)

sac in certain fungi, 1830, Modern Latin, from Greek askos leather bag, wine skin, of unknown
origin.


asea (adj.)

1858, from a- (1) on + sea.


ASEAN

initialism (acronym) for Association of South-East Asian Nations, formed 1967 by Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand; since expanded to 10 nations.


aseismic (n.)

resistant to earthquake destruction, 1884, from a- (2) not + seismic.


aseity (n.)

being by itself, 1690s, from Medieval Latin aseitas state of being by itself, from Latin a from + se
oneself (see suicide).


asepsis (n.)

1892, from a- (2) not + sepsis.


aseptic (adj.)

1859, from a- (2) not + septic. As a noun from 1884.


asexual (adj.)

1830, as a term in biology, a hybrid from a- (2) not + sexual. In general contexts, attested from
1896.


asexuality (n.)

1877; see asexual + -ity.


asexually (adv.)

1862; see asexual + -ly (2).


Asgard (n.)

home of the gods in Norse religion, from Old Norse ass god, from Proto-Germanic *ansu- (cognates:
Old High German ansi, Old English os, Gothic ans god), from PIE *ansu- spirit (cognates:   first
element in Ahura Mazda, from Avestan) + Old Norse gar&eth;r enclosure, yard, garden (see yard
(n.1)).


ash (n.1)

powdery remains of fire, Old English &aelig;sce ash, from Proto-Germanic *askon (cognates: Old Norse
and Swedish aska, Old High German asca, German asche, Gothic azgo ashes), from PIE root *as- to
burn, glow (cognates: Sanskrit asah ashes, dust, Armenian azazem I dry up, Greek azein to dry up,
parch, Latin ardus parched, dry). Spanish and Portuguese ascua red-hot coal are Germanic loan-words.
Symbol of grief or repentance; hence Ash Wednesday (c.1300), from custom introduced by Pope Gregory
the Great of sprinkling ashes on the heads of penitents on the first day of Lent. Ashes meaning
mortal remains of a person is late 13c., in reference to the ancient custom of cremation.


ash (n.2)

type of tree, Old English &aelig;sc ash tree, also spear made of ash wood, from Proto-Germanic
*askaz, *askiz (cognates: Old Norse askr, Old Saxon ask, Middle Dutch esce, German Esche), from PIE
root *os- ash tree (cognates: Armenian haci ash tree, Albanian ah beech, Greek oxya beech, Latin
ornus wild mountain ash, Russian jasen, Lithuanian uosis ash). Ash was the preferred wood for spear-
shafts, so Old English &aelig;sc sometimes meant spear (as in &aelig;sc-here company armed with
spears).


ashamed (adj.)

Old English asceamed feeling shame, filled with shame, past participle of ascamian to feel shame,
from a- intensive prefix + scamian be ashamed, blush; cause shame (see shame (v.)). The verb is
obsolete, but the past participle lives on. Meaning reluctant through fear of shame is c.1300.


Ashanti (n.)

1705, Asiantines, one of the Akan people of central Ghana; native name. As a language, it is part of
the Niger-Congo family.


ashen (adj.)

made of ash wood, c.1300; see ash (n.2) + -en (2); meaning ash-colored, whitish-gray, deadly pale is
1808, from ash (n.1).


Asher

masc. proper name, biblical son of Jacob (also the name of a tribe descended from him), from Hebrew,
literally happy.


asherah (n.)

1863, wooden pillar used as symbol of Canaanite goddess Ashera, of unknown origin.


Ashkenazim (n.)

(plural) central and northern European Jews (as opposed to Sephardim, Jews of Spain and Portugal),
1839, from Hebrew Ashkenazzim, plural of Ashkenaz, eldest son of Gomer (Gen. x:3), also the name of
a people mentioned in Jer. li:27 (perhaps akin to Greek skythoi Scythians, compare Akkadian
ishkuzai); identified historically with various people; in Middle Ages, with the Germans.


ashlar (n.)

late 14c., square stone for building or paving, from Old French aiseler, from Latin axillaris, from
axilla, diminutive of axis board, plank, which is perhaps not the same axis that means axle. The
stone sense is peculiar to English.


Ashley

fem. proper name, all but unknown before c.1965; one of the most popular names for girls born in
U.S. from c.1980; evidently inspired by the surname Ashley, Ashleigh (attested from 12c.), which
means clearing among the ash trees, from Old English &aelig;sc + leah (see ash (n.2) + lea).


ashore (adv.)

1580s, toward the shore, from a- (1) + shore (n.). Meaning on the shore is from 1630s. Middle
English had ashore (late 15c.), but it meant on a slant, literally propped up, from shore (v.).


ashram (n.)

religious hermitage, 1917, from Sanskrit asramah, from a-, adnomial prefix, + sramah effort, toll,
fatigue.


ashtray (n.)

1857 as a receptacle for smokers' ashes, from ash (n.1) + tray.


Ashura (n.)

Islamic fast on the 10th day of Muharram, Arabic Ashura', literally tenth.


ashy (adj.)

late 14c., from ash (n.1) + -y (2).


Asia

c.1300, from Latin Asia, from Greek Asia, speculated to be from Akkadian asu to go out, to rise, in
reference to the sun, thus the land of the sunrise.


Asiago

type of Italian cheese, by 1922, named for town of Asiago (German Schl&auml;gen) in the Veneto
region of Italy.


Asian (n.)

late 14c., inhabitant of Asia (Minor), from Latin Asianus (adjective and noun, belonging to the
province of Asia; an inhabitant of Asia), from Greek Asianos, from Asia (see Asia). Ousted Asiatic
as the preferred term in Britain c.1950.    The term Asiatic has come to be regarded with disfavour
by those to whom it is applied, and they feel entitled to be brought into line with usage in regard
to Europeans, Americans and Australians. [Times Literary Supplement, Feb. 6, 1953]    As an
adjective in English, by 1690s.


Asiatic (adj.)

1630s, from Latin Asiaticus (surname of Latin Corn. Scipio), from Greek Asiatikos, from Asia (see
Asia; also compare Asian). As a noun, by 1763. In ancient Rome, Asiatici oratores was florid and
overly ornate prose.


aside (adv.)

c.1300, off to one side; mid-14c., to or from the side; late 14c., away or apart from others, out of
the way, from a- (1) + side (n.). Noun sense of words spoken so as to be (supposed) inaudible is
from 1727. Middle English had asidely on the side, indirectly (early 15c.) and asideward sideways,
horizontal (late 14c.).


asine (n.)

1530s, she-ass, from French asine, from Latin asina (see ass (n.1)).


asinine (adj.)

c.1600, obstinate, stupid, from Latin asininus stupid, literally like an ass, from asinus ass, also
dolt, blockhead (see ass (n.1)). The literal sense in English is recorded from 1620s.


ask (v.)

Old English ascian ask, call for an answer; make a request, from earlier ahsian, from Proto-Germanic
*aiskon (cognates: Old Saxon escon, Old Frisian askia request, demand, ask, Middle Dutch eiscen,
Dutch eisen to ask, demand, Old High German eiscon to ask (a question), German heischen to ask,
demand), from PIE *ais- to wish, desire (cognates: Sanskrit icchati seeks, desires, Armenian aic
investigation, Old Church Slavonic iskati to seek, Lithuanian ie&#353;kau to seek).    Form in
English influenced by a Scandinavian cognate (such as Danish &aelig;ske; the Old English would have
evolved by normal sound changes into ash, esh, which was a Midlands and southwestern England dialect
form). Modern dialectal ax is as old as Old English acsian and was an accepted literary variant
until c.1600. Related: Asked; asking. Old English also had fregnan/frignan which carried more
directly the sense of question, inquire, and is from PIE root *prek-, the common source of words for
ask in most Indo-European languages (see pray). If you ask me in my opinion is attested from 1910.
Asking price is attested from 1755.


askance (adv.)

1520s, sideways, asquint, of obscure origin. OED has separate listings for askance and obsolete
Middle English askance(s) and no indication of a connection, but Barnhart and others derive the
newer word from the older one. The Middle English word, recorded early 14c. as ase quances and found
later in Chaucer, meant in such a way that; even as; as if; and as an adverb insincerely,
deceptively. It has been analyzed as a compound of as and Old French quanses (pronounced kanses) how
if, from Latin quam how + si if.    The E[nglish] as is, accordingly, redundant, and merely added by
way of partial explanation. The M.E. askances means as if in other passages, but here means, as if
it were, i.e. possibly, perhaps; as said above. Sometimes the final s is dropped .... [Walter W.
Skeat, glossary to Chaucer's Man of Law's Tale, 1894]    Also see discussion in Leo Spitzer, Anglo-
French Etymologies, Philological Quarterly 24.23 (1945), and see OED entry for askance (adv.) for
discussion of the mysterious ask- word cluster in English. Other guesses about the origin of askance
include Old French a escone, from past participle of a word for hidden; Italian a scancio obliquely,
slantingly; or that it is a cognate of askew.


askew (adv.)

1570s, of uncertain etymology; perhaps literally on skew (see skew), or from the Old Norse form, a
ska. Earlier askoye is attested in the same sense (early 15c.).


aslant (adv.)

early 14c., o-slant, literally on slant, from on + slant (v.). As a preposition from c.1600.


asleep (adj.)

c.1200, aslepe, o sl&aelig;pe, from Old English on sl&aelig;pe (see sleep). The parallel form on
sleep continued until c.1550. Of limbs, numb through stoppage of circulation, from late 14c. Meaning
inattentive, off guard is from mid-14c.


Asmodeus

evil spirit, prince of demons, from Latin Asmodaeus, from Greek Asmodaios, from Talmudic Hebrew
Ashmeday, from Avestan Aeshma-d&aelig;va, Aeshma the deceitful, from aeshma anger, daeva- spirit,
demon.


asocial (adj.)

1883, antagonistic to society or social order, from a- not + social (adj.); also compare antisocial.


asp (n.)

poisonous snake, 1520s, earlier aspis (mid-14c.), from Old French aspe asp (13c.) or directly from
Latin aspidem (nominative aspis), from Greek aspis an asp, Egyptian viper, literally shield; the
serpent so called probably in reference to its neck hood.


asparagus (n.)

late 14c., aspergy; late Old English sparage, from Latin asparagus (in Medieval Latin often
sparagus), from Greek asparagos, of uncertain origin; probably from PIE root *sp(h)er(e)g- to spring
up (though perhaps not originally a Greek word).    In Middle English, asperages sometimes was
regarded as a plural, with false singular aspergy. By 16c. the word had been anglicized as far as
sperach, sperage. It was respelled by c.1600 to conform with classical Latin, but in 17c. the folk-
etymologized variant sparrowgrass took hold, persisting into 19c., during which time asparagus had
an air of stiffness and pedantry [John Walker, Critical Pronouncing Dictionary, 1791]. Known in Old
English as eor&eth;nafela.


aspartame (n.)

commercial name of an artificial sweetener, 1973, from aspartic acid (1836), formed irregularly from
asparagine (1813), a compound found in asparagus, beet-root, etc., which was named from asparagus +
chemical suffix -ine (2). The reason for -ame is unknown.


Aspasia

beautiful and capable Milesian consort of Pericles, proper name from fem. of Greek aspasios welcome,
related to aspazesthai to welcome, of uncertain origin.


aspect (n.)

late 14c., an astrological term, relative position of the planets as they appear from earth (i.e.,
how they look at one another); later also way of viewing things, from Latin aspectus a seeing,
looking at, sight, view, countenance, appearance, from past participle of aspicere to look at, from
ad- to (see ad-) + specere to look (see scope (n.1)). Meaning the look one wears, the appearance of
things attested by early 15c.


aspen (n.)

late 14c., from adjective or genitive form of Old English &aelig;spe aspen tree, white poplar, from
Proto-Germanic *aspo- (cognates: Old Norse &ouml;sp, Middle Dutch espe, Old High German aspa, German
Espe), from PIE *apsa aspen (cognates: Lithuanian opuse). The current form in English probably arose
from phrases such as aspen leaf, aspen bark (see -en (2)). Its leaves have been figurative of
tremulousness and quaking since at least early 15c. (an Old English name for it was cwicbeam,
literally quick-tree).


asperate (v.)

1650s, make rough, from Latin asperatus, past participle of asperare to roughen, make rough,
exasperate, from asper rough (see asperity). Related: Asperated; asperating.


asperation (n.)

1721, noun of action from asperate (v.). Asperacioun harshness is attested from early 15c.


Asperger&#039;s Syndrome (n.)

1981, named for the sake of Austrian pediatrician Hans Asperger (1906-1980), who described it in
1944 (and called it autistic psychopathy; German autistischen psychopathen). A standard diagnosis
since 1992; recognition of Asperger's work was delayed, perhaps, because his school and much of his
early research were destroyed by Allied bombing in 1944.    The example of autism shows particularly
well how even abnormal personalities can be capable of development and adjustment. Possibilities of
social integration which one would never have dremt of may arise in the course of development. [Hans
Asperger, Autistic psychopathy in Childhood, 1944]


Asperges (n.)

sprinkling ritual of the Catholic church, 1550s, from Late Latin asperges, noun use of 2nd person
singular future indicative of Latin aspergere to scatter, strew upon, sprinkle, from ad to (see ad-)
+ spargere to sprinkle (see sparse). The word is taken from the phrase Asperges me, Domine, hyssopo
et mundabor, from  Psalm 51 (Vulgate), sung during the rite of sprinkling a congregation with holy
water.


asperity (n.)

c.1200, asprete hardship, harshness of feelings, a figurative use, from Old French asperit&eacute;
difficulty, painful situation, harsh treatment (12c., Modern French &acirc;pret&eacute;), from Latin
asperitatem (nominative asperitas) roughness, from asper rough, harsh, of unknown origin; in Latin
used also of sour wine, bad weather, and hard times. Figurative meaning harshness of feeling in
English is attested from early 15c.


asperse (v.)

late 15c., to besprinkle, from Latin aspersus, past participle of aspergere besprinkle, bespatter
(see aspersion). Meaning to bespatter someone's character with rumor and false reports is recorded
from 1610s.


aspersion (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin aspersionem (nominative aspersio) a sprinkling, noun of action from past
participle stem of aspergere to sprinkle on, from ad- to (see ad-) + spargere sprinkle, strew (see
sparse). Originally in theology, the shedding of Christ's blood. Modern sense of a bespattering with
slander first attested 1590s. To cast aspersions was in Fielding (1749).


asphalt (n.)

early 14c., hard, resinous mineral pitch found originally in Biblical lands, from Late Latin
asphaltum, from Greek asphaltos asphalt, bitumen, probably from a non-Greek source, possibly Semitic
[Klein, citing Lewy, 1895]. Another theory holds it to be from Greek a- not + *sphaltos able to be
thrown down, taken as verbal adjective of sphallein to throw down, in reference to a use of the
material in building.    Meaning paving composition dates from 1847 and its popular use in this
sense established the modern form of the English word, displacing in most senses asphaltum,
asphaltos. As a verb meaning to cover with asphalt, from 1872. Related: Asphaltic.


aspheterism (n.)

doctrine that there ought to be no private property, 1794, from Greek a- not, privative prefix (see
a- (3)), + spheteros one's own, from sphetrisomos appropriation.


asphodel (n.)

late 14c., from Latin asphodelus, from Greek asphodelos asphodel, king's spear, plant of the lily
kind, of unknown origin (see daffodil). It was the peculiar plant of the dead; and in Greek
mythology and English poetic use it overspreads the Elysian meadows.To embathe In nectared lavers
strewed with asphodel. [Milton, Comus, 1634]


asphyxia (n.)

1706, stoppage of pulse, absence of pulse, from Modern Latin, from Greek asphyxia stopping of the
pulse, from a- not (see a- (3)) + sphyzein to throb. Obsolete in its original sense; the transferred
sense of suffocation is from 1778, but it is a curious infelicity of etymology [OED] because victims
of suffocation have a pulse for some time after breathing has stopped.


asphyxiate (v.)

1818, to suffocate (someone or something), from asphyxia + -ate (2). Related: Asphyxiated;
asphyxiating.


asphyxiation (n.)

1866, noun of action from asphyxiate (v.).


aspic (n.)

savory meat jelly, 1789, from French aspic jelly (18c.), literally asp, from Old French aspe (see
asp) + ending from basilisc basilisk (the two creatures sometimes were confused with one another).
The foodstuff said to be so called from its coldness (froid comme un aspic is said by Littr&eacute;
to be a proverbial phrase), or the colors in the gelatin, or the shape of the mold. It also was a
French word for lavendar spike and might refer to this as a seasoning element.


aspirant (n.)

one who aspires, 1738, from French aspirant, from Latin aspirantem (nominative aspirans), present
participle of aspirare (see aspire).


aspirate (n.)

1725, sound of the letter 'H', especially at the beginning of a word, from Latin aspiratio a
breathing, exhalation; the pronunciation of the letter H (see aspire).


aspirate (v.)

to pronounce with audible breath, 1700; perhaps a back-formation from aspiration (n.2), or from
French aspirer or directly from Latin aspiratus, past participle of aspirare (see aspire). Related:
Aspirated; aspirating.


aspiration (n.1)

1530s, action of breathing into, from Latin aspirationem (nominative aspiratio) a breathing on, a
blowing upon; rough breathing; influence, noun of action from past participle stem of aspirare (see
aspire). Meaning steadfast longing for a higher goal, earnest desire for something above one is
recorded from c.1600 (sometimes collectively, as aspirations).


aspiration (n.2)

late 14c., action of aspirating, noun of action from aspirate (v.).


aspire (v.)

strive for, c.1400, from Old French aspirer aspire to; inspire; breathe, breathe on (12c.), from
Latin aspirare to breathe upon, blow upon, to breathe, also, in transferred senses, to be favorable
to, assist; to climb up to, to endeavor to obtain, to reach to, to seek to reach; infuse, from ad-
to (see ad-) + spirare to breathe (see spirit (n.)). The notion is of panting with desire, or
perhaps of rising smoke. Related: Aspired; aspiring.


aspirin (n.)

coined 1899 by German chemist Heinrich Dreser (1860-1924) in German as a trademark name, from Latin
Spiraea (ulmaria) meadow-sweet, the plant in whose flowers or leaves the processed acid in the
medicine is naturally found, + common chemical ending -in (see -ine (2)). Spiraea (Tournefort, 1700)
is from Latinized form of Greek speiraia meadow-sweet, so called from the shape of its follicles
(see spiral (adj.)). The initial -a- is to acknowledge acetylation; Dreser said the word was a
contraction of acetylierte spirs&auml;ure, the German name of the acid, which now is obsolete,
replaced by salicylic acid.   Die Bezeichnung Aspirin ist abgeleitet aus Spirs&#228;ure -- alter
Name der Salicyls&#228;ure und A = Acetyl; statt Acetylirte Spirs&#228;ure, kurzweg Aspirin. [H,
Dreser, Pharmakologisches &#252;ber Aspirin (Acetylsalicyls&#228;ure), in Archiv f&#252;r die
Gesammte Physiologie des Menschen und der Thiere, 1899, p.307]    The custom of giving commercial
names to medicinal products began in Germany in the late 19th century, when nascent pharmaceutical
firms were discovering medical uses for common, easily made chemicals. To discourage competitors
they would market the substance under a short trademarked name a doctor could remember, rather than
the long chemical compound word. German law required prescriptions to be filled exactly as written.


asportation (n.)

a carrying away or off (legal), c.1500, from Latin asportationem (nominative asportatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of asportare to carry off, from abs- away (see ab-) + portare to
carry (see port (n.1)).


asquint (adv.)

early 13c., obliquely, with a sidelong glance, of uncertain etymology; from a- (1) + a word
corresponding to Du. schuinte 'slope, slant' of the independent use of which no instances survive
... [OED]. Middle English Dictionary compares French &eacute;quinter cut to a point; French
dialectal (e)squintar cast a glance, look furtively.


ass (n.1)

beast of burden, Old English assa (Old Northumbrian assal, assald) he-ass, probably from Old Celtic
*as(s)in donkey, which (with German esel, Gothic asilus, Lithuanian asilas, Old Church Slavonic osl)
ultimately is from Latin asinus, which is probably of Middle Eastern origin (compare Sumerian ansu).
For al schal deie and al schal passe, Als wel a Leoun as an asse. [John Gower, Confessio Amantis,
1393]    Since ancient Greek times, in fables and parables, the animal typified clumsiness and
stupidity (hence asshead, late 15c., etc.). To make an ass of oneself is from 1580s. Asses' Bridge
(c.1780), from Latin Pons Asinorum, is fifth proposition of first book of Euclid's Elements. In
Middle English, someone uncomprehending or unappreciative would be lik an asse that listeth on a
harpe. In 15c., an ass man was a donkey driver.


ass (n.2)

slang for backside, first attested 1860 in nautical slang, in popular use from 1930; chiefly U.S.;
from dialectal variant pronunciation of arse (q.v.). The loss of -r- before -s- attested in several
other words (such as burst/bust, curse/cuss, horse/hoss, barse/bass). Indirect evidence of the
change from arse to ass can be traced to 1785 (in euphemistic avoidance of ass donkey by polite
speakers) and perhaps to Shakespeare, if Nick Bottom transformed into a donkey in A Midsummer
Night's Dream (1594) is the word-play some think it is. Meaning woman regarded as a sexual object is
from 1942. Colloquial (one's) ass one's self, one's person attested by 1958.


assail (v.)

c.1200, from Old French assalir attack, assault, assail (12c., Modern French assaillir), from Vulgar
Latin *adsalire to leap at, from Latin ad- at (see ad-) + salire to leap (see salient (adj.)).
Figurative use from mid-14c. Related: Assailed; assailing; assailable.


assailant (n.)

1530s, from French assailant, noun use of present participle of assailir (see assail). Earlier in
same sense was assailer (c.1400).


assassin (n.)

1530s (in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c.), via French and Italian, from Arabic hashishiyyin hashish-
users, plural of hashishiyy, from hashish (q.v.). A fanatical Ismaili Muslim sect of the time of the
Crusades, under leadership of the Old Man of the Mountains (translates Arabic shaik-al-jibal, name
applied to Hasan ibu-al-Sabbah), with a reputation for murdering opposing leaders after intoxicating
themselves by eating hashish. The plural suffix -in was mistaken in Europe for part of the word
(compare Bedouin).


assassinate (v.)

1610s, from past participle stem of Medieval Latin assassinare (see assassin). Of reputations,
characters, etc., from 1620s. Related: Assassinated; assassinating.


assassination (n.)

c.1600, noun of action from assassinate (v.).


assault (n.)

late 14c., earlier asaut (c.1200), from Old French asaut, assaut an attack, an assault, attacking
forces (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *adsaltus attack, assault, from ad to (see ad-) + Latin saltus a
leap, from salire to leap, spring (see assail). In law by 1580s; historically, assault includes
menacing words or actions; battery is an actual blow.


assault (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French asauter, assauter, from Vulgar Latin *assaltare (see assault (n.)).
Related: Assaulted; assaulting.


assay (v.)

c.1300, to try, endeavor, strive; test the quality of, from Anglo-French assaier, from assai (n.),
from Old French essai trial (see essay).


assay (n.)

trial, test of quality, test of character, mid-14c., from Anglo-French assai (see assay (v.)).
Meaning analysis is from late 14c.


assemblage (n.)

c.1704, from French assemblage gathering, assemblage, from assembler (see assemble). Earlier English
words in the same sense include assemblement, assemblance (both late 15c.).


assemble (v.)

earlly 14c., transitive and intransitive, from Old French assembler come together, join, unite;
gather (11c.), from Latin assimulare to make like, liken, compare; copy, imitate; feign, pretend,
later to gather together, from ad- to (see ad-) + simulare to make like (see simulation). In Middle
English and in Old French it also was a euphemism for to couple sexually. Meaning to put parts
together in manufacturing is from 1852. Related: Assembled; assembling. Assemble together is
redundant.


assembly (n.)

c.1300, a gathering of persons, a group gathered for some purpose, from Old French as(s)emblee
assembly, gathering; union, marriage, noun use of fem. past participle of assembler to assemble (see
assemble). Meaning gathering together is recorded from early 15c.; that of act of assembling parts
or objects is from 1914, as is assembly line. School sense is recorded from 1932.


assent (v.)

c.1300, from Old French assentir agree; get used to (12c.), from Latin assentare to agree with,
frequentative of assentire, from ad- to (see ad-) + sentire to feel, think (see sense (n.)).
Related: Assented; assenting.


assent (n.)

early 14c., consent, approval, from Old French assent, a back-formation from assentir (see assent
(v.)).


assert (v.)

c.1600, declare, from Latin assertus, past participle of asserere claim, maintain, affirm (see
assertion). Related: Asserted; asserting. To assert oneself stand up for one's rights is recorded
from 1879.


assertion (n.)

early 15c., assercioun, from Middle French assertion (14c.) or directly from Late Latin assertionem
(nominative assertio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin asserere claim rights over
something, state, maintain, affirm, from ad- to (see ad-) + serere join (see series). By joining
oneself to a particular view, one claimed or maintained it.


assertive (adj.)

1560s, declaratory, positive, full of assertion, from assert + -ive. Meaning insisting on one's
rights is short for self-assertive (1865).


assertively (adv.)

mid-15c., assertiveli; see assertive + -ly (2).


assertiveness (n.)

tendency toward self-assertion, 1881, from assertive + -ness.


assess (v.)

early 15c., to fix the amount (of a tax, fine, etc.), from Anglo-French assesser, from Medieval
Latin assessare fix a tax upon, originally frequentative of Latin assessus a sitting by, past
participle of assidere to sit beside (and thus to assist in the office of a judge), from ad- to (see
ad-) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). One of the judge's assistant's jobs was to fix the amount of a
fine or tax. Meaning to estimate the value of property for the purpose of taxing it is from 1809;
transferred sense of to judge the value of a person, idea, etc. is from 1934. Related: Assessed;
assessing.


assessable (adj.)

mid-15c., from assess + -able.


assessment (n.)

1540s, value of property for tax purposes, from assess + -ment. Meaning determination or adjustment
of tax rate is from 1540s; general sense of estimation is recorded from 1620s. In education jargon
from 1956.


assessor (n.)

late 14c., from Old French assessor assistant judge, assessor (in court) (12c., Modern French
assesseur) and directly from Latin assessor an assistant, aid; an assistant judge, in Late Latin one
who assesses taxes, literally a sitter-by, agent noun from past participle stem of assidere (see
assess).


asset (n.)

see assets.


assets (n.)

1530s, sufficient estate, from Anglo-French asetz (singular), from Old French assez (11c.)
sufficiency, satisfaction; compensation, noun use of adverb meaning enough, sufficiently; very much,
a great deal, from Vulgar Latin *ad satis to sufficiency, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + satis enough
(see sad).    Beginning as a legal term, sufficient estate (to satisfy debts and legacies), it
passed into general use; meaning any property that theoretically can be converted to ready money is
from 1580s. Asset is a 19c. artificial singular. Asset stripping attested from 1972.


asseverate (v.)

1791, from Latin asseveratus, past participle of asseverare to affirm, insist on, maintain, from ad-
to (see ad-) + severus serious, severe (see severe). Related: Asseverated; asseverating.


asseveration (n.)

1550s, from Latin asseverationem (nominative asseveratio) vehement assertion, protestation, noun of
action from past participle stem of asseverare (see asseverate).


asshole (n.)

variant of arsehole (also see ass (n.2)). Meaning contemptible person, mid-1930s.


assiduity (n.)

early 15c., from Latin assiduatem continual presence, noun of quality from past participle stem of
assiduus (see assiduous).


assiduous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin assiduus attending; continually present, incessant; busy; constant, from assidere
to sit down to, thus constantly occupied at one's work; from ad to (see ad-) + sedere to sit (see
sedentary). The word acquired a taint of servility in 18c. Related: Assiduously; assiduousness.


assiento (n.)

1714, contract between the King of Spain and another power (especially that made at the Peace of
Utrecht, 1713, with Great Britain for furnishing African slaves to the Spanish colonies in the
Americas), from Spanish asiento, from asentar to adjust, settle, establish, literally to place on a
chair, from a sentar, from Latin sedens, present participle of sedere to sit (see sedentary).


assign (v.)

c.1300, from Old French assiginer (13c.) assign, set (a date, etc.); appoint legally; allot, from
Latin assignare to mark out, to allot by sign, assign, award, from ad- to (see ad-) + signare make a
sign, from signum mark (see sign). Main original use was in English law, in transferences of
personal property. General meaning to fix, settle, determine, appoint is from c.1300. Related:
Assigned; assigning.


assignation (n.)

early 14c., appointment by authority, from Old French assignacion (14c., Modern French assignation),
from Latin assignationem (nominative assignatio) an assigning, allotment, noun of action from past
participle stem of assignare (see assign). Meaning action of legally transfering (a right or
property) is from 1570s; that of a meeting by arrangement, tryst is from 1650s.


assignee (n.)

early 15c., one who is appointed to act for another, from Old French assigne, past participle of
assignier (see assign).


assignment (n.)

late 14c., order, request, directive, from Old French assignement (legal) assignment (of dower,
etc.), from Late Latin assignamentum, noun of action from Latin assignare (see assign). Meaning
appointment to office is mid-15c.; that of a task assigned (to someone) is from c.1848.


assimilate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin assimilatus feigned, pretended, fictitious, past participle of assimilare to
make like, from ad- to (see ad-) + simulare make similar, from similis like, resembling (see
similar). Originally transitive (with to); intransitive use first recorded 1837. Related:
Assimilated; assimilating.


assimilation (n.)

early 15c., act of assimilating, from Old French assimilacion, from Latin assimilationem (nominative
assimilatio) likeness, similarity, noun of action from past participle stem of assimilare (see
assimilate). Psychological sense is from 1855.


assimilationist (n.)

one who advocates racial or ethnic integration, 1900, in reference to possible U.S. attitudes toward
Hawaii and possessions obtained in the war against Spain; usually with reference to Jews in European
nations; see assimilation + -ist.


assist (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French assister to stand by, help, put, place, assist (14c.), from Latin
assistere stand by, take a stand near, attend, from ad- to (see ad-) + sistere stand still, take a
stand; to set, place, cause to stand, from PIE *si-st-, reduplicated form of root *sta- to stand
(see stet). Related: Assisted; assisting. Medical assisted suicide attested from 1884.


assist (n.)

1570s, an act of assistance, from assist (v.). In the sporting sense attested 1877 in baseball, 1925
in ice hockey.


assistance (n.)

early 15c., act of helping or aiding, from Middle French assistance, from assister (see assist
(v.)).


assistant (n.)

mid-15c., assistent one who helps or aids another, from Middle French assistent, adjective and noun,
properly present participle of assister (see assist (v.)).


assistant (adj.)

mid-15c., helpful, of assistance, from Middle French assistent (see assistant (n.)).


assize (n.)

session of a law court, c.1300 (attested from mid-12c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French assise
session, sitting of a court (12c.), properly fem. past participle of asseoir to cause to sit, from
Latin assidere (see assess). Originally all legal proceedings of the nature of inquests or
recognitions; hence sessions held periodically in each county of England to administer civil and
criminal justice.


associate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin associatus past participle of associare join with, from ad- to (see ad-) +
sociare unite with, from socius companion (see social (adj.)). Related: Associated; associating.
Earlier form of the verb was associen (late 14c.), from Old French associier associate (with).


associate (n.)

1530s, from associate (adj.).


associate (adj.)

early 15c., allied, connected, paired, from Latin associatus, past participle of associare (see
associate (v.)).


association (n.)

1530s, action of coming together, from Medieval Latin associationem (nominative associatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of associare (see associate). Meaning a body of persons with a
common purpose is from 1650s. Meaning mental connection is from 1680s; that of quality or thing
called to mind by something else is from 1810.


associative (adj.)

1812, from associate (v.) + -ive.


assonance (n.)

1727, resemblance of sounds between words, from French assonance, from assonant, from Latin
assonantem (nominative assonans), present participle of assonare to resound, respond to, from ad- to
(see ad-) + sonare to sound (see sonata). Properly, in prosody, rhyming of accented vowels, but not
consonants (1823).


assort (v.)

late 15c., to distribute into groups, from Middle French assortir (15c.), from Old French assorter
to assort, match, from a- to (see ad-) + sorte kind (see sort). Related: Assorted; assorting.


assorted (adj.)

arranged in sorts, 1797, past participle adjective from assort (v.).


assortment (n.)

1610s, action of assorting, from assort + -ment. Sense of group of things of the same sort is
attested from 1759; that of group of things whether the same sort or not from 1791.


assuage (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French assuager, Old French assoagier soften, moderate, alleviate, calm, soothe,
pacify, from Vulgar Latin *adsuaviare, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + suavis sweet, agreeable (see
sweet (adj.)). For sound development in French, compare deluge from Latin diluvium, abridge from
abbreviare. Related: Assuaged; assuaging.


assuasive (adj.)

1708, probably from assume on model of persuasive, etc.


assumable (adj.)

1784, from assume + -able. Related: Assumably; assumability.


assume (v.)

early 15c., assumpten to receive up into heaven (especially of the Virgin Mary), also assumen to
arrogate, from Latin assumere, adsumere to take up, take to oneself, take besides, obtain in
addition, from ad- to, up (see ad-) + sumere to take, from sub under (see sub-) + emere to take (see
exempt (adj.)).    Meaning to suppose, to take for granted as the basis of argument is first
recorded 1590s; that of to take or put on (an appearance, etc.) is from c.1600. Related: Assumed;
assuming. Early past participle was assumpt. In rhetorical usage, assume expresses what the assumer
postulates, often as a confessed hypothesis; presume expresses what the presumer really believes.


assumption (n.)

c.1300, the reception, uncorrupted, of the Virgin Mary into Heaven, also the Church festival (Aug.
15) commemorating this, Feast of the Assumption, from Old French assumpcion and directly from Latin
assumptionem (nominative assumptio) a taking, receiving, noun of action from past participle stem of
assumere take up, take to oneself (see assume).    Meaning minor premise of a syllogism is late 14c.
Meaning appropriation of a right or possession is mid-15c. Meaning action of taking for oneself is
recorded from 1580s; that of something taken for granted is from 1620s.


assumptive (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin assumptivus, from assumpt-, past participle stem of assumere take up, take to
oneself (see assume) + -ive.


assurance (n.)

late 14c., formal or solemn pledge, promise, also certainty, from Old French asseurance (11c.,
Modern French assurance) assurance, promise; truce; certainty, safety, security, from asseurer (see
assure). The word had a negative tinge 18c., often suggesting impudence or presumption.


assure (v.)

late 14c., from Old French asseurer (12c., Modern French assurer) to reassure, calm, protect, to
render sure, from Vulgar Latin *assecurar, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + securus safe, secure (see
secure (adj.)). Related: Assured; assuring.


assured (adj.)

of persons, confident, self-assured, late 14c., past participle adjective from assure. Related:
Assuredly; assuredness.


Assyria

Middle English, from Latin Assyria, from Greek Assyria, short for Assyria ge the Assyrian land, from
fem. of Assyrios pertaining to Assyria, from Akkadian Ashshur, name of the chief city of the kingdom
and also of a god, probably from Assyrian sar prince. (See also Syria).


Assyriology (n.)

1846, from Assyria + -ology. Related: Assyriologist.


Astarte

Phoenician goddess identified with Greek Aphrodite, from Greek Astarte, from Phoenician Astoreth.


astatic (adj.)

1827, from Greek astatos unstable, not steadfast, from a-, privative prefix (see a- (3)), + statos
placed, standing, from PIE root *sta- (see stet).


astatine (n.)

radioactive element, named 1947, from Greek astatos unstable (see astatic) + chemical suffix -ine
(2). So called for its short half-life and lack of stable isotopes. The element appears not to have
a stable form and probably does not exist in nature [Flood, Origin of Chemical Names].


asteism (n.)

genteel irony, polite mockery, 1580s, from Greek asteismos wit, witticism, from asteios of a city or
town (as opposed to country), from asty town, city, especially (without the article) Athens.


aster (n.)

flower genus, 1706, from Latin aster star (see star (n.)); so called for the radiate heads of the
flowers. Originally used in English in the Latin sense (c.1600) but this is obsolete.


asterisk (n.)

figure used in printing and writing to indicate footnote, omission, etc., late 14c., asterich,
asterisc, from Late Latin asteriscus, from Greek asterikos little star, diminutive of aster star
(see astro-). As a verb from 1733.


asterism (n.)

1590s, a constellation, a group of stars, from Greek asterismos a marking with stars, from aster
star (see astro-). Any grouping of stars, whether a constellation or not (though in modern use,
usually the latter). The Big Dipper is an asterism, not a constellation.


astern (adv.)

1620s, from a- (1) on + stern (n.).


asteroid (n.)

1802, coined probably by German-born English astronomer William Herschel (1738-1822) from Greek
asteroeides star-like, from aster star (see astro-) + -eidos form, shape (see -oid).


asthenia (n.)

weakness, 1802, Modern Latin, from Greek asthenia want of strength, weakness, feebleness, sickness;
a sickness, a disease, from asthenes weak, without strength, feeble, from a-, privative prefix (see
a- (3)), + sthenos strength, of uncertain origin.


asthenic (adj.)

1789, from Modern Latin, from Greek asthenikos, from asthenes weak, without strength, feeble (see
asthenia).


asthenosphere (n.)

layer of the Earth's upper mantle, 1914, from Greek asthenos (see asthenia) + sphere.


asthma (n.)

late 14c. asma, asma, from Latin asthma, from Greek asthma short breath, a panting, from azein
breathe hard, probably related to anemos wind. The -th- was restored in English 16c.


asthmatic (adj.)

1540s, from Latin asthmaticus, from Greek asthmatikos, from asthma (see asthma). Noun meaning person
with asthma is recorded from 1610s.


astigmatic (adj.)

1849; see astigmatism + -ic.


astigmatism (n.)

1849, coined by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English polymath, from Greek a- without (see
a- (3)) + stigmatos genitive of stigma a mark, spot, puncture (see stick (v.)).


astir (adv.)

up and about, 1823, from phrase on the stir, or from Scottish asteer; from stir. Old English had
astyrian, which yielded Middle English ben astired be stirred up, excited, aroused.


astonish (v.)

c.1300, astonien, from Old French estoner to stun, daze, deafen, astound, from Vulgar Latin
*extonare, from Latin ex- out + tonare to thunder (see thunder); so, literally to leave someone
thunderstruck. The modern form (influenced by English verbs in -ish, such as distinguish, diminish)
is attested from c.1530.    No wonder is thogh that she were astoned [Chaucer, Clerk's Tale]
Related: Astonished; astonishing; astonishingly.


astonishment (n.)

1590s; see astonish + -ment. Earlier it meant paralysis (1570s).


astound (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle English astouned, astoned (c.1300), past participle of astonen, astonien to
stun (see astonish), with more of the original sense of Vulgar Latin *extonare. Related: Astounded;
astounding.


astral (adj.)

pertaining to the stars, c.1600, from Late Latin astralis, from Latin astrum star, from Greek astron
(see astro-). Meaning pertaining to supersensible substances is from 1690s, popularized late 19c. in
Theosophy.


astray (adv.)

c.1300, astraied away from home; lost, borrowed and partially nativized from Old French estraie,
past participle of estraier astray, riderless (of a horse), lost, literally on stray (see stray
(v.)).


astriction (n.)

1560s, from Latin astrictionem (nominative astrictio), noun of action from past participle stem of
astringere (see astringent).


Astrid

fem. proper name, from Norse, related to Old High German Ansitruda, from ansi god (see Asgard) +
trut beloved, dear.


astride (adv.)

1660s, from a- (1) on + stride (n.).


astringent (adj.)

1540s, from Latin astringentum (nominative astringens), present participle of astringere to bind
fast, tighten, contract, from ad- to (see ad-) + stringere draw tight (see strain (v.)). As a noun
from 1620s.


astro-

element active in English word formation from mid-18c. and meaning star or celestial body; outer
space, from Greek astro-, stem and comb. form of astron star, related to aster star (see star (n.)).
In ancient Greek, aster typically was a star and astron mostly in plural, the stars. In singular it
mostly meant Sirius (the brightest star).


astrobiology (n.)

1903, from French astrobiologie; see astro- + biology. Related: Astrobiological; astrobiologist.


astrobleme (n.)

1961, from astro- + Greek bleme throw of a missile; wound caused by a missile, from ballein to throw
(see ballistics).


astroid (adj.)

star-shaped, 1897, from Greek astroeides, from astron star (see astro-) + -oeides (see -oid).


astrolabe (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French astrelabe, from Medieval Latin astrolabium, from Greek astrolabos
(organon) star taking (instrument), from astron star (see astro-) + lambanien to take (see
analemma).


astrologer (n.)

late 14c., from astrology + -er (1). Drove out French import astrologein, which, had it survived,
probably would have yielded *astrologian, as in Chaucer's The wise Astrologen. Earliest recorded
reference is to roosters as announcers of sunrise.


astrological (adj.)

1590s; see astrology + -ical. Related: Astrologically.


astrology (n.)

late 14c., from Latin astrologia astronomy, the science of the heavenly bodies, from Greek
astrologia telling of the stars, from astron star (see astro-) + -logia treating of (see -logy).
Originally identical with astronomy, it had also a special sense of practical astronomy, astronomy
applied to prediction of events. This was divided into natural astrology the calculation and
foretelling of natural phenomenon (tides, eclipses, etc.), and judicial astrology the art of judging
occult influences of stars on human affairs (also known as astromancy, 1650s). Differentiation
between astrology and astronomy began late 1400s and by 17c. this word was limited to reading
influences of the stars and their effects on human destiny.


astronaut (n.)

coined 1929 in science fiction, popularized from 1961 by U.S. space program, from astro- + nautes
sailor (see naval). French astronautique (adj.) had been coined 1927 by J.H. Rosny, pen name of
Belgian-born science fiction writer Joseph Henri Honor&eacute; Boex (1856-1940) on model of
a&eacute;ronautique, and Astronaut was used in 1880 as the name of a fictional spaceship by English
writer Percy Greg (1836-1889) in Across the Zodiac.


astronautics (n.)

1929, see astronaut + -ics.


astronomer (n.)

late 14c., from astronomy (q.v.), replacing French import astronomyen (c.1300), which, had it
survived, probably would have yielded *astronomian. Still in Shakespeare used in places where we
would write astrologer.


astronomical (adj.)

1550s, from astronomy + -ical. Popular meaning immense, concerning very large figures (as sizes and
distances in astronomy) is attested from 1899. Astronomical unit (abbreviation A.U.) mean distance
from Earth to Sun, used as a unit of measure of distance in space, is from 1909. Related:
Astronomically.


astronomy (n.)

c.1200, from Old French astrenomie, from Latin astronomia, from Greek astronomia, literally star
arrangement, from astron star (see astro-) + nomos arranging, regulating, related to nemein to deal
out (see numismatic). Used earlier than astrology and originally including it.    &#222;er wes moni
god clarc to lokien in &#254;an leofte, to lokien i &#254;an steorren neh&#658;e and feorren.
&#254;e craft is ihate Astronomie. [Layamon, The Brut, c.1200]


astrophotography (n.)

1858, from astro- + photography.


astrophysicist (n.)

1869, usually hyphenated at first, from astro- + physicist. Astrophysics is recorded from 1877.


Astroturf (n.)

1966, proprietary name for a kind of artificial grass, so called because it was used first in the
Houston, Texas, Astrodome, indoor sports stadium. See astro- + turf. Houston was a center of the
U.S. space program.


astute (adj.)

1610s, from Latin astutus crafty, wary, shrewd; sagacious, expert, from astus cunning, cleverness,
adroitness, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Greek asty town, a word borrowed into Latin and with
an overtone of city sophistication (compare asteism). Related: Astutely; astuteness.


Astyanax

son of Hector and Andromache (Iliad), Greek, literally lord of the city, from asty city (see
asteism) + anax chief, lord, master. Also the epithet of certain gods.


asunder (adv.)

mid-12c., contraction of Old English on sundran (see sunder). Middle English used to know asunder
for distinguish, tell apart.


asylum (n.)

early 15c., earlier asile (late 14c.), from Latin asylum sanctuary, from Greek asylon refuge, noun
use of neuter of asylos inviolable, safe from violence, especially of persons seeking protection,
from a- without + syle right of seizure. So literally an inviolable place. General sense of safe or
secure place is from 1640s; meaning benevolent institution to shelter some class of persons is from
1776.


asymmetrical (adj.)

1680s; see asymmetry + -ical. Other forms that have served as an adjective based on asymmetry are
asymmetral (1620s), asymmetrous (1660s), and asymmetric (1875); only the last seems to have any
currency. Related: Asymmetrically.


asymmetry (n.)

1650s, want of symmetry or proportion, from Greek asymmetria, noun of quality from asymmetros having
no common measure; disproportionate, unsymmetrical, from a- not + symmetros commensurable (see
symmetry).


asymptomatic (adj.)

without symptoms, 1856, from a-, privative prefix, + symptomatic.


asymptote (n.)

straight line continually approaching but never meeting a curve, 1650s, from Greek asymptotos not
falling together, from a- not + syn with + ptotos fallen, verbal adjective from piptein to fall (see
symptom). Related: Asymptotic.


asymptotic (adj.)

1670s, see asymptote + -ic. Related: Asymptotical; asymptotically.


asynchronous (adj.)

1748, from a-, privative prefix, + synchronous.


asyndetic (adj.)

1823; see asyndeton + -ic.


asyndeton (n.)

omission of conjunctions, 1580s, from Latin, from Greek asyndeton, neuter of asyndetos unconnected,
from a-, privative prefix (see a- (3)), + syndetos, from syndein to bind together, from syn-
together (see syn-) + dein to bind, related to desmos band, from PIE *de- to bind.


asystole (n.)

1860, from Modern Latin, from Greek a-, privative prefix (see a- (3)), + systole contraction (see
systole).


at (prep.)

Old English &aelig;t, from Proto-Germanic *at (cognates: Old Norse, Gothic at, Old Frisian et, Old
High German az), from PIE *ad- to, near, at (cognates: Latin ad to, toward Sanskrit adhi near; see
ad-).    Lost in German and Dutch, which use their equivalent of to; in Scandinavian, however, to
has been lost and at fills its place. In choosing between at church, in church, etc. at is properly
distinguished from in or on by involving some practical connection; a worshipper is at church; a
tourist is in the church.    The colloquial use of at after where (where it's at) is attested from
1859. At last is recorded from late 13c.; adverbial phrase at least was in use by 1775. At in Middle
English was used freely with prepositions (as in at after, which is in Shakespeare), but this has
faded with the exception of at about, which was used in modern times by Trollope, Virginia Woolfe,
D.H. Lawrence, and Evelyn Waugh, but nonetheless is regarded as a sign of incompetent writing by my
copy editor bosses.


at all

in any way, mid-14c., originally used only affirmatively (as in I Sam. XX:6 in KJV: If thy father at
all misse me); now it is overwhelmingly used only in the negative or in interrogatory expressions,
or in literary attempts at Irish dialect.


at bay

late 14c., originally often at the bay; see bay (n.3). Figurative use, of human beings in
difficulties, is from c.1400. The expression reflects the former more widespread use of at. Earlier
the expression be at abai was used of the hunted animal, be unable to escape, c.1300, from French.


at-

assimilated form of ad- to, toward, before before stems beginning in -t-; see ad-.


at-bat (n.)

baseball player's turn at the plate, 1912, originally a column heading in statistics tables.


at-home (n.)

reception of visitors, 1745, from phrase at home.


Atalanta

in Greek mythology the daughter of king Schoeneus, famous for her swiftness, Latin, from Greek
Atalante, fem. of atalantos having the same value (as a man), from a- one, together + talanton
balance, weight, value (compare talent).


ataractic (adj.)

1941, from Greek ataraktos not disturbed (see ataraxia) + -ic.


ataraxia (n.)

also Englished as ataraxy, calmness, impassivity, c.1600, from Modern Latin, from Greek ataraxia
impassiveness, from a-, privative prefix, + tarassein (Attic tarattein) to disturb, confuse, from
PIE root *dher- (1) to make muddy, darken.


atavic (adj.)

pertaining to a remote ancestor, 1866, from Latin atavus ancestor (see atavism) + -ic.


atavism (n.)

1833, from French atavisme, attested by 1820s, from Latin atavus ancestor, forefather, from at-
perhaps here meaning beyond + avus grandfather, from PIE *awo- adult male relative other than the
father (see uncle).


atavistic (adj.)

pertaining to atavism, 1847; see atavism + -ic.


ataxia (n.)

also anglicized as ataxy, irregularity of bodily functions, 1610s, confusion, disorder, medical
Latin, from Greek ataxia, from a-, privative prefix, + taxis arrangement, order, from stem of
tassein to arrange (see tactics). Pathological sense is attested from 1660s.


ataxic (adj.)

1853, from ataxia + -ic.


atchoo

imitative of the sound of sneezing, first attested 1873, as atcha (a-tschoo is from 1878).


ate

past tense of eat (q.v.).


Ate

Greek goddess of infatuation and evil, from ate infatuation, bane, ruin, mischief, of uncertain
origin.


atelectasis (n.)

incomplete expansion of the lungs, 1836, medical Latin, from Greek ateles imperfect, incomplete,
literally without an end, (from a-, privative prefix, + telos completion) + ektosis extention.
Related: Atelectatic.


atelier (n.)

1840, from French atelier workshop, from Old French astelier (carpenter's) workshop, woodpile
(14c.), from astele piece of wood, a shaving, splinter, probably from Late Latin hastella a thin
stick, diminutive of hasta spear, shaft (see yard (n.2)).


atemporal (adj.)

1870, from a- not + temporal. Related: Atemporally.


Aten

a name of the sun in ancient Egypt, from Egyptian itn.


Athabascan

1846, Athapaskan, from the name of the North American Indian people, from Lake Athabaska in northern
Alberta, Canada, from Woods Cree (Algonquian) Athapaskaw, said by Webster to mean literally grass or
reeds here and there, referring to the delta region west of the lake. Also in reference to their
language group.


Athanasian (adj.)

1580s, from Athanasius, archbishop of Alexandria in the reign of Constantine. The name is Latin,
from Greek Athanasios, from athanatos immortal, from a- not, privative prefix, + thanatos death (see
thanatology).


atheism (n.)

1580s, from French ath&eacute;isme (16c.), from Greek atheos without god (see atheist). A slightly
earlier form is represented by atheonism (1530s) which is perhaps from Italian atheo atheist.
Ancient Greek atheotes meant ungodliness.


atheist (n.)

1570s, from French ath&eacute;iste (16c.), from Greek atheos without god, denying the gods;
abandoned of the gods; godless, ungodly, from a- without + theos a god (see theo-).  The existence
of a world without God seems to me less absurd than the presence of a God, existing in all his
perfection, creating an imperfect man in order to make him run the risk of Hell. [Armand Salacrou,
Certitudes et incertitudes, 1943]


atheistic (adj.)

1630s, from atheist + -ic. Atheistical attested from c.1600.


atheling (n.)

member of a noble family, Old English &aelig;&eth;ling, from &aelig;&eth;el noble family, related to
Old English &aelig;&eth;ele noble, from Proto-Germanic *athala-, from PIE *at-al- race, family, from
*at(i)- over, beyond, super + *al- to nourish. With suffix -ing belonging to. A common Germanic word
(cognates: Old Saxon ediling, Old Frisian etheling, Old High German adaling).


Athelstan

masc. proper name, Old English &AElig;&eth;elstane, literally noble stone; see atheling + stone
(n.).


Athena

Greek goddess of  wisdom, skill in the arts, warfare, etc., from Latin Athena, from Greek Athene,
perhaps from a name in a lost pre-Hellenic language.


Athenaeum (n.)

1727, from Latinized form of Greek Athenaion the temple of Athene, in ancient Athens, in which
professors taught and actors or poets rehearsed. Meaning literary club-room or reading room is from
1799; literary or scientific club is from 1864.


Athenian (n.)

Old English Atheniense (plural noun), from Latin Atheniensis, from Athenae (see Athens).


Athens

city of ancient Attica, capital of modern Greece, from Greek Athenai (plural because the city had
several distinct parts), traditionally derived from Athena, but probably assimilated from a lost
name in a pre-Hellenic language.


atheroma (n.)

encysted tumor, 1706, medical Latin, from Greek atheroma, from athere groats, porridge (related to
ather chaff), in reference to what is inside. For ending, see -oma.


atherosclerosis (n.)

1908, from atherosklerose, coined in German 1904; see atheroma + sclerosis.


athetosis (n.)

1871, from Greek athetos not fixed, without position or place, set aside + -osis. Coined by U.S.
nerve specialist William Alexander Hammond (1828-1900).


athlete (n.)

early 15c., from Latin athleta a wrestler, athlete, combatant in public games, from Greek athletes
prizefighter, contestant in the games, agent noun from athlein to contest for a prize, related to
athlos a contest and athlon a prize, of unknown origin. Before 1750, usually in Latin form. In this
sense, Old English had plegmann play-man. Athlete's foot first recorded 1928, for an ailment that
has been around much longer.


athletic (adj.)

1630s (athletical is from 1590s), pertaining to an athlete, from Latin athleticus, from Greek
athletikos, from athletes (see athlete). Meaning strong of body; vigorous; lusty; robust [Johnson,
who spells it athletick] is from 1650s.


athleticism (n.)

1835, from athletic + -ism.


athletics (n.)

c.1730, from athletic; also see -ics. Probably formed on model of gymnastics.


athrob (adj.)

1857, from a- (1) + throb. Related: Athrobbing.


athwart (adv.)

late 15c., from a- (1) + thwart.


atilt (adv.)

1560s, from a- (1) + tilt (n.).


Atlantic

late 14c., occean of Athlant sea off the west coast of Africa (early 15c. as occean Atlantyke), from
Latin Atlanticus, from Greek Atlantikos of Atlas, adjectival form of Atlas (genitive Atlantos), in
reference to Mount Atlas in Mauritania (see Atlas). Applied to the whole ocean since c.1600.


Atlantis

mythical island-nation, from Greek Atlantis, literally daughter of Atlas. All references trace to
Plato's dialogues Timaeus and Critias, both written c.360 B.C.E.


Atlas

1580s, Titan, son of Iapetus and Clymene, supposed to uphold the pillars of heaven, which was his
punishment for being the war leader of the Titans in the struggle with the Olympian gods. The name
in Greek perhaps means The Bearer (of the Heavens), from a-, copulative prefix, + stem of tlenai to
bear, from PIE root *tele- to lift, support, weigh. Mount Atlas, in Mauritania, was important in
Greek cosmology as a support of the heavens.


atlas (n.)

collection of maps in a volume, 1636, first in reference to the English translation of Atlas, sive
cosmographicae meditationes de fabrica mundi (1585) by Flemish geographer Gerhardus Mercator
(1512-1594), who might have been the first to use this word in this way. A picture of the Titan
Atlas holding up the world appeared on the frontispiece of this and other early map collections.


atlatl (n.)

Native American throwing stick, 1871, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) atlatl spear-thrower.


ATM

1976, acronym for automated teller machine (1974), which was developed in modern form c.1968.


atman (n.)

1785, from Sanskrit atma essence, breath, soul, from PIE *etmen breath (a root found in Sanskrit and
Germanic; cognates: Old English &aelig;&eth;m, Dutch adem, Old High German atum breath, Old English
e&thorn;ian, Dutch ademen to breathe).


atmosphere (n.)

1630s, atmosphaera (modern form from 1670s), from Modern Latin atmosphaera, from atmo-, comb. form
of Greek atmos vapor, steam + spharia sphere (see sphere). Greek atmos is from PIE *awet-mo-, from
root *wet- (1) to blow (also to inspire, spiritually arouse; see wood (adj.)). First used in English
in connection with the Moon, which, as it turns out, practically doesn't have one.  It is observed
in the solary eclipses, that there is sometimes a great trepidation about the body of the moon, from
which we may likewise argue an atmosphaera, since we cannot well conceive what so probable a cause
there should be of such an appearance as this, Quod radii solares a vaporibus lunam ambitntibus
fuerint intercisi, that the sun-beams were broken and refracted by the vapours that encompassed the
moon. [Rev. John Wilkins, Discovery of New World or Discourse tending to prove that it probable
there may be another World in the Moon,  1638]     Figurative sense of surrounding influence, mental
or moral environment is c.1800.


atmospheric (adj.)

1783, from atmosphere + -ic. In a sense of creating a mood or mental environment it is from 1908.
Atmospherics disturbances in wireless communication is from 1905.


atoll (n.)

1620s, atollon, from Malayam atolu reef, probably from adal closing, uniting. Popularized in present
form by Darwin's writings.


atom (n.)

late 15c., as a hypothetical indivisible body, the building block of the universe, from Latin atomus
(especially in Lucretius) indivisible particle, from Greek atomos uncut, unhewn; indivisible, from
a- not + tomos a cutting, from temnein to cut (see tome). An ancient term of philosophical
speculation (in Leucippus, Democritus), revived 1805 by British chemist John Dalton. In late
classical and medieval use also a unit of time, 22,560 to the hour. Atom bomb is from 1945 as both a
noun and a verb; compare atomic.


atomic (adj.)

1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic.
Atomic number is from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy first recorded 1906 in modern
sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903).    March, 1903, was an historic date for chemistry. It is,
also, as we shall show, a date to which, in all probability, the men of the future will often refer
as the veritable beginning of the larger powers and energies that they will control. It was in
March, 1903, that Curie and Laborde announced the heat-emitting power of radium. [Robert Kennedy
Duncan, The New Knowledge, 1906]    Atomic bomb first recorded 1914 in writings of H.G. Wells, who
thought of it as a bomb that would continue to explode indefinitely.  When you can drop just one
atomic bomb and wipe out Paris or Berlin, war will have become monstrous and impossible. [S.
Strunsky, Yale Review, January 1917] Atomic Age is from 1945. Atomical is from 1640s.


atomies (n.)

1590s, atoms, also diminutive beings, from atomy, from Latin atomi, plural of atomus (see atom), but
taken as a singular in English and re-pluralized in the native way. Perhaps also in some cases a
plural of atomy (from misdivision of anatomy).


atomistic (adj.)

1809, in reference to the classical philosophical doctrine of atomism (1670s); modern philosophical
sense (logical atomism) traces to 1914 and Bertrand Russell.


atomization (n.)

1866, noun of action from atomize.


atomize (v.)

reduce to atoms, 1845; reduce a liquid to a very fine mist, 1865, verb formed from atom + -ize.
Related: Atomized; atomizing. Originally in reference to medical treatment for injured or diseased
lungs; sense of to destroy with atomic weapons is from 1945.


atomizer (n.)

1865, agent noun from atomize.


Aton

variant of Aten.


atonal (adj.)

1922, from a- not (see a- (2)) + tonal.


atonality (n.)

1950; see atonal + -ity.


atone (v.)

1550s, from adverbial phrase atonen (c.1300) in accord, literally at one, a contraction of at and
one. It retains the older pronunciation of one. The phrase perhaps is modeled on Latin adunare
unite, from ad- to, at (see ad-) + unum one. Related: Atoned; atoning.


atonement (n.)

1510s, condition of being at one (with others), from atone + -ment. Meaning reconciliation
(especially of sinners with God) is from 1520s; that of propitiation of an offended party is from
1610s.


atop (adv.)

1650s, from a- (1) + top. Two words or hyphenated at first; not fully established as one word till
late 19c.


atopic (adj.)

1923, from atopia (see atopy) + -ic.


atopy (n.)

1923, coined by Edward D. Perry, professor of Greek at Columbia University, at the request of
medical men, from Greek atopia unusualness, strangeness, a being out of the way, from atopos out of
place, strange, odd, eccentric, from a-, privative prefix (see a- (3)), + topos place (see topos).


ATP

abbreviation of adenosine triphosphate, attested from 1939.


atrabiliary (adj.)

1725, from Medieval Latin atrabilarius; see atrabilious.


atrabilious (adj.)

1650s, from Latin atra bilis, translating Greek melankholia black bile (see melancholy; also compare
bile). Atra is fem. of ater black, dark, gloomy, perhaps related to root of atrocity. Related:
Atrabiliousness.


atremble (adv.)

1852, from a- (1) + tremble (v.).


atresia (n.)

occlusion of a natural passage in the body, 1807, from Modern Latin atresia, from Greek atretos not
perforated, from a-, privative prefix, + tresis perforation, from PIE *tere- (1) to rub, turn, with
derivatives referring to boring and drilling (see throw (v.)).


Atreus

son of Pelops, father of Agamemnon and Menelaeus.


atria (n.)

classical plural of atrium.


atrial (adj.)

by 1860 in the medical sense, from atrium + -al (1).


atrium (n.)

1570s, from Latin atrium central court or main room of an ancient Roman house, room which contains
the hearth, sometimes said (on authority of Varro, De Lingua Latina) to be an Etruscan word, but
perhaps from PIE *ater- fire, on notion of place where smoke from the hearth escapes (through a hole
in the roof). Anatomical sense of either of the upper cavities of the heart first recorded 1870.
Meaning skylit central court in a public building first attested 1967.


atrocious (adj.)

1660s, from stem of Latin atrox fierce, savage, cruel (see atrocity) + -ous. Colloquial sense very
bad is late 19c. Related: Atrociously; atrociousness.


atrocity (n.)

1530s, from Middle French atrocit&eacute; or directly from Latin atrocitatem (nominative atrocitas)
cruelty, fierceness, harshness, noun of quality from atrox fierce, cruel, frightful, from PIE *atro-
ek-, from root *ater- fire (see atrium) + *okw- see (see eye (n.)); thus of fiery or threatening
appearance. The meaning an atrocious deed is from 1793.


atrophic (adj.)

1819; see atrophy + -ic.


atrophy (n.)

a wasting away through lack of nourishment, 1620s (atrophied is from 1590s), from French atrophie,
from Late Latin atrophia, from Greek atrophia a wasting away, noun of state from atrophos ill-fed,
un-nourished, from a- not + trophe nourishment, from trephein to fatten (see -trophy).


atrophy (v.)

1822 (implied in atrophied), from atrophy (n.). Related: Atrophying.


atropine (n.)

1836, from Latin atropa deadly nightshade (from which the alkaloid poison is extracted), from Greek
atropos inflexible, also the name of one of the Fates (see Atropos) + chemical suffix -ine (2).


Atropos

one of the Fates (the one who holds the shears and determines the manner of a person's death and
cuts the thread), from Greek, inflexible, literally not to be turned away, from a- not (see a- (3))
+ stem of trepein to turn (see trope). Related form Atropa was the Greek name for deadly nightshade.


attaboy

1909, probably from common pronunciation of that's the boy! a cheer of encouragement or approval.


attach (v.)

mid-14c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), to take or seize (property or goods) by law, a legal term, from
Old French atachier (11c.), earlier estachier to attach, fix; stake up, support (Modern French
attacher, also compare Italian attaccare), perhaps from a- to + Frankish *stakon a post, stake or a
similar Germanic word (see stake (n.)). Meaning to fasten, affix, connect is from c.1400. Related:
Attached; attaching.


attachable (adj.)

1570s, from attach + -able.


attache (n.)

1835, from French attach&eacute; junior officer attached to the staff of an ambassador, etc.,
literally attached, past participle of attacher to attach (see attach). Attache case small leather
case for carrying papers first recorded 1900.


attached (adj.)

affectionate, devoted, fond, 1793, past participle adjective from attach.


attachment (n.)

c.1400, arrest of a person on judicial warrant (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from French attachement,
from attacher (see attach). Application to property (including, later, wages) dates from 1590s;
meaning sympathy, devotion is recorded from 1704; that of something that is attached to something
else dates from 1797 and has become perhaps the most common use since the rise of e-mail.


attack (v.)

c.1600, from French attaquer (16c.), from Florentine Italian attaccare (battaglia) join (battle),
thus the word is a doublet of attach, which was used 15c.-17c. also in the sense now reserved to
attack. Related: Attacked; attacking.


attack (n.)

1660s, from attack (v.). Compare Middle English attach a seizure or attack (of fever), late 14c.


attain (v.)

c.1300, to succeed in reaching, from stem of Old French ataindre (11c., Modern French atteindre) to
come up to, reach, attain, endeavor, strive, from Vulgar Latin *adtangere, from Latin attingere to
touch, to arrive at, from ad- to (see ad-) + tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)). Latin attingere
had a wide range of meanings, including to attack, to strike, to appropriate, to manage, all somehow
suggested by the literal sense to touch. Related: Attained; attaining.


attainable (adj.)

1640s; see attain + -able. Related: Attainability.


attainder (n.)

extinction of rights of a person sentenced to death or outlaw, mid-15c., from noun use of Old French
ataindre to touch upon, strike, hit, seize, accuse, condemn (see attain). For use of French
infinitives as nouns, especially in legal language, see waiver.


attainment (n.)

late 14c., encroachment (a sense now obsolete), from Old French ataignement (Modern French
atteignement), from ataindre; see attain. Meaning action of attaining is from 1540s; sense of that
which is attained, personal accomplishment dates from 1670s.


attar (n.)

1798, from Persian 'atar-gul essence of roses, from 'atar fragrance, from Arabic 'utur perfumes,
aromas.


attemper (v.)

late 14c., from Old French attemprer, from Latin attemperare, from ad- to (see ad-) + temperare (see
temper (v.)). Related: Attempered; attempering.


attempt (v.)

late 14c., from Old French attempter (14c.), earlier atenter to try, attempt, test, from Latin
attemptare to try (cognates: Italian attentare, Old Proven&ccedil;al, Portuguese attentar, Spanish
atentar), from ad- to, upon (see ad-) + temptare to try (see tempt). Related: Attempted; attempting.


attempt (n.)

1530s, from attempt (v.). Meaning effort to accomplish something by violence is from 1580s,
especially as an assault on someone's life.


attend (v.)

c.1300, to direct one's mind or energies, from Old French atendre (12c., Modern French attendre) to
expect, wait for, pay attention, and directly from Latin attendere give heed to, literally to
stretch toward, from ad- to (see ad-) + tendere stretch (see tenet). The notion is of stretching
one's mind toward something. Sense of take care of, wait upon is from early 14c. Meaning to pay
attention is early 15c.; that of to be in attendance is mid-15c. Related: Attended; attending.


attendance (n.)

late 14c., act of attending to one's duties, from Old French atendance attention, wait, hope,
expectation, from atendant, present participle of atendre (see attend). Meaning action of waiting on
someone dates from late 14c. (to dance attendance on someone is from 1560s); that of action of being
present, presenting oneself (originally with intent of taking a part) is from mid-15c. Meaning
number of persons present is from 1835.


attendant (n.)

1550s, one who waits upon, from the adjective, or from Middle French atendant, noun use of present
participle of atendre (see attend).


attendant (adj.)

late 14c., solicitous, attentive, see attendant (n.). Sense of serving under, accompanying in a
dependant position is from c.1400.


attendee (n.)

one who attends (something), 1961, from attend + -ee. Attender is older (mid-15c.) but had senses
one who waits upon and one who gives heed.


attent (adj.)

late 15c., attentive, from Latin attentus, past participle of  attendere (see attend). As a noun,
intention, aim (early 13c.), from Old French atente act of attending, from fem. of Latin attentus.


attention (n.)

late 14c., giving heed, from Latin attentionem (nominative attentio) attention, attentiveness, noun
of action from past participle stem of attendere mental heeding (see attend). Used with a remarkable
diversity of verbs (such as pay, gather, attract, draw, call). As a military cautionary word
preparative to giving a command, it is attested from 1792. Attention span is from 1903 (earlier span
of attention, 1892).


attention deficit disorder (n.)

(abbreviated ADD) became a diagnosis in the third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (1980); expanded to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (the co-existence
of attentional problems and hyperactivity, with each behavior occurring infrequently alone; ADHD) in
DSM-III (1987).


attentive (adj.)

late 14c. (implied in attentively), from Old French attentif, from Vulgar Latin *attenditus, from
Latin attentus heedful, observant (see attend). Sense of actively ministering to the needs and wants
(of another person) is from early 16c. Related: Attentively.


attentiveness (n.)

mid-15c., from attentive + -ness.


attenuate (v.)

to make thin, to make less, 1520s, from Latin attenuatus enfeebled, weak, past participle of
attenuare to make thin, lessen, diminish, from ad- to (see ad-) + tenuare make thin, from tenuis
thin (see tenet). Related: Attenuated; attenuating. Earlier was Middle English attenuen to make thin
(in consistency), early 15c.


attenuation (n.)

early 15c., of persons, emaciation; of diet, reduction, from Latin attenuationem (nominative
attenuatio) a lessening, noun of action from past participle stem of attenuare (see attenuate).


attercop (n.)

spider, Old English attorcoppe, literally poison-head, from ator poison, venom, from Proto-Germanic
*aitra- poisonous ulcer (cognates: Old Norse eitr, Old High German eitar poison; German eiter pus,
Old High German eiz abscess, boil; Old English atorcr&aelig;ft art of poisoning) + copp top, summit,
round head, probably also spider (compare cobweb and Dutch spinne-cop spider).    Amptes &amp;
attircoppes &amp; suche o&thorn;er &thorn;at ben euere bisy ben maide to schewe man ensaumple of
stodye &amp; labour. [Elucidarium of Honorius of Autun (Wycliffite version) c.1400]


attest (v.)

1590s, from Middle French attester (Old French atester, 13c.) affirm, attest, from Latin attestari
confirm, literally bear witness to, from ad- to (see ad-) + testari bear witness, from testis
witness (see testament). Related: Attested; attesting.


attestation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French attestation and directly from Latin attestationem (nominative
attestatio) an attesting, testimony, noun of action from past participle stem of attestari to prove,
confirm (see attest).


Attic (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to Attica, from Latin Atticus, from Greek Attikos Athenian, of Attica, the region
around Athens (see Attica). Attested from 1560s as an architectural term for a type of column base.


attic (n.)

top story under the roof of a house, 1855, shortened from attic storey (1724). The term Attic order
in classical architecture meant a small, square decorative column of the type often used in a low
story above a building's main facade, a feature associated with the region around Athens (see
Attic). The word then was applied by architects to a low decorative facade above the main story of a
building (1690s in English) to convey a classical heritage where none exists, and it came to mean
the space enclosed by such a structure. The modern use is via French attique. An attic is upright, a
garret is in a sloping roof [Weekley].


Attica

traditionally explained as from Greek Attikos (Latin Atticus) of Athens (see Athens); but perhaps
ultimately from Greek akte shore, maritime place, also raised place.


attire (v.)

c.1300, to fit out, equip; to dress in finery, to adorn, from Old French atirier to equip, ready,
prepare, from a- to + tire order, row, dress (see tier). Related: Attired; attiring.


attire (n.)

c.1300, equipment of a man-at-arms; fine apparel, from attire (v.).


attitude (n.)

1660s, via French attitude (17c.), from Italian attitudine disposition, posture, also aptness,
promptitude, from Late Latin aptitudinem (nominative aptitudo; see aptitude). Originally 17c. a
technical term in art for the posture of a figure in a statue or painting; later generalized to a
posture of the body supposed to imply some mental state (1725). Sense of settled behavior reflecting
feeling or opinion is first recorded 1837. Connotations of antagonistic and uncooperative developed
by 1962 in slang.


attitudinal (adj.)

1831, from Italian attitudine (see attitude) + -al (1).


attitudinize (v.)

1784, from attitudinal + -ize. Related: Attitudinized; attitudinizing.


atto-

word-forming element meaning one quintillionth, 1962, from Danish atten eighteen (a quintillion is
10 to the 18th power), related to Old English eahtatene (see eighteen).


attorn (v.)

late 13c., Anglo-French, to turn over to another, from Old French atorner to turn, turn to, assign,
attribute, dispose, from a- to (see ad-) + tourner to turn (see turn (v.)). In feudal law, to
transfer homage or allegiance to another lord.


attorney (n.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French atorn&eacute; (one) appointed, past participle
of aturner to decree, assign, appoint, from atorner (see attorn). The legal Latin form attornare
influenced the spelling in Anglo-French. The sense is of one appointed to represent another's
interests.    In English law, a private attorney was one appointed to act for another in business or
legal affairs (usually for pay); an attorney at law or public attorney was a qualified legal agent
in the courts of Common Law who prepared the cases for a barrister, who pleaded them (the equivalent
of a solicitor in Chancery). So much a term of contempt in England that it was abolished by the
Judicature Act of 1873 and merged with solicitor.Johnson observed that he did not care to speak ill
of any man behind his back, but he believed the gentleman was an attorney. [Boswell]The double -t-
is a mistaken 15c. attempt to restore a non-existent Latin original. Attorney general first recorded
1530s in sense of legal officer of the state (late 13c. in Anglo-French), from French, hence the odd
plural (subject first, adjective second).


attract (v.)

early 15c., from Latin attractus, past participle of attrahere to draw, pull; to attract, from ad-
to (see ad-) + trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Originally a medical term for the body's tendency
to absorb fluids, nourishment, etc., or for a poultice treatment to draw out diseased matter
(1560s). Of the ability of people or animals to draw others to them, it is attested from 1560s; of
physical forces (magnetism, etc.), from c.1600 (implied in attraction). Related: Attracted;
attracting.


attraction (n.)

late 14c., from French attraction, from Latin attractionem (nominative attractio) a drawing
together, noun of action from past participle stem of attrahere (see attract). Originally a medical
word, absorption by the body; meaning action of drawing to is from 1540s (again medical); extended
to magnetic, then figuratively to personal (c.1600) qualities. Meaning a thing which draws a crowd,
interesting or amusing exhibition is from 1829, a sense that developed in English and soon
transferred to the French equivalent of the word.


attractive (adj.)

late 14c., absorptive, from Middle French attractif (14c.), from attract-, past participle stem of
attrahere (see attract). Meaning having the quality of drawing people's eye or interest is from
1580s; sense of pleasing, alluring is from c.1600. Related: Attractively; attractiveness.


attrahent (n.)

that which attracts, 1660s, from Latin attrahentem (nominative attrahens), present participle of
attrahere (see attract).


attributable (adj.)

1660s, from attribute (v.) + -able.


attribute (v.)

late 14c., assign, bestow, from Latin attributus, past participle of attribuere assign to, add,
bestow; figuratively to attribute, ascribe, impute, from ad- to + tribuere assign, give, bestow (see
tribute). Related: Attributed; attributing.


attribute (n.)

quality ascribed to someone, late 14c., from Latin attributum anything attributed, noun use of
neuter of attributus (see attribute (v.)). Distinguished from the verb by pronunciation.


attributes (n.)

qualities belonging to someone or something, c.1600; see attribute (n.).


attribution (n.)

late 15c., action of bestowing or assigning, from Middle French attribution (14c.), from Latin
attributionem (nominative attributio) an assignment, attribution, noun of action from past
participle stem of attribuere (see attribute). Meaning thing attributed is recorded from 1580s.


attributive (adj.)

c.1600, from French attributif, from stem of Latin attributus (see attribute (v.)). As a noun, in
grammar, from 1750. Related: Attributively; attributiveness.


attrit (v.)

1956, U.S. Air Force back-formation from attrition which attained currency during the Vietnam War.
(A 17c. attempt at a verb produced attrite). Related: Attrited; attriting.


attrite (adj.)

worn down, 1620s, from Latin attritus, past participle of atterere (see attrition).


attrition (n.)

1540s, abrasion, a scraping, from Latin attritionem (nominative attritio), literally a rubbing
against, noun of action from past participle stem of atterere to wear, rub away, figuratively to
destroy, waste, from ad- to (see ad-) + terere to rub (see throw (v.)). The earliest sense in
English is from Scholastic theology (late 14c.), sorrow for sin merely out of fear of punishment, a
minor irritation, and thus less than contrition. The sense of wearing down of military strength is a
World War I coinage (1914). Figurative use by 1930.


attune (v.)

1590s, from tune (v.), probably suggested by ATONE [OED]. Related: Attuned; attuning.


attunement (n.)

a bringing into harmony, 1820, from attune + -ment.


ATV (n.)

acronym of all-terrain vehicle, 1969.


atween (adv.)

c.1400, from a- (1) + tween.


atwitter (adv.)

1833, from a- (1) + twitter.


atypical (adj.)

1847, from a- (2) not + typical. Related: Atypically.


Au

chemical symbol for gold, from Latin aurum gold (see aureate).


au

French, at the, to the, from Old French al, contraction of a le, with -l- softened to -u-, as also
poudre from pulverem, chaud from calidus, etc. Used in many expressions in cookery, etc., which have
crossed the Channel since 18c., such as au contraire, literally on the contrary; au gratin,
literally with scrapings; au jus, literally with the juice.


au courant (adj.)

aware of current events, 1762, French, literally with the current (see current (n.)).


au fait (adj.)

1743, French, to the point, to the matter under discussion, literally to the fact, from fait fact
(see feat). Used in French with sense of acquainted with the facts.


au naturel (adj.)

1817, French, literally in the natural state; originally meaning uncooked, but used euphemistically
for undressed. See natural (adj.).


au pair (n.)

1897 of the arrangement, 1960 of the girl; French, literally on an equal footing (see pair (n.)).


au revoir

1690s, French, literally to the seeing again. From revoir (12c.), from Latin revidere.


aubade (n.)

musical announcement of dawn, from French aubade (15c.), from Proven&ccedil;al aubada, from auba
dawn, from Latin alba, fem. of albus white (see alb).


aubain (n.)

1727, from French aubaine (12c.), of unknown origin, perhaps from Medieval Latin Albanus, but the
sense is obscure. Klein suggests Frankish *alibanus, literally belonging to another ban. A right of
French kings, whereby they claimed the property of every non-naturalized stranger who died in their
realm. Abolished 1819.


aubergine (n.)

eggplant, 1794, from French aubergine, fruit of the eggplant (Solanum esculentum), diminutive of
auberge a kind of peach, variant of alberge, from Spanish alberchigo apricot [OED]. Klein derives
the French word from Catalan alberginera, from Arabic al-badinjan the eggplant, from Persian badin-
gan, from Sanskrit vatigagama. As a color like that of the eggplant fruit, it is attested from 1895.


Aubrey

masc. personal name, from Old French Auberi, from Old High German Alberich ruler of elves, or
*Alb(e)rada elf-counsel (fem.). In U.S., it began to be used as a girl's name c.1973 and was among
the top 100 given names for girls born 2006-2008, eclipsing its use for boys, which faded in
proportion.


auburn (n.)

early 15c., from Old French auborne, from Medieval Latin alburnus off-white, whitish, from Latin
albus white (see alb). It came to English meaning yellowish-white, flaxen, but shifted 16c. to
reddish-brown under influence of Middle English brun brown, which also changed the spelling.


auction (n.)

a sale by increase of bids, 1590s, from Latin auctionem (nominative auctio) an increasing sale,
auction, public sale, noun of action from past participle stem of augere to increase, from PIE root
*aug- to increase (see augment). In northern England and Scotland, called a roup. In the U.S.,
something is sold at auction; in England, by auction.


auction (v.)

1807, from auction (n.). Related: Auctioned; auctioning.


auctioneer

1708 as a noun; 1733 as a verb; see auction + -eer.


audacious (adj.)

1540s, confident, intrepid, from Middle French audacieux, from audace boldness, from Latin audacia
daring, boldness, courage, from audax brave, bold, daring, but more often bold in a bad sense,
audacious, rash, foolhardy, from audere to dare, be bold. Bad sense of shameless is attested from
1590s in English. Related: Audaciously.


audacity (n.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin audacitas boldness, from Latin audacis genitive of audax (see
audacious).


audible (adj.)

1520s, from Middle French audible and directly from Late Latin audibilis, from Latin audire to hear,
from PIE *awis-dh-yo-, from root *au- to perceive (see audience). Related: Audibly.


audience (n.)

late 14c., the action of hearing, from Old French audience, from Latin audentia a hearing,
listening, from audientum (nominative audiens), present participle of audire to hear, from PIE
compound *au-dh- to perceive physically, grasp, from root *au- to perceive (cognates: Greek
aisthanesthai to feel; Sanskrit avih, Avestan avish openly, evidently; Old Church Slavonic javiti to
reveal). Meaning formal hearing or reception is from late 14c.; that of persons within hearing
range, assembly of listeners is from early 15c. (French audience retains only the older senses).
Sense transferred 1855 to readers of a book. Audience-participation (adj.) first recorded 1940.


audio (n.)

sound, especially recorded or transmitted, 1934, abstracted from prefix audio- (in audio-frequency,
1919, etc.), from Latin audire hear (see audience).


audio-

word-forming element meaning sound, hearing, from comb. form of Latin audire hear, (see audience);
first used in English as a word-formation element 1913.


audiology (n.)

science of hearing and treatment of deafness, 1946, from audio- + -ology. Related: Audiologist.


audiophile (n.)

1951, originally in High Fidelity magazine, from audio- + -phile.


audiotape (n.)

1957, from audio- + tape (n.).


audiovisual (adj.)

also audio-visual, 1937, from audio- + visual.


audit (n.)

early 15c., from Latin auditus a hearing, past participle of audire hear (see audience). Official
examination of accounts, which originally was an oral procedure.


audit (v.)

mid-15c., from audit (n.). Related: Audited; auditing.


audition (v.)

to try out for a performance part, 1935, from audition (n.). Transitive sense by 1944. Related:
Auditioned; auditioning.


audition (n.)

1590s, power of hearing, from Middle French audicion hearing (in a court of law), from Latin
auditionem (nominative auditio) a hearing, listening to, noun of action from past participle stem of
audire hear (see audience). Meaning trial for a performer first recorded 1881.


auditor (n.)

early 14c., official who receives and examines accounts; late 14c., a listener, from Anglo-French
auditour (Old French oieor listener, court clerk, 13c.; Modern French auditeur), from Latin auditor
a hearer, from auditus, past participle of audire to hear (see audience). Meaning receiver and
examiner of accounts is because this process formerly was done, and vouched for, orally.


auditorium (n.)

1727, from Latin auditorium lecture room, literally place where something is heard, neuter of
auditorius (adj.) of or for hearing, from auditus, past participle of audire to hear (see audience);
also see -ory. Earlier in the same sense was auditory (late 14c.).


auditory (adj.)

1570s, from Latin auditorius pertaining to hearing, from auditor hearer (see auditor).


Audrey

fem. proper name, contracted from Etheldreda, a Latinized form of Old English
&AElig;&eth;el&eth;ry&eth;, literally noble might, from &aelig;&eth;ele noble (see atheling) +
&eth;ry&eth; strength, might.


Audubon

with reference to birds or pictures of them, from U.S. naturalist John James Audubon (1785-1851).


Aufklarung (n.)

1801, from German Aufkl&auml;rung (18c.), literally Enlightenment, from aufkl&auml;ren to enlighten
(17c.), from auf up + kl&auml;ren to clear, from Latin clarus (see clear (adj.)).


Augean (adj.)

filthy, 1590s, in reference to Augean stable, the cleansing of which was one of the labors of
Herakles, from Greek Augeias, like the stable of Augeas, king of Elis, which contained 3,000 oxen
and had gone uncleansed for 30 years. Herakles purified it in one day by turning the river Alpheus
through it.


auger (n.)

c.1500, faulty separation of Middle English a nauger, from Old English nafogar nave drill, from
Proto-Germanic *nabo-gaizaz (cognates: Old Norse nafarr, Old Saxon nabuger, Old High German
nabuger), a compound whose first element is related to nave (n.2) and whose second is identical to
Old English gar a spear, borer (see gar). For similar misdivisions, see adder. The same change took
place in Dutch (avegaar).


aught (n.1)

something, Old English awiht aught, anything, something, literally e'er a whit, from Proto-Germanic
*aiwi ever (from PIE *aiw- vital force, life, long life, eternity; see eon) + *wihti thing, anything
whatever (see wight). In Shakespeare, Milton and Pope, aught and ought occur indiscriminately.


aught (n.2)

nothing, zero, faulty separation of a naught (see naught; see adder for the separation problem).


augment (v.)

c.1400, from Old French augmenter increase, enhance (14c.), from Late Latin augmentare to increase,
from Latin augmentum an increase, from augere to increase, make big, enlarge, enrich, from PIE root
*aug- to increase (cognates: Sanskrit ojas- strength; Lithuanian augu to grow, aukstas high, of
superior rank; Greek auxo increase, auxein to increase; Gothic aukan to grow, increase; Old English
eacien to increase). Related: Augmented; augmenting. As a noun from early 15c.


augmentation (n.)

mid-15c., act of making greater, from Old French augmentacion increase, from Late Latin
augmentationem (nominative augmentatio), noun of action from past participle stem of augmentare (see
augment). Meaning amount by which something is increased is from 1520s. Musical sense is from 1590s.


augmentative (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle French augmentatif (14c.), from Latin augmentat-, stem of augmentare (see
augment).


augmented (adj.)

past participle adjective from augment, c.1600. Musical sense is attested from 1825.


augur (n.)

1540s, from Latin augur, a religious official in ancient Rome who foretold events by interpreting
omens, perhaps originally meaning an increase in crops enacted in ritual, in which case it probably
is from Old Latin *augos (genitive *augeris) increase, and is related to augere increase (see
augment). The more popular theory is that it is from Latin avis bird, because the flights, singing,
and feeding of birds, along with entrails from bird sacrifices, were important objects of divination
(compare auspicious). In that case, the second element would be from garrire to talk.


augur (v.)

c.1600, from augur (n.). Related: Augured; auguring.


augury (n.)

late 14c., divination from the flight of birds, from Old French augure divination, soothsaying,
sorcery, enchantment, or directly from Latin augurium divination, the observation and interpretation
of omens (see augur). Figurative sense of omen, portent, indication is from 1797 (also often in
plural as auguries).


august (adj.)

1660s, from Latin augustus venerable, majestic, magnificent, noble, probably originally consecrated
by the augurs, with favorable auguries (see augur (n.)); or else that which is increased (see
augment).


August

eighth month, 1097, from Latin Augustus (mensis), sixth month of the later Roman calendar, renamed
from Sextilis in 8 B.C.E. to honor emperor Augustus Caesar, literally Venerable Caesar (see august
(adj.)). In England, the name replaced native Weodmona&eth; weed month.


Augusta

fem. proper name, Latin fem. of Augustus.


Augustan (adj.)

1640s, from Latin Augustanus, pertaining to Augustus (Caesar), whose reign was connected with the
palmy period of Latin literature [OED]; hence, period of purity and refinement in any national
literature (1712).


Augustine (adj.)

c.1400 in reference to members of the religious order named for St. Augustine the Great (354-430),
bishop of Hippo.


Augustus

masc. proper name, from Latin augustus venerable (see august). The name originally was a cognomen
applied to Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus as emperor, with a sense something like his majesty.


auk (n.)

1670s, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse alka, probably originally imitative of a water-
bird cry (compare Latin olor swan, Greek elea marsh bird).


auld (adj.)

variant of old that more accurately preserves the Anglo-Saxon vowel. Surviving in northern English
and Scottish; distinctly Scottish after late 14c.


aunt (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French aunte, Old French ante (Modern French tante, from a 13c. variant), from
Latin amita paternal aunt diminutive of *amma a baby-talk word for mother (cognates: Greek amma
mother, Old Norse amma grandmother, Middle Irish ammait old hag, Hebrew em, Arabic umm mother).
Extended senses include an old woman, a gossip (1580s); a procuress (1670s); and any benevolent
woman, in American English, where auntie was recorded since c.1790 as a term often used in accosting
elderly women. The French word also has become the word for aunt in Dutch, German (Tante), and
Danish. Swedish has retained the original Germanic (and Indo-European) custom of distinguishing
aunts by separate terms derived from father's sister (faster) and mother's sister (moster). The Old
English equivalents were fa&eth;u and modrige. In Latin, too, the formal word for aunt on mother's
side was matertera. Some languages have a separate term for aunts-in-law as opposed to blood
relations.


auntie (n.)

1787, also aunty, familiar diminutive form of aunt. As a form of kindly address to an older woman to
whom one is not related, originally in southern U.S., of elderly slave women.  The negro no longer
submits with grace to be called uncle or auntie as of yore. [Harper's Magazine, October 1883]


aura (n.)

1870 in spiritualism, subtle emanation around living beings; earlier characteristic impression made
by a personality (1859), earlier still gentle breeze (late 14c.), from Latin aura breeze, wind, air,
from Greek aura breath, breeze, from PIE root *awer- (see air (n.1)).


aural (adj.)

1847, pertaining to the ear, from Latin auris ear (see ear (n.1)) + -al (1). Meaning received or
perceived by ear is attested from 1860. Related: Aurally.


aureate (adj.)

early 15c., gold, gold-colored, also figuratively, splendid, brilliant, from Latin aureatus
decorated with gold, from aureus golden, from aurum gold, from PIE root *aus- (2) gold (cognates:
Sanskrit ayah metal, Avestan ayo, Latin aes brass, Old English ar brass, copper, bronze, Gothic aiz
bronze, Old Lithuanian ausas gold), probably related to root *aus- to shine (see aurora).


aureole (n.)

early 13c., from Latin aureola (corona), fem. diminutive of aureus golden (see aureate). In medieval
Christianity, the celestial crown worn by martyrs, virgins, etc., as victors over the flesh.


auricle (n.)

part of the ear, 1650s, from Latin auricula ear, diminutive of auris (see ear (n.1)). As a chamber
of the heart, early 15c., from Latin, so called from a perceived similarity in shape to an animal's
ear.


auricular (adj.)

1540s, auditory (originally of confessions), from Medieval Latin auricularis, from Latin auricula
(see auricle). Meaning pertaining to the ear is from 1640s.


auriferous (adj.)

containing gold, 1727, from Latin aurifer gold-bearing, from auri-, comb. form of aurum gold (see
aureate) + -fer producing, bearing (see infer).


Auriga

northern constellation, from Latin auriga a charioteer, driver, from aureae bridle of a horse (from
os, genitive oris, mouth; see oral) + agere set in motion, drive, lead (see act (n.)).


aurochs (n.)

1766, misapplication to the European bison (Bos bison) of a word that actually refers to a species
of wild ox (Bos ursus) that went extinct 17c., from German Aurochs, from Old High German urohso,
from uro aurochs (cognate with Old English ur, Old Norse &uuml;rr), of unknown origin, + ohso ox
(see ox). Latin urus and Greek ouros are Germanic loan-words.


aurora (n.)

late 14c., from Latin Aurora, the Roman goddess of dawn, from PIE *ausus- dawn, also the name of the
Indo-European goddess of the dawn, from root *aus- (1) to shine, especially of the dawn (cognates:
Greek eos dawn, auein to dry, kindle; Sanskrit usah, Lithuanian ausra dawn; Latin auster south wind,
usum to burn; Old English east east).


aurora borealis (n.)

1620s, Northern Lights, literally northern dawn, said to have been coined by French philosopher
Petrus Gassendus (1592-1655) after a spectacular display seen in France Sept. 2, 1621; see aurora +
boreal. In northern Scotland and among sailors, sometimes called the dancers or the merry dancers.


auroral (adj.)

1550s, pertaining to dawn, from aurora + -al (1). Meaning of the color of dawn is from 1827; of the
aurora from 1828.


auscultate (v.)

to listen (especially with a stethoscope), 1832, from Latin auscultatus, past participle of
auscultare to listen attentively to, from aus-, from auris ear (see ear (n.1)); the rest is doubtful
[OED]. Tucker suggests the second element is akin to clinere to lean, bend.


auscultation (n.)

act of listening, 1630s, from Latin auscultationem (nominative auscultatio), noun of action from
past participle stem of auscultare (see auscultate). Medical sense is from 1821.


auspex (n.)

1590s, one who observes flights of birds for the purpose of taking omens, from Latin auspex
interpreter of omens given by birds, from PIE *awi-spek- observer of birds, from *awi- bird (see
aviary) + *spek- to see (see scope (n.1)). Compare Greek oionos bird of prey, also bird of omen,
omen, and ornis bird, which also could mean omen.


auspices (n.)

plural (and now the usual form) of auspice; 1530s, observation of birds for the purpose of taking
omens, from French auspice (14c.), from Latin auspicum divination from the flight of birds; function
of an auspex (q.v.). Meaning any indication of the future (especially favorable) is from 1650s;
earlier (1630s) in extended sense of benevolent influence of greater power, influence exerted on
behalf of someone or something, originally in expression under the auspices of.


auspicious (adj.)

1590s, of good omen (implied in auspiciously), from Latin auspicium divination by observing the
flight of birds, from auspex (genitive auspicis) + -ous. Related: Auspiciously; auspiciousness.


Aussie (n.)

short for Australian (n.) or Australia, attested from 1917.


auster (n.)

south wind, late 14c., from Latin auster the south wind; the south country (see Australia).


austere (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French austere (Modern French aust&egrave;re) and directly from Latin austerus
dry, harsh, sour, tart, from Greek austeros bitter, harsh, especially making the tongue dry
(originally used of fruits, wines), metaphorically austere, harsh, from PIE *saus- dry (cognates:
Greek auos dry, auein to dry). Use in English is figurative: stern, severe, very simple. Related:
Austerely.


austerity (n.)

mid-14c., sternness, harshness, from Old French austerite harshness, cruelty (14c.) and directly
from Late Latin austeritatem (nominative austeritas), from austerus (see austere). Of severe self-
discipline, from 1580s; hence severe simplicity (1875); applied during World War II to national
policies limiting non-essentials as a wartime economy.


Austin

surname (also Austen) and masc. proper name, from Old French Aousten, an abbreviated form of Latin
Augustine.


austral (adj.)

1540s, from Latin australis, from auster (see auster).


Australia

from Latin Terra Australis (16c.), from australis southern + -ia. A hypothetical southern continent,
known as terra australis incognita, had been proposed since 2c. Dutch explorers called the newfound
continent New Holland; the current name was suggested 1814 by Matthew Flinders as an improvement
over Terra Australis as being more agreeable to the ear, and an assimilation to the name of the
other great portions of the earth [Voyage to Terra Australis]. In 1817 Gov. Lachlan Macquarie,
having read Flinders' suggestion, began using it in official correspondence. The ultimate source is
Latin auster south wind, hence, the south country.    The Latin sense shift in australis, if it is
indeed the same word other Indo-European languages use for east (see aurora), for which Latin uses
oriens (see orient), perhaps is based on a false assumption about the orientation of the Italian
peninsula, with shift through 'southeast' explained by the diagonal position of the axis of Italy
[Buck]; see Walde, Alois, Lateinisches etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch, 3rd. ed., vol. 1, p.87;
Ernout, Alfred, and Meillet, Alfred, Dictionnaire &eacute;tymologique de la langue latine, 2nd. ed.,
p.94. Or perhaps the connection is more ancient, and from PIE root *aus- to shine, source of aurora,
which also produces words for burning, with reference to the hot south wind that blows into Italy.
Thus auster (hot) south wind, metaphorically extended to south.


Australian (n.)

1690s, in reference to aboriginal inhabitants, from Australia + -an. As an adjective by 1814.
Australianism in speech is attested from 1891.


Australopithecus (n.)

1925, coined by Australian anthropologist Raymond A. Dart (1893-1988) from Latin australis southern
(see Australia) + Greek pithekos ape. So called because first discovered in South Africa.


Austria

European nation, from Medieval Latin Marchia austriaca eastern borderland. German &Ouml;sterreich is
eastern kingdom, from Old High German ostar eastern (see east) + reich (see Reichstag). So called
for being on the eastern edge of Charlemagne's empire.


Austro-

comb. form meaning Austrian; see Austria.


autarchy (n.)

1660s, absolute sovereignty, from Greek autarkhia, from autarkhein to be an absolute ruler, from
autos self (see auto-) + arkhein to rule (see archon).


autarky (n.)

1610s, self-sufficiency, from Greek autarkeia sufficiency in oneself, independence, from autarkes
self-sufficient, having enough, independent of others (also used of countries), from autos self (see
auto-) + arkein to ward off, keep off, also to be strong enough, sufficient, from PIE root *ark- to
hold, contain, guard (see arcane). From a different Greek source than autarchy, and thus the
spelling. As a term in international economics, prominent late 1930s. Related: Autarkic.


auteur (n.)

1962, from French, literally author (see author (n.)).


authentic (adj.)

mid-14c., authoritative, from Old French autentique (13c., Modern French authentique) authentic;
canonical, and directly from Medieval Latin authenticus, from Greek authentikos original, genuine,
principal, from authentes one acting on one's own authority, from autos self (see auto-) + hentes
doer, being, from PIE *sene- to accomplish, achieve. Sense of entitled to acceptance as factual is
first recorded mid-14c.    Traditionally (at least since the 18c.), authentic implies that the
contents of the thing in question correspond to the facts and are not fictitious; genuine implies
that the reputed author is the real one; though this distinction is not etymological and is not
always now recognized.


authenticate (v.)

verify, establish the credibility of, 1650s, from Medieval Latin authenticatus, past participle of
authenticare, from authenticus (see authentic). Related: Authenticated; authenticating.


authentication (n.)

1788, noun of action from authenticate (v.).


authenticity (n.)

1760; see authentic + -ity. Earlier form was authentity (1650s).


author (n.)

c.1300, autor father, from Old French auctor, acteor author, originator, creator, instigator (12c.,
Modern French auteur), from Latin auctorem (nominative auctor) enlarger, founder, master, leader,
literally one who causes to grow, agent noun from auctus, past participle of augere to increase (see
augment). Meaning one who sets forth written statements is from late 14c. The -t- changed to -th-
16c. on mistaken assumption of Greek origin.    ...[W]riting means revealing onesself to excess ....
This is why one can never be alone enough when one writes, why even night is not night enough. ... I
have often thought that the best mode of life for me would be to sit in the innermost room of a
spacious locked cellar with my writing things and a lamp. Food would be brought and always put down
far away from my room, outside the cellar's outermost door.  The walk to my food, in my dressing
gown, through the vaulted cellars, would be my only exercise. I would then return to my table, eat
slowly and with deliberation, then start writing again at once. And how I would write! From what
depths I would drag it up! [Franz Kafka]


author (v.)

1590s, from author (n.). Revived 1940s, chiefly U.S. Related: Authored; authoring.


authorial (adj.)

1796, from author (n.) + -al (1).


authorisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of authorization (q.v.); for spelling, see -ize.


authorise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of authorize (q.v.); for suffix, see -ize. Related: Authorised;
authorising.


authoritarian (adj.)

1862, favoring imposed order over freedom, from authority + -an. Compare authoritative, which
originally had this meaning to itself. Noun in the sense of one advocating or practicing such
governance is from 1859.


authoritarianism (n.)

1883; see authoritarian + -ism. Early use mostly in communist jargon.


authoritative (adj.)

c.1600, dictatorial (a sense now restricted to authoritarian), from Medieval Latin authoritativus
(see authority). Meaning possessing authority is recorded from 1650s; that of proceeding from proper
authority is from 1809. Related: Authoritatively; authoritativeness.


authority (n.)

early 13c., autorite book or quotation that settles an argument, from Old French auctorit&eacute;
authority, prestige, right, permission, dignity, gravity; the Scriptures (12c.; Modern French
autorit&eacute;), from Latin auctoritatem (nominative auctoritas) invention, advice, opinion,
influence, command, from auctor master, leader, author (see author (n.)).    Usually spelled with a
-c- in English till 16c., when it was dropped in imitation of the French. Meaning power to enforce
obedience is from late 14c.; meaning people in authority is from 1610s. Authorities those in charge,
those with police powers is recorded from mid-19c.


authorization (n.)

c.1600, from authorize + -ation. Earlier form was auctorisation (late 15c.).


authorize (v.)

give formal approval to, late 14c., autorisen, from Old French autoriser authorize, give authority
to (12c.), from Medieval Latin auctorizare, from auctor (see author (n.)). Modern spelling from 16c.
Related: Authorized; authorizing.


authorship (n.)

c.1500, the function of being a writer, from author (n.) + -ship. Meaning literary origin is
attested from 1825.


autism (n.)

1912, from German Autismus, coined 1912 by Swiss psychiatrist Paul Bleuler (1857-1939) from comb.
form of Greek autos- self (see auto-) + -ismos suffix of action or of state. The notion is of morbid
self-absorption.


autistic (adj.)

1912 (Bleuler), from autism (q.v.). Noun meaning person with autism is recorded from 1968 (earlier
in this sense was autist).


auto (n.)

shortened form of automobile, 1899; same development yielded French auto.


auto-

word-forming element meaning self, one's own, by oneself, from Greek auto- self, one's own,
combining form of autos self, same, of unknown origin. Before a vowel, aut-; before an aspirate,
auth-. In Greek also used as a prefix to proper names, as in automelinna Melinna herself. The
opposite prefix would be allo-.


auto-da-fe (n.)

1723, sentence passed by the Inquisition (plural autos-da-f&eacute;), from Portuguese auto-
da-f&eacute; judicial sentence or act of the faith, especially the public burning of a heretic, from
Latin actus de fide, literally act of faith. Although the Spanish Inquisition is better-known today,
there also was one in Portugal.


auto-erotic (adj.)

1898, coined by Havelock Ellis from auto- + erotic. Related: Auto-eroticism.


autobahn (n.)

1937, German, from auto motor car, automobile + bahn path, road, from Middle High German ban, bane
way, road, literally strike (as a swath cut through), from PIE *gwhen- to strike, kill (see bane).


autobiography (n.)

1797, from auto- + biography. Related: Autobiographical.


autocade (n.)

1922, from auto(mobile) + ending from cavalcade.


autocar (n.)

1895, from auto- + car.   <b>Which is it to be?</b> We observe that the London Times has lent the
weight of its authority to the word autocar, which it now prints without the significant inverted
commas but with a hyphen, auto-car. We believe that the vocable originated with a journal called the
Hardwareman, which succeeded in obtaining the powerful support of the Engineer for its offspring. As
for ourselves, being linguistic purists, we do not care for hybrid constructions--auto is Greek,
while car is Latin and Celtic. At the same time, such clumsy phrases as horseless carriages,
mechanical road carriages, and self-propelled vehicles are not meeting with general favour. Why not
therefore adopt the philogically sound motor-car, which could be run into a single word, motorcar?
[The Electrical Engineer, Dec. 20, 1895]


autochthon (n.)

1640s, one sprung from the soil he inhabits (plural autochthones), from Greek autokhthon aborigines,
natives, literally sprung from the land itself, used of the Athenians and others who claimed descent
from the Pelasgians, from auto- self (see auto-) + khthon land, earth, soil (see chthonic).


autochthonic (adj.)

1827, from autochthon + -ic.


autochthonous (adj.)

native, indigenous, 1845, from autochthon + -ous.


autoclave (n.)

1880, from French, literally self-locking, from auto- self (see auto-) + Latin clavis key (see slot
(n.2)).


autocracy (n.)

1650s, independent power, self-sustained power, from French autocratie, from Greek autokrateia
ruling by oneself, noun of state from autokrates (see autocrat). Meaning absolute government,
supreme political power is recorded from 1855.


autocrat (n.)

1803, from French autocrate, from Greek autokrates ruling by oneself, absolute, autocratic, from
autos- self (see auto-) + kratia rule, from kratos strength, power (see -cracy). First used by
Robert Southey, with reference to Napoleon. An earlier form was autocrator (1789), used in reference
to the Russian Czars. Earliest form in English is the fem. autocratress (1762).


autocratic (adj.)

1823, from French autocratique, from autocrate, from Greek autokrates (see autocrat). Earlier
autocratoric (1670s) was directly from Greek autokratorikos. Autocratical is attested from 1801.


autodidact (n.)

1746, from Greek autodidaktos self-taught (see autodidactic).


autodidactic (adj.)

self-taught, 1838, from Greek autodidaktikos self-taught, from autos self (see auto-) + didaktos
taught (see didactic).


autogenous (adj.)

self-generated, 1846, earlier autogeneal (1650s), from Greek autogenes self-produced, from autos
self (see auto-) + genes formation, creation (see genus). Modern form and biological use of the word
said to have been coined by English paleontologist Richard Owen (1804-1892).


autograph (n.)

a person's signature, 1791, from Latin autographum, from Greek autographon, neuter of autographos
written with one's own hand, from autos- self (see auto-) + graphein to write (originally to
scratch; see -graphy). Used earlier (1640s) to mean author's own manuscript.


autograph (v.)

to sign one's name, 1837, from autograph (n.). Related: Autographed; autographing. Earlier to write
with one's own hand (1818).


autoharp (n.)

1882, name on a patent taken out by Charles F. Zimmermann of Philadelphia, U.S.A., for an improved
type of harp, an instrument considerably different from the modern autoharp, actually a chord
zither, which was invented about the same time by K.A. G&uuml;tter of Markneukirchen, Germany, who
called it a Volkszither.


autoimmune (adj.)

1952, from auto- + immune.


autolatry (n.)

self-worship, 1620s (in Latinate form autolatria), from auto- + -latry.


automaker (n.)

manufacturer of automobiles, 1925, from auto + maker.


automat (n.)

automated cafeteria, 1903, probably from automatic.


automate (v.)

to convert to automatic operation, 1954, back-formation from automated (q.v.). Ancient Greek verb
automatizein meant to act of oneself, to act unadvisedly. Related: Automating.


automated (adj.)

1952, American English, adjective based on automation.


automatic (adj.)

self-acting, moving or acting on its own, 1812, from Greek automatos, used of the gates of Olympus
and the tripods of Hephaestus (also without apparent cause, by accident), from autos self (see
auto-) + matos thinking, animated (see automaton). Of involuntary animal or human actions, from
1748, first used in this sense by English physician and philosopher David Hartley (1705-1757). In
reference to a type of firearm, from 1877; specifically of machinery that imitates human-directed
action from 1940.


automatic (n.)

automatic weapon, 1902, from automatic (adj.). Meaning motorized vehicle with automatic transmission
is from 1949.


automatically (adv.)

1834, involuntarily, unconsciously; see automatic + -ly (2).


automation (n.)

1948, in the manufacturing sense, coined by Ford Motor Co. Vice President Delmar S. Harder, from
automatic + -ion. Earlier (1838) was automatism, which meant quality of being automatic in the
classical sense.


automatization (n.)

1924, noun of action from automatize.


automatize (v.)

1837, to make into an automaton; see automaton + -ize. Meaning to make automatic attested by 1952.
Related: Automatized; automatizing.


automaton (n.)

1610s, from Latin automaton (Suetonius), from Greek automaton, neuter of automatos self-acting, from
autos self (see auto-) + matos thinking, animated, willing, from PIE *mn-to-, from root *men- to
think (see mind (n.)).


automobile (adj.)

1883, in reference to electric traction cars, from French automobile (adj.), 1861, a hybrid from
Greek autos self (see auto-) + French mobile moving, from Latin mobilis movable (see mobile (adj.)).


automobile (n.)

self-propelled motor vehicle, 1895, from French automobile, short for v&eacute;hicule automobile
(see automobile (adj.)). The modern Greek calls it autokineto moved of itself. The French word had
competition in the early years from locomobile; in English other early forms were motorcar and
autocar.


automotive (adj.)

1865, in reference to some sort of helicopter-like device, a hybrid from auto- self, from Greek, +
motive (adj.), from Latin. Meaning pertaining to automobiles is from 1898.


autonomic (adj.)

1832, pertaining to autonomy (q.v.); used mostly in physiology. Autonomical is recorded from 1650s.


autonomous (adj.)

1800, from Greek autonomos having one's own laws, of animals, feeding or ranging at will, from autos
self (see auto-) + nomos law (see numismatics). Compare privilege. Used mostly in metaphysics and
politics; see autonomic.


autonomy (n.)

1620s, of states, from Greek autonomia independence, noun of quality from autonomos independent,
living by one's own laws, from auto- self (see auto-) + nomos custom, law (see numismatics). Of
persons, from 1803.


autophobia (n.)

fear of referring to oneself, 1845 (as autophoby), from Greek autos self (see auto-) + -phobia fear.
Related: Autophobic; autophobe.


autopilot (n.)

1935, from auto- + pilot (n.).


autopsy (n.)

1650s, an eye-witnessing, from Modern Latin autopsia, from Greek autopsia a seeing with one's own
eyes, from autos- self (see auto-) + opsis a sight (see eye (n.)). Sense of dissection of a body to
determine cause of death is first recorded 1670s, probably from the same sense in French autopsie
(1570s).


autosome (n.)

coined 1906 by U.S. cytologist T.H. Montgomery (1873-1912), from auto- + -some (3)). Related:
Autosomal.


autosuggestion (n.)

also auto-suggestion, 1879, a hybrid from auto- + suggestion. The idea, and probably the model for
the word, originally from French.


autotheism (n.)

self-deification, 1610s, from auto- + theism. The religion of one who mistakes his own inner voices
for God's voice in him. Also used in a theological sense (1580s) for the regarding of the second
person of the Trinity as God entire. Related: Autotheist.


autumn (n.)

late 14c., autumpne (modern form from 16c.), from Old French autumpne, automne (13c.), from Latin
autumnus (also auctumnus, perhaps influenced by auctus increase), of unknown origin. Perhaps from
Etruscan, but Tucker suggests a meaning drying-up season and a root in *auq- (which would suggest
the form in -c- was the original) and compares archaic English sere-month August.   Harvest was the
English name for the season until autumn began to displace it 16c. In Britain, the season is
popularly August through October; in U.S., September through November. Compare Italian autunno,
Spanish oto&ntilde;o, Portuguese outono, all from the Latin word. Unlike the other three seasons,
its names across the Indo-European languages leave no evidence that there ever was a common word for
it.    Many autumn words mean end, end of summer, or harvest. Compare also Lithuanian ruduo autumn,
from rudas reddish, in reference to leaves; Old Irish fogamar, literally under-winter.


autumnal (adj.)

1570s, from Latin autumnalis pertaining to autumn, from autumnus (see autumn).


auxiliary (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin auxiliaris helpful, from auxilium aid, help, support, related to auctus, past
participle of augere to increase (see augment).


auxiliary (n.)

foreign troops in service of a nation at war, c.1600, from auxiliary (adj.). Related: Auxiliaries.


auxin (n.)

plant growth hormone, 1934, from German (1931), from Greek auxein to increase (see augment) +
chemical suffix -in (2).


avail (v.)

c.1300, availen, apparently a French compound formed in English from Old French a- to (see ad-) +
vailen to avail, from vaill-, present stem of valoir be worth, from Latin valere (see valiant).
Related: Availed; availing. As a noun, from c.1400.


availability (n.)

1803, from available + -ity.


available (adj.)

mid-15c., beneficial, also valid, effective, capable of producing the desired effect, from avail +
-able. Meaning at one's disposal, capable of being made use of is recorded from 1827.


availing (adj.)

advantageous, early 15c., present participle adjective from avail (v.).


availment (n.)

1690s, from avail + -ment.


avalanche (n.)

1763, from French avalanche (17c.), from Romansch (Swiss) avalantze descent, altered (by metathesis
of -l- and -v-, probably influenced by Old French avaler to descend, go down) from Savoy dialect
lavantse, from Proven&ccedil;al lavanca avalanche, perhaps from a pre-Latin Alpine language (the
suffix -anca suggests Ligurian). As a verb, from 1872.


avant

French, literally before, in various terms borrowed into English, corresponding to Italian avanti,
both from Latin abante, a compound of ab from (see ab-) and ante before (see ante).


avant-garde (n.)

(also avant garde, avantgarde); French, literally advance guard (see avant + guard (n.)). Used in
English 15c.-18c. in a literal, military sense; borrowed again 1910 as an artistic term for pioneers
or innovators of a particular period. Also used around the same time in communist and anarchist
publications. As an adjective, by 1925.    The avant-garde g&#233;n&#233;rale, avant-garde
strat&#233;gique, or avant-garde d'arm&#233;e is a strong force (one, two, or three army corps)
pushed out a day's march to the front, immediately behind the cavalry screen. Its mission is,
vigorously to engage the enemy wherever he is found, and, by binding him, to ensure liberty of
action in time and space for the main army. [Sadowa, Gen. Henri Bonnal, transl. C.F. Atkinson, 1907]


avarice (n.)

c.1300, from Old French avarice greed, covetousness (12c.), from Latin avaritia greed, from avarus
greedy, adjectival form of avere crave, long for.


avaricious (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French avaricios greedy, covetous (Modern French avaricieux), from avarice (see
avarice). An Old English word for it was feoh-georn. Related: Avariciously; avariciousness.


avast

1680s, a nautical interjection, hold! stop! probably worn down from Dutch houd vast hold fast.
AVAST. -- The order to stop, or pause, in any exercise or operation; as Avast heaving -- that is to
say, desist, or stop, from drawing in the cable or hawser, by means of the capstan &amp;c.; [George
Biddlecombe, The Art of Rigging, 1848]


avatar (n.)

1784, descent of a Hindu deity, from Sanskrit avatarana descent (of a deity to the earth in
incarnate form), from ava- off, down (from PIE *au- (2) off, away) + base of tarati (he) crosses
over, from PIE root *tere- (2) to cross over (see through). In computer use, it seems to trace to
the novel Snowcrash (1992) by Neal Stephenson.


avaunt

interjection, late 15c., begone, literally move on, from Middle French avant forward! (see avant).


ave

hail, also farewell, early 13c. (in reference to the Ave Maria), from Latin ave, second person
singular imperative of avere to be or fare well.


Ave Maria

modified form of the angelic salutation to the Virgin (Luke i:28) used as a devotional recitation,
early 13c., from the opening words (Ave [Maria] gratia plena).


avenge (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French avenger, Old French avengier, from a- to (see ad-) + vengier take
revenge (Modern French venger), from Latin vindicare to claim, avenge, punish (see vindicate).
Related: Avenged; avenging.


avenger (n.)

1530s, agent noun from avenge (v.). Spenser (1596) has avengeress but no mention of Mrs. Peel.


avenue (n.)

c.1600, a way of approach (originally a military word), from Middle French avenue way of access,
from Old French avenue act of approaching, arrival, noun use of fem. of avenu, past participle of
avenir to come to, arrive, from Latin advenire to come to, from ad- to (see ad-) + venire to come
(see venue). Meaning shifted to a way of approach to a country-house, usually bordered by trees,
hence, a broad, tree-lined roadway (1650s), then to wide, main street (by 1846, especially in U.S.).


aver (v.)

late 14c., from Old French averer verify, from Vulgar Latin *adverare make true, prove to be true,
from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + verus true (see very). Related: Averred; averring.


average (n.)

late 15c., financial loss incurred through damage to goods in transit, from French avarie damage to
ship, and Italian avaria; a word from 12c. Mediterranean maritime trade (compare Spanish averia;
other Germanic forms, Dutch avarij, German haferei, etc., also are from Romanic languages), of
uncertain origin. Sometimes traced to Arabic 'arwariya damaged merchandise. Meaning shifted to equal
sharing of such loss by the interested parties. Transferred sense of statement of a medial estimate
is first recorded 1735. The mathematical extension is from 1755.


average (adj.)

1770; see average (n.).


average (v.)

1769, from average (n.). Related: Averaged; averaging.


Averroes

Latinization of name of Ibn Rushd (1126-1198) Arab philosopher and physician of Spain and Morocco.


averse (adj.)

mid-15c., turned away in mind or feeling, from Old French avers and directly from Latin aversus
turned away, turned back, past participle of avertere (see avert). Originally and usually in English
in the mental sense, while avert is used in a physical sense.


aversion (n.)

a turning away from, 1590s; figurative sense of mental attitude of repugnance is from 1650s, from
Middle French aversion and directly from Latin aversionem (nominative aversio), noun of action from
past participle stem of aversus turned away, backwards, behind, hostile, itself past participle of
avertere (see avert). Earlier in the literal sense of a turning away from (1590s). Aversion therapy
in psychology is from 1950.


avert (v.)

c.1400, from Old French avertir (12c.), turn, direct; avert; make aware, from Vulgar Latin
*advertire, from Latin avertere to turn away, to drive away, from ab- from, away (see ab-) + vertere
to turn (see versus). Related: Averted; averting.


Avestan

Eastern Iranian language that survived in sacred texts centuries after it went extinct, from Persian
Avesta sacred books of the Parsees, earlier Avistak, literally books.


avian (adj.)

pertaining to birds, 1870, from Latin avis bird (see aviary) + -an.


aviary (n.)

1570s, from Latin aviarium place in which birds are kept, neuter of aviarius of birds, from avis
bird, from PIE *awi- bird (cognates: Sanskrit vih, Avestan vish bird, Greek aietos eagle).


aviation (n.)

1866, from French aviation, noun of action from stem of Latin avis bird (see aviary). Coined 1863 by
French aviation pioneer Guillaume Joseph Gabriel de La Landelle (1812-1886) in Aviation ou
Navigation a&eacute;rienne.


aviator (n.)

aircraft pilot, 1887, from French aviateur, from Latin avis (see aviary) + -ateur. Also used c.1891
in a sense of aircraft. Feminine form aviatrix is from 1927; earlier aviatrice (1910), aviatress
(1911).


Avicenna

Latinization of name of Ibn Sina (980-1037), Persian philosopher and physician. Full name Ab&#363;
â&euro;&tilde;Al&#299; al-Husayn ibn â&euro;&tilde;Abd All&#257;h ibn S&#299;n&#257; al-
Balkh&#299;.


aviculture (n.)

1876, from French aviculture, from Latin avis bird (see aviary) + Latin cultura cultivation (see
culture).


avid (adj.)

1769, from French avide (15c.), from Latin avidus longing eagerly, desirous, greedy, from avere to
desire eagerly. Also in part a back-formation from avidity. Related: Avidly.


avidity (n.)

mid-15c., eagerness, zeal, from Old French avidite avidity, greed, from Latin aviditatem (nominative
aviditas) eagerness, avidity, noun of quality from avidus (see avid).


avionics (n.)

1949, from aviation + electronics.


Avis

U.S. car rental company, according to company history, founded 1946 at Willow Run Airport in Detroit
by Warren Avis.


avocado (n.)

1763, from Spanish avocado, altered (by folk etymology influence of earlier Spanish avocado lawyer,
from same Latin source as advocate (n.)) from earlier aguacate, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) ahuakatl
avocado (with a secondary meaning testicle probably based on resemblance), from proto-Nahuan *pawa
avocado. As a color-name, first attested 1945. The English corruption alligator (pear) is 1763, from
Mexican Spanish alvacata, alligato.


avocation (n.)

1520s, a calling away from one's occupation, from Latin avocationem (nominative avocatio) a calling
away, distraction, diversion, noun of action from past participle stem of avocare, from ab- off,
away from (see ab-) + vocare to call (see voice (n.)).


avoid (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French avoider to clear out, withdraw (oneself), partially anglicized from Old
French esvuidier to empty out, from es- out (see ex-) + vuidier to be empty, from voide empty, vast,
wide, hollow, waste (see void (adj.)). Originally a law term; modern sense of have nothing to do
with also was in Middle English and corresponds to Old French eviter with which it was perhaps
confused. Meaning escape, evade first attested 1520s. Related: Avoided; avoiding.


avoidable (adj.)

1630s, from avoid + -able. Related: Avoidably.


avoidance (n.)

late 14c., action of emptying, from avoid + -ance. Sense of action of dodging or shunning is
recorded from early 15c.; it also meant action of making legally invalid, 1620s; becoming vacant (of
an office, etc.), mid-15c.


avoirdupois (n.)

1650s, misspelling of Middle English avoir-de-peise (c.1300), from Old French avoir de pois goods of
weight, from aveir property, goods (noun use of aveir have) + peis weight, from Latin pensum, neuter
of pendere to weigh (see pendant (n.)). After late 15c., the standard system of weights used in
England for all goods except precious metals, precious stones, and medicine.


Avon

river in southwestern England, from Celtic abona river (see afanc).


avouch (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French avochier call upon as authority, in Old French call (to court),
advocate, plead (a case), from Latin advocare call to as a witness (see advocate).   Avouch, which
is no longer in common use, means guarantee, solemnly aver, prove by assertion, maintain the truth
or existence of, vouch for .... Avow means own publicly to, make no secret of, not shrink from
admitting, acknowledge one's responsibility for .... Vouch is now common only in the phrase vouch
for, which has taken the place of avouch in ordinary use, &amp; means pledge one's word for ....
[Fowler]    Related: Avouched; avouching.


avow (v.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French avouer, Old French avoer acknowledge, accept, recognize, especially as
a protector (Modern French avouer), from Latin advocare (see advocate). A synonym of avouch (q.v.),
which tends to contain the more technical, legal aspect of the word. Related: Avowed; avowing.


avowal (n.)

1727, from avow + -al (2).


avuncular (adj.)

1789, from Latin avunculus maternal uncle, diminutive of avus (see uncle) + -ar. Used humorously for
of a pawnbroker (uncle was slang for pawnbroker from c.1600 through 19c.).My only good suit is at
present under the avuncular protection. [Fraser's Magazine, 1832]


aw

expresion of mild disappointment, sympathy, etc., first recorded in this form by 1888.


AWACS (n.)

1966, initialism (acronym) for Airborne Warning and Control Systems.


await (v.)

early 13c., awaiten, from Old North French awaitier (Old French agaitier) to lie in wait for, watch,
observe, from a- to (see ad-) + waitier to watch (see wait (v.)). Originally especially with a
hostile sense. Related: Awaited; awaiting.


awake (v.)

a merger of two Middle English verbs: 1. awaken, from Old English aw&aelig;cnan (earlier
onw&aelig;cnan; strong, past tense awoc, past participle awacen) to awake, arise, originate, from a
on + wacan to arise, become awake (see wake (v.)); and 2. awakien, from Old English awacian (weak,
past participle awacode) to awaken, revive; arise; originate, spring from, from a on (see a (2)) +
wacian to be awake, remain awake, watch (see watch (v.)).    Both originally were intransitive only;
the transitive sense being expressed by Middle English awecchen (from Old English aweccan) until
later Middle English. In Modern English, the tendency has been to restrict the strong past tense and
past participle (awoke, awoken) to the original intransitive sense and the weak inflection
(awakened) to the transitive, but this never has been complete (see wake (v.); also compare awaken).


awake (adj.)

not asleep, c.1300, shortened from awaken, past participle of Old English aw&aelig;cnan (see
awaken).


awaken (v.)

Old English aw&aelig;cnan (intransitive), to spring into being, arise, originate, also, less often,
to wake up; earlier onw&aelig;cnan, from a- (1) on + w&aelig;cnan (see waken). Transitive meaning to
rouse from sleep is recorded from 1510s; figurative sense of to stir up, rouse to activity is from
c.1600.    Originally strong declension (past tense awoc, past participle awacen), already in Old
English it was confused with awake (v.) and a weak past tense aw&aelig;cnede (modern awakened)
emerged and has since become the accepted form, with awoke and awoken transferred to awake. Subtle
shades of distinction determine the use of awake or awaken in modern English. Related: Awakening.


award (v.)

late 14c., decide after careful observation, from Anglo-French awarder, from Old North French
eswarder (Old French esguarder) decide, examine (after careful consideration), from es- out (see
ex-) + warder to watch (see ward (n.)). Related: Awarded; awarding.


award (n.)

late 14c., decision after consideration, from Anglo-French award, Old French esguard, from esguarder
(see award (v.)). Meaning something awarded is first attested 1590s.


aware (adj.)

late Old English gew&aelig;r, from Proto-Germanic *ga-waraz (cognates: Old Saxon giwar, Middle Dutch
gheware, Old High German giwar, German gewahr), from *ga-, intensive prefix, + waraz wary, cautious
(see wary).


awareness (n.)

1828, from aware + -ness.


awash (adj.)

1825, originally nautical, on the level of, flush with, from a- (1) on + wash (n.). Figurative use
by 1912.


away (adv.)

late Old English aweg, earlier on weg on from this (that) place; see a- (1) + way (n.). Colloquial
use for without delay (fire away, also right away) is from earlier sense of onward in time (16c.).
Intensive use (as in away back) is American English, first attested 1818.


awe (n.)

c.1300, earlier aghe, c.1200, from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse agi fright; from Proto-
Germanic *agiz- (cognates: Old English ege fear, Old High German agiso fright, terror, Gothic agis
fear, anguish), from PIE *agh-es- (cognates: Greek akhos pain, grief), from root *agh- to be
depressed, be afraid (see ail). Current sense of dread mixed with veneration is due to biblical use
with reference to the Supreme Being. Awe-inspiring is recorded from 1814.


awe (v.)

c.1300, from awe (n.); Old English had egan (v.). Related: Awed; awing.


aweigh (adj.)

raised, perpendicular, 1620s, nautical, from a- (1) + weigh.


awesome (adj.)

1590s, profoundly reverential, from awe (n.) + -some (1). Meaning inspiring awe is from 1670s;
weakened colloquial sense of impressive, very good is recorded by 1961 and was in vogue from after
c.1980. Related: Awesomely; awesomeness.


awestruck (adj.)

1630s, overwhelmed by reverential fear, from awe (n.) + struck (see strike (v.)).


awful (adj.)

c.1300, agheful worthy of respect or fear, from aghe, an earlier form of awe (n.), + -ful. Replaced
Old English egefull. Weakened sense very bad is from 1809; weakened sense of exceedingly is by 1818.


awfully (adv.)

c.1300, so as to inspire reverence, from awful + -ly (2). Meaning dreadfully, so as to strike one
with awe is recorded from late 14c. As a simple intensifier, very, exceedingly, recorded from
c.1830.


awhile (adv.)

Old English ane hwile (for) a while (see while (n.)); usually written as one word since 13c.


awhirl (adj.)

1837, from a- (1) + whirl (v.).


awing (n.)

action of inspiring with awe, 1650s, verbal noun from awe (v.).


awk (adj.)

mid-15c., turned the wrong way, from Old Norse afugr turned backwards, wrong, contrary, from Proto-
Germanic *afug-, from PIE *apu-ko-, from root *apo- off, away (see apo-). Obsolete since 17c.


awkward (adj.)

mid-14c., in the wrong direction, from awk back-handed + adverbial suffix -weard (see -ward).
Meaning clumsy first recorded 1520s. Related: Awkwardly. Other formations from awk, none of them
surviving, were awky, awkly, awkness.


awkwardness (n.)

1704, lack of grace, from awkward + -ness. Meaning physical clumsiness is attested from c.1770; that
of social embarrassment is from 1788.


awl (n.)

Old English &aelig;l awl, piercer, from Proto-Germanic *&aelig;lo (cognates: Old Norse alr, Dutch
aal, Middle Low German al, Old High German &auml;la, German Ahle), of uncertain origin. Earliest
references are to piercing of the ears, though later it was associated with shoemakers. Through
misdivision, frequently written 15c.-17c. as nawl (for an awl; see N).


awn (n.)

bristly fibers on grain of plants, c.1300, from Old Norse &ouml;gn, from Proto-Germanic *agano
(cognates: Old English egenu, Old High German agana, German Ahne, Gothic ahana), from PIE *ak-ona-
(cognates: Sanskrit asani- arrowhead, Greek akhne husk of wheat, Latin acus chaff, Lithuanian
akuotas beard, awn); suffixed form of PIE root *ak- sharp (see acrid).


awning (n.)

1624, origin uncertain (first recorded use is by Capt. John Smith), perhaps from Middle French
auvans, plural of auvent a sloping roof, itself of doubtful etym[ology] (OED). A nautical term only
until sense of cover for windows or porch emerged 1852.


awoke

past tense of awake (v.), from Old English awoc; also see awaken. The tendency has been to restrict
the strong past tense (awoke) to the original intransitive sense of awake and the weak inflection
(awakened) to the transitive, but this never has been complete.


awoken

past participle of awake (v.); also see awaken.  The tendency has been to restrict the strong past
participle (awoken) to the original intransitive sense of awake and the weak inflection (awakened)
to the transitive, but this never has been complete.


awol (adj.)

also a.w.o.l., military initialism (acronym) for absent without leave. The -o- seems to be there
mostly so the assemblage can be pronounced as a word. In U.S. military use at least from World War
II, popular use by 1960.


awry (adv.)

late 14c., crooked, askew, from a- (1) on + wry (adj.).


aww

see aw.


ax (n.)

see axe (n.).


axe (n.)

Old English &aelig;ces (Northumbrian acas) axe, pickaxe, hatchet, later &aelig;x, from Proto-
Germanic *akusjo (cognates: Old Saxon accus, Old Norse ex, Old Frisian axe, German Axt, Gothic
aqizi), from PIE *agw(e)si- (cognates: Greek axine, Latin ascia).    The spelling ax is better on
every ground, of etymology, phonology, and analogy, than axe, which became prevalent during the 19th
century; but it is now disused in Britain. [OED]   <hr />   The spelling ax, though better on every
ground, of etymology, phonology, &amp; analogy (OED), is so strange to 20th-c. eyes that it suggests
pedantry &amp; is unlikely to be restored. [Fowler]    Meaning musical instrument is 1955,
originally jazz slang for the saxophone; rock slang for guitar dates to 1967. The axe in figurative
sense of cutting of anything (expenses, workers, etc.), especially as a cost-saving measure, is from
1922, probably from the notion of the headman's literal axe (itself attested from mid-15c.). To have
an axe to grind is from an 1815 essay by U.S. editor and politician Charles Miner (1780-1865) in
which a man flatters a boy and gets him to do the chore of axe-grinding for him, then leaves without
offering thanks or recompense. Misattributed to Benjamin Franklin in Weekley, OED print edition, and
many other sources.


axe (v.)

1670s, to shape or cut with an axe, from axe (n.). Meaning to remove, severely reduce, usually
figurative, recorded by 1922. Related: Axed; axing.


axel (n.)

skating jump, 1930, named for Norwegian skater Axel Paulsen (1855-1938).


axial (adj.)

pertaining to an axis, by 1825, from axis + -al (1). Related: Axially.


axillary (adj.)

pertaining to the armpit or shoulder, 1610s, from Latin *axillaris, from axilla armpit, upper arm,
wing (see axle).


axiom (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French axiome, from Latin axioma, from Greek axioma authority, literally that
which is thought worthy or fit, from axioun to think worthy, from axios worthy, worth, of like
value, weighing as much, from PIE adjective *ag-ty-o- weighty, from root *ag- to drive, draw, move
(see act (n.)).    Axioms in philosophy are not axioms until they are proved upon our pulses.
[Keats, letter, May 3, 1818]


axiomatic (adj.)

1797, from Greek axiomatikos, from axioma (genitive axiomatos); see axiom. Form axiomatical is
attested from 1580s.


axion (n.)

1978, from axial + scientific suffix -on.


axis (n.)

1540s, imaginary straight line around which a body (such as the Earth) rotates, from Latin axis
axle, pivot, axis of the earth or sky, from PIE *aks- axis (cognates: Old English eax, Old High
German ahsa axle; Greek axon axis, axle, wagon; Sanskrit aksah an axle, axis, beam of a balance;
Lithuanian aszis axle). Figurative sense in world history of alliance between Germany and Italy
(later extended unetymologically to include Japan) is from 1936. Original reference was to a Rome-
Berlin axis in central Europe. The word later was used in reference to a London-Washington axis
(World War II) and a Moscow-Peking axis (early Cold War).


axle (n.)

pole or pin upon which a wheel revolves, Middle English axel-, from some combination of Old English
eax and Old Norse &ouml;xull axis, both from Proto-Germanic *akhsulaz (cognates: Old English eaxl,
Old Saxon ahsla, Old High German ahsala, German Achsel shoulder), from PIE *aks- axis (see axis).
Found only in compound axletree before 14c.


axolotl (n.)

1786, genus of Mexican salamanders, from Spanish, from Nahuatl, literally servant of water, from atl
water + xolotl slippery or wrinkled one, servant, slave [see Frances Karttunen, An Analytical
Dictionary of Nahuatl].


axon (n.)

axis of the vertebrate body, 1842, from Greek axon axis (see axis).


axonometric (adj.)

1869, from axonometry (1865), from Greek axon (see axis) + metria measurement (see -metry).


ay

see aye.


ayah (n.)

native nurse, children's governess, Anglo-Indian, 1782, from Portuguese aia, cognate with Spanish
aya, Italian aja, etc., nurse, from Latin avia grandmother, fem. of avus grandfather (see uncle).


ayatollah (n.)

honorific title for an Iranian Shiite religious leader, 1950, from Persian, from Arabic ayatu-llah,
literally miraculous sign of God.


aye (interj.)

assent, 1570s, of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of I, meaning I assent; or an alteration of
Middle English yai yes (see yea), or from aye (adv.) always, ever.


aye (adv.)

always, ever, c.1200, from Old Norse ei ever (cognate with Old English a always, ever), from PIE
*aiw- vital force, life, long life, eternity (cognates: Greek aion age, eternity, Latin aevum space
of time; see eon).


ayurvedic (adj.)

1917, pertaining to traditional Hindu science of medicine, from ayurveda science of life, from ayur
life + veda knowledge (see Veda).


azalea (n.)

1753, coined by Linnaeus from the fem. of Greek azaleos dry, related to azein to dry up (see ash
(n.1)). The plant thrives in sandy soil.


Azerbaijan

country name, of unknown origin, perhaps from Old Persian Aturpatakan, from Greek Atropatene, from
the Persian satrap Atropates, who ruled there in the time of Alexander the Great; or from local azer
fire + baydjan (Iranian baykan) guardian, in reference to fire-worship.


azimuth (n.)

distance of a star from the north or south point of the meridian, late 14c., from Old French azimut,
from Arabic as-sumut the ways, plural of as-samt the way, direction (see zenith).


azo-

word-forming element denoting the presence of nitrogen, 1879, from comb. form of azote, the old term
for nitrogen (from Greek a- not, without (see a- (3)) + zoion a living being; see zoo); coined in
French by Lavoisier &amp; de Morveau because living things cannot survive in the gas.


azoic (adj.)

1854, with -ic + Greek azoos, from a- not, without (see a- (3)) + zoon animal (see zoo).


azotemia (n.)

1900, also azotaemia, from azot- (see azo-) + Greek haima blood (see -emia).


Aztec

1787, from Spanish Azteca, from Nahuatl aztecatl (plural aztecah), meaning coming from Aztlan, name
of their legendary place of origin, usually said to lie somewhere in what is now southwestern U.S.


azure (n.)

early 14c., from Old French azur, asur, a color name, from a false separation of Arabic
(al)-lazaward lapis lazuli, as though the -l- were the French article l'. The Arabic name is from
Persian lajward, from Lajward, a place in Turkestan, mentioned by Marco Polo, where the stone was
collected.


