B movie (n.)

by 1939, usually said to be so called from being the second, or supporting, film in a double
feature. Some film industry sources say it was so called for being the second of the two films major
studios generally made in a year, and the one cast with less headline talent and released with less
promotion. And early usage varies with grade-B movie, suggesting a perceived association with
quality.


b&#039;hoy (n.)

1846, U.S. colloquial for spirited lad, young spark, supposedly from the Irish pronunciation of boy.


B&#039;nai B&#039;rith (n.)

Jewish fraternal organization founded in New York City in 1843, Hebrew, literally Sons of the
Covenant, from bene, state construct of banim, plural of ben son, + brith covenant.


B-girl (n.)

1936, abbreviation of bar girl, U.S. slang for a woman paid to encourage customers at a bar to buy
her drinks.


B.B.C. (n.)

for British Broadcasting Company, and continued after 1927 when it was replaced by British
Broadcasting Corporation. BBC English as a type of standardized English recommended for announcers
is recorded from 1928.


B.C.

abbreviation of Before Christ, in chronology, attested by 1823. The phrase itself, Before Christ, in
dating, with exact years, is in use by 1660s.


B.C.E.

initialism (acronym) for Before Common Era or Before Christian Era, 1881; see C.E. A secular
alternative to B.C.


b.o. (n.)

abbreviation of body odor, by c.1950; an advertisers' invention.


baa

imitative sound of a sheep, attested from 1580s, but probably older, as baa is recorded before this
a name for a child's toy sheep. Compare Latin bee sound made by a sheep (Varro), balare to bleat;
Greek blekhe a bleating; Catalan be a sheep.


Baal

Biblical, from Hebrew Ba'al, literally owner, master, lord, a title applied to any deity (including
Jehovah), but later a name of a particular Semitic solar deity worshipped licentiously by the
Phoenecians and Carthaginians; from ba'al he took possession of, also he married; related to or
derived from Akkadian Belu (source of Hebrew Bel), name of Marduk. Identical with the first element
in Beelzebub and the second in Hannibal. Used figuratively in English for any false god.


Baath

pan-Arab socialist party, founded by intellectuals in Syria in 1943, from Arabic ba't resurrection,
renaissance.


baba (n.)

kind of plum cake, 1827, from French baba (19c.), said by French etymology dictionaries to be from
Polish baba.


Babbitt (n.)

conventional, complacent, materialistic American businessman, 1923, from George Babbitt, title
character of Sinclair Lewis' novel (1922).    His name was George F. Babbitt. He was forty-six years
old now, in April 1920, and he made nothing in particular, neither butter nor shoes nor poetry, but
he was nimble in the selling of houses for more money than people could afford to pay. [Sinclair
Lewis, Babbitt, 1922]


babble (v.)

mid-13c., babeln to prattle, chatter, akin to other Western European words for stammering and
prattling (cognates: Swedish babbla, Old French babillier) attested from the same era, some of which
probably were borrowed from others, but etymologists cannot now determine which were original.
Probably imitative of baby-talk, in any case (compare Latin babulus babbler, Greek barbaros non-
Greek-speaking). No direct connexion with Babel can be traced; though association with that may have
affected the senses [OED]. Meaning to repeat oneself incoherently, speak foolishly is attested from
c.1400. Related: Babbled; babbler; babbling; babblement.


babble (n.)

idle talk, c.1500, from babble (v.). In 16c., commonly in reduplicated form bibble-babble.


babe (n.)

late 14c., short for baban (early 13c.), which probably is imitative of baby talk (see babble),
however in many languages the cognate word means old woman (compare Russian babushka grandmother,
from baba peasant woman).    Crist crid in cradil, moder, baba! [John Audelay, c.1426]  Now mostly
superseded by its diminutive form baby. Used figuratively for a childish person from 1520s. Meaning
attractive young woman is 1915, college slang. Babe in the woods is from 1795.


Babel

capital of Babylon, late 14c., from Hebrew Babhel (Gen. xi), from Akkadian bab-ilu Gate of God (from
bab gate + ilu god). The name is a translation of Sumerian Ka-dingir. Meaning confused medley of
sounds (1520s) is from the biblical story of the Tower of Babel.


babelicious (adj.)

1991, from babe in the attractive young woman sense + ending from delicious.


Babism (n.)

1850; see Baha'i.


baboon (n.)

type of old world ape, c.1400, babewyn, earlier a grotesque figure used in architecture or
decoration (early 14c.), from French babouin baboon, from Old French baboin ape, earlier simpleton,
dimwit, fool (13c.), also gaping figure (such as a gargoyle), so perhaps from Old French baboue
grimacing; or perhaps it is imitative of the ape's babbling speech-like cries. Also see -oon. German
Pavian baboon is from Dutch baviaan, from Middle Dutch baubijn, a borrowing of the Old French word.
Century Dictionary says Arabic maimun probably is from the European words.


babouche (n.)

1690s, from French babouche, from Arabic babush, from Persian papush, from pa foot (related to
Avestan pad-, see foot (n.)) + posh covering. Arabic, lacking a -p-, regularly converts -p- in
foreign words to -b-.


babushka (n.)

type of head covering for women, 1938, from Russian babushka grandmother.


baby (n.)

late 14c., babi, diminutive of baban (see babe + -y (3)). Meaning childish adult person is from
c.1600. Meaning youngest of a group is from 1897. As a term of endearment for one's lover it is
attested perhaps as early as 1839, certainly by 1901; its popularity perhaps boosted by baby vamp a
popular girl, student slang from c.1922. As an adjective, by 1750.   Baby food is from 1833. Baby
blues for blue eyes recorded by 1892 (the phrase also was used for postpartum depression 1950s-60s).
To empty the baby out with the bath (water) is first recorded 1909 in G.B. Shaw (compare German das
Kind mit dem Bade aussch&uuml;tten). Baby's breath (noted for sweet smell, which also was supposed
to attract cats) as a type of flower is from 1897. French b&eacute;b&eacute; (19c.) is from English.


baby (v.)

to treat like a baby, 1742, from baby (n.). Related: Babied; babying.


baby boom (n.)

coined 1941, from baby (n.) + boom (n.); derivative baby-boomer (member of the one that began 1945)
recorded by 1974.


babyish (adj.)

1753, from baby (n.) + -ish. Earlier in same sense was babish (1530s).


Babylon

mid-14c., from Greek version of Akkadian Bab-ilani the gate of the gods, from bab gate + ilani,
plural of ilu god (see Babel). The Old Persian form, Babiru-, shows characteristic transformation of
-l- to -r- in words assimilated from Semitic.


Babylonian (n.)

1560s; see Babylon + -ian. From 1630s as an adjective. Earlier in the adjectival sense was
Babylonical (1530s).


babysit (v.)

also baby-sit, 1947, from baby (n.) + sit (v.); figurative use (often contemptuous) by 1968.
Babysitting is from 1946.


babysitter (n.)

also baby-sitter, 1914, from baby (n.) + agent noun from sit (v.). Short form sitter is attested
from 1937.


Bacardi

1921, name for a brand of West Indian rum produced by Compania Ron Bacardi, originally of Cuba.


baccalaureate (n.)

1620s, university degree of a bachelor, from Modern Latin baccalaureatus, from baccalaureus student
with the first degree, alteration of Medieval Latin baccalarius one who has attained the lowest
degree in a university, advanced student lecturing under his master's supervision but not yet having
personal license (altered by folk etymology or word-play, as if from bacca lauri laurel berry,
laurels being awarded for academic success).    The Medieval Latin word is of uncertain origin;
perhaps ultimately from Latin baculum staff (see bacillus), which the young student might carry. Or
it might be a re-Latinization of bachelor in its academic sense.     In modern U.S. usage,
baccalaureate usually is short for baccalaureate sermon (1864), a religious farewell address to a
graduating class at an American college, from the adjectival sense pertaining to the university
degree of bachelor.


baccarat (n.)

card game, 1848, from French baccara (19c.), of unknown origin. Baccarat is the name of a town in
France that was noted for glass-making.


Bacchae (n.)

female attendants of Bacchus, from Greek Bakkhai, plural of Bakkhe, from Bakkhos (see Bacchus).


bacchanal

1530s (n.); 1540s (adj.), from Latin bacchanalis having to do with Bacchus (see Bacchus). Meaning
riotous, drunken roistering; orgy is from 1711.


bacchanalia (n.)

drunken revelry, 1630s, from the name of the Roman festival held in honor of Bacchus, from neuter
plural of Latin bacchanalis (see bacchanal). A participant is a Bacchant (1690s), fem. Bacchante,
from French. The plural of both is Bacchantes.


bacchanalian (adj.)

1560s; see bacchanalia + -an. As a noun from 1610s.


Bacchus

Greek god of wine and revelry, a later name of Dionysus, late 15c., from Latin Bacchus, from Greek
Bakkhos, perhaps related to Latin bacca berry, olive-berry, bead, pearl. Perhaps originally a
Thracian fertility god.


bach (n.)

1845, American English, clipped form of bachelor (n.). Also in colloquial American English use as a
verb (1870) meaning to live as an unmarried man, especially to do one's own cooking and cleaning.
Related: Bached; baching.


bachelor (n.)

c.1300, young man; also youthful knight, novice in arms, from Old French bacheler, bachelor,
bachelier (11c.) knight bachelor, a young squire in training for knighthood, also young man;
unmarried man, and as a university title, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Medieval Latin
baccalarius vassal farmer, adult serf without a landholding, one who helps or tends a baccalaria
field or land in the lord's demesne (according to old French sources, perhaps from an alteration of
vacca a cow and originally grazing land [Kitchin]). Or from Latin baculum a stick, because the
squire would practice with a staff, not a sword. Perhaps several independent words have become
confused in form [Century Dictionary]. Meaning in English expanded early 14c. to young unmarried
man, late 14c. to one who has taken the lowest degree in a university. Bachelor party as a pre-
wedding ritual is from 1882.


bachelorette (n.)

1935, American English, from bachelor with French ending -ette. Replaced earlier bachelor-girl
(1895). Middle French had bachelette young girl; Modern French bacheli&egrave;re is found only in
the student sense.


bacilli (n.)

plural of bacillus (q.v.).


bacillus (n.)

1877, medical Latin, from Late Latin bacillus wand, literally little staff, diminutive of baculum a
stick, from PIE root *bak- staff, also source of Greek bakterion (see bacteria). Introduced as a
term in bacteriology 1853 by German botanist Ferdinand Cohn (1828-1898).


back (n.)

Old English b&aelig;c back, from Proto-Germanic *bakam (cognates: Old Saxon and Middle Dutch bak,
Old Frisian bek), with no known connections outside Germanic. In other modern Germanic languages the
cognates mostly have been ousted in this sense ib words akin to Modern English ridge (cognates:
Danish ryg, German R&uuml;cken). Many Indo-European languages show signs of once having
distinguished the horizontal back of an animal (or a mountain range) from the upright back of a
human. In other cases, a modern word for back may come from a word related to spine (Italian
schiena, Russian spina) or shoulder, shoulder blade (Spanish espalda, Polish plecy).    To turn
(one's) back on (someone or something) ignore is from early 14c. Behind (someone's) back
clandestinely is from late 14c. To know (something) like the back of one's hand, implying
familiarity, is first attested 1893. The first attested use of the phrase is from a dismissive
speech made to a character in Robert Louis Stevenson's Catriona:    If I durst speak to herself, you
may be certain I would never dream of trusting it to you; because I know you like the back of my
hand, and all your blustering talk is that much wind to me.    The story, a sequel to Kidnapped, has
a Scottish setting and context, and the back of my hand to you was noted in the late 19th century as
a Scottish expression meaning I will have nothing to do with you [see Longmuir's edition of
Jamieson's Scottish dictionary]. In English generally, the back of (one's) hand has been used to
imply contempt and rejection since at least 1300. Perhaps the connection of a menacing dismissal is
what made Stevenson choose that particular anatomical reference.


back (v.)

late 15c., to move (something) back, from back (adv.). Meaning to support (as by a bet) is first
attested 1540s. Related: Backed; backing.


back (adj.)

Middle English, from back (n.) and back (adv.). Formerly with comparative backer (c.1400), also
backermore. To be on the back burner in the figurative sense is from 1960, from the image of a cook
keeping a pot there to simmer while he or she works on another concoction at the front of the stove.


back (adv.)

late 14c., shortened from abak, from Old English on b&aelig;c backwards, behind, aback (see back
(n.)). Adverbial phrase back and forth attested from 1814.


back down (v.)

in figurative sense of withdraw a charge, 1859, American English, from notion of descending a
ladder, etc.; from back (v.) + down (adv.).


back off (v.)

retreat, stop annoying someone, by 1938, from the verbal phrase, from back (v.) + off (adv.).


back seat (n.)

also back-seat, 1832, originally of coaches, from back (adj.) + seat (n.). Used figuratively for
less or least prominent position by 1868. Back-seat driver first attested 1926.


back up (v.)

1767, stand behind and support, from back (v.) + up. The noun meaning a standby, a reserve is
recorded from 1952 (often written as one word, backup); specific reference to computing is from
1965.


back-ache (n.)

c.1600, from back (n.) + ache (n.).


back-formation (n.)

also back formation, by 1887, from back (adv.) + formation.


back-stitch (n.)

1610s, from back (adj.) + stitch (n.).


back-to-nature (adj.)

first attested 1915.


backbencher (n.)

1874 in the House of Commons sense, from back (adj.) + bench (n.); occupants of the rear seats being
the least-prominent politicians.


backbiting (n.)

c.1200, bacbitunge, from back (adj. or n.) + biting. Related: back-bite (v.), early 14c.; back-biter
(c.1200).


backbone (n.)

spine, early 14c., from back (n.) + bone (n.). Figurative sense of strength of character is attested
from 1843.


backdate (v.)

also back-date, by 1881 (implied in back-dated), from back (adv.) + date (v.1). Compare antedate.
Related: Backdated; backdating.


backdoor (adj.)

also back-door, devious, shady, illegal, 1640s. The notion is of business done out of public view.
The noun back door in the literal sense is from 1520s, from back (adj.) + door. The association with
sodomy is at least from 19c.; compare also back-door man a married woman's lover, black slang, early
20c.


backdrop (n.)

1913, in U.S. theatrical argot, from back (adj.) + drop (n.).


backer (n.)

supporter, 1580s, agent noun from back (v.).


backfill (n.)

1901 (as backfilling), from back (adj.) + fill (n.). The verb was in use by 1930.


backfire (n.)

1839, American English, originally a fire deliberately lit ahead of an advancing prairie fire to
deprive it of fuel, from back (adj.) + fire (n.). As a verb in this sense, recorded from 1886. The
meaning premature ignition in an internal-combustion engine is first recorded 1897. Of schemes,
plans, etc., to affect the initiator rather than the intended object it is attested from 1912, a
figurative use from the accidental back-firing of firearms.


backgammon (n.)

1640s, baggammon, the second element from Middle English gamen, ancestor of game; the first element
apparently because pieces sometimes are forced to go back. Known 13c.-17c. as tables.


background (n.)

1670s, from back (adj.) + ground (n.); original sense was theatrical, later applied to painting.
Figurative sense is first attested 1854.


backhand (n.)

as a tennis stroke, 1650s, from back (adv.) + hand. As a verb, by 1935. The figurative adjectival
sense of indirect is from c.1800. Related: Backhanded; backhanding.


backhoe (n.)

by 1928, from back (n. or adj.) + hoe (n.).


backing (n.)

1590s, support; 1640s, retreat; verbal noun from back (v.). Physical sense of anything forming a
backing to something else is from 1793. Meaning musical accompaniment is recorded from 1940.


backlash (n.)

1815, of machinery, from back (adj.) + lash (n.). In metaphoric sense, it is attested from 1955.


backless (adj.)

1926, in reference to women's clothing, from back (n.) + -less.


backlist (n.)

1946, in publishing, from back (adj.) + list (n.). As a verb, to put on the back list, from 1983.
Related: Backlisted.


backlog (n.)

1680s, large log placed at the back of a fire, from back (adj.) + log (n.1). Figurative sense of
something stored up for later use is first attested 1883, but this and the meaning arrears of
unfulfilled orders (1932) might be from, or suggested by, log (n.2).


backorder

also back-order, by 1980 (n.); 1985 (v.), from back (adj.) + order. Related: Backordered.


backpack

1914 as a noun, 1916 as a verb, from back (n.) + pack (n.). Related: Backpacked; backpacking.


backside (n.)

c.1400, from back (adj.) + side (n.). In the specific sense of rump, buttocks it is first recorded
c.1500.


backslash (n.)

1982, new punctuation symbol introduced for computer purposes, from back (adj.) + slash (n.).


backslide (v.)

in the religious sense, 1580s, from back (adj.) + slide (v.). Related: Backslider; backsliding
(1550s).


backspace (adj.)

also back-space, 1899, in reference to keyboarding, from back (adv.) + space.    We have had the
pleasure of examining one of the 1899 model Hammond typewriters, with the new back-space key. This
new feature is certainly an improvement in the machine. [The Phonetic Journal, March 11, 1899]


backstabber (n.)

also back-stabber, in the figurative sense, 1839, from back (n.) + agent noun from stab (v.). The
verb backstab in the figurative sense is from 1925.


backstage

also back-stage, 1898, from back (adj.) + stage (n.).


backstairs

stairs at the back of a structure, 1650s, from back (adj.) + stairs (see stair). Figurative use is
attested earlier (1640s).


backstop (n.)

1819, in cricket, from back (adj.) + stop (n.). In U.S. baseball, from 1889, fence behind the
catcher; figurative extension to catcher on a baseball team is from 1890. The verb is attested from
1956 in the sense of support. Related: Backstopped; backstopping.


backstory (n.)

c.1990, from background story.


backstreet (n.)

mid-15c., from back (adj.) + street.


backstroke (n.)

1670s, counter-punch, from back (adj.) + stroke (n.). From 1876 in swimming, from back (n.).


backtalk (n.)

also back-talk, impertinent retort, 1858, originally often used in literary attempts at low Irish
idiom, from back (adj.) + talk (n.).


backtrack (v.)

retrace one's steps, figuratively, by 1896, from literal sense, with reference to hunted foxes, from
back (adv.) + track (v.). Related: Backtracked; backtracking.


backup

see back up.


backward (adv.)

c.1300, from abakward, from Old English on b&aelig;c (see back (adv.)) + -weard adjectival and
adverbial suffix (see -ward). Old English had the adverb b&aelig;cling. As an adjective, from 1550s.
Meaning behindhand with regard to progress is first attested 1690s. To ring bells backward (from
lowest to highest), c.1500, was a signal of alarm for fire or invasion, or to express dismay.
Another Middle English word for backward, wrongly was arseward (c.1400).


backwardness (n.)

1580s, from backward + -ness.


backwards (adv.)

1510s, from backward with adverbial genitive. Figurative phrase bend over backwards is recorded from
1901.


backwash (n.)

1876, motion of a receeding wave, from back (adj.) + wash (n.).


backwater (n.)

late 14c., water behind a dam, from back (adj.) + water (n.1). Hence flat water without a current
near a flowing river, as in a mill race (1820); figurative use of this for any flat, dull place is
from 1899.


backwood (n.)

1709, American English, from back (adj.) + wood (n.) forested tract. Also backwoods. As an
adjective, from 1784.    BACKWOODSMEN ... This word is commonly used as a term of reproach (and
that, only in a familiar style,) to designate those people, who, being at a distance from the sea
and entirely agricultural, are considered as either hostile or indifferent to the interests of the
commercial states. [John Pickering, A Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases Which Have Been
Supposed to be Peculiar to the United States of America, Boston, 1816]


backyard (n.)

also back-yard, 1650s (perhaps early 15c.), from back (adj.) + yard (n.1).


bacon (n.)

early 14c., meat from the back and sides of a pig (originally either fresh or cured, but especially
cured), from Old French bacon, from Proto-Germanic *bakkon back meat (cognates: Old High German
bahho, Old Dutch baken bacon). Slang phrase bring home the bacon first recorded 1908; bacon formerly
being the staple meat of the working class.


bacteria (n.)

1847, plural of Modern Latin bacterium, from Greek bakterion small staff, diminutive of baktron
stick, rod, from PIE *bak- staff used for support (also source of Latin baculum rod, walking stick).
So called because the first ones observed were rod-shaped. Introduced as a scientific word 1838 by
German naturalist Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg (1795-1876).


bacterial (adj.)

1869, from bacteria + -al (1).


bacteriology (n.)

1884, from German; see bacteria + -ology. Related: Bacteriological (1886). Bacteriological warfare
is from 1924.


bacteriophage (n.)

1921, from French bact&eacute;riophage (1917), from bacterio-, comb. form of bacteria, + -phage.


bacterium (n.)

c.1848, singular of bacteria (q.v.).


Bactrian

inhabitant of Bactria, late 14c.; as a type of camel, c.1600, from Latin Bactria, ancient region in
what is now northwestern Afghanistan, literally the western province, from Persian bakhtar the west.


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


bad-mouth (v.)

abuse someone verbally, 1941, probably ultimately from noun phrase bad mouth (1835), in Black
English, a curse, spell, translating an idiom found in African and West Indian languages. Related:
Bad-mouthed; bad-mouthing.


badass (n.)

tough guy, 1950s U.S. slang, from bad + ass (n.2).


badder (adj.)

obsolete or colloquial comparative of bad, common 14c.-18c.


baddest (adj.)

obsolete or colloquial superlative of bad, common 14c.-18c.


baddish (adj.)

rather bad, 1755, from bad + -ish.


baddy (n.)

bad man, 1937, from bad + -y (3).


bade

Old English b&aelig;d, past tense of bid (v.).


badge (n.)

mid-14c., perhaps from Anglo-French bage or from Anglo-Latin bagis, plural of bagia emblem, all of
unknown origin.


badger (n.)

1520s, perhaps from bage badge (see badge) + -ard one who carries some action or possesses some
quality, suffix related to Middle High German -hart bold (see -ard). If so, the central notion is
the badge-like white blaze on the animal's forehead (as in French blaireau badger, from Old French
blarel, from bler marked with a white spot; also obsolete Middle English bauson badger, from Old
French bauzan, literally black-and-white spotted). But blaze (n.2) was the usual word for this.
An Old English name for the creature was the Celtic borrowing brock; also gr&aelig;g (Middle English
grei, grey). In American English, the nickname of inhabitants or natives of Wisconsin (1833).


badger (v.)

1790, from badger (n.), based on the behavior of the dogs in the medieval sport of badger-baiting,
still practiced in 18c. England. Related: Badgered; badgering.


badinage (n.)

light railery, 1650s, from French badinage playfulness, jesting, from badiner (v.) to jest, joke,
from badin silly, jesting, from Old Proven&ccedil;al badar to yawn, gape, from Late Latin badare to
gape, from *bat-, the root of abash.


badlands (n.)

arid, highly eroded regions of the western U.S., 1852, from bad + land (n.). Applied to urban
districts of crime and vice since 1892 (originally with reference to Chicago).


badly (adv.)

c.1300, unluckily; late 14c., wickedly, evilly; poorly, inadequately, from bad + -ly (2).


badminton (n.)

1874, from Badminton House, name of Gloucestershire estate of the Duke of Beaufort, where the game
first was played in England, mid-19c., having been picked up by British officers from Indian poona.
The place name is Old English Badimyncgtun (972), estate of (a man called) Baduhelm.


badness (n.)

late 14c., baddenesse; see bad + -ness.


Baedeker

travel guide, 1863, from German printer and bookseller Karl Baedeker (1801-1859) whose popular
travel guides began the custom of rating places with one to four stars. The Baedeker raids by the
Luftwaffe in April and May 1942 targeted British cultural and historical sites.


baffle (v.)

1540s, to disgrace, perhaps a Scottish respelling of bauchle to disgrace publicly (especially a
perjured knight), which is probably related to French bafouer to abuse, hoodwink (16c.), possibly
from baf, a natural sound of disgust, like bah (compare German baff machen to flabbergast). Meaning
to bewilder, confuse is from 1640s; that of to defeat someone's efforts is from 1670s. Related:
Baffled; baffling.


baffle (n.)

shielding device, 1881, from baffle (v.).


bafflement (n.)

1841, from baffle (v.) + -ment.


baffling (adj.)

1783, bewildering, present participle adjective from baffle (v.); earlier a sailor's adjective for
winds that blow variously and make headway difficult (c.1770s).


bag (n.)

c.1200, bagge, from Old Norse baggi or a similar Scandinavian source; not found in other Germanic
languages, perhaps ultimately of Celtic origin. Disparaging slang for woman dates from 1924 (though
various specialized senses of this are much older). Meaning person's area of interest or expertise
is 1964, from Black English slang, from jazz sense of category, probably via notion of putting
something in a bag.    To be left holding the bag (and presumably nothing else), cheated, swindled
is attested by 1793. Many figurative senses, such as the verb meaning to kill game (1814) and its
colloquial extension to catch, seize, steal (1818) are from the notion of the game bag (late 15c.)
into which the product of the hunt was placed. To let the cat out of the bag reveal the secret is
from 1760.


bag (v.)

mid-15c., to swell out like a bag; also to put money in a bag, from bag (n.). Earliest verbal sense
was to be pregnant (c.1400). Of clothes, to hang loosely, 1824. For sense catch, seize, steal, see
bag (n.). Related: Bagged; bagging.


bag-end (n.)

bottom of a bag, c.1400, from bag (n.) + end (n.).


bagatelle (n.)

1630s, a trifle, from French bagatelle knick-knack, bauble, trinket (16c.), from Italian bagatella a
trifle, diminutive of Latin baca berry. As a piece of light music, it is attested from 1827.


bagel (n.)

1919, from Yiddish beygl, from Middle High German boug- ring, bracelet, from Old High German boug a
ring, related to Old English beag ring (in poetry, an Anglo-Saxon lord was beaggifa ring-giver),
from Proto-Germanic *baugaz-, from PIE root *bheug- (3) to bend, with derivatives referring to bent,
pliable, or curved objects (such as Old High German biogan to bend; see bow (v.)).


bagful (n.)

c.1300, bagge-ful, from bag (n.) + -ful.


baggage (n.)

mid-15c., portable equipment of an army; plunder, loot, from Old French bagage baggage, (military)
equipment (14c.), from bague pack, bundle, sack, ultimately from the same Scandinavian source that
yielded bag (n.). Baggage-smasher (1851) was American English slang for railway porter.


bagger (n.)

mid-15c., retailer in grain (as a surname from mid-13c., probably maker of bags), also, 1740, miser;
agent noun from bag (v.). Of persons who bag various things for a living, from 19c.; meaning machine
that puts things in bags is from 1896.


baggy (adj.)

puffed out, hanging loosely, 1831, from bag (n.) + -y (2). Bagging in this sense is from 1590s.
Baggie as a small protective plastic bag is from 1969. Baggies baggy shorts is from 1962, surfer
slang. Related: Baggily; bagginess.


Baghdad

a pre-Islamic name apparently of Indo-European origin and probably meaning gift of god, with the
first element related to Russian bog god and the second to English donor. Marco Polo (13c.) wrote it
Baudac.


bagpipe (n.)

late 14c., from bag (n.) + pipe (n.1); originally a favorite instrument in England as well as the
Celtic lands, but by 1912 English army officers' slang for it was agony bags. Related: Bagpiper
(early 14c.).


baguette (n.)

1727, a type of architectural ornament, from French baguette (16c.), from Italian bacchetta,
literally a small rod, diminutive of bacchio rod, from Latin baculum a stick (see bacillus). Meaning
a diamond cut long is from 1926; that of a long, thin loaf of French bread is from 1958.


bah

exclamation of contempt, 1817, perhaps c.1600, probably from French bah, Old French ba, expressing
surprise, scorn, dismay. Perhaps simply a natural exclamation in such situations; compare Greek
babai!, an exclamation of surprise.


Baha&#039;i

1889, mystical, tolerant Iranian religion founded by a Mirza Ali Mohammed ibn Radhik, Shiraz
merchant executed for heresy in 1850, and named for his leading disciple, Baha Allah (Persian
splendor of God; ultimately from Arabic). It also is sometimes called Babism, after the name taken
by the founder, Bab-ed-Din, gate of the faith.


Bahamas

islands discovered by Columbus in 1492, settled by English in 1648, long after the native population
had been wiped out by disease or carried off into slavery; the name is said to be from Spanish baja
mar low sea, in reference to the shallow water here, but more likely represents a local name,
Guanahani, whose origin had been lost and whose meaning has been forgotten.


bail (n.1)

bond money, late 15c., a sense that apparently developed from that of temporary release from jail
(into the custody of another, who gives security), recorded from early 15c. That evolved from
earlier meaning captivity, custody (early 14c.). From Old French baillier to control, to guard,
deliver (12c.), from Latin bajulare to bear a burden, from bajulus porter, of unknown origin. In
late 18c. criminal slang, to give leg bail meant to run away.


bail (v.2)

to procure someone's release from prison (by posting bail), 1580s, from bail (n.1); usually with
out. Related: Bailed; bailing.


bail (v.1)

to dip water out of, 1610s, from baile (n.) small wooden bucket (mid-14c.), from nautical Old French
baille bucket, pail, from Medieval Latin *bajula (aquae), literally porter of water, from Latin
bajulare to bear a burden (see bail (n.1)). To bail out leave suddenly (intransitive) is recorded
from 1930, originally of airplane pilots. Related: Bailed; bailing.


bail (n.2)

horizontal piece of wood in a cricket wicket, c.1742, originally any cross bar (1570s), probably
identical with Middle French bail horizontal piece of wood affixed on two stakes, and with English
bail palisade wall, outer wall of a castle (see bailey).


bailey (n.)

wall enclosing an outer court, early 14c. (c.1200 in Anglo-Latin), baylle, variant of bail, from Old
French bail stake, palisade, brace, of unknown origin, perhaps ultimately connected to Latin bacula
sticks, on notion of stakes, palisade fence. Old Bailey, seat of Central Criminal Court in London,
was so called because it stood within the ancient bailey of the city wall. The surname Bailey
usually is from Old French bailli, a later form of baillif (see bailiff).


bailiff (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French baillif (12c., nominative baillis) administrative official, deputy, from
Vulgar Latin *bajulivus official in charge of a castle, from Latin bajulus porter, of unknown
origin. Used in Middle English of a public administrator of a district, a chief officer of a
Hundred, or an officer under a sheriff.


bailiwick (n.)

district of a bailiff, early 15c., baillifwik, from bailiff (q.v.) + Middle English form of Old
English wic village (see wick (n.2)). Figurative sense of one's natural or proper sphere is first
recorded 1843.


bailout (n.)

1945, in aviation, from bail (v.) + out (adv.). As federal help for private business in trouble,
from 1968.


bain-marie (n.)

1822, from French bain-marie, from Medieval Latin balneum Mariae, literally bath of Mary. According
to French sources, perhaps so called for the gentleness of its heating. Middle English had balne of
mary (late 15c.). French bain is from baigner to bathe, from Latin balneare.


bairn (n.)

child (of any age), Old English bearn child, son, descendant, probably related to beran (to bear,
carry, give birth; see bear (v.)). Originally not chiefly Scottish, but felt as such from c.1700.
This was the English form of the original Germanic word for child (see child). Dutch, Old High
German kind, German Kind are from a prehistoric *gen-to-m born, from the same root as Latin gignere.
Middle English had bairn-team brood of children.


bait (n.)

food put on a hook or trap to lure prey, c.1300, from Old Norse beita food, related to Old Norse
beit pasture, Old English bat food, literally to cause to bite (see bait (v.)). Figurative sense
anything used as a lure is from c.1400.


bait (v.1)

to torment or goad (someone unable to escape, and to take pleasure in it), c.1300, beyten, a
figurative use from the literal sense of to set dogs on, from the medieval entertainment of setting
dogs on some ferocious animal to bite and worry it (the literal use is attested from c.1300); from
Old Norse beita to cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitan (cognates: Old English b&aelig;tan to
cause to bite, Old High German beizzen to bait, Middle High German beiz hunting, German beizen to
hawk, to cauterize, etch), causative of *bitan (see bite (v.)); the causative word forked into the
two meanings of harass and food offered. Related: Baited; baiting.


bait (v.2)

to put food on a hook or in a trap, c.1300, probably from bait (n.). Related: Baited; baiting.


baited (adj.)

c.1600, furnished with bait, past participle adjective from bait (v.2). Hence, in a figurative
sense, exciting, alluring (1650s). For bated breath see bate (v.1).


baize (n.)

coarse woolen fabric, 1570s, bayse, from French baies, fem. plural of adjective bai bay-colored,
from Latin badius chestnut-colored (see bay (n.4)). Thus probably so called for its original color.
French plural taken as a singular in English.


Baja

in place names (such as Baja California), Spanish baja, literally lower, either in elevation or
geography.


bake (v.)

Old English bacan to bake, from Proto-Germanic *bakan to bake (cognates: Old Norse baka, Middle
Dutch backen, Old High German bahhan, German backen), from PIE *bheg- (source also of Greek phogein
to roast), extended form of root *bhe- to warm (see bath). Related: Baked (Middle English had
baken); baking. Baked beans attested by 1803.


bake (n.)

social gathering at which baked food is served, 1846, American English, from bake (v.).


bakelite (n.)

type of plastic widely used early 20c., 1909, from German Bakelit, named for Belgian-born U.S.
physicist Leo Baekeland (1863-1944), who invented it. Originally a proprietary name, it is formed by
the condensation of a phenol with an aldehyde.


baker (n.)

Old English b&aelig;cere baker, agent noun from bacan to bake (see bake (v.)). In the Middle Ages,
the craft had two divisions, braun-bakeres and whit-bakeres.    White bakers shall bake no hors
brede..broune bakers shall bake whete brede as it comyth grounde fro the mylle withoute ony bultyng
of the same. Also the seid broune bakers shall bake hors brede of clene benys and pesyn, And also
brede that is called housholdersbrede. [Letterbook in the City of London Records Office, Guildhall,
1441]   Baker's dozen thirteen is from 1590s.  These dealers [hucksters] ... on purchasing their
bread from the bakers, were privileged by law to receive thirteen batches for twelve, and this would
seem to have been the extent of their profits. Hence the expression, still in use, A baker's dozen.
[H.T. Riley, Liber Albus, 1859]


bakery (n.)

c.1820, place for making bread; see bake (v.) + -ery. Replaced earlier bakehouse (c.1400). As shop
where baked goods are sold it was noted as an Americanism by British travelers from c.1830.


baklava (n.)

1650s, from Turkish.


baksheesh (n.)

1620s, in India, Egypt, etc., a tip, from Persian bakhshish, literally gift, from verb bakhshidan to
give (also to forgive), from PIE root *bhag- to share out, apportion, distribute (see -phagous).


balaclava (n.)

woolen head covering, especially worn by soldiers, evidently named for village near Sebastopol,
Russia, site of a battle Oct. 25, 1854, in the Crimean War. But the term (originally Balaclava
helmet) does not appear before 1881 and seems to have come into widespread use in the Boer War. The
British troops suffered from the cold in the Crimean War, and the usage might be a remembrance of
that conflict. The town name (Balaklava) often is said to be from Turkish, but is perhaps folk-
etymologized from a Greek original Palakion.


balalaika (n.)

stringed instrument with a triangular body, 1788, from Russian balalaika, said to be related to
balabolit' to chatter, babble, an imitative word.


balance (n.)

early 13c., apparatus for weighing, from Old French balance (12c.) balance, scales for weighing,
also in the figurative sense; from Medieval Latin bilancia, from Late Latin bilanx, from Latin
(libra) bilanx (scale) having two pans, possibly from Latin bis twice + lanx dish, plate, scale of a
balance. The accounting sense is from 1580s; the meaning general harmony between parts is from 1732;
sense of physical equipoise is from 1660s. Balance of power in the geopolitical sense is from 1701.
Many figurative uses (such as hang in the balance, late 14c.), are from Middle English image of the
scales in the hands of personified Justice, Fortune, Fate, etc.


balance (v.)

1570s, be equal with, from balance (n.). Meaning bring or keep in equilibrium is from 1630s; that of
keep oneself in equilibrium is from 1833. Of accounts, from 1580s. Related: Balanced; balancing.
Balanced meal, diet, etc. is from 1908.


balcony (n.)

1610s, from Italian balcone, from balco scaffold, from a Germanic source (perhaps Langobardic
*balko- beam, cognate with Old English balca beam, ridge; see balk (n.)) + Italian augmentative
suffix -one. Till c.1825, regularly accented on the second syllable.


bald (adj.)

c.1300, ballede, probably, with Middle English -ede adjectival suffix + Celtic bal white patch,
blaze especially on the head of a horse or other animal (from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash,
gleam; see bleach (v.)). Compare, from the same root, Sanskrit bhalam brightness, forehead, Greek
phalos white, Latin fulcia coot (so called for the white patch on its head), Albanian bale forehead.
But connection with ball (n.1), on notion of smooth, round also has been suggested. Bald eagle first
attested 1680s; so called for its white head.


balderdash (n.)

1590s, of unknown origin; originally a jumbled mix of liquors (milk and beer, beer and wine, etc.),
transferred 1670s to senseless jumble of words. From dash; first element perhaps cognate with Danish
balder noise, clatter (see boulder).


baldness (n.)

late 14c., from bald + -ness.


baldric (n.)

c.1300, belt worn over the shoulder, from Old French baldre (Modern French baudrier shoulder-belt),
which probably is from Latin balteus belt, said by Varro to be of Etruscan origin. The English word
perhaps influenced by Middle High German balderich (which itself is from the Old French).


Baldwin

masc. proper name, from Old French Baldoin (Modern French Baudouin), from a Germanic source similar
to Old High German Baldawin, literally bold friend, from bald bold (see bold) + wini friend (see
win). A popular Flemish name, common in England before and after the Conquest.


baldy (n.)

bald-headed person, 1850, from bald + -y (3).


bale (n.)

large bundle or package, early 14c., from Old French bale rolled-up bundle, from a Germanic source
(such as Old High German balla ball), from Proto-Germanic *ball-, from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, swell
(see bole).


baleen (n.)

early 14c., whalebone, from Old French balaine (12c.) whale, whalebone, from Latin ballaena, from
Greek phallaina whale (apparently related to phallos swollen penis, probably because of a whale's
shape), from PIE root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). Klein writes that the Greek to
Latin transition was through the medium of the Illyrian language, a fact which explains the
transition of Gk. -ph- into Latin -b- (instead of -p-).


baleful (adj.)

Old English bealu-full dire, wicked, cruel, from bealu harm, injury, ruin, evil, mischief,
wickedness, a noxious thing, from Proto-Germanic *balwom (cognates: Old Saxon balu, Old Frisian balu
evil, Old High German balo destruction, Old Norse bol, Gothic balwjan to torment), from PIE root
*bhelu- to harm. During Anglo-Saxon times, the noun was in poetic use only (in compounds such as
bealubenn mortal wound, bealu&eth;onc evil thought), and for long baleful has belonged exclusively
to poets. Related: Balefully.


baler (n.)

machine that makes bales, 1888, agent noun from bale (v.).


balk (n.)

Old English balca ridge, bank, from or influenced by Old Norse balkr ridge of land, especially
between two plowed furrows, both from Proto-Germanic *balkon- (cognates: Old Saxon balko, Danish
bjelke, Old Frisian balka, Old High German balcho, German Balken beam, rafter), from PIE *bhelg-
beam, plank (cognates: Latin fulcire to prop up, support, fulcrum bedpost; Lithuanian balziena
cross-bar; and possibly Greek phalanx trunk, log, line of battle). Modern senses are figurative,
representing the balk as a hindrance or obstruction (see balk (v.)). Baseball sense is first
attested 1845.


balk (v.)

late 14c., to leave an unplowed ridge when plowing, from balk (n.). Extended meaning to omit,
intentionally neglect is mid-15c. Most modern senses are figurative, from the notion of a balk in
the fields as a hindrance or obstruction: sense of stop short (as a horse confronted with an
obstacle) is late 15c.; that of to refuse is 1580s. Related: Balked; balking.


Balkanize (v.)

1920, first used in reference to the Baltic states, on the model of what had happened in the
Balkans; said to have been coined by English editor James Louis Garvin (1868-1947), but A.J. Toynbee
(1922) credited it to German Socialists describing the results of the treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
Either way, the reference is to the political situation in the Balkans c.1878-1913, when the
European section of the Ottoman Empire split up into small, warring nations. Balkanized and
Balkanization both also are from 1920.


Balkans

probably from Turkic balkan mountain.


balky (adj.)

1847, from balk (n.) + -y (2). Related: Balkily; balkiness.


ball (n.1)

round object, Old English *beal, from or corresponding to Old Norse bollr ball, from Proto-Germanic
*balluz (cognates: Old High German ballo, German Ball), from PIE root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate,
swell (see bole).    Meaning testicle is from early 14c. Ball of the foot is from mid-14c. A ball as
an object in a sports game is recorded from c.1200; To have the ball hold the advantage is from
c.1400. To be on the ball is 1912, from sports. Ball-point pen first recorded 1946. Ball of fire
when first recorded in 1821 referred to a glass of brandy; as spectacularly successful striver it is
c.1900.


ball (n.2)

dancing party, 1630s, from French, from Old French baller to dance, from Late Latin ballare to
dance, from Greek ballizein to dance, jump about (see ballistics). Hence, very enjoyable time, 1945,
American English slang, perhaps back to 1930s in black slang.


ball (v.)

1650s, make into a ball, from ball (n.1). Sense of to become like a ball is 1713; that of to
copulate is first recorded 1940s in jazz slang, either from the noun sense of testicle or enjoyable
time (from ball (n.2)). Related: Balled; balling.


ball and chain (n.)

a type of prisoner's restraint, 1818; as one's wife, 1920.


ballad (n.)

late 15c., from French ballade dancing song (13c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al ballada (poem for a)
dance, from balar to dance, from Late Latin ballare to dance (see ball (n.2)).


ballade (n.)

late 14c., an earlier borrowing of ballad (q.v.) with a specific metrical sense. Technically, a poem
consisting of one or more triplets of seven- (later eight-) lined stanzas, each ending with the same
line as the refrain, usually with an envoy. Popularized 19c. as a type of musical composition by
Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Chopin. Ballade royal is recorded from late 15c.


Ballard

surname, attested from late 12c., probably meaning bald head; see Wyclif's Stye up, ballard, where
Coverdale translates Come vp here thou balde heade [2 Kg.2:23-24, where God kills 42 children for
making fun of Elijah's lack of hair.]


ballast (n.)

heavy material used to steady a ship, 1520s, from Middle English bar bare (see bare; in this case
mere) + last a load, burden, or borrowed from identical terms in North Sea Germanic and Scandinavian
(compare Old Danish barlast, 14c.). Mere because not carried for commercial purposes. Dutch balg-
last ballast, literally belly-load, is a folk-etymology corruption.


ballerina (n.)

1792, from Italian ballerina, literally dancing girl, fem. of ballerino dancer, from ballo a dance
(see ball (n.2)). The Italian plural form ballerine formerly sometimes was used in English.


ballet (n.)

1660s, from French ballette from Italian balletto, diminutive of ballo a dance (see ball (n.2)).
Balletomane attested by 1930.


ballista (n.)

ancient war engine, late 14c., from Latin ballista, literally a throwing machine, from Greek ballein
to throw (see ballistics).


ballistic (adj.)

1775, pertaining to thrown objects, ultimately from Greek ballein to throw (see ballistics). Of
rockets or missiles (ones that are guided while under propulsion, but fall freely), from 1949.
Ballistic missile first attested 1954; they attain extreme heights, hence figurative expression go
ballistic (1981) become irrationally angry.


ballistics (n.)

1753, art of throwing; science of projectiles, with -ics + Latin ballista ancient military machine
for hurling stones, from Greek ballistes, from ballein to throw, to throw so as to hit, also in a
looser sense, to put, place, lay; from PIE root *gwele- (1) to throw, reach, in extended senses to
pierce (cognates: Sanskrit apa-gurya swinging, balbaliti whirls, twirls; Greek bole a throw, beam,
ray, belemnon dart, javelin, belone needle). Here, too, probably belongs Greek ballizein to dance,
literally to throw one's body, ancient Greek dancing being highly athletic.


ballocks (n.)

testicles, from Old English beallucas, plural diminutive of balle (see ball (n.1)).


ballon (n.)

smoothness in dancing, lightness of step, 1830, from French ballon, literally balloon (see balloon
(n.)).


balloon (n.)

1570s, a game played with a large inflated leather ball, from Italian pallone large ball, from palla
ball, from a Germanic source akin to Langobardic palla (from Proto-Germanic *ball-, from PIE *bhel-
(2) to blow, swell; see bole) + -one, suffix indicating great size.    Perhaps also borrowed in part
from French ballon (16c.), altered (after balle) from Italian pallone. It also meant the ball itself
(1590s), which was batted back and forth by means of large wooden paddles strapped to the forearms.
In 17c., it also meant a type of fireworks housed in a pasteboard ball (1630s) and round ball used
as an architectural ornament (1650s). Acquired modern meaning after Montgolfier brothers' flights,
1783. As a child's toy, it is attested from 1848; as outline containing words in a comic engraving
it dates from 1844. Also see -oon.


balloon (v.)

to go up in a balloon, 1792; to swell, puff up, 1841, from balloon (n.). Related: Ballooned;
ballooning.


ballot (n.)

1540s, small ball used in voting, also secret vote taken by ballots, from Italian pallotte,
diminutive of palla ball, for small balls used as counters in secret voting (see balloon). Earliest
references are to Venice. By 1776 extended to tickets or sheets of paper used in secret voting.
Ballot box attested from 1670s; metonymically from 1834 as system or practice of voting by ballot.


ballot (v.)

1540s, from ballot (n.). Related: Balloted; balloting.


ballpark (n.)

baseball stadium, 1899, from (base)ball + park (n.). Figurative sense of acceptable range of
approximation first recorded 1954, originally in the jargon of atomic weapons scientists, perhaps
originally referring to area within which a missile was expected to return to earth; the reference
is to broad but reasonably predictable dimensions.    The result, according to the author's
estimate, is a stockpile equivalent to one billion tons of TNT. Assuming this estimate is in the
ball park, clearly there is valid reason for urging candor on the part of our government. [Ralph E.
Lapp, Atomic Candor, in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, October 1954]


ballplayer (n.)

mid-15c., from ball (n.1) + player.


ballroom (n.)

1736, from ball (n.2) + room (n.). Ballroom dancing is attested by 1872.


balls (n.)

testicles, early 14c., from plural of ball (n.1). See also ballocks. Meaning courage, nerve is from
1928. Balls to the wall, however, probably is from World War II Air Forces slang, from the ball that
topped the aircraft throttle, thrust to the bulkhead of the cockpit to attain full speed. Ball-
busting difficult is first recorded 1944; ball-buster, disparaging for dominant female, is from
1974.


ballsy (adj.)

courageous, masculine, 1959, first attested in Norman Mailer (writing of Truman Capote); see balls +
-y (2).


bally (adj.)

1885, British English, slang euphemism for bloody.


ballyhoo (n.)

publicity, hype, 1908, from circus slang, a short sample of a sideshow (1901), of unknown origin.
There is a village of Ballyhooly in County Cork, Ireland. In nautical lingo, ballahou or ballahoo
(1867, perhaps 1836) meant an ungainly vessel, from Spanish balahu schooner.


balm (n.)

early 13c., basme, aromatic substance made from resins and oils, from Old French basme (Modern
French baume), from Latin balsamum, from Greek balsamon balsam, from Hebrew basam spice, related to
Aramaic busma, Arabic basham balsam, spice, perfume.    Spelling refashioned 15c.-16c. on Latin
model. Sense of healing or soothing influence (1540s) is from aromatic preparations from balsam (see
balsam). Biblical Balm of Gilead, however, began with Coverdale; the Hebrew word there is tsori,
which was rendered in Septuagint and Vulgate as resin (Greek rhetine, Latin resina).


balmy (adj.)

c.1500, delicately fragrant, from balm + -y (2). Figurative use for soothing dates from c.1600; of
breezes, air, etc. mild, fragrant (combining both earlier senses) it is first attested 1704. Meaning
weak-minded, idiotic, 1851, is from London slang.


balneal (adj.)

pertaining to baths, from Latin balneum bath, from Greek balaneion, of unknown origin.


baloney (n.)

1894, variant of bologna sausage (q.v.). As slang for nonsense, 1922, American English (popularized
1930s by N.Y. Gov. Alfred E. Smith; in this sense sometimes said to have been one of the coinages of
legendary Variety staffer Jack Conway), from earlier sense of idiot (by 1915), perhaps influenced by
blarney, but usually regarded as being from the sausage, as a type traditionally made from odds and
ends. It also was ring slang early 20c. for an inferior fighter.    The aristocratic Kid's first
brawl for sugar was had in Sandusky, Odryo, with a boloney entitled Young Du Fresne. He gave the
green and nervous Kid a proper pastin' for six rounds and the disgusted Dummy sold me his find for a
hundred bucks, leavin' the clubhouse just in time to miss seein' the boy get stung, get mad, and win
by a knockout. [H.C. Witwer, The Leather Pushers, Colliers, Oct. 16, 1920]


balsa (n.)

South American tree, 1866, apparently from Spanish balsa float, originally the name of rafts used on
the Pacific coast of Latin America (1777). The wood is very light.


balsam (n.)

1570s, aromatic resin used for healing wounds and soothing pains, from Latin balsamum gum of the
balsam tree (see balm). There is an isolated Old English reference from c.1000, and Middle English
used basme, baume, from the French form of the word. As a type of flowering plant of the Impatiens
family, it is attested from 1741.


balsamic (adj.)

c.1600, from balsam + -ic.


Balt (n.)

1878, from Late Latin Balthae (see Baltic).


Balthazar

masc. proper name, from French, from Latin, from Greek Baltasar, from Hebrew Belteshatztzar (Dan.
x:1), from Babylonian Balat-shar-usur, literally save the life of the king.


Baltic

1580s, from Medieval Latin Balticus, perhaps from Lithuanian baltas white or Scandinavian balta
straight (in reference to its narrow entranceway). In German, it is Ostsee, literally east sea.


Baltimore

city in Maryland, U.S., founded 1729, named for Cecilius Calvert (1605-1675), 2nd baron Baltimore,
who held the charter for Maryland colony; from a small port town in southern Ireland where the
family had its seat, from Irish Baile na Tighe Mor, literally townland of the big house. In old
baseball slang, a Baltimore chop was a hit right in front of the plate that bounced high.


baluchitherium (n.)

ancient mammal, Modern Latin, from Baluchi (see Baluchistan) + Greek therion beast (see fierce). So
called because its fossils originally were found there.


baluster (n.)

support for a railing, c.1600, from French balustre, from Italian balaustro pillar, from balausta
flower of the wild pomegranate, from Greek balaustion (perhaps of Semitic origin; compare Aramaic
balatz flower of the wild pomegranate). Staircase uprights had lyre-like double curves, like the
calyx tube of the pomegranate flower.


balustrade (n.)

row of balusters, 1640s, from French balustrade (17c.), from Italian balaustrata provided with
balusters, from balaustro pillar (see baluster).


bam

interjection, imitative of the sound of a hard hit, first recorded 1922 (from 1917 as the sound of
an artillery shell bursting). Middle English had a verb bammen to hit or strike (late 14c.). A
literary work from c.1450 represents the sound of repeated impact by Lus, bus! las, das!, and Middle
English had lushe a stroke, blow (c.1400); lushen to strike, knock, beat (c.1300).


bambino (n.)

little child, 1761, from Italian bambino, baby, a diminutive of bambo simple (compare Latin bambalio
dolt, Greek bambainein to stammer). In U.S. baseball lore, a nickname of George Herman Babe Ruth Jr.
(1895-1948).


bamboo (n.)

1590s, from Dutch bamboe, from Portuguese bambu, earlier mambu (16c.), probably from Malay samambu,
though some suspect this is itself an imported word.


bamboozle (v.)

1703, originally a slang or cant word, perhaps Scottish from bombaze perplex, related to bombast, or
French embabouiner to make a fool (literally 'baboon') of. Related: Bamboozled; bamboozling. As a
noun from 1703.


ban (v.)

Old English bannan to summon, command, proclaim, from Proto-Germanic *bannan proclaim, command,
forbid (cognates: Old High German bannan to command or forbid under threat of punishment, German
bannen banish, expel, curse), originally to speak publicly, from PIE root *bha- (2) to speak
(cognates: Old Irish bann law, Armenian ban word; see fame (n.)).     Main modern sense of to
prohibit (late 14c.) is from Old Norse cognate banna to curse, prohibit, and probably in part from
Old French ban, which meant outlawry, banishment, among other things (see banal) and was a borrowing
from Germanic. The sense evolution in Germanic was from speak to proclaim a threat to (in Norse,
German, etc.) curse.    The Germanic root, borrowed in Latin and French, has been productive:
banish, bandit, contraband, etc. Related: Banned; banning. Banned in Boston dates from 1920s, in
allusion to the excessive zeal and power of that city's Watch and Ward Society.


ban (n.2)

governor of Croatia, from Serbo-Croatian ban lord, master, ruler, from Persian ban prince, lord,
chief, governor, related to Sanskrit pati guards, protects. Hence banat district governed by a ban,
with Latinate suffix -atus. The Persian word got into Slavic perhaps via the Avars.


ban (n.1)

edict of prohibition, c.1300, proclamation or edict of an overlord, from Old English (ge)bann
proclamation, summons, command and Old French ban, both from Germanic; see ban (v.).


banal (adj.)

trite, commonplace, 1840, from French banal, belonging to a manor, common, hackneyed, commonplace,
from Old French banel communal (13c.), from ban decree; legal control; announcement; authorization;
payment for use of a communal oven, mill, etc. (see ban (v.)). The modern sense evolved from the
word's use in designating things like ovens or mills that belonged to feudal serfs, or else
compulsory military service; in either case it was generalized in French through open to everyone to
commonplace, ordinary, to trite, petty.


banality (n.)

1861, triteness, from French banalit&eacute; banality, commonplace, from banal (see banal).


banana (n.)

1590s, borrowed by Spanish or Portuguese from a West African word, possibly Wolof banana. The plant
was introduced to the New World from Africa in 1516. Top banana, second banana, etc. are 1950s, from
show business slang use of banana for comedian, especially in a burlesque show. Banana split first
attested 1920. Banana oil nonsense is slang from c.1910.


banana republic (n.)

small Central American state with an economy dependent on banana production, 1901, American English.


bananas (adj.)

crazy, 1968; earlier (1935) it was noted as an underworld slang term for sexually perverted.


banausic (adj.)

merely mechanical, coined 1845 from Greek banausikos pertaining to mechanics, from banausos artisan,
mere mechanical, hence (to the Greeks) base, ignoble; perhaps literally working by fire, from baunos
furnace, forge (but Klein dismisses this as folk etymology and calls it of uncertain origin).


band (n.1)

a flat strip, also something that binds, a merger of two words, ultimately from the same source. In
the sense that by which someone or something is bound, it is attested from early 12c., from Old
Norse band thin strip that ties or constrains, from Proto-Germanic *bindan, from PIE *bendh- to bind
(cognates: Gothic bandi that which binds; Sanskrit bandhah a tying, bandage, source of bandana;
Middle Irish bainna bracelet; see bend (v.), bind (v.)). Most of the figurative senses of this word
have passed into bond (n.), which originally was a phonetic variant of this band.    The meaning a
flat strip (late 14c.) is from Old French bande strip, edge, side, via Old North French bende, from
Old High German binda, from Proto-Germanic *bindan (see above). In Middle English, this was
distinguished by the spelling bande, but since the loss of the final -e the words have fully merged.
Meaning broad stripe of color is from late 15c.; the electronics sense of range of frequencies or
wavelengths is from 1922. The Old North French form was retained in heraldic bend. Band saw is
recorded from 1864.


band (n.2)

an organized group, late 15c., from Middle French bande, which is traceable to the Proto-Germanic
root of band (n.1), probably via a band of cloth worn as a mark of identification by a group of
soldiers or others (compare Gothic bandwa a sign). The extension to group of musicians is c.1660,
originally musicians attached to a regiment of the army. To beat the band (1897) is to make enough
noise to drown it out, hence to exceed everything.


band (v.)

1520s, to bind or fasten; also to join in a company, from band (n.1) and (n.2) in various noun
senses, and partly from French bander. The meaning to affix an ID band to (a wild animal, etc.) is
attested from 1914. Related: Banded; banding.


Band-Aid (n.)

trademark registered 1924 by Johnson &amp; Johnson for a stick-on gauze pad or strip. See band (n.1)
+ aid (n.). The British equivalent was Elastoplast. Figurative sense of temporary or makeshift
solution to a problem, pallative (often lower case, sometimes bandaid) is first recorded 1968; as an
adjective, from 1970.


bandage (n.)

1590s, from Middle French bandage (16c.), from Old French bander to bind, from bande a strip (see
band (n.1)).


bandage (v.)

1774, from bandage (n.). Related: Bandaged; bandaging.


bandana (n.)

also often bandanna, 1752, from Hindi bandhnu, a method of dyeing, from Sanskrit badhnati binds
(because the cloth is tied like modern tie-dye), from same PIE root as band (n.1). Etymologically,
the colors and spots are what makes it a bandana.


bandeau (n.)

1706, from French bandeau, from Old French bandel (12c.), diminutive of bande band (see band (n.1)).


bandicoot (n.)

1789, from Telugu pandi-kokku, literally pig-rat. Properly a large and destructive Indian rat;
applied from 1827 to a type of insectivorous Australian marsupial somewhat resembling it.


bandit (n.)

1590s, from Italian bandito (plural banditi) outlaw, past participle of bandire proscribe, banish,
from Vulgar Latin *bannire to proclaim, proscribe, from Proto-Germanic *bann (see ban (v.)).
*Bannire (or its Frankish cognate *bannjan) in Old French became banir-, which, with lengthened
stem, became English banish.


banditry (n.)

1861, from bandit + -ry.


bandolier (n.)

1570s, shoulder belt (for a wallet), from French bandouiliere (16c.), from Italian bandoliera or
Spanish bandolera, from diminutive of banda a scarf, sash, a Germanic loan-word related to Gothic
bandwa (see band (n.2)). In some cases, directly from Spanish to English as bandoleer. Meaning
ammunition belt for a musket is from 1590s; hence bandolero highwayman, robber (1832), from Spanish,
literally man who wears a bandoleer.


bandstand (n.)

also band-stand, 1859, from band (n.2) + stand (n).


bandwagon (n.)

also band-wagon, 1855, American English, from band (n.2) + wagon, originally a large wagon used to
carry the band in a circus procession; as these also figured in celebrations of successful political
campaigns, being on the bandwagon came to represent attaching oneself to anything that looks likely
to succeed, a usage first attested 1899 in writings of Theodore Roosevelt.


bandwidth (n.)

1930, in electronics, from band (n.1) + width.


bandy (v.)

1570s, to strike back and forth, from Middle French bander, from root of band (n.2). The sense
apparently evolved from join together to oppose, to opposition itself, to exchanging blows, then
metaphorically, to volleying in tennis. Bandy (n.) was a 17c. Irish game, precursor of field hockey,
played with curved a stick (also called a bandy), hence bandy-legged (1680s).


bane (n.)

Old English bana killer, slayer, murderer; the devil, from Proto-Germanic *banon, cognate with
*banja- wound (cognates: Old Frisian bona murderer, Old Norse bani, Old High German bana murder, Old
English benn wound, Gothic banja stroke, wound), from PIE root *gwhen- to strike, kill, wound
(cognates: Avestan banta ill).  Modern sense of that which causes ruin or woe is from 1570s.


bang (v.)

1540s, to strike hard with a loud blow, from a Scandinavian sourse akin to Old Norse banga to pound,
hammer of echoic origin. Slang meaning have sexual intercourse with first recorded 1937. Bang-up
excellent, first-rate, 1820, probably shortened from phrase bang up to the mark. The noun is
recorded from late 16c.  This is the way the world endsNot with a bang but a whimper[T.S. Eliot,
Hollow Men, 1925]


banger (n.)

British English slang for a sausage, 1919, perhaps from sense of a bludgeon, though this is recorded
only in U.S. slang.


Bangladesh

nation formed 1971 from former East Pakistan, from Bengali for Bengali country, from Bangla Bengali
+ desh country.


bangle (n.)

ring-shaped bracelet, 1787, from Hindi bangri colored glass bracelet or anklet.


bangs (n.)

hair cut straight across the forehead, 1878 (singular), American English, attested from 1870 of
horses (bang-tail), perhaps from notion of abruptness (as in bang off immediately, without delay,
though this expression is attested only from 1886). See bang.


banish (v.)

late 14c., banischen, from banniss-, extended stem of Old French banir announce, proclaim; levy;
forbid; banish, proclaim an outlaw, from a Germanic source (perhaps Frankish *bannjan to order or
prohibit under penalty), or from Vulgar Latin cognate *bannire (see bandit). Related: Banished;
banishing.


banishment (n.)

c.1500, from banish + -ment.


banister (n.)

1660s, unexplained corruption of baluster. As late as 1830 condemned as vulgar, it is now accepted.
Surname Bannister is from Old French banastre basket, hence, basket-maker.


banjo (n.)

1764, American English, usually described as of African origin, probably akin to Bantu mbanza, an
instrument resembling a banjo. The word has been influenced by colloquial pronunciation of bandore
(1560s in English), a 16c. stringed instrument like a lute and an ancestor (musically and
linguistically) of mandolin; from Portuguese bandurra, from Latin pandura, from Greek pandoura
three-stringed instrument. The origin and influence might be the reverse of what is here described.


bank (n.1)

financial institution, late 15c., from either Old Italian banca or Middle French banque (itself from
the Italian word), both meaning table (the notion is of the moneylender's exchange table), from a
Germanic source (compare Old High German bank bench); see bank (n.2).   Bank holiday is from 1871,
though the tradition is as old as the Bank of England. To cry all the way to the bank was coined
1956 by flamboyant pianist Liberace, after a Madison Square Garden concert that was packed with
patrons but panned by critics.


bank (n.2)

earthen incline, edge of a river, c.1200, probably in Old English but not attested in surviving
documents, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse banki, Old Danish banke sandbank, from
Proto-Germanic *bangkon slope, cognate with *bankiz shelf (see bench (n.)).


bank (v.)

to act as a banker, 1727, from bank (n.1). As to deposit in a bank from 1833. Figurative sense of to
rely on (i.e. to put money on) is from 1884, U.S. colloquial. Meaning to ascend, as of an incline,
is from 1892. In aeronautics, from 1911. Related: Banked; banking.


banker (n.)

keeper of a bank, 1530s, agent noun formed from bank (n.1), possibly modeled on French banquier
(16c.).


banking (n.)

business of a banker, 1735, verbal noun from bank (v).


bankroll (n.)

roll of bank notes, 1887, from bank (n.1) + roll (n.). The verb is attested from 1928. Related:
Bankrolled; bankrolling.


bankrupt (adj.)

1560s, from Italian banca rotta, literally a broken bench,  from banca moneylender's shop, literally
bench (see bank (n.1)) + rotta broken, defeated, interrupted from (and remodeled on) Latin rupta,
fem. past participle of rumpere to break (see rupture (n.)). [S]o called from the habit of breaking
the bench of bankrupts [Klein]. Earlier in English as a noun, bankrupt person (1530s).


bankrupt (v.)

1550s, from bankrupt (adj.). Related: Bankrupted; bankrupting.


bankruptcy (n.)

1700, from bankrupt, probably on the analogy of insolvency, but with -t erroneously retained in
spelling, instead of being merged in the suffix .... [OED]. Figurative use from 1761.


banlieue (n.)

French, suburbs, precincts, from Vulgar Latin *banleuca, from ban (see ban (n.1)) + leuca a league
(of distance), in Medieval Latin, indefinite extent of territory (see league (n.2)). So, the extent
of a ban; the territory within which a ban is of force, hence, territory subject to one
jurisdiction.


bann (n.)

in phrase banns of marriage (late 12c., spelling with double -n- attested from 1540s), from Old
English bannan to summon, command, proclaim (see ban (v.)). Also probably partly from Old French ban
announcement, proclamation, banns, authorization, from Frankish *ban or some other Germanic cognate
of the Old English word.


banner (n.)

c.1200, from Old French baniere (Modern French banni&egrave;re) flag, banner, standard, from Late
Latin bandum standard, borrowed from a West Germanic cognate of Gothic bandwa a sign (see band
(n.2)). Figurative use from early 14c. Of newspaper headlines, from 1913.


banneret (n.)

c.1300, an order of knighthood, originally in reference to one who could lead his men into battle
under his own banner. Later it meant one who received rank for valiant deeds done in the king's
presence in battle. Also a small banner (c.1300).


bannock (n.)

thick flat cake, Old English bannuc a bit, small piece, from Gaelic bannach a cake, perhaps a loan
from Latin panicium, from panis bread (see food).


banns (n.)

see bann.


banquet (n.)

late 15c., feast, sumptuous entertainment, from French banquet (15c.; in Old French only small
bench), from Old Italian banchetto, diminutive of banco bench; originally a snack eaten on a bench
(rather than at table), hence a slight repast between meals; the meaning has entirely reversed. As a
verb from 1510s.


banquette (n.)

1620s, raised platform in a fortification, from French banquette (15c.), from Italian banchetta,
diminutive of banca bench, shelf (see bank (n.1)).


banshee (n.)

1771, from phonetic spelling of Irish bean sidhe female of the Elves, from bean woman (from PIE
*gwen-; see queen) + sidhe, from sith fairy or sid fairy mound. Specifically, one who calls to the
spirits of the dead.


bantam (n.)

1749, after Bantam, former Dutch residency in Java, from which the small domestic fowl were said to
have been first imported. Extension to small person is 1837. As a light weight class in boxing, it
is attested from 1884, probably from the birds, which are small but aggressive and bred for
fighting.


banter (v.)

1670s, origin uncertain; said by Swift to be a word from London street slang. Related: Bantered;
bantering. The noun is from 1680s.


Banting (n.)

system for weight loss through diet control, named for William Banting (1797-1878), English
undertaker who invented it, tested it himself, and promoted it in his 1863 booklet Letter on
Corpulence, Addressed to the Public. Although the word is a surname, it was used like a verbal noun
in -ing. (She is banting).


Bantu

1862, applied to south African language group in the 1850s by German linguist Wilhelm Heinrich
Immanuel Bleek (1827-1875), from native Ba-ntu mankind, from ba-, plural prefix, + ntu a man,
person. Bantustan in a South African context is from 1949.


banyan (n.)

Indian fig tree, 1630s, so called in reference to a tree on the Iranian coast of the Persian Gulf
under which the Hindu merchants known as banians had built a pagoda. From Sanskrit vanija merchant.


banzai

Japanese war-cry, 1893, literally (may you live) ten thousand years, originally a greeting addressed
to the emperor, from ban ten thousand + sai year.


baobab (n.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin bahobab (1590s), apparently from a central African language.


baptise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of baptize; for spelling, see -ize. Related: Baptised; baptising.


baptism (n.)

c.1300, bapteme, from Old French batesme, bapteme (11c., Modern French bapt&ecirc;me), from Latin
baptismus, from Greek baptismos, noun of action from baptizein (see baptize). The -s- restored in
later 14c.    Figurative sense is from late 14c. The Anglo-Saxons used fulluht in this sense (John
the Baptist was Iohannes se Fulluhtere). Phrase baptism of fire a soldier's first experience of
battle (1857) translates French bapt&ecirc;me de feu; the phrase originally was ecclesiastical Greek
baptisma pyros and meant the grace of the Holy Spirit as imparted through baptism. Later it was used
of martyrdom, especially by burning.


baptismal (adj.)

1640s, from baptism + -al (1).


baptist (n.)

c.1200, one who baptizes; see baptize + -ist. As member of a Protestant sect that believes in adult
baptism by immersion (with capital B-), attested from 1654; their opponents called them anabaptists.


baptize (v.)

c.1300, from Old French batisier (11c.), from Latin baptizare, from Greek baptizein immerse, dip in
water, also figuratively, be over one's head (in debt, etc.), to be soaked (in wine); in Greek
Christian usage, baptize; from baptein to dip, steep, dye, color, from PIE root *gwabh- to dip,
sink. Christian baptism originally consisted in full immersion. Related: Baptized; baptizing.


Baqubah

city in Iraq, from Arabic baya 'kuba Jacob's house.


bar (n.1)

late 12c., stake or rod of iron used to fasten a door or gate, from Old French barre (12c.) beam,
bar, gate, barrier, from Vulgar Latin *barra bar, barrier, which some suggest is from Gaulish
*barros the bushy end [Gamillscheg], but OED regards this as discredited because it in no way suits
the sense. Of soap, by 1833; of candy, by 1906 (the process itself dates to the 1840s). Meaning bank
of sand across a harbor or river mouth is from 1580s, probably so called because it was an
obstruction to navigation. Bar graph is attested from 1925. Bar code first recorded 1963. Behind
bars in prison is attested by 1934, U.S.


bar (v.)

c.1300, to fasten (a gate, etc.) with a bar, from bar (n.1); sense of to obstruct, prevent is
recorded by 1570s. Expression bar none without exception is recorded from 1866.


bar (n.2)

tavern, 1590s, so called in reference to the bars of the barrier or counter over which drinks or
food were served to customers (see bar (n.1)).


bar (n.3)

whole body of lawyers, the legal profession, 1550s, a sense which derives ultimately from the
railing that separated benchers from the hall in the Inns of Court. Students who had attained a
certain standing were called to it to take part in the important exercises of the house. After
c.1600, however, this was popularly assumed to mean the bar in a courtroom, which was the wooden
railing marking off the area around the judge's seat, where prisoners stood for arraignment and
where a barrister (q.v.) stood to plead. As the place where the business of court was done, bar in
this sense had become synonymous with court by early 14c.


bar (n.4)

unit of pressure, coined 1903 from Greek baros weight, related to barys heavy (see grave (adj.)).


Bar Mitzvah

1861, in Judaism, male person who has completed his 13th year and thus reached the age of religious
responsibility, from Hebrew, literally son of command. As a name for the ceremony itself, by 1941.


Barabbas

biblical masc. proper name, Greek Barabbas, from Aramaic barabba, son of the father, or son of the
master. In Hebrew, it would be ben abh.


barb (n.)

late 14c., barb of an arrow, from Old French barbe (11c.) beard, beardlike appendage, from Latin
barba beard, perhaps cognate with Old English beard (see beard (n.)).


barb (v.)

late 15c., to clip, mow; see barb (n.). Meaning to fit or furnish with barbs is from 1610s. Related:
Barbed; barbing.


Barbados

probably from Portuguese las barbados the bearded; the island so called because vines or moss hung
densely from the trees. An inhabitant was called a Barbadian (1732).


Barbara

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of barbarus strange, foreign, barbarous, from Greek barbaros (see
barbarian). For women, unlike men, the concept of alien presumably could be felt as exotic and thus
make an appealing name. Popularized as a Christian name by the legend of Saint Barbara, early 4c.
martyr, whose cult was popular from 7c. The common Middle English form was Barbary. A top 10 name in
popularity for girls born in the U.S. between 1927 and 1958.


barbarian (adj.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin barbarinus (source of Old French barbarin Berber, pagan, Saracen,
barbarian), from Latin barbaria foreign country, from Greek barbaros foreign, strange, ignorant,
from PIE root *barbar- echoic of unintelligible speech of foreigners (compare Sanskrit barbara-
stammering, also non-Aryan, Latin balbus stammering, Czech blblati to stammer).    Greek barbaroi
(n.) meant all that are not Greek, but especially the Medes and Persians. Originally not entirely
pejorative, its sense darkened after the Persian wars. The Romans (technically themselves barbaroi)
took up the word and applied it to tribes or nations which had no Greek or Roman accomplishments.
The noun is from late 14c., person speaking a language different from one's own, also (c.1400)
native of the Barbary coast; meaning rude, wild person is from 1610s.


barbaric (adj.)

late 15c., uncultured, uncivilized, unpolished, from French barbarique (15c.), from Latin barbaricus
foreign, strange, outlandish, from Greek barbarikos like a foreigner, from barbaros foreign, rude
(see barbarian). Meaning pertaining to barbarians is from 1660s.


barbarism (n.)

mid-15c., uncivilized or rude nature, from French barbarisme (13c.), from Latin barbarismus, from
Greek barbarismos foreign speech, from barbarizein to do as a foreigner does (see barbarian). Only
of speech in Greek, Latin, and French; sense extended in English to uncivilized condition.


barbarity (n.)

1560s, want of civilization, from Latin barbarus (see barbarian) + -ity. Meaning savage cruelty is
recorded from 1680s.


barbarous (adj.)

c.1400, uncivilized, uncultured, ignorant, from Latin barbarus, from Greek barbaros (see barbarian).
Meaning not Greek or Latin (of words or language) is from c.1500; that of savagely cruel is from
1580s.


Barbary

c.1300, foreign lands (especially non-Christian lands), from Latin barbaria (see barbarian). Meaning
Saracens living in coastal North Africa is attested from 1590s, via French (Old French barbarie),
from Arabic Barbar, Berber, ancient Arabic name for the inhabitants of North Africa beyond Egypt.
Perhaps a native name, perhaps an Arabic word, from barbara to babble confusedly, but this might be
ultimately from Greek barbaria. The actual relations (if any) of the Arabic and Gr[eek] words cannot
be settled; but in European langs. barbaria, Barbarie, Barbary, have from the first been treated as
identical with L. barbaria, Byzantine Gr[eek] barbaria land of barbarians [OED].


barbecue (n.)

1650s, framework for grilling meat, fish, etc., from American Spanish barbacoa, from Arawakan
(Haiti) barbakoa framework of sticks, the raised wooden structure the Indians used to either sleep
on or cure meat. Sense of outdoor meal of roasted meat or fish as a social entertainment is from
1733; modern popular noun sense of grill for cooking over an open fire is from 1931.


barbecue (v.)

1660s, from barbecue (n.). Related: Barbecued; barbecuing.


barbed wire (n.)

also barb wire, fencing wire with sharp edges or points, 1863, American English, from barb + wire
(n.).


barbell (n.)

1887, from bar (n.1) + ending from dumbbell.


barber (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French barbour (attested as a surname from early 13c.), from Old French barbeor,
barbieor (Modern French barbier, which has a more restricted sense than the English word), from
Vulgar Latin *barbatorem, from Latin barba beard (see barb (n.)). Originally also regular
practitioners of surgery, they were restricted to haircutting and dentistry under Henry VIII.


barber-shop (n.)

1570s, from barber + shop (n.). Earlier in same sense was barbery (c.1500). Barber-shop in reference
to close harmony male vocal quartets, it is attested from 1910; the custom of barber's keeping a
musical instrument in their shops so waiting customers could entertain themselves is an old one, but
the musical product had a low reputation and barber's music (c.1660) was wretched, poorly performed
music.


barbican (n.)

outer fortification of a city or castle, mid-13c., from Old French barbacane (12c.), a general
Romanic word, perhaps ultimately from Arabic or Persian (compare bab-khanah gate-house). Watkins
identifies it as from Old Iranian *pari-varaka protective, from *wor-o-, suffixed variant form of
PIE root *wer- (5) to cover (see wier).


Barbie

1959, trademark name (reg. U.S.). Supposedly named after the daughter of its creator, U.S.
businesswoman Ruth Handler (1916-2002); see Barbara.


barbiturate (n.)

1928 (morphine barbiturate is from 1918), from German, coined 1863 by chemist Adolf von Baeyer
(1835-1917) from Barbiturs&auml;ure barbituric acid, itself coined by Baeyer, perhaps from woman's
name Barbara, or perhaps from Latin barbata, in Medieval Latin usnea barbata, literally bearded
moss. Second element is because it was obtained from uric acid. With chemical ending -ate (3).


Barcelona

city in Spain, said to have been named for Carthaginian general Hamlicar Barca, who is supposed to
have founded it 3c. B.C.E.


bard (n.)

mid-15c., from Scottish, from Old Celtic bardos poet, singer, from PIE root *gwer- to lift up the
voice, praise. In historical times, a term of contempt among the Scots (who considered them
itinerant troublemakers), but one of great respect among the Welsh. All vagabundis, fulis, bardis,
scudlaris, and siclike idill pepill, sall be brint on the cheek. [local Scottish ordinance,
c.1500]Subsequently idealized by Scott in the more ancient sense of lyric poet, singer. Poetic use
of the word in English is from Greek bardos, Latin bardus, both from Gaulish.


bardic (adj.)

1775, from bard + -ic.


bardolatry (n.)

worship of Shakespeare (the 'Bard of Avon'), 1901, from bard + -latry.


bare (v.)

Old English barian, from bare (adj.). Related: Bared; baring.


bare (adj.)

Old English b&aelig;r naked, uncovered, unclothed, from Proto-Germanic *bazaz (cognates: German bar,
Old Norse berr, Dutch baar), from PIE *bhosos (cognates: Armenian bok naked; Old Church Slavonic
bosu, Lithuanian basas barefoot). Meaning sheer, absolute (c.1200) is from the notion of complete in
itself.


bareback (adj.)

1560s, of riding, from bare (adj.) + back (n.).


barefaced (adj.)

1580s, with face uncovered or shaven; see bare (adj.) + face (n.). Thus, unconcealed (c.1600), and,
in a bad sense, shameless (1670s). Compare effrontery. The half-French bare-vis (adj.) conveyed the
same sense in Middle English.


barefoot (adj.)

Old English b&aelig;rfot; see bare (adj.) + foot (n.).


barehanded (adj.)

also bare-handed, mid-15c., from bare (adj.) + handed.


barely (adv.)

Old English b&aelig;rlice openly, clear, public; see bare (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning only, just is
recorded from late 15c.; that of merely, simply is from 1570s. In 15c. it also could mean naked.


bareness (n.)

early 15c., from bare (adj.) + -ness.


barf (v.)

to vomit or retch,1960, American English slang, probably imitative. Related: Barfed; barfing. As a
noun, from 1966. Barf bag air sickness pouch attested from 1966.


barfly (n.)

habitual drunkard, 1910, from bar (n.2) + fly (n.).


bargain (v.)

late 14c., from Old French bargaignier (12c., Modern French barguigner) to haggle over the price,
perhaps from Frankish *borganjan to lend or some other Germanic source, ultimately from Proto-
Germanic *borgan (cognates: Old High German borgen; Old English borgian, source of borrow). Another
suggestion is that the French word comes from Late Latin barca a barge, because it carries goods to
and fro. There are difficulties with both suggestions. Related: Bargained; bargaining.


bargain (n.)

mid-14c., business transaction or agreement, also that which is acquired by bargaining, from Old
French bargaine, from bargaignier (see bargain (v.)). Meaning article priced for special sale is
from 1899. A bargain basement (1899) originally was a basement floor in a store where bargains were
displayed.


barge (n.)

c.1300, small seagoing vessel with sails, from Old French barge, Old Proven&ccedil;al barca, from
Medieval Latin barga, perhaps from Celtic, or perhaps from Latin *barica, from Greek baris Egyptian
boat, from Coptic bari small boat. Meaning flat-bottomed freight boat dates from late 15c.


barge (v.)

to journey by barge, 1590s, from barge (n.). The form barge into and the sense crash heavily into,
in reference to the rough handling of barges, dates from 1830s, American English. Related: Barged;
barging.


bariatric (adj.)

1976, from Greek baros weight, related to barys heavy (see grave (adj.)) + -iatric.


barista (n.)

bartender in a coffee shop, as a purely English word in use by 1992, from Italian, where it is said
to derive ultimately from the English bar (n.2), as borrowed into Italian. The word is of generic
gender and may be applied with equal accuracy to women and men (it is said that the typical barista
in Italy is a man).


baritone (n.)

c.1600, from Italian baritono, from Greek barytonos deep-toned, deep-sounding, from barys heavy,
deep, also, of sound, strong, deep, bass (see grave (adj.)) + tonos tone (see tenet). Technically,
ranging from lower A in bass clef to lower F in treble clef. Meaning singer having a baritone voice
is from 1821. As a type of brass band instrument, it is attested from 1949.


barium (n.)

1808, coined in Modern Latin by its discoverer, English chemist Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829),
because it was present in the mineral barytes heavy spar (barium sulphate), so named by Lavoisier
from Greek barys heavy (see grave (adj.)). The metal is actually relatively light.


bark (n.1)

tree skin, c.1300, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse borkr bark, from Proto-Germanic
*barkuz, which probably is related to birch and Low German borke. The native word was rind.


bark (n.2)

any small ship, early 15c., from Middle French barque (15c.), from Late Latin barca (c.400 C.E.),
probably cognate with Vulgar Latin *barica (see barge). More precise sense of three-masted ship
(17c.) often is spelled barque to distinguish it.


bark (v.)

in reference to a dog sound, Old English beorcan to bark, from Proto-Germanic *berkan (cognates: Old
Norse berkja to bark), of echoic origin. Related: Barked; barking. To bark up the wrong tree is U.S.
colloquial, first attested 1832, from notion of hounds following the wrong scent.


bark (n.3)

dog sound, Old English beorc, from bark (v.). Paired and compared with bite (n.) since at least
1660s; the proverb is older: Timid dogs bark worse than they bite was in Latin (Canis timidus
vehementius latrat quam mordet, Quintius Curtius).


barkeep (n.)

1846, probably short for barkeeper (1712); from bar (n.2) + agent noun of keep (v.).


barker (n.)

noisy fellow, late 15c., agent noun from bark (v.). Specific sense of loud assistant in an auction,
store, or show is from 1690s.


barley (n.)

Old English b&aelig;rlic, originally an adjective, of barley, from bere barley (from Proto-Germanic
*bariz, *baraz) + -lic body, like. First element is related to Old Norse barr barley, and cognate
with Latin far (genitive farris) coarse grain, meal; probably from PIE *bhars- bristle, point,
projection (see bristle (n.)).


barleycorn (n.)

late 14c., from barley + corn (n.). Perhaps to distinguish the barley plant or the grain from its
products. In Britain and U.S., the grain is used mainly to prepare liquor, hence personification as
John Barleycorn (1620) in popular ballad, and many now-obsolete figures of speech, such as to wear a
barley cap (16c.) to be drunk.


barm (n.)

Old English beorma yeast, leaven, also head of a beer, from Proto-Germanic *bermon- (cognates: Dutch
berm, Middle Low German barm), from PIE root *bher- (4) to cook, bake (cognates: Latin fermentum
substance causing fermentation, Sanskrit bhurati moves convulsively, quivers, Middle Irish berbaim I
boil, seethe; see brew (v.)).


barmaid (n.)

1650s, from bar (n.2) + maid.


barmy (adj.)

1530s, frothing, covered with barm; see barm + -y (2). Figurative sense of excited, flighty,
bubbling with excitement is from c.1600. Meaning foolish (1892) is probably an alteration of balmy.


barn (n.)

Old English bere&aelig;rn barn, literally barley house, from bere barley (see barley) + aern house,
metathesized from *rann, *rasn (cognates: Old Norse rann, Gothic razn house, Old English rest
resting place; sealt&aelig;rn saltworks).    Barley was not always the only crop grown as the data
recovered at Bishopstone might suggest but it is always the most commonly represented, followed by
wheat and then rye and oats. [C.J. Arnold, An Archaeology of the Early Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms, 1988,
p.36]    Another word for barn in Old English was beretun, barley enclosure (from tun enclosure,
house), which accounts for the many Barton place names on the English map, and the common surname.
Barn door used figuratively for broad target and great size since 1540s.


Barnabas

surname of Joseph the Levite of Cyprus (Acts iv:36), literally son of exhortation, from Aramaic bar
son + nabha prophecy, exhortation. St. Barnabas' Day (colloquially St. Barnaby), June 11, in the Old
Style calendar was reckoned the longest day of the year.


barnacle (n.)

early 13c., species of wild goose; as a type of shellfish, first recorded 1580s. Often derived from
a Celtic source (compare Breton bernik, a kind of shellfish), but the application to the goose
predates that of the shellfish in English. The goose nests in the Arctic in summer and returns to
Europe in the winter, hence the mystery surrounding its reproduction. It was believed in ancient
superstition to hatch from barnacle's shell, possibly because the crustacean's feathery stalks
resemble goose down. The scientific name of the crustacean, Cirripedes, is from Greek cirri curls of
hair + pedes feet.


barney (n.)

1859, British slang, lark, spree, rough enjoyment, of uncertain origin. Later also a fixed prize-
fight.


barnstorm (v.)

1815, in reference to a theatrical troupe's performances in upstate New York barns (usually
featuring short action pieces to suit vulgar tastes); extended 1896 to electioneering, 1928 to
itinerant airplane pilots who performed stunts at fairs and races. Related: Barnstormed;
barnstorming.


barnyard (n.)

1510s, from barn + yard (n.1). Figurative of coarse or uncivilized behavior from 1920.


barometer (n.)

1660s, from Greek baros weight (see grave (adj.)) + -meter. Probably coined (and certainly
popularized) by English scientist Robert Boyle (1627-1691).


barometric (adj.)

1802, from barometer + -ic. Barometrical is recorded from 1660s.


baron (n.)

c.1200, from Old French baron (nominative ber) baron, nobleman, military leader, warrior, virtuous
man, lord, husband, probably from or related to Late Latin baro man, of uncertain origin, perhaps
from Frankish *baro freeman, man; merged in England with cognate Old English beorn nobleman.


baroness (n.)

early 15c., from Old French barnesse lady of quality, noblewoman (also, ironically, woman of low
morals, slut) or Medieval Latin baronissa (see baron).


baronet (n.)

c.1400, diminutive of baron; originally a younger or lesser baron; as a titled hereditary order,
established 1611.


baronial (adj.)

1767, from baron + -ial.


barony (n.)

c.1300, from Old French baronie, from Late Latin *baronia, from baron (see baron).


baroque (adj.)

1765, from French baroque (15c.) irregular, from Portuguese barroco imperfect pearl, of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to Spanish berruca a wart.This style in decorations got the epithet of
Barroque taste, derived from a word signifying pearls and teeth of unequal size. [Fuseli's
translation of Winkelmann, 1765]Klein suggests the name may be from Italian painter Federigo Barocci
(1528-1612), a founder of the style. How to tell baroque from rococo, according to Fowler: The
characteristics of baroque are grandeur, pomposity, and weight; those of rococo are inconsequence,
grace, and lightness. But the two terms often used without distinction for styles featuring odd and
excessive ornamentation.


barouche (n.)

type of four-wheeled carriage, 1801, from dialectal German barutsche, from Italian baroccio chariot,
originally two-wheeled car, from Latin birotus two-wheeled, from bi- two + rotus wheel, from rotare
go around (see rotary). Frenchified in English, but the word is not French.


barque (n.)

variant of bark (n.2).


barrack (n.)

1680s, temporary hut for soldiers during a siege, from French barraque, from Spanish barraca (mid-
13c. in Medieval Latin) soldier's tent, literally cabin, hut, perhaps from barro clay, mud, which is
probably of Celt-Iberian origin. Meaning permanent building for housing troops (usually in plural)
is attested from 1690s.


barracks (n.)

plural, and usual, form of barrack (q.v.).


barracuda (n.)

1670s, from American Spanish barracuda, perhaps from a Carib word.


barrage (n.)

1859, action of barring; man-made barrier in a stream, from French barrer to stop, from barre bar,
from Old French barre (see bar (n.1)). Artillery sense is 1916, from World War I French phrase tir
de barrage barrier fire intended to isolate the objective. As a verb by 1917. Related: Barraged;
barraging.


barratry (n.)

early 15c., sale of ecclesiastical or state offices, from Old French baraterie deceit, guile,
trickery, from barat malpractice, fraud, deceit, trickery, of unknown origin, perhaps from Celtic.
In marine law, wrongful conduct by a ship's crew or officer, resulting in loss to owners, from
1620s. Meaning offense of habitually starting legal suits is from 1640s. Sense somewhat confused
with that of Middle English baratri combat, fighting (c.1400), from Old Norse baratta fight, contest
strife. This was an active word in Middle English, with forms such as baraten to disturb the peace
(mid-15c.); baratour inciter to riot, bully (late 14c., mid-13c. as a surname). Barataria Bay,
Louisiana, U.S., is from Spanish baratear to cheat, deceive, cognate of the French word; the bay so
called in reference to the difficulty of its entry passages.


barre

1876, in reference to chords played on a guitar, etc., from French, literally bar (see bar (n.1)).


barrel (n.)

c.1300, from Old French baril (12c.) barrel, cask, vat, with cognates in all Romance languages (such
as Italian barile, Spanish barril), but origin uncertain; perhaps from Gaulish, perhaps somehow
related to bar (n.1). Meaning metal tube of a gun is from 1640s. Barrel roll in aeronautics is from
1927.


barrel (v.)

mid-15c., to put in barrels, from barrel (n.). Meaning to move quickly is 1930, American English
slang, perhaps suggestive of a rolling barrel. Related: Barreled; barreling.


barrelful (n.)

late 14c., from barrel (n.) + -ful.


barrelhouse (n.)

cheap saloon, often with an associated brothel, by 1875, American English, so called in reference to
the barrels of beer or booze typically stacked along the wall. See barrel (n.) + house (n.).    Q.
What was this place you rented? -- A. It was a room adjoining a barrel-house.  Q. What is a barrel
house? -- A. It is a room where barrels of whisky are tapped, a very inferior kind of whisky, and
the whisky is sold by the glassful right out of the barrel. It is a primitive coffee house.
[Committee Report of the 43rd Congress, Select Committee on Conditions of the South, 1874-75]


barren (adj.)

c.1200, from Old French baraigne, baraing sterile, barren (12c.), perhaps originally brahain, of
obscure derivation, perhaps from a Germanic language. In England, originally used of women, of land
in France. Of land in English from late 14c. As a noun, mid-13c., a barren woman; later of land.
BARRENS. Elevated lands, or plains upon which grow small trees, but never timber. [Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


barrenness (n.)

late 14c., literal; mid-14c., figurative (of spiritual emptiness),   from barren + -ness.


barret (n.)

type of flat cap, 1828, from French barrette, cognate with Spanish birreta, Italian beretta (see
biretta).


barrette (n.)

bar clip for women's hair, 1901, from French barrette, diminutive of barre bar (see bar (n.1)).


barricade (v.)

1590s, from Middle French barricader to barricade (1550s), from barrique barrel, from Spanish
barrica barrel, from baril (see barrel). Revolutionary associations began during 1588 Huguenot riots
in Paris, when large barrels filled with earth and stones were set up in the streets. Related:
Barricaded; barricading.


barricade (n.)

1640s, from barricade (v.). Earlier was barricado (1580s) with false Spanish ending (see -ado).


barrier (n.)

early 14c., barere, from Anglo-French barrere, Old French barriere obstacle, gatekeeper, from barre
bar (see bar (n.1)). First record of barrier reef is from 1805.


barring (n.)

late 14c., act of fastening with a bar, verbal noun from bar (v.). Meaning exclusion is from 1630s.
As a preposition, excepting, excluding, it is from late 15c. Schoolhouse prank of barring out the
teacher was in use before 1728.


barrio (n.)

1841, ward of a Spanish or Spanish-speaking city, sometimes also used of rural settlements, from
Spanish barrio district, suburb, from Arabic barriya open country (fem.), from barr outside (of the
city). Main modern sense of Spanish-speaking district in a U.S. city is 1939; original reference is
to Spanish Harlem in New York City.


barrister (n.)

1540s, a student of law who has been called to the bar, from bar (n.3) in the legal sense + -ster.
Also see attorney. The second element is obscure.


barroom (n.)

1797, from bar (n.2) + room (n.).


barrow (n.1)

vehicle for carrying a load, c.1300, barewe, probably from an unrecorded Old English *bearwe basket,
barrow, from beran to bear, to carry (see bear (v.)). The original had no wheel and required two
persons to carry it.


barrow (n.2)

mound, Old English beorg (West Saxon), berg (Anglian) barrow, mountain, hill, mound, from Proto-
Germanic *bergaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German berg mountain, Old North bjarg
rock), from PIE root *bhergh- (2) high, elevated (cognates: Old Church Slavonic bregu mountain,
height, Old Irish brigh mountain, Welsh bera stack, pyramid, Sanskrit b'rhant high, Avestan brzant-
high, Old Persian bard- be high, Greek Pergamos, name of the citadel of Troy). Obsolete except in
place-names and southwest England dialect by 1400; revived by modern archaeology.    In place-names
used of small continuously curving hills, smaller than a dun, with the summit typically occupied by
a single farmstead or by a village church with the village beside the hill, and also of burial
mounds. [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]  Meaning mound erected over a grave was a
specific sense in late Old English. Barrow-wight first recorded 1869 in Eirikr Magnusson and William
Morris's translation of the Icelandic saga of Grettir the Strong.


barstool (n.)

also bar-stool, bar stool, 1910, from bar (n.2) + stool.


bart.

abbreviation of baronet. Attested from c.1771.


bartender (n.)

also bar-tender; 1836, American English, from bar (n.2) + agent noun of tend (v.2).


barter (v.)

mid-15c., apparently from Old French barater to barter, cheat, deceive, haggle (also, to have sexual
intercourse), 12c., of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Celtic language (compare Irish brath
treachery). Connection between trading and cheating exists in several languages. Related: Bartered;
bartering. The noun is first recorded 1590s, from the verb.


Bartholomew

masc. proper name, from Old French Barthelemieu, from Latin Bartholom&aelig;us, from Greek
Bartholomaios, from Aramaic bar Talmay, literally son of Talmai, from the proper name Talmai,
abounding in furrows. One of the 12 Apostles, his festival is Aug. 24. On this date in 1572 took
place the massacre of Protestants in France. Bartholomew Fair was held annually from 1133 to 1855 at
West Smithfield.


bas-relief (n.)

1660s, from French bas-relief, a loan-translation of Italian basso-rilievo low relief, raised work.


basal (adj.)

relating to a base, 1828, from base (n.) + -al (1).


basalt (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin basaltes, misspelling of Latin basanites very hard stone, from Greek
basanites a species of slate used to test gold, from basanos touchstone. Not connected with salt.
Said by Pliny [Historia, 36.58] to be an African word, perhaps Egyptian bauhan slate. Any hard, very
dark rock would do as a touchstone; the assayer compared the streak left by the alleged gold with
that of real gold or baser metals. Hence Greek basanizein to be put to the test, examined closely,
cross-examined, to be put to torture.


base (n.)

bottom, foundation, pedestal, early 14c., from Old French bas depth (12c.), from Latin basis
foundation, from Greek basis step, pedestal, from bainein to step (see come). The military sense is
from 1860. The chemical sense (1810) was introduced in French 1754 by French chemist Guillaume-
Fran&ccedil;ois Rouelle (1703-1770). Sporting sense of starting point ia from 1690s, also
destination of a runner (1812). As a safe spot in a tag-like game, suggested from mid-15c. (as the
name of the game later called prisoner's base).


base (adj.)

late 14c., low, of little height, from Old French bas low, lowly, mean, from Late Latin bassus
thick, stumpy, low (used only as a cognomen in classical Latin, humilis being there the usual word
for low in stature or position), possibly from Oscan, or Celtic, or related to Greek basson,
comparative of bathys deep. Figurative sense of low in the moral scale is first attested 1530s in
English, earlier servile (1520s). Base metals (c.1600) were worthless in contrast to noble or
precious metals.


base (v.)

to place on a foundation, 1841, from base (n.). Related: Based; basing.


baseball (n.)

in the modern sense, 1845, American English, from base (n.) + ball (n.1). Earlier references, such
as in Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey, refer to the game of rounders, of which baseball is a more
elaborate variety. Legendarily invented 1839 by Abner Doubleday in Cooperstown, N.Y. Base was used
for start or finish line of a race from 1690s; and the sense of safe spot found in modern children's
game of tag can be traced to 14c. (the sense in baseball is from 1868).


baseboard (n.)

1854, from base (n.) + board (n.1).


Basel

city in northwestern Switzerland, founded 44 C.E. as Robur (from Latin roburetum oak grove); renamed
374 as Basilia (from Greek basilea royal) when it became the royal fortress of Valentinian I.


baseless (adj.)

c.1600, from base (n.) + -less. Related: Baselessly; baselessness.


baseline (n.)

also base-line, 1750, originally in surveying, from base (n.) + line (n.). Baseball diamond sense is
from 1867. Baseline estimate in use by 1983.


basement (n.)

lowest story of a building except the cellar, 1730, from base (n.) + -ment.


baseness (n.)

1550s, from base (adj.) + -ness.


bash (v.)

to strike violently, 1640s, perhaps of Scandinavian origin, from Old Norse *basca to strike
(cognates: Swedish basa to baste, whip, flog, lash, Danish baske to beat, strike, cudgel); or the
whole group might be independently derived and echoic. Figurative sense of abuse verbally or in
writing is from 1948. Related: Bashed; bashing.


bash (n.)

a heavy blow, 1805, from bash (v.). Meaning an attempt is attested by 1948. On a bash on a drunken
spree is slang from 1901, which gave the word its sense of party.


bashaw (n.)

1530s, earlier Englishing of pasha.


basher (n.)

1882, agent noun from bash (v.).


bashful (adj.)

1540s, from baishen to be filled with consternation or dismay (mid-14c.), from Old French baissier
bring down, humiliate (see abash). Related: Bashfully; bashfulness (1530s).


basic (adj.)

1832, originally in chemistry, from base (n.) + -ic.


BASIC

computer language, 1964, initialism (acronym) for Beginners' All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code;
invented by Hungarian-born U.S. computer scientist John G. Kemeny (1926-1992) and U.S. computer
scientist Thomas E. Kurtz (b.1928).


basically (adv.)

1903, from basic (adj.) + -ly (2).


basics (n.)

rudiments or fundamentals of anything, by 1934, from basic. Also see -ics. Phrase back-to-basics was
in use by 1975.


basil (n.)

aromatic shrubby plant, early 15c., from Old French basile (15c., Modern French basilic), from
Medieval Latin basilicum, from Greek basilikon (phyton) royal (plant), from basileus king (see
Basil). So called, probably, because it was believed to have been used in making royal perfumes. In
Latin, confused with basiliscus (see basilisk) because it was supposed to be an antidote to the
basilisk's venom.


Basil

masc. proper name, from Latin Basilius, from Greek Basileios kingly, royal, from basileus king, of
unknown origin, possibly from a language of Asia Minor (compare Lydian battos king).


basilica (n.)

1540s, from Latin basilica building of a court of justice, and, by extension, church built on the
plan of one, from Greek (stoa) basilike royal (portal), the portico of the archon basileus, the
official who dispensed justice in Athens, from basileus king (see Basil). In Rome, applied
specifically to the seven principal churches founded by Constantine.


basilisk (n.)

c.1300, from Latin basiliscus, from Greek basiliskos little king, diminutive of  basileus king (see
Basil); said by Pliny to have been so called because of a crest or spot on its head resembling a
crown.The basilisk has since the fourteenth century been confused with the Cockatrice, and the
subject is now a complicated one. [T.H. White, The Bestiary. A Book of Beasts, 1954]Its breath and
glance were said to be fatal. The South American lizard so called (1813) because it, like the
mythical beast, has a crest. Also used of a type of large cannon, throwing shot of 200 lb., from
1540s.


basin (n.)

large shallow vessel or dish, c.1200, from Old French bacin (11c., Modern French bassin), from
Vulgar Latin *baccinum, from *bacca water vessel, perhaps originally Gaulish. Meaning large-scale
artificial water-holding landscape feature is from 1712. Geological sense of tract of country
drained by one river or draining into one sea is from 1830.


basis (n.)

1570s, bottom or foundation (of something material), from Latin basis foundation, from Greek basis a
step, stand, base, that whereon one stands, from bainein go, step (see come). Transferred and
figurative senses (of immaterial things) are from c.1600.


bask (v.)

late 14c., basken to wallow (in blood), with loss of middle syllable, from Old Norse ba&eth;ask to
bathe oneself, reflexive of ba&eth;a bathe (see bathe). Modern meaning soak up a flood of warmth is
apparently due to Shakespeare's use of the word in reference to sunshine in As You Like It (1600).
Related: Basked; basking.


Baskerville

typeface style, 1802 (the type was created in the 1750s), named for John Baskerville (1706-1775),
British type-founder and printer.    The initial version were cut by John Handy under Baskerville's
watchful eye. The result is the epitome of Neoclassicism and eighteenth-century rationalism in type
-- a face far more popular in Republican France and the American colonies than in eighteenth-century
England, where it was made. [Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style, 1992]


basket (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French bascat, origin obscure despite much speculation. On one theory from
Latin bascauda kettle, table-vessel, said by the Roman poet Martial to be from Celtic British and
perhaps cognate with Latin fascis bundle, faggot, in which case it probably originally meant wicker
basket. But OED frowns on this, and there is no evidence of such a word in Celtic unless later words
in Irish and Welsh, counted as borrowings from English, are original.


basket case (n.)

1919, American English, originally a reference to rumors of quadriplegics as a result of
catastrophic wounds suffered in World War I (the military vehemently denied there were any such in
its hospitals), from basket (n.) + case (n.2). Probably literal, i.e., stuck in a basket, but basket
had colloquial connotations of poverty (begging) and helplessness long before this. Figurative sense
of person emotionally unable to cope is from 1921.


basketball (n.)

1892, American English, from basket + ball (n.1). The game was invented 1891 by James A. Naismith
(1861-1939), physical education instructor in Springfield, Massachusetts, U.S.


basking (adj.)

1742, present participle adjective from bask (v.). Basking shark is recorded from 1769.


Basque

1817 (adj.), 1835 (n.), from French, from Spanish vasco (adj.), from vascon (n.), from Latin
Vascones (Vasconia was the Roman name for the up-country of the western Pyrenees), said by von
Humboldt to originally mean foresters but more likely a Latinized version of the people's name for
themselves, euskara or eskuara.    This contains a basic element -sk- which is believed to relate to
maritime people or sailors, and which is also found in the name of the Etruscans .... [Room,
Placenames of the World, 2006]      Earlier in English was Basquish (1610s, noun and adjective);
Baskles (plural noun, late 14c.); Baskon (mid-15c.).


bass (adj.)

late 14c., of things, low, not high, from Late Latin bassus short, low (see base (adj.)). Meaning
low in social scale or rank is recorded from late 14c. Of voices and music notes, from mid-15c.
(technically, ranging from the E flat below the bass stave to the F above it), infuenced by Italian
basso. Meaning lowest part of a harmonized musical composition is from mid-15c. Meaning bass-viol is
from 1702; that of double-bass is from 1927.


bass (n.)

freshwater fish, early 15c. corruption of Old English b&aelig;rs a fish, perch, from Proto-Germanic
base *bars- sharp (cognates: Middle Dutch baerse, Middle High German bars, German Barsch perch,
German barsch rough), from PIE root *bhar- point, bristle (see bristle (n.)). The fish was so called
for its dorsal fins. For loss of -r-, see ass (n.2).


basset (n.)

type of short-legged dog, 1610s, from French basset, from Old French bas low (see base (adj.)) +
diminutive suffix.


bassinet (n.)

wicker cradle, 1854, from French bassinet a little basin, diminutive of bassin (see basin), or, as
per Klein, the English word is from French bercelonette, double diminutive of berceau cradle,
altered by bassin basin. Middle English had bacinet hemispherical helmet (c.1300).


basso

in various musical terms borrowed from Italian, bass, a bass voice, from Italian basso, from Late
Latin bassus (see bass (adj.)).


bassoon (n.)

1727, from French basson (17c.), from Italian bassone, augmentative of basso (see bass (adj.)).
Compare balloon (n.); also see -oon.


bast (n.)

inner bark of the linden tree, Old English b&aelig;st, a general Germanic word (cognate with Old
Norse, Old Saxon, Middle Dutch, Old High German, German bast), of uncertain origin.


bastard (n.)

illegitimate child, early 13c., from Old French bastard (11c., Modern French b&acirc;tard),
acknowledged child of a nobleman by a woman other than his wife, probably from fils de bast
packsaddle son, meaning a child conceived on an improvised bed (saddles often doubled as beds while
traveling), with pejorative ending -art (see -ard). Alternative possibly is that the word is from
Proto-Germanic *banstiz barn, equally suggestive of low origin.    Not always regarded as a stigma;
the Conqueror is referred to in state documents as William the Bastard. Figurative sense of
something not pure or genuine is late 14c.; use as a vulgar term of abuse for a man is attested from
1830. As an adjective from late 14c. Among the bastard words in Halliwell-Phillipps' Dictionary of
Archaic and Provincial Words are avetrol, chance-bairn, by-blow, harecoppe, horcop, and gimbo (a
bastard's bastard).


bastardize (v.)

1610s, to identify as a bastard, from bastard (q.v.) + -ize. The figurative sense, to make
degenerate, debase is earlier (1580s), probably because bastard also was serving as a verb meaning
to declare illegitimate (1540s). Related: Bastardized; bastardizing; bastardization.


bastardy (n.)

early 14c., condition of illegitimacy, from Anglo-French and Old French bastardie, from bastard (see
bastard). As begetting of bastards, fornication from 1570s.


baste (v.1)

sew together loosely, c.1400, from Old French bastir build, construct, sew up (a garment), baste,
make, prepare, arrange (12c., Modern French b&acirc;tir to build), probably from a Germanic source,
from Proto-Germanic *bastjan join together with bast (source also of Old High German besten; see
bast).


baste (v.2)

to soak in gravy, moisten, late 14c., of unknown origin, possibly from Old French basser to moisten,
soak, from bassin basin (see basin). Related: Basted; basting.


baste (v.3)

beat, thrash, 1530s, perhaps from the cookery sense of baste (v.2) or from some Scandinavian source
(such as Swedish basa to beat, flog, b&ouml;sta to thump) akin to Old Norse beysta to beat, and
related to Old English beatan (see beat (v.)).


baster (n.)

1520s, one who bastes meat, from baste (v.2); from 1726 as heavy blow, from baste (v.3).


Bastille (n.)

14c. Paris prison destroyed by revolutionaries on July 14, 1789, French, literally fortress, tower
(see bastion).


bastinado (n.)

1570s, from Spanish bastonada a beating, cudgeling, from baston stick, from Late Latin bastum (see
baton).


bastion (n.)

1560s, from Middle French bastillon, diminutive of Old French bastille fortress, tower, fortified,
building, from Old Proven&ccedil;al bastir build, perhaps originally make with bast (see baste
(v.1)).


bat (n.1)

a stick, a club, Old English *batt cudgel, perhaps from Celtic (compare Irish and Gaelic bat, bata
staff, cudgel), influenced by Old French batte, from Late Latin battre beat; all from PIE root
*bhat- to strike. Also a lump, piece (mid-14c.), as in brickbat. As a kind of paddle used to play
cricket, it is attested from 1706.    Phrase right off the bat is 1888, also hot from the bat
(1888), probably a baseball metaphor, but cricket is possible as a source; there is an early
citation from Australia (in an article about slang): Well, it is a vice you'd better get rid of
then. Refined conversation is a mark of culture. Let me hear that kid use slang again, and I'll give
it to him right off the bat. I'll wipe up the floor with him. I'll  --- [The Australian Journal,
November 1888].


bat (n.2)

flying mammal (order Chiroptera), 1570s, a dialectal alteration of Middle English bakke (early
14c.), which is probably related to Old Swedish natbakka, Old Danish nathbakk&aelig; night bat, and
Old Norse le&eth;rblaka leather flapper, so original sense is likely flapper. The shift from -k- to
-t- may have come through confusion of bakke with Latin blatta moth, nocturnal insect.    Old
English word for the animal was hreremus, from hreran to shake (see rare (adj.2)), and rattle-mouse
is attested from late 16c., an old dialectal word for bat. As a contemptuous term for an old woman,
perhaps a suggestion of witchcraft (compare fly-by-night), or from bat as prostitute who plies her
trade by night [Farmer, who calls it old slang and finds French equivalent night swallow (hirondelle
de nuit) more poetic].


bat (v.1)

to move the eyelids, 1847, American English, from earlier sense of flutter as a hawk (1610s), a
variant of bate (v.2) on the notion of fluttering wings. Related: Batted; batting.


bat (v.2)

to hit with a bat, mid-15c., from bat (n.1). Related: Batted; batting.


Bat Mitzvah

1950, literally daughter of command; a Jewish girl who has reached age 12, the age of religious
majority. Extended to the ceremony held on occasion of this.


Batavia

former name of Jakarta, capital of Indonesia, when it was the Dutch East Indies, a colony of the
Netherlands; from Batavia, an ancient name for a region of Holland, from Latin Batavi, a people who
dwelt between the Rhine and the Waal on the island of Betawe.


batch (n.)

Old English *b&aelig;cce something baked, from bacan bake (see bake (v.)). Batch is to bake as watch
(n.) is to wake and match (n.2) one of a pair is to make. Extended 1713 to any quantity produced at
one operation.


bate (v.1)

to reduce, to lessen in intensity, c.1300, shortening of abate (q.v.). Now only in phrase bated
breath, which was used by Shakespeare in The Merchant of Venice (1596).


bate (v.2)

c.1300, to contend with blows or arguments, from Old French batre to hit, beat, strike, from Late
Latin battere, from Latin batuere to beat, knock (see batter (v.)). In falconry, to beat the wings
impatiently and flutter away from the perch. Figurative sense of to flutter downward attested from
1580s.


bateau (n.)

French-Canadian river boat, 1711, from French bateau, from Old French batel, from Germanic (see boat
(n.)).


bated breath (n.)

see bate (v.1).


batement (n.)

mid-15c., shortening of abatement.


bath (n.)

Old English b&aelig;&eth; immersing in water, mud, etc., also quantity of water, etc., for bathing,
from Proto-Germanic *batham (cognates: Old Norse ba&eth;, Middle Dutch bat, German bad), from PIE
root *bhe- to warm (see fever) + Germanic *-thuz suffix indicating act, process, condition (as in
birth, death). Original sense was of heating, not immersing in water. The city in Somerset, England
(Old English Ba&eth;un) was so called from its hot springs. Bath salts attested from 1875 (Dr.
Julius Braun, On the Curative Effects of Baths and Waters).


bathe (v.)

Old English ba&thorn;ian to wash, lave, bathe (transitive and intransitive), from root of bath
(q.v.), with different vowel sound due to i-mutation. Related: Bathed; bathing.


bathetic (adj.)

1834, from bathos on the model of pathetic, which, however, does not come directly from pathos (see
pathetic), so the formation is either erroneous or humorous. Bathotic (1863, perhaps on model of
chaotic) is not much better.


bathing (n.)

1540s, verbal noun from bathe (v.). Bathing suit is recorded from 1852 (bathing costume from 1830);
bathing beauty is 1920, from vaudeville.


batholith (n.)

1903, from German batholith (1892), coined by German geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914) from Greek
bathos depth (see benthos) + -lith stone.


bathos (n.)

anticlimax, a descent from the sublime to the ridiculous, 1727, from Greek bathos depth, related to
bathys deep (see benthos). Introduced by Pope.


bathrobe (n.)

1894, from bath (n.) + robe (n.).


bathroom (n.)

1780, from bath + room (n.). Originally a room with apparatus for bathing, used 20c. in U.S. as a
euphemism for a lavatory and often noted as a word that confused British travelers. To  go to the
bathroom, euphemism for relieve oneself; urinate, defecate, from 1920 (in a book for children), but
typically used without regard for whether an actual bathroom is involved.


Bathsheba

Biblical wife of King David, mother of Solomon, from Hebrew Bathshebha, literally daughter of the
oath, from bath daughter.


bathtub (n.)

1837, from bath + tub. Prohibition-era bathtub gin is recorded by 1928.


bathukolpian (adj.)

big-breasted, 1825, from Greek bathykolpos, literally deep-bosomed, from bathys deep (see benthos) +
kolpos breast (see gulf (n.)).


bathyscaphe (n.)

diving apparatus for reaching great depths, 1947, name coined by its inventor, Swiss scientific
extremist Prof. Auguste Piccard (1884-1962), from Greek bathys deep (see benthos) + skaphe light
boat, skiff (see skaphoid).


batik (n.)

1880, from Dutch, from Malay mbatik, said to be from amba to write + titik dot, point.


batman (n.)

officer's servant, originally military title for man in charge of a bat-horse and its load, 1755,
from bat pack-saddle (late 14c.), from Old French bast (Modern French b&acirc;t), from Late Latin
bastum (see baton). Hence also batwoman (1941). The comic book hero dates from 1939.


baton (n.)

1540s, a staff used as a weapon, from French b&acirc;ton stick, walking stick, staff, club, wand,
from Old French baston (12c.) stick, staff, rod, from Late Latin bastum stout staff, probably of
Gaulish origin or else from Greek *baston support, from bastazein to lift up, raise, carry. Meaning
staff carried as a symbol of office is from 1580s; musical sense of conductor's wand is from 1841
(from 1839 as a French word in English). Often anglicized 17c.-18c. as batoon.


Baton Rouge

city in Louisiana, U.S., a French translation of Choctaw itti homma red pole, perhaps in reference
to a painted boundary marker.


battalion (n.)

1580s, from Middle French bataillon (16c.), from Italian battaglione battle squadron, from
diminutive of Vulgar Latin battalia battle, from Latin bauttere to beat (see batter (v.)). Specific
sense of part of a regiment is from 1708.Madame, lui r&eacute;pondit-il, ne vous y fiez pas: j'ay
t&ocirc;ujours v&#251; Dieu do cot&eacute; des gros Batallions. [E.Boursault, 1702]


batten (n.)

strip of wood (especially used to fasten canvas over ships' hatches), 1650s, anglicized variant of
baton a stick, a staff (see baton). Nautical use attested from 1769.


batten (v.1)

to improve; to fatten, 1590s, probably representing an English dialectal survival of Old Norse batna
improve (cognates: Old English batian, Old Frisian batia, Old High German bazen, Gothic gabatnan to
become better, avail, benefit, Old English bet better; also see boot (v.)). Related: Battened;
battening.


batten (v.2)

to furnish with battens, 1775, from batten (n.); phrase batten down recorded from 1823. Related:
Battened; battening.


Battenberg (n.)

type of cake, 1903, from name of a town in Germany, the seat of a family which became known in
Britain as Mountbatten.


batter (v.)

strike repeatedly, beat violently and rapidly, early 14c., from Old French batre to beat, strike
(11c., Modern French battre to beat, to strike), from Latin battuere to beat, strike, an old word in
Latin, but almost certainly borrowed from Gaulish, from PIE root *bhau- to strike (cognates: Welsh
bathu beat; Old English beadu battle, beatan to beat, bytl hammer, mallet). Began to be widely used
1962 in reference to domestic abuse. Related: Battered; battering. Battering-ram is an ancient
weapon (Latin aries), but the word attested only from 1610s.


batter (n.)

flour, eggs, and milk beaten together, late 14c., from Old French batteure a beating, from Latin
battuere to beat, knock (see batter (v.)).


battery (n.)

1530s, action of battering, from Middle French batterie, from Old French baterie (12c.) beating,
thrashing, assault, from batre beat, from Latin battuere beat (see batter (v.)).    Meaning shifted
in Middle French from bombardment (heavy blows upon city walls or fortresses) to unit of artillery
(a sense recorded in English from 1550s). Extension to electrical cell (1748, first used by Ben
Franklin) is perhaps from the artillery sense via notion of discharges of electricity. In Middle
English, bateri meant only forged metal ware. In obsolete baseball jargon battery was the word for
pitcher and catcher considered as a unit (1867, originally only the pitcher).


batting (n.)

sheets of cotton fiber, 1875, variant of obsolete bat felted mass of fur, wool, etc., from bat
(n.1), on notion of beaten fabric.


battle (n.)

c.1300, from Old French bataille battle, single combat, also inner turmoil, harsh circumstances;
army, body of soldiers, from Late Latin battualia exercise of soldiers and gladiators in fighting
and fencing, from Latin battuere to beat, to strike (see batter (v.)). Phrase battle royal fight
involving several combatants is from 1670s.


battle (v.)

early 14c., to fight, from French batailler (12c.), from bataille (see battle (n.)). Related:
Battled; battling.


battle-axe (n.)

late 14c., weapon of war, from battle (n.) + axe (n.); meaning formidable woman is U.S. slang, first
recorded 1896.


battledore (n.)

mid-15c., bat-like implement used in washing clothes, of unknown origin, perhaps from Old
Proven&ccedil;al batedor, Spanish batidor beater, bat, from batir to beat; perhaps blended with
Middle English betel hammer, mallet. As a trype of racket used in a game, from 1590s.


battlefield (n.)

1812, from battle (n.) + field (n.). The usual word for it in Old English was w&aelig;lstow,
literally slaughter-place.


battlement (n.)

early 14c., from Old French bataillement, earlier bastillement fortification, from bastillier to
fortify, to equip with battlements, from bastille fortress, tower (see bastion). The raised parts
are cops or merlons; the indentations are embrasures or crenelles.


battleship (n.)

1794, shortened from line-of-battle ship (1705), one large enough to take part in a main attack
(formerly one of 74-plus guns); from battle (n.) + ship (n.). Later in U.S. Navy in reference to a
class of ships that carried guns of the largest size. The last was decommissioned in 2006.
Battleship-gray as a color is attested from 1916. Fighter and bomber airplanes in World War I
newspaper articles were sometimes called battleplanes, but it did not catch on.


battology (n.)

needless repetition in speaking or writing, c.1600, from Greek battologia a speaking stammeringly,
from battos stammerer, of imitative origin, + -logia (see -logy).


batty (adj.)

1580s, pertaining to bats, from bat (n.2) + -y (2). Slang sense nuts, crazy is attested from 1903,
from the expression (to have) bats in (one's) belfry, also meaning not be right in the head (1899).


bauble (n.)

showy trinket or ornament, early 14c., from Old French baubel child's toy, trinket, probably a
reduplication of bel, from Latin bellus pretty (see bene-). Or else related to babe, baby.


baud (n.)

1932, originally a unit of speed in telegraphy, coined in French in 1929 in honor of French inventor
and engineer Jean-Maurice-&Eacute;mile Baudot (1845-1903), who designed a telegraph printing system.


Bauhaus (n.)

1923, from German Bauhaus, literally architecture-house; school of design founded in Weimar,
Germany, 1919 by Walter Gropius (1883-1969), later extended to the principles it embodied. First
element is bau building, construction, structure, from Old High German buan to dwell (see bound
(adj.2)). For second element, see house (n.).


baulk

alternative spelling of balk, especially in billiards, in reference to a bad shot.


bauxite (n.)

1861, clayey mineral containing aluminum, from French bauxite (1821), from Les Baux, near Soles,
where it was first found. The place name is from Proven&ccedil;al Li Baus, literally the precipices.


Bavaria

named for the Boii, ancient Celtic people who once lived there (also see Bohemia).


bawd (n.)

a complicated word of uncertain history. First attested late 15c., lewd person (of either sex; since
c.1700 applied only to women), probably from baude-strote procurer of prostitutes (mid-14c.), which
may be from Middle English bawde (adj.) merry, joyous, from Old French baud gay, licentious (from
Frankish bald bold or some such Germanic source). It would not be the first time a word meaning
joyous had taken on a sexual sense. The sense evolution shading from bold to lewd is not difficult;
compare Old French baudise ardor, joy, elation, act of boldness, presumption; baudie elation, high
spirits, fole baudie bawdry, shamelessness. The Old French word also is the source of French baudet
donkey, in Picardy dialect loose woman.    The second element in baude-strote would be trot one who
runs errands, or Germanic *strutt (see strut). But OED doubts all this. There was an Old French
baudestrote, baudetrot of the same meaning (13c.), and this may be the direct source of Middle
English baude-strote. The obsolete word bronstrops procuress, frequently found in Middleton's
comedies, probably is an alteration of baude-strote.


bawdry (n.)

obscenity, late 14c., probably from Old French bauderie boldness, ardor, elation, pride (see bawd).


bawdy (adj.)

late 14c., soiled, dirty, filthy, from bawd + -y (2). Meaning lewd is from 1510s, from notion of
pertaining to or befitting a bawd; usually of language (originally to talk bawdy).  Bawdy Basket,
the twenty-third rank of canters, who carry pins, tape, ballads and obscene books to sell. [Grose,
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]  Related: Bawdily; bawdiness.


bawl (v.)

mid-15c., to howl like a dog, from Old Norse baula to low like a cow, and/or Medieval Latin baulare
to bark like a dog, both echoic. Meaning to shout loudly attested from 1590s. To bawl (someone) out
reprimand loudly is 1908, American English. Related: Bawled; bawling.


bay (n.1)

inlet of the sea, c.1400, from Old French baie, Late Latin baia (c.640), perhaps ultimately from
Iberian bahia.


bay (n.2)

opening in a wall, late 14c. (especially bay window, early 15c.), from Old French baee opening,
hole, gulf, noun use of fem. past participle of bayer to gape, yawn, from Medieval Latin batare
gape, perhaps of imitative origin. It is the bay in sick-bay.


bay (n.3)

howl of a dog, early 14c., earlier howling chorus raised (by hounds) when in contact with the hunted
animal, c.1300, from Old French bayer, from PIE root *bai- echoic of howling (compare Greek bauzein,
Latin baubari to bark, English bow-wow; also see bawl). From the hunting usage comes the transferred
sense of final encounter, and thence, on the notion of putting up an effective defense, at bay.


bay (adj.)

reddish-brown, usually of horses, mid-14c., from Anglo-French bai (13c.), Old French bai, from Latin
badius chestnut-brown (used only of horses), from PIE *badyo- yellow, brown (cognates: Old Irish
buide yellow). Also elliptical for a horse of this color.


bay (n.4)

laurel shrub (Laurus nobilis, source of the bay leaf), late 14c., originally only of the berry, from
Old French baie (12c.) berry, seed, from Latin baca berry. Extension to the shrub itself is from
1520s. The leaves or sprigs were woven as wreaths for conquerors or poets. Bayberry first recorded
1570s, after the original sense had shifted.


bay (v.)

to bark or howl (at), late 14c., from bay (n.3). Related: Bayed; baying.


Bayard (n.)

generic or mock-heroic name for a horse, mid-14c., from Old French Baiard, name of the bay-colored
magic steed given by Charlemagne to Renaud in the legends, from Old French baiart bay-colored (see
bay (adj.)). Also by early 14c. proverbial as a blind person or thing, for now-unknown reasons. The
name later was used attributively of gentlemen of courage and integrity, in this sense from Pierre
du Terrail, seigneur de Bayard (1473-1524), French knight celebrated as Chevalier sans peur et sans
reproche. The surname is perhaps in reference to hair color.


bayonet (n.)

1610s, originally a type of dagger; as a steel stabbing weapon fitted to the muzzle of a firearm,
from 1670s, from French baionnette (16c.), said to be from Bayonne, city in Gascony where supposedly
they first were made; or perhaps it is a diminutive of Old French bayon crossbow bolt. The city name
is from Late Latin baia bay + Basque on good. As a verb from c.1700.


bayou (n.)

1766, via Louisiana French, from Choctaw bayuk small stream.


bazaar (n.)

1580s, from Italian bazarra, ultimately from Persian bazar (Pahlavi vacar) a market.


bazar (n.)

alternative spelling of bazaar.


bazooka (n.)

metal tube rocket launcher, 1942, from name of a junkyard musical instrument used (c.1935) as a prop
by U.S. comedian Bob Burns (1896-1956); extension of bazoo, slang for mouth or boastful talk (1877),
probably from Dutch bazuin trumpet.


bazooms (n.)

woman's breasts, especially when deemed prominent, 1955, American English slang alteration of
bosoms.


BBC

see B.B.C.


BBQ

abbreviation of barbecue, by 1956, American English.


BCE

see B.C.E.


be (v.)

Old English beon, beom, bion be, exist, come to be, become, happen, from Proto-Germanic *biju- I am,
I will be. This b-root is from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, grow, come into being, and in addition
to the words in English it yielded German present first and second person singular (bin, bist, from
Old High German bim I am, bist thou art), Latin perfective tenses of esse (fui I was, etc.), Old
Church Slavonic byti be, Greek phu- become, Old Irish bi'u I am, Lithuanian bu'ti to be, Russian
byt' to be, etc. It also is behind Sanskrit bhavah becoming, bhavati becomes, happens, bhumih earth,
world.     The modern verb to be in its entirety represents the merger of two once-distinct verbs,
the b-root represented by be and the am/was verb, which was itself a conglomerate. Roger Lass (Old
English) describes the verb as a collection of semantically related paradigm fragments, while
Weekley calls it an accidental conglomeration from the different Old English dial[ect]s. It is the
most irregular verb in Modern English and the most common. Collective in all Germanic languages, it
has eight different forms in Modern English:   BE (infinitive, subjunctive, imperative)  AM (present
1st person singular)  ARE (present 2nd person singular and all plural)  IS (present 3rd person
singular)  WAS (past 1st and 3rd persons singular)  WERE (past 2nd person singular, all plural;
subjunctive)  BEING (progressive &amp; present participle; gerund)  BEEN (perfect participle).
The paradigm in Old English was:<table width=400 bgcolor=#CCFFFF cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4
border=1><tr><td> </td><td>SING.</td><td>PL.</td></tr><tr><td>1st pres.</td><td>ic eomic
beo</td><td>we sind(on)we beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pres.</td><td>&thorn;u eart&thorn;u
bist</td><td>ge sind(on)ge beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pres.</td><td>he ishe bi&eth;</td><td>hie
sind(on)hie beo&eth;</td></tr><tr><td>1st pret.</td><td>ic w&aelig;s</td><td>we
w&aelig;ron</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pret.</td><td>&thorn;u w&aelig;re</td><td>ge
waeron</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pret.</td><td>heo w&aelig;s</td><td>hie w&aelig;ron</td></tr><tr><td>1st
pret. subj.</td><td>ic w&aelig;re</td><td>we w&aelig;ren</td></tr><tr><td>2nd pret.
subj.</td><td>&thorn;u w&aelig;re</td><td>ge w&aelig;ren</td></tr><tr><td>3rd pret.
subj.</td><td>Egcfer&eth; w&aelig;re</td><td>hie w&aelig;ren</td></tr></table>The b-root had no past
tense in Old English, but often served as future tense of am/was. In 13c. it took the place of the
infinitive, participle and imperative forms of am/was. Later its plural forms (we beth, ye ben, they
be) became standard in Middle English and it made inroads into the singular (I be, thou beest, he
beth), but forms of are claimed this turf in the 1500s and replaced be in the plural. For the origin
and evolution of the am/was branches of this tangle, see am and was.    That but this blow Might be
the be all, and the end all. [Macbeth I.vii.5]


be-

word-forming element with a wide range of meaning: thoroughly, completely; to make, cause seem; to
provide with; at, on, to, for, from Old English be- on all sides (also used to make transitive verbs
and as a privative or intensive prefix), from weak form of Old English bi by, probably cognate with
second syllable of Greek amphi, Latin ambi and originally meaning about (see ambi-).    This sense
naturally drifted into intensive (as in bespatter spatter about, therefore spatter very much). Be-
can also be privative (as in behead), causative, or have just about any sense required. The prefix
was productive 16c.-17c. in forming useful words, many of which have not survived, such as bethwack
to thrash soundly (1550s), betongue to assail in speech, to scold (1630s).


be-all (n.)

see be.


be-in (n.)

a public gathering of hippies [OED], 1967, from be + in.


beach (n.)

1530s, loose, water-worn pebbles of the seashore, probably from Old English b&aelig;ce, bece stream,
from Proto-Germanic *bakiz. Extended to loose, pebbly shores (1590s), and in dialect around Sussex
and Kent beach still has the meaning pebbles worn by the waves. French gr&egrave;ve shows the same
evolution. Beach ball first recorded 1940; beach bum first recorded 1950.


beach (v.)

to haul or run up on a beach, 1840, from beach (n.). Related: Beached; beaching.


beach-comber (n.)

1840, from beach (n.) + agent noun from comb (v.).


beachfront (adj.)

also beach-front, 1903, American English, from beach (n.) + front (n.). The beach front was a
standard way in late 19c. to express the seashore of a town such as Atlantic City.


beachhead (n.)

1940, in reference to German military tactics in World War II, from beach (n.) + head (n.), on the
model of bridgehead, but the image doesn't quite work.


beacon (n.)

Old English beacen sign, portent, lighthouse, from West Germanic *baukna beacon, signal (cognates:
Old Frisian baken, Old Saxon bokan, Old High German bouhhan); not found outside Germanic. Perhaps
borrowed from Latin bucina a crooked horn or trumpet, signal horn. But more likely from PIE *bhew-,
a variant of the base *bha- (1) to gleam, shine (see phantasm). Figurative use from c.1600.


bead (n.)

mid-14c., bede prayer bead, from Old English gebed prayer, with intensive or collective prefix *ge-
+ Proto-Germanic *bidjan to pray, entreat (cognates: Middle Dutch bede, Old High German beta, German
bitte, Gothic bida prayer, request), from PIE *gwhedh- to ask, pray. Shift in meaning came via beads
threaded on a string to count prayers, and in phrases like to bid one's beads, to count one's beads.
German cognate Bitte is the usual word for conversational request please. Also related to bid (Old
English biddan) and Gothic bidjan to ask, pray. Sense transferred to drop of liquid 1590s; to small
knob forming front sight of a gun 1831 (Kentucky slang); hence draw a bead on take aim at, 1841,
U.S. colloquial.


bead (v.)

1570s, to adorn with beads, from bead (n.). Meaning to string like beads is from 1883. Related:
Beaded; beading.


beadle (n.)

Old English bydel herald, messenger from an authority, preacher, from beodan to proclaim (see bid).
Sense of warrant officer, tipstaff was in late Old English; that of petty parish officer, which has
given the job a bad reputation, is from 1590s. French b&eacute;deau (Old French bedel, 12c.) is a
Germanic loan-word.


beadsman (n.)

one who prays for another's benefit, early 13c.; see bead (n.) + man (n.).


beady (adj.)

in reference to eyes, 1826, from bead (n.) + -y (2). Related: Beadily; beadiness.


beagle (n.)

late 15c., of unknown origin, possibly from French becguele noisy person, literally gaping throat,
from bayer open wide (see bay (n.2)) + gueule mouth (see gullet).


beak (n.)

mid-13c., bird's bill, from Old French bec beak, figuratively mouth, also tip or point of a nose, a
lance, a ship, a shoe, from Latin beccus (source also of Italian becco, Spanish pico), said by
Suetonius (De vita Caesarum 18) to be of Gaulish origin, perhaps from Gaulish beccus, possibly
related to Celtic stem bacc- hook. Or there may be a link in Old English becca pickax, sharp end.
Jocular sense of human nose is from 1854 (but also was used mid-15c. in the same sense).


beaker (n.)

open large-mouthed vessel, mid-14c., from Old Norse bikarr or Middle Dutch beker goblet, probably
(with Old Saxon bikeri, Old High German behhari, German Becher) from Medieval Latin bicarium, which
itself is probably a diminutive of Greek bikos earthenware jug, wine jar (said to be an oriental
word, perhaps a borrowing from Syrian buqa a two-handed vase or jug). Form assimilated in English to
beak.


beal (n.)

mouth of a river or valley, 1818 (in Scott), from Gaelic beul mouth.


beam (n.)

Old English beam originally living tree, but by late 10c. also rafter, post, ship's timber, from
Proto-Germanic *baumaz (cognates: Old Norse ba&eth;mr, Old Frisian bam tree, gallows, beam, Middle
Dutch boom, Old High German boum, German Baum tree, Gothic bagms), perhaps from PIE verb root
*bheue- to grow (see be). The shift from *-au- to -ea- is regular in Old English.    Meaning ray of
light developed in Old English, probably because it was used by Bede to render Latin columna lucis,
the Biblical pillar of fire. Nautical sense of one of the horizontal transverse timbers holding a
ship together is from early 13c., hence greatest breadth of a ship, and slang broad in the beam
wide-hipped (of persons). To be on the beam (1941) was originally an aviator's term for to follow
the course indicated by a radio beam.


beam (v.)

emit rays of light, early 15c., from beam (n.) in the ray of light sense. Sense of to smile
radiantly is from 1804; that of to direct radio transmissions is from 1927. Related: Beamed;
beaming.


beamish (adj.)

1530 (Palsgrave), from beam + -ish. Lewis Carroll may have thought he was inventing it in
Jabberwocky.


bean (n.)

Old English bean bean, pea, legume, from Proto-Germanic *bauno (cognates: Old Norse baun, Middle
Dutch bone, Dutch boon, Old High German bona, German Bohne), perhaps from a PIE reduplicated base
*bha-bha- and related to Latin faba bean.    As a metaphor for something of small value it is
attested from c.1300. Meaning head is U.S. baseball slang c.1905 (in bean-ball a pitch thrown at the
head); thus slang verb bean meaning to hit on the head, attested from 1910.    The notion of lucky
or magic beans in English folklore is from the exotic beans or large seeds that wash up occasionally
in Cornwall and western Scotland, carried from the Caribbean or South America by the Gulf Stream.
They were cherished, believed to ward off the evil eye and aid in childbirth.    Slang bean-counter
accountant recorded by 1971. To not know beans (American English, 1933) is perhaps from the of
little worth sense, but may have a connection to colloquial expression recorded around Somerset, to
know how many beans make five be a clever fellow.


bean bag (n.)

also bean-bag, 1871 as a device in children's games, 1969 as a type of chair. From bean (n.) + bag
(n.).


beanery (n.)

cheap restaurant, 1884, American English, from bean (n.) + -ery.


beanie (n.)

small, close-fitting hat, 1940, from bean (n.) in the slang sense of head + -ie.


beano (n.)

1888, colloquial shortening of beanfest annual dinner given by employers for their workers (1805);
they had a reputation for rowdiness. From bean (n.) + fest (n.).


bear (v.)

Old English beran to bear, bring; bring forth, produce; to endure, sustain; to wear (class IV strong
verb; past tense b&aelig;r, past participle boren), from Proto-Germanic *beran (cognates: Old Saxon
beran, Old Frisian bera, Old High German beran, German geb&auml;ren, Old Norse bera, Gothic bairan
to carry, bear, give birth to), from PIE root *bher- (1) meaning both give birth (though only
English and German strongly retain this sense, and Russian has beremennaya pregnant) and carry a
burden, bring (see infer).   Ball bearings bear the friction. Many senses are from notion of move
onward by pressure. Old English past tense b&aelig;r became Middle English bare; alternative bore
began to appear c.1400, but bare remained the literary form till after 1600. Past participle
distinction of borne for carried and born for given birth is from late 18c. To bear (something) in
mind is from 1530s.


bear (n.)

Old English bera bear, from Proto-Germanic *beron, literally the brown (one) (cognates: Old Norse
bj&ouml;rn, Middle Dutch bere, Dutch beer, Old High German bero, German B&auml;r), from PIE *bher-
(3) bright, brown (see brown (adj.)).    Greek arktos and Latin ursus retain the PIE root word for
bear (*rtko; see Arctic), but it is believed to have been ritually replaced in the northern branches
because of hunters' taboo on names of wild animals (compare the Irish equivalent the good calf,
Welsh honey-pig, Lithuanian the licker, Russian medved honey-eater). Others connect the Germanic
word with Latin ferus wild, as if it meant the wild animal (par excellence) of the northern woods.
Symbolic of Russia since 1794. Used of uncouth persons since 1570s. Stock market meaning speculator
for a fall is 1709 shortening of bearskin jobber (from the proverb sell the bearskin before one has
caught the bear); i.e. one who sells stock for future delivery, expecting that meanwhile prices will
fall. Paired with bull from c.1720. Bear claw as a type of large pastry is from 1942, originally
chiefly western U.S.


bear hug (n.)

1876, from bear (n.) + hug (n.).


bearable (adj.)

endurable, mid-15c., from bear (v.) + -able. Related: Bearably.


beard (n.)

Old English beard beard, from West Germanic *barthaz (cognates: Old Frisian berd, Middle Dutch
baert, Old High German bart, German bart), seemingly from PIE *bhardh-a- beard (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic brada, Lithuanian barzda, and perhaps Latin barba beard).    The Greek and Roman Churches
have long disputed about the beard. While the Romanists have at different times practised shaving,
the Greeks, on the contrary, have strenuously defended the cause of long beards. Leo III. (795 AD)
was the first shaved Pope. Pope Gregory IV., after the lapse of only 30 years, fulminated a Bull
against bearded priests. In the 12th century the prescription of the beard was extended to the
laity. Pope Honorius III. to disguise his disfigured lip, allowed his beard to grow. Henry I. of
England was so much moved by a sermon directed against his beard that he resigned it to the barber.
Frederick Barbarossa is said to have been equally tractable. [Tom Robinson, M.D., Beards, St.
James's Magazine, 1881]    Pubic hair sense is from 1600s (but ne&thorn;ir berd pubic hair is from
late 14c.); in the 1811 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, the phrase beard-splitter is defined as, A
man much given to wenching (see beaver).


beard (v.)

c.1300, to grow or have a beard, from beard (n.). The sense of confront boldly and directly is from
Middle English phrases such as rennen in berd oppose openly (c.1200), reproven in the berd to rebuke
directly and personally (c.1400), on the same notion as modern slang get in (someone's) face.
Related: Bearded; bearding.


beardless (adj.)

early 14c., from beard (n.) + -less.


bearer (n.)

Old English -berere (in water-berere), agent noun from bear (v.). Meaning one who helps carry a
corpse to the grave is from 1630s.


bearing (n.)

carrying of oneself, deportment, mid-13c., verbal noun from bear (v.). Mechanical sense of part of a
machine that bears the friction is from 1791.


bearings (n.)

parts of a machine which 'bear' the friction, 1791, from present participle of bear (v.). Meaning
direction from a point of reference is from 1630s; to take (one's) bearings is from 1711.


bearish (adj.)

grumpy, surly, 1744, from bear (n.) + -ish. Related: Bearishly; bearishness.


Bearnaise (n.)

egg-and-butter sauce, 1877, from French sauce b&eacute;arnaise, from fem. of b&eacute;arnais of
B&eacute;arn, region in southwest France (named for the Benarni, a Gaulish tribe).


bearskin (n.)

from bear (n.) + skin (n.).


beast (n.)

c.1200, from Old French beste animal, wild beast, figuratively fool, idiot (11c., Modern French
b&ecirc;te), from Vulgar Latin *besta, from Latin bestia beast, wild animal, of unknown origin. Used
to translate Latin animal. Replaced Old English deor (see deer) as the generic word for wild
creature, only to be ousted 16c. by animal. Of persons felt to be animal-like in various senses from
early 13c. Of the figure in the Christian apocalypse story from late 14c.


beastly (adj.)

c.1200, brutish, sensual, debased; late 14c., in the manner of a beast, from beast + -ly (1).
Weakened in British upper crust use to awfully, exceedingly by mid-19c. Beastly drunk is from 1803.


beat (v.)

Old English beatan inflict blows on, thrash (class VII strong verb; past tense beot, past participle
beaten), from Proto-Germanic *bautan (cognates: Old Norse bauta, Old High German bozan to beat),
from PIE root *bhau- to strike (see batter (v.)). Of the heart, c.1200, from notion of it striking
against the breast. Meaning to overcome in a contest is from 1610s (the source of the sense of
legally avoid, escape in beat the charges, etc., attested from c.1920 in underworld slang).    Past
tense beat is from c.1500, probably not from Old English but a shortening of Middle English beted.
Dead-beat (originally tired-out) preserves the old past participle. Meaning strike cover to rouse or
drive game (c.1400) is source of beat around the bush (1570s), the metaphoric sense of which has
shifted from make preliminary motions to avoid, evade. Command beat it go away first recorded 1906
(though action of feet upon the ground was a sense of Old English betan). To beat off masturbate is
recorded by 1960s. For beat generation see beatnik.


beat (n.)

c.1300, a beating, whipping; the beating of a drum, from beat (v.). As throb of the heart from 1755.
Meaning regular route travelled by someone is attested from 1731, also a track made by animals
(1736), from the sense of the beat of the feet on the ground (late Old English), or perhaps that in
beat the bushes to flush game (c.1400), or beat the bounds (1560s). Extended to journalism by 1875.
Musical sense is by 1842, perhaps from the motion of the conductor and the notion of beating the
time:    It is usual, in beating the time of a piece of music, to mark or signalize the commencement
of every measure by a downward movement or beat of the hand, or of any other article that may be
used for the purpose .... [Godfrey Weber's General Music Teacher, 1842]    Earlier in music it meant
a sort of grace note:    BEAT, in music, a transient grace note, struck immediately before the note
it is intended to ornament. The beat always lies half a note beneath its principal, and should be
heard so closely upon it, that they may almost seem to be struck together. [The British
Encyclopedia, London, 1809]


beat (adj.)

defeated, overcome by effort, c.1400, from past tense of beat (v.). Meaning tired, exhausted, is by
1905, American English.


beat up (v.)

thrash, strike repeatedly, c.1900 (v.), from beat (v.). Beat-up as an adjectival phrase meaning
worn-out dates to 1946.


beatable (adj.)

1610s, from beat (v.) + -able.


beaten (adj.)

hammered (of metal, etc.), c.1300, from past participle of beat (v.), which alternates with beat
with some distinctions of sense. Meaning defeated is from 1560s; that of repeatedly struck is from
1590s.


beater (n.)

mid-14c., an implement for beating; mid-15c., a person who punishes (c.1200 as a surname); agent
noun from beat (v.). Of various mechanical devices that beat in some sense from early 17c. Meaning
one who rouses game is from 1825. Slang meaning old car is from c.1980.


beatific (adj.)

1630s, from French b&eacute;atifique or directly from Late Latin beatificus, from Latin beatus
blessed, happy, past participle of beare make happy, bless (see beatitude). Related: Beatifical (c.
1600); beatifically.


beatification (n.)

c.1500, act of rendering blessed, from Middle French b&eacute;atification, noun of action and state
from past participle stem of Late Latin beatificare (see beatify). As a papal declaration about the
status of a deceased person, it dates from c.1600.


beatify (v.)

1530s, to make very happy, from Middle French b&eacute;atifer, from Late Latin beatificare make
happy, make blessed, from Latin beatus supremely happy, blessed (past participle of beare make
happy, bless) + -ficare, from stem of facere to make, do (see factitious). The Roman Catholic Church
sense of to pronounce as being in heavenly bliss (1620s) is the first step toward canonization.
Related: Beatified; beatifying.


beating (n.)

c.1200, beatunge action of inflicting blows, verbal noun from beat (v.). Meaning pulsation is
recorded from c.1600.


beatitude (n.)

early 15c., supreme happiness, from Middle French b&eacute;atitude (15c.) and directly from Latin
beatitudinem (nominative beatitudo) state of blessedness, from past participle stem of beare make
happy (see bene-). As a declaration of blessedness (usually plural, beatitudes, especially in
reference to the Sermon on the Mount) it is attested from 1520s.


Beatlemania (n.)

1963; see Beatles + mania.The social phenomenon of Beatlemania, which finds expression in handbags,
balloons and other articles bearing the likeness of the loved ones, or in the hysterical screaming
of young girls whenever the Beatle Quartet performs in public. [London Times, Dec. 27, 1963]


Beatles (n.)

seminal rock and pop group formed in Liverpool, England; named as such 1960 (after a succession of
other names), supposedly by then-bassist Stuart Sutcliffe, from beetles (on model of Buddy Holly's
band The Crickets) with a pun on the musical sense of beat. Their global popularity dates to 1963.


beatnik (n.)

coined 1958 by San Francisco newspaper columnist Herb Caen during the heyday of -nik suffixes in the
wake of Sputnik. From Beat generation (1952), associated with beat (n.) in its meaning rhythm
(especially in jazz) as well as beat (past participle adjective) worn out, exhausted, but originator
Jack Kerouac (1922-1969) in 1958 connected it with beatitude.The origins of the word beat are
obscure, but the meaning is only too clear to most Americans. More than the feeling of weariness, it
implies the feeling of having been used, of being raw. It involves a sort of nakedness of the mind.
[New York Times Magazine, Oct. 2, 1952] <hr />   Beat is old carny slang. According to Beat Movement
legend (and it is a movement with a deep inventory of legend), Ginsberg and Kerouac picked it up
from a character named Herbert Huncke, a gay street hustler and drug addict from Chicago who began
hanging around Times Square in 1939 (and who introduced William Burroughs to heroin, an important
cultural moment). The term has nothing to do with music; it names the condition of being beaten
down, poor, exhausted, at the bottom of the world. [Louis Menand, New Yorker, Oct. 1, 2007]


Beatrice

fem. proper name, from French B&eacute;atrice, from Latin beatrix, fem. of beatricem who makes
happy, from beatus happy, blessed, past participle of beare make happy, bless (see beatitude).


beau (n.)

attendant suitor of a lady, 1720, from French beau the beautiful, noun use of an adjective, from Old
French bel beautiful, handsome, fair, genuine, real (11c.), from Latin bellus handsome, fine,
pretty, agreeable, diminutive of bonus good (see bene-). Meaning man who attends excessively to
dress, etiquette, etc.; a fop; a dandy is from 1680s, short for French beau gar&ccedil;on pretty boy
(1660s).


beau monde (n.)

also beau-monde, the fashionable world, 1714, French; see beau + monde, from Latin mundus world (see
mundane).


beau-ideal (n.)

1801, from French beau id&eacute;al the ideal beauty, beautifulness as an abstract ideal, in which
beau is the subject, but as English usually puts the adjective first, the sense has shifted in
English toward perfect type or model.


beaucoup

French, literally a great heap, from beau fine, great (see beau (n.)) + coup a stroke, also a throw,
hence, a heap (see coup (n.)). Compare Spanish golpe multitude.


Beaufort scale

to measure wind velocity, developed 1806 by Francis Beaufort (1774-1857), surveyor and hydrologist.


Beaujolais (n.)

type of Burgundy, 1863, from name of a district in the department of Lyonnais, France, which is
named for the town of Beaujeu, from French beau beautiful + Latin jugum hill.


beaut (n.)

1866, abbreviated form of beauty in the sense of a beautiful thing or person.


beauteous (adj.)

mid-15c., from beauty + -ous. Now mostly limited to poetry and displaced elsewhere by beautiful.
Related: Beauteously; beauteousness.


beautician (n.)

first recorded 1924, American English (the Cleveland, Ohio, telephone directory, to be precise),
from beauty + ending as in technician. Beauty salon is from 1922, a substitution for prosaic beauty
shop (1901).


beautification (n.)

1630s, from beauty + -fication.


beautiful (adj.)

mid-15c., from beauty + -ful. The beautiful people the fashionable set first attested 1964 in (where
else?) Vogue (it also was the title of a 1941 play by U.S. dramatist William Saroyan). House
Beautiful is from Pilgrim's Progress, where it is a proper name of a place. Related: Beautifully.


beautify (v.)

mid-15c., to make beautiful, from beauty + -fy. Intransitive sense, to become beautiful, is recorded
from 1590s. Related: Beautified; beautifying.


beauty (n.)

early 14c., physical attractiveness, also goodness, courtesy, from Anglo-French beute, Old French
biaut&eacute; beauty, seductiveness, beautiful person (12c., Modern French beaut&eacute;), earlier
beltet, from Vulgar Latin bellitatem (nominative bellitas) state of being handsome, from Latin
bellus pretty, handsome, charming, in classical Latin used especially of women and children, or
ironically or insultingly of men, perhaps from PIE *dw-en-elo-, diminutive of root *deu- (2) to do,
perform; show favor, revere (see bene-). Famously defined by Stendhal as la promesse de bonheur the
promise of happiness.    [I]t takes the one hundred men in ten million who understand beauty, which
isn't imitation or an improvement on the beautiful as already understood by the common herd, twenty
or thirty years to convince the twenty thousand next most sensitive souls after their own that this
new beauty is truly beautiful. [Stendhal, Life of Henry Brulard]    Replaced Old English wlite.
Concrete meaning a beautiful woman is first recorded late 14c. Beauty sleep sleep before midnight is
attested by 1850. Beauty spot is from 1650s. Beauty parlor is from 1894.    The sudden death of a
young woman a little over a week ago in a down-town beauty parlor has served to direct public
attention to those institutions and their methods. In this case, it seems, the operator painted on
or injected into the patron's facial blemish a 4-per-cent cocaine solution and then applied an
electrode, the sponge of which was saturated with carbolized water. [The Western Druggist, October
1894]   Beaut&eacute; du diable (literally devil's beauty) is used as a French phrase in English
from 1825.


beaux arts (n.)

the fine arts, 1821, from French; also in reference to Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Paris, and the widely
imitated conventional type of art and architecture advocated there.


beaver (n.)

Old English beofor, befer (earlier bebr), from Proto-Germanic *bebruz (cognates: Old Saxon bibar,
Old Norse bjorr, Middle Dutch and Dutch bever, Low German bever, Old High German bibar, German
Biber), from PIE *bhebhrus, reduplication of root *bher- (3) brown, bright (cognates: Lithuanian
bebrus, Czech bobr, Welsh befer; see bear (n.) for the likely reason for this). Gynecological sense
(female genitals, especially with a display of pubic hair) is 1927 British slang, transferred from
earlier meaning a bearded man (1910), from the appearance of split beaver pelts.


bebop (n.)

1944, from bebop, rebop, bop, nonsense words in jazz lyrics, attested from at least 1928. The style
is associated with Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie.


becalm (v.)

1550s, from be- + calm. Related: Becalmed; becalming.


became

past tense of become (q.v.).


because (conj.)

c.1300, bi cause by cause, modeled on French par cause. Originally a phrase, often followed by a
subordinate clause introduced by that or why. One word from c.1400. As an adverb from late 14c.
Clipped form cause attested in writing by mid-15c.


bechamel (n.)

1796, from French b&eacute;chamel, named for Louis XIV's steward, Louis de B&eacute;chamel, marquis
de Nointel (1630-1703), who perfected it. Gamillscheg identifies him as a great gourmet of the time
(eines bekannten Feinschmeckers des 17. Jhdts.).


bechance (v.)

1520s, from be- + chance. Related: Bechanced; bechancing.


beck (n.)

late 14c., mute signal, from noun use of bekken (v.), variant of becnan to beckon (see beckon).
Transferred sense of slightest indication of will is from late 15c.


beck (v.)

c.1300, shortening of beckon. (v.).


beckon (v.)

Old English gebecnian (West Saxon beacnian) to make a mute sign, derivative of beacen a sign,
beacon, from Proto-Germanic *bauknjan (cognates: Old Saxon boknian, Old High German bouhnen), from
PIE root *bha- (1) to shine (see beacon). Related: Beckoned; beckoning. The noun is attested from
1718, from the verb.


becloud (v.)

1590s, from be- + cloud. Figurative sense of to obscure is recorded from 1610s. Related: Beclouded;
beclouding.


become (v.)

Old English becuman happen, come about, also meet with, arrive, from Proto-Germanic *bikweman become
(cognates: Dutch bekomen, Old High German biqueman obtain, German bekommen, Gothic biquiman). A
compound of be- and come; it drove out Old English weor&eth;an. Meaning to look well is early 14c.,
from earlier sense of to agree with, be fitting (early 13c.).


becoming (adj.)

looking well, 1560s, from earlier sense of fitting (early 13c.), from present participle of become.
Related: Becomingly; becomingness.


bed (v.)

Old English beddian to provide with a bed or lodgings, from bed (n.). From c.1300 as to go to bed,
also to copulate with, to go to bed with; 1440 as to lay out (land) in plots or beds. Related:
Bedded; bedding.


bed (n.)

Old English bedd bed, couch, resting place, garden plot, from Proto-Germanic *badjam sleeping place
dug in the ground (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon bed, Middle Dutch bedde, Old Norse be&eth;r, Old
High German betti, German Bett, Gothic badi bed), from PIE root *bhedh- to dig, pierce (cognates:
Hittite beda- to pierce, prick, Greek bothyros pit, Latin fossa ditch, Lithuanian bedre to dig,
Breton bez grave). Both sleeping and gardening senses are in Old English. Meaning bottom of a lake,
sea, watercourse is from 1580s.


bed-clothes (n.)

also bedclothes, late 14c., from bed (n.) + clothes.


bed-rest (n.)

device for sitting up in bed, by 1836; as a resting in bed for recovery from injury or illness, by
1896; from bed (n.) + rest (n.).


bed-roll (n.)

1905, from bed (n.) + roll (n.).


bed-sore (n.)

gangrene caused by anemia due to continued pressure, 1833, from bed (n.) + sore (n.)


bed-wetting (n.)

1844, from bed (n.) + present participle of wet (v.). Related: Bed-wetter.


bedaub (v.)

1550s, from be- + daub (v). Related: Bedaubed; bedaubing.


bedazzle (v.)

1590s, from be- + dazzle (v.). Related: Bedazzled; bedazzling.


bedbug (n.)

also bed-bug, 1772, from bed (n.) + bug (n.).    [The bed bug] is supposed to have been first
introduced to this country in the fir timber that was brought over to rebuild London after it had
suffered by the great fire; for it is generally said that Bugs were not known in England before that
time, and many of them were found almost immediately afterwards in the new-built houses. [the Rev.
W. Bingley, Animal Biography; or Anecdotes of the Lives, Manners, and Economy of the Animal
Creation, London, 1803]


bedchamber (n.)

also bed-chamber, mid-14c., from bed (n.) + chamber.


bedding (n.)

later Old English beddinge bedding, bed covering, from bed. Meaning bottom layer of anything is from
c.1400.


bedeck (v.)

1560s, from be- + deck (v.). Related: Bedecked; bedecking.


bedevil (v.)

1768, to treat diabolically, abuse, from be- + verbal use of devil (q.v.). Meaning to mischievously
confuse is from 1755; that of to drive frantic is from 1823. Related: Bedeviled (1570s, in a literal
sense, possessed); bedeviling.


bedevilment (n.)

1825, from bedevil + -ment.


bedfellow (n.)

close friend, roommate, mid-15c., from bed (n.) + fellow (n.). Also (late 15c) concubine. Earlier in
the close companion sense was bed-fere (early 14c.). Bedsister husband's concubine is recorded in
Middle English (c.1300).


bedight (v.)

equip, furnish, c.1400, from be- + dight (q.v.). Related: Bedighted; bedighting.


bedim (v.)

1560s, from be- + dim (adj.). Related: Bedimmed; bedimming.


bedizen (v.)

1660s, from be- + dizen to dress (1610s), especially, from late 18c., to dress finely, adorn,
originally to dress (a distaff) for spinning (1520s), and evidently the verbal form of the first
element in distaff.    It is remarkable that neither the vb., nor the sb. as a separate word, has
been found in OE. or ME., and that on the other hand no vb. corresponding to dizen is known in L.G.
or Du. [OED]


bedlam (n.)

scene of mad confusion, 1660s, from colloquial pronunciation of Hospital of Saint Mary of Bethlehem
in London, founded 1247 as a priory, mentioned as a hospital 1330 and as a lunatic hospital 1402;
converted to a state lunatic asylum on dissolution of the monasteries in 1547. It was spelled Bedlem
in a will from 1418, and Betleem is recorded as a spelling of Bethlehem in Judea from 971.


Bedouin (n.)

c.1400, from Old French bed&uuml;in (Modern French b&eacute;douin), from colloquial Arabic badawin
desert-dwellers, plural of badawi, from badw desert, camp. The Arabic plural suffix was mistaken for
part of the word. A word from the Crusades, it probably was lost in English and then reborrowed from
French c.1600. As an adjective from 1844.


bedpan (n.)

also bed-pan, 1580s, from bed (n.) + pan (n.).


bedpost (n.)

also bed-post, 1590s, from bed (n.) + post (n.1).


bedraggle (v.)

1727, from be- + draggle, frequentative of drag.


bedraggled (adj.)

1727, past participle adjective from bedraggle.


bedridden (adj.)

also bed-ridden, mid-14c., from adjectival use of late Old English b&aelig;ddr&aelig;d&aelig;n
bedridden (man), from bedrid, from Old English bedreda, literally bedrider, bedridden (man), from
bed + rida rider (see ride (v.)). Originally a noun, it became an adjective in Middle English and
acquired an -en on the analogy of past participle adjectives from strong verbs such as ride.


bedrock (n.)

also bed-rock, 1850, from bed (n.) + rock (n.). Figurative use by 1869; as an adjective by 1881.


bedroom (n.)

also bed-room, 1610s, from bed (n.) + room. Slightly earlier in a sense sleeping space (1580s).
Replaced earlier bedchamber (late 14c.). First record of slang bedroom eyes is from 1901.


bedside (n.)

late 14c., from bed (n.) + side. Bedside manner attested from 1869.


bedspread (n.)

also bed-spread, 1845, American English, from bed (n.) + spread (n.).


bedstead (n.)

c.1400, from bed (n.) + stead; strictly the place occupied by a bed, but usually raised stand on
which a bed sits.


bedtime (n.)

also bed-time, early 13c., from bed (n.) + time (n.). Bed-time story attested from 1867.


bee (n.)

stinging insect, Old English beo bee, from Proto-Germanic *bion (cognates: Old Norse by, Old High
German bia, Middle Dutch bie), possibly from PIE root *bhi- quiver. Used metaphorically for busy
worker since 1530s.    Sense of meeting of neighbors to unite their labor for the benefit of one of
their number, 1769, American English, probably is from comparison to the social activity of the
insect; this was extended to other senses (such as spelling bee, first attested 1809; Raising-bee
(1814) for building construction; also hanging bee a lynching). To have a bee in (one's) bonnet
(1825), said of one who is harebrained or has an intense new notion or fancy, is said in Jamieson to
be Scottish, perhaps from earlier expressions such as head full of bees (1510s), denoting mad mental
activity.


bee&#039;s knees (n.)

1923, a survivor of a fad around this year for slang terms denoting excellence and based on animal
anatomy. Also existed in the more ribald form bee's nuts. Other versions that lasted through the
century are cat's whiskers (1923), cat's pajamas, cat's meow. More obscure examples are canary's
tusks, cat's nuts and flea's eyebrows. The fad still had a heartbeat in Britain at the end of the
century, as attested by the appearance of dog's bollocks in 1989. Bee's knee was used as far back as
1797 for something insignificant.


bee-sting (n.)

1680s, from bee + sting (n.). Related: Bee-stung, which, of lips, is attested by 1845.


Beeb (n.)

colloquial shortening of B.B.C., attested from 1967.


beech (n.)

Old English bece beech, from Proto-Germanic *bokjon (cognates: Old Norse bok, Dutch beuk, Flemish
boek, Old High German buohha, German Buche, Middle Dutch boeke beech), from PIE root *bhagos beech
tree (cognates: Greek phegos oak, Latin fagus beech, Russian buzina elder), perhaps with a ground
sense of edible (and connected with the root of Greek phagein to eat; see -phagous). Beech mast was
an ancient food source for agricultural animals across a wide stretch of Europe. Formerly with
adjectival form beechen. Also see book.


beef (n.)

c.1300, from Old French buef ox; beef; ox hide (11c., Modern French boeuf), from Latin bovem
(nominative bos, genitive bovis) ox, cow, from PIE root *gwou- cow, ox, bull (see cow (n.)).
Original plural was beeves.


beef (v.)

to complain, slang, 1888, American English, from noun meaning complaint (1880s). The noun meaning
argument is recorded from 1930s. The origin and signification are unclear; perhaps it traces to the
common late 19c. complaint of U.S. soldiers about the quantity or quality of beef rations.


beef up (v.)

add strength, 1941, from college slang, from beef (n.) in slang sense of muscle-power (1851).


beefcake (n.)

by 1952, display of male pulchritude in movies or magazines; said to have been modeled on
cheesecake, but there seems to have been an actual foodstuff called beefcake around this time. The
word seems to be little used in that literal sense since the other sense emerged.


beefeater (n.)

warder of the Tower of London, 1670s, a contemptuous reference to well-fed servants of the royal
household; the notion is of one who eats another's beef (compare Old English hlaf-&aelig;ta servant,
literally loaf-eater).


beefsteak (n.)

also beef-steak, 1711, from beef (n.) + steak.


beefy (adj.)

brawny, 1743, from beef (n.) in colloquial extended sense human muscle + -y (2). Related: Beefiness.


beehive (n.)

early 14c., from bee + hive (n.). As the name of a hairstyle, attested from 1960 (the style itself
said to be popular from 1958). As the name of a star cluster in the constellation Cancer, from 1840
(see Praesepe).


beek (v.)

to bask in the warmth of something, early 13c., a northern and Scottish word of unknown origin;
perhaps ultimately connected to bake (v.).


beeline (n.)

also bee-line, 1838, American English, from bee + line (n.), in reference to the supposed homing
instinct of bees in the field.    TO LINE BEES is to track wild bees to their homes in the woods.
One who follows this occupation is called a bee hunter. [Bartlett, 1859]


Beelzebub

Old English Belzebub, Philistine god worshipped at Ekron (2 Kings i:2), from Latin, used in Vulgate
for New Testament Greek beelzeboub, from Hebrew ba'al-z'bub lord of the flies, from ba'al lord (see
Baal) + z'bhubh fly. By later Christian writers often taken as another name for Satan, though Milton
made him one of the fallen angels. Baal being originally a title, it was applied by the Hebrews to
neighboring divinities based on their attributes; other examples include Baal-berith the covenant
lord, god of the Shechemites; Baal-peor lord of the opening, a god of Moab and Midian.


been (v.)

past participle of be. Dismissive slang phrase been there, done that attested from 1994 (been there
had the experience, usually of something disreputable, is from 1880s).


beep (interj.)

1927, imitative of automobile horns (originally of the sound of a certain type of automobile horn
among several types in use in the years after the klaxon horn was brought into use c.1910). Used as
a noun and verb by 1929. Related: Beeped; beeping.


beeper (n.)

device that emits beeps, 1946, agent noun from beep (v.).


beer (n.)

Old English beor strong drink, beer, mead, a word of much-disputed and ambiguous origin, cognate
with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier.    Probably a
6c. West Germanic monastic borrowing of Vulgar Latin biber a drink, beverage (from Latin infinitive
bibere to drink; see imbibe). Another suggestion is that it comes from Proto-Germanic *beuwoz-, from
*beuwo- barley. The native Germanic word for the beverage was the one that yielded ale (q.v.).
Beer was a common drink among most of the European peoples, as well as in Egypt and Mesopotamia, but
was known to the Greeks and Romans only as an exotic product. [Buck]    They did have words for it,
however. Greek brytos, used in reference to Thracian or Phrygian brews, was related to Old English
breowan brew; Latin zythum is from Greek zythos, first used of Egyptian beer and treated as an
Egyptian word but perhaps truly Greek and related to zyme leaven. French bi&egrave;re is from
Germanic. Spanish cerveza is from Latin cervesia beer, perhaps related to Latin cremor thick broth.
Old Church Slavonic pivo, source of the general Slavic word for beer, is originally a drink (compare
Old Church Slavonic piti drink). French bi&egrave;re is a 16c. borrowing from German. U.S. slang
beer goggles, through which every potential romantic partner looks desirable, is from 1986.


beery (adj.)

1848, from beer (n.) + -y (2). Related: Beerily; beeriness.


beestings (n.)

colostrum, Old English bysting, from beost, a general West Germanic word (cognates: Old High German
biost, German Biest, Middle Dutch and Dutch biest, of unknown origin.


beeswax (n.)

1670s, from genitive of bee + wax. As a jocular alteration of business (usually in an injunction to
someone to mind his own) attested from 1934 in Lower East Side slang as reproduced in Henry Roth's
Call It Sleep.


beet (n.)

Old English bete beet, beetroot, from Latin beta, said to be of Celtic origin. Common in Old
English, then lost till c.1400. Still usually spoken of in plural in U.S. A general West Germanic
borrowing, cognates: Old Frisian bete, Middle Dutch bete, Old High German bieza, German Beete.


beetle (n.1)

type of insect, Old English bitela beetle, literally little biter, from bitel biting, related to
bitan to bite (see bite). As a nickname for the original Volkswagen car, 1946, translating German
K&auml;fer.


beetle (v.)

project, overhang, c.1600, back-formation from bitelbrouwed grim-browed, sullen (mid-14c.), from
bitel sharp-edged, sharp (c.1200), probably a compound from Old English *bitol biting, sharp,
related to bite, + brow, which in Middle English meant eyebrow, not forehead. Meaning to overhang
dangerously (of cliffs, etc.) is from c.1600. Related: Beetled; beetling.


beetle (n.2)

beating tool, Old English bietel, from Proto-Germanic *bautilo-z, from *bautan to beat (see beat
(v.)).


beeves (n.)

original plural of beef (compare boevz, plural of Old French buef), now only in restricted use.


befall (v.)

Old English befeallan to deprive of; fall to, be assigned to; befall, from be- by, about + feallan
(see fall). Compare Old Frisian bifalla, Old Saxon, Old High German bifallan, German befallen.
Related: Befell; befalling.


befit (v.)

mid-15c., from be- + fit (v.). Related: Befitted; befitting.


befitting (adj.)

1560s, present participle adjective from befit (q.v.). Related: Befittingly.


befool (v.)

late 14c., from be- + fool (n.). Related: Befooled; befooling.


before (adv., prep.)

Old English beforan before, in front of, in the presence of, in former times, from Proto-Germanic
*bi- by + *forana from the front, adverbial derivative of *fora (see for). Compare Old Frisian
bifara, Old Saxon biforan, Old High German bifora, German bevor. Contrasting before and after in
illustrations is from Hogarth (1768). Before the mast in old sailing ships denoting common sailor,
is from the place of their berths, in front of the fore-mast.


beforehand (adv., adj.)

also before-hand, early 13c., from before + hand, which here is of uncertain signification, unless
the original notion is payment in advance or something done before another's hand does it.
Hyphenated from 18c., one word from 19c.


befoul (v.)

early 14c., from be- + foul (v.). Related: Befouled; befouling.


befriend (v.)

1550s, from be- + friend (q.v.). Related: Befriended; befriending.


befuddle (v.)

confuse, 1873, from be- + fuddle; originally to confuse with strong drink or opium (by 1832). An
earlier word in the same sense was begunk (1725). Related: Befuddled; befuddling.


beg (v.)

c.1200, perhaps from Old English bedecian to beg, from Proto-Germanic *beth-; or possibly from
Anglo-French begger, from Old French begart (see beggar). The Old English word for beg was
w&aelig;dlian, from w&aelig;dl poverty. Of trained dogs, 1816.    As a courteous mode of asking (beg
pardon, etc.), first attested c.1600. To beg the question translates Latin petitio principii, and
means to assume something that hasn't been proven as a basis of one's argument, thus asking one's
opponent to give something unearned, though more of the nature of taking it for granted without
warrant.


began (v.)

past tense of begin.


begat (v.)

archaic past tense of beget.


beget (v.)

Old English begietan to get by effort, find, acquire, attain, seize (class V strong verb, past tense
begeat, past participle begeaton), from be- + get (v.). Sense of to procreate is from c.1200.
Related to Old High German pigezzan, Gothic bigitan to get, obtain. Related: Begot; begotten.


begetter (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from beget.


beggar (n.)

c.1200, from Old French begart, originally a member of the Beghards, lay brothers of mendicants in
the Low Countries, from Middle Dutch beggaert mendicant, of uncertain origin, with pejorative suffix
(see -ard). Compare Beguine. Early folk etymology connected the English word with bag. Form with -ar
attested from 14c., but begger was more usual 15c.-17c. The feminine form beggestere is attested as
a surname from c.1300. Beggar's velvet was an old name for dust bunnies. Beggers should be no
choosers is in Heywood (1562).


beggar (v.)

reduce to poverty, mid-15c., from beggar (n.). Related: Beggared; beggaring. Figurative use by
1640s.


beggarly (adj.)

1520s, from beggar (n.) + -ly (1).


beggary (n.)

late 14c.; see beg + -ary.


begin (v.)

Old English beginnan to begin, attempt, undertake, a rare word beside the more usual form onginnan
(class III strong verb; past tense ongann, past participle ongunnen); from bi- (see be-) + West
Germanic *ginnan, of obscure meaning and found only in compounds, perhaps to open, open up (compare
Old High German in-ginnan to cut open, open up, also begin, undertake), with sense evolution from
open to begin. Cognates elsewhere in Germanic include Old Frisian biginna to begin, Middle Dutch
beghinnen, Old High German beginnan, German beginnen, Old Frisian bijenna to begin, Gothic duginnan.


beginner (n.)

early 14c., founder, agent noun from begin. Meaning novice is from late 15c. Beginner's luck is from
1897.


beginning (n.)

late 12c., time when something begins, from begin. Meaning act of starting something is from early
13c. The Old English word was fruma.


begird (v.)

Old English begyrdan; see be- + gird (v.).


begone (v.)

late 14c., contracted from be (imperative) + gone.


begonia (n.)

1751, from French begonia (1706), named by Plumier for Michel B&eacute;gon (1638-1710), French
governor of Santo Domingo (Haiti) and patron of botany.


begorra

1839, antiquated Anglo-Irish form of expletive By God.


begotten (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from beget.


begrime (v.)

1530s, from be- + grime (n.). Related: Begrimed.


begrudge (v.)

mid-14c., from be- + Middle English grucchen to murmur (see grudge). Related: Begrudged; begrudging;
begrudgingly.


beguile (v.)

early 13c., from be- + guile (v.). Related: Beguiled; beguiling.


beguiling (adj.)

c.1400, present participle adjective from beguile.


Beguine (n.)

late 15c., from French b&eacute;guine (13c.), Medieval Latin beguina, a member of a women's
spiritual order said to have been founded c.1180 in Liege in the Low Countries. They are said to
take their name from the surname of Lambert le B&egrave;gue Lambert the Stammerer, a Liege priest
who was instrumental in their founding, and it's likely the word was pejorative at first.    The
order generally preserved its reputation, though it quickly drew imposters who did not; nonetheless
it eventually was condemned as heretical. A male order, called Beghards founded communities by the
1220s in imitation of them, but they soon degenerated (compare Old French beguin (male) Beguin, also
hypocrite) and wandered begging in the guise of religion; they likely were the source of the words
beg and beggar, though there is disagreement over whether Beghard produced Middle Dutch beggaert
mendicant or was produced by it.    Cole Porter's Begin the Beguine (1935) refers to a kind of
popular dance of West Indian origin, from French colloquial b&eacute;guin an infatuation, boyfriend,
girlfriend, earlier child's bonnet, and before that nun's headdress (14c.), from Middle Dutch
beggaert, ultimately the same word.


begun (v.)

past participle of begin.


behalf (n.)

c.1300, behalve (with dative suffix), from Old English (him) be healfe by (his) side, and on (his)
healfe on (his) side, from healfe side (see half).


behave (v.)

early 15c., from be- intensive prefix + have in sense of to have or bear (oneself) in a particular
way, comport (compare German sich behaben, French se porter). Cognate Old English compound behabban
meant to contain, and alternatively the modern sense of behave might have evolved from behabban via
a notion of self-restraint. Related: Behaved; behaving.


behavior (n.)

late 15c., essentially from behave, but with ending from Middle English havour possession, a word
altered (by influence of have) from aver, noun use of Old French verb aveir to have.


behavioral (adj.)

1927, in psychology, from behavior + -al (1).


behaviorism (n.)

coined 1913 by U.S. psychologist John B. Watson (1878-1958) from behavior + -ism. Behaviorist is
from the same time.


behaviour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of behavior; for suffix, see -or.


behavioural (adj.)

chiefly British English spelling of behavioral (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


behead (v.)

Old English beheafdian, from be-, here with privative force, + heafod (see head (n.)). Related:
Beheaded; beheading.


beheld (v.)

past tense and past participle of behold.


behemoth (n.)

late 14c., huge biblical beast (Job xl:15), from Latin behemoth, from Hebrew b'hemoth, usually taken
as plural of intensity of b'hemah beast. But the Hebrew word is perhaps a folk etymology of Egyptian
pehemau, literally water-ox, the name for the hippopotamus.    Long before Jumbo was dreamed of, a
hippo was exhibited by George K. Bailey, who invented the tank on wheels now used so generally in
the circuses. The beast was advertised as the blood sweating Behemoth of Holy Writ, and he made
several men rich. [Isaac F. Marcosson, Sawdust and Gold Dust, in The Bookman, June 1910]


behest (n.)

Old English beh&aelig;s a vow, perhaps from behatan to promise (from be- + hatan command, call; see
cite) and confused with obsolete hest command, which may account for the parasitic -t as well as the
Middle English shift in meaning to command, injunction (late 12c.).


behind (adv.)

Old English behindan behind, after, from bi by + hindan from behind (see hind (adj.)). The
prepositional sense emerged in Old English. Euphemistic noun meaning backside of a person is from
1786. Phrase behind the times is from 1905. Behind the scenes (1711) is from the theater; figurative
sense attested by 1779.


behindhand (adv., adj.)

1520s, from behind + -hand, probably on model of beforehand.


behold (v.)

Old English bihaldan (West Saxon behealdan) give regard to, hold in view, also to keep hold of, to
belong to, from be- + haldan, healdan (see hold). Related: Beheld; beholding. A common West Germanic
compound, compare Old Saxon bihaldan hold, keep, Old Frisian bihalda, Old High German bihaltan,
German behalten, but [t]he application to watching, looking, is confined to English [OED].


beholden (adj.)

under obligation, mid-14c., originally past participle of behold (and preserving the original past
participle of hold), but a sense directly related to this usage is not recorded among the many and
varied meanings attested for behold.


beholder (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from behold.


behoof (n.)

c.1200, use, benefit, advantage; Old English had bihoflic useful, implying *bihof advantage,
utility; from Proto-Germanic *bi-hof that which binds, requirement, obligation (cognates: Old
Frisian bihof advantage, Dutch behoef, Middle High German bihuof useful thing, German Behuf benefit,
use, advantage). In the common Germanic compound, the first element, likely intensive, is cognate
with be- and the second with Old English hof, past tense of hebban to raise (see heave (v.)). The
original sense is perhaps, then, taking up (for oneself).


behoove (v.)

Old English behofian to have need of, have use for, verbal form of the ancient compound word
represented by behoof.    Historically, it rimes with move, prove, but being now mainly a literary
word, it is generally made to rime with rove, grove, by those who know it only in books. [OED]


behove

chiefly British English spelling of behoove.


beige (n.)

1858, fine woolen fabric, from dialectal French beige yellowish-gray, brownish-gray, from Old French
bege the natural color of wool and cotton; raw, not dyed (13c.), of obscure origin. Das Wort lebt
namentlich in der Bourgogne und Fr. Comt&eacute;, daneben aber auch im S&uuml;dwesten [Gamillscheg].
As a shade of color, it is attested from 1879. As an adjective by 1879.


beignet (n.)

fritter, 1835, from French beignet fritter, eggroll, doughnut (14c.), from Old French buigne bump,
lump, from a Germanic source (compare Middle High German bunge clod, lump), or from Gaulish *bunia
(compare Gaelic bonnach).


Beijing

Chinese capital, from bei north + jing capital (as opposed to Nanking, literally southern capital).


being (n.)

c.1300, condition, state, circumstances; presence, fact of existing, early 14c., existence, from be
+ -ing. Sense of that which physically exists, person or thing (as in human being) is from late 14c.


Beirut

Lebanese capital, from Hebrew, literally the wells, from be'erot, plural of be'er well.


bejesus

mild expletive, 1908, perhaps from by Jesus. To beat the bejesus out of someone is from 1934.


bejewel (v.)

1550s, from be- + jewel. Related: Bejeweled.


beknow (v.)

c.1300, to become acquainted with; to be aware or conscious of, from be- + know. Related: Beknown;
beknowing.


bel (n.)

unit of power level in measuring sound, 1929, named for Scottish-born telephone pioneer Alexander
Graham Bell (1847-1922).


Bel

heaven-and-earth god of Babylonian religion, from Akkadian Belu, literally lord, owner, master,
cognate with Hebrew ba'al.


bel (adj.)

beautiful, early 14c., from Old French bel, belle beautiful, fair, fine (see belle). Naturalized in
ME.; but after 1600 consciously French [OED].


bel canto

1894, Italian, literally fine song.


bel paese

type of mild, creamy cheese, 1935, Italian proprietary name, literally beautiful country or region.


belabor (v.)

1590s, to exert one's strength upon, from be- + labor (v.). But figurative sense of assail with
words is attested somewhat earlier (1590s); and belabored is attested from mid-15c. with a sense of
tilled, cultivated.


belabour (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of belabor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


belated (adj.)

1610s, overtaken by night, past participle adjective from belate to make late, detain, from be- +
late. Sense of coming past due, behind date is from 1660s. Related: Belatedly.


belay (v.)

from Old English bilecgan, which, among other senses, meant to lay a thing about (with other
objects), from be- + lecgan to lay (see lay (v.)). The only surviving sense is the nautical one of
coil a running rope round a cleat or pin to secure it (also transferred to mountain-climbing), first
attested 1540s; but this is possibly a cognate word, from Dutch beleggen.


belch (v.)

Old English bealcan bring up wind from the stomach, also swell, heave, of echoic origin (cognates:
Dutch balken to bray, shout). Extended to volcanoes, cannons, etc. 1570s. Related: Belched;
belching. As a noun, recorded from 1510s. It is recorded in 1706 as a slang noun meaning poor beer.


beldam (n.)

aged woman, 1570s; earlier grandmother (mid-15c.), from dame (q.v.) in the sense of mother + bel-,
Middle English prefix expressing relationship (as in belfader, belsire grandfather), from Old French
bel, belle beautiful, fair, fine (see belle). This direct relationship sense of bel is not found in
French, where the prefix is used to form words for in-laws.


beleaguer (v.)

1580s, from Dutch or Low German belegeren to besiege, from be- around (see be-) + legeren to camp,
from leger bed, camp, army, lair, from Proto-Germanic *leg-raz-, from PIE *legh-to- lie (see lie
(v.2)). A word from the Flemish Wars (cognates: Swedish bel&auml;gra, Dutch belegeren besiege,
German Belagerung siege). Spelling influenced by league. Related: Beleaguered; beleaguering.


beleave (v.)

Old English bel&aelig;fan, to cause or allow to remain behind, to leave something behind, a general
Germanic compound (compare Gothic bilaibjan) from be- + Old English l&aelig;fan to leave (see leave
(v.)). In Middle English sometimes contracted to bleve. For further development, see belive.


belfry (n.)

c.1400, siege tower (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin with a sense bell tower), from Old North French
berfroi movable siege tower (Modern French beffroi), from Middle High German bercfrit protecting
shelter, literally that which watches over peace, from bergen to protect (see bury) + frid peace.
Originally a wooden siege tower on wheels (free to move); it came to be used for chime towers (mid-
15c.), which at first often were detached from church buildings (as the Campanile on Plaza San Marco
in Venice). Spelling altered by dissimilation or by association with bell (n.).


Belgian (adj.)

1620s, in reference to the ancient Belg&aelig; (see Belgium). Belgian Congo formed 1908 by
annexation.


Belgic (adj.)

1580s, from Latin Belgicus, from Belgae (see Belgium).


Belgium

c.1600, Low Germany and the Netherlands, from the Latin name of the territory near here occupied by
the Belg&aelig;, a Celtic tribe. Adopted 1830 as the name of a new nation formed from the southern
part of the former United Kingdom of the Netherlands.


Belial

early 13c., from Hebrew bel'yya'al destruction, literally worthless, from b'li without + ya'al use.
Wickedness as an evil force (Deut. xiii:13); later treated as a proper name for Satan (2 Cor.
vi:15), though Milton made him one of the fallen angels.


belie (v.)

Old English beleogan to deceive by lies, from be- + lie (v.1) to lie, tell lies. Current sense of to
contradict as a lie is first recorded 1640s. The other verb lie once also had a formation like this,
from Old English belicgan, which meant to encompass, beleaguer, and in Middle English was a
euphemism for to have sex with (i.e. to lie with carnally).


belief (n.)

late 12c., bileave, replacing Old English geleafa belief, faith, from West Germanic *ga-laubon to
hold dear, esteem, trust (cognates: Old Saxon gilobo, Middle Dutch gelove, Old High German giloubo,
German Glaube), from *galaub- dear, esteemed, from intensive prefix *ga- + *leubh- to care, desire,
like, love (see love (v.)). The prefix was altered on analogy of the verb believe. The distinction
of the final consonant from that of believe developed 15c.    The be-, which is not a natural prefix
of nouns, was prefixed on the analogy of the vb. (where it is naturally an intensive) .... [OED]
Belief used to mean trust in God, while faith meant loyalty to a person based on promise or duty (a
sense preserved in keep one's faith, in good (or bad) faith and in common usage of faithful,
faithless, which contain no notion of divinity). But faith, as cognate of Latin fides, took on the
religious sense beginning in 14c. translations, and belief had by 16c. become limited to mental
acceptance of something as true, from the religious use in the sense of things held to be true as a
matter of religious doctrine (a sense attested from early 13c.).


believability (n.)

1865, from believable + -ity.


believable (adj.)

late 14c., from believe + -able. Related: Believably.


believe (v.)

Old English belyfan to believe, earlier geleafa (Mercian), gelefa (Northumbrian), gelyfan (West
Saxon) believe, from Proto-Germanic *ga-laubjan to believe, perhaps literally hold dear, love
(cognates: Old Saxon gilobian believe, Dutch geloven, Old High German gilouben, German glauben),
ultimately a compound based on PIE *leubh- to care, desire, love (see belief).    Spelling beleeve
is common till 17c.; then altered, perhaps by influence of relieve, etc. To believe on instead of in
was more common in 16c. but now is a peculiarity of theology; believe of also sometimes was used in
17c. Related: Believed (formerly occasionally beleft); believing. Expression believe it or not
attested by 1874; Robert Ripley's newspaper cartoon of the same name is from 1918. Emphatic you
better believe attested from 1854.


believer (n.)

one who has faith in religion, 1540s, agent noun from believe.


belittle (v.)

1781, to make small, from be- + little (v.); first recorded in writings of Thomas Jefferson (and
probably coined by him), who was roundly execrated for it in England:Belittle! What an expression!
It may be an elegant one in Virginia, and even perfectly intelligible; but for our part, all we can
do is to guess at its meaning. For shame, Mr. Jefferson! [European Magazine and London Review, 1787,
reporting on Notes on the State of Virginia; to guess was considered another barbarous
Yankeeism.]Jefferson used it to characterize Buffon's view that American life was stunted by nature,
which he was refuting. The figurative sense of depreciate, scorn as worthless (as the reviewers did
to this word) is from 1797. Related: Belittled; belittling.


belive (v.)

Old English belifan remain, intransitive form of bel&aelig;fan cause to remain (see beleave). A
general Germanic word (cognates: Gothic beleiban, Old High German biliban, German bleiben, Dutch
blijven); confused in early Middle English with beleave and merged into it, which gave beleave two
clashing senses (to leave, also to remain) which might be why the compound word, the cognate of
important verbs in other Germanic languages, was abandoned in English and only leave (v.) remains.


bell (n.)

Old English belle, common North Sea Germanic (cognates: Middle Dutch belle, Middle Low German belle)
but not found elsewhere in Germanic (except as a borrowing), from PIE root *bhel- (4) to sound,
roar. Statistical bell curve was coined 1870s in French. Of glasses in the shape of a bell from
1640s. Bell pepper is from 1707, so called for its shape. Bell, book, and candle is a reference to a
form of excommunication. To ring a bell awaken a memory (1934) is perhaps a reference to Pavlovian
experiments.


bell (v.)

attach a bell, late 14c., from bell (n.). Related: Belled; belling. Allusions to the story of the
mice that bell the cat (so they can hear him coming) date to 1520s.


bell bottoms (n.)

type of trousers, 1882, from bell (n.) + bottom (n.).


Bella

fem. proper name, from Italian bella fair, from Latin bella, fem. of bellus beautiful, fair (see
bene-). In some cases short for Isabella (see Isabel).


belladonna (n.)

1590s, deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna), from Italian, literally fair lady; the plant so called
supposedly because women made cosmetic eye-drops from its juice (an 18c. explanation; atropic acid,
found in the plant, has a well-known property of dilating the pupils) or because it was used to
poison beautiful women. Perhaps a folk etymology alteration; Gamillscheg suggests ultimately of
Gaulish origin.


Bellatrix

bright star in the left shoulder of Orion, from Latin bellatrix a female warrior, frequently used as
an adjective, warlike, skilled in war, fem. of bellator to wage war, from bellum war (see
bellicose). The Latin name, from the Alfonsine Tables (mid-13c.), very loosely translates the Arabic
name for the star, Al Najid the conqueror.    In astrology it was the natal star of all destined to
great civil or military honors, and rendered women born under its influence lucky and loquacious; or
as old Thomas Hood said, Women born under this constellation shall have mighty tongues. [Allen]


bellboy (n.)

from bell (n.) + boy; originally (1851) a ship's bell-ringer, later (1861) a hotel page.


belle (n.)

beautiful woman well-dressed; reigning beauty, 1620s, from French belle, from Old French bele, from
Latin bella, fem. of bellus beautiful, fair (see bene-).


Bellerophon

Greek hero, from Latin form of Greek Bellerophontes, probably literally killer of the demon
Bellerus, from -phontes killer of.


belles-lettres (n.)

elegant literature, aesthetics, 1710, French, literally fine letters, from belles, plural of belle,
fem. of beau fine, beautiful (see beau) + lettres, plural of lettre letter (see letter). The
literary equivalent of beaux arts.


belletrist (n.)

also bellettrist, 1816, from belles-lettres + -ist. Adjective belletristic is recorded from 1821.


bellhop (n.)

also bell-hop, by 1906, American English, shortening of slang bellhopper (1899), from bell (n.) +
hop (v.). The notion is one who hops into action when the bell is rung.


bellicose (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin bellicosus warlike, valorous, given to fighting, from bellicus of war, from
bellum war, Old Latin duellum, dvellum, of uncertain origin.


bellicosity (n.)

1857, from bellicose + -ity.


bellied (adj.)

having a swelling or hollow middle, late 15c., from belly (n.). Also, in compounds, having a belly
(of a certain kind).


belligerence (n.)

1814; see belligerent + -ence. Related: belligerency.


belligerent (adj.)

1570s, from Latin belligerantem (nominative belligerans), past participle of belligerare to wage
war, from bellum war (see bellicose) + gerere to bear, to carry (see gest). The noun meaning party
or nation at war is from 1811. Related: Belligerently.


Bellona

Roman goddess of war, from Latin bellum war, Old Latin duellum, dvellum, of uncertain origin.


bellow (v.)

apparently from Old English bylgan to bellow, from PIE root *bhel- (4) to sound, roar. Originally of
animals, especially cows and bulls; used of human beings since c.1600. Related: Bellowed; bellowing.
As a noun from 1779.


bellowing (n.)

late 14c., from present participle of bellow (v.). As an adjective, recorded from 1610s.


bellows (n.)

c.1200, belwes, literally bags, plural of belu, belw, northern form of beli, from late Old English
belg bag, purse, leathern bottle (see belly (n.)). Reduced from bl&aelig;stb&aelig;lg, literally
blowing bag. Used exclusively in plural since 15c., probably due to the two handles.


bellwether (n.)

mid-14c. (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin; late 12c. as a surname), from bell (n.) + wether; the lead sheep
(on whose neck a bell was hung) of a domesticated flock. Figurative sense of chief, leader is from
mid-14c.


belly (n.)

Old English belg, bylg (West Saxon), b&aelig;lg (Anglian) leather bag, purse, bellows, from Proto-
Germanic *balgiz bag (cognates: Old Norse belgr bag, bellows, bylgja billow, Gothic balgs wineskin),
from PIE *bholgh-, from root *bhelgh- to swell, an extension of *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Meaning shifted to body (late 13c.), then focused to abdomen (mid-14c.). Meaning bulging part
or concave surface of anything is 1590s. The West Germanic root had a figurative or extended sense
of anger, arrogance (as in Old English bolgenmod enraged; belgan (v.) to become angry).    Indo-
European languages commonly use the same word for both the external belly and the internal (stomach,
womb, etc.), but the distinction of external and internal is somewhat present in English
belly/stomach; Greek gastr- (see gastric) in classical language denoted the paunch or belly, while
modern science uses it only in reference to the stomach as an organ. Fastidious avoidance of belly
in speech and writing (compensated for by stretching the senses of imported stomach and abdomen,
baby-talk tummy and misappropriated midriff) began late 18c. and the word was banished from Bibles
in many early 19c. editions. Belly punch (n.) is attested from 1811.


belly (v.)

to swell out, 1620s, from belly (n.). Related: Bellied; bellying. Old English belgan meant to be or
become angry (a figurative sense). A comparable Greek verb-from-noun, gastrizein, meant to hit
(someone) in the belly.


belly button (n.)

navel, 1877, colloquial, from belly (n.) + button (n.). Also bellybutton, belly-button.


belly dance (n.)

also bellydance, 1883, from belly (n.) + dance (n.), in later uses translating French danse du
ventre. As a verb from 1963.


bellyache (n.)

also belly-ache, 1590s, from belly (n.) + ache (n.). The verb in the slang sense of complain is
first recorded 1888, American English; it appears not to have been used earlier than that, if ever,
in a literal sense. Related: bellyached; bellyaching.


bellyful (n.)

figuratively, enough and more, 1530s, from belly (n.) + -ful. Older than the literal sense (1570s).


belong (v.)

mid-14c., to go along with, properly relate to, from be- intensive prefix, + longen to go, from Old
English langian pertain to, to go along with, of unknown origin. Senses of be the property of and be
a member of first recorded late 14c. Cognate with Middle Dutch belanghen, Dutch belangen, German
belangen. Replaced earlier Old English gelang, with completive prefix ge-.


belongings (n.)

goods, effects, possessions, 1817, from plural of verbal noun from belong.


beloved (adj.)

late 14c., from past participle of verb belove (c.1200), from be- + loven to love (see love (v.)).
Noun meaning one who is beloved is from 1520s.


below (adv.)

early 14c., biloogh, from be- by, about + logh, lou, lowe low (see low (adj.)). Apparently a variant
of earlier a-lowe (influenced by other adverbs in be-; see before), the parallel form to an-high
(now on high). Beneath was the usual word; below was very rare in Middle English and gained currency
only in 16c. It is frequent in Shakespeare. As a preposition from 1570s. According to Fowler, below
is the opposite of above and concerns difference of level and suggests comparison of independent
things. Under is the opposite of over and is concerned with superposition and subjection and
suggests some interrelation.


Belshazzar

last Chaldean king of Babylon (Dan. v), from Hebrew Belshatztzar, a contraction of Akkadian Bel-
shar-usur, literally Bel-protect-the-king (see Bel).


belt (n.)

Old English belt belt, girdle, from Proto-Germanic *baltjaz (cognates: Old High German balz, Old
Norse balti, Swedish b&auml;lte), an early Germanic borrowing from Latin balteus girdle, sword belt,
said by Varro to be an Etruscan word.    As a mark of rank or distinction, mid-14c.; references to
boxing championship belts date from 1812. Mechanical sense is from 1795. Transferred sense of broad
stripe encircling something is from 1660s. Below the belt unfair (1889) is from pugilism. To get
something under (one's) belt is to get it into one's stomach. To tighten (one's) belt endure
privation is from 1887.


belt (v.)

early 14c., to fasten or gird with a belt, from belt (n.). Meaning to thrash as with a belt is
1640s; general sense of to hit, thrash is attested from 1838. Colloquial meaning to sing or speak
vigorously is from 1949. Related: Belted; belting. Hence (from the thrash with a belt sense) the
noun meaning a blow or stroke (1899).


Beltane (n.)

early 15c., from Lowland Scottish, from Gaelic bealltainn May 1, important Celtic religious rite
marking the start of summer, probably literally blazing fire, from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine,
flash, burn (see bleach (v.)) + Old Irish ten fire, from PIE *tepnos, related to Latin tepidus warm.
But this derivation of the second element is hotly disputed by some on philological grounds, and
fires were equally important in the other Celtic holidays.    The rubbish about Baal, Bel, Belus
imported into the word from the Old Testament and classical antiquity, is outside the scope of
scientific etymology. [OED]    Also known as Old May Day, because after the 1752 calendar reform it
continued to be reckoned according to Old Style; it was one of the quarter-days of ancient Scotland.


beltless (adj.)

1884, from belt (n.) + -less.


beltway (n.)

term in U.S. for a ring highway around an urban area, especially Interstate 495 around Washington,
D.C., the Capital Beltway, completed 1964; from belt (n.) + way (n.). Figurative for Washington,
D.C., and its culture for better or worse, since c.1978.


beluga (n.)

1590s, from Russian beluga, literally great white, from belo- white (from PIE *bhel-o-, from root
*bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.)) + augmentative suffix -uga. Originally the great
sturgeon, found in the Caspian and Black seas; later (1817) also the small white whale
(Delphinapterus leucas) found in northern seas.


belvedere (n.)

raised turret atop a house, 1590s, from Italian belvedere, literally a fair sight, from bel, bello
beautiful (from Latin bellus beautiful, fair; see bene-) + vedere a view, sight (see vista).
Pronunciation perhaps influenced by the French form of the word. So called because it was used for
viewing the grounds.


Bembo (n.)

type face, 1930; the type was cut in 1929 based on one used in 15c. by Aldus Manutius in an edition
of a work by Pietro Bembo.


bemoan (v.)

Old English bem&aelig;nan to bemoan, wail, lament; see be- + moan (v.). Related: Bemoaned;
bemoaning.


bemuse (v.)

to make utterly confused, from be- + muse (compare amuse); attested from 1735 but probably older, as
Pope (1705) punned on it as devoted utterly to the Muses.


bemused (adj.)

1735, past participle adjective from bemuse (v.). Related: Bemusedly.


bemusement (n.)

1881, from bemuse + -ment.


ben (n.)

mountain peak in Celtic place names (especially of roughly pyramidal peaks standing alone), from
Gaelic beinn, from Old Irish *benno- peak, horn, conical point, from PIE root *bend- projecting
point.


bench (n.)

Old English benc long seat, from Proto-Germanic *bankiz bank of earth, perhaps here man-made
earthwork, later bench, table (cognates: Old Frisian bank bench, Old Norse bekkr, Danish b&aelig;nk,
Middle Dutch banc, Old High German banch), from PIE root *bheg- to break. Used for office of a judge
since late 13c. Sporting sense reserve of players (in baseball, North American football, etc.) is by
1909, from literal sense of place where players sit when not in action (by 1889).


bench (v.)

to take out of the game, 1902, from bench (n.) in the sporting sense. Related: Benched; benching.
Old English also had a verb form, but it meant to make benches.


bench-warmer (n.)

1892, baseball slang; see bench.  The days for bench-warmers with salaries are also past. [New York
Sporting News, Jan. 9, 1892]  Old English had bencsittend one who sits on a bench.


benchmark (n.)

also bench-mark, surveyor's point of reference, 1838, from a specialized surveyors' use of bench
(n.) + mark (n.1); figurative sense is from 1884.


bend (v.)

Old English bendan to bend a bow; confine with a string, fetter, causative of bindan to bind, from
Proto-Germanic base *band- string, band (cognates: Old Norse benda to join, strain, strive, bend),
from PIE root *bhendh- to bind (cognates: Gothic bindan, Old High German bintan, Sanskrit badhnati
binds, Lithuanian bendras partner; Old Persian bandaka- subject).    Modern sense (early 14c.) is
via notion of bending a bow to string it. Cognate with band, bind, and bond. Related: Bended; bent;
bending.


bend (n.1)

a bending or curving, 1590s; thing of bent shape, c.1600, from bend (v.). Earlier act of drawing a
bow (mid-15c.). The bends decompression pain first attested 1894.


bend (n.2)

broad diagonal band in a coat-of-arms, etc., c.1400, from earlier sense of thin, flat strap for
wrapping round, from Old English bend fetter, shackle, chain, from PIE *bhendh- (see bend (v.)).


bended

original past participle of bend (v.), retained after 14c. in certain formal or poetic formulations,
especially on bended knee.


bender (n.)

late 15c., instrument for bending, agent noun from bend (v.). Slang meaning drinking bout is
American English, attested from 1846, perhaps from the Scottish sense of a hard drinker (1728).


bene-

word-forming element meaning well, from Latin bene well, in the right way, honorably, properly, from
PIE *dw-ene-, adverbial form of root *deu- (2) to do, perform; show favor, revere. From the same
source come Latin bonus good, bellus handsome, fine, pretty, and possibly beatus blessed, beare to
make blessed.


beneath (adv., adj.)

Old English beneo&eth;an beneath, under, below, from be- by + neo&eth;an below, originally from
below, from Proto-Germanic *ni&thorn;ar lower, farther down, down (see nether). Meaning unworthy of
is attested from 1849 (purists prefer below in this sense). The be- gave or emphasized the notion of
'where,' excluding that of 'whence' pertaining to the simple ni&eth;an [OED].


benedict (n.)

newly married man (especially one who had seemed a confirmed bachelor), 1821, from the character
Benedick in Much Ado About Nothing (1599). The name is from Late Latin Benedictus, literally
blessed, from Latin benedicte bless (you) (see benediction). This also produced the proper name
Bennet; hence also benet (late 14c.), the third of the four lesser orders of the Roman Catholic
Church, one of whose functions was to exorcize spirits.


Benedictine (n.)

c.1600, one of the order known from the color of its dress as the Black Monks, founded c.529 by St.
Benedict (see benedict).


benediction (n.)

c.1400, from Latin benedictionem (nominative benedictio), noun of action from bene dicere to speak
well of, bless, from bene well (see bene-) + dicere to speak (see diction). The oldest sense in
English is of grace before meat. The older French form, benei&ccedil;on passed into Middle English
as benison.


benefactor (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin benefactor, from Latin phrase bene facere, from bene well (see bene-) +
facere to do (see factitious). Translated in Old English as wel-doend.


benefice (n.)

c.1300, a church living, from Old French benefice (13c.) and directly from Latin beneficium a favor,
service, generosity, kindness, benefit, from beneficus generous, kind, benevolent, obliging, from
bene- good, well (see bene-) + -ficus, from stem of -ficere, unstressed form of facere to do, to
make (see factitious).


beneficence (n.)

quality of being beneficent, kind, charitable, mid-15c., from Latin beneficentia kindness,
generosity, a back-formation from beneficentior (see beneficent).


beneficent (adj.)

1610s, doing good, charitable, probably from beneficent on model of magnificent, etc.


beneficial (adj.)

mid-15c., helpful, advantageous, from Middle French b&eacute;n&eacute;ficial and directly from Latin
beneficialis pertaining to a favor, from beneficium (see benefice). Related: Beneficially.


beneficiary

1610s (n.), 1620s (adj.), probably via French b&eacute;n&eacute;ficiaire, from Latin beneficiarius
enjoying a favor, privileged, from beneficium (see benefice).


benefit (n.)

late 14c., good or noble deed, also advantage, profit, from Anglo-French benfet well-done, from
Latin benefactum good deed, from bene facere (see benefactor). Meaning performance or entertainment
to raise money for some charitable cause is from 1680s.


benefit (v.)

late 15c., from benefit (n.). Related: Benefited; benefiting.


benefits (n.)

financial support (especially for medical expenses) to which one is entitled through employment or
membership, 1895, plural of benefit (n.).


Benelux

the customs union of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxemburg, formed October 1947.


benevolence (n.)

c.1400, disposition to do good, from Old French benivolence and directly from Latin benevolentia
good feeling, good will, kindness, from bene well (see bene-) + volantem (nominative volens) present
participle of velle to wish (see will (v.)). In English history, this was the name given to forced
extra-legal loans or contributions to the crown, first so called 1473 by Edward IV, who cynically
asked it as a token of good will toward his rule.


benevolent (adj.)

mid-15c., wishing to do good, kindly, from Middle French benivolent and directly from Latin
benevolentem (nominative benevolens) wishing (someone) well, benevolent, related to benevolentia
good feeling (see benevolence). Related: Benevolently.


Bengal

region in South Asia, named for its people, said to be from Banga, name of a founding chief. It is
attested in Europe as far back as Marco Polo (1298), who wrote of Bangala.


benight (v.)

1550s, to be overtaken by darkness, from be- + night. Figurative sense (especially in past
participle adjective benighted) of to involve in moral or intellectual darkness is from c.1600.


benign (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French benigne (12c., kind, benign, merciful, gracious; Modern French
b&eacute;nin, fem. b&eacute;nigne), from Latin benignus kindly, kindhearted, friendly, generous,
literally well born, from bene well (see bene-) + gignere to bear, beget, from genus birth (see
genus). For similar sense evolution, compare gentle, kind (adj.), generous. Related: Benignly.


benignant (adj.)

c.1782, from benign + -ant (see -ent); on model of malignant. Related: Benignantly; benignancy.


benignity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French benignit&eacute; goodness, kindness (12c.), from Latin benignitatem
(nominative benignitas), from benignus kindly, kindhearted (see benign).


Benin

former West African kingdom, from the Bini people, whose name is perhaps related to Arabic bani
sons. Though now the people is associated with Nigeria, the name was taken 1974 by the former nation
of Dahomey.


benison (n.)

c.1300, blessing, beatitude, from Old French benei&ccedil;on blessing, benediction, from Latin
benedictionem (see benediction).


Benjamin

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, Jacob's youngest son (Gen. xxxv:18), from Hebrew Binyamin,
literally son of the south, though interpreted in Genesis as son of the right hand, from ben son of
+ yamin right hand, also south (in an East-oriented culture). Compare Arabic cognate yaman right
hand, right side, south; yamana he was happy, literally he turned to the right. The right was
regarded as auspicious (see left and dexterity). Also see Yemen, southpaw, and compare deasil
rightwise, turned toward the right, from Gaelic deiseil toward the south; toward the right, from
deas right, right-hand; south. Also compare Sanskrit dakshina right; south. Slang meaning money (by
1999) is from portrait of Benjamin Franklin on U.S. $100 bill.


bent (n.1)

mental inclination, 1570s, probably from earlier literal sense condition of being deflected or
turned (1530s), from bent (adj.) not straight (q.v.).


bent (n.2)

stiff grass, Old English beonet, from West Germanic *binut- rush, marsh grass (cognates: Old Saxon
binet, Old High German binuz, German Binse rush, reed), of unknown origin. An obsolete word, but
surviving in place names (such as Bentley, from Old English Beonet-leah; Bentham).    The verdure of
the plain lies buried deep  Beneath the dazzling deluge; and the bents,  And coarser grass,
upspearing o'er the rest,  Of late unsightly and unseen, now shine  Conspicuous, and, in bright
apparel clad  And fledg'd with icy feathers, nod superb.    [Cowper, The Winter-Morning Walk, from
The Task]


bent (adj.)

not straight, late 14c. (earlier ibent, c.1300, from past participle of bend (v.). Meaning turned or
inclined in some direction is from 1530s, probably as a translation of Latin inclinatio. Meaning
directed in a course is from 1690s. Figurative phrase bent out of shape extremely upset is 1960s
U.S. Air Force and college student slang.


benthos (n.)

life forms of the deep ocean and sea floor, 1891, coined by Haeckel from Greek benthos depth of the
sea, related to bathos depth, bathys deep, of unknown origin. Adjective benthic is attested from
1902.


benumb (v.)

late 15c., from be- + numb. Originally of mental states; of the physical body from 1520s. Related:
Benumbed; benumbing.


Benzedrine (n.)

trade name of a type of amphetamine, 1933, registered as a proprietary name 1935 by Smith, Kline
&amp; French Laboratories, from benzoic (see benzene) + chemical suffix -edrine from ephedrine, etc.
It is a carbonate of benzyl-methyl-carbinamine. Slang shortening benny first attested 1955.


benzene (n.)

1835, benzine, altered from German Benzin, coined in 1833 by German chemist Eilhardt Mitscherlich
(1794-1863) from Benz(oes&auml;ure) benzoic acid + -in, indicating derived from (see -ine (2)).
Mitscherlich obtained it from a distillation of benzoic acid, obtained from benzoin. The form
benzene (with hydrocarbon suffix -ene), proposed in 1835, began to be used from 1838 in English, but
in mid-19c. it also commonly was called benzol.


benzine (n.)

see benzene.


benzodiazepine (n.)

1934, from benzo-, word-forming element used in chemistry to indicate presence of a benzene ring
fused with another ring, + di + azo- + epine, a suffix denoting a seven-membered ring, from
(h)ep(ta) (see seven).


benzoic (adj.)

1791, from benzoin + -ic.


benzoin (n.)

balsamic resin obtained from a tree (Styrax benzoin) of Indonesia, 1560s (earlier as bengewine,
1550s), from Middle French benjoin (16c.), which comes via Spanish, Portuguese, or Italian from
Arabic luban jawi incense of Java (actually Sumatra, with which the Arabs confused it), with lu
probably mistaken in Romance languages for a definite article. The English form with -z- is perhaps
from influence of Italian benzoi (Venetian, 1461).


Beowulf

Old English beo wulf, literally bee-wolf, a wolf to bees; a kenning for bear. See bee (n.) + wolf
(n.).


bepester (v.)

c.1600, from be- + pester (v.). Related: Bepestered; bepestering.


bepuzzle (v.)

1826, from be- + puzzle (v.). Related: Bepuzzled; bepuzzling.


bequeath (v.)

Old English becwe&eth;an to say, speak to, exhort, blame, also leave by will; from be- + cwe&eth;an
to say, from Proto-Germanic *kwithan, from PIE *gwet- to say, speak.    Original sense of say, utter
died out 13c., leaving legal sense of transfer by will. Closely related to bequest. An old word kept
alive in wills [OED 1st ed.]. Old English beque&eth;ere meant interpreter, translator. Related:
Bequeathed; bequeathing.


bequest (n.)

c.1300, act of bequeathing, from be- + *cwis, *cwiss saying (related to quoth; from Proto-Germanic
*kwessiz; see bequeath), with excrescent -t. Meaning that which is bequeathed is recorded from late
15c.


berate (v.)

1540s, from be- thoroughly + Middle English rate to scold (late 14c.), from Old French reter accuse,
blame, from Latin reputare (see reputation). Obsolete except in U.S. [OED 1st ed.], but it seems to
have revived in Britain 20c. Related: Berated; berating.


Berber

1820 (n.); 1832 (adj.), from Arabic name for the peoples living west of Egypt; perhaps ultimately
from Greek barbaros barbarians (see Barbary).


berceuse (n.)

cradle song, 1876, from French berceuse cradle-song, woman who rocks an infant, from bercer to rock
(Old French bercier to rock a child in a cradle, 12c.) + fem. agent suffix -euse.


bereave (v.)

Old English bereafian to deprive of, take away, seize, rob, from be + reafian rob, plunder, from
Proto-Germanic *raubojanan, from PIE *reup- to snatch (see rapid). A common Germanic formation
(compare Old Frisian birava despoil, Old Saxon biroban, Dutch berooven, Old High German biroubon,
German berauben, Gothic biraubon). Since mid-17c., mostly in reference to life, hope, loved ones,
and other immaterial possessions. Past tense forms bereaved and bereft have co-existed since 14c.,
now slightly differentiated in meaning, the former applied to loss of loved ones, the latter to
circumstances.


bereavement (n.)

1731, from bereave + -ment.


bereft (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from bereave (v.).


Berenice

fem. proper name, from Latin Berenice, from Macedonian Greek Berenike (classical Greek Pherenike),
literally bringer of victory, from pherein to bring (see infer) + nike victory. The constellation
Berenice's hair is from the story of the pilfered locks of the wife of Ptolemy Euergetes, king of
Egypt, c.248 B.C.E., which the queen cut off as an offering to Venus. The constellation features a
dim but visible star cluster. But the earliest use of the phrase in astronomy in English was as a
name for the star Canopus (1601).


beret (n.)

also berret, 1827, from French b&eacute;ret, 19c., from dialect of B&eacute;arn, from Old Gascon
berret cap, from Medieval Latin birretum, diminutive of Late Latin birrus a large hooded cloak,
perhaps of Gaulish origin. The round, flat cap originally was worn by Basque peasants.


Beretta (n.)

Italian firearms manufacturer, business attested from 1520s, founded by gunsmith Bartolomeo Beretta
(1498-1565) of Lombardy.


berg (n.)

short for iceberg, attested from 1823.


bergamot (n.)

type of citrus tree, also its fruit, both similar to bitter orange, and the essence prepared from
the oil of the rind of the fruit, 1690s, from French bergamote (17c.), from Italian bergamotta,
named for Bergamo, town in Italy. The name is Roman Bergamum, from a Celtic or Ligurian berg
mountain, cognate with the identical Germanic word.    Earlier (1610s) as a kind of pear deemed
especially luscious, in this sense ultimately a Romanic folk-etymologization from Turkish beg-armudi
prince's pear or prince of pears, influenced in form by the other word, but probably not from it
(the town is on the opposite end of the peninsula from where the pear grows). Also used of garden
plants of the mint order with a smell like that of oil of bergamot.


beriberi (n.)

also beri-beri, paralytic disease prevalent in much of India, 1703, literally great weakness,
intensifying reduplication of Sinhalese beri weakness.


Bering

strait and sea between Alaska and Siberia, named for Danish explorer Vitus Bering (1681-1741), who
worked for Peter the Great and led the first European expedition to sight Alaska, in 1741.


berk (n.)

fool, 1936, abbreviation of Berkshire Hunt (or Berkeley Hunt), rhyming slang for cunt but typically
applied only to contemptible persons, not to the body part.  This is not an objective, anatomical
term, neither does it imply coitus. It connects with that extension of meaning of the unprintable, a
fool, or a person whom one does not like. [Dictionary of Rhyming Slang, 1960]


Berkshire

Old English Bearrocscir (893), from an ancient Celtic name meaning hilly place + Old English scir
shire, district.


Berlin

city in Brandenburg, capital of Germany, traditionally by folk-etymology from German B&auml;r bear,
but likely from a Slavic source, compare Old Polabian berl-, birl- swamp, in reference to the old
city's location on low, marshy ground along the River Spree. A flashpoint city in the Cold War, the
Berlin airlift ran from June 28, 1948 to May 12, 1949. The Berlin Wall began to be built Aug. 15,
1961, and was effective until Nov. 9, 1989.


berlin (n.)

old type of four-wheeled covered carriage, 1690s, so called because it was introduced in
Brandenburg, c.1670; see Berlin. Hence berline (from the French form) automobile with a glass
partition behind the driver's seat. In reference to a type of wool and the popular patterns made for
it, from 1841.


berm (n.)

narrow ledge, 1729, from French berme (17c.), from Old Dutch baerm edge of a dike, probably related
to brim (q.v.). In U.S., 19c., also the name for the bank of a canal opposite the tow path.


Bermuda

Atlantic island, named for Spanish explorer Juan de Bermudez (d.1570), who discovered it c.1515.
Bermuda shorts first attested 1946 (in The Princeton Alumni Weekly), from the type of garb worn by
U.S. tourists there. Bermuda triangle in the supernatural sense was popular from 1972. As the
adjective form, Bermudian (1777) holds seniority over Bermudan (1895).


Bern

Swiss capital, probably originally from PIE root *ber- marshy place, but by folk etymology from
German B&auml;r bear (compare Berlin). Related: Bernese.


Bernard

masc. proper name, from German Bernhard, literally bold as a bear, from Old High German bero bear
(see bear (n.)) + harti hard, bold, strong (see hard).


Bernicia

Anglo-Saxon kingdom in northernmost England, founded by mid-6c., eventually merged into Northumbria;
the name evidently is a survival of a pre-invasion Celtic name, perhaps that represented by Welsh
Bryneich.


Bernoulli&#039;s principle

named for Dutch mathematician Daniel Bernoulli (1700-1782), who published it in 1738.


berry (n.)

Old English berie, from Proto-Germanic *basjom (cognates: Old Norse ber, Middle Dutch bere, German
Beere berry; Old Saxon winber, Gothic weinabasi grape), of unknown origin. This and apple are the
only native fruit names.


berserk (adj.)

1844, from berserk (n.) Norse warrior, by 1835, an alternative form of berserker (1822), a word
which was introduced by Sir Walter Scott, from Old Norse berserkr (n.) raging warrior of superhuman
strength; probably from *ber- bear + serkr shirt, thus literally a warrior clothed in bearskin. Thus
not from Old Norse berr bare, naked.    Thorkelin, in the essay on the Berserkir, appended to his
edition of the Krisini Saga, tells that an old name of the Berserk frenzy was hamremmi, i.e.,
strength acquired from another strange body, because it was anciently believed that the persons who
were liable to this frenzy were mysteriously endowed, during its accesses, with a strange body of
unearthly strength. If, however, the Berserk was called on by his own name, he lost his mysterious
form, and his ordinary strength alone remained. [Notes and Queries, Dec. 28, 1850]     The
adjectival use probably is from such phrases as berserk frenzy, or as a title (Arngrim the Berserk).


berserker (n.)

alternative form of berserk (q.v.), from Old Norse berserkr, accusative of berserk. This is the
oldest form of the word in its revival in Modern English (1822), and perhaps Scott, who introduced
it, mistook the -r for an agent-noun suffix. Further compicated because it has the form of the Old
Norse plural, and English berserker sometimes is plural.


berth (n.)

1620s, convenient sea room (both for ships and sailors), of uncertain origin, probably from bear
(v.) + abstract noun suffix -th (2) as in strength, health, etc. Original sense is preserved in
phrase to give (something or someone) wide berth. Meaning place on a ship to stow chests, room for
sailors is from 1706; extended to non-nautical situations by 1778.


berth (v.)

1660s, of ships, from berth (n.). Of persons (intransitive), from 1886. Related: Berthed; berthing.


Bertha

fem. proper name, from Old High German Berahta, Perahta, the name of a goddess, literally the bright
one, from Old High German beraht, related to Old English beorht (see bright). Soldiers' nickname Big
Bertha for large-bore German mortar of World War I is a reference to Frau Bertha Krupp von Bohlen
und Halbach, owner of Krupp steel works 1903-43.


beryl (n.)

hard, lustrous mineral, c.1300, from Old French beryl (12c., Modern French b&eacute;ryl), from Latin
beryllus, from Greek beryllos, perhaps from Prakrit veruliya, from Sanskrit vaidurya-, of Dravidian
origin, perhaps from the city of Velur (modern Belur) in southern India.    Medieval Latin berillus
also was applied to any precious stone of a pale green color, to fine crystal, and to eyeglasses
(the first spectacle lenses may have been made of beryl), hence German Brille spectacles, from
Middle High German berille beryl, and French besicles (plural) spectacles, altered 14c. from Old
French bericle.


beryllium (n.)

metallic element, 1863, so called because it figures in the composition of the pale green precious
stone beryl and was identified in emerald (green beryl) in 1797 by French chemist Louis Nicolas
Vauquelin (1763-1829) and first isolated in 1828. At first and through 19c. also sometimes called
glucinum or glucinium.


beseech (v.)

late 12c., bisecen to beseech, beg urgently, from be- + Middle English secen to seek (see seek).
German cognate besuchen is merely to visit. Related: Besought; beseeching.


beseeching (n.)

supplication, prayer, c.1300, verbal noun from beseech. Related: Beseechingly; beseechingness.


beseem (v.)

early 13c., from be- + seem (v.). Related: Beseemed; beseeming.


beseeming (adj.)

1520s, present participle adjective from beseem.


beset (v.)

Old English besettan to put, place; own, keep; occupy, settle; cover, surround with, besiege, from
Proto-Germanic *bisatjan (cognates: Old Saxon bisettjan, Dutch bezetten, Old High German bisezzan,
German besetzen, Gothic bisatjan); see be- + set (v.). The figurative sense also was in Old English.
Related: Beset (past tense); besetting.


beshrew (v.)

early 14c., deprave, pervert, corrupt, from be- + shrew (v.) to curse; see shrew. Meaning to invoke
evil upon is from late 14c.


beside (prep.)

Old English be sidan by the side of (only as two words), from be- + sidan dative of side (n.). By
1200, formed as one word and used as both adverb and preposition. The alternative Middle English
meaning outside led to the sense preserved in beside oneself out of one's wits (late 15c.).


besides (prep.)

attested from c.1200 (common after c.1400), from beside + adverbial genitive -s. Once sharing all
the senses of beside, now properly limited to in addition to, otherwise.


besiege (v.)

c.1300, from be- + siege. Related: Besieged; besieging.


besmear (v.)

Old English bismierwan, besmyrwan (West Saxon), besmerwan (Anglian); see be- + smear (v.). Related:
Besmeared; besmearing.


besmirch (v.)

1590s, from be- + smirch.    Our Gayness and our Gilt are all besmyrcht. [Henry V, IV.iii.110]
Related: Besmirched; besmirching.


besom (n.)

Old English besma bundle of twigs (used as a broom or a flail), from West Germanic *besmon
(cognates: Old Frisian besma, Old Saxon besmo, Old High German besmo, German Besen, Dutch bezem), of
unknown origin. Perhaps something bound or twisted, from PIE *bheidh-.


besot (v.)

 affect with a foolish manifestation, 1570s, from be- + sot. Related: Besotted; besotting.


besotted (adj.)

past participle adjective from besot.


besought

Middle English besohte, past tense and past participle of beseech.


bespangle (v.)

1610s, from be- + spangle. Related: Bespangled; bespangling.


bespatter (v.)

1640s, from be- + spatter (v.). Related: Bespattered; bespattering.


bespeak (v.)

Old English besprecan speak about, speak against, complain, from be- + sprecan to speak (see speak
(v.)). A common Germanic compound (cognates: Old Saxon bisprecan, Dutch bespreken, Old High German
bisprehhan, German besprechen); originally to call out, it evolved a wide range of meaning in
English, including speak up, oppose, request, discuss, arrange, and to order (goods) (1580s).    The
connection of the senses is very loose; some of them appear to have arisen quite independently of
each other from different applications of BE- pref. [OED]


bespeckle (v.)

c.1600, from be- + speckle. Related: Bespeckled; bespeckling.


bespectacled (adj.)

1742, past participle adjective from be- + spectacles.


bespoke (adj.)

custom or custom-made, made to order, of goods, as distinguished from ready-made, 1755, the same
sense found earlier in bespoken (c.1600), past participle of bespeak, in a sense of to speak for, to
arrange beforehand, a sense attested in bespeak from 1580s. Now usually of tailored suits.


bespread (v.)

c.1200, from be- + spread (v.).


besprinkle (v.)

mid-15c., from be- + sprinkle (v.). Related: Besprinkled; besprinkling.


Bessemer

in reference to the process for decarbonizing and desiliconizing pig iron by passing air through the
molten metal, 1856, named for engineer and inventor Sir Harry Bessemer (1813-1898) who invented it.


best (adj.)

Old English beste, reduced by assimilation of -t- from earlier Old English betst best, first, in the
best manner, originally superlative of bot remedy, reparation, the root word now only surviving in
to boot (see boot (n.2)), though its comparative, better, and superlative, best, have been
transferred to good (and in some cases well). From Proto-Germanic root *bat-, with comparative
*batizon and superlative *batistaz (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Middle Dutch best, Old High
German bezzist, German best, Old Norse beztr, Gothic batists).    The best-laid schemes o' mice an'
men  Gang aft agley,  An' lea'e us nought but grief an' pain,  For promis'd joy!  [Burns]   Best-
seller as short for best-selling book is from 1902, apparently originally in the publishing trade;
best friend was in Chaucer (late 14c.). Best girl is first attested 1881, American English; best man
is 1814, originally Scottish, replacing groomsman. To be able to do something with the best of them
is recorded by 1748.


best (v.)

to get the better of, 1863, from best (adj.). Related: Bested; besting.


best (n.)

c.1200, from best (adj.).


bestead (v.)

to help, support, prop, 1580s, from be- + stead (v.); see stead.


bestest (adj.)

jocular emphatic superlative of best (which is itself a superlative), attested from 1834.


bestial (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French bestial (13c.) relating to animals, stupid, foolish, bestial and directly
from Latin bestialis like a beast, from bestia (see beast). Sense of below the dignity of a human is
from c.1400, and in many cases its use is unjust to the beasts.


bestiality (n.)

late 14c., the nature of beasts, from bestial + -ity. Meaning indulgence in beastly instincts is
from 1650s; sense of sexual activity with a beast is from 1611 (KJV).


bestiary (n.)

medieval treatise on beasts usually with moralistic overtones, 1818, from Medieval Latin bestiarium
a menagerie, also a book about animals, from bestia (see beast). A Latin term for such works was
liber de bestiis compositus. Roman bestiarius meant a fighter against beasts in the public
entertainments.


bestir (v.)

Old English bestyrian to heap up, from be- + stir. Related: Bestirred; bestirring.


bestow (v.)

early 14c., bistowen give (as alms, etc.), from be- + stowen to place (see stow). Related: Bestowed;
bestowing; bestower.


bestowal (n.)

1773, from bestow + -al (2).


bestrew (v.)

Old English bestreowian; see be- + strew (v.).


bestride (v.)

Old English bestridan to bestride, mount, from be- + stridan to stride (see stride). Compare Middle
Dutch bestryden.


bet

1590s, as both a verb and noun, in the argot of petty criminals, of unknown origin; probably a
shortening of abet or else from obsolete beet to make good, from Old English b&aelig;tan make
better, arouse, stimulate, from Proto-Germanic *baitjan, in which case the verb would be the
original. The original notion is perhaps to improve a contest by wagering on it, or it is from the
bait sense in abet. Used since 1852 in various American English slang assertions (compare you bet be
assured, 1857). Related: Betting.


beta (n.)

second letter of the Greek alphabet, c.1300, from Greek, from Hebrew/Phoenician beth (see alphabet);
used to designate the second of many things. Beta radiation is from 1899 (Rutherford). Beta particle
is attested from 1904.


betake (v.)

c.1200, from be- + take. Related: Betook; betaken.


Betamax (n.)

1975, proprietary name (Sony), from Japanese beta-beta all over + max, from English maximum.


betcha

representing casual pronunciation of bet you, attested by 1904.


bete noire (n.)

insufferable person, 1844, from French b&ecirc;te noire personal aversion, as an adjective, stupid,
foolish; literally the black beast.


beteach (v.)

Old English bet&aelig;can, from be- + teach. Related: Betaught; beteaching.


betel (n.)

1550s, probably via Portuguese betel, from Malayalam vettila, from veru ila simple leaf.


Betelgeuse

bright star in the shoulder of Orion, 1515, from Arabic Ibt al Jauzah the Armpit of the Central One.
Intermediary forms include Bed Elgueze, Beit Algueze.


Bethany

Biblical village, its name in Hebrew or Aramaic is literally house of poverty, from bet house of
(construct state of bayit house) + 'anya poverty.


bethel (n.)

1610s, a place where God is worshipped, from Hebrew beth El house of God, from beth, construct state
of bayit house. Popular as a name for religious meeting houses among some Protestant denominations.
Beth also was the name of the second letter of the Hebrew alphabet, so called for its shape, and was
borrowed into Greek as beta.


Bethesda

1857, name of a pool in Jerusalem (John v:2), from Greek Bethesda, from Aramaic beth hesda house of
mercy, or perhaps place of flowing water. Popular as a name for religious meeting houses among some
Protestant denominations.


bethink (v.)

reflexive verb, Old English be&thorn;encan to consider, from be- + &thorn;encan to think (see
think). Related: Bethought.


Bethlehem

the name probably means House of Lahmu and Lahamu, a pair of Mesopotamian agricultural deities.


betide (v.)

to happen, befall, late 12c., from be- + tiden to happen (see tide).


betimes (adv.)

at an early period, early 14c., from betime (c.1300, from be- + time) + adverbial genitive -s.


betoken (v.)

late 12c., from be- + Old English tacnian to signify, from tacn sign (see token). Related:
Betokened; betokening.


betray (v.)

late 13c., bitrayen mislead, deceive, betray, from be- + obsolete Middle English tray, from Old
French traine betrayal, deception, deceit, from trair (Modern French trahir) betray, deceive, from
Latin tradere hand over, from trans- across (see trans-) + dare to give (see date (n.1)). Related:
Betrayed; betraying.


betrayal (n.)

1816; from betray + -al (2). Earlier in the same sense were betrayment (1540s), betraying (late
14c.).


betrayer (n.)

1520s, agent noun from betray (v.).


betroth (v.)

c.1300, betrouthen, from bi-, here probably with a sense of thoroughly, + Middle English treow&eth;e
truth, from Old English treow&eth;e truth, a pledge (see troth). Related: Betrothed; betrothing.


betrothal (n.)

1844, from betroth + -al (2). Earlier in same sense were betrothment (1580s), betrothing (14c.).


betrothed (adj.)

1530s, past participle adjective from betroth (v.). As a noun, in use by 1580s.


Betsy

fem. pet name, a diminutive of Bet, itself short for Elizabet or Elizabeth. Betsy as the typical a
pet name for a favorite firearm is attested in American English by 1856 (compare Brown Bess, by
1785, British army slang for the old flintlock musket).


better (adj.)

Old English bettra, earlier betera, from Proto-Germanic *batizo-, from PIE *bhad- good; see best.
Comparative adjective of good in the older Germanic languages (compare Old Frisian betera, Old Saxon
betiro, Old Norse betr, Danish bedre, Old High German bezziro, German besser, Gothic batiza). In
English it superseded bet in the adverbial sense by 1600. Better half wife is first attested 1570s.


better (v.)

Old English *beterian improve, amend, make better, from Proto-Germanic  *batizojan (cognates: Old
Frisian beteria, Dutch beteren, Old Norse betra, Old High German baziron, German bessern), from
*batiz- (see better (adj.)). Related: Bettered; bettering.


better (n.)

late 12c., that which is better, from better (adj.). Specific meaning one's superior is from early
14c. To get the better of (someone) is from 1650s, from better in a sense of superiority, mastery,
which is recorded from mid-15c.


betterment (n.)

1590s, from better (v.) + -ment.


bettor (n.)

also better (OED notes that English agent nouns in -er tend to shift toward -or as their senses
become more specific), agent noun from bet (v.).


Betty

fem. pet name, from Bet, shortened from Elizabeth, + -y (3).


Betula (n.)

genus of the birches, from Latin betula birch, from Gaulish betu- bitumen (cognates: Middle Irish
beithe box tree, Welsh bedwen birch tree). According to Pliny, so called because the Gauls extracted
tar from birches. Birch tar is still sold as an analgesic and stimulant and made into birch beer by
the Pennsylvania Dutch.


between (prep.)

Old English betweonum between, among, by turns, Mercian  betwinum, from bi- by (see be-) + tweonum
dative plural of *tweon two each (compare Gothic tweih-nai two each). Between a rock and a hard
place is from 1940s, originally cowboy slang. Between-whiles is from 1670s.


betweenity (n.)

1760, a jocular formation, perhaps coined by Horace Walpole, from between + -ity.


betweenness (n.)

1881, from between + -ness.


betwixt (prep., adv.)

Old English betweox between, among, amidst, meanwhile, from bi- by (see be-) + tweox for two, from
Proto-Germanic *twa two + *-isk -ish. With parasitic -t that first appeared in Old English and
became general after c.1500.


Beulah

fem. proper name, from Hebrew be'ulah married woman, fem. past participle of ba'al he married (see
baal).


bevel (adj.)

1560s, possibly from Old French *baivel (Modern French b&eacute;veau, biveau), possibly from bayer
to gape, yawn, from Latin *batare to yawn, gape, from Latin root *bat-, possibly imitative of
yawning. If so, the time gap is puzzling. The verb is first recorded 1670s. The noun is 1670s, from
the adjective.


beverage (n.)

mid-13c., from Anglo-French beverage, Old French bevrage, from Old French boivre to drink (Modern
French boire; from Latin bibere to imbibe; see imbibe) + -age, suffix forming mass or abstract
nouns.


Beverly Hills

city in southern California, U.S., named 1911, earlier Beverly (1907), named for Beverly Farms,
Massachusetts, summer home of U.S. President Taft, which ultimately is named for the Yorkshire town
Beverly, which means, in Old English, beaver lodge.


bevy (n.)

early 15c., collective noun of quails and ladies, from Anglo-French bev&eacute;e, of unknown origin.
One supposed definition of the word is a drinking bout, but this is perhaps a misprint of bever,
from Old French beivre (see beverage). Still, it's possible that the original sense could be a
company of birds gathered at a puddle or pool for drinking or bathing.


bewail (v.)

c.1300, from be- + wail (v.). Related: Bewailed; bewailing.


beware (v.)

c.1200, probably from a conflation of be ware (though the compound bewarian defend existed in Old
English). See ware (v.).


beweep (v.)

Old English bewepan, cognate with Old Frisian biwepa, Old Saxon biwopian; see be- + weep. Related:
Bewept.


bewig (v.)

1714, from be- + wig. Related: Bewigged; bewigging.


bewilder (v.)

1680s, from be- thoroughly + archaic wilder lead astray, lure into the wilds, probably a back-
formation of wilderness. An earlier word with the same sense was bewhape (early 14c.). Related:
Bewildered; bewildering; bewilderingly.


bewildered (adj.)

1680s, past participle adjective from bewilder (q.v.).


bewilderment (n.)

1820, condition of being bewildered, from bewilder + -ment; meaning thing or situation which
bewilders is from 1844.


bewitch (v.)

c.1200, biwicchen, from be- + Old English wiccian to enchant, to practice witchcraft (see witch).
Literal at first, figurative sense of to fascinate is from 1520s. *Bewiccian may well have existed
in Old English, but it is not attested. Related: Bewitched; bewitching; bewitchingly.


bewitched (adj.)

late 14c. in the literal sense, past participle adjective from  bewitch; figurative use from 1570s.


bewray (v.)

to reveal, expose, c.1300, from be- + wray. Probably more or less of a conscious archaism since the
17th c. [OED] Related: Bewrayed; bewraying.


bey (n.)

governor of a Turkish district, 1590s, from Turkish bey, a title of honor, the Osmanli equivalent of
Turkish beg.


beyond (prep.)

Old English begeondan beyond, from the farther side, from be- by, here probably indicating position,
+ geond yonder (prep.); see yond. A compound not found elsewhere in Germanic.


bezant (n.)

gold coin, c.1200, from Old French besant (12c.), from Latin byzantius, short for Byzantius nummus
coin of Byzantium.


bezel (n.)

1610s, sloping edge, also groove in which a stone is set, from Old French *besel (13c.; Modern
French biseau), cognate with Spanish bisel; of uncertain origin, perhaps literally a stone with two
angles, from Vulgar Latin *bis-alus, from bis- twice (see bis-) + ala wing, side (see alar). Meaning
oblique face of a gem is from c.1840. The verb meaning grind (a tool) down to an edge is from 1670s.


bezique (n.)

card game, 1861, from French b&eacute;zigue (19c.), of unknown origin.


bezoar (n.)

late 15c., ultimately from Arabic bazahr, from Persian pad-zahr counter-poison, from pad protecting,
guardian, master (from Iranian *patar-, source also of Avestan patar-, from PIE *pa-tor-, from root
*pa- to protect, feed; see food) + zahr poison (from Old Iranian *jathra, from PIE *gwhn-tro-, from
root *gwhen- to strike, kill; see bane). Originally antidote, later specifically in reference to a
concoction from solid matter found in the stomachs and intestines of ruminants, which was held to
have antidotal qualities (1570s).


Bhagavad-Gita (n.)

dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna inserted in Mahabharata, from Sanskrit, Song of the Sublime One,
from Bhaga, a god of wealth, from Sanskrit bhagah, literally allotter, distributor, master, lord,
from bhajati assigns, allots, apportions, enjoys, loves (related to Avestan baga, Old Persian baga
master, lord, god) + gita song, fem. past participle of gayate sings, calls, from PIE root *gei- to
sing (cognates: Avestan gatha song, Lithuanian giedoti to sing).


bhang (n.)

1590s, from Hindi bhang narcotic from hemp, from Sanskrit bhangah hemp. Perhaps cognate with Russian
penika hemp. The word first appears in Western Europe in Portuguese (1560s).


bi (adj.)

1956 as a colloquial abbreviation of bisexual.


bi-

word-forming element meaning two, twice, double, doubly, once every two, etc., from Latin bi- twice,
double, from Old Latin dvi- (cognate with Sanskrit dvi-, Greek di-, Old English twi- twice, double),
from PIE root *dwo- two. Nativized from 16c. Occasionally bin- before vowels; this form originated
in French, not Latin, and might be partly based on or influenced by Latin bini twofold (see binary).


bialy (n.)

bagel with onion flakes sprinkled on it, by 1936, ultimately short for Bia&#322;ystok, city in
modern Poland. The city name is literally white river, from Polish bia&#322;y white + stok river
(the Bialy River flows through the region).


Bianca

fem. proper name, from Italian, literally fem. of bianco white (see blank (adj.)). A doublet of
French Blanche.


biangular (adj.)

also bi-angular, by 1770; see bi- + angular.


biannual (adj.)

also bi-annual; occurring every six months, twice a year, 1837, from bi- + annual. Related:
Biannually; bi-annually.


bias (n.)

1520s, from French biais slant, slope, oblique, also figuratively, expedient, means (13c.,
originally in Old French a past participle adjective, sideways, askance, against the grain), of
unknown origin, probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al biais, with cognates in Old Catalan and
Sardinian; possibly from Vulgar Latin *(e)bigassius, from Greek epikarsios athwart, crosswise, at an
angle, from epi- upon + karsios oblique, from PIE *krs-yo-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)). It became a noun in Old French. [A] technical term in the game of bowls, whence come all the
later uses of the word [OED]. Transferred sense of predisposition, prejudice is from 1570s in
English.    For what a man had rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, because they narrow hope; the deeper
things of nature, from superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride, lest his
mind should seem to be occupied with things mean and transitory; things not commonly believed, out
of deference to the opinion of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and sometimes
imperceptible, in which the affections colour and infect the understanding. [Francis Bacon, Novum
Organum, 1620]


bias (v.)

1620s, literal and figurative, from bias (n.). Related: Biased; biasing.


biased (adj.)

1610s in reference to bowling, 1660s in reference to persons; past participle adjective from bias
(v.).


biathlon (n.)

1956, from bi- + Greek athlon contest, abstracted from pentathlon.


biaxial (adj.)

also bi-axial, 1833; see bi- + axial.


bib (n.)

linen worn over the breast while eating, 1570s, from verb bibben to drink (late 14c.), imitative of
lip sounds, or else from Latin bibere (see imbibe), but difficult now to say whether this is because
it was worn while drinking or because it soaked up spills.


bibber (n.)

drinker, tippler, 1530s, from Middle English bib (v.) to drink heartily (see bib (n.)).


bibelot (n.)

small curio, 1873, from French bibelot knick-knack, from Old French beubelet trinket, jewel (12c.),
from belbel plaything, a reduplication of bel pretty.


bibitory (adj.)

pertaining to drinking, 1690s, from Modern Latin bibitorius, from Late Latin bibitor drinker, toper,
from bibere to drink (see imbibe).


Bible (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-Latin biblia, Old French bible (13c.) the Bible, also any large book
generally, from Medieval and Late Latin biblia (neuter plural interpreted as feminine singular), in
phrase biblia sacra holy books, a translation of Greek ta biblia to hagia the holy books, from Greek
biblion paper, scroll, the ordinary word for book, originally a diminutive of byblos Egyptian
papyrus, possibly so called from Byblos (modern Jebeil, Lebanon), the name of the Phoenician port
from which Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece (compare parchment). Or the place name might be
from the Greek word, which then would be probably of Egyptian origin. The Christian scripture was
referred to in Greek as Ta Biblia as early as c.223. Bible replaced Old English biblio&eth;ece (see
bibliothek) as the ordinary word for the Scriptures. Figurative sense of any authoritative book is
from 1804.    Walter Scott and Pope's Homer were reading of my own election, but my mother forced
me, by steady daily toil, to learn long chapters of the Bible by heart; as well as to read it every
syllable through, aloud, hard names and all, from Genesis to the Apocalypse, about once a year; and
to that discipline -- patient, accurate, and resolute -- I owe, not only a knowledge of the book,
which I find occasionally serviceable, but much of my general power of taking pains, and the best
part of my taste in literature. ... [O]nce knowing the 32nd of Deuteronomy, the 119th Psalm, the
15th of 1st Corinthians, the Sermon on the Mount, and most of the Apocalypse, every syllable by
heart, and having always a way of thinking with myself what words meant, it was not possible for me,
even in the foolishest times of youth, to write entirely superficial or formal English .... [John
Ruskin, Fors Clavigera, 1871]


Bible Belt (n.)

1926, reputedly coined by H.L. Mencken.


Bible-thumper (n.)

strict Christian, by 1843.


biblical (adj.)

1790, from Bible + -ical. Related: Biblically. Earlier adjective was Biblic (1680s).


biblico-

word-forming element meaning biblical, from comb. form of Medieval Latin biblicus, from biblia (see
bible).


biblio-

word-forming element meaning book or sometimes Bible, from Greek biblio-, comb. form of biblion book
(see Bible).


bibliographer (n.)

1650s, from Greek bibliographos writer of books, transcriber, copyist, related to bibliographia (see
bibliography).


bibliographical (adj.)

1670s; see bibliography + -ical.


bibliography (n.)

1670s, the writing of books, from Greek bibliographia the writing of books, from biblio- + graphos
(something) drawn or written (see -graphy). Sense of a list of books that form the literature of a
subject is first attested 1869. Related: Bibliographic.


biblioklept (n.)

1881, from biblio- + Greek kleptes thief (see kleptomania). Walsh calls it a modern euphemism which
softens the ugly word book-thief by shrouding it in the mystery of the Greek language.


bibliolator (n.)

1820, perhaps first in Coleridge, from bibliolatry (q.v.).


bibliolatry (n.)

1763, worship of books, from biblio- + -latry. Meaning worship of the Bible is from 1847.


bibliomancy (n.)

1753, divination by opening a book (especially the Bible) at random, the first verse presenting
itself being taken as a prognostication of future events, from biblio- + -mancy. In pagan times,
Homer (sortes Homericae) and Virgil (sortes Virgilianae) were used.


bibliomania (n.)

1734, after French bibliomanie, from biblio- + mania.


bibliomaniac (n.)

1816; see bibliomania.    A bibliomaniac must be carefully distinguished from a bibliophile. The
latter has not yet freed himself from the idea that books are meant to be read. [Walsh]


bibliophile (n.)

also bibliophil, 1824, from French bibliophile, from biblio- + -phile.


bibliopole (n.)

bookseller, 1775, from Latin bibliopola, from Greek bibliopoles bookseller, from biblion book (see
bible) + poles merchant, seller (see monopoly).


bibliotheca (n.)

see bibliothek.


bibliothecary (n.)

librarian, 1610s, from Latin bibliothecarius, from bibliotheca (see bibliothek). An earlier form in
English was bibliothecar (1580s).


bibliothek (n.)

Old English biblio&eth;ece the Scriptures, from Latin bibliotheka library, room for books;
collection of books, from Greek bibliotheke, literally book-repository (from biblion, see Bible, +
theke case, chest, sheath, from root of tithenai to put, place; see theme), used of the Bible by
Jerome and serving as the common Latin word for it until Biblia began to displace it 9c.


bibulous (adj.)

1670s, spongy, absorbent, from Latin bibulus drinking readily, given to drink; of things, absorbent;
moistened, from bibere to drink (see imbibe). Meaning fond of drink attested in English by 1861.


Bic (n.)

popular type of plastic ball-point pen, designed c.1950 in France, named 1953 as a shortened form of
company co-founder Marcel Bich (1914-1994).


bicameral (adj.)

having two chambers, 1832, from bi- two (see bi-) + Late Latin camera chamber (see camera) + -al
(1).


bicarbonate (n.)

1819, from bi- + carbonate.


bice (n.)

pale blue color, early 15c., shortened from blew bis blue bice, from French bis swarthy, brownish-
gray (12c.), cognate with Italian bigio; of unknown origin. Via French combinations azur bis, vert
bis the word came into English with a sense of blue or green.


bicentenary (adj.)

pertaining to a 200-year period, 1843; see bi- + centenary. Also see bicentennial. As a noun, a
bicentennial anniversary or celebration, also from 1843.


bicentennial

also bi-centennial, 1843 (adj.), 1871 (noun), American English, from bi- + centennial (q.v.). In
rivalry with bicentenary (1831) which seems to have been the more common word in Britain.


bicep (n.)

false singular of biceps (q.v.).


bicephalous (adj.)

1803, a hybrid from bi- + Latinized adjectival form of Greek kephale head (see cephalo-).


biceps

1630s (adj.), from Latin biceps having two parts, literally two-headed, from bis double (see bis-) +
-ceps comb. form of caput head (see capitulum). As a noun meaning biceps muscle, from 1640s, so
called for its structure. Despite the -s, it is singular, and classicists insist there is no such
word as bicep.


bicipital (adj.)

having two heads, 1640s, from Latin biceps (genitive bicipitis); see biceps + -al (1).


bicker (v.)

early 14c., bikere, to skirmish, fight, perhaps from Middle Dutch bicken to slash, stab, attack, +
-er, Middle English frequentative suffix. Meaning to quarrel is from mid-15c. Related: Bickered;
bickering.


bicker (n.)

c.1300, skirmish, battle; from the same source as bicker (v.). In modern use, often to describe the
sound of a flight of an arrow or other repeated, loud, rapid sounds, in which sense it is perhaps at
least partly echoic.


bickering (n.)

c.1300, a skirmish, from bicker (v.). Meaning a verbal wrangle is from 1570s.


bickering (adj.)

1808 in the sense of contentious, present participle adjective from bicker (v.). Earlier it was used
to mean flashing, quivering (1660s).


bicoastal (adj.)

also bi-coastal, by 1977 in reference to the East and West coasts of the U.S. (or, specifically, New
York and Los Angeles); from bi- + coastal.


bicuspid (adj.)

1826, having two parts, from bi- + Latin cuspidem cusp, point. As a noun, short for bicuspid molar,
attested from 1837.


bicycle (n.)

1868, coined from bi- two + Greek kyklos circle, wheel (see cycle (n.)), on the pattern of tricycle;
both the word and the vehicle superseding earlier velocipede. The English word probably is not from
French, though often said to be (many French sources say the French word is from English). The
assumption apparently is because Pierre Lallement, employee of a French carriage works, improved
Macmillan's 1839 pedal velocipede in 1865 and took the invention to America. See also pennyfarthing.
As a verb, from 1869.  That ne plus ultra of snobbishness -- bicyclism. [1876]


bicyclist (n.)

1869, from bicycle + -ist.


bid (v.)

probably a merger of two old words: The sense in bid farewell is from Old English biddan to ask,
entreat, pray, beseech; order; beg (class V strong verb, past tense b&aelig;d, past participle
beden), from Proto-Germanic *bidjan to pray, entreat (source also of German bitten to ask, attested
from 8c.), which, according to Kluge and Watkins is from a PIE root *gwhedh- to ask, pray (see bead
(n.)).    To bid at an auction, meanwhile, is from Old English beodan offer, proclaim (class II
strong verb; past tense bead, past participle boden), from Proto-Germanic *beudan to stretch out,
reach out, offer, present, (source also of German bieten to offer), from PIE root *bheudh- to be
aware, make aware (cognates: Sanskrit bodhati is awake, is watchful, observes, buddhah awakened,
enlightened; Old Church Slavonic bljudo to observe; Lithuanian budeti to be awake; Old Irish buide
contentment, thanks). As a noun, 1788, from the verb.


bidden

past participle of bid and bide.


biddy (n.)

old woman, 1785; meaning Irish maid-servant (1861) is American English; both from Biddy, pet form of
common Irish proper name Bridget.


bide (v.)

Old English bidan to stay, continue, live, remain, also to trust, rely (cognate with Old Norse
bi&eth;a, Old Saxon bidan, Old Frisian bidia, Middle Dutch biden, Old High German bitan, Gothic
beidan to wait), apparently from PIE *bheidh-, an extended stem of one root of Old English biddan
(see bid (v.)), the original sense of which was to command, and to trust (compare Greek peithein to
persuade, pistis faith; Latin fidere to trust, foedus compact, treaty, Old Church Slavonic beda
need). Perhaps the sense evolved in prehistoric times through endure, and endure a wait, to to wait.
Preserved in Scotland and northern England, replaced elsewhere by abide in all senses except to bide
one's time. Related: Bided; biding.


bidet (n.)

1620s, small horse, from French bidet (16c.), of unknown etymology. Originally in French a small
horse, a pony, thus a vessel on a low narrow stand, which can be bestridden for bathing purposes, a
sense attested in English from 1766.


bidirectional (adj.)

also bi-directional, 1941, from bi- + direction + -al (1). Originally of microphones. Related:
Bidirectionally.


Biedermeier

1854, from German, from Gottlieb Biedermeier, name of a fictitious writer of stodgy poems (invented
by Ludwig Eichrodt as a satire on bourgeois taste); the name generally applied to styles prevalent
in Germany 1815-48; also conventional, bourgeois.


biennial (adj.)

lasting for two years (1620s); occurring every two years (1750), from Latin biennium two-year
period, from bi- (see bi-) + annus year (see annual). The vowel change is due to the Latin phonetic
law according to which the unaccented and closed radical syllable of the second element of
compounds, original -&#259;- becomes -&#277;- [Klein]. The noun meaning a biennial plant is attested
by 1770.


biennium (n.)

space of two years, by 1851, from Latin biennium two years, a period of two years, from bi- + annus
year (see annual). For vowel change, see biennial.


bier (n.)

Old English b&aelig;r (West Saxon), ber (Anglian) handbarrow, litter, bed, from West Germanic *bero
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German bara, Old Frisian bere, Middle Dutch bare, Dutch baar, German
Bahre bier), from PIE root *bher- (1) to carry; to bear children, and thus related to the Old
English verb beran to bear (see bear (v.)), making a bier etymologically anything used for carrying,
only later limited to funerary sense. Since c.1600, spelling influenced by French bi&egrave;re, from
Old French biere, from Frankish *bera, from the same Germanic root.


bifarious (adj.)

1650s, from Latin bifarius twofold, double, probably originally that which can be expressed in two
ways [Klein], from bi- (see bi-) + fari to speak, say (see fame (n.)). Related: Bifariously.


biff (v.)

to hit, 1877, imitative (as a sound effect, from 1847). Related: Biffed; biffing. As a noun,
attested from 1881.


bifid (adj.)

split in two equal parts, 1660s, from Latin bifidus split into two parts, from bi- (see bi-) + stem
of findere to split (see fissure).


bifocal (adj.)

having two foci, 1844, from bi- + focal.


bifocals (n.)

bifocal spectacles, 1899, see bifocal. Conceived by Benjamin Franklin, but called by him double
spectacles.


bifoliate (adj.)

having two leaves, 1817, from bi- + foliate.


bifurcate (v.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin bifurcatus, from Latin bi- (see bi-) + furca, the root of fork. Related:
Bifurcated; bifurcating.


bifurcate (adj.)

1835, from Medieval Latin bifurcatus, from Latin bi- (see bi-) + furca, the root of fork (n.).


bifurcation (n.)

1610s, the point at which something splits in two, noun of action from bifurcate (v.). Meaning
division into two forks is from 1640s.


big (adj.)

c.1300, northern England dialect, powerful, strong, of obscure origin, possibly from a Scandinavian
source (compare Norwegian dialectal bugge great man). Old English used micel in many of the same
senses. Meaning of great size is late 14c.; that of grown up is attested from 1550s. Sense of
important is from 1570s. Meaning generous is U.S. colloquial by 1913.   Big band as a musical style
is from 1926. Slang big head conceit is first recorded 1850. Big business large commercial firms
collectively is 1905; big house penitentiary is U.S. underworld slang first attested 1915 (in
London, a workhouse, 1851). In financial journalism, big ticket items so called from 1956. Big lie
is from Hitler's grosse L&uuml;ge.


Big Apple

New York, 1909 (but popularized by 1970s tourism promotion campaign), apparently from jazz
musicians' use of apple for any city, especially a Northern one.


big bang

hypothetical explosive beginning of the universe, developed from the work of Monsignor Georges Henri
Joseph &Eacute;douard Lema&icirc;tre and George Gamow, the name first attested 1950 (said to have
been used orally 1949) by British astronomer Fred Hoyle (1915-2001) in an attempt to explain the
idea in laymen's terms.


Big Ben

clock in the Parliament tower in London, generally said to have been named for Sir Benjamin Hall
(1802-1867), first Chief Commissioner of Works, under whose supervision the bell was cast.


Big Brother

ubiquitous and repressive but apparently benevolent authority first recorded 1949, from George
Orwell's novel Nineteen Eighty-Four.


big deal (n.)

from mid-19c. in poker or business; as an ironic expression, popular in American English from
c.1965, perhaps a translated Yiddishism (such as a groyser kunst).


Big Dipper (n.)

American English name for the seven-star asterism (known in England as the plough; see Charles's
Wain) in the constellation Ursa Major, first attested 1833 as simply the Dipper (sometimes Great
Dipper, its companion constellation always being the Little Dipper). See dipper.


Big Mac

trademark name (McDonald's Corp.) of a type of hamburger sandwich, patented 1974 but alleged to have
been in use from 1957.


big mouth (n.)

also bigmouth person who talks too much, 1889, American English, from big + mouth (n.).


big shot (n.)

important person, 1929, American English, from Prohibition-era gangster slang; earlier in the same
sense was great shot (1861). Ultimately a reference to large type of gunshot.


big time (n.)

upper reaches of a profession or pursuit, c.1910 from vaudeville slang; the phrase was common in
colloquial use late 19c.-early 20c. in a broad range of senses: party, shindig, fun, frolic.


big-tent (adj.)

in reference to welcoming all sorts and not being ideologically narrow, American English, 1982 with
reference to religion, by 1987 with reference to politics.


bigamist (n.)

1630s; see bigamy + -ist. Earlier in the same sense was bigame (mid-15c.), from Old French bigame,
from Medival Latin bigamus.


bigamous (adj.)

1690s; see bigamy + -ous.


bigamy (n.)

state of having two wives or husbands at the same time, mid-13c., from Old French bigamie (13c.),
from Church Latin bigamia, from Late Latin bigamus twice married, a hybrid from bi- double (see bi-)
+ Greek gamos marrying (see gamete). The Greek word was digamos twice married.Bigamie is unkinde
&eth;ing, On engleis tale, twie-wifing. [c.1250]In Middle English, also of two successive marriages
or marrying a widow.


bigass (adj.)

also big-ass, big-assed, by 1945, U.S. military slang, from big + ass (2).


bigfoot (n.)

supposed elusive man-like creature of the Pacific Northwest, 1963, from big (adj.) + foot (n.).


bigger (adj.)

comparative of big.


biggest (adj.)

superlative of big.


biggie (n.)

1931, from big + -ie.


bight (n.)

Old English byht bend, angle, corner (related to bow), from Proto-Germanic *buhtiz (cognates: Middle
Low German bucht, German Bucht, Dutch bocht, Danish bught bight, bay), from PIE root *bheug- (3) to
bend, with derivatives referring to bent, pliable, or curved objects (cognates: Old English beag,
Old High German boug ring; see bow (v.)). Sense of indentation on a coastline is from late 15c.


bigness (n.)

late 15c., from big + -ness.


bigot (n.)

1590s, sanctimonious person, religious hypocrite, from French bigot (12c.), of unknown origin.
Earliest French use of the word is as the name of a people apparently in southern Gaul, which led to
the now-doubtful, on phonetic grounds, theory that the word comes from Visigothus. The typical use
in Old French seems to have been as a derogatory nickname for Normans, the old theory (not
universally accepted) being that it springs from their frequent use of the Germanic oath bi God. But
OED dismisses in a three-exclamation-mark fury one fanciful version of the by god theory as absurdly
incongruous with facts. At the end, not much is left standing except Spanish bigote mustache, which
also has been proposed but not explained, and the chief virtue of which as a source seems to be
there is no evidence for or against it.    In support of the by God theory, as a surname Bigott,
Bygott are attested in Normandy and in England from the 11c., and French name etymology sources
(such as Dauzat) explain it as a derogatory name applied by the French to the Normans and
representing by god. The English were known as goddamns 200 years later in Joan of Arc's France, and
during World War I Americans serving in France were said to be known as les sommobiches (see also
son of a bitch). But the sense development in bigot is difficult to explain. According to Donkin,
the modern use first appears in French 16c. This and the earliest English sense, religious
hypocrite, especially a female one, might have been influenced by beguine and the words that cluster
around it. Sense extended 1680s to other than religious opinions.


bigoted (adj.)

1640s, from bigot (q.v.).


bigotry (n.)

1670s, from French bigoterie sanctimoniousness, from bigot (see bigot).


bigwig (n.)

1731, from big + wig, in reference to the imposing wigs formerly worn by men of rank or authority.


bijou (n.)

1660s, from French bijou, from Breton bizou (jeweled) ring, from bez finger (compare Cornish bisou
finger-ring, 13c.).


bike (n.)

1882, American English, shortened and altered form of bicycle.


biker (n.)

motorcycle rider (especially with reference to club affiliation), 1968, American English, from bike
(n.) in its slang sense of motorcycle (1939).


bikini (n.)

low-waisted two-piece women's bathing suit, 1948, from French coinage, 1947, named for U.S. A-bomb
test of June 1946 on Bikini, Marshall Islands atoll, locally Pikinni and said to derive from pik
surface and ni coconut, but this is uncertain. Various explanations for the swimsuit name have been
suggested, none convincingly, the best being an analogy of the explosive force of the bomb and the
impact of the bathing suit style on men's libidos (compare c.1900 British slang assassin an
ornamental bow worn on the female breast, so called because it was very killing).Bikini, ce mot
cinglant comme l'explosion m&ecirc;me ... correspondant au niveau du v&ecirc;tement de plage
&agrave; on an&eacute;antissement de la surface v&ecirc;tue; &agrave; une minimisation extr&ecirc;me
de la pudeur. [Le Monde, 1947]  As a style of scanty briefs, from 1960. Variant trikini (1967), with
separate bra cups held on by Velcro, falsely presumes a compound in bi-.


bilabial (adj.)

1857, from bi- + labial. Alternative bilabiate is attested from 1794.


bilateral (adj.)

having two sides, 1775, from bi- + lateral. Related: Bilaterally.


bilateralism (n.)

1852, from bilateral + -ism.


bilbo (n.)

kind of sword noted for temper and elasticity, 1590s, from Bilbao, town in northern Spain where
swords were made, in English Bilboa. The town name is Roman Bellum Vadum beautiful ford (over the
Nervion River).


Bildungsroman (n.)

1910, from German Bildungsroman, from Bildung education, formation, growth (from Bild picture,
image, figure; Old High German bilade) + roman novel (see romance). A novel set in the formative
years, or the time of spiritual education, of the main character.


bile (n.)

1660s, from French bile (17c.) bile, also, informally, anger, from Latin bilis fluid secreted by the
liver, also one of the four humors (also known as choler), thus anger, peevishness (especially as
black bile, 1797).


bilge (n.)

1510s, lowest internal part of a ship, also used of the foulness which collects there; variant of
bulge ship's hull, also leather bag, from Old North French boulge leather sack, from Late Latin
bulga leather sack, apparently from Gaulish bulga (see budget (n.)).


biliary (adj.)

pertaining to bile, 1731, from French biliaire, from bile (see bile). Meaning bilious in mood or
temperament is recorded from 1837.


bilinear (adj.)

also bi-linear, 1851, from bi- + linear. Related: Bilinearly; bilinearity.


bilingual (adj.)

1818, from bi- + lingual. Latin bilinguis meant literally two-tongued, and, figuratively, speaking a
jumble of languages, also double-tongued, hypocritical, false.


bilingualism (n.)

1873, from bilingual + -ism.


bilious (adj.)

1540s, pertaining to bile, biliary, from French bilieux, from Latin biliosus pertaining to bile,
from bilis (see bile). Meaning wrathful, peevish, ill-tempered (as people afflicted with an excess
of bile were believed to be) is attested from 1560s. This is the main modern sense in English and
French; the more literal meaning being taken up by biliary. Related: Biliousness.


bilirubin (n.)

reddish pigment found in bile, 1871, from German bilirubin (1864), from bili- (see bile) + Latin
ruber red (see red (1)) + -ine (2).


bilk (v.)

1650s, from or along with the noun (1630s), first used as a cribbage term; as a verb, to spoil
(someone's) score. Origin obscure, it was believed in 17c. to be a word signifying nothing; perhaps
it s a thinned form of balk to hinder. Meaning to defraud is first recorded 1670s. Related: Bilked;
bilking.


bill (n.1)

written statement, mid-14c., from Anglo-French bille, Anglo-Latin billa list, from Medieval Latin
bulla decree, seal, sealed document, in classical Latin bubble, boss, stud, amulet for the neck
(hence seal; see bull (n.2)). Sense of account, invoice first recorded c.1400; that of order to pay
(technically bill of exchange) is from 1570s; that of paper money is from 1660s. Meaning draft of an
act of Parliament is from 1510s.


bill (n.2)

bird's beak, Old English bill bill, bird's beak, related to bill, a poetic word for a kind of sword
(especially one with a hooked blade), from a common Germanic word for cutting or chopping weapons
(compare Old High German bihal, Old Norse bilda hatchet, Old Saxon bil sword), from PIE root *bheie-
to cut, to strike (cognates: Armenian bir cudgel, Greek phitos block of wood, Old Church Slavonic
biti to strike, Old Irish biail ax). Used also in Middle English of beak-like projections of land
(such as Portland Bill).


bill (v.)

to send someone a bill of charge, 1864, from bill (n.1). Related: Billed; billing.


bill (n.3)

ancient weapon, Old English bill sword (especially one with a hooked blade), chopping tool, common
Germanic (compare Old Saxon bil sword, Middle Dutch bile, Dutch bijl, Old High German bihal, German
Beil, Old Norse bilda hatchet. See bill (n.2).


billable (adj.)

1570s, from bill (v.) + -able.


billabong

Australian, backwater, stagnant pool, 1865, from Billibang, Aboriginal name of Bell River, from
billa water + bang, of uncertain meaning.


billboard (n.)

1845, American English, from bill (n.1) + board (n.1). Any sort of board where bills were meant to
be posted. Billboard magazine founded 1894, originally a trade paper for the bill-posting industry.
Its music sales charts date from 1930s.


billet (v.)

1590s, to assign quarters to, earlier, as a noun, official record or register (Middle English), from
Anglo-French billette list, schedule, diminutive of bille (see bill (n.1)). Related: Billeted;
billeting.


billet (n.1)

thick stick of wood, mid-15c., from Middle French billette, diminutive of bille stick of wood (see
billiards).


billet (n.2)

document, note; see billet-doux.


billet-doux (n.)

also billet doux, 1670s, love letter, French, literally sweet note, from billet document, note
(14c., diminutive of bille; see bill (n.1)) + doux sweet, from Latin dulcis (see dulcet).


billfold (n.)

1879, from bill (n.1) + fold, here perhaps short for folder.


billiard

singular of billiards, used only in combinations.


billiards (n.)

1590s, from French billiard, originally the word for the wooden cue stick, a diminutive from Old
French bille stick of wood, from Medieval Latin billia tree, trunk, possibly from Gaulish (compare
Irish bile tree trunk).


billing (n.)

1875, announcement on a bill or poster, verbal noun from bill (v.); hence top billing (1928).
Meaning act of sending out a bill is recorded from 1908.


billingsgate (n.)

1670s, the kind of coarse, abusive language once used by women in the Billingsgate market on the
River Thames below London Bridge.  Billingsgate is the market where the fishwomen assemble to
purchase fish; and where, in their dealings and disputes they are somewhat apt to leave decency and
good manners a little on the left hand. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811]  The place name is
Old English Billingesgate, gate of (a man called) Billing; the gate probably being a gap in the
Roman river wall. The market is mid-13c., not exclusively a fish market until late 17c.


billion (n.)

1680s, from French billion (originally byllion in Chuquet's unpublished Le Triparty en la Science
des Nombres, 1484; copied by De la Roche, 1520); see bi- two + million. A million million in Britain
and Germany (numeration by groups of sixes), which was the original sense; subsequently altered in
French to a thousand million (numeration by groups of threes) and picked up in that form in U.S.,
due in part to French influence after the Revolutionary War [David E. Smith, History of Mathematics,
1925]. France then reverted to the original meaning in 1948. British usage is truer to the
etymology, but U.S. sense is said to be increasingly common there in technical writing.    In
Italian arithmetics from the last quarter of the fifteenth century the words bilione or duilione,
trilione, quadrilione or quattrilione, quintilione, cinquilione, or quinquilione, sestione or
sestilione, settilione, ottilione, noeilione and decilione occur as common abbreviations of due
volte millioni, tre volte millione, etc. In other countries these words came into use much later,
although one French writer, Nicolas Chuquet, mentions them as early as 1484, in a book not printed
until 1881. The Italians had, besides, another system of numeration, proceeding by powers of a
thousand. The French, who like other northern peoples, took most if not all their knowledge of
modern or Arabic arithmetic from the Italians, early confounded the two systems of Italian
numeration, counting in powers of a thousand, but adopting the names which properly belong to powers
of a million.


billionaire (n.)

1844, American English, from billion on model of millionaire. The first in the U.S. likely was John
D. Rockefeller (1839-1937), some time after World War I.


billionth

1778, from billion + -th (2).


billow (n.)

1550s, perhaps older in dialectal use, from Old Norse bylgja a wave, a billow, from Proto-Germanic
*bulgjan (cognates: Middle High German bulge billow, bag), from PIE *bhelgh- to swell (see belly
(n.)).


billow (v.)

1590s, from billow (n.). Related: Billowed; billowing.


billowy (adj.)

1610s, from billow (n.) + -y (2). Related: Billowiness.


billy (n.)

club, 1848, American English, originally burglars' slang for crowbar; meaning policeman's club first
recorded 1856, probably from nickname of William, applied to various objects (compare jack, jimmy,
jenny).


bimbo (n.)

1919, fellow, chap, from variant of Italian bambino baby; first attested in Italian-accented theater
dialogue. Originally especially stupid, inconsequential man, contemptible person; by 1920 the sense
of floozie had developed (popularized by Variety staffer Jack Conway, d.1928). Resurrection during
1980s U.S. political sex scandals led to derivatives including diminutive bimbette (1990) and male
form himbo (1988).


bimetallic (adj.)

also bi-metallic, composed of two metals, 1864, from bi- + metallic. In economics, 1876, from French
bim&eacute;talique (Cornuschi).


bimodal (adj.)

also bi-modal, 1891, from bi- + modal. Related: Bimodality.


bimonthly (adj.)

also bi-monthly, 1846, happening once in two months, every two months, also occurring twice a month,
a hybrid from bi- + monthly.


bin (n.)

receptacle, Old English binne basket, manger, crib, probably from Gaulish, from Old Celtic *benna,
akin to Welsh benn a cart, especially one with a woven wicker body. The same Celtic word seems to be
preserved in Italian benna dung cart, French benne grape-gatherer's creel, Dutch benne large basket,
all from Late Latin benna cart, Medieval Latin benna basket. Some linguists think there was a
Germanic form parallel to the Celtic one.


binary (adj.)

dual, mid-15c., from Late Latin binarius consisting of two, from bini twofold, two apiece, two-by-
two (used especially of matched things), from bis double (see bis-). Binary code in computer
terminology was in use by 1952, though the idea itself is ancient. Binary star in astronomy is from
1802.


binate (adj.)

double, 1807, from Latin bini two by two, twofold, two apiece (see binary) + -ate (2).


binaural (adj.)

pertaining to both ears, 1861, from Latin bini twofold, two apiece (see binary) + aural. In
reference to electronic recordings, from 1933.


bind (v.)

Old English bindan to tie up with bonds (literally and figuratively), also to make captive; to cover
with dressings and bandages (class III strong verb; past tense band, past participle bunden), from
Proto-Germanic *bindan (cognates: Old Saxon bindan, Old Norse  and Old Frisian binda, Old High
German binten to bind, German binden, Gothic bindan), from PIE root *bhendh- to bind (see bend).
Intransitive sense of stick together is from 1670s. Of books, from c.1400.


bind (n.)

anything that binds, in various senses, late Old English, from bind (v.). Meaning tight or awkward
situation is from 1851.


binder (n.)

Old English bindere one who binds (see bind). Of various objects or products that bind, from early
16c.


bindery (n.)

1810, American English; see bind (v.) + -ery.


binding (n.)

mid-13c., verbal noun from bind (v.). Meaning thing that binds is from c.1300; state of being bound
is from late 14c. Meaning covering of a book is recorded from 1640s.


bindle (n.)

tramp's bundle, c.1900, perhaps from bundle (n.) or Scottish dialectal bindle cord or rope to bind
things. Related: Bindlestiff.


bine (n.)

climbing stem, flexible shoot of a shrub, 1727, from a dialectal form of bind (n.).


bing (n.)

heap or pile, 1510s, from Old Norse bingr heap. Also used from early 14c. as a word for bin, perhaps
from notion of place where things are piled.


binge (n.)

1854, drinking bout, also (v.) drink heavily, soak up alcohol; dialectal use of binge soak (a wooden
vessel). Noted originally as a Northampton dialect word. Sense extended c. World War I to include
eating as well as drinking. Related: Binged; binging.


bingo (n.)

lotto-like game of chance, 1936; many theories about its origin, none satisfying; the most likely is
bingo! as an exclamation of sudden realization or surprise (attested from 1923). Uncertain
connection to the slang word for brandy (1690s); attested as liquor in American English, 1861.
Thomas Chandler Haliburton (Sam Slick) in The Americans at Home (1854) recounts a story of a
drinking game in which the children's song about the farmer's dog was sung and when it came time to
spell out the name, every participant had to take a letter in turn, and anyone who missed or flubbed
had to drink.


binnacle (n.)

wooden box for a ship's compass, c.1750, corruption of bittacle (1620s), which is probably from
Spanish bitacula or Portuguese bitacola, both from Latin habitaculum little dwelling place, from
habitare to inhabit (see habit).


binocle (n.)

1690s, from French binocle (17c.), from Latin bini- two by two, twofold, two apiece (see binary) +
oculus eye (see eye (n.)).


binocular (adj.)

1738, involving both eyes, earlier having two eyes (1713), from French binoculaire, from Latin bini
two by two, twofold, two apiece (see binary) + ocularis of the eye, from oculus eye (see eye (n.)).
The double-tubed telescopic instrument (1871, short for binocular glass) earlier was called a
binocle. Related: Binocularity.


binoculars (n.)

1866; see binocular. Earlier binocle (1690s).


binomial

1550s (n.); 1560s (adj.), from Late Latin binomius having two personal names, a hybrid from bi- (see
bi-) + nomius, from nomen (see name (n.)). Taken up 16c. in the algebraic sense consisting of two
terms.


bint (n.)

girlfriend, 1855, British English, from Arabic bint daughter; adopted by British servicemen in the
Middle East.


bio (n.)

short for biography, attested from 1961.


bio-

word-forming element, from Greek bio-, comb. form of bios one's life, course or way of living,
lifetime (as opposed to zoe animal life, organic life), from PIE root *gweie- (1) to live (cognates:
Sanskrit jivah alive, living; Old Persian *jivaka- alive, Middle Persian zhiwak alive; Old English
cwic, cwicu living, alive; Latin vivus living, alive, vita life; Old Church Slavonic zivo to live;
Lithuanian gyvas living, alive, gyvata (eternal) life; Old Irish bethu life, bith age; Welsh byd
world). The correct usage is that in biography, but in modern science it has been extended to mean
organic life.


biocentric (adj.)

also bio-centric, 1889, from bio- + -centric. Anti-biocentric attested from 1882.


biochemical (adj.)

also bio-chemical, 1851, after German biochemisch, from bio- + chemical. Related: Biochemically.


biochemist (n.)

also bio-chemist, 1897; see bio- + chemist.


biochemistry (n.)

also bio-chemistry, 1857, from bio- + chemistry.


biocide (n.)

destruction of living tissue or living species, 1947, from bio- + -cide.


biodegradable (adj.)

also bio-degradable, 1960, from bio- + degrade + -able.


biodiesel (n.)

also bio-diesel, 1992, from bio- + diesel.


biodiversity (n.)

also bio-diversity, by 1988, from bio- + diversity.


bioethics (n.)

also bio-ethics, coined 1970 by U.S. biochemist Van Rensselaer Potter II (1911-2001), who defined it
as Biology combined with diverse humanistic knowledge forging a science that sets a system of
medical and environmental priorities for acceptable survival. From bio- + ethics.


biofeedback (n.)

also bio-feedback, 1969, from bio- + feedback. Said to have been coined by U.S. psychologist and
parapsychologist Gardner Murphy (1890-1975).


biofuel (n.)

also bio-fuel, by 1984, from bio- + fuel (n.).


biogenesis (n.)

also bio-genesis, 1870, theory that living organisms arise only from pre-existing living matter,
coined by English biologist T.H. Huxley (1825-1895) from Greek bios life (see bio-) + genesis
(q.v.). Related: Biogenetic; biogenetical.


biogenic (adj.)

1904, with reference to Haeckel's recapitulation theory; 1913 as produced by living organisms, from
bio- + genic produced by (see genus).


biogeny (n.)

1870, biogenesis; see biogenic. As history of the evolution of an organism, 1879.


biogeography (n.)

also bio-geography, 1892, from bio- + geography. Related: Biogeographical.


biographer (n.)

1715; see biography + -er (1). Earlier was biographist (1660s).    Of every great and eminent
character, part breaks forth into public view, and part lies hid in domestic privacy. Those
qualities which have been exerted in any known and lasting performances may, at any distance of
time, be traced and estimated; but silent excellencies are soon forgotten; and those minute
peculiarities which discriminate every man from all others, if the are not recorded by those whom
personal knowledge enabled to observe them, are irrecoverably lost. [Johnson, Life of Sir Thomas
Browne, 1756]


biographical (adj.)

1738; see biography + -ical. Related: Biographically.


biography (n.)

1680s, probably from Latin biographia, from Late Greek biographia description of life, from Greek
bio- life (see bio-) + graphia record, account (see -graphy). Biographia was not in classical Greek
(bios alone was the word for it), though it is attested in later Greek from c.500.


biohazard (n.)

also bio-hazard, 1973, from bio- + hazard (n.).


biological (adj.)

1840, from biology + -ical. Biological clock attested from 1955; not especially of human
reproductive urges until c.1991. Related: Biologically.


biologist (n.)

1813, from biology + -ist. Earliest use is in reference to human life. In modern scientific sense,
by 1874.


biology (n.)

1819, from Greek bios life (see bio-) + -logy. Suggested 1802 by German naturalist Gottfried
Reinhold Treviranus (1776-1837), and introduced as a scientific term that year in French by Lamarck.


bioluminescence (n.)

also bio-luminescence, 1909; see bio- + luminescence.


bioluminescent (adj.)

also bio-luminescent, 1929; see bioluminescence.


biomass (n.)

also bio-mass, c.1980, from bio- + mass (n.1).


biome (n.)

1908, from Greek bios (see bio-) + -ome.


biomechanics (n.)

also bio-mechanics, 1933, study of the action of forces on the body, from bio- + mechanic (also see
-ics). Earlier (1924) as a term in Russian theater, from Russian biomekhanika (1921).


biomedical (adj.)

also bio-medical, 1961, from bio- + medical.


biometric (adj.)

1888, from bio- + -metric.


biometrics (n.)

application of mathematics to biology, 1902, from biometric (also see -ics); slightly earlier in
this sense was biometry (1901), which was coined by Whewell and used by him and others with a sense
of calculation of life expectancy (1831).


biometry (n.)

see biometrics.


biomorphic (adj.)

1895, from bio- + Greek morphe form (see Morpheus) + -ic.


bionic (adj.)

1901, as a term in the study of fossils, from Greek. bios life (see bio-). Meaning pertaining to
bionics is recorded from 1963. Popular sense of superhumanly gifted or durable is from 1976, from
popular U.S. television program The Bionic Man and its spin-offs.


bionics (n.)

1959, from bio- + second element from electronic; also see -ics.


bionomics (n.)

science of organic evolution; ecology, 1888, coined by Scottish biologist Patrick Geddes (1854-1932)
from Greek bio- (see bio-) + nomos managing, from nemein manage (see numismatic).


biopic (n.)

also bio-pic, 1951, from biographical + (moving) picture. Frequent from mid-1951 in Billboard and
possibly coined there.


biopsy (n.)

1895, from French biopsie, coined by French dermatologist Ernest Besnier (1831-1909) from Greek bi-
comb. form of bios life (see bio-) + opsis a sight (see eye (n.)). As a verb, from 1964.


biorhythm (n.)

also bio-rhythm, 1960, from bio- + rhythm. Related: Biorhythmic.


biosphere (n.)

1899, on model of German Biosph&auml;re (1875), coined by German geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914);
see bio- + sphere.


biota (n.)

1901, from Greek biota life (see bio-).


biotechnology (n.)

also bio-technology, 1947, use of machinery in relation to human needs; 1972 in sense of use of
biological processes in industrial production, from bio- + technology.


bioterrorism (n.)

also bio-terrorism, by 1997, from bio- + terrorism. Related: Bioterrorist.


biotic (adj.)

pertaining to life, 1847, in the medical sense, from Latin bioticus, from Greek biotikos pertaining
to life, from bios life (see bio-). Biotic factor was in use by 1907. Related: Biotical.


biotin (n.)

vitamin of the B group (also sometimes called vitamin H) essential for the growth of yeast, 1936,
from German Biotin (1936), from Greek biotos life (see bio-) + chemical suffix -in (2).


biparous (adj.)

bringing forth two at birth, 1731, from bi- + Latin -parus, from parere bring forth, bear (see
pare).


bipartisan (adj.)

also bi-partisan, 1894, from bi- + partisan.


bipartisanship (n.)

also bi-partisanship, 1895, from bipartisan + -ship.


bipartite (adj.)

1570s, from Latin bipartitus divided, past participle of bipartire to divide into two parts, from
bi- (see bi-) + partitus, past participle of partiri to divide (see part (v.)).


biped (n.)

animal with two feet, 1640s, from Latin bipedem (nominative bipes) two-footed, as a plural noun,
men; from bi- two (see bi-) + pedem (nominative pes) foot (see foot (n.)).


bipedal (adj.)

c.1600, from biped + -al (1). Classical Latin bipedalis meant two feet long or thick.


bipedalism (n.)

1897; see bipedal + -ism.


biplane (n.)

airplane with two full wings, one above the other, 1874, as a theoretical notion; first attested
1908 in reference to the real thing; from bi- + plane (n.1). So called from the two planes of the
double wings.


biplicity (n.)

1731; see bi- + ending from multiplicity. A useful and non-pejorative alternative to duplicity.


bipolar (adj.)

having two poles, from bi- + polar; 1810 with figurative sense of of double aspect; 1859 with
reference to physiology. Psychiatric use in reference to what had been called manic-depressive
psychosis is said to have begun 1957 with German psychiatrist Karl Leonhard. The term became popular
early 1990s. Bipolar disorder was in DSM III (1980).


bipolarity (n.)

also bi-polarity, 1834; see bi- + polarity.


bippy (n.)

by 1968, buttocks, ass, U.S. slang, the kind of thing that once sounded naughty on Laugh-In (and
briefly popularized by that program). As it often was used with you bet your ... it may be nonsense
chosen for alliteration, but there may be some whiff of bipedal in it.


biracial (adj.)

also bi-racial, 1904, from bi- + racial. Related: Biracially.


birch (n.)

Old English berc, beorc (also the name of the rune for b), from Proto-Germanic *berkjon (cognates:
Old Saxon birka, Old Norse b&ouml;rk, Danish birk, Swedish bj&ouml;rk, Middle Dutch berke, Dutch
berk, Old High German birihha, German Birke), from PIE *bhergo (cognates: Ossetian barz, Old Church
Slavonic breza, Russian bereza, Lithuanian ber&#382;as, Sanskrit bhurjah, Latin farnus, fraxinus
mountain ash), from root *bhereg- to gleam, white. Meaning bunch of birch twigs used for flogging
(1640s) led to verb meaning to flog (1830). Related: Birched; birching. Birch beer is by 1827,
American English.


birchbark (n.)

1640s, American English, from birch (n.) + bark (n.). Old English had beorcrind.


birchen (adj.)

mid-15c., from birch (n.) + -en (2).


Bircher (n.)

1961, member of the U.S. anti-communist John Birch Society, founded 1958.


bird (n.1)

Old English bird, rare collateral form of bridd, originally young bird, nestling (the usual Old
English for bird being fugol), of uncertain origin with no cognates in any other Germanic language.
The suggestion that it is related by umlaut to brood and breed is rejected by OED as quite
inadmissible. Metathesis of -r- and -i- was complete 15c.    Middle English, in which bird referred
to various young animals and even human beings, may have preserved the original meaning of this
word. Despite its early attestation, bridd is not necessarily the oldest form of bird. It is usually
assumed that -ir- from -ri- arose by metathesis, but here, too, the Middle English form may go back
to an ancient period. [Liberman]    Figurative sense of secret source of information is from 1540s.
Bird dog (n.) attested from 1832, a gun dog used in hunting game birds; hence the verb (1941)
meaning to follow closely. Bird-watching attested from 1897. Bird's-eye view is from 1762. For the
birds recorded from 1944, supposedly in allusion to birds eating from droppings of horses and
cattle.A byrde yn honde ys better than three yn the wode. [c.1530]


bird (n.3)

middle finger held up in a rude gesture, slang derived from 1860s expression give the big bird to
hiss someone like a goose, kept alive in vaudeville slang with sense of to greet someone with boos,
hisses, and catcalls (1922), transferred 1960s to the up yours hand gesture (the rigid finger
representing the hypothetical object to be inserted) on notion of defiance and contempt. Gesture
itself seems to be much older (the human anatomy section of a 12c. Latin bestiary in Cambridge
describes the middle finger as that by means of which the pursuit of dishonour is indicated).


bird (n.2)

maiden, young girl, c.1300, confused with burd (q.v.), but felt by later writers as a figurative use
of bird (n.1). Modern slang meaning young woman is from 1915, and probably arose independently of
the older word.


bird-brain (n.)

also birdbrain, 1936, slang, stupid person, also perhaps suggestive of flightiness, from bird (n.1)
+ brain (n.).


birdbath (n.)

also bird-bath, bird bath, 1862, from bird (n.1) + bath (n.).


birdcage (n.)

also bird-cage, late 15c., from bird (n.1) + cage (n.).


birdie (n.)

little bird, 1792, from bird (n.1) + -ie. As golf slang for a hole played one under par, by 1908,
perhaps from bird (n.) in American English slang sense of exceptionally clever or accomplished
person or thing (1839).


birdlime (n.)

viscous sticky stuff prepared from holly bark and used to catch small birds, mid-15c., from bird
(n.1) + lime (n.1). Used as rhyming slang for time (especially time in prison) by 1857.


birdseed (n.)

1736, from bird (n.1) + seed (n.).


biretta (n.)

square cap worn by Catholic clergy, 1590s, from Italian beretta, from Late Latin birrus, birrum
large cloak with hood; perhaps of Gaulish origin, or from Greek pyrros flame-colored, yellow.


Birmingham

industrial city in central England, 1086, Bermingehame, literally homestead of the place (or people)
named for Beorma, some forgotten Anglo-Saxon person, whose name probably is a shortening of
Beornmund. The Birmingham in Alabama, U.S., was founded 1871 as an industrial center and named for
the English city.


Biro (n.)

proprietary name of a type of ball-point pen, 1947, from L&aacute;szl&oacute; B&iacute;r&oacute;,
the Hungarian inventor. The surname means judge.


birth (n.)

early 13c., from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse *byr&eth;r (replacing cognate Old English
gebyrd birth, descent, race; offspring; nature; fate), from Proto-Germanic *gaburthis (cognates: Old
Frisian berd, Old Saxon giburd, Dutch geboorte, Old High German giburt, German geburt, Gothic
gabaur&thorn;s), from PIE *bhrto past participle of root *bher- (1) to carry; to bear children
(cognates: Sanskrit bhrtih a bringing, maintenance, Latin fors, genitive fortis chance; see bear
(v.)).    Suffix -th is for process (as in bath, death). Meaning parentage, lineage, extraction
(revived from Old English) is from mid-13c. Birth control is from 1914; birth rate from 1859. Birth
certificate is from 1842.


birth (v.)

mid-13c., from birth (n.). Related: Birthed; birthing.


birthday (n.)

late 14c., from Old English byrdd&aelig;g, anniversary celebration of someone's birth (at first
usually a king or saint); see birth (n.) + day. Meaning day on which one is born is from 1570s.
Birthnight is attested from 1620s.


birthday suit (n.)

first attested 1730s, but probably much older. The notion is the suit of clothes one was born in,
i.e., no clothes at all. Compare Middle English mother naked naked as the day one was born; Middle
Dutch moeder naect, German mutternackt.


birthmark (n.)

also birth-mark, by 1805, from birth (n.) + mark (n.1). Birth marks in 17c. could be longing marks;
supposedly they showed the image of something longed for by the mother while expecting. Related:
Birthmarked.


birthplace (n.)

also birth-place, c.1600, from birth (n.) + place (n.).


birthright (n.)

also birth-right, 1530s, from birth (n.) + right (n.). Used as an adjective from 1650s, especially
by Quakers.


birthstone (n.)

1874, from birth (n.) + stone (n.).


bis-

word-forming element meaning twice, from Latin bis twice, in two ways, doubly, from Old Latin dvis,
cognate with Sanskrit dvih, Avestan bish, Greek dis, Middle High German zwis twice, from PIE *dwo-
two (see two). Also the form of bi- used before -s-, -c-, or a vowel.


biscotti (n.)

1990s, from Italian biscotti, plural of biscotto, from Old Italian biscotto, from Medieval Latin
biscoctum (see biscuit).


biscuit (n.)

respelled early 19c. from bisket (16c.), ultimately (besquite, early 14c.) from Old French bescuit
(12c.), literally twice cooked; altered under influence of cognate Old Italian biscotto, both from
Medieval Latin biscoctum, from Latin (panis) bis coctus (bread) twice-baked; see bis- + cook (v.).
U.S. sense of soft bun is recorded from 1818.


bisect (v.)

to cut in two, 1640s, from Modern Latin bisectus, from Latin bi- two (see bi-) + secare to cut (see
section (n.)). Related: Bisected; bisecting.


bisection (n.)

division in two, 1650s, noun of state from bisect. Related: Bisectional.


bisector (n.)

1821; agent noun from bisect.


bisexual (adj.)

1824, having both sexes in one being, hermaphroditic, from bi- + sexual. Meaning attracted to both
sexes is from 1914; the noun in this sense is attested from 1922, and compare bisexuality. Not in
general use until 1950s. Ambisexual was proposed in this sense early 20c.    I suggest that the term
ambisexuality be used in psychology instead of the expression bisexual predisposition. This would
connote that we understand by this predisposition, not the presence of male and female material in
the organism (Fliess), nor of male and female sex hunger in the mind, but the child's psychical
capacity for bestowing his erotism, originally objectless, on either the male or the female sex, or
on both. [S. Ferenczi, Sex in Psycho-Analysis, transl. Ernest Jones, Boston, 1916]


bisexuality (n.)

attraction to both sexes 1892, in translation of Krafft-Ebing; see bisexual + -ity.


bishop (n.)

Old English bisceop bishop, high priest (Jewish or pagan), from Late Latin episcopus, from Greek
episkopos watcher, overseer, a title for various government officials, later taken over in a Church
sense, from epi- over (see epi-) + skopos one that watches, one that looks after; a guardian,
protector (see scope (n.1)). Given a specific sense in the Church, but the word also was used in the
New Testament as a descriptive title for elders, and continues as such in some non-hierarchical
Christian sects.    A curious example of word-change, as effected by the genius of different
tongues, is furnished by the English bishop and the French &#233;v&#234;que. Both are from the same
root, furnishing, perhaps the only example of two words from a common stem so modifying themselves
in historical times as not to have a letter in common. (Of course many words from a far off Aryan
stem are in the same condition.) The English strikes off the initial and terminal syllables, leaving
only piscop, which the Saxon preference for the softer labial and hissing sounds modified into
bishop. &#201;v&#234;que (formerly evesque) merely softens the p into v and drops the last syllable.
[William S. Walsh, Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities, Philadelphia, J.B. Lippincott, 1892]    Late
Latin episcopus in Spanish became obispo. Cognate with Old Saxon biscop, Old High German biscof. The
chess piece (formerly archer, before that alfin) was so called from 1560s.


bishopric (n.)

Old English bisceoprice diocese, province of a bishop, from bishop + rice realm, dominion, province
(see regal).


Bismarck

drink of champagne and stout (also called a black velvet), 1910, named for the German chancellor
(1815-1898), who was said to have been fond of it. The surname is said to be short for Biscofsmark
bishop's boundary.


bismillah

first attested in English in Byron, from Arabic bi'smillah(i) in the name of God (Allah).


bismuth (n.)

1660s, from obsolete German Bismuth, also Wismut, Wissmuth (early 17c.), of unknown origin; perhaps
a miner's contraction of wis mat white mass, from Old High German hwiz white. Latinized 1530 by
Georgius Agricola (who may have been the first to recognize it as an element) as bisemutum.
According to Klein, not from Arabic.


bison (n.)

c.1600, from French bison (15c.), from Latin bison wild ox, borrowed from Proto-Germanic *wisand-
aurochs (cognates: Old Norse visundr, Old High German wisunt bison, Old English/Middle English
wesend, which is not attested after c.1400). Possibly ultimately of Baltic or Slavic origin, and
meaning the stinking animal, in reference to its scent while rutting (see weasel). A European wild
ox formerly widespread on the continent, including the British Isles, now surviving on forest
reserves in Lithuania. Applied 1690s to the North American species commonly mis-called a buffalo.


bisque (n.1)

soup, 1640s, bisk, from French bisque crayfish soup (17c.), said to be an altered form of Biscaye
Biscay. Gamillscheg says: Volkst&uuml;mliche Entlehnung aus norm. bisque 'schlechtes Getr&auml;nk.'
Modern form in English from 1731.


bisque (n.2)

unglazed porcelain, 1660s, alteration of biscuit.


bissextile

1580s (n.); 1590s (adj.), in reference to Roman leap year, from Late Latin (annus) bissextilis leap
year, literally the twice sixth-day, because the sixth day before the Calends of March was doubled.


bistro (n.)

1906, from French bistro (1884), originally Parisian slang for little wineshop or restaurant, of
unknown origin. Commonly said to be from Russian bee-stra quickly, picked up during the Allied
occupation of Paris in 1815 after the defeat of Napoleon; but this, however quaint, is unlikely.
Another guess is that it is from bistraud a little shepherd, a word of the Poitou dialect, from
biste goat.


bit (n.1)

small piece, c.1200; related Old English bite act of biting, and bita piece bitten off, probably are
the source of the modern words meaning boring-piece of a drill (1590s), mouthpiece of a horse's
bridle (mid-14c.), and a piece bitten off, morsel (c.1000). All from Proto-Germanic *biton
(cognates: Old Saxon biti, Old Norse bit, Old Frisian bite, Middle Dutch bete, Old High German bizzo
biting, German Bissen a bite, morsel), from PIE root *bheid- to split (see fissure).    Meaning
small piece, fragment is from c.1600. Sense of short space of time is 1650s. Theatrical bit part is
from 1909. Money sense in two bits, etc. is originally from Southern U.S. and West Indies, in
reference to silver wedges cut or stamped from Spanish dollars (later Mexican reals); transferred to
eighth of a dollar.


bit (n.2)

computerese word, 1948 abbreviation coined by U.S. computer pioneer John W. Tukey (1915-2000) of
binary digit, probably chosen for its identity with bit (n.1).


bit (v.)

past tense of bite.


bitch (n.)

Old English bicce female dog, probably from Old Norse bikkjuna female of the dog (also fox, wolf,
and occasionally other beasts), of unknown origin. Grimm derives the Old Norse word from Lapp
pittja, but OED notes that the converse is equally possible. As a term of contempt applied to women,
it dates from c.1400; of a man, c.1500, playfully, in the sense of dog. Used among male homosexuals
from 1930s. In modern (1990s, originally black English) slang, its use with reference to a man is
sexually contemptuous, from the woman insult.BITCH. A she dog, or doggess; the most offensive
appellation that can be given to an English woman, even more provoking than that of whore.
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811] Bitch goddess coined 1906 by William James; the original one
was success.


bitch (v.)

to complain, attested at least from 1930, perhaps from the sense in bitchy, perhaps influenced by
the verb meaning to bungle, spoil, which is recorded from 1823. But bitched in this sense seems to
echo Middle English bicched cursed, bad, a general term of opprobrium (as in Chaucer's bicched bones
unlucky dice), which despite the hesitation of OED, seems to be a derivative of bitch (n.).


bitching (adj.)

also bitchen, good, teen/surfer slang attested from 1950s, apparently from bitch (v.) in some
inverted sense. Meaning complaining is by 1945, U.S. armed services.


bitchy (adj.)

1925, U.S. slang, sexually provocative; later (1930s) spiteful, catty, bad-tempered (usually of
females); from bitch + -y (2). Earlier in reference to male dogs though to look less rough or coarse
than usual.    Mr. Ramsay says we would now call the old dogs bitchy in face. That is because the
Englishmen have gone in for the wrong sort of forefaces in their dogs, beginning with the days when
Meersbrook Bristles and his type swept the judges off their feet and whiskers and an exaggerated
face were called for in other varieties of terriers besides the wire haired fox. [James Watson, The
Dog Book, New York, 1906]    Related: Bitchily; bitchiness.


bite (v.)

Old English bitan (class I strong verb; past tense bat, past participle biten), from Proto-Germanic
*bitan (cognates: Old Saxon bitan, Old Norse and Old Frisian bita, Middle Dutch biten, Dutch bijten,
German beissen, Gothic beitan to bite), from PIE root *bheid- to split, crack (see fissure).    To
bite the bullet is said to be 1700s military slang, from old medical custom of having the patient
bite a lead bullet during an operation to divert attention from pain and reduce screaming.
Figurative use from 1891; the custom itself attested from 1840s. To bite (one's) tongue refrain from
speaking is 1590s. To bite the dust die is 1750 (Latin had the same image; compare Virgil's
procubuit moriens et humum semel ore momordit). To bite off more than one can chew (c.1880) is U.S.
slang, from plug tobacco.


bite (n.)

c.1200, from bite (v).


bitmap (n.)

1973, in computer jargon, from bit (n.2) + map. Literally, a map of bits.


bitsy (adj.)

1883, from plural of bit (n.1) or a variant of bitty.


bitten

past participle of bite.


bitter (adj.)

Old English biter bitter, sharp, cutting; angry, embittered; cruel, from Proto-Germanic *bitras-
(cognates: Old Saxon bittar, Old Norse bitr, Dutch bitter, Old High German bittar, German bitter,
Gothic baitrs bitter), from PIE root *bheid- to split (cognates: Old English bitan to bite; see bite
(v.)). Evidently the meaning drifted in prehistoric times from biting, of pungent taste, to acrid-
tasting. Used figuratively in Old English of states of mind and words. Related: Bitterly.


bitter end (n.)

In lexicons of sea language going back to 1759, the bitter end is the part of a cable which is round
about the bits (two great timbers used to belay cables) when the ship is at anchor.   Bitter end of
the Cable, the End which is wound about the Bitts. [The News-Readers Pocket-Book: Or, a Military
Dictionary, London, 1759]    See bit (n.1). So, when a cable is played out to the bitter end, there
is no more left to play. The term began to be used c.1835 in non-nautical use and with probable
influence of bitter (adj.).


bittern (n.)

heron-like bird, 13c., botor, from Old French butor bittern, perhaps from Gallo-Roman *butitaurus,
from Latin butionem bittern + taurus bull (see steer (n.)); according to Pliny, so called because of
its booming voice, but this seems fanciful. Modern form from 1510s.


bitterness (n.)

Old English biternys bitterness, grief; see bitter + -ness. Figurative sense (of feelings, etc.) is
attested earlier than literal sense (of taste), which will surprise no one who reads any amount of
Anglo-Saxon literature.


bitters (n.)

1713, from bitter. So called for its taste.


bittersweet

also bitter-sweet, late 14c. as a noun; used especially in Middle English of a type of apple, from
bitter (adj.) + sweet (adj.). As an adjective, attested from 1610s.


BitTorrent

peer-to-peer file sharing protocol, implemented in 2001, from bit (n.2) in the computing sense +
torrent.


bitty (adj.)

1892, made of little scraps, from bit (n.1) + -y (2). As a clipped variant of bitsy, recorded from
1905, American English.


bitumen (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin bitumen asphalt, probably, via Oscan or Umbrian, from  Celtic *betu- birch,
birch resin (compare Gaulish betulla birch, used by Pliny for the tree supposedly the source of
bitumen).


bituminous (adj.)

1610s, from French bitumineux, from Latin bituminosus, from bitumen (see bitumen).    The Plain,
wherein a black bituminous gurge Boiles out from under ground, the mouth of Hell. [Paradise Lost,
XII.41]


bivalence (n.)

1868; see bivalent + -ence.


bivalency (n.)

1872; see bivalent + -ency.


bivalent (adj.)

1864, of chemicals, 1899, of chromosomes, from bi- + -valent, from Latin valentem, present
participle of valere be worth (see valiant).


bivalve (adj.)

1660s in reference to mollusks with double shells; 1670s in reference to shutters or doors; from bi-
+ valve. The noun is 1680s in the mollusk sense.


bivariate (adj.)

also bi-variate, involving two variables, 1906, from bi- + -variate, from Latin variatio (see
variation).


bivouac (n.)

1702, from French bivouac (17c.), ultimately from Swiss/Alsatian biwacht night guard, from bei-
double, additional + wacht guard (see wait (v.)). Original meaning was an army that stayed up on
night watch; sense of outdoor camp is 1853. Not a common word in English before the Napoleonic Wars.
Italian bivacco is from French. As a verb, 1809, to post troops in the night; meaning camp out of
doors is from 1814.


biweekly (adj.)

also bi-weekly, 1865, from bi- + weekly. The sense twice a week is the first attested, but that of
every two weeks is equally implied.


biz (n.)

1862, American English, colloquial and phonetic shortening of business.


bizarre (adj.)

1640s, from French bizarre odd, fantastic (16c.), originally handsome, brave, perhaps from Basque
bizar a beard (the notion being of bearded Spanish soldiers making a strange impression on the
French); alternative etymology traces it to Italian bizarro angry, fierce, irascible, from bizza fit
of anger.


bize

obsolete form of bice.


blab (v.)

mid-15c., apparently from Middle English noun blabbe one who does not control his tongue (late
13c.), probably echoic. Related: Blabbed; blabbing. The exact relationship between the blabs and
blabber is difficult to determine. The noun was [e]xceedingly common in 16th and 17th c.; unusual in
literature since c 1750 [OED].


blabber (v.)

mid-14c., to speak as an infant speaks, frequentative of blabben, of echoic origin (compare Old
Norse blabbra, Danish blabbre babble, German plappern to babble). Meaning to talk excessively is
from late 14c. Related: Blabbered; blabbering.


blabbermouth (n.)

1931, from blabber + mouth (n.).


black (adj.)

Old English bl&aelig;c dark, from Proto-Germanic *blakaz burned (cognates: Old Norse blakkr dark,
Old High German blah black, Swedish bl&auml;ck ink, Dutch blaken to burn), from PIE *bhleg- to burn,
gleam, shine, flash (cognates: Greek phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin flagrare to blaze, glow, burn),
from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.).    The same root produced Old English
blac bright, shining, glittering, pale; the connecting notions being, perhaps, fire (bright) and
burned (dark). The usual Old English word for black was sweart (see swart). According to OED: In ME.
it is often doubtful whether blac, blak, blake, means 'black, dark,' or 'pale, colourless, wan,
livid.'  Used of dark-skinned people in Old English.    Of coffee, first attested 1796. Meaning
fierce, terrible, wicked is late 14c. The color of sin and sorrow since at least c.1300; sense of
with dark purposes, malignant emerged 1580s (as in black magic). Black face in reference to a
performance style originated in U.S., is from 1868. Black flag, flown (especially by pirates) as a
signal of no mercy, from 1590s. Black dog melancholy attested from 1826. Black belt is from 1875 in
reference to districts of the U.S. South with heaviest African population; 1870 with reference to
fertility of soil; 1913 in judo sense. Black power is from 1966, associated with Stokely Carmichael.


black (v.)

c.1200, to become black; early 14c., to make black, darken; from black (adj.). Related: Blacked;
blacking.


black (n.)

Old English bl&aelig;c the color black, also ink, from noun use of black (adj.). From late 14c. as
dark spot in the pupil of the eye. The meaning black person, African is from 1620s (perhaps late
13c., and blackamoor is from 1540s). To be in the black (1922) is from the accounting practice of
recording credits and balances in black ink.    For years it has been a common practice to use red
ink instead of black in showing a loss or deficit on corporate books, but not until the heavy losses
of 1921 did the contrast in colors come to have a widely understood meaning. [Saturday Evening Post,
July 22, 1922]


black box (n.)

1947, RAF slang for navigational instruments; later extended to any sort of apparatus that operates
in a sealed container. Especially of flight recorders from c.1964.


black code (n.)

local or state legal restrictions on black persons, free or slave; attested by 1840, American
English, though the thing itself is much older.


black comedy (n.)

first recorded 1961, from black (adj.) in a figurative sense of morbid; compare French pi&egrave;ce
noire. In a racial sense, from 1921.


Black Death (n.)

bubonic/pneumonic plague epidemic of 1347-51 in Europe, a modern name, introduced in English 1823 by
Elizabeth Penrose's history of England. The contemporary name for it in most languages was something
like the great dying or simply the plague (or, looking back after its return, the first pestilence).
The term Black Death first turns up in 16c. Swedish and Danish chronicles, but in reference to a
visitation of plague in Iceland in 1402-3 that carried off much of the population there (which had
been spared in the earlier outbreak). The exact sense of black is not clear. The term appears in
English translations of the Scandinavian works from 1750s. It was picked up in German c.1770 and
applied to the earlier outbreak, and taken from there into English in that sense.


black dwarf (n.)

in astrophysics, a kind of dead and lightless star, 1966.


Black English (n.)

English as spoken by African-Americans, by 1969.


black eye (n.)

discoloration around the eye from injury c.1600, from black (adj.) + eye (n.). Figurative sense of
injury to pride, rebuff is by 1744; that of bad reputation is from 1880s. In reference to dark eyes,
often as a mark of beauty, from 1660s. Black-eyed, of peas, attested from 1728. The black-eyed Susan
as a flower (various species) so called from 1881, for its appearance. It also was the title of a
poem by John Gay (1685-1732), which led to a popular British stage play of the same name in the mid-
19c.    All in the Downs the fleet was moored,  The streamers waving in the wind,  When black-eyed
Susan came aboard,    Oh! where shall I my true love find?  Tell me, ye jovial sailors, tell me
true,    If my sweet William sails among the crew?


black friar (n.)

Dominican, c.1500, so called from the color of their dress.


Black Hand (n.)

Italian immigrant secret society in U.S., 1904; earlier a Spanish anarchist society, both from the
warning mark they displayed to potential victims.


Black Hills

South Dakota landform, translating Lakhota pah&aacute;-sapa; supposedly so called because their
densely forested flanks look dark from a distance.


black hole (n.)

in astrophysics, 1968, probably with awareness of Black Hole of Calcutta, incident of June 19, 1756,
in which 146 British POWs taken by the Nawab of Bengal after the capture of Ft. William, Calcutta,
were held overnight in punishment cell of the barracks (meant to hold 4 people) and all but 23
perished.


black letter

early 17c., from black (adj.); so called to distinguish heavy, old-style printers' types from the
ones coming into use then, which are the dominant modern forms, though a style of black letter was
preserved in German into 20c.


black market (n.)

1931, from black + market.


Black Panther

1965, the movement an outgrowth of Student Nonviolent Co-ordinating Committee.


Black Sea

see Euxine.


black sheep (n.)

by 1822 in figurative sense of member of some group guilty of offensive conduct and unlike the other
members, supposedly because a real black sheep had wool that could not be dyed and was thus worth
less. But one black sheep in a flock was considered good luck by shepherds in Sussex, Somerset,
Kent, Derbyshire. Baa Baa Black Sheep nursery rhyme's first known publication is in Tommy Thumb's
Pretty Song Book (c.1744).


Black Shirt

1922, member of Fasci di Combattimento, Italian paramilitary unit founded 1919 by Mussolini; so
called for their uniforms.


black widow (n.)

type of poisonous spider (Latrodectus mactans) in U.S. South, 1904, so called from its color and
from the female's supposed habit of eating the male after mating (they are cannibalistic, but this
particular behavior is rare in the wild). Sometimes also known as shoe-button spider. The name black
widow is attested earlier (1830s) as a translation of a name of the scorpion spider of Central Asia.


Blackamoor (n.)

dark-skinned person, 1540s, from black (adj.) + Moor, with connecting element.


blackball (v.)

also black-ball, to exclude from a club by adverse votes, 1770, from black (adj.) + ball (n.1).
Black balls of wood or ivory dropped into an urn during secret ballots.


blackberry (n.)

early 12c., from Old English blaceberian, from black (adj.) + berry. Also in Old English as
bremelberie, bremel&aelig;ppel (from bramble). The wireless handheld device of the same name
introduced 1999.


blackbird (n.)

late 15c. (late 13c. as a surname), from black (adj.) + bird (n.1). OED says so called for being the
only black (really dark brown) bird among the songbirds, reflecting an older sense of bird that did
not include rooks, crows, ravens.


blackboard (n.)

1823, from black + board (n.1). Blackboard jungle inner-city school rife with juvenile delinquency
is from Evan Hunter's novel title (1954).


blacken (v.)

c.1200, become black or dark; early 14c., make black, darken, dye (hair); see black + -en (1).
Figurative sense of to besmirch (with dishonor, etc.) is from early 15c. Related: Blackened;
blackening.


blackguard (n.)

1530s, scullion, kitchen knave. Perhaps once an actual military or guard unit; more likely
originally a mock-military reference to scullions and kitchen-knaves of noble households, of black-
liveried personal guards, and of shoeblacks. By 1736, sense had emerged of one of the criminal
class. Hence the adjectival use (1784), of low or worthless character.


blackhead (n.)

comedo, 1837, from black (adj.) + head (n.). So called for its appearance.


blackie (n.)

also blacky, a black person, 1815, from black (adj.) + -y (3).


blacking (n.)

thing which makes (something else) black, 1570s; as action of making black, c.1600, verbal noun from
black (v.).


blackish (adj.)

mid-15c., from black (adj.) + -ish.


blackjack (n.)

used in many senses since 16c., earliest is possibly tar-coated leather jug for beer (1590s), from
black (adj.) + jack in any of its many slang senses. The weapon so called from 1889; the card game
by 1900.


blackleg (n.)

swindler, especially in equestrian events, 1771, from black (adj.) + leg (n.), but the exact
signification is uncertain.


blacklist (n.)

also black-list, black list, list of persons who have incurred suspicion, 1610s, from black (adj.),
here indicative of disgrace, censure, punishment (attested from 1590s, in black book) + list (n.).
Specifically of employers' list of workers considered troublesome (usually for union activity) is
from 1888. As a verb, from 1718. Related: Blacklisted; blacklisting.


blackly (adv.)

1560s, from black (adj.) + -ly (2).


blackmail (n.)

1550s, from black (adj.) + Middle English male rent, tribute, from Old English mal lawsuit, terms,
bargaining, agreement, from Old Norse mal speech, agreement; related to Old English m&aelig;&eth;el
meeting, council, m&aelig;l speech, Gothic ma&thorn;l meeting place, from Proto-Germanic *mathla-,
from PIE *mod- to meet, assemble (see meet (v.)). From the practice of freebooting clan chieftains
who ran protection rackets against Scottish farmers. Black from the evil of the practice. Expanded
c.1826 to any type of extortion money. Compare silver mail rent paid in money (1590s); buttock-mail
(Scottish, 1530s) fine imposed for fornication.


blackmail (v.)

1852, from blackmail (n.). Related: Blackmailed; blackmailing.


blackness (n.)

late 14c., from black (adj.) + -ness.


blackout (n.)

also black-out, 1908 in the theatrical sense of a darkened stage, from black + out. Figurative sense
of loss of memory is 1934 (verb and noun); as a dousing of lights as an air raid precaution, it is
recorded from 1935. Verbal phrase black out, in reference to printed or written matter deemed
objectionable and covered in black ink, is attested from 1888.


blacksmith (n.)

late 15c. (mid-13c. as a surname), from black + smith (n.). Listed in royal ordinance (along with
bladesmiths, spurriers and goldbeaters). Those who work in heated, heavy metals as opposed to those
who beat gold, tin, or pewter (whitesmith).


blacktop (n.)

road resurfacing material, 1931, American English, from black (adj.) + top (n.1).


bladder (n.)

Old English bl&aelig;dre (West Saxon), bledre (Anglian) (urinary) bladder, also blister, pimple,
from Proto-Germanic *blaedron (cognates: Old Norse bla&eth;ra, Old Saxon bladara, Old High German
blattara, German Blatter, Dutch blaar), from PIE *bhle- to blow (see blast). Extended senses from
early 13c. from animal bladders used for buoyancy, storage, etc.


blade (n.)

Old English bl&aelig;d a leaf, but also a leaf-like part (of spade, oar, etc.), from Proto-Germanic
*bladaz (cognates: Old Frisian bled leaf, German blatt, Old Saxon, Danish, Dutch blad, Old Norse
bla&eth;), from PIE *bhle-to-, suffixed form (past participle) of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom,
possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see bole). Extended in Middle English to
shoulders (c.1300) and swords (early 14c.). The modern use in reference to grass may be a Middle
English revival, by influence of Old French bled corn, wheat (11c., perhaps from Germanic). The
cognate in German, Blatt, is the general word for leaf; Laub is used collectively as foliage. Old
Norse bla&eth; was used of herbs and plants, lauf in reference to trees. This might have been the
original distinction in Old English, too. Of men from 1590s; in later use often a reference to 18c.
gallants, but the original exact sense, and thus signification, is uncertain.


blah (n.)

idle, meaningless talk, 1918, probably echoic; the adjective meaning bland, dull is from 1919,
perhaps influenced by French blas&eacute; bored, indifferent. The blahs depression is attested by
1966.


blain (n.)

Old English blegen a sore, from Proto-Germanic *blajinon a swelling (cognates: Danish blegn, Dutch
blein), from PIE *bhlei- to swell, from root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell; see bole.


blaise

Scottish variant of blaze.


blame (v.)

c.1200, find fault with; c.1300, lay blame on, from Old French blasmer (12c., Modern French
bl&acirc;mer) to rebuke, reprimand, condemn, criticize, from Vulgar Latin *blastemare, from Late
Latin blasphemare revile, reproach (see blaspheme). Replaced Old English witan with long i. Related:
Blamed; blaming.


blame (n.)

early 13c., from Old French blasme blame, reproach; condemnation, a back-formation from blasmer (see
blame (v.)).


blamed (adv.)

confoundedly 1833, later also as an adjective, from past participle of blame (v.), as a euphemistic
evasion of the horrible word damn. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848].    This adjective
'blamed' is the virtuous oath by which simple people, who are improving their habits, cure
themselves of a stronger epithet. [Edward Everett Hale, If, Yes, and Perhaps, 1868]    Compare also
blamenation (1837) as an expletive. The imprecation blame me is attested from 1830.


blameless (adj.)

late 14c., from blame (n.) + -less. Related: Blamelessly; blamelessness. Seldom-used blameful is
recorded from late 14c.


blameworthy (adj.)

also blame-worthy, late 14c., from blame (n.) + worthy (adj.). Related: Blameworthiness.


blanch (v.1)

c.1400, transitive, to make white, turn pale, from Old French blanchir to whiten, wash, from blanc
white (11c.; see blank (adj.)). Originally to remove the hull of (almonds, etc.) by soaking.
Intransitive sense of to turn white is from 1768. Related: Blanched; blanching.


blanch (v.2)

to start back, turn aside, 1570s, variant of blench. Related: Blanched; blanching.


Blanche

fem. proper name, from French Blanche, from Old French blanc white, of Germanic origin (see blank
(adj.)). A fairly popular name for girls born in the U.S. from about 1880 to 1900.


blancmange (n.)

late 14c., from Old French blancmengier (13c.), literally white eating, originally a dish of fowl
minced with cream, rice, almonds, sugar, eggs, etc.; from blanc white (also used in Old French of
white foods, such as eggs, cream, also white meats such as veal and chicken; see blank (adj.)) +
mangier to eat (see manger).


bland (adj.)

1660s, from Italian blando delicate, or Old French bland flattering, complimentary, both from Latin
blandus smooth-talking, flattering, alluring, perhaps from PIE *mlad-, nasalized variant of *meld-,
extended form of root *mel- (see melt). Related: Blandly; blandness. Latin also had
blandiloquentulus flattering in speech, which might have yielded a useful English *blandiloquent.


blandish (v.)

c.1300, from Old French blandiss-, present participle stem of blandir to flatter, caress, from Latin
blandiri flatter, soothe, caress, coax, from blandus (see bland). OED reports it rare in 17c., 18c.
Related: Blandished; blandishing.


blandishment (n.)

flattering speech, 1590s, from blandish + -ment. Sense of attraction, allurement (often
blandishments) is from 1590s.


blank (adj.)

early 13c., white, pale, colorless, from Old French blanc white, shining, from Frankish *blank
white, gleaming, or some other West Germanic source (compare Old Norse blakkr, Old English blanca
white horse; Old High German blanc, blanch; German blank shining, bright), from Proto-Germanic
*blangkaz to shine, dazzle, extended form of PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach
(v.)).    Meaning having empty spaces evolved c.1400. Sense of void of expression (a blank look) is
from 1550s. Spanish blanco, Italian bianco are said to be from Germanic. Related: Blankly,
blankness.


blank (n.)

late 14c. as the name of a small French coin; 1550s as white space in the center of a target, from
the same source as blank (adj.). Meaning empty space (in a document, etc.) is from c.1570. Meaning
losing lottery ticket (1560s) is behind the expression draw a blank. The word has been for decorum's
sake, substituted for a word of execration [OED] from 1854. From 1896 as short for blank cartridge
(itself from 1826).


blank (v.)

1540s, to nonplus, disconcert, shut up; 1560s, to frustrate, from blank (adj.). Sports sense of
defeat (another team) without allowing a score is from 1870. Meaning to become blank or empty is
from 1955. Related: Blanked; blanking.


blank verse (n.)

1580s; the thing itself is attested in English poetry from mid-16c. and is classical in origin.


blanket (n.)

c.1300, bed-clothing; white woolen stuff, from Old French blanchet light wool or flannel cloth; an
article made of this material, diminutive of blanc white (see blank (adj.), which had a secondary
sense of a white cloth. Wet blanket (1830) is from the notion of a person who throws a damper on
social situations like a wet blanket smothers a fire. In U.S. history, a blanket Indian (1859) was
one using the traditional garment instead of wearing Western dress.    Only 26,000 blanket Indians
are left in the United States. [Atlantic Monthly, March 1906]


blanket (v.)

c.1600, to cover with or as with a blanket; also to toss in a blanket (as punishment), from blanket
(n.). Related: Blanketed; blanketing.


blare (v.)

late 14c., bleren to wail, possibly from an unrecorded Old English *bl&aelig;ren, or from Middle
Dutch bleren to bleat, cry, bawl, shout. Probably echoic, either way. Related: Blared; blaring. As a
noun from 1809, from the verb.


blaring (adj.)

mid-15c., from present participle of blare. Of things other than sounds, from 1866.


blarney (n.)

1796, from Blarney Stone (which is said to make a persuasive flatterer of any who kiss it), in a
castle near Cork, Ireland. As Bartlett explains it, the reason is the difficulty of the feat of
kissing the stone where it sits high up in the battlement: to have ascended it, was proof of
perseverence, courage, and agility, whereof many are supposed to claim the honor who never achieved
the adventure. So to have kissed the Blarney Stone came to mean to tell wonderful tales [Dictionary
of Americanisms, 1848]. The word reached wide currency through Lady Blarney, the smooth-talking
flatterer in Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield (1766). As a verb from 1803.


blase (adj.)

bored from overindulgence, 1819, from French blas&eacute;, past participle of blaser to satiate
(17c.), of unknown origin. Perhaps from Dutch blazen to blow (related to English blast), with a
sense of puffed up under the effects of drinking.


blase

see blas&eacute;.


blaspheme (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French blasfemer to blaspheme (14c., Modern French blasph&eacute;mer), from
Church Latin blasphemare (also in Late Latin revile, reproach), from Greek blasphemein to speak
lightly or amiss of sacred things, to slander, from blasphemos evil-speaking (see blasphemy). A
reintroduction after the original word had been worn down and sense-shifted to blame (v.). Related:
Blasphemed; blaspheming.


blasphemous (adj.)

early 15c., blasfemous, from Old French blasfemeus or directly from Late Latin blasphemus, from
blasphemare (see blaspheme).


blasphemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French blasfemie blasphemy, from Late Latin blasphemia, from Greek blasphemia a
speaking ill, impious speech, slander, from blasphemein to speak evil of. Second element is pheme
utterance (see fame); first element uncertain, perhaps related to blaptikos hurtful, though blax
slack (in body and mind), stupid also has been suggested.


blast (n.)

Old English bl&aelig;st blowing, breeze, puff of wind, from Proto-Germanic *bles- (cognates: Old
Norse blastr, Old High German blast a blowing, blast, German blasen, Gothic blesan to blow), from
PIE *bhle- to blow, probably a variant of root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).
Meaning explosion is from 1630s; that of noisy party, good time is from 1953, American English
slang. Sense of strong current of air for iron-smelting (1690s) led to blast furnace and transferred
sense in full blast the extreme (1839). Blast was the usual word for a smoke of tobacco c.1600.


blast (v.)

Old English bl&aelig;stan to blow, belch forth, from the root of blast (n.). Since 16c., often to
breathe on balefully. Meaning to blow up by explosion is from 1758. Related: Blasted; blasting.
Blast off (n.) is attested from 1950.


blasted (adj.)

stricken by malignant forces (natural or supernatural), cursed, blighted, 1550s, from blast (v.),
with the notion of balefully breathed upon. In the sense of cursed, damned it is attested from
1680s. Meaning drunk or stoned dates from 1972 (blast (v.) smoke marijuana attested from 1959).


blastema (n.)

1849, Modern Latin, from Greek blastema offspring, offshoot, from stem of blastanein to shoot forth,
from blastos sprout, germ, of unknown origin. Related: Blastemal.


blasto-

before vowels blast-, word-forming element used in scientific compounds to mean germ, bud, from
Greek blasto-, comb. form of blastos sprout, germ, of unknown origin.


blastocyst (n.)

1876, from blasto- + cyst.


blastula (n.)

embryonic state, 1875, Modern Latin, from Greek blastos sprout, germ + diminutive ending -ula.


blat (v.)

1846, U.S. colloquial, imitative. Related: Blatted; blatting. As a noun from 1904.


blatant (adj.)

1596, in blatant beast, coined by Edmund Spenser in The Faerie Queen to describe a thousand-tongued
monster representing slander; probably suggested by Latin blatire to babble. It entered general use
1650s, as noisy in an offensive and vulgar way; the sense of obvious, glaringly conspicuous is from
1889. Related: Blatantly.


blather (v.)

1520s, Scottish, probably from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse bla&eth;ra mutter, wag the
tongue, perhaps of imitative origin. Related: Blathered; blathering.


blather (n.)

1787, from blather (v.).


blatherskite (n.)

c.1650, bletherskate, in Scottish song Maggie Lauder, which was popular with soldiers in the
Continental Army in the American Revolution, hence the colloquial U.S. use for talkative fellow,
foolish talk, especially in early 19c. From blather (v.) + dialectal skite contemptible person.


blaxploitation (n.)

1972, from black + exploitation.


blaze (n.1)

bright flame, fire, Old English bl&aelig;se a torch, flame, firebrand, lamp, from Proto-Germanic
*blas- shining, white (cognates: Old Saxon blas white, whitish, Middle High German blas bald,
originally white, shining, Old High German blas-ros horse with a white spot, Middle Dutch and Dutch
bles, German Blesse white spot, blass pale, whitish), from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn
(see bleach (v.)).


blaze (n.2)

light-colored mark or spot, 1630s, northern English dialect, probably from Old Norse blesi white
spot on a horse's face (from the same root as blaze (n.1)). A Low German cognate of the Norse word
also has been suggested as the source. Applied 1660s in American English to marks cut on tree trunks
to indicate a track; thus the verb meaning to mark a trail; first recorded 1750, American English.
Related: Blazed; blazing.


blaze (v.2)

make public (often in a bad sense, boastfully), late 14c., perhaps from Middle Dutch blasen to blow
(on a trumpet), from Proto-Germanic *blaes-an (cognates: German blasen, Gothic -blesan), from PIE
*bhle-, variant of root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).


blaze (v.1)

to burn brightly or vigorously, c.1200, from blaze (n.1). Related: Blazed; blazing.


blaze (v.3)

to mark (a tree, a trail), 1750, American English; see blaze (n.2).


blazer (n.)

bright-colored jacket, 1880, British university slang, from blaze (n.1), in reference to the red
flannel jackets worn by the Lady Margaret, St. John College, Cambridge, boating club. Earlier it had
been used in American English in the sense something which attracts attention (1845).


blazes (n.)

euphemism for Hell, 1818, plural of blaze (n.1).


blazing (adj.)

late 14c., shining, also vehement, present participle adjective from blaze (v.1). As a mild or
euphemistic epithet, attested from 1888 (no doubt connected with the blazes in colloquial sense of
Hell).


blazon (n.)

coat of arms, late 13c., from Old French blason (12c.) a shield, blazon, also collar bone; common
Romanic (compare Spanish blason, Italian blasone, Portuguese brasao, Proven&ccedil;al blezo, the
first two said to be French loan-words); of uncertain origin. OED doubts, on grounds of sense, the
connection proposed by 19c. French etymologists to Germanic words related to English blaze (n.1).


blazon (v.)

1560s, to depict or paint (armorial bearings), from blazon (n.) or else from French blasonner.
Earlier as to set forth decriptively (1510s); especially to vaunt or boast (1530s), in this use
probably from or influenced by blaze (v.2).


bleach (v.)

Old English bl&aelig;can bleach, whiten, from Proto-Germanic *blaikjan to make white (cognates: Old
Saxon blek, Old Norse bleikr, Dutch bleek, Old High German bleih, German bleich pale; Old Norse
bleikja, Dutch bleken, German bleichen to bleach), from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn
(cognates: Sanskrit bhrajate shines; Greek phlegein to burn; Latin flamma flame, fulmen lightning,
fulgere to shine, flash, flagrare to burn; Old Church Slavonic belu white; Lithuanian balnas pale).
The same root probably produced black; perhaps because both black and white are colorless, or
because both are associated with burning. Compare Old English scimian, related to the source of
shine (n.), meaning both to shine and to dim, grow dusky, grow dark. Related: Bleached; bleaching.


bleach (n.)

act of bleaching, 1887; a bleaching agent, 1898, probably directly from bleach (v.). The Old English
noun bl&aelig;ce meant leprosy; Late Old English also had bl&aelig;co paleness, and Middle English
had blech whitening or bleaching agent.


bleacher (n.)

1540s, one who bleaches, agent noun from bleach (v.). The bench for spectators at a sports field
sense (usually bleachers) is attested since 1889, American English; so named because the boards were
bleached by the sun.


bleak (adj.)

c.1300, pale, from Old Norse bleikr pale, whitish, blond, from Proto-Germanic *blaika- shining,
white, from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Later bare, windswept
(1530s). Sense of cheerless is c.1719 figurative extension. The same Germanic root produced Old
English blac pale, but this died out, probably from confusion with bl&aelig;c black; however bleak
persisted, with a sense of bare as well as pale.


bleakly (adv.)

1530s, from bleak (adj.) + -ly (2).


bleakness (n.)

c.1600, from bleak + -ness.


blear (adj.)

c.1300, blere watery, rheumy, perhaps related to blur. Compare Middle High German blerre having
blurred vision.


blear (v.)

to dim (of vision); to have watery or rheumy eyes, early 14c., of uncertain origin, possibly from an
Old English *blerian, from the same source as blear (adj.). Related: Bleared; blearing.


bleary (adj.)

late 14c., from blear + -y (2). Related: Blearily; bleariness.


bleat (v.)

Old English bl&aelig;tan, from West Germanic *bhle- (source also of Dutch blaten to bleat), of
imitative origin (compare Greek blekhe a bleating; the wailing of children, Old Church Slavonic
blejat to bleat, Latin flere to weep). Related: Bleated; bleating.


bleat (n.)

c.1500, from bleat (v.).


bleb (n.)

c.1600, blister or swelling, imitative. Also used for bubble (1640s), protuberance on a cell surface
(1962).


bled

past tense and past participle of bleed (v.).


bleed (v.)

Old English bledan to let blood, in Middle English and after, to let blood from surgically; also to
emit blood, from Proto-Germanic *blodjan emit blood (cognates: Old Norse bl&aelig;&eth;a, German
bluten), from *bhlo-to- swell, gush, spurt (see blood (n.)). Meaning extort money from is from
1670s. Of dyes or paints, from 1862. Related: Bled; bleeding.


bleeder (n.)

1756, one who lets blood, agent noun from bleed (v.). As one with hemophilia, from 1803.


bleeding (n.)

late 14c., a flowing out of blood; mid-15c. as a drawing out of blood; verbal noun formed after
earlier present participle adjective (early 13c.) of bleed. Figurative use is from 1796. As a
euphemism for bloody, from 1858. In U.S. history, Bleeding Kansas, in reference to the slavery
disputes in that territory 1854-60, is attested from 1856, said to have been first used by the New
York Tribune.


bleeding heart (n.)

type of flowering plant, so called from 1690s. In the sense of person excessively sympathetic
(especially toward those the speaker deems not to deserve it) is attested by 1951, but said by many
to have been popularized with reference to liberals (especially Eleanor Roosevelt) in 1930s by
newspaper columnist Westbrook Pegler (1894-1969), though quotations are wanting; bleeding in a
figurative sense of generous is from late 16c., and the notion of one's heart bleeding as a figure
of emotional anguish is from late 14c., but the exact image here may be the bleeding heart of Jesus.


bleep (n.)

electronic noise, 1953, imitative.


bleep (v.)

1957, from bleep (n.); specific sense of edit a sound over a word deemed unfit for broadcast is from
1968 (earliest reference seems to be to the Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour on U.S. television).
Related: Bleeped; bleeping.


blemish (v.)

early 14c., to hurt, damage, from Old French blemiss- to turn pale, extended stem of blemir, blesmir
to make pale; stain, discolor, also to injure (13c., Modern French bl&ecirc;mir), probably from
Frankish *blesmjan to cause to turn pale, or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *blas
shining, white, from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)).    The order of
appearance of senses in Middle English is hurt, damage; impair morally, sully (late 14c.); mar,
spoil, injure (early 15c.); to mar the beauty or soundness of (mid-15c.). Related: Blemished;
blemishing.


blemish (n.)

1520s, from blemish (v.).


blench (v.)

Old English blencan deceive, cheat, from Proto-Germanic *blenk- to shine, dazzle, blind, from PIE
root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Sense of move suddenly, wince, dodge is
from c.1300. Related: Blenched; blenching.


blend (v.)

c.1300, blenden, to mix, mingle, stir up a liquid, in northern writers, from or akin to rare Old
English blandan to mix, blondan (Mercian) or Old Norse blanda to mix, or a combination of the two;
from Proto-Germanic *blandan to mix, which comes via a notion of to make cloudy from an extended
Germanic form of the PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.); also blind (adj.)).
Compare Old Saxon and Old High German blantan, Gothic blandan, Middle High German blenden to mix;
German Blendling bastard, mongrel, and outside Germanic, Lithuanian blandus troubled, turbid, thick;
Old Church Slavonic blesti to go astray. Figurative use from early 14c. Related: Blended; blending.


blend (n.)

mixture formed by blending, 1690s, from blend (v.).


blende (n.)

an ore of zinc, 1680s, from German Blende, a back-formation from blenden to blind, deceive (see
blind (adj.)). So called because it resembles lead but does not yield any.


blender (n.)

person or thing that blends, 1872, agent noun from blend (v.). As a type of electric-powered food
processor, from 1942.


blenny (n.)

1774, from Latin blennius (in Pliny), from Greek blennos, from blenna slime, mucus, from PIE *mled-
sno-, from root *mel- soft. The fish so called from the coating on its scales.


blepharoplasty (n.)

1839, from blepharo-, comb. form of Greek blepharon eyelid (related to blepein to look, see) +
-plasty.


bless (v.)

Old English bletsian, bledsian, Northumbrian bloedsian to consecrate, make holy, give thanks, from
Proto-Germanic *blodison hallow with blood, mark with blood, from *blotham blood (see blood).
Originally a blood sprinkling on pagan altars. This word was chosen in Old English bibles to
translate Latin benedicere and Greek eulogein, both of which have a ground sense of to speak well
of, to praise, but were used in Scripture to translate Hebrew brk to bend (the knee), worship,
praise, invoke blessings. Meaning shifted in late Old English toward pronounce or make happy, by
resemblance to unrelated bliss. No cognates in other languages. Related: Blessed; blessing.


blessed (adj.)

late 12c., supremely happy, also consecrated (c.1200), past participle adjective from bless (v.).
Reversed or ironic sense of cursed, damned is recorded from 1806. Related: Blessedly; blessedness.


blessing (n.)

Old English bletsunga, bledsunge; see bless. Meaning gift from God is from mid-14c. In sense of
religious invocation before a meal it is recorded from 1738. Phrase blessing in disguise is recorded
from 1746.


blest

alternative past tense and past participle of bless.


bleu

French form of blue (1), used from c.1890 in names of various French blue cheeses (French fromage
bleu) marketed in Britain and U.S.


blew

Old English bleow, past tense of blow (v.1).


blight (n.)

1610s, origin obscure; according to OED it emerged into literary speech from the talk of gardeners
and farmers, perhaps ultimately from Old English bl&aelig;ce, bl&aelig;c&eth;u, a scrofulous skin
condition and/or from Old Norse blikna become pale. Used in a general way of agricultural diseases,
sometimes with suggestion of invisible baleful influence; hence figurative sense of anything which
withers hopes or prospects or checks prosperity (1828). Compare slang blighter. Urban blight
attested by 1935.


blight (v.)

afflict with blight, 1660s (implied in blighted), from blight (n.). Figurative use by 1712. Related:
Blighted; blighting.


blighter (n.)

1822, thing which blights, agent noun from blight (v.). British colloquial sense of contemptible
person (often jocular) is recorded from 1896.


blimey

by 1889, probably a corruption of (God) blind me! First attested in a slang dictionary which defines
it as an apparently meaningless, abusive term.


blimp (n.)

1916, of obscure origin, many claimants. One of the weird coinages of the airmen [Weekley]. Common
theory is that it is from designers' prototype nickname Type B-limp, in the sense of without
internal framework, as opposed to Type A-rigid; thus see limp (adj.).


blind (adj.)

Old English blind blind, also dark, enveloped in darkness, obscure; unintelligent, lacking mental
perception, probably from Proto-Germanic *blinda- blind (cognates: Dutch and German blind, Old Norse
blindr, Gothic blinds blind), perhaps, via notion of to make cloudy, deceive, from an extended
Germanic form of the PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Compare Lithuanian
blendzas blind, blesti to become dark. The original sense would be not sightless but rather
confused, which perhaps underlies such phrases as blind alley (Chaucer's lanes blynde), which is
older than the sense of closed at one end (1610s).  The twilight, or rather the hour between the
time when one can no longer see to read and the lighting of the candles, is commonly called
blindman's holiday. [Grose, 1796]    In reference to doing something without seeing it first, by
1840. Of aviators flying without instruments or without clear observation, from 1919. Related:
Blinded; blinding. Blindman's bluff is from 1580s.


blind (v.)

deprive of sight, early 13c., from Old English blendan to blind, deprive of sight; deceive, from
Proto-Germanic *blandjan (see blind (adj.)); form influenced in Middle English by the adjective.
Related: Blinded; blinding.


blind (n.)

a blind person; blind persons collectively, late Old Engish, from blind (adj.). Meaning place of
concealment is from 1640s. Meaning anything that obstructs sight is from 1702.


blind date (n.)

by 1921, U.S. college student slang, from blind (adj.) + date (n.3). Earliest attested use is in
reference to the person.


blind side (n.)

unguarded aspect, c.1600; see blind (adj.). As a verb, also blind-side, blindside, to hit from the
blind side, first attested 1968, American English, in reference to U.S. football tackles.


blind spot (n.)

1864, spot within one's range of vision where yet one cannot see. Of flaws in the eye, from 1872;
figurative sense in use by 1907.


blinded (adj.)

1590s, past participle adjective from blind (v.). Figurative sense is earlier (1530s).


blinder (n.)

1580s, agent noun from blind (v.). Especially of blinkers for horses from c.1800, often figurative.
Related: Blinders.


blindfold (v.)

1520s, alteration, by similarity to fold, of blindfelled (early 14c.), past participle of
blindfellan blindfold, cover the eyes (with a bandage, etc.), also to strike blind (c.1200), from
Old English (ge)blindfellian to strike blind, from blind (adj.) + Anglian gefeollan to strike down,
as in to fell a tree (see fell (v.)). Related: Blindfolded; blindfolding.


blindfold (n.)

1880, from blindfold (v.).


blinding (adj.)

1784, past participle adjective from blind (v.). Related: Blindingly.


blindly (adv.)

Old English blindlice; see blind (adj.) + -ly (2).


blindness (n.)

Old English blindnysse, blendes, from blind + -ness. Figurative sense was in Old English.


blinds (n.)

window screens, 1771, from blind (singular blind in this sense is recorded from 1731).


bling (n.)

also bling-bling, by 1997, U.S. rap slang, wealth, expensive accessories, a sound suggestive of the
glitter of jewels and precious metals (compare German blinken to gleam, sparkle).


blink (v.)

1580s, perhaps from Middle Dutch blinken to glitter, of uncertain origin, possibly, with German
blinken to gleam, sparkle, twinkle, from a nasalized form of base found in Old English blican to
shine, glitter (see bleach (v.)).    Middle English had blynke (c.1300) in the sense a brief gleam
or spark, perhaps a variant of blench to move suddenly or sharply; to raise one's eyelids (c.1200),
perhaps from the rare Old English blencan deceive. Related: Blinked; blinking. The last, as a
euphemism for a stronger word, is attested by 1914.


blink (n.)

1590s, a glance; see blink (v.). As is the case with the verb, there is a similar word in Middle
English, in use from c.1300, that might represent a native form of the same root.


blinkard (n.)

a mocking term for a person with bad eyesight, c.1500, from blink (v.) + -ard. Figuratively, one who
lacks intellectual perception (1520s).


blinker (n.)

1630s, one who blinks, agent noun from blink (v.). As a type of horse eye screen to keep the animal
looking straight ahead, from 1789. Slang meaning the eye is from 1816. Meaning intermittent flashing
light is from 1923.


blinkered (adj.)

in the figurative sense, 1867, from horses wearing blinkers to limit the range of their vision (see
blinker).


blintz (n.)

1903, from Yiddish blintze, from Russian blinyets, diminutive of blin pancake, from Old Russian
blinu.


blip (n.)

1894, in reference to a kind of popping sound, of echoic origin. Radar screen sense is from 1945. As
a verb from 1924. Related: Blipped; blipping.


bliss (n.)

Old English blis, also bli&eth;s bliss, merriment, happiness, grace, favor, from Proto-Germanic
*blithsjo (cognates: Old Saxon blidsea, blizza), from *blithiz gentle, kind + *-tjo noun suffix.
Originally mostly of earthly happiness; influenced by association with bless and blithe.


bliss (v.)

often with out, by 1973, U.S. colloquial, from bliss (n.).


blissful (adj.)

late 12c., blisfulle, from bliss + -ful. Related: Blissfully; blissfulness.


blister (n.)

c.1300, perhaps via Old French blestre blister, lump, bump, from a Scandinavian source (compare Old
Norse blastr a blowing, dative bl&aelig;stri swelling), or from Middle Dutch blyster swelling;
perhaps from PIE *bhlei- to blow, swell, extension of root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell; see
bole.


blister (v.)

to become covered in blisters, late 15c.; to raise blisters on, 1540s, from blister (n.). Related:
Blistered; blistering.


blite (n.)

spinach, or plants like it, early 15c., from Latin blitum, from Greek bliton, of unknown origin.


blithe (adj.)

Old English bli&thorn;e joyous, kind, cheerful, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *blithiz gentle, kind
(cognates: Old Saxon bli&eth;i bright, happy, Middle Dutch blide, Dutch blijde, Old Norse bli&eth;r
mild, gentle, Old High German blidi gay, friendly, Gothic blei&thorn;s kind, friendly, merciful).
Rare since 16c. No cognates outside Germanic. The earlier application was to the outward expression
of kindly feeling, sympathy, affection to others, as in Gothic and ON.; but in OE. the word had come
more usually to be applied to the external manifestation of one's own pleased or happy frame of
mind, and hence even to the state itself. [OED]


blither (v.)

1868, variant of blether talk nonsense, 1520s, a northern British and Scottish word, from Middle
English blather (see blather (v.)). Related: Blithered; blithering.


blithering (adj.)

1880, present participle adjective (from the first typically with idiot) from blither (v.) to talk
nonsense. From 1872 as a verbal noun.


blithesome (adj.)

1724, from blithe + -some (1). An adjective from an adjective. Related: Blithesomely;
blithesomeness.


blitz (n.)

sudden overwhelming attack, 1940, shortening of blitzkrieg (1939). The use in U.S. football is from
1959. As a verb, 1940, from the noun. Related: Blitzed; blitzing.


blitzkrieg (n.)

rapid attack, 1939, from German Blitzkrieg, from Blitz lightning (from Middle High German blicze,
back-formation from bliczen to flash, from Old High German blecchazzen to flash, lighten (8c.), from
Proto-Germanic *blikkatjan, from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.)) + Krieg
war (see kriegspiel).


blizzard (n.)

strong, sustained snowstorm, 1859, origin obscure (perhaps somehow connected with blaze (n.1)); it
came into general use in the U.S. in this sense the hard winter 1880-81. OED says it probably is
more or less onomatop&#339;ic, and adds there is nothing to indicate a French origin. Before that it
typically meant violent blow, also hail of gunfire in American English from 1829, and blizz violent
rainstorm is attested from 1770. The winter storm sense perhaps is originally a colloquial
figurative use in the Upper Midwest of the U.S.


bloat (v.)

1670s, to cause to swell (earlier, in reference to cured fish, to cause to be soft, 1610s), from now
obsolete bloat (adj.), attested from c.1300 as soft, flabby, flexible, pliable, but by 17c. meaning
puffed up, swollen. Perhaps from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse blautr soaked, soft from
being cooked in liquid (compare Swedish bl&#246;t fisk soaked fish), possibly from Proto-Germanic
*blaut-, from PIE *bhleu- to swell, well up, overflow, an extension of root *bhel- (2) to blow,
inflate, swell (see bole).    Influenced by or combined with Old English blawan blow, puff.
Figurative use by 1711. Intransitive meaning to swell, to become swollen is from 1735. Related:
Bloated; bloating.


bloat (n.)

1860 as a disease of livestock, from bloat (v.). Meaning bloatedness is from 1905.


bloated (adj.)

overgrown, 1660s, past participle adjective from bloat (v.). Figurative sense by 1711.


blob (n.)

drop, globule, 1725, from a verb meaning to make or mark with blobs (early 15c.), perhaps related to
bubble. The same word was used 16c. in a sense bubble, blister.


bloc (n.)

1903, in reference to alliances in Continental politics, from French bloc group, block, from Old
French bloc piece of wood (see block (n.)).


block (n.)

solid piece, c.1300, from Old French bloc log, block of wood (13c.), via Middle Dutch bloc trunk of
a tree or Old High German bloh, from a common Germanic source, from PIE *bhlugo-, from *bhelg- a
thick plank, beam (see balk).    Meaning mould for a hat is from 1570s. Slang sense of head is from
1630s. Extended sense of obstruction is first recorded 1640s. In cricket from 1825; in U.S. football
from 1912. The meaning in city block is 1796, from the notion of a compact mass of buildings; slang
meaning fashionable promenade is 1869.    BLOCK. A term applied in America to a square mass of
houses included between four streets. It is a very useful one. [Bartlett]


block (v.)

obstruct, 1590s, from French bloquer to block, stop up, from Old French bloc (see block (n.)).
Meaning to make smooth or to give shape on a block is from 1620s. Stage and theater sense is from
1961. Sense in cricket is from 1772; in U.S. football from 1889. Related: Blocked; blocking.


blockade (n.)

mid-17c., from block (v.) + -ade, false French ending (the French word is blocus, 18c. in this
sense, which seems to be in part a back-formation from the verb bloquer and in part influenced by
Middle Dutch blokhuus blockhouse).


blockade (v.)

late 17c., from blockade (n.). Related: Blockaded; blockading.


blockage (n.)

1827, from block (v.) + -age.


blockbuster (n.)

also block-buster, big bomb (4,000 pounds or larger, according to some sources), 1942, from block
(n.) in the built-up city square sense. Entertainment sense is attested from 1957. U.S. sense of
real estate broker who sells a house to a black family on an all-white neighborhood, thus sparking
an exodus, is from 1955.


blocker (n.)

c.1400 of a tool, c.1600 of a person, agent noun from block (v.). U.S. football sense from 1914.


blockhead (n.)

also block-head, stupid person, 1540s (implied in blockheaded), from block (n.) + head (n.);
probably originally an image of the head-shaped oaken block used by hat-makers, though the insulting
sense is the older one.


blockhouse (n.)

c.1500, of uncertain origin (see blockade (n.)). Also in 16c. French, Dutch, German.


blocking (n.)

1630s, verbal noun from present participle of block (v.). By 1891 in U.S. football; by 1961 in
theater.


blocks (n.)

children's wooden building toys, 1821, from block (n.).


blocky (adj.)

1879, from block (n.) + -y (2). Related: Blockily; blockiness.


blog (n.)

1998, short for weblog (which is attested from 1994, though not in the sense online journal), from
(World Wide) Web + log. Joe Bloggs (c.1969) was British slang for any hypothetical person (compare
U.S. equivalent Joe Blow); earlier blog meant a servant boy in one of the college houses (c.1860,
see Partridge, who describes this use as a perversion of bloke), and, as a verb, to defeat in
schoolboy slang. The Blogger online publishing service was launched in 1999.


bloke (n.)

fellow, 1851, London slang, of unknown origin, perhaps from Celtic ploc large, stubborn person;
another suggestion is Romany (Gypsy) and Hindi loke a man.


blond (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French blont fair, blond (12c.), from Medieval Latin blundus yellow, perhaps
from Frankish *blund. If it is a Germanic word, it is possibly related to Old English blonden-feax
gray-haired, from blondan, blandan to mix (see blend (v.)). According to Littr&eacute;, the original
sense of the French word was a colour midway between golden and light chestnut, which might account
for the notion of mixed.    Old English beblonden meant dyed, so it is also possible that the root
meaning of blonde, if it is Germanic, may be dyed, as ancient Teutonic warriors were noted for dying
their hair. Du Cange, however, writes that blundus was a vulgar pronunciation of Latin flavus
yellow. Another guess (discounted by German etymologists), is that it represents a Vulgar Latin
*albundus, from alba white.    The word was reintroduced into English 17c. from French, and was
until recently still felt as French, hence blonde (with French feminine ending) for females. Italian
biondo, Spanish blondo, Old Proven&ccedil;al blon all are of Germanic origin.    Fair hair was much
esteemed by both the Greeks and Romans, and so they not only dyed and gold-dusted theirs ..., but
also went so far as to gild the hair of their statues, as notably those of Venus de Medici and
Apollo. In the time of Ovid (A.U.C. 711) much fair hair was imported from Germany, by the Romans, as
it was considered quite the fashionable color. Those Roman ladies who did not choose to wear wigs of
this hue, were accustomed to powder theirs freely with gold dust, so as to give it the fashionable
yellow tint. [C. Henry Leonard, The Hair, 1879]


blond (n.)

c.1755 of a type of lace, 1822 of persons; from blond (adj.).


blonde

late 15c.; see blond (adj.).


blondish (adj.)

1857, from blond (adj.) + -ish.


blondness (n.)

1842, from blond (adj.) + -ness.


blood (n.)

Old English blod blood, from Proto-Germanic *blodam blood (cognates: Old Frisian blod, Old Saxon
bl&#244;d, Old Norse blo&eth;, Middle Dutch bloet, Dutch bloed, Old High German bluot, German Blut,
Gothic blo&thorn;), from PIE *bhlo-to-, perhaps meaning to swell, gush, spurt, or that which bursts
out (compare Gothic blo&thorn; blood, bloma flower), in which case it would be from suffixed form of
*bhle-, extended form of *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).    There seems to have been
an avoidance in Germanic, perhaps from taboo, of other PIE words for blood, such as *esen- (source
of poetic Greek ear, Old Latin aser, Sanskrit asrk, Hittite eshar); also *krew-, which seems to have
had a sense of blood outside the body, gore from a wound (source of Latin cruour blood from a wound,
Greek kreas meat), which came to mean simply blood in the Balto-Slavic group and some other
languages.    Inheritance and relationship senses (also found in Latin sanguis, Greek haima) emerged
in English by mid-13c. Meaning person of one's family, race, kindred is late 14c. As the seat of
passions, it is recorded from c.1300. Slang meaning hot spark, a man of fire [Johnson] is from
1560s. Blood pressure attested from 1862. Blood money is from 1530s; originally money paid for
causing the death of another.   Blood type is from 1928. That there were different types of human
blood was discovered c.1900 during early experiments in transfusion. To get blood from a stone do
the impossible is from 1660s. Expression blood is thicker than water attested by 1803, in reference
to family ties of those separated by distance. New (or fresh) blood, in reference to members of an
organization or group is from 1880.


blood (v.)

1590s, to smeart with blood; 1620s, to cause to bleed, from blood (n.). Meaning to give an animal
its first taste of blood is from 1781. Related: Blooded; blooding.


blood-curdling (adj.)

also bloodcurdling, 1817, from blood (n.) + present participle of curdle. Also formerly with a noun
form, bloodcurdler incident which freezes the blood, especially sensational story, 1877, slang; also
in use in this sense was blood-freezer (1886).


blood-letting (n.)

also bloodletting, early 13c., blod letunge, from blood (n.) + let (v.). Hyphenated from 17c., one
word from mid-19c. Old English had blodl&#230;te blood-letting.


blood-red (adj.)

Old English blodread; see blood (n.) + red (adj.1).


blood-stained (adj.)

1590s, from blood (n.) + past participle of stain (v.).


bloodhound (n.)

also blood-hound, type of large dog used in hunting, c.1300, from blood (n.) + hound (n.).


bloodily (adv.)

1560s, from bloody + -ly (2).


bloodiness (n.)

1590s, from bloody (adj.) + -ness.


bloodless (adj.)

Old English blodleas; see blood (n.) + -less. The figurative sense in Middle English was powerless.
Related: Bloodlessly.


bloodlust (n.)

1847 (Bulwer Lytton), also blood-lust, from blood (n.) + lust (n.).


bloodshed (n.)

also blood-shed, c.1500, the shedding of (one's) blood, from verbal phrase (attested in late Old
English), from blood (n.) + shed (v.). The sense of slaughter is much older (early 13c., implied in
bloodshedding).


bloodshot (adj.)

also blood-shot, 1550s, short for bloodshotten (c.1500), from blood (n.) + old past participle of
shoot.


bloodstream (n.)

also blood-stream, 1847, from blood (n.) + stream (n.).


bloodsucker (n.)

also blood-sucker, late 14c., of animals, from blood (n.) + sucker (n.); in the figurative sense, of
persons, it is attested from 1660s.


bloodthirsty (adj.)

also blood-thirsty, 1530s (Coverdale, Ps. xxv:9), from blood (n.) + thirsty (adj.). Ancient Greek
had a similar image in haimodipsos. Related: Bloodthirstiness.


bloody (adj.)

Old Engish blodig, adjective from blod (see blood). Common Germanic, compare Old Frisian blodich,
Old Saxon bl&#244;dag, Dutch bloedig, Old High German bluotag, German blutig.    It has been a
British intensive swear word since at least 1676. Weekley relates it to the purely intensive use of
the cognate Dutch bloed, German Blut. But perhaps it ultimately is connected with bloods in the
slang sense of rowdy young aristocrats (see blood (n.)) via expressions such as bloody drunk as
drunk as a blood.    Partridge reports that it was respectable before c.1750, and it was used by
Fielding and Swift, but heavily tabooed c.1750-c.1920, perhaps from imagined association with
menstruation; Johnson calls it very vulgar, and OED writes of it, now constantly in the mouths of
the lowest classes, but by respectable people considered 'a horrid word', on par with obscene or
profane language.    The onset of the taboo against bloody coincides with the increase in linguistic
prudery that presaged the Victorian Era but it is hard to say what the precise cause was in the case
of this specific word. Attempts have been made to explain the term's extraordinary shock power by
invoking etymology. Theories that derive it from such oaths as By our Lady or God's blood seem
farfetched, however. More likely, the taboo stemmed from the fear that many people have of blood
and, in the minds of some, from an association with menstrual bleeding. Whatever, the term was
debarred from polite society during the whole of the nineteenth century. [Rawson]    Shaw shocked
theatergoers when he put it in the mouth of Eliza Doolittle in Pygmalion (1914), and for a time the
word was known euphemistically as the Shavian adjective. It was avoided in print as late as 1936.
Bloody Sunday, Jan. 30, 1972, when 13 civilians were killed by British troops at protest in
Londonderry, Northern Ireland.


bloody (v.)

1520s, from bloody (adj.). Related: Bloodied; bloodying. Old English had blodigan to make bloody,
but the modern word seems to be a later formation.


Bloody Mary

the cocktail, attested from 1953 (originally touted in part as a hangover cure), said to be named
for Mary Tudor, queen of England 1553-58, who earned her epithet for vigorous prosecution of
Protestants. The drink earned its, apparently, simply for being red from tomato juice. The
cocktail's popularity also concided with that of the musical South Pacific, which has a character
named Bloody Mary.


blooey (n.)

ruin, smash, 1915, U.S. slang, probably imitative.


bloom (n.1)

blossom of a plant, c.1200, a northern word, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse blomi
flower, blossom, also collectively flowers and foliage on trees; from Proto-Germanic *blomon
(cognates: Old Saxon blomo, Middle Dutch bloeme, Dutch bloem, Old High German bluomo, German Blume,
Gothic bloma), from PIE *bhle- (cognates: Old Irish blath blossom, flower, Latin flos flower,
florere to blossom, flourish), extended form of *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).
Related to Old English blowan to flower (see blow (v.2)).    Transferred sense, of persons, is from
c.1300; meaning state of greatest loveliness is from early 14c.; that of blush on the cheeks is from
1752. Old English had cognate bloma, but only in the figurative sense of state of greatest beauty;
the main word in Old English for flower was blostm (see blossom).


bloom (n.2)

rough mass of wrought iron, from Old English bloma lump of metal; mass, of unknown origin. Identical
in form to bloom (n.1), and sometimes regarded as a secondary sense of it, but evidence of a
connection is wanting.


bloom (v.)

mid-13c., blomen, from the noun (see bloom (n.1)). Related: Bloomed; blooming.


bloomer (n.)

1730, agent noun from bloom (v.).


bloomers (n.)

1851, named for U.S. feminist reformer Amelia Jenks Bloomer (1818-1894), who promoted them. The
surname is attested from c.1200, said to mean literally iron-worker, from Old English bloma (see
bloom (n.2)).


blooming (adj.)

late 14c., present participle adjective from bloom (v.). Meaning full-blown (often a euphemism for
bloody) is attested from 1882.


Bloomsbury

1910, in reference to the set of Bohemian writers, artists, and intellectuals (including E.M.
Forster, Virginia Woolf, Vanessa and Clive Bell, John Maynard Keynes) centered on Lytton Strachey;
so called from the London neighborhood where several lived and worked.Women in love with buggers and
buggers in love with womanizers, I don't know what the world is coming to. [Lytton Strachey]  The
place name is recorded 1291 as Blemondesberi manor held by the Blemond family, from Bl&eacute;mont
in France. It was laid out for housing in 17c., fashionable from 18c.


bloop (n.)

1931, from bloop (v.), 1926, a word from the early days of radio (see blooper). Related: Blooped;
blooping.


blooper (n.)

blunder, 1943, apparently first in theater, from American English baseball slang meaning a fly ball
in a high arc missed by the fielder (1937) or else from the earlier sense radio receiver that
interferes with nearby sets when a careless operator throws it into oscillation (1926), in which
case it imitates the resulting sound.


blossom (n.)

c.1200, from Old English blostm, blostma blossom, flower, fruit, from Proto-Germanic *blo-s-
(cognates: Middle Low German blosom, Dutch bloesem, German Blust), from PIE *bhlow-, extended form
of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom, possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see
bole). This is the native word, now largely superseded by bloom and flower.


blossom (v.)

late 14c., from Old English blostmian, from blostma blossom, flower (see blossom (n.)). Figurative
use from late 14c. Related: Blossomed; blossoming.


blot (n.)

late 14c., originally blemish, perhaps from Old Norse blettr blot, stain, or from Old French blot,
variant of bloc block, or blestre blister, lump, clump of earth.


blot (v.)

early 15c., to make blots; mid-15c. to blot out, obliterate (words), from blot (n.). Related:
Blotted; blotting.


blotch (n.)

c.1600, perhaps a blend of blot and botch or patch.


blotchy (adj.)

1799, from blotch + -y (2). Related: Blotchiness.


blotter (n.)

1590s, thing for drying wet spots, agent noun from blot (v.). Meaning bad writer is from c.1600.
Sense of day book is from 1670s, and the word was applied early 19c. to rough drafts, scrap books,
notebooks, and draft account books. Hence the police jargon sense arrest record sheet, recorded from
1887.


blotting (n.)

mid-15c., verbal noun from blot (v.). Blotting paper is recorded from 1510s.


blotto (adj.)

drunk, c.1905, from some signification of blot (v.) in its soak up liquid meaning.


blouse (n.)

1828 (from 1822 as a French word in English), from French blouse, workman's or peasant's smock
(1788), origin unknown. Perhaps akin to Proven&ccedil;al (lano) blouso short (wool) [Gamillscheg].
Another suggestion [Klein] is that it is from Medieval Latin pelusia, from Pelusium, a city in Upper
Egypt, supposedly a clothing manufacturing center in the Middle Ages.    In Paris, a very slovenly,
loose, drawn frock, with most capacious sleeves, had been introduced called a blouse. Some of our
priestesses of the toilet seemed emulous of copying this deshabille, with some slight alterations,
but we never wish to see it on the symmetrical form of a British lady. [Summary of Fashion for 1822,
in Museum of Foreign Literature and Science, Jan.-June 1823]


bloviate (v.)

1857, American English, a Midwestern word for to talk aimlessly and boastingly; to indulge in 'high
falutin', according to Farmer (1890), who seems to have been the only British lexicographer to
notice it. He says it was based on blow (v.) on the model of deviate, etc.    It seems to have been
felt as outdated slang already by late 19c. (It was a leasure for him to hear the Doctor talk, or,
as it was inelegantly expressed in the phrase of the period, 'bloviate' .... [Overland Monthly, San
Francisco, 1872, describing a scene from 1860]), but it enjoyed a revival early 1920s during the
presidency of Warren G. Harding, who wrote a notoriously ornate and incomprehensible prose (e.e.
cummings eulogized him as The only man, woman or child who wrote a simple declarative sentence with
seven grammatical errors) at which time the word took on its connection with political speech; it
faded again thereafter, but, with its derivative, bloviation, it enjoyed a revival in the 2000 U.S.
election season that continued through the era of blogging.


bloviation (n.)

pompous oratory, 1857; noun of action; see bloviate.


blow (v.1)

move air, Old English blawan blow, breathe, make an air current; kindle; inflate; sound a wind
instrument (class VII strong verb; past tense bleow, past participle blawen), from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;-anan (source of Old High German blaen, German bl&auml;hen), from PIE *bhle- to swell,
blow up (source of Latin flare to blow), possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole).    Meaning to squander (of money) is from 1874. Sense of depart suddenly is from 1902. Slang
do fellatio on sense is from 1933, as blow (someone) off, originally among prostitutes (compare blow
job). This usage probably is not connected to the colloquial imprecation (1781, associated with
sailors, as in Popeye's well, blow me down!), which has past participle blowed. Meaning to spend
(money) foolishly and all at once is 1890s; that of bungle an opportunity is from 1943. To blow over
pass is from 1610s, originally of storms. To blow (someone's) mind was in use by 1967; there is a
song title Blow Your Mind released in a 1965 Mirawood recording by a group called The Gas Company.


blow (v.2)

to bloom, blossom (intransitive), from Old English blowan to flower, blossom, flourish, from Proto-
Germanic *bl&aelig;- (cognates: Old Saxon bloian, Old Frisian bloia, Middle Dutch and Dutch bloeien,
Old High German bluoen, German bl&uuml;hen), from PIE *bhle-, extended form of *bhel- (2) to blow,
inflate, swell (see bole). This word is the source of the blown in full-blown.


blow (n.1)

hard hit, mid-15c., blowe, from northern and East Midlands dialects, perhaps from Middle Dutch
blouwen to beat, a common Germanic word of unknown origin (compare German bleuen, Gothic bliggwan to
strike). Influenced in English by blow (v.1). In reference to descriptions or accounts, blow-by-blow
is recorded from 1921, American English, originally of prize-fight broadcasts.    LIKE a hungry
kitten loves its saucer of warm milk, so do radio fans joyfully listen to the blow-by-blow broadcast
description of a boxing bout. [The Wireless Age, December 1922]


blow (n.2)

a blowing, a blast, 1650s, from blow (v.1).


blow job (n.)

also blowjob, 1961, from blow + job. Exactly which blow is meant is the subject of some debate; the
word might have begun as a euphemism for suck (thus from blow (v.1)), or it might refer to the
explosive climax of an orgasm (thus blow (v.2)). Unlike much sex slang, its date of origin probably
is pretty close to the date it first is attested in print: as recently as the early 1950s, military
pilots could innocently talk of their jet planes as blow jobs according to the Thesaurus of American
Slang. Compare blow (v.1).


blow out (n.)

also blowout, 1825, American English colloquial, outburst, brouhaha (what, in modern use, would be
called a blow up), from blow (v.1) + out. Meaning abundant feast is recorded from 1824; that of flat
tire is from 1908.


blow up (v.)

explode, 1590s, from blow (v.1) + up (adv.). As a noun, it is recorded from 1809 in the sense
outburst, quarrel. Meaning enlargement from a photograph is attested by 1945. Old English had an
adjective upablawan upblown, used of a volcano, etc.


blow-dry (v.)

1971, of hair; see blow (v.1) + dry (v.). Related: Blow-dried; blow-drying.


blow-fly (n.)

1720, from fly (n.) + blow (v.1) in an obsolete sense to deposit eggs, to infect with eggs, in
reference to to insects, apparently connected with old notions of natural history [OED].


blow-gun (n.)

type of weapon, 1799, from blow (v.1) + gun (n.).


blow-pipe (n.)

type of weapon, 1680s, from blow (v.1) + pipe (n.1).


blowback (n.)

also blow-back, 1883, in reference to flames in enclosed spaces (firearms, furnaces, etc.), from
blow (v.1) + back (adv.). Sense in reference to convert actions, etc., is from 1978.


blower (n.)

early 12c. (originally of horn-blowers), from Old English blawere, agent noun from blow (v.1). Of
mechanical devices from 1795.


blowfish (n.)

also blow-fish, 1862, American English, from blow (v.1) + fish (n.).    Then he described another
odd product of the bay, that was known as the blow-fish, and had the power of inflating himself with
air when taken out of the water. [The Young Nimrods in North America, New York, 1881]


blowhard (n.)

also blow-hard, 1840, a sailor's word (from 1790 as a nickname for a sailor), perhaps not originally
primarily meaning braggart; from blow (v.1) + hard (adv.). An adjective sense of boastful appeared
c.1855, and may be a separate formation leading to a modified noun use.


blowhole (n.)

also blow-hole, 1787, of whales and porpoises, from blow (v.1) + hole.


blown (adj.)

early 15c., inflated, from Old English blawen, past participle of blow (v.1). Figurative sense of
inflated by pride is from late 15c. Meaning out of breath is from 1670s. As a past participle
adjective from blow (v.2), it was Old English geblowenne.


blowzy (adj.)

c.1770, from obsolete blouze (1570s), wench, beggar's trull, perhaps originally a cant term, + -y
(2).


blub (n.)

fit of weeping, 1894, imitative. As a verb by 1843. Related: Blubbed; blubbing.


blubber (n.)

late 14c., blober a bubble, bubbling water; foaming waves, probably echoic of bubbling water.
Original notion of bubbling, foaming survives in the figurative verbal meaning to weep, cry
(c.1400). Meaning whale fat first attested 1660s; earlier it was used in reference to jellyfish
(c.1600) and of whale oil (mid-15c.). As an adjective from 1660s.


blubber (v.)

late 14c., to seethe, bubble, from blubber (n.). Meaning to cry, to overflow with weeping is from
c.1400. Related: Blubbered; blubbering.


blubbering

c.1400, present participle adjective from blubber (v.). Originally of fountains, springs, etc.; of
weeping, from 1580s. As a verbal noun, from 1570s.


blubbery (adj.)

1791, from blubber (n.) + -y (2).


Bluchers (n.)

type of old-style boots, from Prussian Field Marshal Gebhard Leberecht Bl&uuml;cher (1742-1819).


bludge (v.)

shirk responsibility, 1919, Australian and New Zealand slang, earlier be a prostitute's pimp, from
bludger pimp.


bludgeon (v.)

1802, from earlier noun bludgeon short club (1730), of unknown origin. Related: Bludgeoned;
bludgeoning.


bludgeon (n.)

short club, 1730, of unknown origin.


bludger (n.)

prostitute's pimp, 1856, short for bludgeoner, agent noun from bludgeon (v.).


blue (1)

c.1300, bleu, blwe, etc., from Old French blo pale, pallid, wan, light-colored; blond; discolored;
blue, blue-gray, from Frankish *blao or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old English blaw, Old Saxon and Old High German blao, Danish blaa, Swedish
bl&#229;, Old Frisian blau, Middle Dutch bla, Dutch blauw, German blau blue), from PIE *bhle-was
light-colored, blue, blond, yellow, from PIE root bhel- (1) to shine, flash (see bleach (v.)).
The same PIE root yielded Latin flavus yellow, Old Spanish blavo yellowish-gray, Greek phalos white,
Welsh blawr gray, Old Norse bla livid (the meaning in black and blue), showing the usual slippery
definition of color words in Indo-European The present spelling is since 16c., from French influence
(Modern French bleu).    The exact color to which the Gmc. term applies varies in the older
dialects; M.H.G. bla is also 'yellow,' whereas the Scandinavian words may refer esp. to a deep,
swarthy black, e.g. O.N. blama&eth;r, N.Icel. blama&eth;ur 'Negro' [Buck]   <hr />   Few words enter
more largely into the composition of slang, and colloquialisms bordering on slang, than does the
word BLUE. Expressive alike of the utmost contempt, as of all that men hold dearest and love best,
its manifold combinations, in ever varying shades of meaning, greet the philologist at every turn.
[John S. Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890, p.252]    The color of constancy
since Chaucer at least, but apparently for no deeper reason than the rhyme in true blue (c.1500).
From early times blue was the distinctive color of the dress of servants, which may be the reason
police uniforms are blue, a tradition Farmer dates to Elizabethan times. For blue ribbon see cordon
bleu under cordon. Blue whale attested from 1851, so called for its color. The flower name blue bell
is recorded by 1570s. Blue streak, of something resembling a bolt of lightning (for quickness,
intensity, etc.) is from 1830, U.S. Western slang.    Many Indo-European languages seem to have had
a word to describe the color of the sea, encompasing blue and green and gray; such as Irish glass
(see Chloe); Old English h&aelig;wen blue, gray, related to har (see hoar); Serbo-Croatian sinji
gray-blue, sea-green; Lithuanian &#353;yvas, Russian sivyj gray.


blue (2)

lewd, indecent recorded from 1840 (in form blueness, in an essay of Carlyle's); the sense connection
is unclear, and is opposite to that in blue laws (q.v.). John Mactaggart's Scottish Gallovidian
Encyclopedia (1824) containing odd words he had learned while growing up in Galloway and elsewhere
in Scotland, has an entry for Thread o'Blue, any little smutty touch in song-singing, chatting, or
piece of writing. Farmer [Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890] offers the theory that
this meaning derives from the blue dress uniforms issued to harlots in houses of correction, but he
writes that the earlier slang authority John Camden Hotten suggests it as coming from the French
Biblioth&egrave;que Bleu, a series of books of very questionable character, and adds, from Hotten,
that, Books or conversation of an entirely opposite nature are said to be Brown or Quakerish, i.e.,
serious, grave, decent.


blue (v.)

to make blue, c.1600, from blue (1).


blue blood

1834, translating Spanish sangre azul, claimed by certain families of Castile as uncontaminated by
Moorish or Jewish admixture, probably from the notion of the visible veins of people of fair
complexion.


blue chip (adj.)

also blue-chip, in reference to the high-value poker counter, from 1904 in the figurative sense of
valuable; stock exchange sense, in reference to shares considered a reliable investment, is first
recorded 1929; especially of stocks that saw spectacular rises in value in the four years or so
before the Wall Street crash of that year.


blue collar (adj.)

also blue-collar, 1949, from blue (1) + collar (n.). From the common color of men's work shirts.


blue jeans

from 1843 as a type of fabric; see jean. As short for blue jeans trousers, from 1878.


blue laws

1781, severe Puritanical code said to have been enacted 18c. in New Haven, Connecticut; of uncertain
origin, perhaps from one of the ground senses behind blues, or from notion of coldness. Or perhaps
connected to bluestocking in the sense of puritanically plain or mean (see bluestocking, which is a
different application of the same term; the parliament of 1653 was derisively called the
bluestocking parliament). The common explanation that they were written on blue paper is not
considered valid; pale blue paper was used for many old U.S. legal documents and there would have
been nothing notable about its use in this case.


blue moon (n.)

1821 as a specific term in the sense very rarely, perhaps suggesting something that, in fact, never
happens (compare at the Greek calends, and the native in the reign of Queen Dick and Saint
Geoffrey's Day Never, there being no saint of that name, reported in Grose (1788)); suggested
earliest in this couplet from 1528:Yf they say the mone is blewe,We must beleve that it is true.
Though this might refer to calendrical calculations by the Church, so that the general sense of the
term and the specific one (commonly misinterpreted as second full moon in a calendar month, but
actually a quarterly calculation) are difficult to disentangle. In either case, the sense of blue is
obscure. Literal blue moons do sometimes occur under extreme atmospheric conditions.


blueberry (n.)

c.1775, from blue (1) + berry.


bluebird (n.)

also blue-bird, North American warbler-like bird, 1680s, from blue (1) in reference to its plumage +
bird (n.1). Figurative use in bluebird of happiness is from 1909 play romance l'Oiseau bleu,
literally The Blue Bird, by Belgian dramatist and poet Maurice Maeterlinck (1862-1949).


bluegrass (n.)

also blue-grass, music style, 1958, in reference to the Blue Grass Boys, country music band
1940s-'50s, from the blue grass (Poa pratensis) characteristic of Kentucky, the grass so called from
1751. Kentucky has been called the Bluegrass State since at least 1872; see blue (n.) + grass.


blueing (n.)

substance which makes (something) blue, 1660s, verbal noun from blue (v.).


blueprint (n.)

also blue-print, 1882, from blue (1) + print (n.). The process uses blue on white, or white on blue.
Figurative sense of detailed plan is attested from 1926. As a verb by 1939.


blues (n.)

as a music form featuring flatted thirds and sevenths, possibly c.1895 (though officially 1912, in
W.C. Handy's Memphis Blues); meaning depression, low spirits goes back to 1741, from adjectival blue
low-spirited, late 14c.


bluestocking (n.)

also blue-stocking, 1790, derisive word for a woman considered too learned, traces to a London
literary salon founded c.1750 by Elizabeth Montagu on the Parisian model, featuring intellectual
discussion instead of card games, and in place of ostentatious evening attire, simple dress,
including Benjamin Stillingfleet's blue-gray tradesman's hose which he wore in place of gentleman's
black silk, hence the term, first applied in derision to the whole set by Admiral Boscawen. None of
the ladies wore blue stockings. Borrowed by the neighbors in loan-translations, such as French bas-
bleu, Dutch blauwkous, German Blaustrumpf.


bluesy (adj.)

1946, from blues + -y (2).


bluff (v.)

1839, American English, poker term, perhaps from Dutch bluffen to brag, boast, or verbluffen to
baffle, mislead. An identical word meant blindfold, hoodwink in 1670s, but the sense evolution and
connection are unclear; OED calls it one of the numerous cant terms ... which arose between the
Restoration and the reign of Queen Anne. Extended or figurative sense by 1854. Related: Bluffed;
bluffing.


bluff (n.1)

broad, vertical cliff, 1680s, from bluff (adj.) with a broad, flat front (1620s), a sailors' word,
probably from Dutch blaf flat, broad. Apparently a North Sea nautical term for ships with flat
vertical bows, later extended to landscape features.


bluff (n.2)

1844 as an alternative name for poker; from bluff (v.). As an act of bluffing by 1864.


bluffing (n.)

1845, in the poker sense, verbal noun from bluff (v.).


bluffs (n.)

see bluff (n.1).


bluish (adj.)

late 14c., blewysh; see blue + -ish.


blunder (v.)

mid-14c., to stumble about blindly, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse blundra shut one's
eyes, from PIE root *bhlendh- (see blind). Meaning make a stupid mistake is first recorded 1711.
Related: Blundered; blundering.


blunder (n.)

mid-14c., apparently from blunder (v.), though of about the same age.


blunderbuss (n.)

1650s, from Dutch donderbus, from donder thunder (Middle Dutch doner, donder, from Proto-Germanic
*thunaraz; see thunder (n.)) + bus gun (originally box, tube); altered by resemblance to blunder.


blunderful (adj.)

1881, jocular blend of blunder and wonderful.


blundering

mid-14c. as a present participle adjective; mid-15c. as a verbal noun, from blunder (v.). Related:
Blunderingly.


blunt (adj.)

c.1200, dull, obtuse, perhaps from or related to Old Norse blundra (see blunder (v.)). Of tools or
weapons, late 14c. Meaning abrupt of speech or manner is from 1580s.


blunt (v.)

late 14c., from blunt (adj.). Related: Blunted; blunting.


blunt (n.)

street slang for marijuana and tobacco cigar (easier to pass around, easier to disguise, and the
stimulant in the tobacco enhances the high from the pot) surfaced c.1993, but is said to have
originated among Jamaicans in New York City in the early 1980s; from Phillies Blunt brand cigars;
see blunt (adj.), which has been used of certain cigars since 19c.Users say that the Phillies Blunt
brand produces less harsh-tasting or sweeter smoke. The leaf wrapper of a Phillies Blunt is strong
enough to hold together through the manipulations of making a blunt. Other brands fall apart.
[http://nepenthes.lycaeum.org/Drugs/THC/Smoke/blunts.html]


bluntly (adv.)

1550s, stupidly, from blunt (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning directly is from 1570s.


bluntness (n.)

late 15c., stupidity, from blunt (adj.) + -ness. Meaning rudeness is from c.1600.


blur (n.)

1540s, smear on the surface of writing; perhaps akin to blear. Extended sense of confused dimness is
from 1860.


blur (v.)

1580s, and thus probably from blur (n.), but the dates are close and either might be the original.
Related: Blurred; blurring.


blurb (n.)

used by U.S. scholar Brander Matthews (1852-1929) in 1906 in American Character; popularized 1907 by
U.S. humorist Frank Gelett Burgess (1866-1951). Originally mocking excessive praise printed on book
jackets.    Gelett Burgess, whose recent little book, Are You a Bromide? has been referred to above,
then entertained the guests with some characteristic flashes of Burgessian humor. Referring to the
word blurb on the wrapper of his book he said: To 'blurb' is to make a sound like a publisher. The
blurb was invented by Frank A. Munsey when he wrote on the front of his magazine in red ink 'I
consider this number of Munsey's the hottest pie that ever came out of my bakery.' ... A blurb is a
check drawn on Fame, and it is seldom honored.[] [Publishers' Weekly, May 18, 1907]


blurry (adj.)

1855, from blur + -y (2). Related: Blurrily; blurriness.


blurt (v.)

1570s, probably echoic. Related: blurted; blurting. As a noun, 1570s, probably from the verb.


blush (v.)

mid-14c., bluschen, blischen, probably from Old English blyscan blush, become red, glow (glossing
Latin rutilare), akin to blyse torch, from Proto-Germanic *blisk- to shine, burn, which also yielded
words in Low German (Dutch blozen to blush) and Scandinavian (Danish blusse to blaze; to blush);
ultimately from PIE *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)).    For vowel evolution, see
bury. Earliest recorded senses were to shine brightly; to look, stare. Sense of turn red in the face
(with shame, modesty, etc.) is from c.1400. Related: Blushed; blushing.


blush (n.)

mid-14c., a look, a glance (sense preserved in at first blush), also a gleam, a gleaming (late
14c.), from blush (v.). As a reddening of the face from 1590s. Meaning a rosy color is 1590s.


bluster (n.)

1580s, from bluster (v.).


bluster (v.)

late 14c., from a Low German source, such as Middle Low German bl&uuml;stren to blow violently, East
Frisian bl&uuml;stern to bluster (see blow (v.1)). Related: Blustered; blustering.


blustery (adj.)

1707, from bluster (n.) + -y (2). Blustering in this sense is recorded from 1510s.


BMX

1978, semi-acronym from bicycle motocross.


bo tree (n.)

1680s, from Sinhalese bo, from Pali bodhi, short for bodhi-taru bo tree, literally tree of wisdom or
enlightenment (related to Sanskrit buddhah awakened; see bid) + taru tree.


boa (n.)

late 14c., large snake, from Latin boa, type of large serpent mentioned in Pliny's Natural History;
origin unknown (in Middle English folk etymology associated with Greek bous ox). Extension to snake-
like coil of fur worn by ladies is from 1836. Boa constrictor so called from 1788.


Boanerges

name given by Christ to John and James, the two sons of Zebedee (Mark iii:17), from Galilean
dialectal corruption of Hebrew bene reghesh sons of rage (interpreted in Greek as sons of thunder),
from bene (see B'nai B'rith) + reghesh commotion, tumult, throng. Applied figuratively to zealous or
loud preachers.


boar (n.)

Old English bar boar, from West Germanic *bairaz (cognates: Old Saxon ber, Dutch beer, Old High
German ber), of unknown origin with no cognates outside West Germanic. Applied in Middle English to
persons of boar-like character.


board (n.1)

Old English bord a plank, flat surface, from Proto-Germanic *burdam (cognates: Old Norse bor&eth;
plank, Dutch bord board, Gothic fotu-baurd foot-stool, German Brett plank), from PIE *bhrdh- board,
from root *bherdh- to cut. See also board (n.2), with which this is so confused as practically to
form one word (if indeed they were not the same word all along).    A board is thinner than a plank,
and generally less than 2.5 inches thick. The transferred meaning food (late 14c.) is an extension
of the late Old English sense of table (compare boarder, boarding); hence, also, above board honest,
open (1610s). A further extension is to table where council is held (1570s), then transferred to
leadership council, council (that meets at a table), 1610s.


board (n.2)

side of ship, Old English bord border, rim, ship's side, from Proto-Germanic *bordaz (cognates: Old
Saxon bord, Dutch boord, German Bord, Old High German bart, Old Norse bar&eth;), perhaps from the
same source as board (n.1), but not all sources accept this. Connected to border; see also
starboard.    If not etymologically related to board (n.1), the two forms represented in English by
these words were nonetheless confused at an early date in most Germanic languages, a situation made
worse in English because this Germanic root also was adopted as Medieval Latin bordus (source of
Italian and Spanish bordo). It also entered Old French as bort beam, board, plank; side of a ship
(12c., Modern French bord), either from Medieval Latin or Frankish, and from thence it came over
with the Normans to mingle with its native cousins. By now the senses are inextricably tangled. Some
etymology dictionaries treat them as having been the same word all along.


board (v.)

verb senses derived from various senses of board (n.1) and board (n.2) include come alongside (a
ship), mid-15c. (from n.2); put boards on, frame with boards, late 14c. (implied in boarded, from
n.1);   to get onto (a ship), 1590s, transferred from mid-19c. to stages, railway cars, aircraft,
etc. (from n.2). Meaning to be supplied with food and lodging is from 1550s (from n.1 in transferred
sense). Transitive meaning provide with daily meals and lodging is from 1590s. Related: Boarded;
boarding.


boarder (n.)

1520s, one who has food and/or lodging at the house of another, agent noun from board (v.), in this
sense from board (n.1) in the food sense; meaning one who boards (an enemy's) ships is from 1769,
from a verbal sense derived from board (n.2).


boarding (n.)

1530s, supplying of meals, food and lodging, from board (n.1) in its extended sense of food (via
notion of table). Boarding-school is from 1670s; boarding house attested from 1728.


boardroom (n.)

1731, from board (n.1) in the sense of table where council is held + room (n.).


boardwalk (n.)

walkway made of boards, 1864, American English, from board (n.1) + walk (n.). As a seaside
attraction from 1881, first in reference to Atlantic City, N.J.


boast (n.)

mid-13c., arrogance, presumption, pride, vanity; c.1300, a brag, boastful speech, from Anglo-French
bost ostentation, probably via Scandinavian (compare Norwegian baus proud, bold, daring), from
Proto-Germanic *bausia to blow up, puff up, swell (cognates: Middle High German bus swelling,
dialectal German baustern to swell; Middle Dutch bose, Dutch boos evil, wicked, angry, Old High
German bosi worthless, slanderous, German b&ouml;se evil, bad, angry), from PIE *bhou-, variant of
root *beu-, *bheu- to grow, swell (see bull (n.2)).    The notion apparently is of being puffed up
with pride; compare Old English belgan to become angry, offend, provoke, belg anger, arrogance, from
the same root as bellows and belly (n.). Related: Boasted; boasting. An Old English word for
boasting was micelsprecende, big talk.


boast (v.)

early 14c., to brag, speak arrogantly; from the same source as boast (n.). Related: Boasted;
boasting.


boastful (adj.)

early 14c., from boast (n.) + -ful. Related: Boastfully; boastfulness.


boat (n.)

Old English bat boat, ship, vessel, from Proto-Germanic *bait- (cognates: Old Norse batr, Dutch
boot, German Boot), possibly from PIE root *bheid- to split (see fissure), with the sense of making
a boat by hollowing out a tree trunk; or it may be an extension of the name for some part of a ship.
French bateau boat is from Old English or Norse. Spanish batel, Italian battello, Medieval Latin
batellus likewise probably are from Germanic.


boatswain (n.)

mid-15c., from late Old English batswegen, from bat boat (see boat (n.)) + Old Norse sveinn boy (see
swain). Phonetic spelling bo'sun is attested from 1840.


bob (v.1)

move with a short, jerking motion, late 14c., probably connected to Middle English bobben to strike,
beat (late 13c.), perhaps of echoic origin. Another early sense was to make a fool of, cheat (early
14c.). Related: Bobbed; bobbing. The sense in bobbing for apples (or cherries) recorded by 1799.


bob (n.2)

short hair, 1680s, attested 1570s in sense of a horse's tail cut short, from earlier bobbe cluster
(as of leaves), mid-14c., a northern word, perhaps of Celtic origin (compare Irish baban tassel,
cluster, Gaelic babag). Used over the years in various senses connected by the notion of round,
hanging mass, such as weight at the end of a line (1650s). The hair sense was revived with a shift
in women's styles early 20c. (verb 1918, noun 1920). Related words include bobby pin, bobby sox,
bobsled, bobcat.


bob (n.1)

act of bobbing, 1540s, from bob (v.1). As a slang word for shilling it is attested from 1789, but
the signification is unknown.


bobbin (n.)

1520s, from French bobine, small instrument used in sewing or tapestry-making, perhaps from Latin
balbus (see babble (v.)) for the stuttering, stammering noise it made.


bobbinet (n.)

1819, from bobbin + net (n.).


bobble (v.)

1812, frequentative of bob (v.1). The notion is to move or handle something with continual bobbing.
Related: Bobbled; bobbling. Bobble-head as a type of doll is from 1968.


bobby (n.)

London policeman, 1844, from Mr. (later Sir) Robert Peel (1788-1850), Home Secretary who introduced
the Metropolitan Police Act (10 Geo IV, c.44) of 1829. Compare peeler.


bobby pin (n.)

1928, from diminutive of bob (n.2) + pin (n.).


bobby sox

1943, from diminutive of bob (n.2) + sox. So called because they are shortened compared to knee-
socks. Derivative bobby-soxer first attested 1944.    Months ago colored bobby sox folded at the top
were decreed, not by anyone or any group but, as usual, by a sudden mysterious and universal
acceptance of the new idea. Now no teen-ager dares wear anything but pure white socks without a
fold. [Life magazine, Dec. 11, 1944]


bobcat (n.)

North American lynx, 1873, in a Maine context; so called for its short tail; see bob (n.2) + cat
(n.).


bobolink (n.)

1796, American English, from bob-o-Lincoln (1774), imitative of the call of the bird.


bobsled (n.)

1839, from bob (n.2) + sled (n.). So called because it is a short type.


bobwhite (n.)

North American partridge, 1819, so called from the sound of its cry.


Boccaccio

the name means big-mouth in Italian, from boccaccia, augmentative of bocca mouth (see bouche).


bocce (n.)

from Italian bocce (wooden) balls, plural of boccia, which is related to French bosse bump, hump,
perhaps from a Germanic source.


Boche (n.)

1914, from French slang, rascal, of unknown origin, applied by soldiers to Germans in World War I.
Another theory traces it to French Allemand German, in eastern French Al(le)moche, altered
contemptuously to Alboche by association with caboche, a slang word for head, literally cabbage
(compare tete de boche, French for German in an 1887 slang dictionary). All the French terms are no
older than mid-19c.


bock (n.)

type of beer, 1856, from German ambock, Bavarian dialectal pronunciation of Einbecker bier, from
Einbeck, Hanover, where it was first brewed.


bod (n.)

1788, a person, short for body. Meaning physical body is recorded from 1933.


bodacious (adj.)

1837 (implied in bodaciously), Southern U.S. slang, perhaps from bodyaciously bodily, totally, or a
blend of bold and audacious, which suits the earliest attested sense of the word. Popularized anew
by 1982 Hollywood film An Officer and a Gentleman.


bode (v.)

Old English bodian proclaim, announce; foretell, from boda messenger, probably from Proto-Germanic
*budon- (cognates: Old Saxon gibod, German gebot, Old Norse bo&eth;), from PIE *bheudh- be aware,
make aware (see bid (v.)). As a shortened form of forebode (usually evil), it dates from 1740.
Related: Boded; boding.


bodega (n.)

1848, from Mexican Spanish, from Spanish bodega a wine shop; cellar, from Latin apotheca, from Greek
apotheke depot, store (see apothecary). The same word as boutique.


Bodhisattva (n.)

1828, from Sanskrit, literally one whose essence is perfect knowledge, from bodhi perfect knowledge
(see Buddha) + sattva reality, being.


bodice (n.)

1560s, oddly spelled plural of body, name of a tight-fitting Elizabethan garment covering the torso;
plural because the body came in two parts which fastened in the middle. Bodice-ripper for racy
romance novel is from 1981.


bodily (adj.)

c.1300, pertaining to the body; also opposed to spiritual; from body + -ly (1). As an adverb (with
-ly (2)) from late 14c.


bodkin (n.)

late 14c., boydekin, of unknown origin. The ending suggests a diminutive formation, and Celtic has
been suggested as the source of the root.


Bodleian

from Sir Thomas Bodley (1545-1613), who in 1597 refounded the library at Oxford University.


Bodoni

1880, typeface based on that used by celebrated Italian printer Giambattista Bodoni (1740-1813) of
Parma. The modern type of this name is a composite of his many forms.


body (n.)

Old English bodig trunk, chest (of a man or animal); related to Old High German botah, of unknown
origin. Not elsewhere in Germanic, and the word has died out in German (replaced by leib, originally
life, and k&ouml;rper, from Latin). In English, extension to person is from late 13c. Meaning main
part of anything was in late Old English, hence its use in reference to vehicles (1520s).
Contrasted with soul since at least mid-13c. Meaning corpse (short for dead body) is from late 13c.
Transferred to matter generally in Middle English (as in heavenly body, late 14c.). Body politic the
nation, the state first recorded 1520s, legalese, with French word order. Body image was coined
1935. Body language is attested from 1967, perhaps from French langage corporel (1966). Phrase over
my dead body attested by 1833.


bodyguard (n.)

1735, retinue, escort, collective singular, from body + guard (n.). Attested 1861 as a soldier of
the bodyguard.


Boeing

U.S. aerospace corporation, founded 1916 by William E. Boeing in Seattle, Washington, as an airplane
manufacturer. The family name is German.


Boeotian (adj.)

1590s, ignorant, dull, from Boeotia, district around Thebes in ancient Greece (said to have been so
called for its cattle pastures; Greek bous = ox), whose inhabitants were characterized as
proverbially dull and countrified by their neighbors, the Athenians. The Boeotians presumably held
reciprocal opinions, but their great writers, Plutarch and Pindar, though patriots, are full of
praise for Athenian deeds and institutions.    Though his aim was to vindicate Boeotia, [Pindar] has
probably done her a disservice, in that he has helped to immortalise the scurrilous proverb
&#914;&#959;&#953;&#969;&#964;&#943;&#945; &#973;&#962;, which he wished to confute. ... If left to
itself, the slander might have passed into oblivion long ago. [W. Rhys Roberts, The Ancient
Boeotians, 1895]


Boer (n.)

Dutch colonist in South Africa, 1824, from Dutch boer farmer, from Middle Dutch, cognate with Old
English gebur dweller, farmer, peasant, and thus related to bower, German Bauer, and the final
syllable of neighbor (see boor). Boer War (1899-1902) was technically the Second Boer War, there
having been a brief preview 1880-1881.


boffin (n.)

person engaged in innovative research, especially in aviation, 1945; earlier elderly naval officer
(1941), probably from one of the Mr. Boffins of English literature (as in Our Mutual Friend).


boffo (adj.)

strikingly successful, by 1961, show biz slang, probably echoic of a hit.


bog (n.)

c.1500, from Gaelic and Irish bogach bog, from adjective bog soft, moist, from PIE *bhugh-, from
root *bheugh- to bend (see bow (v.)). Bog-trotter applied to the wild Irish from 1670s.


bog (v.)

to sink (something or someone) in a bog, c.1600, from bog (n.). Intransitive use from c.1800.
Related: Bogged; bogging.


bogart (v.)

1969, to keep a joint in your mouth, dangling from the lip like Humphrey Bogart's cigarette in the
old movies, instead of passing it on. First attested in Easy Rider. The word was also used 1960s
with notions of get something by intimidation, be a tough guy (again with reference to the actor and
the characters he typically played). In old drinking slang, Captain Cork was a man slow in passing
the bottle.


bogey (n.1)

World War II aviator slang for unidentified aircraft, presumably hostile, probably ultimately from
bogge, a variant of Middle English bugge a frightening specter (see bug (n.)). Thus it shares
ancestry with many dialect words, such as bog/bogge (attested 16c.-17c.), bogeyman (16c.), boggart
specter that haunts a gloomy spot (c.1570, in Westmoreland, Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire).
The earliest modern form appears to be Scottish bogle ghost, attested from c.1500 and popularized
c.1800 in English literature by Scott, Burns, etc.


bogey (n.2)

in golfing, c.1891, originally number of strokes a good player is supposed to need for a given hole
or course; later, score one over par (1946); from the same source as bogey (n.1), on the notion of a
phantom opponent, represented by the ground score. The word was in vogue at the time in Britain
because of the popularity of a music hall tune Hush, Hush, Hush, Here Comes the Bogey Man.One
popular song at least has left its permanent effect on the game of golf. That song is 'The Bogey
Man.' In 1890 Dr. Thos. Browne, R.N., the hon. secretary of the Great Yarmouth Club, was playing
against a Major Wellman, the match being against the 'ground score,' which was the name given to the
scratch value of each hole. The system of playing against the 'ground score' was new to Major
Wellman, and he exclaimed, thinking of the song of the moment, that his mysterious and well-nigh
invincible opponent was a regular 'bogey-man.' The name 'caught on' at Great Yarmouth, and to-day
'Bogey' is one of the most feared opponents on all the courses that acknowledge him. [1908, cited in
OED]  Other early golfing sources give it an American origin. As a verb, attested by 1948.


bogeyman (n.)

16c.; see bogey (n.1) + man (n.).


boggle (v.)

1590s, to start with fright (as a startled horse does), from Middle English bugge specter (among
other things, supposed to scare horses at night); see bug (n.); also compare bogey (n.1). The
meaning to raise scruples, hesitate is from 1630s. Related: Boggled; boggling.


boggy (adj.)

1580s, from bog (n.) + -y (2). Related: Bogginess.


bogus

1838, counterfeit money, spurious coin, American English, apparently from a slang word applied
(according to some sources first in Ohio in 1827) to a counterfeiter's apparatus.    One bogus or
machine impressing dies on the coin, with a number of dies, engraving tools, bank bill paper,
spurious coin, &amp;c.; &amp;c.; making in all a large wagon load, was taken into possession by the
attorney general of Lower Canada. [Niles' Register, Sept. 7, 1833, quoting from Concord, New
Hampshire, Statesman, Aug. 24]     Some trace this to tantrabobus, also tantrabogus, a late 18c.
colloquial Vermont word for any odd-looking object, in later 19c. use the devil, which might be
connected to tantarabobs, recorded as a Devonshire name for the devil. Others trace it to the same
source as bogey (n.1).


boh

see boo.


Bohemia

central European kingdom, mid-15c., Beeme, from Middle French Boheme Bohemia, from Latin Boiohaemum
(Tacitus), from Boii, the Celtic people who settled in what is now Bohemia (and were driven from it
by the Germanic Marcomans early 1c.; singular Boius, fem. Boia, perhaps literally warriors) + Proto-
Germanic *haimaz home (see home (n.)). Attested from 1861 in meaning community of artists and social
Bohemians or in reference to the district where they live (see bohemian).


bohemian (n.)

a gypsy of society, 1848, from French bohemi&eacute;n (1550s), from the country name (see Bohemia).
The modern sense is perhaps from the use of this country name since 15c. in French for gypsy (they
were wrongly believed to have come from there, though their first appearance in Western Europe may
have been directly from there), or from association with 15c. Bohemian heretics. It was popularized
by Henri Murger's 1845 story collection Scenes de la Vie de Boheme, the basis of Puccini's La
Boh&egrave;me. Used in English 1848 in Thackary's Vanity Fair.The term 'Bohemian' has come to be
very commonly accepted in our day as the description of a certain kind of literary gipsey, no matter
in what language he speaks, or what city he inhabits .... A Bohemian is simply an artist or
litt&eacute;rateur who, consciously or unconsciously, secedes from conventionality in life and in
art. [Westminster Review, 1862]


Bohunk (n.)

1903, U.S. derogatory slang for lower class immigrant from Central or Eastern Europe, probably from
Bohemian + a distortion of Hungarian.


boil (v.)

early 13c., from Old French bolir boil, bubble up, ferment, gush (12c., Modern French bouillir),
from Latin bullire to bubble, seethe, from PIE base *beu- to swell (see bull (n.2)). The native word
is seethe. Figurative sense of to agitate the feelings is from 1640s.I am impatient, and my blood
boyls high. [Thomas Otway, Alcibiades, 1675]  Related: Boiled; boiling. Boiling point is recorded
from 1773.


boil (n.)

hard tumor, altered from Middle English bile (Kentish bele), perhaps by association with the verb;
from Old English byl, byle boil, carbuncle, from West Germanic *buljon- swelling (cognates: Old
Frisian bele, Old High German bulia, German Beule). Perhaps ultimately from PIE root *bhel- (2) to
swell (see bole), or from *beu- to grow, swell (see bull (n.2); also compare boast (n.)). Compare
Old Irish bolach pustule, Gothic ufbauljan to puff up, Icelandic beyla hump.


boiler (n.)

1540s, agent noun from boil (v.). Meaning vessel for boiling is from 1725; steam engine sense is
from 1757.


boilermaker (n.)

a maker of boilers for engines, 1814, from boiler (n.) + maker. Meaning shot of whiskey with a glass
of beer is short for boilermaker's delight (1910), strong cheap whiskey, so called in jest from the
notion that it would clean the scales from the interior of a boiler.


boilerplate (n.)

newspaper (and now information technology) slang for unit of writing that can be used over and over
without change, 1893, from a literal meaning (1840) metal rolled in large, flat plates for use in
making steam boilers. The connecting notion is probably of sturdiness or reusability. From 1890s to
1950s, publicity items were cast or stamped in metal ready for the printing press and distributed to
newspapers as filler. The largest supplier was Western Newspaper Union.


boink

have sex with; the sex act, slang by c.2000, perhaps an alteration of bonk in its popular sexual
sense. Related: Boinked; boinking.


Boise

city in Idaho, U.S., from French-Canadian bois&eacute;, literally wooded, from French bois wood,
which (with Italian bosco, Spanish bosque, Medieval Latin boscus) apparently is borrowed from the
Germanic root of bush (n.). Medieval Latin boscus was used especially of woodland pasture.


boisterous (adj.)

late 15c., unexplained alteration of Middle English boistous (c.1300) rough, coarse (as of food),
clumsy, violent, of unknown origin, perhaps from Anglo-French bustous rough (road), which is perhaps
from Old French boisteos curved, lame; uneven, rough (Modern French boiteux), itself of obscure
origin. Another guess traces it via Celtic to Latin bestia. Used of persons from 1560s. Related:
Boisterously; boisterousness.


bok choy (n.)

type of Chinese cabbage, from Cantonese, literally white vegetable.


bold (adj.)

Old English beald (West Saxon), bald (Anglian) bold, brave, confident, strong, from Proto-Germanic
*balthaz (cognates: Old High German bald bold, swift, in names such as Archibald, Leopold, Theobald;
Gothic bal&thorn;ei boldness; Old Norse ballr frightful, dangerous), perhaps from PIE *bhol-to-
suffixed form of *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see bole).    Of flavors (coffee, etc.) from 1829. The
noun meaning those who are bold is from c.1300. Old French and Proven&ccedil;al baut bold, Italian
baldo bold, daring, fearless are Germanic loan-words.


bold-face (n.)

in typography, 1845, from bold (adj.) + face (n.). In reference to types, bold (adj.) is attested
from 1790, perhaps from the secondary sense easily visible, striking to the eye.


bole (n.)

early 14c., from Old Norse bolr tree trunk, from Proto-Germanic *bulas (cognates: Middle Dutch bolle
trunk of a tree), from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (cognates: Greek phyllon leaf, phallos
swollen penis; Latin flos flower, florere to blossom, flourish, folium leaf; Old Prussian balsinis
cushion; Old Norse belgr bag, bellows; Old English bolla pot, cup, bowl; Old Irish bolgaim I swell,
blath blossom, flower, bolach pimple, bolg bag; Breton bolc'h flax pod; Serbian buljiti to stare, be
bug-eyed; Serbo-Croatian blazina pillow).


bolero (n.)

kind of Spanish dance, 1787, from Spanish, probably from bola ball (and perhaps with reference to
whirling motion), from Latin bulla (see bull (n.2)). In reference to a type of short jacket, it is
recorded by 1864.


Bolivia

South American republic, founded 1825, named for Simon Bolivar (1783-1830), statesman and soldier.


boll (n.)

Old English bolla bowl, cup, pot, merged with Middle Dutch bolle round object, borrowed 13c., both
from Proto-Germanic *bul-, from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). Influenced in
meaning by Latin bulla bubble, ball, ultimately from the same PIE root. Extended c.1500 to round
seed pod of flax or cotton. Boll weevil is 1895, American English.    In south Texas, among Spanish-
speaking people, the insect is generally known as the 'picudo,' a descriptive name which refers to
the snout or beak of the insect. English-speaking planters generally referred to the insect at first
as 'the sharpshooter,' a term which for many years has been applied to any insect which causes
through its punctures the shedding of the squares or the rotting of the bolls. As there are several
native insects that are commonly called sharpshooters and which, though injurious, are by no means
to be compared with this insect, it becomes necessary to discourage in every way the use of the word
sharpshooter as applied to this weevil. The adoption of the term 'Mexican cotton-boll weevil' for
the new pest is recommended. [New Mexico College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts Agricultural
Experiment Station Bulletin No. 19, April 1896]    A case of entomology meddling in etymology.


bollard (n.)

1844, originally a post for fixing mooring ropes; since 1948, usually a traffic control device;
probably from bole + suffix -ard.


bollix (v.)

bungle, respelling (perhaps euphemistic) of bollocks, plural of bollock testicle, from Old English
beallucas testicles, from Proto-Germanic *ball-, from PIE *bhel- (2) to inflate, swell (see bole).
Related: Bollixed; bollixing.


bollock (n.)

singular of bollocks (q.v.).


bollocks (n.)

testicles, 1744, see bollix. In British slang, as an ejaculation meaning nonsense, recorded from
1919.


Bollywood

film industry based in Mumbai, India, 1977, from Bombay (old name of Mumbai) + Hollywood.


Bolo (n.)

traitor, 1917, from Paul Bolo, French adventurer shot for treason April 17, 1918; used in World War
I with reference to pacifist propagandists; later somewhat assimilated to Bolshevik (q.v.).


bologna (n.)

1850, variant of bologna sausage (1590s), named for the city in Italy, whose name is from Latin
Bononia, which either represents Gaulish bona foundation, fortress, or Boii, the name of the Gaulish
people who occupied the region 4c. B.C.E. Also see baloney.


Bolognese (adj.)

1756, pertaining to Bologna (q.v.).


boloney (n.)

see baloney.


Bolshevik (n.)

1917, from Russian bol'shiy greater, comparative of adjective bol'shoy big, great (as in Bolshoi
Ballet), from Old Church Slavonic boljiji larger, from PIE root *bel- strong (cognates: Sanskrit
balam strength, force, Greek beltion better, Phrygian balaios big, fast, Old Irish odbal strong,
Welsh balch proud; Middle Dutch, Low German, Frisian pal strong, firm).    It was the faction of the
Russian Social Democratic Worker's Party after a split in 1903 that was either larger or more
extreme (or both) than the Mensheviks (from Russian men'shij less); after they seized power in 1917,
applied generally to Russian communists. Bolshevism is recorded from 1917.


bolster (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in bolstered), propped up, made to bulge (originally of a woman's breasts), from
bolster (n.). Figurative sense is from c.1500, on the notion of to support with a bolster, prop up.
Related: Bolstering.


bolster (n.)

Old English bolster bolster, cushion, something stuffed so that it swells up, especially long,
stuffed pillow, from Proto-Germanic *bolkhstraz (cognates: Old Norse bolstr, Danish, Swedish, Dutch
bolster, German polster), from PIE *bhelgh- to swell (see belly (n.)).


bolt (n.)

Old English bolt short, stout arrow with a heavy head; also crossbow for throwing bolts, from Proto-
Germanic *bultas (cognates: Old Norse bolti, Danish bolt, Dutch bout, German Bolzen), perhaps from
PIE root *bheld- to knock, strike (cognates: Lithuanian beldu I knock, baldas pole for striking).
Applied since Middle English to other short metal rods (especially those with knobbed ends). From
the notion of an arrow's flight comes the lightning bolt (1530s). A bolt of canvas (c.1400) was so
called for its shape. Adverbial phrase bolt upright is from late 14c.


bolt (v.)

from bolt (n.) in its various senses; from a crossbow arrow's quick flight comes the meaning to
spring, to make a quick start (early 13c.). Via the notion of runaway horses, this came to mean to
leave suddenly (early 19c.). Meaning to gulp down food is from 1794. The meaning to secure by means
of a bolt is from 1580s. Related: Bolted; bolting.


bomb (n.)

1580s, from French bombe, from Italian bomba, probably from Latin bombus a deep, hollow noise; a
buzzing or booming sound, from Greek bombos deep and hollow sound, echoic. Originally of mortar
shells, etc.; modern sense of explosive device placed by hand or dropped from airplane is 1909.
Meaning old car is from 1953. Meaning success is from 1954 (late 1990s slang the bomb the best is
probably a fresh formation); opposite sense of a failure is from 1963. The bomb atomic bomb is from
1945.


bomb (v.)

1680s, from bomb (n.). Meaning to fail attested from 1963. Related: Bombed; bombing. Slang bombed
drunk is attested by 1956.


bombard (n.)

early 15c., catapult, military engine for throwing large stones, from Middle French bombarde mortar,
catapult (14c.), from bombe (see bomb (n.)). The same word, from the same source, was used in
English and French late 14c. in reference to the bass shawm, a bassoon-like musical instrument,
preserving the buzzing sense in the Latin.


bombard (v.)

1590s, from French bombarder, from bombarde mortar, catapult (see bombard (n.)). Figurative sense by
1765. Related: Bombarded; bombarding.


bombardier (n.)

1550s, soldier with a bombard, from French bombardier, from bombard (see bombard (n.)). In 17c.-18c.
of soldiers who manned artillery (especially mortars and howitzers); meaning one who aims the bombs
in an aircraft is attested 1932, American English.


bombast (n.)

1560s, cotton padding, corrupted from earlier bombace (1550s), from Old French bombace cotton,
cotton wadding, from Late Latin bombacem, accusative of bombax cotton, 'linteorum aut aliae quaevis
quisquiliae,'  a corruption and transferred use of Latin bombyx silk, from Greek bombyx silk,
silkworm (which also came to mean cotton in Medieval Greek), from some oriental word, perhaps
related to Iranian pambak (modern panba) or Armenian bambok, perhaps ultimately from a PIE root
meaning to twist, wind. From stuffing and padding for clothes or upholstery, meaning extended to
pompous, empty speech (1580s).    Also from the same source are Swedish bomull, Danish bomuld
cotton, and, via Turkish forms, Modern Greek mpampaki, Rumanian bumbac, Serbo-Croatian pamuk. German
baumwolle cotton is probably from the Latin word but altered by folk-etymology to look like tree
wool. Polish bawe&#322;na, Lithuanian bovelna are partial translations from German.


bombastic (adj.)

1704, inflated, from bombast + -ic. Meaning given to bombastic language is from 1727.


Bombay

city in western India, from Portuguese, and popularly explained as Portuguese bom bahia good bay,
but that seems folk etymology (for one, the adjective is masculine and the noun is feminine), and
the more likely candidate is the local Mumbadevi Goddess Mumba, a Hindu deity worshipped there. The
city's name officially changed to Mumbai in 1995.


bombazine (n.)

(also bombasine, bambazine), 1550s, from French bombasin (14c.) cotton cloth, from Medieval Latin
bombacinium silk texture, from Late Latin bombycinium, neuter of bombycinius silken, from bombyx
silk, silkworm, from Greek bombyx. The post-classical transfer of the word from silk to cotton may
reflect the perceived silk-like nature of the fabric, or a waning of familiarity with genuine silk
in the European Dark Ages, but compare bombast.


bomber (n.)

one who throws bombs, 1915, agent noun from bomb (v.). As a type of military aircraft, from 1917.


bombinate (v.)

make a buzzing noise, 1865, from Latin bombinare, corrupted from bombitare to hum, buzz, from bombus
a deep, hollow sound; hum, buzz, echoic. Related: Bombinated; bombinating.


bombination (n.)

1816; see bombinate + -ion.


bombshell (n.)

1708, from bomb (n.) + shell (n.). The figurative sense of shattering or devastating thing or event
attested from 1860. In reference to a pretty woman (especially a blonde) it is attested from 1942
(Bombshell as title of a movie starring blond U.S. actress Jean Harlow (1911-1937) is from 1933).


bon

French, literally good (adj.), from Latin bonus good (see bene-). It has crossed the Channel in
phrases such as bon ap&eacute;tit (1860), literally good appetite; bon-ton (1744) good style; bon
mot.


bon mot (n.)

1735, French, good saying,  literally good word, from bon good + mot (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
muttum, from Latin muttire to mutter, mumble, murmur (see mutter).


bon vivant (n.)

also bon-vivant, one fond of good living, 1690s, French (see bon); the fem. is bonne vivante.


bon voyage

1670s, French, pleasant journey, from bon good, (see bon) + voyage (see voyage (n.)).


bona fide

1540s, Latin, literally in good faith, ablative of bona fides good faith (see faith). Originally
used as an adverb, later (18c.) also as an adjective. The opposite is mala fide.


bona fides (n.)

by 1838, English pluralization of bona fide, as though it were a noun meaning guarantee of good
faith.


bonafide

see bona fide.


bonanza (n.)

1844, American English, from Spanish bonanza a rich lode, originally fair weather at sea,
prosperity, from Vulgar Latin *bonacia, from Latin bonus good (see bene-).


bonbon (n.)

1796, from French bonbon (17c.), childish reduplication of bon good. Hence, bonbonniere (1818) a box
for sweets.


bond (n.)

early 13c., anything that binds, phonetic variant of band (n.1). For vowel change, see long (adj.);
also influenced by Old English bonda householder, literally dweller (see bondage). Legalistic sense
first recorded 1590s.


bond (v.)

1670s (transitive), from bond (n.). Intransitive sense from 1836. Originally of things; of persons
by 1969. Related: Bonded; bonding. Male bonding attested by 1969.


bondage (n.)

c.1300, condition of a serf or slave, from Anglo-Latin bondagium, from Middle English bond a serf,
tenant farmer, from Old English bonda householder, from Old Norse boandi free-born farmer, noun use
of present participle of boa dwell, prepare, inhabit, from PIE *bhow-, from root *bheue- to be,
exist, dwell (see be). Meaning in English changed by influence of bond. The sexual sado-masochism
sense is recorded by 1966.


bonded (adj.)

legally confirmed by bond, 1590s, from bond (v.).


bondman (n.)

mid-13c., husband, husbandman, from Middle English bond (see bondage) + man (n.). Later, man in
bondage, slave (mid-14c.).


bondsman (n.)

one who stands surety by bond, 1754, from bond (n.) + man (n.), with genitive -s- added probably in
part to avoid confusion with bondman.


bone (n.)

Old English ban bone, tusk, from Proto-Germanic *bainam (cognates: Old Frisian ben, Old Norse bein,
Danish ben, German Bein). No cognates outside Germanic (the common PIE root is *os-; see osseous);
the Norse, Dutch, and German cognates also mean shank of the leg, and this is the main meaning in
Modern German, but English never seems to have had this sense.


bone (v.)

especially in bone up study, 1880s student slang, probably from Bohn's Classical Library, a popular
series in higher education published by German-born English publisher Henry George Bohn (1796-1884)
as part of a broad series of libraries he issued from 1846, totaling 766 volumes, continued after
1864 by G. Bell &amp; Sons.


bonehead (n.)

stupid person, 1908, from bone (n.) + head (n.). Compare blockhead, meathead.


boner (n.)

blunder, 1912, baseball slang, probably from bonehead. Meaning erect penis is 1950s, from earlier
bone-on (1940s), probably a variation (with connecting notion of hardness) of hard-on (1893).


bones (n.)

plural of bone (n.). As a colloquial way to say dice, it is attested from late 14c. As a nickname
for a surgeon, it dates to 1887, short for sawbones. To make bones about something (mid-15c.) refers
to bones found in soup, etc., as an obstacle to being swallowed. To feel something in one's bones
have a presentiment is 1867, American English.


bonfire (n.)

1550s, from Middle English banefire (late 15c.), originally a fire in which bones were burned. See
bone (n.) + fire (n.).


bong (n.)

water pipe for marijuana, 1960s, U.S. slang, said to have been introduced by Vietnam War veterans,
said to be from Thai baung, literally cylindrical wooden tube.


bongo (n.)

1920, from American Spanish (West Indies, especially Cuba), from a word of West African origin, such
as Lokele (Zaire) boungu.


bonhomie (n.)

good nature, 1803, from French bonhomie good nature, easy temper, from bonhomme good man (with
unusual loss of -m-), from bon good (see bon) + homme man, from Latin homo (see homunculus).


Boniface

innkeeper, from Will Boniface, character in George Farquhar's comedy The Beaux' Stratagem
(1707).Contrary to the common opinion, this name derives not from Latin bonifacius 'well-doer,' but
from bonifatius, from bonum 'good' and fatum 'fate.' The change to Bonifacius was due to
pronunciation and from this was deduced a false etymology. Bonifatius is frequent on Latin
inscriptions. Bonifacius is found only twice and these late (Thesaurus) [Dictionary of English
Surnames]


bonito (n.)

type of sea fish, 1590s, from Spanish bonito, probably literally the good one, diminutive of bueno
good, from Latin bonus (see bene-).


bonjour

French, literally good day, from bon good, from Latin bonus (see bene-) + jour (see journey (n.)).


bonk (v.)

to hit, 1931, probably of imitative origin; 1975 in sense of have sexual intercourse with. Related:
Bonked; bonking.


bonkers (adj.)

crazy, 1957, British slang, perhaps from earlier naval slang meaning slightly drunk (1948), from
notion of a thump (bonk) on the head.


bonnet (n.)

late 14c., Scottish bonat brimless hat for men, from Old French bonet, short for chapel de bonet,
from bonet (12c., Modern French bonnet) kind of cloth used as a headdress, from Medieval Latin
bonitum material for hats, perhaps a shortening of Late Latin abonnis a kind of cap (7c.), which is
perhaps from a Germanic source.


bonny (adj.)

1540s, of unknown origin, apparently from Old French bon, bone good (see bon).


bonnyclabber (n.)

1620s (in shortened form clabber), from Modern Irish bainne milk (from Middle Irish banne drop,
also, rarely, milk; cognate with Sanskrit bindu- drop) + claba thick. Compare Irish and Gaelic
clabar mud, which sometimes has made its way into English (Yeats, etc.).


bonsai

1914, from Japanese bon basin, pot + sai to plant.


bonus (n.)

1773, Stock Exchange Latin [Weekley], from Latin bonus good (adj.); see bene-. The correct noun form
would be bonum. In U.S. history the bonus army was tens of thousands of World War I veterans and
followers who marched on Washington, D.C., in 1932 demanding early redemption of their service bonus
certificates (which carried a maximum value of $625).


bony (adj.)

late 14c., from bone (n.) + -y (2).


boo

expression meant to startle, early 15c., boh, A combination of consonant and vowel especially fitted
to produce a loud and startling sound [OED, which compares Latin boare, Greek boaein to cry aloud,
roar, shout.]; as an expression of disapproval, 1801 (n.), 1816 (v.); hence, the verb meaning shower
someone with boos (1893).    Booing was common late 19c. among London theater audiences and at
British political events; In Italy, Parma opera-goers were notorious boo-birds, but the custom seems
to have been little-known in America till c.1910.    To say boo open one's mouth, speak, originally
was to say boo to a goose.    To be able to say Bo! to a goose is to be not quite destitute of
courage, to have an inkling of spirit, and was probably in the first instance used of children. A
little boy who comes across some geese suddenly will find himself hissed at immediately, and a great
demonstration of defiance made by them, but if he can pluck up heart to cry 'bo!' loudly and advance
upon them, they will retire defeated. The word 'bo' is clearly selected for the sake of the
explosiveness of its first letter and the openness and loudness of its vowel. [Walter W. Skeat, Cry
Bo to a Goose, Notes and Queries, 4th series vi Sept. 10, 1870]


boo-boo (n.)

mistake, 1954, apparently a reduplication of boob, which had acquired a secondary sense of foolish
mistake (1934).


boo-hoo

also boohoo, 1520s, originally of laughter or weeping (now only of weeping); see boo.


boo-ya

also booyah, exclamation used in various situations, first attested c.1990 in hip-hop slang.


boob (n.)

stupid person, 1909, American English slang, perhaps from booby.


boob tube (n.)

television set, U.S. slang, by 1965, from boob stupid person + slang tube (n.) television,
television programming, because the sets really did have vacuum tubes in them once upon a time.


boobs (n.)

breasts, 1929, U.S. slang, probably from much older term boobies (late 17c.), related to 17c. bubby;
perhaps ultimately from Latin puppa, literally little girl, hence, in child-talk, breast. Or else it
is a natural formation in English (compare French poupe teat, German dialectal Bubbi, etc.).


booby (n.)

1590s, from Spanish bobo stupid person, slow bird (used of various ungainly seabirds), probably from
Latin balbus stammering, from an imitative root (see barbarian).   Booby prize is by 1883: an object
of little value given to the loser of a game; booby trap is 1850, originally a schoolboy prank; the
more lethal sense developed during World War I.    At the end of every session the dominie had the
satirical custom of presenting his tawse as a booby-prize to some idle or stupid lout whom he picked
out as meriting this distinction so that next time they met he might start fresh and fair with new
pair for a new set of classes. [Ascott R. Hope, Dumps, Young England magazine, 1883]


boodle (n.)

1833, crowd; 1858, phony money, especially graft money, actual or potential (1883), both American
English slang, either or both based on bundle, or from Dutch boedel property.


booger (n.)

nasal mucus, by 1890s; earlier bugger. Also boogie.


boogie (v.)

originally dance to boogie music, a late 1960s style of rock music based on blues chords, from
earlier boogie, a style of blues (1941, also as a verb), short for boogie-woogie (1928), a
reduplication of boogie (1917), which meant rent party in American English slang. A song title, That
Syncopated Boogie-boo, appears in a copyright listing from 1912.


book (n.)

Old English boc book, writing, written document, traditionally from Proto-Germanic *bokiz beech
(cognates: German Buch book Buche beech; see beech), the notion being of beechwood tablets on which
runes were inscribed, but it may be from the tree itself (people still carve initials in them). The
Old English word originally meant any written document. Latin and Sanskrit also have words for
writing that are based on tree names (birch and ash, respectively). Meaning libretto of an opera is
from 1768. A betting book is from 1856.


book (v.)

Old English bocian to grant or assign by charter, from book (n.). Meaning to enter into a book,
record is early 13c. Meaning to enter for a seat or place, issue (railway) tickets is from 1841; to
engage a performer as a guest is from 1872. Related: Booked; booking.


bookcase (n.)

1726, from book (n.) + case (n.2). An Old English word for this was bocfodder.


bookie (n.)

1885, colloquial shortening of bookmaker in the wagering sense.


bookish (adj.)

1560s, literary, from book (n.) + -ish. In sense of overly studious it is recorded from 1590s.
Related: Bookishly; bookishness.


bookkeeper (n.)

also book-keeper, 1550s, from book (n.) + keeper. A rare English word with three consecutive double
letters. Related: Bookkeeping, which is from 1680s in the sense the work of keeping account books;
book-keep (v.) is a back-formation from 1886.


booklet (n.)

1859, from book (n.) + diminutive ending -let.


bookmaker (n.)

also book-maker, 1510s, printer and binder of books, from book (n.) + agent noun from make (v.). The
wagering sense is from 1862. Related: Book-making (late 15c., betting sense 1824).


bookmark (n.)

also book-mark, 1840, from book (n.) + mark (n.1). Bookmarker is older (1838). As a verb, by 1900.
Related: Bookmarked; bookmarking.


bookstore (n.)

1763, from book (n.) + store (n.).


bookworm (n.)

1590s (of people), 1855 of insects or maggots; there is no single species known by this name, which
is applied to the anolium beetle, silverfishes, and book lice. See book (n.) + worm (n.).


Boolean (adj.)

in reference to abstract algebraic systems, 1851, named for George Boole (1815-1864), English
mathematician. The surname is a variant of Bull.


boom (v.)

mid-15c., earliest use was for bees and wasps, probably echoic of humming. The meaning make a loud
noise is 15c. Compare bomb. Meaning to burst into prosperity (of places, businesses, etc.) is 1871,
American English. Related: Boomed; booming. Boom box first attested 1978.


boom (n.1)

long pole, 1540s, from Scottish boun, borrowed from Dutch boom tree, pole, beam, from a Middle Dutch
word analogous to Old English beam (see beam (n.)).


boom (n.2)

in the business sense, 1873, sometimes said to be from boom (n.1), from the nautical meaning a long
spar run out to extend the foot of a sail -- a ship booming being one in full sail. But it could
just as well be from boom (v.) on the notion of suddenness.


boomerang (n.)

1827, adapted from an extinct Aboriginal languages of New South Wales, Australia. Another variant,
perhaps, was wo-mur-rang (1798).


boomerang (v.)

1880, from boomerang (n.).


boon (n.)

late 12c., bone petition, from Old Norse bon a petition, prayer, from Proto-Germanic *boniz
(cognates: Old English ben prayer, petition, bannan to summon; see ban).


boon (adj.)

in boon companion (1560s), only real survival of Middle English boon good (early 14c.), from Old
French bon (see bon).


boondocks (n.)

1910s, from Tagalog bundok mountain. Adopted by occupying American soldiers in the Philippines for
remote and wild place. Reinforced or re-adopted during World War II. Hence, also boondockers shoes
suited for rough terrain, originally (1944) U.S. services slang word for field boots.


boondoggle (n.)

1935, American English, of uncertain origin, popularized during the New Deal as a contemptuous word
for make-work projects for the unemployed. Said to have been a pioneer word for gadget; it also was
by 1932 a Boy Scout term for a kind of woven braid.


boonies (n.)

colloquial shortening of boondocks; by 1964, originally among U.S. troops in Vietnam War (in
reference to the rural areas of the country, as opposed to Saigon).


boor (n.)

13c., from Old French bovier herdsman, from Latin bovis, genitive of bos cow, ox. Re-introduced 16c.
from Dutch boer, from Middle Dutch gheboer fellow dweller, from Proto-Germanic *buram dweller,
especially farmer, from PIE *bhu-, from root *bheue- (see be). Original meaning was peasant farmer
(compare German Bauer, Dutch boer, Danish bonde), and in English it was at first applied to
agricultural laborers in or from other lands, as opposed to the native yeoman; negative connotation
attested by 1560s (in boorish), from notion of clownish rustics. Related: Boorishness.


boorish (adj.)

1560s, from boor (n.) + -ish.  Related: Boorishly; boorishness.


boost (v.)

1815, literal and figurative, American English, of unknown origin. Related: Boosted; boosting. As a
noun by 1825.


booster (n.)

1890, one who boosts something, agent noun from boost (v.). Electrical sense is recorded from 1894.
Young child's booster chair is attested under that name from 1960.


boot (n.1)

footwear, early 14c., from Old French bote boot (12c.), with corresponding words in Proven&ccedil;al
and Spanish, of unknown origin, perhaps from a Germanic source. Originally for riding boots only. An
old Dorsetshire word for half-boots was skilty-boots [Halliwell, Wright].


boot (n.2)

profit, use, Old English bot help, relief, advantage; atonement, literally a making better, from
Proto-Germanic *boto (see better (adj.)). Compare German Bu&szlig;e penance, atonement, Gothic botha
advantage. Now mostly in phrase to boot (Old English to bote).


boot (v.2)

start up a computer, 1975, from bootstrap (v.), a 1958 derived verb from bootstrap (n.) in the
computer sense.


boot (v.1)

to kick, 1877, American English, from boot (n.1). Generalized sense of eject, kick out is from 1880.
Related: Booted; booting.


boot camp (n.)

by 1941, U.S. Marines slang, said to be from boot (n.) as slang for recruit, which supposedly dates
from the Spanish-American War and is a synecdoche from boots, leggings worn by U.S. sailors.


boot-licker (n.)

also bootlicker, toady, servile follower, 1846, from boot (n.1) + agent noun from lick (v.). Foot-
licker in the same sense is from 1610s.


booth (n.)

mid-12c., from Old Danish bo&thorn; temporary dwelling, from East Norse *boa to dwell, from Proto-
Germanic *bowan-, from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, grow (see be). See also bound (adj.2). Compare
German Bude booth, stall, Middle Dutch boode, Lithuanian butas house, Old Irish both hut, Bohemian
bouda, Polish buda, some probably borrowed from East Norse, some formed from the PIE root.


bootleg (n.)

leg of a boot, 1630s, from boot (n.1) + leg (n.). As an adjective in reference to illegal iquor,
1889, American English slang, from the trick of concealing a flask of liquor down the leg of a high
boot. Before that the bootleg was the place to secret knives and pistols.


bootlegger (n.)

1889, from bootleg (q.v.).


bootlegging (n.)

also boot-legging, 1890, from bootleg (q.v.).


bootless (adj.2)

late Old English botleas unpardonable, not to be atoned for, without help or remedy, from boot (n.2)
+ -less. Meaning useless, unprofitable is from early 15c.


bootless (adj.1)

lacking boots, late 14c., from boot (n.1) + -less.


bootstrap (n.)

also boot-strap, tab or loop at the back of the top of a men's boot, which the wearer hooked a
finger through to pull the boots on, 1870, from boot (n.) + strap (n.).    Circa 1900, to pull
(oneself) up by (one's) bootstraps was used figuratively of an impossible task (Among the practical
questions at the end of chapter one of Steele's Popular Physics schoolbook (1888) is, 30. Why can
not a man lift himself by pulling up on his boot-straps?). By 1916 its meaning expanded to include
better oneself by rigorous, unaided effort. The meaning fixed sequence of instructions to load the
operating system of a computer (1953) is from the notion of the first-loaded program pulling itself,
and the rest, up by the bootstrap.


booty (n.)

plunder, gain, profit, mid-15c., from Old French butin booty (14c.), from a Germanic source akin to
Middle Low German bute exchange. Influenced in form and sense by boot (n.2) and in form by nouns
ending in -y. Meaning female body considered as a sex object is 1920s, black slang.


bootylicious (adj.)

by 1998, hip-hop slang, from booty + ending from delicious.


booze (n.)

by 1821, perhaps 1714; probably originally as a verb, to drink a lot (1768), variant of Middle
English bouse (c.1300), from Middle Dutch busen to drink heavily, related to Middle High German bus
(intransitive) to swell, inflate, of unknown origin. The noun reinforced by name of Philadelphia
distiller E.G. Booz. Johnson's dictionary has rambooze A drink made of wine, ale, eggs and sugar in
winter time; or of wine, milk, sugar and rose-water in the summer time. In New Zealand from c.World
War II, a drinking binge was a boozeroo.


boozy (adj.)

inebriated, 1719, from booze + -y (2). It was one of Benjamin Franklin's 225 synonyms for drunk
published in 1722. Related: Boozily; booziness.


bop (n.)

1948, shortening of bebop or rebop; as a verb, play bop music, play (a song) in a bop style, from
1948. It soon came to mean do any sort of dance to pop music (1956). Related: Bopped; bopping.
The musical movement had its own lingo, which was in vogue in U.S. early 1950s. Life magazine [Sept.
29, 1952] listed examples of bop talk: crazy new, wonderful, wildly exciting; gone (adj.) the tops--
superlative of crazy; cool (adj.) tasty, pretty; goof to blow a wrong note or make a mistake;
hipster modern version of hepcat; dig to understand, appreciate the subtleties of; stoned drunk,
captivated, ecstatic, sent out of this world; flip (v.) to react enthusiastically. [Life Sept. 29,
1952]


borage (n.)

flowering plant used in salads, mid-13c., from Anglo-French, Old French borage (13c., Modern French
bourrache), from Medieval Latin borrago. Klein says this is ultimately from Arabic abu arak,
literally the father of sweat, so called by Arab physicians for its effect on humans. But OED says
it's from Latin borra rough hair, short wool, in reference to the texture of the foliage.


borax (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French boras, from Medieval Latin baurach, from Arabic buraq, applied by the
Arabs to various substances used as fluxes, probably from Persian burah. Originally obtained in
Europe from the bed of salt lakes in Tibet.


borborygmi (n.)

also borborygmus, 17c., from Latin borborigmus, from Greek borborygmos, from borboryzein to have a
rumbling in the bowels, imitative.


Bordeaux

1560s, type of wine imported from the city in southwestern France. Its name is Roman Burdigala
(1c.), perhaps from a Celtic or pre-Celtic source the sense of which has been lost.


bordello (n.)

c.1300, bordel house of prostitution, from Old French bordel small hut, cabin; brothel (12c.),
diminutive of borde hut made of planks, from Frankish *bord wooden board or some other Germanic
source related to board (n.1). The modern form is a result of the French word being borrowed by
Italian then passed back to French with a suffix and re-borrowed into English in its current form by
1590s.


border (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French bordure seam, edge of a shield, border, from Frankish *bord or a similar
Germanic source (compare Old English bord side; see board (n.2)). The geopolitical sense first
attested 1530s, in Scottish (replacing earlier march), from The Borders, name of the district
adjoining the boundary between England and Scotland.


border (v.)

c.1400, to put a border on; 1640s as to lie on the border of, from border (n.). Related: Bordered;
bordering.


borderline (n.)

1869, strip of land along a frontier, from border (n.) + line (n.). As an adjective meaning verging
on it is attested from 1907, originally in medical jargon.


bore (v.1)

Old English borian to bore through, perforate, from bor auger, from Proto-Germanic *buron (cognates:
Old Norse bora, Swedish borra, Old High German boron, Middle Dutch boren, German bohren), from PIE
root *bher- (2) to cut with a sharp point, pierce, bore (cognates: Greek pharao I plow, Latin forare
to bore, pierce, Old Church Slavonic barjo to strike, fight, Albanian brime hole).    The meaning
diameter of a tube is first recorded 1570s; hence figurative slang full bore (1936) at maximum
speed, from notion of unchoked carburetor on an engine. Sense of be tiresome or dull first attested
1768, a vogue word c.1780-81 according to Grose (1785); possibly a figurative extension of to move
forward slowly and persistently, as a boring tool does.


bore (v.2)

past tense of bear (v.).


bore (n.)

thing which causes ennui or annoyance, 1778; of persons by 1812; from bore (v.1).  The secret of
being a bore is to tell everything. [Voltaire, Sept Discours en Vers sur l'Homme, 1738]


boreal (adj.)

northern, late 15c., from Latin borealis, from boreas north wind, from Greek Boreas, name of the god
of the north wind, of unknown origin, perhaps related to words in Balto-Slavic for mountain and
forest.


borealis

shortening of aurora borealis (q.v.).


bored (adj.)

1823, past participle adjective from bore (v.) in the figurative sense.    Society is now one
polished horde,  Formed of two mighty tribes, the Bores and Bored.  [Byron, Don Juan, 1823]


boredom (n.)

state of being bored, 1852, from bore (v.1) + -dom. It also has been employed in a sense bores as a
class (1883) and practice of being a bore (1864, a sense properly belonging to boreism, 1833).


borg (n.)

fictional hostile alien hive-race in the Star Trek series, noted for assimilating defeated rivals,
first introduced in The Next Generation TV series (debut fall 1987). Their catchphrase is resistance
is futile.


boring (adj.)

mid-15c., action of piercing, from bore (v.). From 1853 in reference to animals that bore; 1840 in
the sense wearying, causing ennui.


Boris

Slavic masc. proper name, literally fight, from Slavic root *bor- to fight, overcome (see bore
(v.)).


bork (v.)

1987, to discredit a candidate for some position by savaging his or her career and beliefs, from
name of U.S. jurist Robert H. Bork (1927-2012), whose Supreme Court nomination in 1987 was rejected
after an intense counter-campaign.


born

Old English boren, alternative past participle of beran (see bear (v.)). Distinction between born
and borne is 17c.


born-again (adj.)

of Protestant Christians, by 1920, based on John iii:3. Used in figurative (non-religious) sense by
1977.


borne

past participle of bear (v.).


Borneo

large island in Indonesia, from Portuguese alteration of Brunei, which is today the name of a
sultanate on the island. This is Hindi and probably ultimately from Sanskrit bhumi land, region.


boron (n.)

1812, from borax + ending abstracted unetymologically from carbon (it resembles carbon). Originally
called boracium by Humphrey Davy because it was drawn from boracic acid. Related: Boric.


borough (n.)

Old English burg, burh a dwelling or dwellings within a fortified enclosure, from Proto-Germanic
*burgs hill fort, fortress (cognates: Old Frisian burg castle, Old Norse borg wall, castle, Old High
German burg, buruc fortified place, citadel, German Burg castle, Gothic baurgs city), from PIE root
*bhergh- (2) high, with derivatives referring to hills, hill forts, fortified elevations (source
also of Old English beorg hill; see barrow (n.2)).    In German and Old Norse, chiefly as fortress,
castle; in Gothic, town, civic community. Meaning shifted in Middle English from fortress, to
fortified town, to simply town (especially one possessing municipal organization or sending
representatives to Parliament). In U.S. (originally Pennsylvania, 1718) often an incorporated town;
in Alaska, however, it is the equivalent of a county. The Scottish form is burgh. The Old English
dative singular byrig survives in many place names as -bury.


borrow (v.)

Old English borgian to lend, be surety for, from Proto-Germanic *borg pledge (cognates: Old English
borg pledge, security, bail, debt, Old Norse borga to become bail for, guarantee, Middle Dutch
borghen to protect, guarantee, Old High German boragen to beware of, German borgen to borrow; to
lend), from PIE root *bhergh- (1) to hide, protect (see bury). Sense shifted in Old English to
borrow, apparently on the notion of collateral deposited as security for something borrowed.
Related: Borrowed; borrowing.


borscht (n.)

1884, from Russian borshch cow parsnip, which was an original recipe ingredient. Borscht belt region
of predominantly Jewish resorts in and around the Catskill Mountains of New York (also known as the
Yiddish Alps) is by 1938.


bort (n.)

waste diamonds, small chips from diamond-cutting, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Old French
bort bastard.


borzoi (n.)

Russian wolfhound, 1887, from Russian borzoy, literally swift, quick (compare Czech brzy, Serbo-
Croatian brzo quickly, Lithuanian bruzdeti to hurry).


bose (n.)

to seek for hollows underground by ramming the ground and observing the vibrations, 1929, ultimately
from Scottish word boss hollow, empty (1510s), earlier a noun meaning small cask, wine flask (late
14c.).


bosh (n.)

empty talk, nonsense, 1834, from Turkish, literally empty. Introduced in Ayesha, popular romance
novel by J.J. Morier (1780-1849).


Bosnia

named for the River Bosna, which is perhaps from an Indo-European root *bhog- current. As a name or
adjective for someone there, Bosnian (1788) is older in English than Bosniac (1836, from Russian
Bosnyak).


bosom (n.)

Old English bosm breast; womb; surface; ship's hold, from West Germanic *bosm- (cognates: Old
Frisian bosm, Old Saxon bosom, Middle Dutch boesem, Dutch boezem, Old High German buosam, German
Busen bosom, breast), perhaps from PIE root *bhou- to grow, swell, or *bhaghus arm (in which case
the primary notion would be enclosure formed by the breast and the arms). Narrowed meaning a woman's
breasts is from 1959; but bosomy big-breasted is from 1928. Bosom-friend is attested 1580s; bosom
buddy from 1920s.


boson (n.)

class of subatomic particles, named for Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose (1894-1974) + subatomic
particle suffix -on.


boss (n.1)

overseer, 1640s, American English, from Dutch baas a master, Middle Dutch baes, of obscure origin.
If original sense was uncle, perhaps it is related to Old High German basa aunt, but some sources
discount this theory. The Dutch form baas is attested in English from 1620s as the standard title of
a Dutch ship's captain. The word's popularity in U.S. may reflect egalitarian avoidance of master
(n.) as well as the need to distinguish slave from free labor. The slang adjective meaning excellent
is recorded in 1880s, revived, apparently independently, in teen and jazz slang in 1950s.


boss (n.2)

protuberance, button, c.1300, from Old French boce a hump, swelling, tumor (12c., Modern French
bosse), from either Frankish *botija or Vulgar Latin *bottia, both of uncertain origin.


boss (v.)

1856, from boss (n.1). Related: Bossed; bossing.


bossa nova

1962, Brazilian style of music, from Portuguese, literally new tendency.


bossy (adj.)

1540s, swelling, projecting and rounded, decorated with bosses from boss (n.2). Meaning domineering,
fond of ordering people about is recorded 1882, from boss (n.1) + -y (2). As a common cow name it
represents Latin bos cow (see cow (n.)).


Boston

U.S. city, 1630, named for town in Lincolnshire, a region from which many settlers came to New
England. The name is said to be literally Botolph's Stone, probably from the name of some Anglo-
Saxon landowner (Old English Botwulf). Boston Massacre was March 5, 1770; three civilians killed,
two mortally wounded. Card game Boston (1800) is based on the siege of Boston during the American
Revolution. The Boston Tea Party (1824) took place on Dec. 16, 1773 (see tea party).


bot (n.)

in Internet sense, c.2000, short for robot. Its modern use has curious affinities with earlier uses,
such as parasitical worm or maggot (1520s), of unknown origin; and Australian-New Zealand slang
worthless, troublesome person (World War I-era). The method of minting new slang by clipping the
heads off words does not seem to be old or widespread in English. Examples (za from pizza, zels from
pretzels, rents from parents) are American English student or teen slang and seem to date back no
further than late 1960s.


botanic (adj.)

1650s, from French botanique (17c.) or directly from Medieval Latin botanicus, from Greek botanikos
of herbs, from botane a plant, grass, pasture, fodder. The Greek words seems to have more to do with
pasturage than plants; compare related botamia pastures, meadows, boter herdsman, boton grazing
beast.


botanical (adj.)

1650s, from botanic + -al. Related: Botanically.


botanist (n.)

1680s; see botany + -ist.


botany (n.)

1690s, from botanic. The -y is from astronomy, etc. Botany Bay so called by Capt. Cook on account of
the great variety of plants found there.


botch (v.)

late 14c., bocchen to repair, later, to spoil by unskillful work (1520s); of unknown origin.
Related: Botched; botching. As a noun from c.1600.


both (adj., pron.)

there are several theories, all similar, and deriving the word from the tendency to say both the.
One is that it is Old English begen (masc.) both (from Proto-Germanic *ba, from PIE *bho both) +
-&thorn; extended base. Another traces it to the Proto-Germanic formula represented in Old English
by ba &thorn;a both these, from ba (feminine nominative and accusative of begen) + &thorn;a,
nominative and accusative plural of se that. A third traces it to Old Norse ba&eth;ir both, from
*bai thaiz both the, from Proto-Germanic *thaiz, third person plural pronoun. Compare similar
formation in Old Frisian bethe, Dutch beide, Old High German beide, German beide, Gothic
bajo&thorn;s.


bother (v.)

1718, probably from Anglo-Irish pother, because its earliest use was by Irish writers Sheridan,
Swift, Sterne. Perhaps from Irish bodhairim I deafen. Related: Bothered; bothering. As a noun from
1803.


botheration (n.)

1797, noun of action from bother (v.).


bothersome (adj.)

1817, from bother + -some (1).


botony (n.)

1570s, in heraldry, from Old French boton&eacute; (Modern French boutonn&eacute;) covered with buds,
past participle of boutonner to bud, from bouton bud, button, 12c., from a Germanic source.


Botox

a commercial name for botulinum toxin, and composed of elements from those words, approved in U.S.
as a temporary cosmetic injection in 2002.


botryo-

before vowels botry-, word-forming element meaning cluster, cluster-like, from Greek botrys cluster
of grapes, of unknown origin.


bottle (n.)

mid-14c., originally of leather, from Old French boteille (12c., Modern French bouteille), from
Vulgar Latin butticula, diminutive of Late Latin buttis a cask, which is perhaps from Greek. The
bottle, figurative for liquor, is from 17c.


bottle (v.)

1640s, from bottle (n.). Related: Bottled; bottling.


bottleneck (n.)

also bttle-neck, narrow entrance, spot where traffic becomes congested, 1896; from bottle (n.) +
neck (n.). Meaning anything which obstructs a flow is from 1922; the verb in this sense is from
1928.


bottom (n.)

Old English botm, bodan ground, soil, foundation, lowest part, from Proto-Germanic *buthm-
(cognates: Old Frisian boden soil, Old Norse botn, Dutch bodem, Old High German bodam, German Boden
ground, earth, soil), from PIE root *bhu(n)d(h)- (cognates: Sanskrit budhnah, Avestan buna- bottom,
Greek pythmen foundation, Latin fundus bottom, piece of land, farm, Old Irish bond sole of the
foot). Meaning posterior of a person is from 1794. Bottom dollar the last dollar one has is from
1882. Bottom-feeder, originally of fishes, is from 1866.


bottom (v.)

1540s, to put a bottom on, from bottom (n.). Meaning to reach the bottom of is from 1808 (earlier
figuratively, 1785). Related: Bottomed; bottoming.


bottom line (n.)

figurative sense is attested from 1967, from profit and loss accounting, where the final figure
after both are calculated is the bottom line on the page. Also (especially as an adjective)
bottomline.


bottomless (adj.)

early 14c., from bottom + -less.


botulism (n.)

1878, from German Botulismus (1878), coined in German from Latin botulus sausage (see bowel) +
-ismus suffix of action or state (see -ism). Sickness first traced to eating tainted sausage
(sausage poisoning was an old name for it).


bouche (n.)

French, literally mouth (Old French boche, 11c.), from Latin bucca, literally cheek, which in Late
Latin replaced os (see oral) as the word for mouth (and also is the source of Italian bocca, Spanish
boca). Borrowed in English in various senses, such as king's allowance of food for his retinue (mid-
15c.); mouth (1580s); metal plug for a cannon's vent (1862; verb in this sense from 1781).


boudoir (n.)

1777, room where a lady may retire to be alone, from French boudoir (18c.), literally pouting room,
from bouder to pout, sulk, which, like pout, probably ultimately is imitative of puffing.


bouffant (adj.)

1869, from French bouffant, present participle of bouffer to puff out, from Old French bouffer
(12c.), from Vulgar Latin *buffare, probably ultimately imitative of puffing. As a noun by 1870.
Earlier as a French word in English. First used of hairdo style 1955.


bougainvillaea (n.)

see bougainvillea.


bougainvillea (n.)

type of woody vine, 1866, named for French navigator Louis Bougainville (1729-1811).


bough (n.)

Old English bog shoulder, arm, extended in Old English to twig, branch (compare limb (n.1)), from
Proto-Germanic *bogaz (cognates: Old Norse bogr shoulder, Old High German buog, German Bug shoulder,
hock, joint), from PIE *bhagus elbow, forearm (cognates: Sanskrit bahus arm, Armenian bazuk, Greek
pakhys forearm). The limb of a tree sense is peculiar to English.


bought

past tense and past participle of buy (v.).


boughten (adj.)

irregular past participle of buy; as an adjective from 1793, especially in colloquial U.S. usage, of
clothing and other items, opposed to made.    BOUGHTEN. Which is bought. This is a common word in
the interior of New England and New York. It is applied to articles purchased from the shops, to
distinguish them from similar articles of home manufacture. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms,
1848]


bougie (n.)

wax candle, 1755, from French bougie wax candle, from Bugia, Algeria, (Arabic Bijiyah), a town with
a long-established wax trade.


bouillabaisse (n.)

fish stew, 1845, from French bouillabaisse (19c.), from Proven&ccedil;al bouiabaisso, boulh-abaisso,
a compound of two verbs corresponding to English boil-abase (the latter in the original sense of to
lower).


bouillon (n.)

1650s, from French bouillon (11c.), noun use of past participle of bouillir to boil, from Old French
bolir (see boil (v.)).


boulder (n.)

1670s, variant of Middle English bulder (c.1300), from a Scandinavian source akin to Swedish
dialectal bullersten noisy stone (large stone in a stream, causing water to roar around it), from
bullra to roar + sten stone. Or the first element might be from *buller- round object, from Proto-
Germanic *bul-, from PIE *bhel- (2) to inflate, swell (see bole).


boulevard (n.)

1769, from French boulevard (15c.), originally top surface of a military rampart, from a garbled
attempt to adopt Middle Dutch bolwerc wall of a fortification (see bulwark) into French, which at
that time lacked a -w- in its alphabet. The notion is of a promenade laid out atop demolished city
walls, a way which would be much wider than urban streets. Originally in English with conscious
echoes of Paris; since 1929, in U.S., used of multi-lane limited-access urban highways. Early French
attempts to digest the Dutch word also include boloart, boulever, boloirque, bollvercq.


boulevardier (n.)

1856, French, one who frequents the boulevard; i.e.: man-about-town, one fond of urban living and
society.


bounce (v.)

early 13c., bounsen to thump, hit, perhaps from Dutch bonzen to beat, thump, or Low German bunsen,
or imitative; sense probably influenced by bound (v.). Sense of to bounce like a ball is from 1510s;
the rubber check sense is from 1927. Related: Bounced; bouncing.


bounce (n.)

1520s, a heavy blow, also a leap, a rebound from bounce (v.). In reference to politicians and public
opinion polls, by 1996, American English.


bouncer (n.)

mid-19c. in various senses, noun derivative of bounce (v.) in its original sense of thump, hit.
Earliest attested is boaster, bully, braggart (1833); also large example of its kind (1842);
enforcer of order in a bar or saloon (1865, American English, originally colloquial).  The Bouncer
is merely the English chucker out. When liberty verges on license and gaiety on wanton delirium, the
Bouncer selects the gayest of the gay, and -- bounces him! [London Daily News, July 26, 1883]


bouncing (adj.)

vigorous, big, 1570s, present participle adjective from bounce (v.).


bouncy (adj.)

1895, from bounce (n.) + -y (2).


bound (v.1)

to form the boundary of, also to set the boundaries of, late 14c., from bound (n.). Related:
Bounded; bounding.


bound (v.2)

to leap, 1580s, from French bondir to rebound, resound, echo, from Old French bondir to leap,
rebound; make a noise, beat (a drum), 13c., ultimately to echo back, from Vulgar Latin *bombitire to
buzz, hum (see bomb (n.)), perhaps on model of Old French tentir, from Vulgar Latin *tinnitire.


bound (adj.1)

fastened, mid-14c., in figurative sense of compelled, from bounden, past participle of bind (v.).
Meaning under obligation is from late 15c.; the literal sense made fast by tying is the latest
recorded (1550s).


bound (adj.2)

ready to go, c.1200, boun, from Old Norse buinn past participle of bua to prepare, also to dwell, to
live, from Proto-Germanic *bowan (cognates: Old High German buan to dwell, Old Danish both dwelling,
stall), from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, dwell (see be). Final -d is presumably through
association with bound (adj.1).


bound (n.)

limit, c.1200, from Anglo-Latin bunda, from Old French bonde limit, boundary, boundary stone (12c.,
Modern French borne), variant of bodne, from Medieval Latin bodina, perhaps from Gaulish. Now
chiefly in out of bounds, which originally referred to limits imposed on students at schools.


boundary (n.)

1620s, from bound (n.) + -ary.


bounder (n.)

1560s, one who sets bounds, agent noun from bound (v.1); British English slang meaning person of
objectionable social behavior, would-be stylish person, is from 1882, perhaps from bound (v.2) on
notion of one trying to bound into high society, but earliest usage suggests one outside the bounds
of acceptable socializing, which would connect it with the noun.


boundless (adj.)

1590s, from bound (n.) + -less. Related: Boundlessly; boundlessness.


bounteous (adj.)

late 14c., from bounty + -ous; originally full of goodness, but always shading toward generous in
bestowing, a sense which logically might have been left to bountiful. Related: Bounteously;
bounteousness.


bountiful (adj.)

late 15c., from bounty + -ful. Related: Bountifully.


bounty (n.)

mid-13c., generosity, from Old French bonte goodness (12c., Modern French bont&eacute;), from Latin
bonitatem (nominative bonitas) goodness, from bonus good (see bene-). Sense of gift bestowed by a
sovereign or the state led to extended senses of gratuity to a military recruit (1702) and reward
for killing or taking a criminal or enemy (1764).I do ... promise, that there shall be paid ... the
following several and respective premiums and Bounties for the prisoners and Scalps of the Enemy
Indians that shall be taken or killed .... [Papers of the Governor of Pennsylvania, 1764]


bouquet (n.)

1716, introduced to English by Lady Mary Montague from French bouquet, originally little wood, from
Picard form of Old French bochet (14c.), diminutive of bosco, from Medieval Latin boscus grove (see
bush (n.)).


bourbon (n.)

type of American corn whiskey, 1846, from Bourbon County, Kentucky, where it first was made,
supposedly in 1789. Bourbon County was organized 1785, one of the nine established by the Virginia
legislature before Kentucky became a state. The name reflects the fondness felt in the United States
for the French royal family, and especially Louis XVI, in gratitude for the indispensable support he
had given to the rebel colonists. See Bourbon.


Bourbon

line of French kings (who also ruled in Naples and Spain), of whom it was proverbially said, they
learn nothing and forget nothing. The royal family ruled in France 1589-1792 and 1815-1848; its name
is from Bourbon l'Archambault, chief town of a lordship in central France, probably from Borvo, name
of a local Celtic deity associated with thermal springs, whose name probably is related to Celtic
borvo foam, froth.


bourgeois (adj.)

1560s, of the French middle class, from French bourgeois, from Old French burgeis, borjois town
dweller (see bourgeoisie). Sense of socially or aesthetically conventional is from 1764; in
communist and socialist writing, as a noun, a capitalist (1883).It is better to be a good ordinary
bourgeois than a bad ordinary bohemian. [Aldous Huxley, 1930]


bourgeoise (adj.)

proper French fem. of bourgeois (q.v.).


bourgeoisie (n.)

1707, body of freemen in a French town; the French middle class, from French bourgeois, from Old
French burgeis, borjois (12c.) town dweller (as distinct from peasant), from borc town, village,
from Frankish *burg city (see borough). Communist use for the capitalist class generally attested
from 1886.


bourn (n.1)

also bourne, small stream, especially of the winter torrents of the chalk downs, Old English brunna,
burna brook, stream, from Proto-Germanic *brunnoz spring, fountain (cognates: Old High German
brunno, Old Norse brunnr, Old Frisian burna, German Brunnen fountain, Gothis brunna well),
ultimately from PIE root *bhreue- to boil, bubble, effervesce, burn (see brew (v.)).


bourn (n.2)

destination, 1520s, from French borne, apparently a variant of bodne (see bound (n.)). Used by
Shakespeare in Hamlet's soliloquy (1602), from which it entered into English poetic speech. He meant
it probably in the correct sense of boundary, but it has been taken to mean goal (Wordsworth,
Matthew Arnold) or sometimes realm (Keats).The dread of something after death, The vndiscouered
Countrey; from whose Borne No Traueller returnes. [Hamlet III.i.79]


bourse (n.)

stock exchange, 1570s, burse, from Old French borse money bag, purse (12c.), from Medieval Latin
bursa a bag (see purse (n.)). French spelling and modern sense of exchange for merchants is first
recorded 1845, from the name of the Paris stock exchange. The term originated because in 13c. Bruges
the sign of a purse (or perhaps three purses), hung on the front of the house where merchants met.


boustrophedon (n.)

1783, ancient form of writing with lines alternately written left-to-right and right-to-left, from
Greek, literally turning as an ox in plowing, from bous ox (see cow (n.)) + strephein to turn (see
strophe).


bout (n.)

1540s, from Middle English bught, probably from an unrecorded Old English variant of byht a bend,
from Proto-Germanic *bukhta- (see bight (n.)). Sense evolved from a circuit of any kind (as of a
plow) to a round at any kind of exercise (1570s), a round at fighting (1590s), a fit of drinking
(1660s).


boutique (n.)

fashion shop, 1953, earlier small shop of any sort (1767), from French boutique (14c.), from Old
Proven&ccedil;al botica, from Latin apotheca storehouse (see apothecary). Latin apotheca directly
into French normally would have yielded *avouaie.


boutonniere (n.)

1877, from French boutonni&egrave;re, from bouton (see button (n.)).


bovine (adj.)

1817, from French bovin (14c.), from Late Latin bovinus, from Latin bos (genitive bovis) ox, cow,
from PIE *gwous- (see cow (n.)). Figurative sense of inert and stupid is from 1855.


bovver

1969, Cockney pronunciation of bother trouble (q.v.), given wide extended usage in skinhead slang.


bow (v.)

Old English bugan to bend, to bow down, to bend the body in condescension, also to turn back (class
II strong verb; past tense beag, past participle bogen), from Proto-Germanic *bugon (cognates: Dutch
buigen, Middle Low German bugen, Old High German biogan, German biegen, Gothic biugan to bend, Old
Norse boginn bent), from *beugen, from PIE root *bheug- (3) to bend, with derivatives referring to
bent, pliable, or curved objects (cognates: Sanskrit bhujati bends, thrusts aside; Old High German
boug, Old English beag a ring). The noun in this sense is first recorded 1650s. Related: Bowed;
bowing. Bow out withdraw is from 1942.


bow (n.1)

weapon for shooting arrows, Old English boga archery bow, arch, rainbow, from Proto-Germanic *bugon
(cognates: Old Norse bogi, Old Frisian boga, Dutch boog, German Bogen bow; see bow (v.)). The sense
of a looped knot is from 1540s. The musician's bow (1570s) formerly was curved like the archer's.
Bowlegged is attested from 1550s.


bow (n.2)

front of a ship, mid-14c., from Old Norse bogr or Middle Dutch boech bow of a ship, literally
shoulder (of an animal), the connecting notion being the shoulders of the ship. See bough.


bow tie (n.)

by 1887, from bow (n.) in the sense ribbon or other fabric tied in a bow-knot (by 1874) + tie (n.).


bow-wow

imitative of a dog's barking, first recorded 1570s.


bowdlerize (v.)

1836, from Thomas Bowdler (1754-1825), English editor who in 1818 published a notorious expurgated
Shakespeare, in which, according to his frontispiece, nothing is added to the original text; but
those words and expressions omitted which cannot with propriety be read aloud in a family. Related:
Bowdlerized; bowdlerizing.


bowel (n.)

c.1300, from Old French boele intestines, bowels, innards (12c., Modern French boyau), from Medieval
Latin botellus small intestine, originally sausage, diminutive of botulus sausage, a word borrowed
from Oscan-Umbrian, from PIE *gwet-/*geut- intestine (cognates: Latin guttur throat, Old English
cwi&eth;, Gothic qi&thorn;us belly, womb, German kutteln guts, chitterlings).    Greek splankhnon
(from the same PIE root as spleen) was a word for the principal internal organs, which also were
felt in ancient times to be the seat of various emotions. Greek poets, from Aeschylus down, regarded
the bowels as the seat of the more violent passions such as anger and love, but by the Hebrews they
were seen as the seat of tender affections, especially kindness, benevolence, and compassion.
Splankhnon was used in Septuagint to translate a Hebrew word, and from thence early Bibles in
English rendered it in its literal sense as bowels, which thus acquired in English a secondary
meaning of pity, compassion (late 14c.). But in later editions the word often was translated as
heart. Bowel movement is attested by 1874.


bower (n.)

Old English bur room, hut, dwelling, chamber, from Proto-Germanic *buraz (cognates: Old Norse bur
chamber, Swedish bur cage, Old High German bur dwelling, chamber, German Bauer birdcage), from *bu-
to dwell, from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, dwell (see be). Modern spelling developed after mid-
14c. Sense of leafy arbor (place closed in by trees) is first attested 1520s. Hence, too,
Australia's bower-bird (1847).


bowery (n.)

farm, plantation, from Dutch bowerij homestead farm (from the same source as bower); a Dutch word
probably little used in America outside New York, and there soon limited to one road, The Bowery,
that ran from the built-up part of the city out to the plantations in middle Manhattan, attested
from 1787; the city's growth soon overran it, and it was noted by 1840 as a commercial district
notorious for squalor, rowdiness, and low life.   <b>Bowery Boy</b>, the typical New York tough of a
generation or two ago, named from the street which he chiefly affected .... He rather prided himself
on his uncouthness, his ignorance, and his desperado readiness to fight, but he also loved to have
attention called to his courage, his gallantry to women, his patriotic enthusiasm, and his innate
tenderness of heart. A fire and a thrilling melodrama called out all his energies and emotions.
[Walsh, 1892]


bowie knife

1827, named for its inventor, U.S. fighter and frontiersman Col. James Jim Bowie (1799-1836), and
properly pronounced boo-ee.


bowl (n.)

Old English bolla pot, cup, bowl, from Proto-Germanic *bul- a round vessel (cognates: Old Norse
bolle, Old High German bolla), from PIE *bhl-, from root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see
bole).


bowl (v.)

to roll a ball on the ground, typically as part of a game or contest, mid-15c., from bowl wooden
ball (see bowls). Specifically of cricket from 1755; cricket use is source of late 19c. expressions
bowl over, etc. Related: Bowled; bowling.


bowler (n.1)

hard round hat, 1861, said to be from a J. Bowler, 19c. London hat manufacturer. A John Bowler of
Surrey, hat manufacturer, was active from the 1820s to the 1840s, and a William Bowler, hat-
manufacturer, of Southwark Bridge Road, Surrey, sought a patent in 1854 for improvements in hats and
other coverings for the head. But perhaps the word is simply from bowl (n.); compare Old English
heafodbolla brainpan, skull. The earliest usages are with a lower-case b-.


bowler (n.2)

player at bowls, c.1500.


bowling (n.)

1530s, originally playing at bowls, verbal noun from bowl (v.). Bowling alley is from 1550s.


bowls (n.)

game played with balls, mid-15c. (implied in bowlyn), from gerund of bowl wooden ball (early 15c.),
from Old French bole (13c., Modern French boule) ball, ultimately from Latin bulla bubble, knob,
round thing (see bull (n.2)).  Noon apprentice ... [shall] play ... at the Tenys, Closshe, Dise,
Cardes, Bowles nor any other unlawfull game. [Act 11, Henry VII, 1495]


Bowman&#039;s capsule (n.)

1882, named for English surgeon William Bowman (1816-1892).


bowser (n.)

a dog's name, 1806, perhaps imitative of baying.


bowsprit (n.)

spar extending from the bow of a ship, late 13c., probably from Middle Low German bochspret, from
boch bow of a ship (see bow (n.2)) + spret pole (compare Old English spreot pole, Dutch spriet
spear; see sprit). French beaupre is a Dutch loan word.


bowyer (n.)

maker of bows, attested late 12c. as a surname, from bow (n.1) + -yer.


box (n.1.)

Old English box a wooden container, also the name of a type of shrub, from Late Latin buxis, from
Greek pyxis boxwood box, from pyxos box tree, of uncertain origin. See OED entry for discussion.
German B&uuml;chse also is a Latin loan word.    Meaning compartment at a theater is from c.1600.
Meaning pigeon-hole at a post office is from 1832. Meaning television is from 1950. Slang meaning
vulva is attested 17c., according to Dictionary of American Slang; modern use seems to date from
c.World War II, perhaps originally Australian, on notion of box of tricks. Box office is 1786; in
the figurative sense of financial element of a performance it is first recorded 1904. Box lunch (n.)
attested from 1899. The box set, multiple-album, CD or cassette issue of the work of an artist is
attested by 1955.


box (n.2.)

a blow, c.1300, of uncertain origin, possibly related to Middle Dutch boke, Middle High German buc,
and Danish bask, all meaning a blow, perhaps imitative.


box (v.1)

to put into storage, put into a box, mid-15c., from box (n.1). Related: Boxed; boxing.


box (v.2)

to beat or whip, late 14c., from box (n.2). Meaning to fight with the fists is from 1560s. Related:
Boxed; boxing.


box-top (n.)

1937, American English, from box (n.1) + top (n.1).


boxcar (n.)

1856, American English, from box (n.1) + car.


boxer (n.)

fighter, late 15c., agent noun from box (v.2). The name of the breed of dog (1934), is from German
(the breed originated in Germany), itself taken from English boxer fighter; the dog so called for
its pugnaciousness. Boxer shorts (1943) so called from their resemblance to the attire worn in the
ring.


Boxer Rebellion

1900, a name based on mistranslation of Chinese xenophobic society I-He-T'uan, Righteous Harmony
Band, rendered by British as I-He-Ch'uan Righteous Uniting Fists, and so associated with the
pugilistic boxer.


boxing (n.)

fighting with the fists as a sport, 1711, verbal noun from box (v.2).


Boxing Day (n.)

1809, first weekday after Christmas, on which postmen and others expect to receive a Christmas
present, originally in reference to the custom of distributing the contents of the Christmas box,
which was placed in the church for charity collections. See box (n.1). The custom is older than the
phrase.


boxy (adj.)

1858, from box (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Boxiness.


boy (n.)

mid-13c., boie servant, commoner, knave, boy, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old French embuie one
fettered, from Vulgar Latin *imboiare, from Latin boia leg iron, yoke, leather collar, from Greek
boeiai dorai ox hides. (Words for boy double as servant, attendant across the Indo-European map --
compare Italian ragazzo, French gar&ccedil;on, Greek pais, Middle English knave, Old Church Slavonic
otroku -- and often it is difficult to say which meaning came first.)    But it also appears to be
identical with East Frisian boi young gentleman, and perhaps with Dutch boef knave, from Middle
Dutch boeve, perhaps from Middle Low German buobe. This suggests a gradational relationship to babe.
For a different conjecture:    In Old English, only the proper name Boia has been recorded. ME boi
meant 'churl, servant' and (rarely) 'devil.' In texts, the meaning 'male child' does not antedate
1400. ModE boy looks like a semantic blend of an onomatopoeic word for an evil spirit (*boi) and a
baby word for 'brother' (*bo). [Liberman]   <hr />   A noticable number of the modern words for
'boy', 'girl', and 'child' were originally colloquial nicknames, derogatory or whimsical, in part
endearing, and finally commonplace. These, as is natural, are of the most diverse, and in part
obscure, origin. [Buck]    Used slightingly of young men in Middle English; meaning male negro slave
or Asian personal servant of any age attested from c.1600. Exclamation oh, boy attested from 1892.


boyar (n.)

member of a Russian aristocratic class (abolished by Peter the Great), 1590s, from Russian boyarin,
perhaps from boji struggle, or from Slavic root *bol- great.


boycott

1880, noun and verb, from Irish Land League ostracism of Capt. Charles C. Boycott (1832-1897), land
agent of Lough-Mask in County Mayo, who refused to lower rents for his tenant farmers. Quickly
adopted by newspapers in languages as far afield as Japanese (boikotto). The family name is from a
place in England.


Boyd

in many cases, the family name represents Gaelic or Irish buidhe yellow, suggesting blond hair,
compare Manx name Mac Giolla Buidhe (c.1100).


boyfriend (n.)

woman's paramour, 1909, from boy + friend (n.).


boyish (adj.)

1540s, pertaining to boys, from boy + -ish. Meaning puerile is from 1570s. Related: Boyishly;
boyishness.


Boyle&#039;s law

named for Irish-born chemist and physicist Robert Boyle (1627-1691), who first published it in 1662.


boysenberry (n.)

1935, developed early 1900s by California botanist Rudolf Boysen (1895-1950) and named for him.


bozo (n.)

muscular low-I.Q. male, c.1910, perhaps from Spanish bozal, used in the slave trade and also to mean
one who speaks Spanish poorly. Bozo the clown was created 1940 at Capitol Records as the voice in a
series of story-telling records for children [Wall Street Journal, Oct. 31, 1983].


bra (n.)

by 1923, shortening of brassiere.


Brabant

region in eastern Belgium (in Middle Ages much more extensive), from Old High German brahha newly
broken land (see break (v.)) + bant region.


brace (n.)

early 14c., piece of armor for the arms, also thong, strap for fastening, from Old French brace,
braz arms, also length measured by two arms (12c., Modern French bras arm, power; brasse fathom,
armful, breaststroke), from Latin bracchia, plural of bracchium an arm, a forearm, from Greek
brakhion an arm (see brachio-). Applied to various devices for fastening and tightening on notion of
clasping arms. Of dogs, a couple, a pair from c.1400.


brace (v.)

mid-14c., to seize, grasp, also wrap, enshroud; tie up, fetter, from Old French bracier to embrace,
from brace (see brace (n.)). Meaning to render firm or steady by tensing is mid-15c., earlier in
figurative sense strengthen or comfort (someone), early 15c., with later extension to tonics, etc.
that brace the nerves (compare bracer stiff drink). Related: Braced; bracing.


bracelet (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French bracelet (14c.), diminutive of bracel, from Latin bracchiale armlet, from
bracchium (see brace (n.)).


bracer (n.)

early 14c., piece of armor protecting the arm; 1580s, a clamp, bind, brace, from brace (n.).
Figurative sense of that which braces the nerves is 1740; especially of alcoholic drinks from
c.1850. Related: Bracers.


brach (n.)

bitch hound (archaic), mid-14c., brache, originally hound that hunts by scent, from Old French
braches hound, hunting dog, brachez, plural of brachet, of West Germanic origin (compare Middle
Dutch brache, Old High German braccho hound, setter), from PIE *bhrag- to smell (cognates: Middle
High German br&aelig;hen to smell, Latin fragrare to smell sweetly). Italian bracco is a Germanic
loan word.


brachio-

before a vowel, brachi-, word-forming element meaning arm, from Greek brakhion arm, perhaps
originally upper arm, literally shorter, and from brakhys short (see brief (adj.)), in contrast to
the longer forearm.


brachiopod (n.)

bivalve mollusk, 1836, Modern Latin, from Greek brakhion arm (see brachio-) + pous foot (see foot
(n.)). They have long spiral arms on either side of their mouths.


brachiosaurus (n.)

1903, Modern Latin, from Greek brakhion arm (see brachio-) + -saurus. The forelegs are notably
longer than the hind legs.


brachy-

word-forming element meaning short, from Latinized comb. form of Greek brakhys short (see brief
(adj.)).


brack (adj.)

salty, briny, 1510s, from Dutch brak brackish, probably from Middle Dutch brak worthless, a word
also used in commercial trade and which also made its way into early Modern English.


bracken (n.)

coarse fern, early 14c., a northern England word from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish bregne,
Swedish br&auml;ken fern).


bracket (n.)

1570s, bragget, architectural support, probably from Middle French braguette codpiece armor (16c.),
from a fancied resemblance of architectural supports to that article of attire (Spanish cognate
bragueta meant both codpiece and bracket), diminutive of brague knee pants, ultimately from Gaulish
*braca pants, itself perhaps from Germanic (compare Old English broc garment for the legs and trunk;
see breeches). The sense might reflect the breeches sense, on the notion of two limbs or of
appliances used in pairs. The typographical bracket is first recorded 1750, so called for its
resemblance to double supports in carpentry (a sense attested from 1610s). Senses affected by Latin
brachium arm.


bracket (v.)

1797, of printed matter, to enclose in brackets, from bracket (n.). Also, to couple or connect with
a brace (1827), also figurative, to couple one thing with another in writing (1807). Artillery
rangefinding sense is from 1903, from the noun (1891) in the specialized sense distance between the
ranges of two shells, one under and one over the object. Related: Bracketed; bracketing. In home-
building and joinery, bracketed is attested by 1801.


brackish (adj.)

1530s, from Scottish brack salty (see brack) + -ish. Related: Brackishness.


bract (n.)

in botany, small leaf at the base of a flower, Modern Latin, from Latin bractea, literally thin
metal plate, of unknown origin. Related: Bracteal; bracteate.


brad (n.)

small wire nail, late 13c., brod, from Old Norse broddr spike, point, arrow, from Proto-Germanic
*brozda- (cognates: Old English brord point, prick, blade of grass, Old High German brort point,
edge, crown), from PIE *bhrs-dh-, from root *bhars- projectile, point, bristle (see bristle (n.)).


brady-

medical word-forming element meaning slow, delayed, tardy, from Greek bradys slow; as in bradycardia
(1890), with Latinized form of Greek kardia heart; bradykinesia, slow movement, with Greek kinesis
movement, motion; bradypnea, with Greek pneo/pnein to breathe.


brae (n.)

steep slope, in northern England especially the sides of a hill, early 14c., from Scottish, slope,
river bank, from Old Norse bra eyelash, cognate with Old English br&aelig;w eyelid, German Braue
eyebrow (see brow). The word must have passed through the sense of 'eye-brow' to 'brow of a hill',
supercilium (cf. OE. eaghill 'eye-hill'=eyebrow) [OED].


brag (n.)

late 14c., pomp; arrogance, pride; see brag (v.); the exact relationship of the forms is uncertain.
Meaning that which is boasted is from 1530s. As a once-popular poker-like card game, from 1734.


brag (v.)

mid-14c., braggen to make a loud sound, also to talk boastfully, of obscure origin, perhaps related
to bray of a trumpet, or related to the Middle English adjective brag ostentatious, proud; spirited,
brave (early 14c.), which probably is from Celtic. Other sources suggest Old Norse bragr the best,
the toast (of anything), also poetry. Also see braggart for another possibility. Related: Bragged;
bragging.


Braganza

city in Portugal (Portuguese Bragan&#231;a), from Celtic briga height


braggadocio (n.)

Spenser's coinage, 1590, as a name for his personification of vainglory, from brag, with
augmentative ending by analogy to the Italian words then in vogue in England. In general use by 1594
for an empty swaggerer; of the talk of such persons, from 1734.


braggart (n.)

1570s, from French bragard (16c.), with pejorative ending (see -ard) + Middle French braguer to
flaunt, brag, perhaps originally to show off clothes, especially breeches, from brague breeches (see
bracket). There may be an element of codpiece-flaunting in all this.    The word in English has been
at least influenced by brag (v.), even if, as some claim, it is unrelated to it. Bragger arrogant or
boastful person, agent noun from brag (v.), attested in English from late 14c.


Brahma

1785, from Sanskrit Brahma, nominative of Brahman, chief god of the trinity Brahma-Vishnu-Siva in
post-Vedic Hindu religion (see brahmin).


Brahman

see brahmin.


Brahmaputra

river in Asia, Hindi, literally son of Brahma.


brahmin (n.)

member of Boston's upper class, 1823, figurative use of Brahman member of the highest priestly Hindu
caste, late 15c., from Sanskrit brahmana-s, from brahman- prayer, also the universal soul, the
Absolute, of uncertain origin. Related to Brahma.


braid (v.)

to plait, knit, weave, twist together, c.1200, breidan, from Old English bregdan to move quickly,
pull, shake, swing, throw (in wrestling), draw (a sword); bend, weave, knit, join together; change
color, vary; scheme, feign, pretend (class III strong verb, past tense br&aelig;gd, past participle
brogden), from Proto-Germanic *bregthan make sudden jerky movements from side to side (compare Old
Norse breg&eth;a to brandish, turn about, braid; Old Saxon bregdan to weave; Dutch breien to knit;
Old High German brettan to draw, weave, braid), from PIE root *bherek- to gleam, flash (compare
Sanskrit bhrasate flames, blazes, shines). In English the verb survives only in the narrow
definition of plait hair. Related: Braided; braiding.


braid (n.)

in part from stem found in Old English gebr&#230;gd craft, fraud, gebregd commotion, Old Norse
brag&#240; deed, trick, and in part from or influenced by related braid (v.). Earliest senses are a
deceit, stratagem, trick (c.1200), sudden or quick movement (c.1300); meaning anything plaited or
entwined (especially hair) is from 1520s.


braids (n.)

1520s; see braid (n.).


brail (n.)

small rope used on ships, mid-15c., from Old French brail, earlier braiel belt, leather thong, from
Latin bracale waistbelt, from brac&aelig; breeches (plural, see breeches).


Braille

1853, from Louis Braille (1809-1852), French musician and teacher, blind from age 3, who devised it
c.1830.


brain (v.)

to dash the brains out, late 14c., from brain (n.). Related: Brained; braining.


brain (n.)

Old English br&aelig;gen brain, from Proto-Germanic *bragnam (cognates: Middle Low German bregen,
Old Frisian and Dutch brein), from PIE root *mregh-m(n)o- skull, brain (cognates: Greek brekhmos
front part of the skull, top of the head). But Liberman writes that brain has no established
cognates outside West Germanic ... and is not connected to the Greek word. More probably, he writes,
its etymon is PIE *bhragno something broken.    The custom of using the plural to refer to the
substance (literal or figurative), as opposed to the organ, dates from 16c. Figurative sense of
intellectual power is from late 14c.; meaning a clever person is first recorded 1914. Brain teaser
is from 1923. Brain stem first recorded 1879, from German. Brain drain is attested from 1963. An Old
English word for head was br&aelig;gnloca, which might be translated as brain locker. In Middle
English, brainsick (Old English br&aelig;genseoc) meant mad, addled.


brain child (n.)

also brainchild, idea, creation of one's own, 1881, from brain (n.) + child. Earlier was the more
alliterative brain-brat (1630).


brain trust (n.)

occasionally used since early 1900s, it became current in 1933, in reference to the intellectuals
gathered by U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt as advisors; from brain (n.) + trust (n.).


brain-dead (adj.)

1976, popularized in U.S. by the Karen Anne Quinlan case (brain death is from 1968).


brainiac (n.)

very smart person, 1982, U.S. slang, from brain (n.) + ending from ENIAC, etc. Brainiac also was the
name of a comic book villain in the Superman series and a do-it-yourself computer building kit, both
from the late 1950s, and the word may bear traces of either or both of these.


brainstorm (n.)

brilliant idea, mental excitement, fit of mental application, 1849, from brain (n.) + figurative use
of storm (n.). As a verb, recorded from 1920s. Related: Brainstormed; brainstorming.


brainwash (v.)

1955 (past participle adjective brainwashed attested from 1953); see brainwashing.


brainwashing (n.)

1950, a literal translation of Chinese xi nao. A term from the Korean War.


brainy (adj.)

1845, from brain (n.) + -y (2). Latin equivalent cerebrosus meant passionate, hot-headed, leading
Tucker to remark that  'Brainy' is not a natural expression for 'frantic.'


braise (v.)

1797, from French braiser to stew (17c.), from braise live coals, from Old French brese embers
(12c.), ultimately from West Germanic *brasa (as is Italian bragia, Spanish brasa), from PIE *bhre-
burn, heat (see brawn). Related: Braised; braising.


brake (n.1)

mid-15c., instrument for crushing or pounding, from Middle Dutch braeke flax brake, from breken to
break (see break (v.)). The word was applied to many crushing implements and to the ring through the
nose of a draught ox. It was influenced in sense by Old French brac, a form of bras an arm, thus a
lever or handle, which was being used in English from late 14c., and applied to a bridle or curb
from early 15c. One or the other or both took up the main modern meaning of stopping device for a
wheel, first attested 1772.


brake (n.2)

kind of fern, early 14c.; see bracken.


brake (v.)

to apply a brake to a wheel, 1868, from brake (n.1). Earlier, to beat flax (late 14c.). Related:
Braked; braking.


bramble (n.)

Old English br&aelig;mbel rough, prickly shrub (especially the blackberry bush), with euphonic -b-,
from earlier br&aelig;mel, from Proto-Germanic *br&aelig;maz (see broom).


bran (n.)

c.1300, the husk of wheat, barley, etc., separated from the flour after grinding, from Old French
bren bran, scurf, scales, feces (12c., Modern French bran), perhaps connected with Gaulish *brenno-
manure, or with burn (v.). The word also was used 16c. in English for dandruff flakes.


branch (n.)

c.1300, braunch, limb of a tree (also used of things analogous to it, especially geographic
features), from Old French branche branch, bough, twig; branch of a family (12c.), from Late Latin
branca footprint, later a claw, paw, of unknown origin, probably from Gaulish. The connecting notion
would be the shape (compare pedigree). Replaced native bough. Meaning local office of a business is
first recorded 1817, from earlier sense of component part of a system (1690s).


branch (v.)

send out shoots or new limbs, late 14c., also, of blood vessels, family trees, etc., to be forked,
from branch (n.). Meaning to spread out from a center, radiate is from c.1400. Related: Branched;
branching.


brand (n.)

Old English brand, brond fire, flame; firebrand, piece of burning wood, torch, and (poetic) sword,
from Proto-Germanic *brandaz (cognates: Old Norse brandr, Old High German brant, Old Frisian brond
firebrand, blade of a sword, German brand fire), from root *bran-/*bren- (see burn (v.)). Meaning
identifying mark made by a hot iron (1550s) broadened by 1827 to a particular make of goods. Brand
name is from 1922.


brand (v.)

c.1400, to brand, cauterize; stigmatize, originally of criminal marks or cauterized wounds, from
brand (n.). As a means of marking property, 1580s; figuratively from c.1600, often in a bad sense,
with the criminal marking in mind. Related: Branded; branding.


brand new (adj.)

also brand-new, 1570s, from brand (n.)  + new. Originally it must have meant fresh from the fire
(Shakespeare has fire-new).


Brandenburg

region in northeastern Germany, traditionally said to be ultimately from Slavic, but perhaps German
and meaning literally burned fortress, or else from a Celtic proper name.


brandish (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French brandiss-, present participle stem of brandir to flourish (a sword)
(12c.), from brant blade of a sword, prow of a ship, of Frankish origin (see brand (n.)). Related:
Brandished; brandishing.


brandy (n.)

1650s, abbreviation of brandywine (1620s) from Dutch brandewijn burnt wine, so called because it is
distilled (compare German cognate Branntwein and Czech palenka brandy, from paliti to burn). The
Brandywine Creek in Pennsylvania, site of a Revolutionary War battle, supposedly so named by the
Dutch for the color of its waters.


branks (n.)

1590s, of unknown origin, perhaps from North Sea Germanic. An instrument of punishment for women,
originally Scottish, it was a kind of iron cage for the head with a metal bit attached to still the
tongue.Paide for caring a woman throughe the towne for skoulding, with branks, 4d. [Municipal
Accounts of Newcastle, 1595]Ungallant, and unmercifully severe, as this species of torture seems to
be, Dr. Plot, in his History of Staffordshire, much prefers it to the cucking stool, which, he says,
'not only endangers the health of the party, but also gives the tongue liberty 'twixt every dip.'
[Brockett, A Glossary of North Country Words,1829].


Branwen

fem. proper name, from Welsh bran raven + (g)wen fair. Daughter of Llyr, she was one of the
legendary heroines of Wales.


brash (adj.)

1824, of obscure origin, originally American English; perhaps akin to 16c. Scottish brash attack,
assault, or French breche fragments, especially of ice, from a Germanic source (compare Old High
German brehha breach, from brehhan to break), or to German brechen to vomit.


brass (n.)

Old English br&aelig;s brass, bronze, originally in reference to an alloy of copper and tin (now
bronze), later and in modern use an alloy of two parts copper, one part zinc. A mystery word, with
no known cognates beyond English. Perhaps akin to French brasser to brew, because it is an alloy. It
also has been compared to Old Swedish brasa fire, but no sure connection can be made. Yet another
theory connects it with Latin ferrum iron, itself of obscure origin.    As brass was unknown in
antiquity, use of the word in Bible translations, etc., likely means bronze. The Romans were the
first to deliberately make it. Words for brass in other languages (such as German Messing, Old
English m&aelig;sling, French laiton, Italian ottone) also tend to be difficult to explain.    The
meaning effrontery, impudence is from 1620s. Slang sense of high officials is first recorded 1899.
The brass tacks that you get down to (1897) probably are the ones used to measure cloth on the
counter of a dry goods store, suggesting precision. Slang brass balls toughness, courage
(emphatically combining two metaphors for the same thing) attested by 1960s.


brasserie (n.)

1864, brewery, from French brasserie, from Middle French brasser to brew, from Latin brace grain
used to prepare malt, said by Pliny to be a Celtic word (compare Welsh brag malt).


brassiere (n.)

18c., woman's underbodice, from French brassi&egrave;re child's chemise; shoulder strap (17c.), from
Old French braciere arm guard (14c.), from bras an arm, from Latin bracchium (see brace (n.)).
Modern use is a euphemistic borrowing employed in the garment trade by 1902.


brassy (adj.)

impudent, 1570s, from brass + -y (2). Compare brazen. Sense of debased and pretentious is from
1580s, from brass as contrasted with gold; sense of strident and artificial is from 1865. Related:
Brassily; brassiness.


brat (n.)

c.1500, slang, beggar's child, originally northern, Midlands and western England dialect word for
makeshift or ragged garment; probably the same word as Old English bratt cloak, which is from a
Celtic source (compare Old Irish bratt cloak, cloth). The modern meaning is perhaps from notion of
child's apron. Hollywood Brat Pack (modeled on 1950s Rat Pack) is from 1985.


Bratislava

capital of Slovakia, a Slavic settlement named for its founder or chief; the name is the same
element in the first half of the German name for the city, Pressburg (9c.).


bratty (adj.)

spoiled and juvenile, 1929, from brat + -y (2).


bratwurst (n.)

1911, from German Bratwurst, from wurst + Br&auml;t lean meat, finely chipped calf or swine meat,
from Old High German brato (12c.), from Proto-Germanic *bred-on- roast flesh (source also of Old
English br&aelig;de meat), from PIE *bhreue- (see brawn). German folk etymology derives it from
braten to roast, bake, broil, grill; more likely both are from the same ancient source.


Braun

German manufacturing company, named for founder Max Braun, mechanical engineer in Frankfurt am Main
(1921).


bravado (n.)

1580s, from French bravade bragging, boasting, from Italian bravata bragging, boasting (16c.), from
bravare brag, boast, be defiant, from bravo (see brave (adj.)). The English word was influenced in
form by Spanish words ending in -ado.


brave (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French brave, splendid, valiant, from Italian bravo brave, bold, originally
wild, savage, possibly from Medieval Latin bravus cutthroat, villain, from Latin pravus crooked,
depraved; a less likely etymology being from Latin barbarus (see barbarous). A Celtic origin (Irish
breagh, Cornish bray) also has been suggested.    Old English words for this, some with overtones of
rashness, included modig (now moody), beald (bold), cene (keen), dyrstig (daring). Brave new world
is from the title of Aldous Huxley's 1932 satirical utopian novel; he lifted the phrase from
Shakespeare (Tempest v.i.183).


brave (v.)

to face with bravery, 1776, from French braver, from brave (see brave (adj.)). Related: Braved;
braving.


brave (n.)

North American Indian warrior, c.1600, from brave (adj.), and compare bravo.


bravery (n.)

1540s, daring, defiance, boasting, from French braverie, from braver to brave (see brave) or else
from cognate Italian braveria, from bravare.    No Man is an Atheist, however he pretend it and
serve the Company with his Braveries. [Donne, 1631]    As a good quality, attested from 1580s.
Meaning fine clothes is from 1560s and holds the older sense.


bravo

as an exclamation, well done!, 1761, from Italian bravo, literally brave (see brave (adj.)). Earlier
it was used as a noun meaning desperado, hired killer (1590s). Superlative form is bravissimo.It is
held by some philologists that as Bravo! is an exclamation its form should not change, but remain
bravo under all circumstances. Nevertheless bravo is usually applied to a male, brava to a female
artist, and bravi to two or more. [Elson's Music Dictionary, 1905]


bravura (n.)

1788, piece of music requiring great skill, from Italian bravura bravery, spirit (see brave (adj.)).
Sense of display of brilliancy, dash is from 1813.


braw

Scottish formation and pronunciation of brave.


brawl (v.)

late 14c., braulen to cry out, scold, quarrel, probably related to Dutch brallen to boast, or from
French brailler to shout noisily, frequentative of braire to bray (see bray (v.)). Meaning quarrel,
wrangle, squabble is from early 15c. Related: Brawled; brawling.


brawl (n.)

mid-15c., from brawl (v.).


brawn (n.)

late 13c., from Old French braon fleshy or muscular part, buttock, from Frankish *brado ham, roast
or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *bred-on- (cognates: Old High German brato tender
meat, German Braten roast, Old Norse bra&eth; raw meat, Old English br&aelig;d flesh), from PIE
*bhre- burn, heat, from root *bhreue- to boil, bubble, effervesce, burn (see brew (v.)). The
original sense is piece of meat suitable for roasting. The specific sense 'boar's flesh' is
exclusively of English development, and characteristic of English habits [OED].


brawny (adj.)

1590s, characterized by muscle, from brawn + -y (2).


bray (v.)

c.1300, from Old French braire to cry, from Gallo-Roman *bragire to cry out, perhaps from a Celtic
source (compare Gaelic braigh to shriek, crackle), probably imitative. Related: Brayed; braying.


bray (n.)

c.1300, from bray (v.).


braze (v.1)

to expose to the action of fire, 1580s, perhaps from French braser to solder, in Old French, to
burn, related to brese embers (see braise). Related: Brazed; brazing.


braze (v.2)

to make of or cover in brass, Old English brasian to do work in brass, make of brass, from
br&aelig;s (see brass). Compare glaze from glass.


brazen (adj.)

Old English br&aelig;sen of brass, from br&aelig;s brass (see brass) + -en (2). The figurative sense
of hardened in effrontery is 1570s (in brazen-face), perhaps suggesting a face unable to show shame
(see brass). To brazen it out face impudently is from 1550s.


brazier (n.)

metal container to hold burning coals, 1680s, from French brasier pan of hot coals, from Old French
brasier, from brese embers (see braise).


Brazil

1550s, from Spanish/Portuguese terra de brasil red-dye-wood land, from Spanish brasil or Italian
brasile, probably connected to French braize (see braize) for resemblance of color to a glowing
ember (but Old Italian form verzino suggests a possible connection with Arabic wars saffron).
Originally the name of a type of wood from an East Indian tree, used in making dye; the name later
was transferred to a similar South American species. Brazil in reference to the wood is attested in
English from late 14c. Complicating matters is Hy Brasil, a name applied by 1436 to one of the
larger Azores Islands, later transferred to a legendary island or rock off the west coast of Ireland
(sighted in 1791 at lat. 51Â° 10', long. 15Â° 58').


Brazzaville

capital of Republic of Congo, named for French explorer Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza (1852-1905), who
founded it in 1883. An Italian count, his title is from the Adriatic island of Brazza, now Bra&#269;
in Croatia.


brb

by 1996, Internet chat acronym for be right back.


breach (n.)

Old English bryce breach, fracture, a breaking, from brecan (see break), influenced by Old French
breche breach, opening, gap, from Frankish; both from Proto-Germanic *brecho, *br&aelig;ko broken,
from PIE root *bhreg- to break (see fraction). Figurative sense of a breaking of rules, etc. was in
Old English Breach of contract is at least from 1660s.


breach (v.)

1570s, from breach (n.). Related: Breached; breaching.


bread (n.)

Old English bread bit, crumb, morsel; bread, cognate with Old Norse brau&eth;, Danish br&oslash;d,
Old Frisian brad, Middle Dutch brot, Dutch brood, German Brot. According to one theory [Watkins,
etc.] from Proto-Germanic *brautham, which would be from the root of brew (v.) and refer to the
leavening.    But OED argues at some length for the basic sense being not cooked food but piece of
food, and the Old English word deriving from a Proto-Germanic *braudsmon- fragments, bits (cognate
with Old High German brosma crumb, Old English breotan to break in pieces) and being related to the
root of break (v.). It cites  Slovenian kruh bread, literally a piece.    Either way, by c.1200 it
had replaced the usual Old English word for bread, which was hlaf (see loaf (n.)). Slang meaning
money dates from 1940s, but compare breadwinner. Bread-and-butter in the figurative sense of basic
needs is from 1732. Bread and circuses (1914) is from Latin, in reference to food and entertainment
provided by governments to keep the populace happy. Duas tantum res anxius optat, Panem et circenses
[Juvenal, Sat. x.80].


bread (v.)

to dress with bread crumbs, 1727, from bread (n.). Related: Breaded; breading.


bread-basket (n.)

1550s, basket for holding bread, from bread (n.) + basket. Slang meaning stomach is attested from
1753, especially in pugilism.


breadth (n.)

1520s, alteration of brede breadth, from Old English br&aelig;du breadth, width, extent, from
br&aelig;d; probably by analogy of long/length.


breadwinner (n.)

also bread-winner, one who supplies a living for others, especially a family, 1821, from the noun
bread (probably in a literal sense) + winner, from win (v.) in its sense of struggle for, work at.
Attested slightly earlier (1818) in sense skill or art by which one makes a living. Not too far
removed from the image at the root of lord (n.).


break (v.)

Old English brecan to break, shatter, burst; injure, violate, destroy, curtail; break into, rush
into; burst forth, spring out; subdue, tame (class IV strong verb; past tense br&aelig;c, past
participle brocen), from Proto-Germanic *brekan (cognates: Old Frisian breka, Dutch breken, Old High
German brehhan, German brechen, Gothic brikan), from PIE root *bhreg- to break (see fraction). Most
modern senses were in Old English. In reference to the heart from early 13c. Meaning to disclose is
from early 13c.   Break bread share food (with) is from late 14c. Break the ice is c.1600, in
reference to the coldness of encounters of strangers. Break wind first attested 1550s. To break
(something) out (1890s) probably is an image from dock work, of freeing cargo before unloading it.
Ironic theatrical good luck formula break a leg has parallels in German Hals- und Beinbruch break
your neck and leg, and Italian in bocca al lupo. Evidence of a highly superstitious craft (see
Macbeth).


break (n.)

c.1300, act of breaking, from break (v.). Sense of short interval between spells of work (originally
between lessons at school) is from 1861. Meaning stroke of luck is attested by 1911, probably an
image from billiards (where the break that starts the game is attested from 1865). Meaning stroke of
mercy is from 1914. Musical sense, improvised passage, solo is attested from 1920s in jazz.


break dancing (n.)

1982, but the style itself evolved late 1970s in South Bronx. The reference is to the rhythmic break
in a pop-dance song (see break (n.)), which the DJs isolated and the dancers performed to. Breakdown
a riotous dance, in the style of the negroes is recorded from 1864.


breakable (adj.)

1560s, from break (v.) + -able. As a noun, breakables is attested from 1820.


breakage (n.)

1813, action of breaking, from break (v.) + -age. Meaning loss or damage done by breaking is from
1848.


breakaway

1906 (n.), in reference to sports; 1930s (adj.) in reference to splinter groups; from break (v.) +
away (adv.).


breakdown (n.)

a collapse, 1832, from break (v.) + down (adv.). The verbal phrase is attested from late 14c. The
noun, specifically of machinery, is from 1838; meaning an analysis in detail is from 1936. Nervous
breakdown is from 1905.


breaker (n.)

heavy ocean wave, 1680s, agent noun from break (v.). Related: Breakers.


breakeven (adj.)

also break-even; usually with point, 1938, from break (v.) + even (adv.). The verbal phrase in the
financial sense is recorded from 1914.


breakfast (n.)

mid-15c., from break (v.) + fast (n.). An Old English word for it was undernmete (see undern), also
morgenmete morning meal.. The verb is recorded from 1670s. Related: Breakfasted; breakfasting.
Spanish almuerzo lunch, but formerly and still locally breakfast, is from Latin admorsus, past
participle of admordere to bite into, from ad- to + mordere to bite. In common with almuerzo, words
for breakfast tend over time to shift in meaning toward lunch; compare French d&eacute;jeuner
breakfast, later lunch (equivalent of Spanish desayuno breakfast), both from Vulgar Latin
*disieiunare to breakfast, from Latin dis- apart, in a different direction from + ieiunare, jejunare
fast (see jejune; also compare dine). German Fr&#252;hst&#252;ck is from Middle High German
vruost&#252;cke, literally early bit.


breakneck (adj.)

1560s, likely to end in a broken neck, from break (v.) + neck (n.).


breakout (n.)

1820, from break (v.) + out (adv.). The verbal phrase goes back to Old English ut brecan, utabrecan.
Transitive sense is attested from 1610s.


breakthrough (n.)

1918, in a military sense, from break (v.) + through (adv.). The verbal phrase is attested from
c.1400. Meaning abrupt solution or progress is from 1930s, on the notion of a successful attack.


breakup (n.)

also break-up, 1795, from verbal expression break up (mid-15c.), which was used originally of
plowland, later of groups, assemblies, etc. Of things (also of marriages, relationships), to
disintegrate, from mid-18c. See break (v.) + up (adv.). Break it up as a command to stop a fight,
etc., is recorded from 1936.


breakwater (n.)

1721, from break (v.) + water (n.1).


bream (n.)

freshwater fish, late 14c., from Old French braisme bream, from Frankish *brahsima, from West
Germanic *brahsm- (compare Old High German brahsima), perhaps from Proto-Germanic base *brehwan to
shine, glitter, sparkle, from PIE *bherek- (see braid (v.)).


breast (n.)

Old English breost breast, bosom; mind, thought, disposition, from Proto-Germanic *breustam breast
(cognates: Old Saxon briost, Old Frisian briast, Old Norse brjost, Dutch borst, German brust, Gothic
brusts), perhaps literally swelling and from PIE root *bhreus- to swell, sprout (cognates: Middle
Irish bruasach having a broad, strong chest, Old Irish bruinne breast). The spelling conforms to the
Scottish and northern England dialectal pronunciation. Figurative sense of seat of the emotions was
in Old English.


breastbone (n.)

sternum, Old English breostban; see breast (n.) + bone (n.).


breastwork (n.)

fieldwork thrown up breast-high for defense, 1640s, from breast (n.) + work (n.) in fortification
sense. Old English had breostweall in same sense.


breath (n.)

Old English br&aelig;&eth; odor, scent, stink, exhalation, vapor (Old English word for air exhaled
from the lungs was &aelig;&eth;m), from Proto-Germanic *br&aelig;thaz smell, exhalation (cognates:
Old High German bradam, German Brodem breath, steam), from PIE root *gwhre- to breathe, smell.


breathalyzer (n.)

1960, from breath + (an)alyzer; an earlier name for it was drunkometer (1934).


breathe (v.)

c.1300, not in Old English, but it retains the original Old English vowel of its source word,
breath. Related: Breathed; breathing.


breather (n.)

c.1600, a living creature, one who breathes, agent noun from breathe. Meaning spell of exercise to
stimulate breathing is from 1836; that of a rest to recover breath is from 1901.


breathless (adj.)

late 14c., unable to breathe, from breath + -less. Meaning out of breath, panting is from mid-15c.
Used from 1590s in the sense dead. Meaning forgetting to breathe due to excitement, awe,
anticipation, etc. is recorded from 1802. Related: Breathlessly; breathlessness.


breathtaking (adj.)

1867, from breath + present participle of take (v.). Phrase to take (one's) breath away with
astonishment or delight is from 1864. Breathtaking (n.) act of taking breaths or a breath is from
1620s. Related: Breathtakingly.


breathy (adj.)

1520s, pertaining to breath, from breath + -y (2). Of voices, full of breath, from 1883. Related:
Breathily; breathiness.


breccia (n.)

rock of angular pieces, 1774, from Italian breccia, marble of angular pieces, from a Germanic source
akin to Old High German brecha a breaking, from Proto-Germanic *brekan, from PIE *bhreg- to break
(see fraction).


bred

past tense and past participle of breed (v.).


breech (n.)

back part of a gun or firearm, 1570s, from singular of breeches (q.v.).


breeches (n.)

c.1200, a double plural, from Old English brec breeches, which already was plural of broc garment
for the legs and trunk, from Proto-Germanic *brokiz (cognates: Old Norse brok, Dutch broek, Danish
brog, Old High German bruoh, German Bruch, obsolete since 18c. except in Swiss dialect), perhaps
from PIE root *bhreg- (see break (v.)). The Proto-Germanic word is a parallel form to Celtic
*bracca, source (via Gaulish) of Latin braca (aource of French braies), and some propose that the
Germanic word group is borrowed from Gallo-Latin, others that the Celtic was from Germanic.
Expanded sense of part of the body covered by breeches, posterior led to senses in childbirthing
(1670s) and gunnery (the part of a firearm behind the bore, 1570s). As the popular word for trousers
in English, displaced in U.S. c.1840 by pants. The Breeches Bible (Geneva Bible of 1560) so called
on account of rendition of Gen. iii:7 (already in Wyclif) They sewed figge leaues together, and made
themselues breeches.


breed (v.)

Old English bredan bring young to birth, carry, also cherish, keep warm, from West Germanic *brodjan
(cognates: Old High German bruoten, German br&uuml;ten to brood, hatch), from *brod- fetus,
hatchling, from PIE *bhreue- burn, heat (see brood (n.)). Original notion of the word was
incubation, warming to hatch. Sense of grow up, be reared (in a clan, etc.) is late 14c. Related:
Bred; breeding.


breed (n.)

race, lineage, stock (originally of animals), 1550s, from breed (v.). Of persons, from 1590s.
Meaning kind, species is from 1580s.


breeder (n.)

1570s, one who produces or originates, agent noun from breed (v.). Meaning one who breeds cattle or
some other animal is recorded from 1530s. Of nuclear reactors, from 1948. As a scornful homosexual
term for heterosexual person, attested from 1986.


breeding (n.)

late 14c., hatching, incubation; also formation, development, growth, verbal noun from breed (v.).
Meaning good manners is from 1590s.


breeze (n.)

1560s, north or northeast wind, from Old Spanish briza cold northeast wind; in West Indies and
Spanish Main, the sense shifting to northeast trade wind, then fresh wind from the sea. English
sense of gentle or light wind is from 1620s. An alternative possibility is that the English word is
from East Frisian brisen to blow fresh and strong. The slang for something easy is American English,
c.1928.


breeze (v.)

move briskly, 1904, from breeze (n.). Related: Breezed; breezing.


breezeway (n.)

1904, American English, from breeze (n.) + way (n.).


breezy (adj.)

1718, from breeze (n.) + -y (2). Figurative sense fresh, easygoing, light, airy is from 1870.
Related: Breezily; breeziness.


brekekekex

c.1600, from Greek (Aristophanes), echoic of the croaking of frogs.


Bremen

city in Germany, from Old Saxon bremo edge (related to English brim (n.)), in reference to its site
on a river bank.


Bren

type of machine gun used by the British army in World War II, 1937, short for Bren gun, coined from
first letters of Brno, Czechoslovakia, and Enfield, near London. The patent was purchased in Brno,
and the gun was manufactured in Enfield.


Brenner Pass

historical route over the Alps between Germany and Italy, from Breuni, name of a people who lived
near there, perhaps Celtic.


brer

in Brer Rabbit, etc., 1881, Joel Chandler Harris' representation of U.S. Southern black
pronunciation of brother.


Brest

city in France, from Celtic, from bre hill. The city in Belarus is from Slavic berest elm. Part of
Lithuania from 1319, it thus was known, for purposes of distinguishing them, as Brest Litovsk until
1921.


brethren (n.)

alternative plural of brother (q.v.); predominant c.1200-1600s, but surviving now only in religious
usage.


Breton (n.)

native or language of Brittany, late 14c., from French form of Briton (q.v.).


breve (n.)

mid-15c., musical notation indicating two whole notes, from Latin breve (adj.) short in space or
time (see brief (adj.)). The grammatical curved line placed over a vowel to indicate shortness
(1540s) is from the same source.


brevet (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French brievet letter, note, piece of paper; papal indulgence (13c.), diminutive
of bref letter, note (see brief (adj.)). Army sense is from 1680s.


brevet (v.)

1839, from French breveter, from brevet (see brevet (n.)). Related: Breveted; breveting.


breviary (n.)

1540s, brief statement; sense of short prayer book used by Catholic priests is from 1610s, from
Latin breviarium summary, noun use of neuter of adjective breviarius abridged, from breviare to
shorten, abbreviate, from brevis short (see brief (adj.)).


brevity (n.)

c.1500, from Latin brevitatem (nominative brevitas) shortness in space or time, from brevis short
(see brief (adj.)).


brew (v.)

Old English breowan to brew (class II strong verb, past tense breaw, past participle browen), from
Proto-Germanic *breuwan to brew (cognates: Old Norse brugga, Old Frisian briuwa, Middle Dutch
brouwen, Old High German briuwan, German brauen to brew), from PIE root *bhreue- to bubble, boil,
effervesce (cognates: Sanskrit bhurnih violent, passionate, Greek phrear well, spring, cistern,
Latin fervere to boil, foam, Thracian Greek brytos fermented liquor made from barley, Russian bruja
current, Old Irish bruth heat; Old English beorma yeast; Old High German brato roast meat), the
original sense thus being make a drink by boiling. Related: Brewed; brewing.


brew (n.)

c.1500, a brewed beverage, from brew (v.).


brewery (n.)

1650s (but perhaps from c.1200 as a surname element), from brew (v.) + -ery. Old English had
breawern in this sense (from aern house; see barn), and brewhouse was the more common word through
18c.


brewhouse (n.)

late 14c.; late 13c. as a surname, from brew (v.) + house (n.).


brewster (n.)

early 13c. as a surname, probably originally a female brewer (even though most of the early surnames
on the records are of men), from brew (v.) + -ster. Compare Old French braceresse female brewer,
Middle English name Clarice le Breweres on the 1312 Colchester Borough Court Rolls.


briar (n.)

see brier (n.1).


Briareus

hundred-handed giant in Greek mythology, from Greek briaros strong, stout.


bribe (n.)

late 14c., thing stolen, from Old French bribe bit, piece, hunk; morsel of bread given to beggars
(14c., compare Old French bribeor vagrant, beggar), from briber, brimber to beg, a general Romanic
word (Gamillscheg marks it as Rotwelsch, i.e. thieves' jargon), of uncertain origin; old sources
suggest Celtic (compare Breton breva to break). Shift of meaning to gift given to influence
corruptly is by mid-15c.


bribe (v.)

late 14c., pilfer, steal, also practice extortion, from Old French briber go begging, from bribe
(see bribe (n.)). Related: Bribed; bribing.


bribery (n.)

late 14c., theft, robbery, swindling, pilfering; see bribe (n.) + -ery. Specifically of magistrates
taking money for corrupted services from mid-16c.; sense of offering of a bribe is from 1560s.


bric-a-brac (n.)

1840, from obsolete French &agrave; bric et &agrave; brac (16c.) at random, any old way, a nonsense
phrase.


brick (n.)

early 15c., from Old French briche brick, probably from a Germanic source akin to Middle Dutch
bricke a tile, literally a broken piece, from the verbal root of break (v.). Meaning a good, honest
fellow is from 1840, probably on notion of squareness (as in fair and square) though most extended
senses of brick (and square) applied to persons in English are not meant to be complimentary. Brick
wall in the figurative sense of impenetrable barrier is from 1886.


brick (v.)

to wall up with bricks, 1640s, from brick (n.). Related: Bricked; bricking.


brickbat (n.)

mid-16c., piece of brick (half or less) used as a missile, from brick (n.) + bat (n.1). Figurative
use, of comments, insults, etc., is from 1640s.


bridal (adj.)

mid-15c., transferred use of noun bridal wedding feast, Old English brydealo marriage feast, from
bryd ealu, literally bride ale (see bride + ale); second element later confused with suffix -al (1),
especially after c.1600.


bride (n.)

Old English bryd bride, betrothed or newly married woman, from Proto-Germanic *bruthiz woman being
married (cognates: Old Frisian breid, Dutch bruid, Old High German brut, German Braut bride). Gothic
cognate bru&thorn;s, however, meant daughter-in-law, and the form of the word borrowed from Old High
German into Medieval Latin (bruta) and Old French (bruy) had only this sense. In ancient Indo-
European custom, the married woman went to live with her husband's family, so the only newly wed
female in such a household would have been the daughter-in-law. On the same notion, some trace the
word itself to the PIE verbal root *bru- to cook, brew, make broth, as this likely was the daughter-
in-law's job.


bridegroom (n.)

Old English brydguma suitor, from bryd bride (see bride) + guma man (source also of Old Norse gumi,
Old High German gomo, cognate with Latin homo man; see homunculus). Ending altered 16c. by folk
etymology after groom (n.) groom, boy, lad (q.v.).    Common Germanic compound (compare Old Saxon
brudigumo, Old Norse bru&eth;gumi, Old High German brutigomo, German Br&auml;utigam), except in
Gothic, which used bru&thorn;sfa&thorn;s, literally bride's lord.


bridesmaid (n.)

1550s, bridemaid, from bride + maid. The -s- is excrescent but began to appear by 1794 and the form
with it predominated by the end of the 19c.


bridewell (n.)

prison, 1550s, from Bridewell, house of correction in London, originally a royal lodging (given by
Edward VI for a hospital, later converted to a prison) near Bride's Well, short for St. Bridget's
Well.


bridge (n.1)

causeway over a ravine or river, Old English brycge, from Proto-Germanic *brugjo (cognates: Old
Saxon bruggia, Old Norse bryggja, Old Frisian brigge, Dutch brug, Old High German brucca, German
Br&uuml;cke), from PIE root *bhru log, beam, hence wooden causeway (cognates: Gaulish briva bridge,
Old Church Slavonic bruvuno beam, Serbian brv footbridge). For vowel evolution, see bury. Meaning
bony upper part of the nose is from early 15c.; of stringed instruments from late 14c.


bridge (v.)

Old English brycgian to bridge, make a causeway, from bridge (n.). Related: Bridged; bridging.


bridge (n.2)

card game, 1886 (perhaps as early as 1843), an alteration of biritch, but the source and meaning of
that are obscure. Probably of Levantine origin, since some form of the game appears to have been
long known in the Near East [OED]. One guess is that it represents Turkish *bir-&uuml;&ccedil; one-
three, because one hand is exposed and three are concealed. The game also was known early as Russian
whist (attested in English from 1839).


Bridget

fem. proper name, from Irish Brighid, fire goddess, from brigh strength, from Celtic *brig-o-, from
PIE *bhrgh-nt- high, mighty, from root *bhrgh- high (see borough).


bridle (n.)

Old English bridel bridle, rein, curb, restraint, related to bregdan move quickly, from Proto-
Germanic *bregdilaz (see braid (v.)).


bridle (v.)

to control, dominate, c.1200, from Old English bridlian to fit with a bridle, from bridel (see
bridle (n.)). Meaning to throw up the head (as a horse does when reined in) is from mid-15c.
Related: Bridled; bridling.


Brie (n.)

type of soft cheese, 1848, from name of district in department Seine-et-Marne, southeast of Paris,
famous for its cheeses. The name is from Gaulish briga hill, height.


brief (adj.)

late 13c., from Latin brevis (adj.) short, low, little, shallow, from PIE *mregh-wi-, from root
*mregh-u- short (cognates: Greek brakhys short, Old Church Slavonic bruzeja shallow places, shoals,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten).


brief (n.)

from Latin breve (genitive brevis), noun derivative of adjective brevis (see brief (adj.)) which
came to mean letter, summary, specifically a letter of the pope (less ample and solemn than a bull),
and thus came to mean letter of authority, which yielded the modern, legal sense of summary of the
facts of a case (1630s).


brief (v.)

to give instructions or information to, 1866; originally to instruct by a brief (1862), from brief
(n.). Related: Briefed; briefing.


briefcase (n.)

portable folding case for holding papers, 1926, from brief (n.) in the paper sense + case (n.2).


briefing (n.)

fact or situation of giving preliminary instructions, 1910 (but popularized by World War II pre-
flight conferences), verbal noun from brief (v.).


briefly (adv.)

c.1300, from brief (adj.) + -ly (2). As an introduction to a statement, in short, recorded from
1510s.


briefs (n.)

short, tight underwear, 1934, from brief (adj.).


brier (n.1)

thorny shrub, heath, 1540s, variant of Middle English brere, from Old English brer (Anglian),
br&aelig;r (West Saxon) brier, bramble, prickly bush, of unknown origin. Briar is the most recent
variant (c.1600). Originally used of prickly, thorny bushes in general, now mostly restricted to
wild rose bushes. Used figuratively (in plural) for troubles from c.1500.


brier (n.2)

type of tobacco pipe introduced to England c.1859 and made from the root of a certain shrub, 1868,
from French bruy&egrave;re heath plant, from Old French bruiere heather, briar, heathland, moor
(12c.), from Gallo-Roman *brucaria, from *brucus heather, from Gaulish (compare Breton brug heath,
Old Irish froech). Form altered in English by influence of brier (n.1).


brig (n.)

1720, colloquial shortening of brigantine (q.v.). Apparently such vessels being used for prison
ships upon retirement from active duty led to extended meaning a jail, first recorded 1852.


brigade (n.)

subdivision of an army, 1630s, from French brigade body of soldiers (14c.), from Italian brigata
troop, crowd, gang, from brigare brawl, fight, from briga strife, quarrel, perhaps of Celtic
(compare Gaelic brigh, Welsh bri power) or Germanic origin.


brigadier (n.)

1670s, officer in command of a brigade, from French brigadier, from brigade (see brigade).


brigand (n.)

c.1400, lightly armed foot soldier, from Old French brigand (14c.), from Italian brigante trooper,
skirmisher, foot soldier, from brigare (see brigade). Sense of one who lives by pillaging is from
early 15c., reflecting the lack of distinction between professional mercenary armies and armed,
organized criminals.


brigantine (n.)

small two-masted ship, 1520s, from Middle French brigandin (15c.), from Italian brigantino, perhaps
skirmishing vessel, pirate ship, from brigante skirmisher, pirate, brigand from brigare fight (see
brigade).


bright (adj.)

Old English bryht, by metathesis from beorht bright; splendid; clear-sounding; beautiful; divine,
from Proto-Germanic *berhta- bright (cognates: Old Saxon berht, Old Norse bjartr, Old High German
beraht, Gothic bairhts bright), from PIE root *bhereg- to gleam, white (cognates: Sanskrit bhrajate
shines, glitters, Lithuanian breksta to dawn, Welsh berth bright, beautiful). Meaning quick-witted
is from 1741.


Bright&#039;s disease

chronic nephritis, 1831, so called for English physician Richard Bright (1789-1858), who in 1827
first described it.


brighten (v.)

Old English *beorhtnian to make bright (see bright (adj.) + -en (1)). Intransitive sense, to become
brighter, attested from c.1300. Figurative use from 1590s. Related: Brightened; brightening.


brightness (n.)

Old English beorhtnes brightness, clearness, splendor, beauty; see bright + -ness.


brill (n.)

kind of flat fish, late 15c., of unknown origin.


brilliance (n.)

1755, from brilliant + -ance. Figurative sense (of wit, intelligence, etc.) is from 1779.
Distinguished from brilliancy in that the latter usually is applied to things measurable in degrees.


brilliancy (n.)

1747; see brilliant + -cy. Also compare brilliance.


brilliant (adj.)

1680s, from French brilliant sparkling, shining present participle of briller to shine (16c.), from
Italian brillare sparkle, whirl, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *berillare to shine like a beryl, from
berillus beryl, precious stone, from Latin beryllus (see beryl). In reference to diamonds (1680s) it
means a flat-topped cut invented 17c. by Venetian cutter Vincenzo Peruzzi.


brim (n.)

c.1200, brymme edge of the sea, of obscure origin, perhaps akin to Old Norse barmr rim, brim,
probably related to German br&auml;me margin, border, fringe, from PIE *bhrem- point, spike, edge.
(Old English had brim in the sense sea, surf, but this probably was from the Germanic stem *brem- to
roar, rage.) Extended by 1520s to cups, basins, hats.


brim (v.)

to fill to the brim, 1610s, from brim (n.). Intransitive sense (be full to the brim) attested from
1818. Related: Brimmed; brimming.


brimful (adj.)

1520s, from brim (n.) + -ful.


brimming (adj.)

being full to the brim, 1660s, present participle adjective from brim (v.).


brimstone (n.)

Old English brynstan, from brin- stem of brinnen to burn (see burn (v.)) + stan (see stone (n.)). In
Middle English the first element also recorded as brem-, brom-, brum-, bren-, brin-,  bron-, brun-,
bern-, born-, burn-, burned-, and burnt-. Formerly the mineral sulfur, now restricted to biblical
usage.    The Lord reynede vpon Sodom and Gomor brenstoon and fier. [Wycliff's rendition (1382) of
Gen. xix:24]    The Old Norse cognate compound brennusteinn meant amber, as does German Bernstein.


brinded (adj.)

early 15c., the older form of brindled (q.v.).


brindle (adj.)

1670s; see brindled.


brindled (adj.)

marked with streaks, streaked with a dark color, 1670s, from Middle English brended (early 15c.),
from bren brown color (13c.), noun made from past participle of brennen burn (see burn (v.)); the
derived adjective perhaps means marked as though by branding or burning. Form altered perhaps by
influence of kindled.


brine (n.)

Old English bryne brine, origin unknown; no known cognates beyond Dutch brijn, Flemish brijne.


bring (v.)

Old English bringan to bring, bring forth, produce, present, offer (past tense brohte, past
participle broht), from Proto-Germanic *brengan (cognates: Old Frisian brenga, Middle Dutch
brenghen, Old High German bringan, Gothic briggan); no exact cognates outside Germanic, but it
appears to be from PIE root *bhrengk-, compound based on root *bher- (1) to carry (source also of
Latin ferre; see infer).    The tendency to conjugate this as a strong verb on the model of sing,
drink, etc., is ancient: Old English also had a rare strong past participle form, brungen,
corresponding to modern colloquial brung. To bring down the house figuratively (1754) is to elicit
applause so thunderous it collapses the roof.


brink (n.)

early 13c., from Middle Low German brink edge, or Danish brink steepness, shore, bank, grassy edge,
from Proto-Germanic *brenkon, probably from PIE *bhreng-, variant of root *bhren- project, edge
(cognates: Lithuanian brinkti to swell).


brinkmanship (n.)

also brinksmanship, with parasitic -s- and construction based on salesmanship, sportsmanship, etc.;
from brink (the image of the brink of war dates to at least 1840).    Associated with the policies
advocated by John Foster Dulles (1888-1959), U.S. Secretary of State 1953-1959. The word springs
from Dulles' philosophy as outlined in a magazine interview [with Time-Life Washington bureau chief
James Shepley] early 1956:    The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the
necessary art. If you cannot master it, you inevitably get into war. If you try to run away from it,
if you are scared to go to the brink, you are lost.    The quote was widely criticized by the
Eisenhower Administration's opponents, and the first attested use of brinkmanship seems to have been
in such a context, a few weeks after the magazine appeared, by Democratic presidential candidate
Adlai Stevenson criticizing Dulles for boasting of his brinkmanship, ... the art of bringing us to
the edge of the nuclear abyss.


briny (adj.)

c.1600, from brine + -y (2). Used earlier of tears than of the ocean (1610s). Related: Brininess.


brio (n.)

liveliness, vivacity, 1734, from Italian brio, literally mettle, fire, life, perhaps a shortened
derivative of Latin ebrius drunk. Or via Proven&ccedil;al briu vigor, from Celtic *brig-o- strength,
from PIE *gwere- (2) heavy (see grave (adj.)). Probably entered English via musical instruction con
brio.


brioche (n.)

enriched type of French bread, 1826, from French brioche (15c.), from brier to knead the dough,
Norman form of broyer to grind, pound, from West Germanic *brekan to break (see break (v.)).


briquette (n.)

1884, originally blocks of compressed coal dust held together by pitch, from French briquette
(18c.), diminutive of brique (see brick (n.)).


bris (n.)

Yiddish word for the circumcision ceremony, from bris milah, Ashkenazi pronunciation of brit milah
covenant of circumcision.


brisk (adj.)

1550s, as Scottish bruisk, probably an alteration of French brusque (see brusque). Related: Briskly;
briskness.


brisket (n.)

mid-14c., brusket, perhaps from Old French bruschet, with identical sense of the English word, or
from Old Norse brjosk gristle, cartilage (related to brjost breast) or Danish bryske or Middle High
German brusche lump, swelling; from PIE *bhreus- to swell, sprout (see breast (n.)).


bristle (n.)

Old English byrst bristle, with metathesis of -r-, from Proto-Germanic *bursti- (cognates: Middle
Dutch borstel, German borste), from PIE *bhrsti- from root *bhars- point, bristle (cognates:
Sanskrit bhrstih point, spike). With -el, diminutive suffix.


bristle (v.)

c.1200 (implied in past participle adjective bristled) set or covered with bristles, from bristle
(n.). Meaning become angry or excited is 1540s, from the way animals show fight. Related: Bristling.


bristly (adj.)

1590s, from bristle (n.) + -y (2). Figurative sense is recorded from 1872. Related: Bristliness.


Bristol

City in western England, Middle English Bridgestow, from Old English Brycgstow, literally assembly
place by a bridge (see bridge (n.) + stow). A local peculiarity of pronunciation adds -l to words
ending in vowels. Of a type of pottery, 1776; of a type of glass, 1880. In British slang, breast,
1961, from Bristol cities, rhyming slang for titties.


Brit (n.)

U.S. colloquial shortening of Britisher or Briton, 1901, formerly (in common with Britisher) highly
offensive to Englishmen traveling in the States, who regarded it as yet another instance of the
odious vulgarism of the Americans, but Bret and Bryt were common Old English words for the (Celtic)
Britons and survived until c.1300. In Old French, Bret as an adjective meant British, Breton;
cunning, crafty; simple-minded, stupid.


Britain (n.)

c.1300, Breteyne, from Old French Bretaigne, from Latin Britannia, earlier Brittania, from Brittani
the Britons (see Briton). The Old English place-name Brytenlond meant Wales. If there was a Celtic
name for the island, it has not been recorded.


Britannic (adj.)

1640s, from Latin Britannicus (see Britain).


britches (n.)

1905, from britch (1620s), an old variant of breeches.


brite

variant of bright (adj.). It figures in English phonetic spelling reform from at least the late
19c.; as an advertiser's word it dates from at least 1905 (Star-brite Metal Polish, made by the
Star-Brite Company of Lancaster, Pa., U.S.).


British (adj.)

Old English Bryttisc of or relating to (ancient) Britons, from Bryttas natives of ancient Britain
(see Briton). First modern record of British Isles is from 1620s.


Briton (n.)

Anglo-French Bretun, from Latin Brittonem (nominative Britto, misspelled Brito in MSS) a member of
the tribe of the Britons, from *Britt-os, the Celtic name of the Celtic inhabitants of Britain and
southern Scotland before the 5c. Anglo-Saxon invasion drove them into Wales, Cornwall, and a few
other corners. In 4c. B.C.E. Greek they are recorded as Prittanoi, which is said to mean tattooed
people. Exclusively in historical use after Old English period; revived when James I was proclaimed
King of Great Britain in 1604, and made official at the union of England and Scotland in 1707.


Brittany (n.)

French Bretagne, named for 5c. Romano-Celtic refugees from the Anglo-Saxon invasion of Britain who
crossed the channel and settled there (see Britain). The Little Britain or Less Britain (lasse
brutaine, c.1300) of old, contrasted with the Great Britain. As a name for girls (with various
spellings), almost unknown in U.S. before 1970, then a top-10 name for babies born between 1986 and
1995.


brittle (adj.)

late 14c., britel, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English adjective *brytel, related to brytan to
crush, pound, to break to pieces, from Proto-Germanic stem *brutila- brittle, from *breutan to break
up (cognates: Old Norse brjota to break, Old High German brodi fragile), from PIE *bhreu- to cut,
break up (see bruise (v.)). With -le, suffix forming adjectives with meaning liable to.


bro (n.)

colloquial abbreviation of brother, attested from 1660s.


broach (n.)

pointed instrument, c.1300, from Old French broche (12c.) spit for roasting, awl, point end, top,
from Vulgar Latin *brocca pointed tool, noun use of fem. of Latin adjective broccus projecting,
pointed (used especially of teeth), perhaps of Gaulish origin (compare Gaelic brog awl).


broach (v.)

pierce, early 14c., from the same source as broach (n.). Meaning begin to talk about is 1570s, a
figurative use with suggestions of broaching a cask or of spurring into action (compare Old French
brochier, 12c., to spur, also to penetrate sexually). Related: Broached broaching.


broad (adj.)

Old English brad broad, flat, open, extended, from Proto-Germanic *braithaz (cognates: Old Frisian
bred, Old Norse brei&eth;r, Dutch breed, German breit, Gothic brou&thorn;s), of unknown origin. Not
found outside Germanic languages. No clear distinction in sense from wide. Related: Broadly. Broad-
brim as a style of hat (1680s, broad-brimmed) in 18c.-19c. suggested Quaker male from their
characteristic attire.


broad (n.)

woman, slang, 1911, perhaps suggestive of broad (adj.) hips, but it also might trace to American
English abroadwife, word for a woman (often a slave) away from her husband. Earliest use of the
slang word suggests immorality or coarse, low-class women. Because of this negative association, and
the rise of women's athletics, the track and field broad jump was changed to the long jump c.1967.


broad-minded (adj.)

1590s; see broad (adj.) + minded. This abstract mental sense of broad existed in Old English; for
example in bradnes breadth, also liberality.


broadband (n.)

type of high-speed Internet access widely available from 2006, from broad (adj.) + band (n.1).


broadcast

1767, adjective, in reference to the spreading of seed, from broad (adj.) + past participle of cast
(v.). Figurative use is recorded from 1785. Modern media use began with radio (1922, adjective and
noun). As a verb, recorded from 1813 in an agricultural sense, 1829 in a figurative sense, 1921 in
reference to radio.


broadcasting (n.)

1922, verbal noun from broadcast (v.).


broaden (v.)

1727, from broad (adj.) + -en (1). The word seems no older than this date (discovered by Johnson in
one of James Thomson's Seasons poems); broadened also is first found in the same poet, and past
participle adjective broadening is recorded from 1850.


broadside (n.)

1590s, side of a ship (technically, the side of a ship above the water, between the bow and the
quarter), from broad (adj.) + side (n.); thus the artillery on one side of a ship all fired off at
once (1590s, with figurative extensions). Two words until late 18c. Of things other than ships,
1630s. But oldest-recorded sense in English is sheet of paper printed only on one side (1570s).


broadsword (n.)

Old English brad swurd, from broad (adj.) + sword.


Broadway

common street name, from broad (adj.) + way (n.); the allusive use for New York theater district is
first recorded 1881.


Brobdingnag

(not *brobdignag), 1727, Swift's name in Gulliver's Travels for imaginary country where everything
was on a gigantic scale.


brobdingnagian (adj.)

huge, immense, gigantic, 1728, from Brobdingnag + -ian.


brocade (n.)

1560s, from Spanish brocado, from Italian broccato embossed cloth, originally past participle of
broccare to stud, set with nails, from brocco small nail, from Latin broccus projecting, pointed
(see broach (n.)).


brocade (v.)

1650s (implied in brocaded), from brocade (n.). Related: Brocading.


broccoli (n.)

1690s, from Italian broccoli, plural of broccolo a sprout, cabbage sprout, diminutive of brocco
shoot, protruding tooth, small nail (see brocade (n.)).


broch (n.)

prehistoric stone tower of the Scottish Highland and isles, 1650s, from Scottish broch, from Old
Norse borg castle, cognate with Old English burh (see borough).


brochure (n.)

1748, pamphlet; short written work stitched together, from French brochure a stitched work, from
brocher to stitch (sheets together), from Old French brochier to prick, jab, pierce, from broche
pointed tool, awl (see broach (n.)).


brock (n.)

Old English brocc badger, a borrowing from Celtic (compare Old Irish brocc, Welsh broch). After
c.1400, often with the adjective stinking, and meaning a low, dirty fellow.


brogans (n.)

type of coarse shoes, 1846, from Irish and Gaelic brogan, diminutive of brog shoe (also see brogue).


brogue (n.)

type of Celtic accent, 1705, perhaps from the meaning rough, stout shoe worn by rural Irish and
Scottish highlanders (1580s), via Gaelic or Irish, from Old Irish broce shoe, thus originally
meaning something like speech of those who call a shoe a brogue. Or perhaps it is from Old Irish
barrog a hold (on the tongue).


broil (v.1)

to cook, late 14c. (earlier to burn, mid-14c.), from Old French bruller to broil, roast (Modern
French br&#251;ler), earlier brusler to burn (11c.), which, with Italian bruciare, is of uncertain
and much-disputed origin.    Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *brodum broth, borrowed from Germanic and
ultimately related to brew (v.). Gamillscheg proposes it to be from Latin ustulare to scorch, singe
(from ustus, past participle of urere to burn) and altered by influence of Germanic burn words
beginning in br-. Related: Broiled; broiling.


broil (v.2)

early 15c., to quarrel, brawl, also mix up, present in disorder, from Anglo-French broiller mix up,
confuse, Old French brooillier to mix, mingle, figuratively to have sexual intercourse (13c., Modern
French brouiller), perhaps from breu, bro stock, broth, brew, from Frankish or another Germanic
source (compare Old High German brod broth) akin to broth (see brew (v.)); also compare imbroglio.


broiler (n.)

late 14c., grill or gridiron used in broiling, agent noun from broil (v.1). From c.1300 as a
surname, perhaps meaning cook who specializes in broiling. Meaning chicken for broiling is from
1876.


broke (adj.)

past tense and obsolete past participle of break (v.); extension to insolvent is first recorded 1716
(broken in this sense is attested from 1590s). Old English cognate broc meant, in addition to that
which breaks, affliction, misery.


broken (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from break (v.). Broken record in reference to someone
continually repeating the same thing is from 1944, in reference to scratches on records that cause
the needle to jump back and repeat.    When Britain's Minister of State, Selwyn Lloyd[,] became
bored with a speech by Russia's Andrei Vishinsky in UN debate, he borrowed a Dizzy Gillespie bebop
expression and commented: Dig that broken record. While most translators pondered the meaning, a man
who takes English and puts it into Chinese gave this translation: Recover the phonograph record
which you have discarded. [Jet, Oct. 15, 1953]


broken-hearted (adj.)

also brokenhearted, 1520s, from broken + hearted. Related: Broken-heartedly; broken-heartedness.


broker (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French brocour small trader, from abrokur retailer of wine, tapster; perhaps
from Portuguese alborcar barter, but more likely from Old French brocheor, from brochier to broach,
tap, pierce (a keg), from broche pointed tool (see broach (n.)), giving original sense of wine
dealer, hence retailer, middleman, agent. In Middle English, used contemptuously of peddlers and
pimps.


broker (v.)

1630s (implied in brokering), from broker (n.). Related: Brokered.


brokerage (n.)

mid-15c., a broker's trade, from broker (n.) + -age. Also, in 17c., a pimp's trade.


brolly (n.)

British slang, umbrella, by 1866, a clipped and shortened form of umbrella.


bromeliad (n.)

from Modern Latin Bromeliace&aelig;, family name given by Linn&aelig;us, for Olaus Bromel
(1639-1705), Swedish botanist. Related: Bromeliads.


bromide (n.)

compound of bromine and another metal or radical, 1836, from bromine, the pungent, poisonous
element, + -ide. Used as a sedative; figurative sense of dull, conventional person or trite saying
popularized by U.S. humorist Frank Gelett Burgess (1866-1951) in his book Are You a Bromide? (1906).
Related: Bromidic.


bromine (n.)

nonmetallic element, 1827, from French brome, from Greek bromos stench. With chemical suffix -ine
(2). The evil-smelling dark red liquid was discovered by French chemist Antoine J&eacute;r&ocirc;me
Balard (1802-1876), who initially called it muride.


bronchial (adj.)

c.1735, from Late Latin bronchus, from Greek bronkhos windpipe, throat (from PIE *gwro-nkh-, from
root *gwere- (4) to swallow; see voracity) + -al (1). bronchial tubes is from 1847.


bronchiectasis (n.)

Modern Latin, from Greek bronkhia the bronchial tubes (plural; see bronchial) + ektasis a stretching
out, extension, dilation.


bronchiole (n.)

Modern Latin, from diminutive of bronchia  the bronchial tubes (plural; see bronchial).


bronchitis (n.)

coined in Modern Latin 1808 by Charles Bedham, from bronchia the bronchial tubes (plural; see
bronchial) + -itis.


bronchoscopy (n.)

from German bronchoskopie (1898), from Latinized comb. form of Greek bronkhia the bronchial tubes
(plural; see bronchial); also see -scope.


bronchus (n.)

1706 (plural bronchi), from Greek bronkhos the wind pipe (see bronchial).


bronco (n.)

also broncho, 1850, American English, untamed or half-tamed horse, from noun use of Spanish bronco
(adj.) rough, rude, originally a noun meaning a knot in wood, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *bruncus a
knot, projection, apparently from a cross of Latin broccus projecting (see broach (n.)) + truncus
trunk of a tree (see trunk (n.)). Bronco-buster is attested from 1886.


brontosaurus (n.)

1879, Modern Latin, from Greek bronte thunder (perhaps from PIE imitative root *bhrem- to growl) +
-saurus. Brontes was the name of one of the Cyclopes in Greek mythology.


Bronx

named for Jonas Bronck, who settled there in 1641.    Jonas Bronck, who arrived at New Amsterdam in
1639, and whose name is perpetuated in Bronx Borough, Bronx Park, Bronxville -- in New York -- was a
Scandinavian, in all probability a Dane and originally, as it seems, from Thorshavn, Faroe Islands,
where his father was a pastor in the Lutheran Church. Faroe then belonged to Denmark-Norway and had
been settled by Norwegians. The official language of the island in Bronck's days was Danish. ...
Bronck may have been a Swede if we judge by the name alone for the name of Brunke is well known in
Sweden. [John Oluf Evjen, Scandinavian immigrants in New York, 1630-1674, Minneapolis, 1916] Bronx
cheer first recorded 1929.


bronze (n.)

1721, alloy of copper and tin, from French bronze, from Italian bronzo, from Medieval Latin
bronzium. Perhaps cognate (via notion of color) with Venetian bronza glowing coals, or German brunst
fire. Perhaps influenced by Latin Brundisium the Italian town of Brindisi (Pliny writes of aes
Brundusinum). Perhaps ultimately from Persian birinj copper.    In Middle English, the distinction
between bronze (copper-tin alloy) and brass (copper-zinc alloy) was not clear, and both were called
bras. A bronze medal was given to a third-place finisher since at least 1852. The archaeological
Bronze Age (1865) falls between the Stone and Iron ages, and is a reference to the principal
material for making weapons and ornaments.


bronze (v.)

1640s, literally, 1726 figuratively, from French bronzer (16c.) or else from bronze (n.). Related:
Bronzed; bronzing. Meaning to make to be bronze in color is from 1792.


brooch (n.)

early 13c., from Old French broche long needle (see broach (n.)). Specialized meaning led 14c. to
distinct spelling.


brood (n.)

Old English brod brood, fetus, hatchling, from Proto-Germanic *brod (cognates: Middle Dutch broet,
Old High German bruot, German Brut brood), literally that which is hatched by heat, from *bro- to
warm, heat, from PIE *bhre- burn, heat, incubate, from root *bhreue- to boil, bubble, effervesce,
burn (see brew (v.)).


brood (v.)

sit on eggs, hatch, mid-15c., from brood (n.). The figurative meaning (to incubate in the mind) is
first recorded 1570s, from notion of nursing one's anger, resentment, etc. Related: Brooded;
brooding.


brooding (adj.)

1640s, hovering, overhanging (as a mother bird does her nest), from present participle of brood
(v.); meaning that dwells moodily first attested 1818 (in Frankenstein).


brooding (n.)

action of incubating, c.1400, verbal noun from brood (v.). Figuratively (of weather, etc.) from
1805; of mental fixations by 1873. Related: Broodingly.


broody (adj.)

1510s, apt to breed, from brood (v.) + -y (2). Figuratively, of persons, from 1851. Also, in modern
use, sometimes full of maternal yearning. Related: Broodily; broodiness.


brook (n.)

small stream, Old English broc flowing stream, torrest, of obscure origin, probably from Proto-
Germanic *broka- which yielded words in German (Bruch) and Dutch (broek) that have a sense of marsh.
In Sussex and Kent, it means water-meadow, and in plural, low, marshy ground.


brook (v.)

to endure, Old English brucan use, enjoy, possess; eat; cohabit with, from Proto-Germanic *bruk- to
make use of, enjoy (cognates: Old Saxon brukan, Old Frisian bruka, Old High German bruhhan, German
brauchen to use, Gothic brukjan), from PIE root *bhrug- to make use of, have enjoyment of (cognates:
Latin fructus). Sense of use applied to food led to be able to digest, and by 16c. to tolerate.


Brooke

fem. proper name, rare in U.S. before 1965, popular 1980s, 1990s.


Brooklyn

New York City borough, named for village founded there 1646 and named for Dutch township of
Breukelen near Utrecht; from Old High German bruoh moor, marshland; spelling of U.S. place name
influenced by brook (n.), which probably is distantly related.


broom (n.)

Old English brom broom, brushwood, the common flowering shrub whose twigs were tied together to make
a tool for sweeping, from Proto-Germanic *br&aelig;maz thorny bush (cognates: Dutch braam, German
Brombeere blackberry), from PIE root *bh(e)rem- to project, a point.    Traditionally, both the
flowers and sweeping with broom twigs were considered unlucky in May (Suffolk, Sussex, Wiltshire,
etc.). The witch's flying broomstick originally was one among many such objects (pitchfork, trough,
bowl), but the broomstick became fixed as the popular tool of supernatural flight via engravings
from a famous Lancashire witch trial of 1612.


brose (n.)

1650s, Scottish, earlier browes, from Old French broez, nominative of broet (13c.) stew, soup made
from meat broth, diminutive of  breu, from Medieval Latin brodium, from Old High German brod broth
(see broth).


broth (n.)

Old English bro&thorn;, from Proto-Germanic *bruthan (cognates: Old High German *brod), from verb
root *bhreue- to heat, boil, bubble; liquid in which something has been boiled (source also of Old
English breowan to brew; see brew (v.)). Picked up from Germanic by the Romanic and Celtic
languages.    The Irishism broth of a boy, which is in Byron, was thought to originate from the
Irish Broth, passion -- Brotha passionate, spirited ... [Farmer], and if so is not immediately
related.


brothel (n.)

bawdy house, 1590s, shortened from brothel-house, from brothel prostitute (late 15c.), earlier vile,
worthless person of either sex (14c.), from Old English bro&eth;en past participle of breo&eth;an
deteriorate, go to ruin, from Proto-Germanic *breuthan to be broken up, related to *breutan to break
(see brittle). In 16c. brothel-house was confused with unrelated bordel (see bordello) and the word
shifted meaning from a person to a place.


brother (n.)

Old English bro&thorn;or, from Proto-Germanic *brothar (cognates: Old Norse bro&eth;ir, Danish
broder, Old Frisian brother, Dutch broeder, German Bruder, Gothic br&oacute;&thorn;ar), from PIE
root *bhrater (cognates: Sanskrit bhr&aacute;t&aacute;r-, Old Persian brata, Greek phrat&eacute;r,
Latin frater, Old Irish brathir, Welsh brawd, Lithuanian broterelis, Old Prussian brati, Old Church
Slavonic bratru, Czech bratr brother).    A highly stable word across the Indo-European languages.
In the few cases where other words provide the sense, it is where the cognate of brother had been
applied widely to member of a fraternity, or where there was need to distinguish son of the same
mother and son of the same father. E.g. Greek adelphos, probably originally an adjective with frater
and meaning, specifically, brother of the womb or brother by blood; and Spanish hermano brother,
from Latin germanus full brother. As a familiar term of address from one man to another, it is
attested from 1912 in U.S. slang; the specific use among blacks is recorded from 1973.


Brother Jonathan (n.)

sobriquet for United States, 1816, often connected with Jonathan Trumbull (1740-1809) of
Connecticut, called Brother Jonathan by George Washington, who often sought his advice, somehow in
reference to 2 Sam i:26.


brother-in-law (n.)

c.1300; also brother in law; see brother. In Arabic, Urdu, Swahili, etc., brother-in-law, when
addressed to a male who is not a brother-in-law, is an extreme insult, with implications of I slept
with your sister.


brotherhood (n.)

equivalent of Old English bro&thorn;errede fellowship, brotherhood, with ending as in kindred; in
early Middle English the word was brotherhede with ending as in maidenhead. The modern word, with
-hood, is from 15c. Originally relationship of a brother, also friendly companionship. Concrete
sense of an association, a fraternity is from mid-14c. in the Middle English word (later also labor
union, 1880s). Old English also had bro&eth;orscipe brothership, bro&#240;orsibb kinship of
brothers.    Oh, the Protestants hate the Catholics,  And the Catholics hate the Protestants,  And
the Hindus hate the Muslims,  And everybody hates the Jews.    [Tom Lehrer, National Brotherhood
Week lyrics, 1965]


brotherliness (n.)

Old English bro&#240;orlichnes; see brotherly + -ness.


brotherly (adj.)

Old English bro&#240;orlic; see brother + -ly (1).


brougham (n.)

1851, one-horse closed carriage with two or four wheels, for two or four persons, from first Lord
Brougham (1778-1868). The family name is from a place in Westmoreland.


brought

past tense and past participle of bring (v.).


brouhaha (n.)

1890, from French brouhaha (1550s), said by Gamillscheg to have been, in medieval theater, the cry
of the devil disguised as clergy. Perhaps from Hebrew barukh habba' blessed be the one who comes,
used on public occasions (as in Psalm 118).


brow (n.)

early 14c., browes, brues brow, forehead, eyebrow, earlier brouwes (c.1300), bruwen (c.1200), from
Old English bru, probably originally eyebrow, but extended to eyelash, then eyelid by association of
the hair of the eyebrow with the hair of the eyelid, the eyebrows then becoming Old English oferbrua
overbrows (early Middle English uvere breyhes or briges aboue &thorn;e eiges).    The general word
for eyebrow in Middle English was  brew, breowen (c.1200), from Old English br&aelig;w (West Saxon),
*brew (Anglian), from Proto-Germanic *br&aelig;wi- blinker, twinkler (cognates: Old Frisian bre, Old
Saxon brawa, Middle Dutch brauwe eyelid, Old High German brawaeyebrow, Old Norse bra eyebrow, Gothic
brahw twinkle, blink, in phrase in brahwa augins in the twinkling of an eye).    Old English bru is
from Proto-Germanic *brus- eyebrow (source also of Old Norse brun), from PIE *bhru- eyebrow
(cognates: Sanskrit bhrus eyebrow, Greek ophrys, Old Church Slavonic bruvi, Lithuanian bruvis brow,
Old Irish bru edge). The -n- in the Old Norse (brun) and German (braune) forms of the word are from
a genitive plural inflection.    Words for eyelid, eyelash, and eyebrow changed about maddeningly in
Old and Middle English (and in all the West Germanic languages). By 1530s, brow had been given an
extended sense of forehead, especially with reference to movements and expressions that showed
emotion or attitude.


browbeat (v.)

to bully, originally to bear down with stern or arrogant looks, 1580s, from brow + beat (v.).
[I]t appears from the earliest quotations ... that the brow in question was that of the beater, not
of the beaten party; but it is not evident whether the meaning was 'to beat with one's (frowning)
brows,' or 'to beat (?lower) one's brows at.' [OED]    Related: Browbeaten; browbeating.


brown (adj.)

Old English brun dark, dusky, developing a definite color sense only 13c., from Proto-Germanic
*brunaz (cognates: Old Norse brunn, Danish brun, Old Frisian and Old High German brun, Dutch bruin,
German braun), from PIE *bher- (3) shining, brown (cognates: Lithuanian beras brown), related to
*bheros dark animal (compare beaver, bear (n.), and Greek phrynos toad, literally the brown animal).
The Old English word also had a sense of brightness, shining, preserved only in burnish. The
Germanic word was adopted into Romanic (Middle Latin brunus, Italian and Spanish bruno, French
brun). Brown Bess, slang name for old British Army flintlock musket, first recorded 1785.


brown (n.)

brown color, c.1600, from brown (adj.).


brown (v.)

c.1300, to become brown, from brown (adj.). From 1560s as to make brown. Related: Browned; browning.


Brown Shirt (n.)

generic term for Nazi, fascist, especially of the thuggish sort, 1934, originally (1922) in
reference to the German Sturmabteilung, Nazi militia founded 1921; they were called Brown Shirts in
English because of their uniforms.


brown-bag (v.)

to bring lunch or liquor in a brown paper bag, 1970, from brown (adj.) + bag (n.). Related: Brown-
bagging.


brown-nose (v.)

also brownnose, 1939, American English colloquial, said to be military slang originally, from brown
(adj.) + nose (n.), from the implication that servility is tantamount to having one's nose in the
anus of the person from whom advancement is sought [Webster, 1961]. Related: Brown-noser, brown-
nosing (both 1950).


brownfield (n.)

abandoned or disused industrial land, often contaminated to some degree, 1992, American English,
from brown (adj.) + field (n.).


Brownian movement (n.)

1871, for Scottish scientist Dr. Robert Brown (1773-1858), who first described it.


brownie (n.)

benevolent goblin supposed to haunt old farmhouses in Scotland, 1510s, diminutive of brown a wee
brown man (see brown (adj.)). The name for the junior branch of the Girl Guides or Girl Scouts is
1916, in reference to uniform color. Brownie point (1963) is sometimes associated with Brownie in
the Scouting sense but is perhaps rather from brown-nose.


Browning

one of a range of U.S.-made weapons, 1905, named for inventor, John M. Browning (1855-1926) of Utah.


brownstone (n.)

dark sandstone, 1858, from brown (adj.) + stone (n.). As house or building fronted with brownstone
from 1948.


browse (v.)

mid-15c., feed on buds, from Middle French brouster, from Old French broster to sprout, bud, from
brost young shoot, twig, probably from Proto-Germanic *brust- bud, shoot, from PIE *bhreus- to
swell, sprout (see breast (n.)). Lost its final -t in English on the mistaken notion that the letter
was a past participle inflection. Figurative extension to peruse (books) is 1870s, American English.
Related: Browsed; browsing.


browser (n.)

1845, animal which browses, agent noun from browse (v.). In the computer sense by 1982.    The first
browser was invented at PARC by Larry Tesler, now a designer at Apple Computer. Tesler's first
Smalltalk browser was a tree-structured device. It enabled programmers to hunt quickly for items in
a Smalltalk dictionary. [InfoWorld magazine, vol. v., no. 4, Jan. 24, 1983]


Bruce

a Norman surname, but etymology from Brix (place in La Manche, Normandy) is now considered doubtful
[Dictionary of English Surnames]. Originated in Britain with Robert de Bruis, a baron listed in the
Domesday Book. His son, a friend of David I, king of Scotland, was granted by him in 1124 the
lordship of Annandale, and David's son, Robert, founded the Scottish House of Bruce. As a given name
for U.S. males, most popular for boys born c.1946-1954.


brucellosis (n.)

1930, Modern Latin, named for Scottish physician Sir David Bruce (1855-1931), who discovered the
bacteria that caused it (1887).


bruin (n.)

bear, late 15c., from Middle Dutch Bruin, name of the bear in Reynard the Fox fables; literally
brown; cognate with Old English brun (see brown (adj.)).


bruise (v.)

Old English brysan to crush, bruise, pound, from Proto-Germanic *brusjan, from PIE root *bhreu- to
smash, cut, break up (cognates: Old Irish bronnaim I wrong, I hurt; Breton brezel war, Vulgar Latin
brisare to break). Merged by 17c. with Anglo-French bruiser to break, smash, from Old French
bruisier to break, shatter, perhaps from Gaulish *brus-, from the same PIE root. Related: Bruised;
bruising.


bruise (n.)

1540s, from bruise (v.).


bruiser (n.)

a pugilist, 1744, agent noun from bruise (v.).


bruit (v.)

to report, 1520s, from bruit (n.) rumor, tiding, fame, renown (mid-15c.), from French bruit (n.),
from bruire to make noise, roar, of uncertain origin. Related: Bruited; bruiting.


brulee (adj.)

from French br&#251;l&eacute;e burned, from br&#251;ler, from Old French brusler (11c.); see broil
(v.1). Cr&egrave;me br&#251;l&eacute;e was known in English by various names from early 18c.,
including a translated burnt cream.


brumal (adj.)

belonging to winter, 1510s, from Latin brumalis, from bruma winter (see brume). The Latin word also
is the ultimate source of Brumaire, second month (Oct. 22-Nov. 20) in calendar of the French
Republic, literally the foggy month, coined 1793 by Fabre d'Eglantine from French brume fog (see
brume).


brume (n.)

fog, mist, 1808, from French brume fog (14c.), in Old French, wintertime, from Latin bruma winter,
perhaps with an original sense season of the shortest day, from *brevima, contracted from
brevissima, superlative of brevis short (see brief (adj.)).


brummagem (adj.)

cheap and showy, 19c., from a noun, from the vulgar pronunciation of Birmingham, England, in
reference to articles mass-manufactured there. The word also recalls Birmingham's old reputation for
counterfeiting.


brunch

1896, British student slang merger of breakfast and lunch.To be fashionable nowadays we must
'brunch'. Truly an excellent portmanteau word, introduced, by the way, last year, by Mr. Guy
Beringer, in the now defunct Hunter's Weekly, and indicating a combined breakfast and lunch. [Punch,
Aug. 1, 1896]


brunet (n.)

dark-complexioned person, 1887, from French brunet, diminutive of brun brown, which is from a
Germanic source (see brown (adj.)).


brunette (adj.)

1660s, from French brunette (masc. brunet), from Old French brunet brownish, brown-haired, dark-
complexioned, fem. diminutive of brun brown (12c.), of West Germanic origin (see brown (adj.)). As a
noun, woman of a dark complexion, from 1710. The metathesized form, Old French burnete, is the
source of the surname Burnett. Burnete also was used of a wool-dyed cloth of superior quality,
originally dark brown.


brung

dialectal past tense and past participle of bring (v.).


Bruno

masc. proper name, from Old High German Bruno, literally brown (see brown (adj.)).


brunt (n.)

early 14c., a sharp blow, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse brundr sexual heat, or bruna
to advance like wildfire. Meaning chief force is first attested 1570s.


brush (v.1)

late 15c., to clean or rub (clothing) with a brush, also (mid-15c.) to beat with a brush, from brush
(n.1). Related: Brushed; brushing. To brush off someone or something, rebuff, dismiss, is from 1941.


brush (n.1)

dust-sweeper, a brush for sweeping, late 14c., also, c.1400, brushwood, brushes; from Old French
broisse (Modern French brosse) a brush (13c.), perhaps from Vulgar Latin *bruscia a bunch of new
shoots (used to sweep away dust), perhaps from Proto-Germanic *bruskaz underbrush.


brush (n.2)

shrubbery, early 14c., from Anglo-French bruce brushwood, Old North French broche, Old French broce
bush, thicket, undergrowth (12c., Modern French brosse), from Gallo-Roman *brocia, perhaps from
*brucus heather, or possibly from the same source as brush (n.1).


brush (v.2)

move briskly especially past or against something or someone, 1670s, from earlier sense (c.1400) to
hasten, rush, probably from brush (n.2), on the notion of a horse, etc., passing through dense
undergrowth (compare Old French brosser travel (through woods), and Middle English noun brush
charge, onslaught, encounter, mid-14c.), but brush (n.1) probably has contributed something to it as
well. Related: Brushed; brushing.


brushfire (n.)

1850, from brush (n.2) + fire (n.).


brusque (adj.)

1650s, from French brusque lively, fierce, from Italian adjective brusco sharp, tart, rough, perhaps
from Vulgar Latin *bruscum butcher's broom plant.


Brussels

capital of old Brabant, now of Belgium, of Germanic origin, from brocca marsh + sali room, building,
from Latin cella (see cell). It arose 6c. as a fortress on an island in a river. As a type of
carpet, from 1799; as a type of lace, from 1748. Brussels sprouts (Brassica oleracea gemmifera)
attested from 1748 (first written description is from 1580s).


brut (adj.)

dry, 1891, used of wines, especially champagnes, from French brut (14c.), literally raw, crude (see
brute).


brutal (adj.)

mid-15c., in reference to the nature of animals, from Latin brutus (see brute (adj.)) + -al (1). Of
persons, fierce, 1640s. Related: Brutally.


brutality (n.)

1630s, savage cruelty, inhuman behavior, from brutal + -ity. Literal sense condition or state of a
brute is from 1711.


brute (adj.)

early 15c., of or belonging to animals, from Middle French brut coarse, brutal, raw, crude, from
Latin brutus heavy, dull, stupid, an Oscan word, from PIE root *gwere- (2) heavy (see grave (adj.)).
Before reaching English the meaning expanded to of the lower animals. Used of human beings from
1530s.


brute (n.)

1610s, from brute (adj.).


brutish (adj.)

1530s, pertaining to animals, from brute (n.) + -ish. In reference to human brutes, from 1550s.
Related: Brutishly; brutishness.


Brutus

 A surname of the Junian gens. Association with betrayal traces to Marcus Junius Brutus (c.85
B.C.E.-42 B.C.E.), Roman statesman and general and conspirator against Caesar.


bruxism (n.)

grinding the teeth unconsciously, from Greek ebryxa, aorist root of brykein to gnash the teeth.


bryo-

word-forming element meaning moss in scientific compounds, from Greek bryos, bryon moss.


bryophyte (n.)

from Modern Latin Bryophyta (1864), from bryo- moss + -phyte plant (n.).


Brythonic (adj.)

of the Britons, Welsh, 1884, from Welsh Brython, cognate with Latin Britto (see Briton). Introduced
by Welsh Celtic scholar Professor John Rhys (1840-1915) to avoid the confusion of using
Briton/British with reference to ancient peoples, religions, and languages.


BS (n.)

c.1900, slang abbreviation of bullshit (q.v.).


btw

Internet abbreviation of by the way, in use by 1989.


bub (n.)

familiar address for males, 1839, perhaps a variation of bud a little boy (1848), American English
colloquial; perhaps from German bube boy, or from English brother.


bubba (n.)

Southern U.S. slang, 1860s, a corruption of brother.


bubble (n.)

early 14c., perhaps from Middle Dutch bobbel (n.) and/or Middle Low German bubbeln (v.), all
probably of echoic origin. Bubble bath first recorded 1949. Of financial schemes originally in South
Sea Bubble (1590s), on notion of fragile and insubstantial.


bubble (v.)

mid-15c., perhaps from bubble (n.) and/or from Middle Low German bubbeln (v.), probably of echoic
origin. Related: Bubbled; bubbling.


bubble-gum (n.)

1937, from bubble (n.) + gum (n.). Figurative of young teenager tastes or culture from the early
1960s.


bubbly (adj.)

1590s, from bubble (n.) + -ly (2). Of persons, from 1939. The slang noun meaning champagne (1920) is
short for bubbly water (1910).


bubo (n.)

late 14c., plural buboes, from Late Latin bubo (genitive bubonis) swelling of lymph glands (in the
groin), from Greek boubon the groin, swelling in the groin.


bubonic (adj.)

characterized by swelling in the groin, by 1795, from Latin bubo (genitive bubonis) swelling of
lymph glands (in the groin), from Greek boubon the groin; swelling in the groin + -ic. Bubonic
plague attested by 1827.


buccal (adj.)

pertaining to the cheek, 1831, from Latin bucca cheek, especially when puffed out (later mouth); see
bouche.


buccaneer (n.)

1660s, from French boucanier user of a boucan, a native grill for roasting meat, from Tupi mukem
(rendered in Portuguese as moquem c.1587): initial b and m are interchangeable in the Tupi language
[Klein]. For Haitian variant barbacoa, see barbecue. Originally used of French settlers working as
hunters and woodsmen in the Spanish West Indies, a lawless and piratical set after they were driven
from their trade by Spanish authorities in the 1690s.


Bucephalus

Alexander the Great's favorite horse, from Greek Boukephalos, literally Ox-head, from bous ox (see
cow (n.)) + kephale head (see cephalo-).  Men called [him] Bucephalus ... of the marke or brand of a
buls head, which was imprinted vpon his shoulder. [Pliny, I.220, tr. Holland, 1601]


buck (n.1)

male deer, c.1300, earlier male goat; from Old English bucca male goat, from Proto-Germanic *bukkon
(cognates: Old Saxon buck, Middle Dutch boc, Dutch bok, Old High German boc, German Bock, Old Norse
bokkr), perhaps from a PIE root *bhugo (cognates: Avestan buza buck, goat, Armenian buc lamb), but
some speculate that it is from a lost pre-Germanic language. Barnhart says Old English buc male
deer, listed in some sources, is a ghost word or scribal error.    Meaning dollar is 1856, American
English, perhaps an abbreviation of buckskin, a unit of trade among Indians and Europeans in
frontier days, attested in this sense from 1748. Pass the buck is first recorded in the literal
sense 1865, American English:The 'buck' is any inanimate object, usually knife or pencil, which is
thrown into a jack pot and temporarily taken by the winner of the pot. Whenever the deal reaches the
holder of the 'buck', a new jack pot must be made. [J.W. Keller, Draw Poker, 1887]Perhaps originally
especially a buck-handled knife. The figurative sense of shift responsibility is first recorded
1912. Buck private is recorded by 1870s, of uncertain signification.


buck (v.)

1848, apparently with a sense of jump like a buck, from buck (n.1). Related: Bucked; bucking. Buck
up cheer up is from 1844.


buck (n.2)

sawhorse, 1817, American English, apparently from Dutch bok trestle.


buck-eye (n.)

American horse chestnut, 1763, said to be so called from resemblance of the nut to a stag's eye. See
buck (n.1) + eye (n.). Meaning native of Ohio is attested since 1822.


buckaroo (n.)

1889, American English, from bakhara (1827), from Spanish vaquero cowboy, from vaca cow, from Latin
vacca (see vaccination). Spelling altered by influence of buck (n.1).


buckboard (n.)

1839, plank on wheels, from board (n.1) + buck body of a cart or wagon (1690s), perhaps representing
a dialectal survival of Old English buc belly, body, trunk(see bucket). As a type of vehicle
constructed this way, from 1874.


bucket (n.)

mid-13c., from Anglo-French buquet bucket, pail, from Old French buquet bucket, which is from a
Germanic source, or a diminutive of cognate Old English buc pitcher, bulging vessel, originally
belly (buckets were formerly of leather as well as wood), both from West Germanic *buh- (cognates:
Dutch buik, Old High German buh, German Bauch belly), possibly from a variant of PIE root *beu-,
*bheu- to grow, swell (see bull (n.2)).   Kick the bucket to die (1785) perhaps is from unrelated
Old French buquet balance, a beam from which slaughtered animals were hung; perhaps reinforced by
the notion of suicide by hanging after standing on an upturned bucket (but Farmer calls attention to
bucket a Norfolk term for a pulley).


Buckinghamshire

Old English Buccingahamscir, from Buccingahamme (early 10c.), River-bend land of the family or
followers of a man called Bucca.


buckish (adj.)

dandyish, 1782, from buck (n.1) in the slang sense + -ish. Related: Buckishly.


buckle (v.1)

late 14c., bokelen, to fasten with a buckle, from buckle (n.). Related: Buckled; buckling. To buckle
down apply effort, settle down, (1874) is said to be a variant of knuckle down (see knuckle).


buckle (n.)

spiked metal ring for holding a belt, etc., c.1300, bukel, from Old French bocle boss (of a shield),
then shield, then by further extension buckle, metal ring, (12c., Modern French boucle), from Latin
buccula cheek strap of a helmet, in Late Latin boss of a shield, diminutive of bucca cheek (see
bouche).   Boucle in the middle ages had the double sense of a shield's boss and a ring; the last
sense has alone survived, and it metaph. developed in the boucle de cheveux, ringlets. [Kitchin]


buckle (v.2)

distort, warp, bend out of shape 1520s, bokelen to arch the body, from Middle French boucler to
bulge, from Old French bocler to bulge, from bocle boss of a shield (see buckle (n.)). Meaning bend
under strong pressure is from 1590s (figurative from 1640s) . Related: Buckled; buckling.


buckler (n.)

small, round shield used to ward off blows, c.1300, from Old French bocler boss (of a shield),
shield, buckler (12c., Modern French bouclier), from Latin *buccularius (adj.) having a boss, from
buccula (see buckle (n.)).


bucko (n.)

term of address, originally (1883) nautical and with a sense of swaggering, domineering fellow.
Probably from buck (n.1) in the slang sense of a blood or choice spirit.There are in London divers
lodges or societies of Bucks, formed in imitation of the Free Masons: one was held at the Rose, in
Monkwell-street, about the year 1705. The president is styled the Grand Buck. [Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, 1811]


buckra (n.)

disparaging term among U.S. blacks for white person, especially a poor one, 1790, apparently from an
African language; compare mbakara master in Efik, a language of the Ibibio people of southern
Nigeria.


buckram (n.)

early 13c., from Old French boquerant fine oriental cloth (12c., Modern French bougran), probably
(along with Spanish bucar&#225;n, Italian bucherame) from Bukhara, city in central Asia from which
it was imported to Europe. Originally a name of a delicate, costly fabric, it later came to mean
coarse linen used for lining. The -m in the English word may indicate Italian origin (compare
Italian bucherame, 14c.).


buckshot (n.)

coarse kind of shot used for deer and other large game, 1776, from buck (n.1) + shot (n.).


buckskin (n.)

c.1300, skin of a buck, from buck (n.1) + skin (n.). Meaning leather made from buckskin was in use
by 1804. The word was a nickname for Continental troops in the American Revolution.


bucktooth (n.)

1540s, from buck (n.1), perhaps on the notion of kicking up, + tooth. In French, buck teeth are
called dents &agrave; l'anglaise, literally English teeth. Old English had twisel to&#240; with two
protruding front teeth. Related: Buck-toothed.


buckwheat (n.)

1540s, from Middle Dutch boecweite beech wheat (compare Danish boghvede, Swedish bovete, German
Buchweizen), so called from resemblance between grains and seed of beech trees. Possibly a native
formation on the same model as the Dutch word, from a dialectal form of beech. See beech + wheat.


bucolic (adj.)

1610s, earlier bucolical (1520s), from Latin bucolicus, from Greek boukolikos pastoral, rustic, from
boukolos cowherd, herdsman, from bous cow (see cow (n.)) + -kolos tending, related to Latin colere
to till (the ground), cultivate, dwell, inhabit (the root of colony). Middle Irish b&#250;achaill,
Welsh bugail shepherd are Celtic words form from the same root material as Greek boukolos.


bud (n.)

late 14c., budde, origin unknown, perhaps from Old French boter push forward, thrust, itself a
Germanic word (compare Dutch bot bud, Old Saxon budil bag, purse, German Beutel), or perhaps from
Old English budd beetle.


bud (v.)

c.1400; see bud (n.). Related: Budded; budding.


Budapest

Hungarian capital, formed 1872 from merger of two cities on opposite shores of the Danube, Buda
(probably from a word originally meaning water) + Pest, a Hungarian word meaning furnace, oven,
cove, also in Slavic (compare Russian pech'). Compare Ofen, literally oven, the old German name for
the place.


Buddha (n.)

1680s, from Pali, literally awakened, enlightened, past participle of budh to awake, know, perceive,
related to Sanskrit bodhati is awake, observes, understands (see bid). Title given by his adherents
to the man who taught this path, Siddhartha Gautama, also known to them as Sakyamuni Sage of the
Sakyas (his family clan), who lived in northern India 5c. B.C.E.


Buddhism (n.)

1801, from Buddha + -ism.


Buddhist (n.)

1810, from Buddha + -ist. An earlier word in this sense was a direct borrowing of Sanskrit Bauddha
follower of Buddha (1801 in English), hence early erroneous hybrid compounds such as Boudhist,
Bauddhist.


buddy (n.)

1850, American English, possibly an alteration of brother, or from British colloquial butty
companion (1802), itself perhaps a variant of booty in booty fellow confederate who shares plunder
(1520s). But butty, meaning work-mate, also was a localized dialect word in England and Wales,
attested since 18c., and long associated with coal miners. Short form bud is attested from 1851.
Reduplicated form buddy-buddy (adj.) attested by 1952, American English.    Lenny Kent, a long-time
fave here, is really in his element. ... After four weeks here he's got everone in town saying,
Hiya, Buddy, Buddy with a drawl simulating his. [Review of Ned Schuyler's 5 O'Clock Club, Miami
Beach, Fla., Billboard, Nov. 12, 1949]   Buddy system attested from 1920.


buddy (v.)

1931, perhaps originally U.S. underworld slang, usually with up, from buddy (n.). Related: Buddied;
buddying.


budge (v.)

1580s, from Middle French bougier to move, stir (Modern French bouger), from Vulgar Latin *bullicare
to bubble, boil (hence, to be in motion), from Latin bullire to boil (see boil (v.)). Compare
Spanish bullir to move about, bustle; Portuguese bulir to move a thing from its place. Related:
Budged; budging.


budgerigar (n.)

1847, from Native Australian, said to mean good cockatoo, from budgeri good + gar cockatoo.


budget (v.)

to include in a (fiscal) budget, 1884, from budget (n.). Related: Budgeted; budgeting.


budget (n.)

early 15c., leather pouch, from Middle French bougette, diminutive of Old French bouge leather bag,
wallet, pouch, from Latin bulga leather bag, of Gaulish origin (compare Old Irish bolg bag, Breton
bolc'h flax pod), from PIE *bhelgh- (see belly (n.)). Modern financial meaning (1733) is from notion
of treasury minister keeping his fiscal plans in a wallet. Another 18c. transferred sense was bundle
of news, hence the use of the word as the title of some newspapers.


budgie (n.)

1936, short for budgerigar.


buff (n.)

1570s, buffe leather leather made of buffalo hide, from Middle French buffle buffalo (15c., via
Italian, from Latin bufalus; see buffalo (n.)).    The color term comes from the hue of buffalo
hides (later ox hides). Association of hide and skin led c.1600 to in the buff. Buff-colored
uniforms of New York City volunteer firefighters since 1820s led to meaning enthusiast (1903).The
Buffs are men and boys whose love of fires, fire-fighting and firemen is a predominant
characteristic. [N.Y. Sun, Feb. 4, 1903]


buff (adj.)

well-built, hunky, 1980s, from buff (v.) polish, make attractive.


buff (v.)

to polish, make attractive, 1885, in reference to the treatment of buff leather or else to the use
of buff cloth in polishing metals, from buff (n.). Related: Buffed; buffing.


buffalo (n.)

1580s (earlier buffel, 1510s, from Middle French), from Portuguese bufalo water buffalo, from Latin
bufalus, variant of bubalus wild ox, from Greek boubalos buffalo, originally a kind of African
antelope, later used of a type of domesticated ox in southern Asia and the Mediterranean lands,
perhaps from bous ox, cow (see cow (n.)). Wrongly applied since 1630s to the American bison. Buffalo
gnat is recorded from 1822.


Buffalo

city in western New York state, U.S., of disputed origin (there never were buffalo thereabouts),
perhaps from the name of a native chief, or a corruption of French beau fleuve beautiful river.
Buffalo wings finger food so called because the recipe was invented in Buffalo (1964, at Frank &amp;
Teressa's Anchor Bar on Main Street).


buffalo (v.)

alarm, overawe, 1900, from buffalo (n.). Probably from the animals' tendency to mass panic. Related:
Buffaloed; buffaloing.


buffer (n.)

1835, agent noun from obsolete verb buff make a dull sound when struck (mid-16c.), from Old French
bufe a blow, slap, punch (see buffet (n.2)); hence also something that absorbs a blow.


buffer (v.)

1894, from buffer (n.). Related: Buffered; buffering.


buffet (v.)

c.1200, to strike with the fist or hand; cuff, box, slap;  from Old French bufeter to strike, slap,
punch, from bufet (see buffet (n.2)). Related: Buffeted; buffeting.


buffet (n.1)

table, 1718, from French bufet bench, stool, sideboard, 12c., of uncertain origin. Sense in English
extended 1888 to meal served from a buffet.


buffet (n.2)

c.1200, blow struck with a fist or weapon, from Old French bufet slap, punch, diminutive of bufe a
blow, slap, punch; puff of wind, figuratively cunning trick, probably echoic of the sound of
something soft being hit.


bufflehead (n.)

small North American duck, 1858 (buffle-headed duck attested from 1831), from buffle (1510s),
obsolete variant of buffalo (n.) + head (n.). So called for its large head; earlier the noun meant
stupid person (1650s; compare buffle-headed big-headed, also foolish, 1650s).


buffoon (n.)

1540s, type of pantomime dance; 1580s, clown, from Middle French bouffon (16c.), from Italian
buffone jester, from buffa joke, jest, pleasantry, from buffare to puff out the cheeks, a comic
gesture, of echoic origin. Also see -oon.


buffoonery (n.)

1620s; see buffoon + -ery.


Bufo (n.)

toad genus, from Latin bufo a toad, an Osco-Umbrian loan-word, perhaps from PIE *gwebh-, a root
denoting sliminess and also forming words for frog (cognates: Old Prussian gabawo toad, Old Church
Slavonic &#382;aba frog, Middle Low German kwappe tadpole, German Quappe).


bug (v.2)

to annoy, irritate, 1949, probably from bug (n.) and a reference to insect pests. Sense of equip
with a concealed microphone is from 1919. Related: Bugged; bugging.


bug (n.)

insect, 1620s (earliest reference is to bedbugs), of unknown origin, probably but not certainly from
or influenced by Middle English bugge something frightening, scarecrow (late 14c.), a meaning
obsolete since the insect sense arose except in bugbear (1570s) and bugaboo (q.v.).    Probably
connected with Scottish bogill goblin, bugbear, or obsolete Welsh bwg ghost, goblin (compare Welsh
bwgwl threat, earlier fear, Middle Irish bocan&#225;ch supernatural being). Some speculate that
these words are from a root meaning goat (see buck (n.1)) and represent originally a goat-like
spectre. Compare also bogey (n.1) and German b&ouml;gge, b&ouml;ggel-mann goblin. Perhaps influenced
in meaning by Old English -budda used in compounds for beetle (compare Low German budde louse, grub,
Middle Low German buddech thick, swollen).     In the United States bug is not confined, as in
England, to the domestic pest, but is applied to all insects of the Coleoptera order, which includes
what in this country are generally called beetles. [Farmer &amp; Henley, Dictionary of Slang and
Colloquial English, 1912 abridged edition]    Meaning defect in a machine (1889) may have been
coined c.1878 by Thomas Edison (perhaps with the notion of an insect getting into the works).
Meaning person obsessed by an idea (such as firebug) is from 1841, perhaps from notion of
persistence. Sense of microbe, germ is from 1919. Bugs crazy is from c.1900. Bug juice as a slang
name for drink is from 1869, originally bad whiskey. The 1811 slang dictionary has bug-hunter an
upholsterer. Bug-word word or words meant to irritate and vex is from 1560s.


bug (v.1)

to bulge, protrude, 1872, originally of eyes, perhaps from a humorous or dialect mispronunciation of
bulge (v.). Related: Bugged; bugging. As an adjective, bug-eyed recorded from 1872; so commonly used
of space creatures in mid-20c. science fiction that the initialism (acronym) BEM for bug-eyed
monster was current by 1953.


bug (v.3)

to scram, skedaddle, 1953, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to bug (v.2), and compare bug off.


bug off (v.)

by 1956, perhaps from bugger off (see bugger (v.)), which chiefly is British (by 1920s) but was
picked up in U.S. Air Force slang in the Korean War.


bugaboo (n.)

1843, earlier buggybow (1740), probably an alteration of bugbear (also see bug (n.)), but connected
by Chapman [Dictionary of American Slang] with Bugibu, demon in the Old French poem Aliscans from
1141, which is perhaps of Celtic origin (compare Cornish bucca-boo, from bucca bogle, goblin).


bugbear (n.)

1580s, a sort of demon in the form of a bear that eats small children, also object of dread (whether
real or not), from obsolete bug goblin, scarecrow (see bug (n.)) + bear (n.).


bugger (n.)

sodomite, 1550s, earlier heretic (mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin Bulgarus a Bulgarian (see
Bulgaria), so called from bigoted notions of the sex lives of Eastern Orthodox Christians or of the
sect of heretics that was prominent there 11c. Compare Old French bougre Bulgarian, also heretic;
sodomite. Softened secondary sense of fellow, chap, is in British English from mid-19c. Related:
Buggerly.


bugger (v.)

to commit buggery, 1590s, from bugger (n.). Meaning ruin, spoil is from 1923. Related: Buggered;
buggering.


buggery (n.)

mid-14c., heresy, from Old French bougrerie, from bougre heretic (see bugger (n.)). Later unnatural
intercourse with man or beast, carnalis copula contra Naturam, &amp; hoc vel per confusionem
Specierum; from bugger (n.) + -y (4).


buggy (n.)

light carriage, 1773, of unknown origin. Extended to baby carriages by 1890.


buggy (adj.)

infested with bugs, 1774, from bug (n.) + -y (2).


bughouse

1902 (n.) insane asylum; 1891 (adj.) insane, from bug (n.) + house (n.); perhaps originally tramps'
slang.


bugle (n.)

mid-14c., abbreviation of buglehorn musical horn, hunting horn (c.1300), from Old French bugle
(musical) horn, also wild ox, buffalo, from Latin buculus heifer, young ox, diminutive of bos ox,
cow (see cow (n.)). Middle English also had the word in the buffalo sense and it survived in dialect
with meaning young bull. Modern French bugle is a 19c. borrowing from English.


bugle (v.)

1852, from bugle (n.). Related: Bugled; bugling (1847). Also compare bugler.


bugler (n.)

1793; see bugle (n.). Bugle-boy attested from 1817.


bugloss (n.)

1530s, from French buglosse, from Latin buglossa, from Greek bouglossos, literally ox-tongued, from
bous ox (see cow (n.)) + glossa tongue  (see gloss (n.2)) . So called from the shape of its leaves.


build (v.)

late Old English byldan construct a house, verb form of bold house, from Proto-Germanic *buthlam
(cognates: Old Saxon bodl, Old Frisian bodel building, house), from PIE *bhu- to dwell, from root
*bheue- to be, exist, grow (see be). Rare in Old English; in Middle English it won out over more
common Old English timbran (see timber). Modern spelling is unexplained. Figurative use from mid-
15c. Of physical things other than buildings from late 16c. Related: Builded (archaic); built;
building.    In the United States, this verb is used with much more latitude than in England. There,
as Fennimore Cooper puts it, everything is BUILT. The priest BUILDS up a flock; the speculator a
fortune; the lawyer a reputation; the landlord a town; and the tailor, as in England, BUILDS up a
suit of clothes. A fire is BUILT instead of made, and the expression is even extended to
individuals, to be BUILT being used with the meaning of formed. [Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues,
1890]


build (n.)

style of construction, 1660s, from build (v.). Earlier in this sense was built (1610s). Meaning
physical construction and fitness of a person attested by 1981. Earliest sense, now obsolete, was a
building (early 14c.).


build-up (n.)

also buildup, 1927, accumulation of positive publicity, from build (v.) + up (adv.). Of any
accumulation (but especially military) from 1943.


builder (n.)

late 13c., agent noun from build (v.).


building (n.)

a structure, c.1300, verbal noun from build (v.).


built (adj.)

1560s, constructed, erected, past participle adjective from build (v.). Meaning physically well-
developed is by 1940s (well-built in reference to a woman is from 1871); Built-in (adj.) is from
1898.


bulb (n.)

1560s, an onion, from Middle French bulbe (15c.), from Latin bulbus bulb, bulbous root, onion, from
Greek bolbos plant with round swelling on underground stem. Expanded by 1800 to swelling in a glass
tube (thermometer bulb, light bulb, etc.).


bulbous (adj.)

1570s, pertaining to a bulb, from Latin bulbosus, from bulbus (see bulb). Meaning bulb-shaped is
recorded from 1783. Related: Bulbously; bulbousness.


Bulgar (n.)

1759, inhabitant of Bulgaria (Bulgarian is attested from 1550s), from Medieval Latin Bulgarus (see
Bulgaria).


Bulgaria (n.)

Medieval Latin, from Bulgari Bulgarians, perhaps literally the men from the Bolg, the River Volga,
upon whose banks they lived until 6c. But the people's name for themselves in Old Bulgarian was
Blugarinu, according to OED, which suggests a different origin. In other sources [such as Room], the
name is said to be ultimately from Turkic bulga mixed, in reference to the nature of this people of
Turko-Finnish extraction but Slavic language.


Bulgarian (n.)

1550s, from Bulgaria + -ian.


bulge (n.)

c.1200, wallet, leather bag, from Old French bouge, boulge wallet, pouch, leather bag, or directly
from Latin bulga leather sack (see budget (n.)). Sense of a swelling is first recorded 1620s. Bilge
(q.v.) might be a nautical variant.


bulge (v.)

to protrude, swell out, 1670s, from bulge (n.). Related: Bulged; bulging.


bulgur (n.)

cereal food, from Turkish bulghur, bulgar.


bulimia (n.)

1976, Modern Latin, from Greek boulimia, ravenous hunger as a disease, literally ox-hunger, from
bou-, intensive prefix (originally from bous ox; see cow (n.)) + limos hunger, from PIE root *leie-
to waste away. As a psychological disorder, technically bulemia nervosa. Englished bulimy was used
from late 14c. in a medical sense of ravishing hunger.


bulimic (adj.)

1854, voracious; see bulimia + -ic. Meaning suffering from bulimia nervosa is recorded from 1977.
The noun in this sense is from 1980.


bulk (n.)

mid-15c., a heap, earlier ship's cargo (mid-14c.), from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse
bulki a heap; ship's cargo, thus goods loaded loose (perhaps literally rolled-up load), from Proto-
Germanic *bul-, from PIE root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).    Meaning extended by
confusion with obsolete bouk belly (from Old English buc body, belly, from Proto-Germanic *bukaz;
see bucket), which led to sense of size, first attested mid-15c.


bulk (v.)

swell, become more massive, 1550s (usually with up), from bulk (n.). Related: Bulked; bulking.


bulkhead (n.)

late 15c., with head (n.); the first element perhaps from bulk framework projecting in the front of
a shop (1580s), which is perhaps from Old Norse bolkr beam, balk (see balk (n.)).


bulky (adj.)

mid-15c., plump, stout, from bulk (n.) + -y (2). Related: Bulkiness.


bull (n.1)

bovine male animal, from Old English bula a bull, a steer, or Old Norse boli bull, both from Proto-
Germanic *bullon- (cognates: Middle Dutch bulle, Dutch bul, German Bulle), perhaps from a Germanic
verbal stem meaning to roar, which survives in some German dialects and perhaps in the first element
of boulder (q.v.). The other possibility [Watkins] is that the Germanic root is from PIE *bhln-,
from root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).    An uncastrated male, reared for
breeding, as opposed to a bullock or steer. Extended after 1610s to males of other large animals
(elephant, alligator, whale, etc.). Stock market sense is from 1714 (see bear (n.)). Meaning
policeman attested by 1859. Figurative phrase to take the bull by the horns first recorded 1711. To
be a bull in a china shop, figurative of careless and inappropriate use of force, attested from 1812
and was the title of a popular humorous song in 1820s England. Bull-baiting attested from 1570s.


bull (n.2)

papal edict, c.1300, from Medieval Latin bulla sealed document (source of Old French bulle, Italian
bulla), originally the word for the seal itself, from Latin bulla round swelling, knob, said
ultimately to be from Gaulish, from PIE *beu-, a root supposed to have formed words associated with
swelling (cognates: Lithuanian bule buttocks, Middle Dutch puyl bag, also possibly Latin bucca
cheek).


bull (v.)

push through roughly, 1884, from bull (n.1). Related: Bulled; bulling.


bull (n.3)

false talk, fraud, Middle English, apparently from Old French bole deception, trick, scheming,
intrigue, and perhaps connected to modern Icelandic bull nonsense.  Sais christ to ypocrites ... yee
ar ... all ful with wickednes, tresun and bull. [Cursor Mundi, early 14c.]  There also was a verb
bull meaning to mock, cheat, which dates from 1530s.


bull-dyke (n.)

also bulldyke, 1926, from bull (n.1) + dyke.


bull-headed (adj.)

also bullheaded, obstinate, 1818, from bull (n.1) + head (n.).


bull-ring (n.)

arena for bull fights, c.1600, from bull (n.1) + ring (n.1).


bulla (n.)

1876, from Latin bulla (plural bullae), literally bubble (see bull (n.2)).


bulldog (n.)

c.1500, from bull (n.1) + dog (n.). Perhaps from shape, perhaps because originally used for baiting
bulls.


bulldoze (v.)

by 1880, from an earlier noun, bulldose a severe beating or lashing (1876), literally a dose fit for
a bull, a slang word referring to the intimidation beating of black voters (by either blacks or
whites) in the chaotic 1876 U.S. presidential election. See bull (n.1) + dose (n.). Related:
Bulldozed; bulldozing.


bulldozer (n.)

person who intimidates by violence, 1876, agent noun from bulldoze (q.v.). Meaning extended to
ground-clearing caterpillar tractor in 1930.


bullet (n.)

1550s, from Middle French boulette cannonball, small ball, diminutive of boule a ball (13c.), from
Latin bulla round thing, knob (see bull (n.2)). Earliest version of bite the bullet recorded 1891,
probably with a sense of giving someone a soft lead bullet to clench in the teeth during a painful
operation.


bulletin (n.)

1765, from French bulletin (16c.), modeled on Italian bulletino, diminutive of bulletta document,
voting slip, itself a diminutive of Latin bulla (see bull (n.2)). The word was used earlier in
English in the Italian form (mid-17c.). Popularized by their use in the Napoleonic Wars as the name
for dispatches sent from the front and meant for the home public (which led to the proverbial
expression as false as a bulletin). Bulletin board is from 1831.


bullfinch (n.)

1560s, from bull (n.1) + finch; supposedly so called for the shape of its head and neck; compare
French bouvreuil.


bullfrog (n.)

also bull-frog, 1738, from bull (n.1) + frog (n.1). So called for its voice.


bullied (adj.)

1851, past participle adjective from bully (v.).


bullion (n.)

early 15c., uncoined gold or silver, from Anglo-French bullion bar of precious metal, also place
where coins are made, mint, perhaps, through the notion of melting, from Old French boillir to boil,
from Latin bullire boil (see boil (v.)). But perhaps it is rather from Old French bille stick, block
of wood (see billiards).


bullish (adj.)

1560s, from bull (n.1) + -ish; stock market sense is from 1882. Related: Bullishly; bullishness.


bullock (n.)

Old English bulluc young bull, from Proto-Germanic *bulluka-, from the stem of bull (n.1). Now
always a castrated bull reared for beef.


bullpen (n.)

also bull-pen, 1915, in the baseball sense, from bull (n.1) + pen (n.2); perhaps from earlier slang
meaning temporary holding cell for prisoners (1809). Bullpen also was the name of a baseball-like
game played in U.S. late 19c.


bullseye (n.)

also bulls-eye, 1833, center of a target, from bull (n.1) + eye (n.). So called for size and color.
Meaning shot that hits the mark is from 1857.


bullshit (n.)

eloquent and insincere rhetoric, 1915, American English slang; see bull (n.1) + shit (n.), probably
because it smells. But bull in the sense of trivial or false statements (1914), which usually is
associated with this, might be a continuation of Middle English bull false talk, fraud (see bull
(n.3)).


bullshit (v.)

by 1942, from bullshit (n.). Related: Bullshitted; bullshitting.


bully (n.)

1530s, originally sweetheart, applied to either sex, from Dutch boel lover; brother, probably a
diminutive of Middle Dutch broeder brother (compare Middle High German buole brother, source of
German Buhle lover; see brother (n.)).    Meaning deteriorated 17c. through fine fellow and
blusterer to harasser of the weak (1680s, from bully-ruffian, 1650s). Perhaps this was by influence
of bull (n.1), but a connecting sense between lover and ruffian may be in protector of a prostitute,
which was one sense of bully (though not specifically attested until 1706). The expression meaning
worthy, jolly, admirable (especially in 1864 U.S. slang bully for you!) is first attested 1680s, and
preserves an earlier, positive sense of the word.


bully (v.)

1710, from bully (n.). Related: Bullied; bullying.


bully pulpit (n.)

1904, coined by U.S. president Teddy Roosevelt, in reference to the White House.


bullying (n.)

1802, verbal noun from bully (v.).


bulrush (n.)

also bullrush, type of tall plant growing in or near water (in Biblical use, the Egyptian papyrus),
mid-15c., bolroysche, from rush (n.); the signification of bull is doubtful.


bulwark (n.)

early 15c., from Middle Dutch bulwerke or Middle High German bolwerc, probably from bole plank, tree
trunk (from Proto-Germanic *bul-, from PIE root *bhel- (2) to blow, swell; see bole) + werc work
(see work (n.)). Figurative sense is from 1570s.


bum (n.1)

buttocks, late 14c., probably onomatop&#339;ic, to be compared with other words of similar sound and
with the general sense of 'protuberance, swelling.'  [OED]


bum (n.2)

dissolute loafer, tramp, 1864, American English, from bummer loafer, idle person (1855), probably
from German slang bummler loafer, from bummeln go slowly, waste time. Bum first appears in a German-
American context, and bummer was popular in the slang of the North's army in the American Civil War
(as many as 216,000 German immigrants in the ranks). Bum's rush forcible ejection first recorded
1910.


bum (adj.)

of poor quality, 1859, American English, from bum (n.). Bum steer in figurative sense of bad advice
attested from 1901.


bum (v.)

1863, to loaf and beg, American English, a word from the Civil War, perhaps a back-formation from
bummer loafer, or from bum (n.). Meaning to feel depressed is from 1973, perhaps from bummer in the
bad experience sense. Related: Bummed; bumming.


bumbailiff (n.)

server of writs, maker of arrests, etc., c.1600, from bum arse (see bum (n.1)), because he was
always felt to be close behind, + bailiff.


bumble (v.)

to flounder, blunder, 1530s, probably of imitative origin. Related: Bumbled; bumbler; bumbling.


Bumble

self-important petty official, 1856, from the name of the fussy, pompous, stupid beadle in Dickens'
Oliver Twist.


bumblebee (n.)

also bumble-bee, 1520s, replacing Middle English humbul-be (altered by association with Middle
English bombeln to boom, buzz, late 14c.); echoic, from PIE echoic root *kem to hum.


bumf (n.)

papers, paperwork, 1889, British schoolboy slang, originally toilet-paper, from bum-fodder.


bummer (n.)

loafer, idle person, 1855, possibly an extension of the British word for backside (similar
development took place in Scotland by 1540), but more probably from German slang bummler loafer,
agent noun from bummeln go slowly, waste time.    According to Kluge, the German word is from 17c.,
and the earliest sense of it is oscillate back and forth; possibly connected to words in German for
dangle (baumeln), via back-and-forth motion of a bell clapper, transferred to going back and forth,
hence doing nothing. Meaning bad experience is 1968 slang.


bump (n.)

1590s, protuberance caused by a blow; 1610s as a dull, solid blow; see bump (v.). The dancer's bump
and grind attested from 1940.


bump (v.)

1560s, to bulge out; 1610s, to strike heavily, perhaps from Scandinavian, probably echoic, original
sense was hitting then of swelling from being hit. Also has a long association with obsolete bum to
make a booming noise, which perhaps influenced surviving senses such as bumper crop, for something
full to the brim (see bumper). To bump into meet is from 1880s; to bump off kill is 1908 in
underworld slang. Related: Bumped; bumping. Bumpsy (adj.) was old slang for drunk (1610s).


bumper (n.)

1670s, glass filled to the brim; perhaps from notion of bumping as large, or from a related sense of
booming (see bump (v.)). Meaning anything unusually large is from 1759, slang. Agent-noun meaning
buffer of a car is from 1839, American English, originally in reference to railway cars; 1901 of
automobiles (in phrase bumper-to-bumper, in reference to a hypothetical situation; of actual traffic
jams by 1908).


bumpkin (n.)

awkward country fellow, 1560s, probably from Middle Dutch bommekijn little barrel, diminutive of
boom tree (see beam (n.)). Apparently, though itself Dutch, it began as a derogatory reference to
Dutch people as short and dumpy.


bumptious (adj.)

assertive, 1803, probably a humorous coinage from bump on the pattern of fractious, etc. Related:
Bumptiously; bumptiousness.


bumpy (adj.)

1865, from bump + -y (2).    Fasten your seatbelts. It's going to be a bumpy night. [Bette Davis
(Margo Channing), All About Eve, 1950]    Related: Bumpiness.


bun (n.)

late 14c., origin obscure, perhaps from Old French buignete a fritter, originally boil, swelling,
diminutive of buigne swelling from a blow, bump on the head, from a Germanic source (compare Middle
High German bunge clod, lump), or from Gaulish *bunia (compare Gaelic bonnach). Spanish bu&#241;elo
a fritter apparently is from the same source. Of hair coiled at the back of the head, first attested
1894. To have a bun in the oven be pregnant is from 1951.    The first record of buns in the sense
of male buttocks is from 1960s, perhaps from a perceived similarity; but bun also meant tail of a
hare (1530s) in Scottish and northern England dialect and was transferred to human beings (and
conveniently rhymed with nun in ribald ballads). This may be an entirely different word; OED points
to Gaelic bun stump, root.


buna (n.)

synthetic rubber made from butadiene, from German Buna, from first elements of butadiene, name of a
hydrocarbon (related to butane; the suffix indicates the presence of two double bonds) + Na,
indicating sodium (from natrium; see sodium).


bunch (n.)

early 14c., protuberance on the body, swelling, perhaps echoic of the sound of hitting and connected
to bump (compare, possibly in similar relationship, hump/hunch).    The sense of cluster is mid-
15c.; connection with the earlier sense is obscure, and this may be a separate word, perhaps through
a nasalized form of Old French bouge (2), 15c., from Flemish boudje diminutive of boud bundle.
Meaning a lot, a group is from 1620s.


bunch (v.)

to bulge out, late 14c., from bunch (n.). Meaning to gather up in a bunch (transitive) is from 1828;
sense of to crowd together (intransitive) is from 1873. Related: Bunched; bunching.


buncombe (n.)

see bunk (n.2).


bund (n.)

league, confederacy, 1850, from German Bund (related to English band (n.2) and bind (v.)). In names
of various fraternal organizations, in U.S. especially the German-American Bund, pro-Nazi
organization founded 1936.


Bundestag (n.)

German federal council, 1879, from German Bundestag, from genitive of Bund league, confederacy,
association (related to English band (n.2) and bind (v.)) + tag, literally day; as a verb, tagen,
meaning to sit in conference (see day; also compare adjourn). Hence also Bundesrat, from rat, rath
council (see read (v.)).


bundle (n.)

early 14c., bound collection of things, from Middle Dutch bondel, diminutive of bond, from binden to
bind, or perhaps a merger of this word and Old English byndele binding, from Proto-Germanic
*bundilin (source also of German b&uuml;ndel to bundle), from PIE root *bhendh- tie (see bend (v.)).
Meaning a lot of money is from 1899. To be a bundle of nerves very anxious is from 1938.


bundle (v.)

1620s, to make into a bundle, from bundle (n.); meaning to wrap up in warm heavy clothes is from
1893. Meaning to sleep with another, clothed, in the same bed, a noted former custom in New England,
is from 1781. Meaning to send away hurriedly is from 1823. Related: Bundled; bundling.


bundling (n.)

1640s, a gathering into a bundle, verbal noun from bundle (v.). Meaning sharing a bed for the night,
fully dressed, wrapped up with someone of the opposite sex (1782) is a former local custom in New
England (especially Connecticut and southeastern Massachusetts). It was noted there from about 1750s
and often regarded by outsiders as grossly immoral, but New Englanders wrote defenses of it and
claimed it was practiced elsewhere, too. It seems to have died out with the 18th century.    I am no
advocate for temptation; yet must say, that bundling has prevailed 160 years in New England, and, I
verily believe, with ten times more chastity than the sitting on a sofa. I had daughters, and speak
from near forty years' experience. Bundling takes place only in cold seasons of the year--the sofa
in summer is more dangerous than the bed in winter. [The Rev. Samuel Peters, A general history of
Connecticut, 1782]


bung (n.)

mid-15c., large stopper for a cask, from Middle Dutch bonge stopper; or perhaps from French bonde
bung, bunghole (15c.), which may be of Germanic origin (or the Germanic words may be borrowed from
Romanic), or it may be from Gaulish *bunda (compare Old Irish bonn, Gaelic bonn, Welsh bon base,
sole of the foot). It is possible that either or both of these sources is ultimately from Latin
puncta in the sense of hole. Transferred to the cask-mouth itself (also bung-hole) from 1570s.


bung-hole (n.)

also bunghole, hole in a cask for a stopper, 1570s, from bung (n.) + hole (n.). Sense extended to
anus by c.1600.


bungalow (n.)

1670s, from Gujarati bangalo, from Hindi bangla low, thatched house, literally Bengalese, used
elliptically for house in the Bengal style (see Bengal). Related: Bungaloid.


bungee (n.)

1930, elastic rope; used in late 19c. British schoolboy slang for rubber eraser; probably from
notions of bouncy and spongy; first record of bungee jumping is from 1979.


bungle (v.)

1520s, origin obscure. OED suggests imitative; perhaps a mix of boggle and bumble, or more likely
from a Scandinavian word akin to Swedish bangla to work ineffectually, Old Swedish bunga to strike
(related to German Bengel cudgel, also rude fellow). Related: Bungled; bungling.


bungle (n.)

1650s, from bungle (v.).


bungler (n.)

1530s, agent noun from bungle (v.).


bungling (n.)

1660s, verbal noun from bungle (v.).


bungling (adj.)

1580s, past participle adjective from bungle (v.). Related: Bunglingly.


bunion (n.)

1718, apparently from East Anglian dialectic bunny lump, swelling (16c.), which is probably from
Middle French buigne bump on the head, swelling from a blow (see bun).


bunk (n.1)

sleeping berth, 1758, probably a shortened form of bunker (n.) in its sense seat. Bunk-bed (n.)
attested by 1869.


bunk (n.2)

nonsense, 1900, short for bunkum, phonetic spelling of Buncombe, a county in North Carolina. The
usual story (by 1841) of its origin is this: At the close of the protracted Missouri statehood
debates, supposedly on Feb. 25, 1820, N.C. Representative Felix Walker (1753-1828) began what
promised to be a long, dull, irrelevant speech, and he resisted calls to cut it short by saying he
was bound to say something that could appear in the newspapers in the home district and prove he was
on the job. I shall not be speaking to the House, he confessed, but to Buncombe. Bunkum has been
American English slang for nonsense since 1841 (from 1838 as generic for a U.S. Representative's
home district).    MR. WALKER, of North Carolina, rose then to address the Committee on the question
[of Missouri statehood]; but the question was called for so clamorously and so perseveringly that
Mr. W. could proceed no farther than to move that the committee rise. [Annals of Congress, House of
Representatives, 16th Congress, 1st Session, p. 1539]


bunk (v.)

to sleep in a bunk, 1840, originally nautical, from bunk (n.1). Related: Bunked; bunking.


bunker (n.)

1758, originally Scottish, seat, bench, of uncertain origin, possibly a variant of banker bench
(1670s; see bank (n.2)); possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Swedish bunke boards used
to protect the cargo of a ship). Of golf courses, first recorded 1824, from extended sense earthen
seat (1805); meaning dug-out fortification probably is from World War I.


Bunker Hill

battle site in Massachusetts, U.S., was land assigned in 1634 to George Bunker, who came from the
vicinity of Bedford, England. The name dates from 1229, as Bonquer and is from Old French bon quer
good heart.


bunkum (n.)

variant of Buncombe.


bunny (n.)

1680s, diminutive of Scottish dialectal bun, pet name for rabbit, previously (1580s) for squirrel,
and also a term of endearment for a young attractive woman or child (c.1600). Ultimately it could be
from Scottish bun tail of a hare (1530s), or from French bon, or from a Scandinavian source. The
Playboy Club hostess sense is from 1960. The Bunny Hug (1912), along with the foxtrot and the Wilson
glide, were among the popular/scandalous dances of the ragtime era.


Bunsen burner

1879, named for Prof. Robert Wilhelm Bunsen (1811-1899) of Heidelberg, who invented it in 1855. He
also was co-inventor of the spectroscope.


bunt (v.)

1825, to strike with the head or horns, perhaps an alteration of butt (v.) with a goat in mind, or a
survival from Middle English bounten to return. As a baseball term from 1889. Related: Bunted;
bunting.


bunt (n.)

1767, a push; see bunt (v.). Baseball sense is from 1889.


bunting (n.1)

flag material, 1742, perhaps from Middle English bonting gerundive of bonten to sift, because cloth
was used for sifting grain, via Old French, from Vulgar Latin *bonitare to make good.


bunting (n.2)

lark-like bird, c.1300, bountyng, of unknown origin. Perhaps from buntin plump (compare baby
bunting, also Scots buntin short and thick; Welsh bontin rump, and bontinog big-assed), or a double
diminutive of French bon. Or it might be named in reference to speckled plumage and be from an
unrecorded Old English word akin to German bunt speckled, Dutch bont.


bunyip (n.)

1848, fabulous swamp-dwelling animal (supposedly inspired by fossil bones), from an Australian
aborigine language.


buoy (n.)

late 13c., perhaps from either Old French buie or Middle Dutch boeye, both from West Germanic
*baukna beacon, signal (see beacon). OED, however, supports Middle Dutch boeie, or Old French boie
fetter, chain (see boy), because of its being fettered to a spot.


buoy (v.)

late 16c., to mark with a buoy, from buoy (n.). Meaning rise up, lift, sustain is from c.1600,
perhaps influenced by Spanish boyar to float, ultimately from the same source. In the figurative
sense (of hopes, spirits, etc.) it is recorded from 1640s. Related: Buoyed; buoying.


buoyance (n.)

1821, from buoyant + -ance.


buoyancy (n.)

1713, from buoyant + -cy. Figurative sense (of spirits, etc.) is from 1819.


buoyant (adj.)

1570s, perhaps from Spanish boyante, present participle of boyar to float, from boya buoy, from
Dutch boei (see buoy (n.)). Of personalities, etc., from c.1748. Related: Buoyantly.


bur (n.)

prickly seed vessel of some plants, c.1300, burre, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish borre,
Swedish hard-borre, Old Norse burst bristle), from PIE *bhars- (see bristle (n.)). Transferred 1610s
to rough edge on metal, which might be the source of the sense rough sound of the letter -r- (see
burr).


burble (v.)

make a bubbling sound, c.1300, imitative. Related: Burbled; burbling.


burd (n.)

poetic word for woman, lady in old ballads; later young lady, maiden; c.1200, perhaps from Old
English byrde wealthy, well-born. Or a metathesis of bryd bride. The masculine equivalent was berne.


burden (n.1)

a load, Old English byr&eth;en a load, weight, charge, duty; also a child; from Proto-Germanic
*burthinjo- that which is borne (cognates: Old Norse byr&eth;r, Old Saxon burthinnia, German
b&uuml;rde, Gothic baur&thorn;ei), from PIE root *bher- (1) to bear, to carry; give birth (see
infer).    The shift from -th- to -d- took place beginning 12c. (compare murder (n.)). Archaic
burthen is occasionally retained for the specific sense of capacity of a ship. Burden of proof is
recorded from 1590s.


burden (n.2)

leading idea, 1640s, a figurative use from earlier sense refrain or chorus of a song, 1590s,
originally bass accompaniment to music (late 14c.), from Old French bordon bumble-bee, drone, or
directly from Medieval Latin burdonom drone, drone bass (source of French bourdon, Spanish bordon,
Portuguese bord&atilde;o, Italian bordone), of echoic origin.


burdensome (adj.)

1570s, from burden (n.1) + -some (1). Earlier was burdenous (1520s). Related: Burdensomeness.


burdock (n.)

coarse, weedy plant, 1590s, from bur + dock (n.3).


burdon (n.)

mule born of a horse and a she-ass, late 14c., from Latin burdonem.


bureau (n.)

1690s, desk with drawers, writing desk, from French bureau office; desk, writing table, originally
cloth covering for a desk, from burel coarse woolen cloth (as a cover for writing desks), Old French
diminutive of bure dark brown cloth, which is perhaps either from Latin burrus red, or from Late
Latin burra wool, shaggy garment. Offices being full of such desks, the meaning expanded 1720 to
division of a government. Meaning chest of drawers is from 1770, said to be American English but
early in British use.


bureaucracy (n.)

1818, from French bureaucratie, coined by French economist Jean Claude Marie Vincent de Gournay
(1712-1759) on model of democratie, aristocratie, from bureau office, literally desk (see bureau) +
Greek suffix -kratia denoting power of (see -cracy).    That vast net-work of administrative tyranny
... that system of bureaucracy, which leaves no free agent in all France, except for the man at
Paris who pulls the wires. [J.S. Mill, Westminster Review XXVIII, 1837]   <hr />  <b>bureaucrat</b>,
&amp;c.; The formation is so barbarous that all attempt at self-respect in pronunciation may perhaps
as well be abandoned. [Fowler]


bureaucrat (n.)

1839, from French bureaucrate (19c.); see bureaucracy.


bureaucratic (adj.)

1836, from French bureaucratique (19c.); see bureaucracy. Related: Bureaucratically.
Bureaucratization is from 1916.


burette (n.)

1836, from French burette small vase, cruet, diminutive of buire vase for liquors, in Old French
jug, variant of buie (12c.) bottle, water jog, from Frankish *buk- or some similar Germanic source
(see bucket (n.)). As a laboratory measuring tube, from 1836.


burg (n.)

town or city, 1843, American English colloquial, from many place names ending in -burg (see borough;
also see -ville).


burgeois

obsolete form of bourgeois.


burgeon (v.)

early 14c., grow, sprout, blossom, from Anglo-French burjuner, Old French borjoner to bud, sprout,
from borjon a bud, shoot, pimple (Modern French bourgeon), of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Vulgar
Latin *burrionem (nominative *burrio), from Late Latin burra flock of wool, itself of uncertain
origin. Some sources (Kitchin, Gamillscheg) say either the French word or the Vulgar Latin one is
from Germanic. The English verb is perhaps instead a native development from burjoin (n.) a bud
(c.1300), from Old French. Related: Burgeoned; burgeoning.


burger (n.)

1939, American English, shortened from hamburger (q.v.).


burgess (n.)

c.1200, burgeis citizen of a borough, from Old French borjois (Modern French bourgeois), from Late
Latin burgensis (see bourgeois). Applied from late 15c. to borough representatives in Parliament and
used later in Virginia and other colonies used to denote members of the legislative body, while in
Pennsylvania, etc., it meant member of the governing council of a borough.


burgher (n.)

1560s, freeman of a burgh, from Middle Dutch burgher or German B&#252;rger, from Middle High German
burger, from Old High German burgari inhabitant of a fortress, from burg fortress, citadel (see
borough). Burgh, as a native variant of borough, persists in Scottish English (as in Edinburgh).


burglar (n.)

1540s, shortened from Anglo-Latin burglator (late 13c.), earlier burgator, from Medieval Latin
burgator burglar, from burgare to break open, commit burglary, from Latin burgus fortress, castle, a
Germanic loan-word akin to borough. The intrusive -l- is perhaps from influence of Latin latro thief
(see larceny). The native word, Old English burgh-breche, might have influenced the word.


burglarious (adj.)

1769, from burglary + -ous. Related: Burglariously; burglariousness.


burglarize (v.)

1865, American English, from burglary + -ize. Related: Burglarized; burglarizing.    We see in a
telegraphic despatch from across the boundary line that a store was burglarized a short time ago. We
are sorry that any thing so dreadful should have happened to any of our inventive cousins. Truly the
American language is fearfully and wonderfully made. [Upper Canada Law Journal, September 1865,
p.228]   <hr />  Burglarize, to, a term creeping into journalism. The Yankeeisms donated, collided,
and burglarized have been badly used up by an English magazine writer. (Southern Magazine, April,
1871.) The word has a dangerous rival in the shorter burgle. [Maximilian Schele De Vere,
Americanisms; The English of the New World, 1872]


burglary (n.)

c.1200, Anglo-Latin burglaria (see burglar).


burgle (v.)

1869, verbal back-formation from burglar (q.v.). Related: Burgled; burgling. Compare burglarize.


Burgundy (n.)

1670s, wine made in Burgundy, region and former duchy in France. The place name is from Medieval
Latin Burgundia, from Late Latin Burgundiones, literally highlanders, from PIE *bhrgh-nt- high,
mighty, from root *bhrgh- high (see borough).


burial (n.)

act of burying, late 13c.; earlier tomb (c.1200), false singular from Old English byrgels tomb, from
byrgan to bury + suffix -els; a compound also found in Old Saxon burgisli, suggesting a Proto-
Germanic *burgisli-, from PIE root *bhergh- (1) to hide, protect (see bury). The Germanic suffix
*-isli- (also in Old English hydels hiding place, f&aelig;tels bag) became obsolete and was felt as
a plural of the Latin-derived suffix -al (2) forming nouns of action from verbs (survival, approval,
etc.).


burin (n.)

engraver's tool, 1660s, from French burin, cognate with Italian bolino, Spanish buril, perhaps from
Old High German bora tool for boring (see bore (v.)).


burka (n.)

1836, from Hindi, from Arabic burqa'.


Burke (v.)

family name (first recorded 1066), from Anglo-Norman pronunciation of Old English burgh. Not common
in England itself, but it took root in Ireland, where William de Burgo went in 1171 with Henry II
and later became Earl of Ulster. As shorthand for a royalty reference book, it represents A General
and Heraldic Dictionary of the Peerage and Baronetage of the United Kingdom, first issued 1826,
compiled by John Burke (1787-1848). As a verb meaning murder by smothering, it is abstracted from
William Burk, executed in Edinburgh 1829 for murdering several persons to sell their bodies for
dissection.


burl (n.)

small knot in wool or cloth, mid-15c., from Old French bourle tuft of wool, which perhaps is related
to the root of bur, or from Vulgar Latin *burrula small flock of wool, from Late Latin burra wool.


burlap (n.)

1690s, probably from Middle English borel coarse cloth, from Old French burel (see bureau); or Dutch
boeren coarse, perhaps confused with boer peasant. The second element, -lap, meant piece of cloth
(see lap (n.)).


burlesque (n.)

1660s, derisive imitation, grotesque parody, from French burlesque (16c.), from Italian burlesco,
from burla joke, fun, mockery, possibly ultimately from Late Latin burra trifle, nonsense, literally
flock of wool. Modern sense of variety show featuring striptease is American English, 1870.
Originally (1857) the sketches at the end of minstrel shows. As a verb, from 1670s.


burly (adj.)

c.1300, perhaps from Old English burlic noble, stately, literally bowerly, fit to frequent a lady's
apartment (see bower). Sense descended through stout, and sturdy by 15c. to heavily built. Another
theory connects the Old English word to Old High German burlih lofty, exalted, related to burjan to
raise, lift.


Burma

from Burmese people's self-designation; see Myanmar. Related: Burman.


Burmese

1823 (adj.), 1824 (n.), from Burma + -ese.


burn (v.)

12c., combination of Old Norse brenna to burn, light, and two originally distinct Old English verbs:
b&aelig;rnan to kindle (transitive) and beornan to be on fire (intransitive), all from Proto-
Germanic *brennan/*branajan (cognates: Middle Dutch bernen, Dutch branden, Old High German brinnan,
German brennen, Gothic -brannjan to set on fire). This perhaps is from PIE   *gwher- to heat, warm
(see warm (adj.)), or from PIE *bhre-n-u, from root *bhreue- to boil forth, well up (see brew (v.)).
Related: Burned/burnt (see -ed); burning.    Figuratively (of passions, battle, etc.) in Old
English. Meaning cheat, swindle, victimize is first attested 1650s. In late 18c, slang, burned meant
infected with venereal disease. To burn one's bridges (behind one) behave so as to destroy any
chance of returning to a status quo (attested by 1892 in Mark Twain), perhaps ultimately is from
reckless cavalry raids in the American Civil War. Slavic languages have historically used different
and unrelated words for the transitive and intransitive senses of set fire to/be on fire: for
example Polish pali&#263;/gorze&#263;, Russian &#382;e&#269;'/gorel.


burn (n.)

c.1300, act of burning, from Old English bryne, from the same source as burn (v.). Until mid-16c.
the usual spelling was brenne. Meaning mark made by burning is from 1520s. Slow burn first attested
1938, in reference to U.S. movie actor Edgar Kennedy (1890-1948), who made it his specialty.


burnable (adj.)

1610s, a hybrid from burn (v.) + -able.


burner (n.)

late 13c., also as a surname, Brenner, person who makes bricks, agent noun from burn (v.)). As a
name for a part of a lamp where the flame is applied, from 1790. Of gas-cooking stoves, by 1885.


burning (adj.)

Old English in the literal sense; c.1300 figurative, present participle adjective from burn (v.)).
Burning question matches French question br&#251;lante, German brennende Frage. Burning bush is from
Exodus III. Burning glass is attested from 1560s.


burnish (v.)

early 14c., from Old French burniss- present participle stem of burnir, metathesis of brunir to
shine, gleam, sparkle (trans.), to polish, make sparkle, make bright, shine, from brun brown;
polished, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German brun, Old Norse brunn bright, polished;
brown; see brown (adj.)). The connection to brown might be explained if the original objects in mind
were wooden ones. Related: Burnished; burnishing.


burnout (n.)

also burn-out, drug user, by 1972, slang, from the verbal phrase, from burn (v.) + out (adv.).
Meaning mental exhaustion from continuous effort is from 1975.


burnsides (n.)

style of facial hair consisting of side whiskers and a mustache (but clean-shaven chin), 1875
(singular; plural form from 1878; many early uses are in college and university magazines), a
reference to U.S. Army Gen. Ambrose E. Burnside (1824-1881) of Civil War fame, who wore them and
inspired the style. Compare sideburns.


burnt (adj.)

past participle adjective from alternative past participle of burn (v.). Burnt offering (late 14c.)
is biblical (see Ex. xx:24, Mark xii:33).


burp

1932, noun and verb, American English, apparently imitative. The transitive sense of the verb is
first recorded 1940. Related: Burped; burping. Burp gun attested from 1945.


burqua (n.)

see burka.


burr (n.)

rough sound of the letter -r- (especially that common in Northumberland), 1760, later extended to
northern accented speech in general. Possibly the sound of the word is imitative of the speech
peculiarity itself, or it was adapted from one of the senses of bur (q.v.), perhaps from the phrase
to have a bur in (one's) throat (late 14c.), which was a figure of speech for feel a choking
sensation, huskiness. OED says the Scottish -r- is a lingual trill, not a true burr.


burrito (n.)

Mexican food dish, 1934, from Spanish, literally little burro (see burro).


burro (n.)

donkey, 1800, from Spanish burrico donkey, from Late Latin burricus small, shaggy horse, probably
from burrus reddish-brown, from Greek pyrros flame-colored, yellowish-red, from pyr (genitive pyros)
fire (see fire (n.)). Or, for its shaggy hair, from Late Latin burra wool.


burrow (n.)

rabbit-hole, fox-hole, etc., c.1300, borewe, from Old English burgh stronghold, fortress (see
borough); influenced by bergh hill, and berwen to defend, take refuge.


burrow (v.)

c.1600, to place in a burrow, from burrow (n.). Figuratively (such as to burrow (one's) head) by
1862. Intransitive sense, to bore one's way into, penetrate is from 1610s, originally figurative
(literal sense, of animals, attested by 1771). Related: Burrowed; borrowing.


burry (adj.)

mid-15c., full of burs; see bur + -y (2).


bursa (n.)

by 1788 as an English word in physiology, shortened from medieval Latin bursa mucosa mucus pouch,
from Medieval Latin bursa bag, purse, from Late Latin bursa, variant of byrsa hide, from Greek byrsa
hide, skin, wineskin, drum, of unknown origin; compare purse (n.).


bursar (n.)

treasurer of a college, 1580s, from Anglo-Latin burser treasurer (13c.), from Medieval Latin
bursarius purse-bearer, from bursa (see purse (n.)). Related: Bursarial.


bursary (n.)

treasury, 1690s, from Medieval Latin bursaria treasurer's room, from bursarius (see bursar).


bursitis (n.)

1834, inflammation of the bursa; also see -itis.


burst (v.)

Old English berstan (intransitive) break suddenly, shatter under pressure (class III strong verb;
past tense b&aelig;rst, past participle borsten), from a West Germanic metathesis of Proto-Germanic
*brest- (cognates: Old Saxon brestan, Old Frisian bersta, Middle Dutch berstan, Low German barsten,
Dutch barsten, Old High German brestan, German bersten to burst), from PIE root *bhres- to burst,
break, crack.    The forms reverted to brest- in Middle English from influence of Old Norse
brestan/brast/brosten, from the same Germanic root, but it was re-metathesized late 16c. and emerged
in the modern form, though brast was common as past tense through 17c. and survives in dialect.
Of extended or distended surfaces from 1530s. Figuratively, in reference to being over-full of
excitement, anticipation, etc., from 1630s. Transitive sense (to cause to break) is from late 13c.
Meaning to issue suddenly and abundantly is from c.1300 (literal), mid-13c. (figurative). Meaning
break into sudden activity or expression is from 1680s. Related: Bursting.


burst (n.)

1610s, act of bursting, from burst (v.). Meaning a spurt (of activity, etc.) is from 1862. The
earlier noun berst (early Middle English) meant damage, injury, harm.


burthen

see burden.


bury (v.)

Old English byrgan to raise a mound, hide, bury, inter, akin to beorgan to shelter, from Proto-
Germanic *burzjan- protection, shelter (cognates: Old Saxon bergan, Dutch bergen, Old Norse bjarga,
Swedish berga, Old High German bergan protect, shelter, conceal, German bergen, Gothic bairgan to
save, preserve), from PIE root *bhergh- (1) to hide, protect (cognates: Old Church Slavonic brego I
preserve, guard). Related: Buried; burying. Burying-ground cemetery attested from 1711.    The Old
English -y- was a short oo sound, like modern French -u-. Under normal circumstances it transformed
into Modern English -i- (as in bridge, kiss, listen, sister), but in bury and a few other words (as
in merry, knell) it retained a Kentish change to e that took place in the late Old English period.
In the West Midlands, meanwhile, the Old English -y- sound persisted, slightly modified over time,
giving the standard modern pronunciation of blush, much, church.


bus (n.)

1832, abbreviation of omnibus (q.v.). The modern English noun is nothing but a Latin dative plural
ending. To miss the bus, in the figurative sense of lose an opportunity, is from 1901, Australian
English (OED has a figurative miss the omnibus from 1886). Busman's holiday leisure time spent doing
what one does for a living (1893) is probably a reference to London bus drivers riding the buses on
their days off.


bus (v.)

1838, to travel by omnibus, from bus (n.). Transitive meaning transport students to integrate
schools is from 1961, American English. Meaning clear tables in a restaurant is first attested 1913,
probably from the four-wheeled cart used to carry dishes. Related: Bused; busing.


busboy (n.)

also bus-boy, 1913, from bus (v.) in the restaurant sense + boy.


busby (n.)

fur hat worn by hussars on parade, 1807, earlier a kind of bushy, tall wig (1764), of unknown
origin, though it is both a place name and a surname in England. Related: Busbied.


bush (n.)

many-stemmed woody plant, Old English bysc, from West Germanic *busk bush, thicket (cognates: Old
Saxon and Old High German busc, Dutch bosch, bos, German Busch). Influenced by or combined with
cognate words from Scandinavian (such as Old Norse buskr, Danish busk, but this might be from West
Germanic) and Old French (busche firewood, apparently of Frankish origin), and also perhaps Anglo-
Latin bosca firewood, from Medieval Latin busca (whence Italian bosco, Spanish bosque, French bois),
which apparently also was borrowed from West Germanic; compare Boise.    In British American
colonies, applied from 1650s to the uncleared districts, hence country, as opposed to town (1780);
probably originally from Dutch bosch in the same sense, because it seems to appear first in English
in former Dutch colonies. Meaning pubic hair (especially of a woman) is from 1745. To beat the
bushes (mid-15c.) is a way to rouse birds so that they fly into the net which others are holding,
which originally was the same thing as beating around the bush (see beat (v.)).


bush league (adj.)

mean, petty, unprofessional, 1906, from baseball slang for the small-town baseball clubs below the
minor league where talent was developed (by 1903), from bush (n.) in the slang sense of rural,
provincial, which originally was not a value judgment.


bushed (adj.)

tired, 1870, American English, perhaps from earlier sense of lost in the woods (1856), from bush
(n.).


bushel (n.)

early 14c., measure of capacity containing four pecks or eight gallons, from Old French boissel
bushel (13c., Modern French boisseau), probably from boisse, a grain measure based on Gallo-Roman
*bostia handful, from Gaulish *bosta palm of the hand (compare Irish bass, Breton boz the hollow of
the hand). The exact measure varied from place to place and according to commodity, and since late
14c. it has been used loosely to mean a large quantity or number.


bushido (n.)

1898, from Japanese, said to mean literally military-knight way.


bushing (n.)

metal sleeve fitted into a machine or hole, 1839, from gerundive of bush metal lining of the axle
hole of a wheel or touch hole of a gun (1560s), from Middle Dutch busse box (cognate with the second
element in blunderbuss).


Bushman (n.)

1785, from South African Dutch boschjesman, literally man of the bush, from boschje, from Dutch
bosje, diminutive of bosch, bos (see bush (n.)).


bushwa (n.)

also bushwah, 1920, U.S. slang, euphemistic for bullshit.


bushwhacker (n.)

also bush-whacker, 1809, American English, literally one who beats the bushes (to make his way
through), perhaps modeled on Dutch bosch-wachter forest keeper; see bush (n.) + whack (v.). In
American Civil War, irregular who took to the woods (1862), variously regarded as patriot guerillas
or as freebooters. Hence bushwhack (v.), 1837; bushwhacking (1826).


bushy (adj.)

late 14c., overgrown with bushes, from bush (n.) + -y (2). Of hair, etc., from 1610s. Related:
Bushiness.


busily (adv.)

c.1200, bisiliche; see busy (adj.) + -ly (2).


business (n.)

Old English bisignes (Northumbrian) care, anxiety, occupation, from bisig careful, anxious, busy,
occupied, diligent (see busy (adj.)) + -ness. Middle English sense of state of being much occupied
or engaged (mid-14c.) is obsolete, replaced by busyness.    Sense of a person's work, occupation is
first recorded late 14c. (in late Old English bisig (adj.) appears as a noun with the sense
occupation, state of employment). Meaning what one is about at the moment is from 1590s. Sense of
trade, commercial engagements is first attested 1727. In 17c. it also could mean sexual intercourse.
Modern two-syllable pronunciation is 17c.   Business card first attested 1840; business letter from
1766. Business end the practical or effective part (of something) is American English, by 1874.
Phrase business as usual attested from 1865. To mean business be intent on serious action is from
1856. To mind (one's) own business is from 1620s. Johnson's dictionary also has busiless At leisure;
without business; unemployed.


businessman (n.)

1826, from business + man (n.). Man of business is recorded from 1660s.


busk (n.)

strip of wood, whalebone, etc., used in corset-making, 1590s, probably from French busc (16c.), from
Italian bosco splinter, of Germanic origin (see bush (n.)).


busk (v.)

to prepare, to dress oneself, also to go, set out, c.1300, probably from Old Norse buask to prepare
oneself, reflexive of bua to prepare (see bound (adj.2)) + contraction of Old Norse reflexive
pronoun sik. Most common in northern Middle English and surviving chiefly in Scottish and northern
English dialect. Related boun had the same senses in northern and Scottish Middle English. Related:
Busked; busking.    The nautical term is attested from 1660s (in a general sense of to tack, to beat
to windward), apparently from obsolete French busquer to shift, filch, prowl, which is related to
Italian buscare to filch, prowl, Spanish buscar (from Old Spanish boscar), perhaps originally from
bosco wood (see bush (n.)), with a hunting notion of beating a wood to flush game.


busker (n.)

itinerant entertainer, 1857, from busk (v.) to offer goods for sale only in bars and taprooms, 1851
(in Mayhew), perhaps from busk to cruise as a pirate, which was used in a figurative sense by 1841,
in reference to people living shiftless and peripatetic lives. Busker has been mistakenly derived
from buskin in the stage sense.


buskin (n.)

half boot, c.1500, origin unknown. The word exists in different forms in most of the continental
languages, and the exact relationship of them all apparently has yet to be determined. The English
word is perhaps immediately from Old French broissequin buskin; a kind of cloth (14c., Modern French
brodequin by influence of broder to embroider), or from Middle Dutch brosekin small leather boot,
which is of uncertain origin. OED suggests a likely candidate in Spanish borcegui, earlier boszegui
Figurative senses in English relating to tragedy are from the word being used (since mid-16c.) to
translate Greek kothurnus, the high, thick-soled boot worn in Athenian tragedy; contrasted with
sock, the low shoe worn by comedians. Related: Buskined.


busking (n.)

1851, slang, described variously as selling articles or obscene ballads in public houses, playing
music on the streets, or performing as a sort of informal stand-up comedy act in pubs, perhaps from
an earlier word meaning to cruise as a pirate (see busker).


buss (n.)

a kiss, 1560s; probably of imitative origin, as are Welsh and Gaelic bus kiss, lip, French baiser
kiss (12c., from Latin basiare), Spanish buz, German dialectal Buss.


buss (v.)

1570s, from buss (n.). Related: Bussed; bussing.  Kissing and bussing differ both in this,We busse
our wantons, but our wives we kisse.[Robert Herrick, Hesperides, 1648]


bussing (n.)

kissing, 1888, verbal noun from buss (v.).


bust (n.1)

1690s, sculpture of upper torso and head, from French buste (16c.), from Italian busto upper body,
from Latin bustum funeral monument, tomb, originally funeral pyre, place where corpses are burned,
perhaps shortened from ambustum, neuter of ambustus burned around, past participle of amburere burn
around, scorch, from ambi- around + urere to burn. Or perhaps from Old Latin boro, the early form of
classical Latin uro to burn. Sense development in Italian is probably from Etruscan custom of
keeping dead person's ashes in an urn shaped like the person when alive. Meaning bosom is by 1884.


bust (n.2)

variant of burst (n.), 1764, American English. For loss of -r-, compare ass (n.2). Originally
frolic, spree; sense of sudden failure is from 1842. Meaning police raid or arrest is from 1938.
Phrase ______ or bust as an emphatic expression attested by 1851 in British depictions of Western
U.S. dialect. Probably from earlier expression bust (one's) boiler, by late 1840s, a reference to
steamboat boilers exploding when driven too hard.


bust (v.)

to burst, 1806, variant of burst (v.); for loss of -r-, compare ass (n.2). Meaning go bankrupt is
from 1834. Meaning break into is from 1859. The slang meaning demote (especially in a military
sense) is from 1918; that of place under arrest is from 1953 (earlier to raid from Prohibition). In
card games, to go over a score of 21, from 1939. Related: Busted; busting.


bustard (n.)

large crane-like bird, mid-15c. (late 14c. as a surname), from Old French bistarde, said to be from
Latin avis tarda, but the sense of this (slow bird) is the opposite of the bird's behavior.


busted (adj.)

broken, ruined, 1837, past participle adjective from bust (v.).


buster (n.)

1838, anything large; a man of great strength, American English slang (originally
Missouri/Arkansas), perhaps meaning something that takes one's breath away and an agent noun from
bust (v.). Around the same years, buster (as an extended form of bust (n.)) also meant a frolic, a
spree. Hence a roistering blade (OED; probably not the favored definition in old Missouri and
Arkansas), attested from 1850. As a generic or playful address to a male, from 1948, American
English. Meaning horse-breaker is from 1891, American English; hence back-formed verb bust (v.)
break a horse.


bustier (n.)

1979, from French bustier, from buste bust (see bust (n.1)).


bustle (v.)

be active, 1570s (bustling noisy or excited activity is from early 15c.), frequentative of Middle
English bresten to rush, break, from Old English bersten (see burst (v.)), influenced by Old Norse
buask to make oneself ready (see busk (v.)), or from busk (v.) via a frequentative form buskle.
Related: Bustled; bustling; bustler.


bustle (n.2)

padding in a skirt, 1788, of uncertain origin, perhaps from German Buschel bunch, pad, or it might
be a special use of bustle (n.1) with reference to rustling motion.    BUSTLE. A pad stuffed with
cotton, feathers, bran, &amp;c.;, worn by ladies for the double purpose of giving a greater
rotundity or prominence to the hips, and setting off the smallness of the waist. [Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


bustle (n.1)

activity, stir, fuss, commotion, 1630s, from bustle (v.).


bustling (adj.)

of a place, 1880, present participle adjective from bustle (v.).


busty (adj.)

having large breasts, 1944, from bust (n.1) in the bosom sense + -y (2). Related: Bustiness.


busy (adj.)

Old English bisig careful, anxious, later continually employed or occupied, cognate with Old Dutch
bezich, Low German besig; no known connection with any other Germanic or Indo-European language.
Still pronounced as in Middle English, but for some unclear reason the spelling shifted to -u- in
15c.    The notion of anxiousness has drained from the word since Middle English. Often in a bad
sense in early Modern English, prying, meddlesome (preserved in busybody). The word was a euphemism
for sexually active in 17c. Of telephone lines, 1893. Of display work, excessively detailed,
visually cluttered, 1903.


busy (v.)

late Old English bisgian, from busy (adj.). Related: Busied; busying.


busy-work (n.)

also busy work, 1910, from busy (adj.) + work (n.).


busybody (n.)

meddlesome person, 1520s, from busy (adj.) in the otherwise-obsolete sense prying, meddlesome + body
person.


busyness (n.)

1849, first attested in Thoreau, from busy (adj.) + -ness. A modern formation made necessary after
business evolved away from busy.


but (adv., prep.)

Old English butan, buton unless, except; without, outside, from West Germanic *be-utan, a compound
of *be- by (see by) + *utana out, outside; from without, from ut out (see out (adv.)). Not used as a
conjunction in Old English. As a noun from late 14c.


butane (n.)

paraffin hydrocarbon, 1875, from butyl, hydrocarbon from butyric acid, a product of fermentation
found in rancid butter, from Latin butyrum (see butter (n.)) + chemical suffix -ane.


butch (n.)

tough youth, 1902, first attested in nickname of U.S. outlaw George Cassidy  (1866-?), probably an
abbreviation of butcher (n.). Sense of aggressive lesbian is 1940s.


butcher (v.)

1560s, from butcher (n.). Related: Butchered; butchering. Re-nouned 1640s as butcherer.


butcher (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French boucher, from Old French bochier butcher, executioner (12c., Modern French
boucher), probably literally slaughterer of goats, from bouc male goat, from Frankish *bukk or some
other Germanic source (see buck (n.1)) or Celtic *bukkos he-goat. Figurative sense of brutal
murderer is attested from 1520s. Butcher-knife attested from 18c. Related: Butcherly.


butchery (n.)

the trade of a butcher, mid-15c., bocherie, from Old French bocherie (13c., Modern French
boucherie), from bochier (see butcher (n.)).


butler (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-French buteillier cup-bearer, from Old French boteillier cup-bearer, butler,
officer in charge of wine, from boteille wine vessel, bottle (see bottle (n.)). The word reflects
the position's original function as chief servant in charge of wine. In Old French, fem. boteilliere
was used of the Virgin Mary as dispenser of the cup of Mercy.


butt (n.1)

thick end, c.1400, butte, which probably is related to Middle Dutch and Dutch bot, Low German butt
blunt, dull, Old Norse bauta (see beat (v.)). Or related somehow to Old English buttuc end, small
piece of land, and Old Norse butr short. In sense of human posterior it is recorded from mid-15c.
Meaning remainder of a smoked cigarette first recorded 1847.


butt (n.2)

liquor barrel, late 14c., from Anglo-French but and Old French bot barrel, wineskin (14c., Modern
French botte), from Late Latin buttis cask (see bottle (n.)). Cognate with Spanish and Portuguese
bota, Italian botte. Usually a cask holding 108 to 140 gallons, or roughly two hogsheads, but the
measure varied greatly.


butt (n.3)

target of a joke, 1610s, originally target for shooting practice (mid-14c.), from Old French but
aim, goal, end, target (of an arrow, etc.), 13c., which seems to be a fusion of Old French words for
end (bout) and aim, goal (but), both ultimately from Germanic. The latter is from Frankish *but
stump, stock, block, or some other Germanic source (compare Old Norse butr log of wood), which would
connect it with butt (n.1).


butt (v.)

hit with the head, c.1200, from Anglo-French buter, from Old French boter to push, shove, knock; to
thrust against, from Frankish or another Germanic source (compare Old Norse bauta, Low German boten
to strike, beat), from Proto-Germanic *butan, from PIE root *bhau- to strike (see batter (v.)).
Related: Butted; butting. To butt in rudely intrude is American English, attested from 1900.


butt (n.4)

flat fish, c.1300, a general Germanic name applied to various kinds of flat fishes; compare Old
Swedish but flatfish, German Butte, Dutch bot, perhaps ultimately related to butt (n.1). Hence butt-
woman, who sells these, a fish-wife. [OED]


butte (n.)

1805, American English, from French butte, from Old French but mound, knoll (see butt (n.3)). A
French word introduced in Lewis &amp; Clark's journals.


butter (n.)

Old English butere butter, general West Germanic (compare Old Frisian, Old High German butera,
German Butter, Dutch boter), an early loan-word from Latin butyrum butter (source of Italian burro,
Old French burre, French beurre), from Greek boutyron, perhaps literally cow-cheese, from bous ox,
cow (see cow (n.)) + tyros cheese (see tyrosine); but this might be a folk etymology of a Scythian
word.    The product was used from an early date in India, Iran and northern Europe, but not in
ancient Greece and Rome. Herodotus described it (along with cannabis) among the oddities of the
Scythians. Butter-knife attested from 1818.


butter (v.)

Old English buterian spread butter on, from the same source as butter (n.). Figurative meaning to
flatter lavishly is by 1798 (with up (adv.), in Connelly's Spanish-English dictionary, p.413).
Related: Buttered; buttering.


butter-fingered (adj.)

apt to let things fall, 1610s, from butter (n.) + finger (n.).


buttercup (n.)

type of small wildflower with a yellow bloom, 1777, from a merger of two older names, gold-cups and
butterflower. See butter (n.) + cup (n.).


butterfingers (n.)

person apt to let things fall, 1837; see butter-fingered.


butterfly (n.)

Old English buttorfleoge, evidently butter (n.) + fly (n.), but of obscure signification. Perhaps
based on the old notion that the insects (or witches disguised as butterflies) consume butter or
milk that is left uncovered. Or, less creatively, simply because the pale yellow color of many
species' wings suggests the color of butter. Another theory connects it to the color of the insect's
excrement, based on Dutch cognate boterschijte. An overview of words for butterfly in various
languages can be found here. Also see papillon.    Applied to persons from c.1600, originally in
reference to vain and gaudy attire; by 1806 in reference to transformation from early lowly state;
in reference to flitting tendencies by 1873. The swimming stroke so called from 1936. Butterflies
light stomach spasms caused by anxiety is from 1908.    The butterfly effect is a deceptively simple
insight extracted from a complex modern field. As a low-profile assistant professor in MIT's
department of meteorology in 1961, [Edward] Lorenz created an early computer program to simulate
weather. One day he changed one of a dozen numbers representing atmospheric conditions, from .506127
to .506. That tiny alteration utterly transformed his long-term forecast, a point Lorenz amplified
in his 1972 paper, Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly's Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado
in Texas? [Peter Dizikes, The Meaning of the Butterfly, The Boston Globe, June 8, 2008]


buttermilk (n.)

1520s, from butter (n.) + milk (n.). Compare German Buttermilch. It is what remains after the butter
has been churned out.


butternut (n.)

also butter-nut, 1753, nut of the white walnut, a North American tree; transferred to the tree
itself from 1783. The nut's color was a brownish-gray, hence the word was used (1861) to describe
the warm gray color of the Southern army uniforms in the American Civil War.


buttery (adj.)

resembling butter, late 14c., from butter (n.) + -y (2). Related: Butteriness.


buttery (n.)

place for storing liquor, originally room where provisions are laid up (late 14c.), from Old French
boterie, from Late Latin botaria, from bota, variant of butta cask, bottle; see butt (n.2) + -ery.


butthead (n.)

also butt-head, late 1980s, student slang, objectionable person, from butt (n.1) + head (n.);
perhaps influenced by butterhead, 1960s black slang for one who is a disgrace to the community.
Earlier, butthead meant simply the butt end, bottom of anything (1630s).


butthole (n.)

also butt-hole, anus, 1950s slang, from butt (n.1) + hole (n.). Earlier it meant blind hole; cul-de-
sac (early 20c.).


buttinski (n.)

a jocular name for one who cuts into a line, etc., 1902, American English, from verbal phrase butt
in (see butt (v.)) + surname ending based on Eastern European names.


buttock (n.)

late 13c., singular of buttocks (q.v.).


buttocks (n.)

late 13c., probably related to Old English buttuc end, short piece of land (see butt (n.1)).


button (n.)

c.1300 (surname Botouner button-maker attested from mid-13c.), from Old French boton a button,
originally a bud (12c., Modern French bouton), from bouter, boter to thrust, common Romanic (Spanish
boton, Italian bottone), ultimately from Germanic (see butt (v.)). Thus a button is, etymologically,
something that pushes up, or thrusts out.    Meaning point of the chin is pugilistic slang, by 1921.
A button as something you push to create an effect by closing an (electrical) circuit is attested
from 1840s. Button-pusher as deliberately annoying or provocative person is attested by 1990 (in
reference to Bill Gates, in InfoWorld magazine, Nov. 19). In the 1980s it meant photographer.


button (v.)

late 14c., to furnish with buttons; early 15c., to fasten with buttons (of a garment,) from button
(n.) or from Old French botoner (Modern French boutonner), from boton (n.). Related: Buttoned;
buttoning. Button-down (adj.) in reference to shirt collars is from 1916.


button-hole (n.)

1560s, from button (n.) + hole (n.). The verb, also buttonhole, meaning to detain (someone) in
conversation against his will (1862) was earlier button-hold (1834), from button-holder (1806, in
this sense). The image is of holding someone by the coat-button so as to detain him.


buttonwood (n.)

also button-wood, North American plane tree, 1690s, from button (n.) + wood (n.). So called for
their characteristic round fruit.


buttress (n.)

early 14c., from Old French (arc) botrez flying buttress, apparently from bouter to thrust against,
of Frankish origin (compare Old Norse bauta to strike, beat), from Proto-Germanic *butan, from PIE
root *bhau- to strike (see butt (v.)).


buttress (v.)

late 14c., literal and figurative, from buttress (n.). Related: Buttressed; buttressing.


butty (n.)

slice of bread and butter, 1855, northern English, from butter (n.) + -y (2).


butyl (n.)

hydrocarbon radical, 1868, from butyric acid, a product of fermentation found in rancid butter, from
Latin butyrum butter (see butter (n.)).


butyric (adj.)

1826, from stem of Latin butyrum butter (see butter (n.)) + -ic.


buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


buy (v.)

Old English bycgan (past tense bohte) to buy, pay for, acquire; redeem, ransom; procure; get done,
from Proto-Germanic *bugjan (cognates: Old Saxon buggjan, Old Norse byggja, Gothic bugjan), of
unknown origin, not found outside Germanic.    The surviving spelling is southwest England dialect;
the word was generally pronounced in Old English and Middle English with a -dg- sound as budge, or
bidge. Meaning believe, accept as true first recorded 1926. Related: Bought; buying. To buy time
prevent further deterioration but make no improvement is attested from 1946.


buy (n.)

a purchase, especially a worthwhile one, 1879, American English, from buy (v.).


buy-in (v.)

verbal phrase, to purchase a commission or stock, 1826, from buy (v.) + in (adv.). As a noun by
1970.


buy-out (n.)

also buy-out, the purchasing of a controlling share in a company, 1976, from verbal phrase buy out
purchase someone's estate and turn him out of it, 1640s, from buy (v.) + out (adv.).


buyer (n.)

c.1200, biggere one who purchases, agent noun from buy (v.). Meaning one whose job is to buy goods
for a store is from 1884. Buyer's market attested from 1886.


buzkashi (n.)

Afghan sport, a sort of mounted polo played with a goat carcass, 1956, from Persian buz goat + kashi
dragging, drawing.


buzz (v.)

late 15c., echoic of bees and other insects. Aviation sense of fly low and close is by 1941 (see
buzz (n.)). Related: Buzzed; buzzing. Buzz off (1914) originally meant to ring off on the telephone,
from the use of buzzers to signal a call or message on old systems. As a command, it originally
would have been telling someone to get off the line.


buzz (n.)

a busy rumour [Rowe], 1620s (earlier a fancy, c.1600), figurative use from buzz (v.). Literal sense
of humming sound is from 1640s. A buzz was the characteristic sound of an airplane in early 20c.;
hence verbal sense to fly swiftly, by 1928; by 1940 especially in military use, to fly low over a
surface as a warning signal (for example that target practice is about to begin):    The patrol
aircraft shall employ the method of warning known as buzzing which consists of low flight by the
airplane and repeated opening and closing of the throttle. [1941 Supplement to the Code of Federal
Regulations of the United States of America, Chap. II, Corps of Engineers, War Department, p. 3434,
etc. ]    Meaning pleasant sense of intoxication first recorded 1935. The children's game of
counting off with 7 or multiples of it replaced by buzz is attested from 1864 and is mentioned in
Little Women (1868). To give (someone) a buzz (by 1922) is from the buzz that announced a call on
old telephone systems.


buzz-cut (n.)

by 1973, American English, from buzz (n.), perhaps from the sound of the barber's electric clipper,
+ cut (n.) in the haircut sense.


buzz-saw (n.)

1858, American English, from buzz (v.) + saw (n.).


buzzard (n.)

c.1300, from Old French buisart buzzard, harrier, inferior hawk, from buson, buison, from Latin
buteonem (nominative buteo) a kind of hawk, perhaps with -art suffix for one that carries on some
action or possesses some quality, with derogatory connotation (see -ard).


buzzer (n.)

c.1600, buzzing insect, agent noun from buzz (v.). In reference to mechanical devices that buzz,
from 1870 (steam-powered at first; electric mechanisms so called from 1884).


buzzword (n.)

also buzz word, 1946, from buzz (n.) + word (n.). Noted as Harvard student slang for the key words
in a lecture or reading. Perhaps from the use of buzz in the popular counting game.


BVDs (n.)

men's underwear, 1935, from trademark name (dating to 1876) of manufacturer Bradley, Voorhees, and
Day.


bwana

respectful or reverential form of address in East Africa, 1878, from Swahili.


by (prep.)

Old English be- (unstressed) or bi (stressed) near, in, by, during, about, from Proto-Germanic *bi
around, about (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian bi by near, Middle Dutch bie, Dutch bij, German
bei by, at, near, Gothic bi about), from *umbi (cognate with second element in PIE *ambhi around;
see ambi-).    Originally an adverbial particle of place, in which sense it is retained in place
names (Whitby, Grimsby, etc.). Elliptical use for secondary course (opposed to main, as in byway,
also compare by-blow illegitimate child, 1590s) was in Old English. This also is the sense of the
second by in the phrase by the by (1610s). By the way literally means in passing by (mid-14c.); used
figuratively to introduce a tangential observation by 1540s.    Phrase by and by (early 14c.)
originally meant one by one, modern sense is from 1520s. By and large (1660s) originally was
nautical, sailing to the wind and off it, hence in one direction then another.


by-product (n.)

also byproduct; 1857, from by + product.


Byblos

ancient Phoenician port (modern Jebeil, Lebanon) from which Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece.
The name probably is a Greek corruption of Phoenician Gebhal, said to mean literally frontier town
(compare Hebrew gebhul frontier, boundary, Arabic jabal mountain), or perhaps it is Canaanite gubla
mountain. The Greek name also might have been influenced by, or come from, an Egyptian word for
papyrus.


bye (1)

in sporting use, a variant of by (prep). Originally in cricket, a run scored on a ball that is
missed by the wicket-keeper (1746); later, in other sports, position of one who is left without a
competitor when the rest have drawn pairs (1883), originally in lawn-tennis.


bye (2)

shortened form of good-bye. Reduplication bye-bye is recorded from 1709, though as a sound used to
lull a child to sleep it is attested from 1630s.


bygone (adj.)

early 15c., from by (adv.) + gone. Compare similar construction of aforesaid. As a noun from 1560s
(see bygones).


bygones (n.)

things that are past, especially offenses, 1560s, from plural of noun use of bygone (q.v.).


bylaw (n.)

late 13c., bilage local ordinance, from Old Norse or Old Danish bi-lagu town law, from byr place
where people dwell, town, village, from bua to dwell (see bower) + lagu law (see law). So, a local
law pertaining to local residents, or rule of a corporation or association. Sense influenced by by.


byline (n.)

1926, line giving the name of the writer of an article in a newspaper or magazine; it typically
reads BY ________. From by (prep.) + line (n.). As a verb by 1958.


BYOB

initialism (acronym) for bring your own bottle or bring your own booze, by 1951.


bypass (n.)

also by-pass, 1848, of certain pipes in a gasworks, from by + pass (n.). First used 1922 for road
for the relief of congestion; figurative sense is from 1928. The heart operation was first so called
1957.


bypass (v.)

1823, to pass by (implied in bypassed), from bypass (n.). From 1928 as to go around, avoid;
figurative use from 1941. Related: Bypassed; bypassing.


byre (n.)

cow-shed, Old English byre, perhaps related to bur cottage, dwelling, house (see bower).


Byronic (adj.)

1823, pertaining to or resembling British poet George Gordon, 6th Baron Byron (1788-1824).
Perfect she was, but as perfection is  Insipid in this naughty world of ours,  Where our first
parents never learn'd to kiss  Till they were exiled from their earlier bowers,  Where all was
peace, and innocence, and bliss  (I wonder how they got through the twelve hours),  Don Jose like a
lineal son of Eve,  Went plucking various fruit without her leave.  [from Don Juan]


bystander (n.)

1610s, from by + agent noun from stand (v.). They have been innocent at least since 1829. Stander-by
is from 1540s.


byte (n.)

1956, American English; see bit (n.2). Reputedly coined by Dr. Werner Buchholz at IBM.


byway (n.)

mid-14c., from by + way (n.).


byword (n.)

also by-word, Old English biword proverb, formed on the model of Latin proverbium or Greek parabole.
Meaning something that has become proverbial is from 1530s.


Byzantine (adj.)

1770, from Latin Byzantinus (see Byzantium); originally used of art style; later in reference to the
complex, devious, and intriguing character of the royal court of Constantinople (1937). As a noun
from 1770.


Byzantium

said to be named for its 7c. B.C.E. Greek founder, Byzas of Megara.


