-cene

word-forming element in geology, introduced by Sir Charles Lyell (1797-1875), from Greek kainos new,
cognate with Latin recens (see recent).


-centric

word-forming element meaning having a center (of a certain kind); centered on, from Greek kentrikos
pertaining to a center, from kentron (see center (n.)).


-cide

word-forming element meaning killer, from French -cide, from Latin -cida cutter, killer, slayer,
from -cidere, comb. form of caedere to strike down, chop, beat, hew, fell, slay, from PIE *kae-id-,
from root *(s)k(h)ai- to strike (Pokorny, not in Watkins; cognates: Sanskrit skhidati beats, tears,
Lithuanian kaisti shave, German heien beat). For Latin vowel change, see acquisition. The element
also can represent killing, from French -cide, from Latin -cidium a cutting, a killing.


-cracy

word-forming element forming nouns meaning rule or government by, from French -cratie or directly
from Medieval Latin -cratia, from Greek -kratia power, might; rule, sway; power over; a power,
authority, from kratos strength, from PIE *kre-tes- power, strength, suffixed form of root
*kar-/*ker- hard (see hard). The connective -o- has come to be viewed as part of it. Productive in
English from c.1800.


-cule

word-forming element used to make diminutives, from French -cule or directly from Latin -culus
(masc.), -cula (fem.), -culum (neuter).


-cy

abstract noun suffix of quality or rank, from Latin -cia, -tia, from Greek -kia, -tia, from abstract
ending -ia + stem ending -c- or -t-. The native correspondents are -ship, -hood.


C

third letter of the alphabet. Alphabetic writing came to Rome via the southern Etruscan Caeretan
script, in which gamma was written as a crescent. Early Romans made little use of Greek kappa and
used gamma for both the g and k sounds, the latter more frequently, so that the k sound came to be
seen as the proper one for gamma. To restore a dedicated symbol for the g sound, a modified gamma
was introduced c.250 B.C.E. as G. In classical Latin -c- has only the value k, and thus it passed to
Celtic and, via Irish monks, to Anglo-Saxon, where -k- was known but little used.    In Old French,
many k sounds drifted to ts and by 13c., s, but still were written with a -c-. Thus the 1066
invasion brought to the English language a more vigorous use of -k- and a flood of French and Latin
words in which -c- represented s (as in cease, ceiling, circle). By 15c. native English words with
-s- were being respelled with -c- for s (as in ice, mice, lice). In some words from Italian,
meanwhile, the -c- has a ch sound (a sound evolution in Italian that parallels the Old French one).


C.E.

as an abbreviation for Common Era or Christian Era, and a non-Christian alternative to A.D.,
attested from 1838 in works on Jewish history. Companion B.C.E. is attested from 1881.


C.O.D.

abbreviation of cash on delivery, 1859, originally American English.


c/o

addressing abbreviation for care of; common by 1889.


ca.sa.

abbreviation of Latin capias ad satisfaciendum, a writ issued upon a judgment in a personal action
for the recovery of money  (see capias).


cab (n.)

1826,  light, horse-drawn carriage, shortening of cabriolet (1763), from French  cabriolet (18c.),
diminutive of cabrioler leap, caper (16c./17c.), from Italian capriolare jump in the air, from
capriola, properly the leap of a kid, from Latin capreolus wild goat, roebuck, from PIE *kap-ro- he-
goat, buck (cognates: Old Irish gabor, Welsh gafr, Old English h&aelig;fr, Old Norse hafr he-goat).
The carriages had springy suspensions.    Extended to hansoms and other types of carriages, then
extended to similar-looking parts of locomotives (1851). Applied especially to public horse
carriages, then to automobiles-for-hire (1899) when these began to replace them.


cabal (n.)

1520s, mystical interpretation of the Old Testament, later society, small group meeting privately
(1660s), from French cabal, in both senses, from Medieval Latin cabbala (see cabbala). Popularized
in English 1673 as an acronym for five intriguing ministers of Charles II (Clifford, Arlington,
Buckingham, Ashley, and Lauderdale), which gave the word its sinister connotations.


cabala (n.)

1670s, variant of cabbala. Related: Cabalist.


cabalistic (adj.)

1670s; see cabal + -istic.


caballero (n.)

1877, a Spanish gentleman, from Spanish caballero, from Latin caballarius, from caballus a pack-
horse, nag, hack (see cavalier (n.)). Equivalent of French chevalier, Italian cavaliere.


cabana (n.)

1898, western U.S., from American Spanish cognate of cabin (q.v.).


cabaret (n.)

1650s, tavern, bar, little inn, from French cabaret, originally tavern (13c.), of uncertain origin,
perhaps from Middle Dutch cambret, from Old French (Picard dialect) camberete, diminutive of cambre
chamber (see chamber (n.)). The word was somewhat naturalized in this sense [OED]. It was borrowed
again from French with a meaning a restaurant/night club in 1912; extension of meaning to
entertainment, floor show is by 1922.


cabbage (n.)

mid-15c., caboge, from Middle French caboche head (in dialect, cabbage), from Old French caboce
head, a diminutive from Latin caput head (see capitulum). Introduced to Canada 1541 by Jacques
Cartier on his third voyage. First written record of it in U.S. is 1660s.    The decline of ch to j
in the unaccented final syllable parallels the common pronunciation of spinach, sandwich, Greenwich,
etc. The comparison of a head of cabbage to the head of a person (usually disparaging to the latter)
is at least as old as Old French cabus (head of) cabbage; nitwit, blockhead, from Italian cappuccio,
diminutive of capo.


cabbala (n.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin cabbala, from Mishnaic Hebrew qabbalah reception, received lore,
tradition, especially tradition of mystical interpretation of the Old Testament, from qibbel to
receive, admit, accept. Compare Arabic qabala he received, accepted.


cabbalistic (adj.)

1620s, from cabbala + -istic.


cabbie (n.)

also cabby, cab-driver, 1859, from cab (n.) + -ie. Also see taxi (n.).


caber (n.)

pole used in housebuilding, especially as an object tossed in the Highland games, 1510s, from Gaelic
cabar pole, spar, cognate with Irish cabar lath, Welsh ceibr beam, rafter.


cabernet (n.)

family of grapes, or wine made from them, 1833, from French. Supposedly the best of them, cabernet
sauvignon is attested in English from 1846.


cabin (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French cabane hut, cabin, from Old Proven&ccedil;al cabana, from Late Latin
capanna hut (source of Spanish cabana, Italian capanna), of doubtful origin. French cabine (18c.),
Italian cabino are English loan-words. Meaning room or partition of a vessel is from late 14c. Cabin
fever first recorded by 1918 in the need to get out and about sense; earlier (1820s) it was a term
for typhus.


cabinet (n.)

1540s, secret storehouse, treasure chamber, from Middle French cabinet small room (16c.), diminutive
of Old French cabane cabin (see cabin); perhaps influenced by (or rather, from) Italian gabbinetto,
diminutive of gabbia, from Latin cavea stall, stoop, cage, den for animals (see cave (n.)).
Meaning case for safe-keeping (of papers, liquor, etc.) is from 1540s, gradually shading to mean a
piece of furniture that does this. Sense of private room where advisors meet (c.1600) led to modern
political meaning (1640s); perhaps originally short for cabinet council (1630s); compare board (n.1)
in its evolution from place where some group meets to the word for the group that meets there.


cabinet-maker (n.)

1680s, from cabinet + maker.


cabinetry (n.)

1857, from cabinet + -ry.


cable (n.)

c.1200, from Old North French cable, from Medieval Latin capulum lasso, rope, halter for cattle,
from Latin capere to take, seize (see capable). Technically, in nautical use, a rope 10 or more
inches around; in non-nautical use, a rope of wire (not hemp or fiber). Given a new range of senses
in 19c.: Meaning message received by telegraphic cable is from 1883 (short for cable message). Cable
car is from 1879. Cable television first attested 1963; shortened form cable is from 1972.


cable (v.)

c.1500, to tie up with cables; 1871, American English, to transmit by cable; from cable (n.).
Related: Cabled; cabling.


cablese (n.)

1895, from cable in the telegraphic sense + -ese as a language name suffix. Since cablegrams had to
be paid for by the word and even press rates were expensive the practice was to affix Latin prefixes
and suffixes to make one word do the work of several [Daniel Schorr], such as exLondon and
Londonward to mean from London, to London (non-Latin affixes also were used). Hence the tale, famous
in the lore of the United Press International, of the distinguished but harried foreign
correspondent who reached his breaking point and wired headquarters UPSTICK JOB ASSWARD. Its economy
and expressive power fascinated Hemingway in his newspapering days.


cabochon (n.)

1570s, from French cabochon (14c.), augmentative of caboche (12c.), augmentative or pejorative
formation, ultimately from Latin caput head (see capitulum). Essentially the same word as cabbage.


caboodle (n.)

c.1848, see kit.


caboose (n.)

1747, ship's cookhouse, from Middle Dutch kambuis ship's galley, from Low German kabhuse wooden
cabin on ship's deck; probably a compound whose elements correspond to English cabin and house (n.).
Railroading sense is by 1859.


cabriolet (n.)

light two-wheeled chaise, 1766, from French cabriolet (18c.), derivative of cabriole (see cab). So
called from its light, leaping motion.


caca (n.)

excrement, a nursery word but a very ancient one (PIE *kakka-), forming the base word for excrement,
to void excrement in many Indo-European languages, such as Greek kakke human excrement, Latin
cacare, Irish caccaim, Serbo-Croatian kakati, Armenian k'akor; Old English cac-hus latrine.
Etymologists dispute whether the modern Germanic words (Dutch kakken, Danish kakke, German kacken),
are native cognates or student slang borrowed from Latin cacare. The word in this form appears in
English slang c.1870, and could have been taken from any or several of the languages that used it
(Spanish, Modern Greek).


cacao (n.)

seed from which cocoa and chocolate are made, 1550s, from Spanish cacao, from Nahuatl (Aztecan)
cacaua, root form of cacahuatl bean of the cocoa-tree.


cacciatore (adj.)

by 1973, from Italian, literally hunter, from past participle of cacciare to hunt, chase (see chase
(v.)).


cache (n.)

1797, hiding place, from French Canadian trappers' slang, hiding place for stores (1660s), a back-
formation from French cacher to hide, conceal (13c., Old French cachier), from Vulgar Latin
*coacticare store up, collect, compress, frequentative of Latin coactare constrain, from coactus,
past participle of cogere to collect (see cogent). Sense extended by 1830s to anything stored in a
hiding place.


cache-sexe (n.)

1926, French, from cacher to hide (see cache) + sexe genitals (fem.); see sex (n.).


cachectic (adj.)

1630s, from Latinized form of Greek kakhektikos in a bad habit of body (see cachexia).


cachet (n.)

1630s, Scottish borrowing of French cachet seal affixed to a letter or document (16c.), from Old
French dialectal cacher to press, crowd, from Latin coactare constrain (see cache). Meaning evolving
through (letter under) personal stamp (of the king) to prestige. Compare French lettre de cachet
letter under seal of the king.


cachexia (n.)

bad general state of health, 1540s, from Latinized form of Greek kakhexia bad habits, from kakos bad
(see caco-) + -exia, related to exis habit or state, from exein to have, be in a condition, from PIE
root *segh- to hold, hold in one's power, to have (see scheme (n.)). Related: cachexic.


cachinnate (v.)

to laugh loudly or immoderately, 1824, from Latin cachinnatum, past participle of cachinnare (see
cachinnation). Related: Cachinnated; cachinnating.


cachinnation (n.)

loud laughter, 1620s, from Latin cachinnationem (nominative cachinnatio) violent laughter, excessive
laughter, noun of action from past participle stem of cachinnare to laugh immoderately or loudly, of
imitative origin. Compare Sanskrit kakhati laughs, Greek kakhazein to laugh loudly, Old High German
kachazzen, English cackle, Armenian xaxanc'.


cack

act of voiding excrement; to void excrement, mid-15c., from Latin cacare (see caca). Related:
Cacked; cacking.


cackle (v.)

early 13c., imitative (see cachinnation); perhaps partly based on Middle Dutch kake jaw. Related:
Cackled; cackling. As a noun from 1670s. Cackleberries, slang for eggs is first recorded 1880.


caco-

before vowels cac-, word-forming element meaning bad, ill, poor (as in cacography, the opposite of
calligraphy), from Latinized form of Greek kako- a hard-working prefix in ancient Greek, from kakos
bad, evil, considered by etymologists probably to be connected with PIE *kakka- to defecate (see
caca).


cacoethes (n.)

itch for doing something, 1560s, from Latinized form of Greek kakoethes ill-habit, wickedness, itch
for doing (something), from kakos bad (see caco-) + ethe- disposition, character (see ethos). Most
famously, in Juvenal's insanabile scribendi cacoethes incurable passion for writing.


cacoon (n.)

large, flat bean from an African shrub, 1854, from some African word.


cacophony (n.)

1650s, from Greek kakophonia, from kakophonos harsh sounding, from kakos bad, evil (see caco-) +
phone voice (see fame (n.)). Related: Cacophonous.


cactus (n.)

c.1600, from Latin cactus cardoon, from Greek kaktos, name of a type of prickly plant of Sicily (the
Spanish artichoke), perhaps of pre-Hellenic origin. Modern meaning is 18c., because Linnaeus gave
the name to a group of plants he thought were related to this but are not.


cad (n.)

1730, shortening of cadet (q.v.); originally used of servants, then (1831) of town boys by students
at British universities and public schools (though at Cambridge it meant snob). Meaning person
lacking in finer feelings is from 1838.A cad used to be a jumped-up member of the lower classes who
was guilty of behaving as if he didn't know that his lowly origin made him unfit for having sexual
relationships with well-bred women. [Anthony West, H.G. Wells: Aspects of a Life, 1984]


cadastral (adj.)

1858, from French cadastral, from cadastre register of the survey of lands (16c.), from Old Italian
catastico, from Late Greek katastikhos register, literally by the line (see cata-, stair).
Gamillscheg dismisses derivation from Late Latin capitastrum register of the poll tax.


cadaver (n.)

c.1500, from Latin cadaver dead body (of men or animals), probably from a perfective participle of
cadere to fall, sink, settle down, decline, perish (see case (n.1)). Compare Greek ptoma dead body,
literally a fall (see ptomaine); poetic English the fallen those who died in battle.


cadaverous (adj.)

looking like a corpse, early 15c., from Latin cadaverosus corpse-like, from cadaver (see cadaver).
Related: Cadaverously; cadaverousness.


caddie (n.)

1630s, Scottish form of French cadet (see cadet). Originally person who runs errands; meaning of
golfer's assistant is 1851. A letter from Edinburgh c.1730 describes the city's extensive and semi-
organized Cawdys, a very useful Black-Guard, who attend ... publick Places to go at Errands; and
though they are Wretches, that in Rags lye upon the Stairs and in the Streets at Night, yet are they
often considerably trusted .... This Corps has a kind of Captain ... presiding over them, whom they
call the Constable of the Cawdys.


caddis (n.)

larva of the May-fly, 1650s, of unknown origin, perhaps a diminutive of some sense of cad.


caddy (n.)

small box for tea, 1792, from Malay kati a weight equivalent to about a pound and a third (in
English from 1590s as catty), adopted as a standard mid-18c. by British companies in the East
Indies. Apparently the word for a measure of tea was transferred to the chest it was carried in.


cade (adj.)

pet, tame, mid-15c., used in reference to young animals abandoned by their mothers and brought up by
hand; of unknown origin.


cadence (n.)

late 14c., flow of rhythm in verse or music, from Middle French cadence, from Old Italian cadenza
conclusion of a movement in music, literally a falling, from Vulgar Latin *cadentia, from neuter
plural of Latin cadens, present participle of cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). In 16c., sometimes
used literally for an act of falling. A doublet of chance (n.).


cadenza (n.)

ornamental passage near the close of a song or solo, 1836, from Italian cadenza (see cadence).


cadet (n.)

c.1610, younger son or brother, from French cadet military student officer, noun use of adjective,
younger (15c.), from Gascon capdet captain, chief, youth of a noble family, from Late Latin
capitellum, literally little chief, hence, inferior head of a family, diminutive of Latin caput head
(see capitulum). The eldest son being regarded as the first head of the family, the second son the
cadet, or little head [Kitchin].    Apparently younger sons from Gascon noble families were sent to
French court to serve as officers, which gave the word its military meaning. In English, the meaning
gentleman entering the military as a profession is from 1650s, and that of student at a military
college is from 1775.


cadge (v.)

to beg (1812), to get by begging (1848), of uncertain origin, perhaps a back-formation from cadger
itinerant dealer with a pack-horse, mid-15c., which is perhaps from early 14c. cadge to fasten, to
tie, of unknown origin.


Cadillac (n.)

Cadillac Automobile Company, established in 1902 by Detroit engine-maker Henry Martyn Leland and
named for Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac (1658-1730), French minor aristocrat and colonial governor
who founded Detroit in 1701.


Cadmean victory (n.)

c.1600, victory involving one's own ruin, translating Greek Kadmeia nike, from Cadmus (Greek
Kadmos), legendary founder of Thebes in Boeotia and bringer of the alphabet to Greece. Probably a
reference to the story of Cadmus and the Sown-Men, who fought each other till only a handful were
left alive. Compare Pyrrhic (adj.1).


cadmium (n.)

bluish-white metal, 1822, discovered 1817 by German scientist Friedrich Strohmeyer, coined in Modern
Latin from cadmia, a word used by ancient naturalists for various earths and oxides (especially zinc
carbonate), from Greek kadmeia (ge) Cadmean (earth), from Kadmos Cadmus, legendary founder of
Boeotian Thebes. So called because the earth was first found in the vicinity of Thebes (Kadmeioi was
an alternative name for Thebans since the time of Homer).


cadre (n.)

1830, from French cadre, literally a frame of a picture (16c.), so, a detachment forming the
skeleton of a regiment (1851), from Italian quadro, from Latin quadrum a square (see quadrille). The
communist sense is from 1930.


caduceus (n.)

1590s, from Latin caduceus, alteration of Doric Greek karykeion herald's staff, from karyx (genitive
karykos) a herald, from PIE *karu-, from root *kar- to praise loudly, extol (cognates: Sanskrit
carkarti mentions with praise, Old English hre&eth; fame, glory). Token of a peaceful embassy;
originally an olive branch. Especially the wand carried by Mercury, messenger of the gods, usually
represented with two serpents twined round it.


cady (n.)

hat, cap, 1846, of unknown origin.


caecum (n.)

1721, from Latin intestinum caecum blind gut, from neuter of caecus blind, hidden, from Proto-Italic
*kaiko-, from PIE  *kehi-ko- one-eyed, cognate with Old Irish ca'ech one-eyed, coeg empty, Welsh
coeg-dall, Old Cornish cuic one-eyed; Gothic haihs one-eyed, blind. So called for being prolonged
into a cul-de-sac.


Caesar

c.1200, see caesarian; Old English had casere, which would have yielded modern *coser, but it was
replaced in Middle English by keiser, from Norse or Low German, and later in Middle English by the
French or Latin form of the name. C&aelig;sar was used as a title of emperors down to Hadrian (138
C.E.), and also is the root of German Kaiser and Russian tsar (see czar). He competes as progenitor
of words for king with Charlemagne (Latin Carolus), as in Lithuanian karalius, Polish krol. In U.S.
slang c.1900, a sheriff was Great Seizer.


Caesar salad

1952, said to be named not for the emperor, but for Cesar Cardini, restaurant owner in Tijuana,
Mexico, who is said to have served the first one c.1924.


Caesarea

Latin city name derived from Caesar, applied in honor of the emperors to some new and existing
cities in the Roman Empire, including modern Kayseri, Turkey; Shaizar, Syria, and Cherchell, Algeria
(representing a French spelling of an Arabic name based on a Berber garbling of the Latin word).


caesarean

see caesarian.


caesarian (n.)

1923, shortening of Caesarian section (1610s); supposedly from Caius Julius Caesar, who was said to
have been delivered surgically, thus legend traces his cognomen to Latin caesus past participle of
caedere to cut (see -cide).    But if this is the etymology of the name, it was likely an ancestor
who was so born (Caesar's mother lived to see his triumphs and such operations would have been fatal
to the woman in ancient times). And Pliny derives his cognomen from caesaries head of hair, because
the future dictator was born with a full one. Caesarian section may come directly from caesus.


caesium (n.)

see cesium.


caesura (n.)

1550s, from Latin caesura, metrical pause, literally a cutting, from past participle stem of caedere
to cut down (see -cide).


cafe (n.)

1802, from French caf&eacute; coffee, coffeehouse, from Italian caffe coffee (see coffee). The
beverage was introduced in Venice by 1615 and in France from 1650s by merchants and travelers who
had been to Turkey and Egypt. The first public caf&eacute; might have been the one opened in
Marseilles in 1660.


cafe au lait (n.)

1763, French caf&eacute; au lait, literally coffee with milk, from lait milk (12c.), from Vulgar
Latin lactis, from Latin lactis (see lactation).


cafeteria (n.)

1839, American English, from Mexican Spanish cafeteria coffee store, from caf&eacute; coffee (see
coffee) + Spanish -ter&iacute;a place where something is done (usually business). The ending came to
be understood popularly as meaning help-yourself (as though caf&eacute; + -teria) and was extended
to new formation with that sense from c.1923.


caffeine (n.)

trimethyl-derivative of xanthine, 1830, from German Kaffein, coined by chemist F.F. Runge
(1795-1867), apparently from German Kaffee coffee (see coffee) + chemical suffix -ine (2) (German
-in). The form of the English word may be via French caf&eacute;ine.


caftan (n.)

1590s, long tunic worn in Turkey, etc., from Turkish qaftan (also in Arabic), from Persian khaftan.
As a similar shirt or dress style in the West, it is attested from c.1955.


cage (n.)

early 13c., from Old French cage cage, prison; retreat, hideout (12c.), from Latin cavea hollow
place, enclosure for animals, coop, hive, stall, dungeon, spectators' seats in the theater (source
also of Italian gabbia basket for fowls, coop; see cave (n.)).


cage (v.)

1570s, from cage (n.). Related: Caged; caging.


cagey (adj.)

evasive, reticent, 1896, U.S. colloquial, of unknown origin. Earlier in English dialect it meant
sportive.


cahier (n.)

exercise book, c.1845, from French cahier writing book, copy-book, from Old French cayer, originally
quaier sheet of paper folded in four (see quire).


cahoot

see cahoots.


cahoots (n.)

1829, American English, of unknown origin; said to be perhaps from French cahute cabin, hut (12c.),
but U.S. sources credit it to French cohorte (see cohort), a word said to have been in use in the
U.S. South and West with a sense of companions, confederates.


caiman (n.)

also cayman, 1570s, from Portuguese or Spanish caiman, from Carib acayouman crocodile, or perhaps
from a Congo African word applied to the reptiles in the new world by African slaves. The name
appears to be one of those like anaconda and bom, boma, which the Portuguese or Spaniards very early
caught up in one part of the world, and naturalized in another. [OED]


Cain

elder son of Adam and Eve, from Hebrew Qayin, literally created one, also smith, from Semitic stem
q-y-n to form, to fashion. To raise Cain is first recorded 1840. Surnames McCain, McCann, etc., are
a contraction of Irish Mac Cathan son of Cathan, from Celtic cathan, literally warrior, from cath
battle.


cairn (n.)

1530s, from Scottish carne, from Gaelic carn heap of stones, rocky hill, akin to Gaulish karnon
horn, perhaps from PIE *ker-n- highest part of the body, horn, thus tip, peak (see horn (n.)).


Cairo

city in Egypt, from Arabic al-Kahira the strong, the name given 973 C.E. to the new city built north
of the old one, Egyptian khere-ohe, said to mean place of combat and to be in reference to a battle
between the gods Seth and Horus that took place here.


caisson (n.)

1704, from French caisson ammunition wagon, box, crate, from Middle French caisson large box (16c.),
from Italian cassone, augmentative form of cassa a chest, from Latin capsa a box (see case (n.2)).


caitiff (adj.)

c.1300, wicked, base, cowardly, from Old North French caitive captive, miserable (Old French
chaitif, 12c., Modern French ch&eacute;tif puny, sickly, poor, weak), from Latin captivum (see
captive, which was a later, scholarly borrowing of the same word). In most Romance languages, it has
acquired a pejorative sense.


caitiff (n.)

c.1300, wicked man, scoundrel, from Anglo-French caitif, noun use from Old North French caitive
captive, miserable (see caitiff (adj.)). From mid-14c as prisoner.


Caitlin

fem. proper name, alternative spelling of Kathleen, not much used in U.S. then suddenly popular from
c.1985.


Caius

variant of Gaius, common Roman praenomen. Both forms have the abbreviation C., and the confusion
reflects the early Roman uncertainty about the use of gamma (see C).


cajole (v.)

1640s, from French cajoler to cajole, wheedle, coax, perhaps a blend of Middle French cageoler to
chatter like a jay (16c., from gajole, southern diminutive of geai jay; see jay (n.)), and Old
French gaioler to cage, entice into a cage (see jail (n.)). Related: Cajoled; cajoling.


cajolery (n.)

1640s, from French cajolerie persuasion by flattery (16c.), from cajoler (see cajole).


Cajun

1868, Cagian, dialectic pronunciation of Acadian, from Acadia, former French colony in what is now
Canadian Maritimes. Its French setters were dispersed and exiled by the English and thousands made
their way to New Orleans in the period 1764-1788.


cake (n.)

early 13c., from Old Norse kaka cake, from West Germanic *kokon- (cognates: Middle Dutch koke, Dutch
koek, Old High German huohho, German Kuchen). Not now believed to be related to Latin coquere to
cook, as formerly supposed. Replaced its Old English cognate, coecel.  What man, I trow ye raue,
Wolde ye bothe eate your cake and haue your cake? [The Proverbs &amp; Epigrams of John Heywood,
1562]  Originally (until early 15c.) a flat, round loaf of bread. Piece of cake something easy is
from 1936. The let them eat cake story is found in Rousseau's Confessions, in reference to an
incident c.1740, long before Marie Antoinette, though it has been associated with her since c.1870;
it apparently was a chestnut in the French royal family that had been told of other princesses and
queens before her.


cake (v.)

c.1600, from cake (n.). Related: Caked; caking.


caked (adj.)

thickly encrusted, 1922, past participle adjective from cake (v.).


cakewalk (n.)

1863, American English, from cake (n.) + walk (n.), probably in reference to the cake given as a
prize for the fanciest steps in a procession in a Southern black custom (explained by Thornton,
1912, as, A walking competition among negroes, in which the prize cake goes to the couple who put on
most style). Its figurative meaning of something easy (1863) is recorded before the literal one
(1879). As a verb, from 1909. This may also be the source of the phrase to take the cake (1847).


calabash (n.)

1590s, dried, hollowed gourd used as a drinking cup, from Spanish calabaza, possibly from Arabic
qar'a yabisa dry gourd, from Persian kharabuz, used of various large melons; or from a pre-Roman
Iberian *calapaccia.


calaboose (n.)

prison, 1792, American English, from Louisiana French calabouse, from Spanish calabozo dungeon,
probably from Vulgar Latin *calafodium, from pre-Roman *cala protected place, den + Latin fodere to
dig (see fossil).


Calais

city on the French coast of the English Channel, from Gaulish Caleti, the name of a Celtic people
who once lived along the shore there.


calamari (n.)

1560s, from Italian calamari, from Latin calamarius, literally pertaining to a pen, from calamus a
writing pen, literally reed (see shawm). So called from the cuttlefish's pen-like internal shell and
perhaps also from its being full of ink.


calamine (n.)

zinc carbonate; zinc silicate, 1590s, from French calamine, from Old French calemine, chalemine
(13c.), from Medieval Latin calamina, corrupted by alchemists from Latin cadmia zinc ore, from Greek
kadmeia (see cadmium). Or possibly the Medieval Latin word is from Latin calamus reed, in reference
to the mineral's shape.


calamitous (adj.)

1540s, from French calamiteux (16c.), from Latin calamitosus causing loss, destructive, from
calamitas (see calamity). Related: Calamitously; calamitousness.


calamity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French calamite (14c.), from Latin calamitatem (nominative calamitas)
damage, loss, failure; disaster, misfortune, adversity, origin obscure. Early etymologists
associated it with calamus straw (see shawm); but it is perhaps from a lost root preserved in
incolumis uninjured, from PIE *kle-mo-, from base *kel- (1) to strike, cut (see holt).


calcaneus        (n.)

from Latin (os) calcaneum bone of the heel, from calcem (nominative calx (1)) heel.


calcareous (adj.)

also calcarious, 1670s, from Latin calcarius of lime, from calx (genitive calcis) lime, limestone
(see chalk (n.)).


calcify (v.)

1785 (implied in calcified), from French calcifier, from stem of Latin calcem lime (see chalk (n.))
+ -fy. Related: Calcifying; calcification.


calcite (n.)

crystalling calcium carbonate, 1849, from German Calcit, coined by Austrian mineralogist Wilhelm
Karl von Hardinger (1795-1871) from Latin calx (genitive calcis) lime (see chalk (n.)) + mineral
suffix -ite (2) (German -it).


calcitrant (adj.)

1866, as if from Latin calcitrantem (nominative calcitrans) kicking (see recalcitrant). Pedantic
humor; probably a back-formation.


calcium (n.)

coined 1808 by English chemist Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829), who first succeeded in isolating it,
from Latin calx (genitive calcis) limestone (see chalk (n.)) + metallic element ending -ium.


calculate (v.)

1560s, to compute, to estimate by mathematical means, from Latin calculatus, past participle of
calculare to reckon, compute, from calculus (see calculus). Meaning to plan, devise is from 1650s.
Replaced earlier calculen (mid-14c.), from Old French calculer. Related: Calculable.


calculated (adj.)

1863, devised beforehand, past participle adjective from calculate. Earlier, suited, apt (1722).


calculating (adj.)

1710, carrying out calculations, present participle adjective from calculate. Meaning shrewdly or
selfishly seeking advantage is attested from c.1810.


calculation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin calculationem (nominative calculatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of calculare to reckon, compute, from Latin calculus reckoning, account, originally
pebble used in counting, diminutive of calx (genitive calcis) limestone (see chalk (n.)).


calculator (n.)

late 14c., mathematician, one who calculates, from Latin calculator, from calculatus, past
participle of calculare to reckon, compute, from calculus (see calculus). Of mechanical adding
machine contraptions, from 1784. Of electronic ones, from 1946.    Electronic calculator uses 18,000
tubes to solve complex problems [Scientific American headline, June 1946]


calculus (n.)

1660s, from Latin calculus reckoning, account, originally pebble used as a reckoning counter,
diminutive of calx (genitive calcis) limestone (see chalk (n.)). Modern mathematical sense is a
shortening of differential calculus. Also used from 1732 to mean kidney stones, etc., then generally
for concretion occurring accidentally in the animal body, such as dental plaque. Related: Calculous
(adj.).


Calcutta

city in eastern India, named for Hindu goddess Kali.


caldera (n.)

cavity on the summit of a volcano, 1865, from Spanish caldera cauldron, kettle, from Latin
caldarium, caldarius pertaining to warming, from calidus warm, hot (see calorie).


caldron (n.)

spelling of cauldron prefered by other dictionary editors.


Caleb

masc. proper name, in the Bible, one of the 12 men sent by Moses to reconnoiter Canaan, from Hebrew
Kalebh, literally dog-like, from kelebh dog.


Caledonia

Roman name of part of northern Britain, taken from the name of former inhabitants, of unknown
origin, perhaps Celtic; since 18c, applied poetically to Scotland or the Scottish Highlands.
Related: Caledonian.


calendar (n.)

c.1200, system of division of the year; mid-14c. as table showing divisions of the year; from Old
French calendier list, register, from Latin calendarium account book, from calendae/kalendae calends
the first day of the Roman month -- when debts fell due and accounts were reckoned -- from calare to
announce solemnly, call out, as the priests did in proclaiming the new moon that marked the calends,
from PIE root kele- (2) to call, shout (see claim (v.)).    Taken by the early Church for its
register list of saints and their feast days. The -ar spelling in English is 17c. to differentiate
it from the now obscure calender cloth-presser.


calender (v.)

to pass through a calender, a machine which smooths and presses paper, cloth, etc., 1510s, from
Middle French calandre, the machine name, from Medieval Latin calendra (see calender (n.)).


calender (n.)

machine which smooths and presses paper, cloth, etc., 1510s (late 13c. in surnames of persons who
use such a machine), 1510s, from Old French calandreur, from Medieval Latin calendra cloth-pressing
machine, so called from the shape of the machine used, from Latin cylindrus, from Greek kylindros
roll, cylinder (see cylinder).


calf (n.1)

young cow, Old English cealf (Anglian c&aelig;lf) young cow, from Proto-Germanic *kalbam (cognates:
Middle Dutch calf, Old Norse kalfr, German Kalb, Gothic kalbo), perhaps from PIE *gelb(h)-, from
root *gel- to swell, hence, womb, fetus, young of an animal. Elliptical sense of leather made from
the skin of a calf is from 1727. Used of icebergs that break off from glaciers from 1818.


calf (n.2)

fleshy part of the lower leg, early 14c., from Old Norse kalfi, source unknown; possibly from the
same Germanic root as calf (n.1).


caliber (n.)

1560s, degree of merit or importance, a figurative use from Middle French calibre (late 15c.),
apparently ultimately from Arabic qalib a mold for casting. Arabic also used the word in the sense
mold for casting bullets, which is the oldest literal meaning in English. Meaning inside diameter of
a gun barrel is attested from 1580s. Barnhart remarks that Spanish calibre, Italian calibro appear
too late to act as intermediate forms between the Arabic word and the French.


calibrate (v.)

1839, verb formed from caliber + -ate (2). Related: calibrated; calibrating.


calibration (n.)

1854, noun of action from calibrate.


calibre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of caliber (q.v.); for spelling, see -re.


calice (n.)

early form of chalice (q.v.).


caliche (n.)

sodium nitrate deposits in Chile and Peru, 1858, from American Spanish, from Spanish caliche pebble
in a brick, from Latin calx pebble (see chalk (n.)).


calico (n.)

1530s, kalyko, corruption of Calicut (modern Kozhikode), seaport on Malabar coast of India, where
Europeans first obtained it. In 16c. it was second only to Goa among Indian commercial ports for
European trade. Extended to animal colorings suggestive of printed calicos in 1807, originally of
horses.


calid (adj.)

1590s, from Latin calidus warm, from PIE root *kele- (1) warm (see calorie).


California

name of an imaginary realm in Las sergas de Esplandi&aacute;n (Exploits of Esplad&aacute;n), a
romance by Spanish writer Garci Ord&oacute;&ntilde;ez de Montalvo, published in 1510. It was a
sequel to his Amadis de Gaula, and was said to have been influential among Spanish explorers of the
New World. It could have led them to misidentify Baja California as this mythical land and to
mistake it for an island. The Amadis tales are the Iberian equivalent of the Arthurian romances;
they are older than 1510 (traces of them have been found mid-14c.) and were wildly popular. That
conquistadors and sailors would have known the story in all its imaginative detail is hardly
surprising.   Amadis de Gaula ... set a fashion: all later Spanish writers of books of chivalry
adopted the machinery of Amadis de Gaula. Later knights were not less brave (they could not be
braver than) Amadis; heroines were not less lovely (they could not be lovelier) than Oriana; there
was nothing for it but to make the dragons more appalling, the giants larger, the wizards craftier,
the magic castles more inaccessible, the enchanted lakes deeper. Subsequent books of chivalry are
simple variants of the types in Amadis de Gaula: Cervantes made his barber describe it as 'the best
of all books of this kind.' This verdict is essentially just. Amadis de Gaula was read everywhere,
especially in the French version of Herberay des Essarts. It was done into Hebrew during the
sixteenth century, and attracted readers as different as St Ignatius of Loyola and Henry of Navarre.
Its vogue perhaps somewhat exceeded its merit, but its merits are not inconsiderable. [James
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, Spanish Literature, 1922 edition]    Where Montalvo got the name and what it
means, if anything, is a mystery. Californian is attested from 1785. The element Californium (1950)
was named in reference to University of California, where it was discovered.


caliginous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin caliginosus misty, from caliginem (nominative caligo) mistiness, darkness, fog,
gloom. Related: Caliginosity.


caligraphy (n.)

alternative spelling of calligraphy.


Caligula

cognomen of the third Roman emperor (12 C.E.-41 C.E.), born Gaius Caesar. The nickname is Latin,
literally little boot, given when he joined his father on military campaigns when still a toddler,
in full, child-sized military gear; diminutive of caliga heavy military shoe, of unknown origin.


caliper (n.)

1620s, short for calliper compass (1580s), a device used to measure caliber (q.v.). Related:
Calipers.


caliph (n.)

late 14c., from Old French caliphe (12c., also algalife), from Medieval Latin califa, from Arabic
khalifa successor, originally Abu-Bakr, who succeeded Muhammad in the role of leader of the faithful
after the prophet's death.


caliphate (n.)

dominion of a caliph, 1610s, from caliph + -ate (1). Meaning rank of a caliph is recorded from 1753.


calisthenics (n.)

1847 (calisthenic (adj.) is from 1839), formed on model of French callisthenie, from Latinized comb.
form of Greek kallos beauty (see Callisto) + sthenos strength + -ics. Originally, gymnastic
exercises suitable for girls and meant to develop the figure and promote graceful movement. The
proper Greek, if there was such a word in Greek, would have been *kallistheneia.


call (v.)

Old English ceallian to call, shout, less common than clipian; replaced by related Old Norse kalla
to cry loudly, from Proto-Germanic *kall- (cognates: Dutch kallen to talk, Old High German kallon to
call), from PIE root *gal- (2) to call, scream, shriek, shout (cognates: Sanskrit garhati bewail,
criticize; Latin gallus cock; Old High German klaga, German Klage complaint, grievance, lament,
accusation; Old English clacu affront; Old Church Slavonic glasu voice, glagolu word; Welsh galw
call). Related: Called; calling.    Meaning to give a name to is mid-13c. Coin-toss sense is from
1801. Meaning to visit (Middle English) was literally to stand at the door and call.
Telephone/telegraph sense is from 1889. To call out someone to fight (1823) corresponds to French
provoquer. To call it a day is from 1834.


call (n.)

early 14c., from call (v.). Sense of a short formal visit is from 1862.


call girl (n.)

prostitute who makes appointments by phone, c.1900, from call + girl.


caller (n.)

c.1500, one who proclaims, agent noun from call (v.). Meaning one who announces step changes at a
dance is recorded from 1882; one who places a telephone call, 1898. Meaning a social visitor is
attested from 1786.


calligraphy (n.)

1610s, from Greek kaligraphia, from kallos beauty (see Callisto) + graphein to write (see -graphy).
Related: Calligraphic. The usual comb. form in Greek was kalli- beautiful, fine, happy, favorable;
kalo- was a later, rarer alternative form.


calling (n.)

vocation, mid-13c., verbal noun from call (v.). The sense traces to I Cor. vii:20.


calliope (n.)

1858, steam-whistle keyboard organ, named for Calliope, ninth and chief muse, presiding over
eloquence and epic poetry, Latinized from Greek Kalliope, literally beautiful-voiced, from kalli-,
combining form of kallos beauty (see Callisto) + opos (genitive of *ops) voice, related to Latin vox
(see voice (n.)).


calliper (n.)

variant of caliper. Related: Callipers.


callipygian (adj.)

of, pertaining to, or having beautiful buttocks, 1800, Latinized from Greek kallipygos, name of a
statue of Aphrodite at Syracuse, from kalli-, combining form of kallos beauty (see Callisto) + pyge
rump, buttocks. Sir Thomas Browne (1646) refers to Callipyg&aelig; and women largely composed
behinde.


Callisto

fourth moon of Jupiter; in classical mythology a nymph, mother of Arcas by Zeus, turned to a bear by
Hera, from Greek kallistos, superlative of kalos beautiful, from PIE *kal- (2) beautiful. Feminized
as proper name Callista.


callithumpian (adj.)

1836, U.S. colloquial, probably a fanciful construction. The English Dialect Dictionary reports
Gallithumpians as a Dorset and Devon word from 1790s for a society of radical social reformers, and
also in reference to noisy disturbers of elections and meetings (1770s). The U.S. reference is most
commonly a band of discordant instruments or bangers on pots and pans, especially to serenade a
newlywed couple to show disapproval of one or the other or the match.


callosal (adj.)

pertaining to the corpus callosum, from Latin callosus (see callous) + -al (1).


callous (adj.)

c.1400, hardened, in the physical sense, from Latin callosus thick-skinned, from callus, callum hard
skin (see callus). The figurative sense of unfeeling appeared in English by 1670s. Related:
Callously; callousness.


callow (adj.)

Old English calu bare, bald, from Proto-Germanic *kalwa- (cognates: Middle Dutch calu, Dutch kaal,
Old High German kalo, German Kahl), from PIE root *gal- (1) bald, naked (cognates: Russian golyi
smooth, bald). From young birds with no feathers, meaning extended to any young inexperienced thing
or creature (1570s). Apparently not related to Latin calvus bald.


callus (n.)

hardened skin, 1560s, from Latin callus, variant of callum hard skin, related to callere be hard,
from PIE root *kal- (3) hard (cognates: Sanskrit kalika bud, Old Irish calath hard, Old Church
Slavonic kaliti to cool, harden).


calm (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French calme tranquility, quiet, traditionally from Old Italian calma, from Late
Latin cauma heat of the mid-day sun (in Italy, a time when everything rests and is still), from
Greek kauma heat (especially of the sun), from kaiein to burn (see caustic). Spelling influenced by
Latin calere to be hot. Figurative application to social or mental conditions is 16c.


calm (n.)

late 14c., from Old French calme, carme stillness, quiet, tranquility, from the adjective (see calm
(adj.)).


calm (v.)

late 14c., from Old French calmer or from calm (adj.). Related: Calmed; calming.


calmative (adj.)

by 1831, from French calmatif; see calm (adj.) + -ative. A hybrid word; purists prefer sedative. The
Latinic suffix is here defensible on the ground of It. and Sp. calmar, F. calmer .... [OED].


calmly (adv.)

1590s, from calm (adj.) + -ly (2).


calmness (n.)

1510s, from calm (adj.) + -ness.


calomel (n.)

old name for mercurous chloride, 1670s, from French calomel, supposedly (Littr&eacute;) from Greek
kalos fair (see Callisto) + melas black; but as the powder is yellowish-white this seems difficult.
It is perhaps of significance that the salt is blackened by ammonia and alkalis [Flood].


Calor (n.)

proprietary name for a type of liquid gas sold in Britain, 1936, from Latin calor, literally heat
(see calorie).


caloric (n.)

hypothetical fluid in a now-discarded model of heat exchange, 1792, from French calorique, coined in
this sense by Lavoisier, from Latin calorem heat (nominative calor; see calorie). The adjective is
recorded from 1865.


calorie (n.)

1866, from French calorie, from Latin calor (genitive caloris) heat, from PIE *kle-os-, suffixed
form of root *kele- (1) warm (cognates: Latin calidus warm, calere be hot; Sanskrit carad- harvest,
literally hot time; Lithuanian silti become warm, silus August; Old Norse hl&aelig;r, Old English
hleow warm).    In scientific use, largely replaced 1950 by the joule. As a unit of energy, defined
as heat required to raise 1 gram of water 1 degree Celsius (the small or gram calorie), but also as
heat required to raise 1 kilogram of water 1 degree Celsius (the large calorie or kilocalorie).


calorimeter (n.)

1794, from calorie + -meter. A hybrid word.


calque (n.)

loan translation of a foreign word or phrase, from French calque, literally a copy, from calquer to
trace by rubbing (itself borrowed in English 1660s as calk), introduced 16c. from Italian calcare,
from Latin calcare to tread, to press down.


calumet (n.)

1660s, from Canadian French calumet, from Norman French calumet pipe (Old French chalemel, 12c.,
Modern French chalumeau), from Latin calamellus, diminutive of calamus reed; something made of reed
or shaped like a reed (see shawm).


calumniate (v.)

1550s, from Latin calumniatus, past participle of calumniari to accuse falsely, from calumnia
slander, false accusation (see calumny). Related: Calumniated; calumniating.


calumniation (n.)

1540s, noun of action from calumniate (v.).


calumniator (n.)

1690s, from Latin calumniator, agent noun from calumniari (see calumniate (v.)).


calumnious (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin calumniosus, from calumnia (see calumny). Related: Calumniously.


calumny (n.)

False &amp; malicious misrepresentation of the words or actions of others, calculated to injure
their reputation [Fowler], mid-15c., from Middle French calomnie (15c.), from Latin calumnia
trickery, subterfuge, misrepresentation, malicious charge, from calvi to trick, deceive, from PIE
root *kel- (6) to deceive, confuse (cognates: Greek kelein to bewitch, seduce, beguile, Gothic holon
to deceive, Old Norse hol praise, flattery, Old English hol slander, holian to slander).


Calvary

name of the mount of the Crucifixion, late 14c., from Latin Calvaria (Greek Kraniou topos),
translating Aramaic gulgulta place of the skull (see Golgotha). Rendered literally in Old English as
Heafodpannan stow. Latin Calvaria is related to calvus bald (see Calvin).


calve (v.)

Old English cealfian, from cealf calf (see calf (n.1)). Of icebergs, 1837. Related: Calved; calving.


Calvin

John Calvin (1509-1564), Protestant leader, born Jean Caulvin, the surname related to French Chauvin
(compare chauvinism), from Latin calvus bald, from PIE *kle-wo- bald.


Calvinism (n.)

1560s, from John Calvin (1509-1564), Protestant reformer, + -ism. Alternative form Calvinian was in
use in 1566. Generalized association with stern moral codes and predestination is attested since at
least 1853. Related: Calvinist.


Calypso

sea nymph in the Odyssey, literally hidden, hider (perhaps originally a death goddess) from Greek
kalyptein to cover, conceal, from PIE *kel- to cover, conceal, save, root of English Hell (see
cell). The West Indian type of song is so called from 1934, of unknown origin or connection to the
nymph.


calyx (n.)

1680s, from Latin calyx, from Greek kalyx seed pod, husk, outer covering (of a fruit, flower bud,
etc.), from root of kalyptein to cover, conceal (see cell). The proper plural is calyces. Some
sources connect the word rather with Greek kylix drinking cup.


cam (n.1)

a projecting part of a rotating machinery, 1777, from Dutch cam cog of a wheel, originally comb;
cognate of English comb (n.). This might have combined with English camber having a slight arch; or
the whole thing could be from camber.


cam (n.2)

abbreviation of camera, by 1990.


camaraderie (n.)

1840, from French camaraderie, from camarade comrade (see comrade).


camber (n.)

1610s, nautical term, from Old French cambre, chambre bent, from Latin camurum (nominative camur)
crooked, arched; related to camera.


cambium (n.)

1670s in botany sense, from Late Latin cambium exchange, from Latin cambiare change (see change
(v.)).


Cambodia

from Kambu, legendary ancestor of the people. Related: Cambodian.


Cambrian (adj.)

1650s, from or of Wales or the Welsh, from Cambria, variant of Cumbria, Latinized derivation of
Cymry, the name of the Welsh for themselves, from Old Celtic Combroges compatriots. Geological sense
(of rocks first studied in Wales and Cumberland) is from 1836.


cambric (n.)

late 14c., from Kamerijk, Flemish form of Cambrai, city in northern France where the cloth was
originally made, from Latin Camaracum. The modern form of the English word has elements from both
versions of the name.


Cambridge

Old English Grontabricc (c.745) Bridge on the River Granta (a Celtic river name, of obscure origin).
The change to Cante- and later Cam- was due to Norman influence. The river name Cam is a back-
formation in this case, but Cam also was a legitimate Celtic river name, meaning crooked.


camcorder (n.)

1982, from camera and recorder.


came

past tense of come.


camel (n.)

Old English camel, perhaps via Old North French camel (Old French chamel, Modern French chameau),
from Latin camelus, from Greek kamelos, from Hebrew or Phoenician gamal, perhaps related to Arabic
jamala to bear.    Another Old English word for the beast was olfend, apparently based on confusion
of camels with elephants in a place and time when both were known only from travelers' vague
descriptions. The Arabian have one hump (the lighter variety is the dromedary); the Bactrian have
two.


cameleon (n.)

obsolete form of chameleon.


camellia (n.)

1753, named by Linn&aelig;us from Latinized form of Georg Joseph Kamel (1661-1706), Moravian-born
Jesuit who described the flora of the island of Luzon.


Camelot (n.)

a name first found in medieval French romances; it corresponds to Latin Camuladonum, the Roman
forerunner of Colchester, which was an impressive ruin in the Middle Ages. But Malory identifies it
with Winchester and Elizabethans tended to see it as Cadbury Castle, an Iron Age hill fort near
Glastonbury.


Camembert (n.)

type of soft, rich cheese, 1878, from name of village near Argentan, Normandy, where it originally
was made. The place name is Medieval Latin Campus Maimberti field of Maimbert (a West Germanic
personal name).


cameo (n.)

early 15c., kaadmaheu, camew, chamehieux and many other spellings (from early 13c. in Anglo-Latin),
carved precious stone with two layers of colors, from Old French camaieu and directly from Medieval
Latin cammaeus, of unknown origin, perhaps ultimately from Arabic qamaa'il flower buds, or Persian
chumahan agate. Transferred sense of small character or part that stands out from other minor parts
in a play, etc., is from 1928, from earlier meaning short literary sketch or portrait (1851), a
transferred sense from cameo silhouettes.


camera (n.)

1708, vaulted building, from Latin camera vaulted room (source of Italian camera, Spanish camara,
French  chambre), from Greek kamara vaulted chamber.    The word also was used early 18c. as a short
form of Modern Latin camera obscura dark chamber (a black box with a lens that could project images
of external objects), contrasted with camera lucida (Latin for light chamber), which uses prisms to
produce on paper beneath the instrument an image, which can be traced. It became the word for
picture-taking device when modern photography began, c.1840 (extended to television filming devices
1928). Camera-shy is attested from 1890. Old Church Slavonic komora, Lithuanian kamara, Old Irish
camra all are borrowings from Latin.


camera obscura (n.)

1725, a darkened room; c.1730, a device for project pictures; see camera.


camerlengo (n.)

papal chamberlain, from Italian camerlingo chamberlain (see chamberlain).


Cameron

Highland clan name, from Gaelic camshron wry or hooked nose.


Camilla

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of Camillus, cognomen of several members of the gens Furia, from
camillus noble youth attending at sacrifices, perhaps from Etruscan.


camisole (n.)

1816, from French camisole (16c.), from Proven&ccedil;al camisola mantle, diminutive of camisa
shirt, from Late Latin camisia shirt, nightgown (see chemise).


camomile (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French camemile, from Late Latin camomilla, from Latin chamomilla, from Greek
chamaimelon, literally earth apple, from chamai on the ground (also dwarf; see chameleon) + melon
apple (see malic). So called for its scent. Old English had it as camemalon.


camouflage

1917, noun, verb, and adjective, from French camoufler, Parisian slang, to disguise, from Italian
camuffare to disguise, of uncertain origin, perhaps a contraction of capo muffare to muffle the
head. Probably altered by influence of French camouflet puff of smoke, on the notion of blow smoke
in someone's face. The British navy in World War I called it dazzle-painting.    Since the war
started the POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY has published photographs of big British and French field pieces
covered with shrubbery, railway trains painted out of the landscape, and all kinds of devices to
hide the guns, trains, and the roads from the eyes of enemy aircraft.    Until recently there was no
one word in any language to explain this war trick. Sometimes a whole paragraph was required to
explain this military practice. Hereafter one word, a French word, will save all this needless
writing and reading. Camouflage is the new word, and it means fooling the enemy. [Popular Science
Monthly, August 1917]


camp (n.)

place where an army lodges temporarily, 1520s, from French camp, from Italian campo, from Latin
campus open field, level space (also source of French champ; see campus), especially open space for
military exercise.    A later reborrowing of the Latin word, which had been taken up in early West
Germanic as *kampo-z and appeared originally in Old English as camp contest, battle, fight, war.
This was obsolete by mid-15c. Transferred to non-military senses 1550s. Meaning body of adherents of
a doctrine or cause is 1871. Camp-follower first attested 1810. Camp-meeting is from 1809,
originally usually in reference to Methodists. Camp-fever (1758) is any epidemic fever incident to
life in a camp, especially typhus or typhoid.


camp (adj.)

tasteless, 1909, homosexual slang, of uncertain origin, perhaps from mid-17c. French camper to
portray, pose (as in se camper put oneself in a bold, provocative pose); popularized 1964 by Susan
Sontag's essay Notes on Camp. Campy is attested from 1959.


camp (v.)

to encamp, 1540s, from camp (n.). Related: Camped; camping. Camping out is attested from 1834,
American English.


Camp David

U.S. presidential retreat near Thurmont, Maryland, built 1939 as Hi-Catoctin, in reference to the
name of the mountains around it; called Shangri-La by F.D. Roosevelt, after the mythical hard-to-
get-to land in the novel Lost Horizon; named Camp David by Eisenhower in 1953 for his grandson, born
1947. The Camp David Accords were signed there Sept. 17, 1978.


campagne (n.)

obsolete form of campaign.


campaign (n.)

1640s, operation of an army in the field, during a single season, in a particular region, or in a
definite enterprise; from French campagne campaign, literally open country, from Old French
champagne countryside, open country (suited to military maneuvers), from Late Latin campania level
country (source of Italian campagna, Spanish campa&ntilde;a, Portuguese campanha), from Latin campus
a field (see campus). Old armies spent winters in quarters and took to the open field to seek battle
in summer. Extension of meaning to political activity before an election, marked by organized action
in influencing the voters [DAE] is American English, 1809.


campaign (v.)

1701, from campaign (n.). Political sense is from 1801. Related: Campaigned; campaigning.


campanile (n.)

1630s, from Italian, from campana bell, from Late Latin campana, originally metal vessel made in
Campania, region around Naples.


Campbell

family name, from Gaelic caimbeul wry or crooked mouth, from cam crooked, deformed, one-eyed, cross-
eyed. Also in surname Cameron, from Gaelic camshron wry or hooked nose (in the Highland clan; the
Lowland name is for a locality in Fife). The Campbell Soup Company was started in 1869 by Joseph A.
Campbell; Warhol began painting their cans in 1962.


Campbellite (n.)

1830, follower of Alexander Campbell, preacher from Virginia, U.S.A. They called themselves
Disciples.


camper (n.)

1630s, soldier, agent noun from camp (v.). Meaning attendee at a camp meeting is from 1806; meaning
one who sleeps in temporary quarters outdoors is from 1856; that of motor vehicle with sleeping
quarters is from 1960. Extended use of happy camper is from c.1987.


campfire (n.)

also camp-fire, 1835, from camp (n.) + fire (n.).


camphor (n.)

substance extensively used in medicine, early 14c., caumfre, from Old French camphre, from Medieval
Latin camfora, from Arabic kafur, perhaps via Sanskrit karpuram, from Malay kapur camphor tree.
Related: Camphorated.


campus (n.)

college grounds, 1774, from Latin campus a field, probably properly an expanse surrounded (by woods,
higher ground, etc.), from PIE *kampos a corner, cove, from root *kamp- to bend (cognates:
Lithuanian kampus corner, Polish k&#281;pa cluster of trees or brush). First used in college sense
at Princeton.


can (v.1)

Old English 1st &amp; 3rd person singular present indicative of cunnan know, have power to, be able,
(also to have carnal knowledge), from Proto-Germanic *kunnan to be mentally able, to have learned
(cognates: Old Norse kenna to know, make known, Old Frisian kanna to recognize, admit, German kennen
to know, Gothic kannjan to make known), from PIE root *gno- (see know).    Absorbing the third sense
of to know, that of to know how to do something (in addition to to know as a fact and to be
acquainted with something or someone). An Old English preterite-present verb, its original past
participle, couth, survived only in its negation (see uncouth), but see also could. The present
participle has spun off as cunning.


can (n.)

Old English canne a cup, container, from Proto-Germanic *kanna (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse,
Swedish kanna, Middle Dutch kanne, Dutch kan, Old High German channa, German Kanne). Probably an
early borrowing from Late Latin canna container, vessel, from Latin canna reed, also reed pipe,
small boat; but the sense evolution is difficult.    Modern air-tight vessel of tinned iron is from
1867 (can-opener is from 1877). Slang meaning toilet is c.1900, said to be a shortening of piss-can.
Meaning buttocks is from c.1910.


can (v.2)

to put up in cans, 1860, from can (n.1). Sense of to fire an employee is from 1905. Related: Canned;
canning.


can&#039;t (v.)

1706, contraction of cannot.


can-do (adj.)

by 1952, from expression can do it is possible, literally (I or we) can do (it), 1903, perhaps based
on earlier no can do (see no).


Canada

1560s (implied in Canadian), said to be a Latinized form of a word for village in an Iroquoian
language of the St. Lawrence valley that had gone extinct by 1600. Most still-spoken Iroquoian
languages have a similar word (such as Mohawk kana:ta town). Canada goose is attested from 1772.


Canadian

1560s; see Canada.


Canadianism (n.)

1875, from Canadian + -ism.


canaille (n.)

rabble, from French canaille (16c.), from Italian canaglia, literally a pack of dogs, from cane dog
(see canine).


canal (n.)

early 15c., from French canal, chanel water channel, tube, pipe, gutter (12c.), from Latin canalis
water pipe, groove, channel, noun use of adjective from canna reed (see cane (n.)). Originally in
English a pipe for liquid, its sense transferred by 1670s to artificial waterway.


canard (n.)

before 1850, from French canard a hoax, literally a duck (from Old French quanart, probably echoic
of a duck's quack); said by Littr&eacute; to be from the phrase vendre un canard &agrave;
moiti&eacute; to half-sell a duck, thus, from some long-forgotten joke, to cheat.


canary (n.)

type of small songbird, 1650s (short for Canary-bird, 1570s), from French canarie, from Spanish
canario canary bird, literally of the Canary Islands, from Latin Insula Canaria Canary Island,
largest of the Fortunate Isles, literally island of dogs (canis, genitive canarius; see canine
(n.)), so called because large dogs lived there. The name was extended to the whole island group
(Canari&aelig; Insul&aelig;) by the time of Arnobius (c.300). As a type of wine (from the Canary
Islands) from 1580s.


canasta (n.)

1948, Uruguayan card game played with two decks and four jokers, popular c.1945-1965; from Spanish,
literally basket, from Latin canistrum (see cannister); perhaps in reference to the packs of cards
used.


Canberra

capital of Australia, 1826, from Aborigine nganbirra meeting place.


cancan (n.)

also can-can, 1848, from French, possibly from can, a French children's word for duck (see canard),
via some notion of waddling too obscure or obscene to attempt to disentangle here. Or perhaps from
French cancan (16c.) noise, disturbance, echoic of quacking.


cancel (v.)

late 14c., cross out with lines, from Anglo-French canceler, from Latin cancellare to make resemble
a lattice, which in Late Latin took on a sense cross out something written by marking it with
crossed lines, from cancelli, plural of cancellus lattice, grating, diminutive of cancer crossed
bars, lattice, a variant of carcer prison (see incarceration). Figurative use, to nullify an
obligation is from mid-15c. Related: Canceled (also cancelled); cancelling.


cancellation (n.)

also cancelation, 1530s, from Latin cancellationem (nominative cancellatio), noun of action from
past participle stem of cancellare to cancel (see cancel). Of reservations for conveyances, hotels,
etc., from 1953.


cancer (n.)

Old English cancer spreading sore, cancer (also canceradl), from Latin cancer a crab, later,
malignant tumor, from Greek karkinos, which, like the Modern English word, has three meanings: crab,
tumor, and the zodiac constellation (late Old English), from PIE root *qarq- to be hard (like the
shell of a crab); cognates: Sanskrit karkatah crab, karkarah hard; and perhaps cognate with PIE root
*qar-tu- hard, strong, source of English hard.    Greek physicians Hippocrates and Galen, among
others, noted similarity of crabs to some tumors with swollen veins. Meaning person born under the
zodiac sign of Cancer is from 1894. The sun being in Cancer at the summer solstice, the
constellation had association in Latin writers with the south and with summer heat. Cancer stick
cigarette is from 1959.


cancerous (adj.)

1560s, from cancer + -ous.


candela (n.)

unit of luminous intensity, 1950, from Latin candela (see candle).


candelabrum (n.)

1811, from Latin candelabrum, which meant candlestick, from candela (see candle). Old English had
candeltreow candle-tree in same sense. The word was borrowed earlier (late 14c.) from Old French as
chaundelabre with the Latin sense. Candelabra is the Latin plural.


candescent (adj.)

1824, from Latin candescentem (nominative candescens), present participle of candescere to become
white, begin to gleam, inchoative of candere to shine, to glow (see candle).


candid (adj.)

1620s, white, from Latin candidum white; pure; sincere, honest, upright, from candere to shine, from
PIE root *kand- to glow, to shine (see candle). In English, metaphoric extension to frank first
recorded 1670s (compare French candide open, frank, ingenuous, sincere). Of photography, 1929.
Related: Candidly; candidness.


candidacy (n.)

1822; see candidate + -cy.


candidate (n.)

c.1600s, from Latin candidatus one aspiring to office, originally white-robed, past participle of
candidare to make white or bright, from candidus (see candid). Office-seekers in ancient Rome wore
white togas.


candied (adj.)

c.1600, past participle adjective from candy (v.).


candle (n.)

Old English candel lamp, lantern, candle, an early ecclesiastical borrowing from Latin candela a
light, torch, candle made of tallow or wax, from candere to shine, from PIE root *kand- to glow, to
shine, to shoot out light (cognates: Sanskrit cand- to give light, shine, candra- shining, glowing,
moon; Greek kandaros coal; Welsh cann white; Middle Irish condud fuel).    Candles were unknown in
ancient Greece (where oil lamps sufficed), but common from early times among Romans and Etruscans.
Candles on birthday cakes seems to have been originally a German custom. To hold a candle to
originally meant to help in a subordinate capacity, from the notion of an assistant or apprentice
holding a candle for light while the master works (compare Old English taporberend acolyte). To burn
the candle at both ends is recorded from 1730.


candlelight (n.)

Old English candelleoht; from candle + light (n.).


Candlemass

Old English candelm&aelig;sse (from candle + mass (n.2)), feast of the purification of the Virgin
Mary (Feb. 2), celebrated with many candles, corresponding to Celtic pagan Imbolc.


candlestick (n.)

Old English candelsticca; see candle + stick (n.).


candor (n.)

openness of mind, impartiality, frankness, c.1600, from Latin candor purity, openness, originally
whiteness, from candere to shine, to be white (see candle). Borrowed earlier in English (c.1500)
with the Latin literal sense extreme whiteness.


candour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of candor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


candy (n.)

late 13c., crystalized sugar, from Old French &ccedil;ucre candi sugar candy, ultimately from Arabic
qandi, from Persian qand cane sugar, probably from Sanskrit khanda piece (of sugar), perhaps from
Dravidian (compare Tamil kantu candy, kattu to harden, condense).


candy (v.)

1530s, from candy (n.). Related: Candied; candying.


candy-striper (n.)

young female volunteer nurse at a hospital, by 1962, so called from the pink-striped design of her
uniform, similar to patterns on peppermint candy.


candyass

also candy-ass, 1961, from candy (n.) + ass (n.2). Perhaps originally U.S. military.


cane (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cane reed, cane, spear (13c., Modern French canne), from Latin canna
reed, cane, from Greek kanna, perhaps from Assyrian qanu tube, reed (compare Hebrew qaneh, Arabic
qanah reed), from Sumerian gin reed. But Tucker finds this borrowing needless and proposes a native
Indo-European formation from a root meaning to bind, bend.  Sense of walking stick in English is
1580s.


cane (v.)

to beat with a walking stick, 1660s, from cane (n.). Related: Caned; caning.


canebreak (n.)

1770, American English, from cane (n.) + break (n.).


Canfield (n.)

type of solitaire, 1912, from U.S. gambler J.A. Canfield (1855-1914).


canicular (adj.)

late 14c., in reference to the dog days, from Latin canicularis pertaining to the dog days, from
canicula little dog, also the Dog Star, diminutive of canis (see canine). Also see heliacal; Sirius.
In literal use (pertaining to a dog) historically only as attempt at humor.


canid (n.)

member of the Canidae family (dogs, wolves, foxes, jackals), 1889, from Modern Latin Canidae, from
Latin canis dog (see canine (n.)) + -idae.


canine (n.)

pointed tooth, late 14c., from Latin caninus of the dog, genitive of canis dog (source of Italian
cane, French chien), from PIE root *kwon- dog (cognates: Greek kyon, Old English hund, Old High
German hunt, Old Irish cu, Welsh ci, Sanskrit svan-, Avestan spa, Russian sobaka (apparently from an
Iranian source, such as Median spaka), Armenian shun, Lithuanian &#353;uo). The noun meaning dog is
first recorded 1869.


canine (adj.)

c.1600, of teeth, from canine (n.) or Latin caninus. Meaning pertaining to a dog or dogs is from
1620s.


canister (n.)

late 15c., basket, from Latin canistrum wicker basket for bread, fruit, flowers, etc., from Greek
kanystron basket made from reed, from kanna (see cane (n.)). It came to mean metal receptacle (1711)
through influence of can (n.). As short for canister shot, it is attested from 1801, so called for
its casing.


canker (n.)

late Old English cancer spreading ulcer, cancerous tumor, from Latin cancer malignant tumor,
literally crab (see cancer); influenced in Middle English by Old North French cancre canker, sore,
abscess (Old French chancre, Modern French chancre). The word was the common one for cancer until
c.1700. Also used since 15c. of caterpillars and insect larvae that eat plant buds and leaves. As a
verb from late 14c. Related: Cankered; cankerous. Canker blossom is recorded from 1580s.


cannabis (n.)

1798, common hemp, from Cannabis, Modern Latin plant genus named (1728), from Greek kannabis hemp, a
Scythian or Thracian word. Also source of Armenian kanap', Albanian kanep, Russian konoplja, Persian
kanab, Lithuanian kanapes hemp, and English canvas and possibly hemp. In reference to use of the
plant parts as an intoxicant, from 1848. Related: Cannabic.


canned (adj.)

1859, put up in a can, past participle adjective from can (v.2). Figuratively, of music, from 1904,
originally a contemptuous term (associated with John Philip Sousa) for music played by automatic
instruments.


cannery (n.)

1879, from can (v.2) + -ery.


Cannes

city on the French Riviera, perhaps from a pre-Indo-European word *kan, meaning height. The film
festival dates from 1946.


cannibal (n.)

human that eats human flesh, 1550s, from Spanish canibal, caribal a savage, cannibal, from Caniba,
Christopher Columbus' rendition of the Caribs' name for themselves (see Caribbean). The natives were
believed to be anthropophagites. Columbus, seeking evidence that he was in Asia, thought the name
meant the natives were subjects of the Great Khan. Shakespeare's Caliban (in The Tempest) is from a
version of this word, with -n- and -l- interchanged, found in Hakluyt's Voyages (1599). The Spanish
word had reached French by 1515. Used of animals from 1796. An Old English word for cannibal was
self&aelig;ta.


cannibalism (n.)

1796, from cannibal + -ism. Perhaps from French cannibalisme, from the same year.


cannibalistic (adj.)

1840, from cannibal + -istic. Elder but failing to flourish were cannibalic, cannibalish (both from
1824).


cannibalization (n.)

by 1907, noun of action from cannibalize.


cannibalize (v.)

1798 (in Burke's memoirs), figurative, and meaning be perverted into cannibalism, from cannibal +
-ize. Meaning take parts from one construction and use them in another is from 1943, originally of
military equipment. Related: Cannibalized; cannibalizing.


cannister (n.)

obsolete form of canister.


cannon (n.)

c.1400, tube for projectiles, from Anglo-French canon, Old French canon (14c.), from Italian cannone
large tube, barrel, augmentative of Latin canna reed, tube (see cane (n.)). Meaning large ordnance
piece, the main modern sense, is from 1520s. Spelling not differentiated from canon till c.1800.
Cannon fodder (1891) translates German kanonenfutter (compare Shakespeare's food for powder in I
Hen. IV).


cannon-ball (n.)

also cannon ball, 1660s, from cannon (n.) + ball (n.1). As a type of dive, from 1905.


cannon-shot (n.)

distance a cannon will throw a ball, 1570s, from cannon (n.) + shot (n.).


cannonade (n.)

discharge of artillery, 1650s, from cannon + -ade. As a verb, from 1660s. Compare French canonnade
(16c.), Italian cannonata. Related: Cannonaded; cannonading.


cannot (v.)

c.1400, from can (v.1) + not. Old English expressed the notion by ne cunnan.


cannula (n.)

1680s in surgical sense, from Latin cannula small reed or pipe, diminutive of canna reed, pipe (see
cane (n.)).


canny (adj.)

1630s, Scottish and northern English formation from can (v.1) in its sense of know how to, + -y (2).
Knowing, hence, careful. A doublet of cunning that flowed into distinct senses. Often used
superciliously of Scots by their southern neighbors (and their American cousins).    The Canny Scot
is so well known as scarcely to require description. He carries caution, cunning, and selfishness to
excess. Deceitful when a purpose is to be accomplished, he is not habitually deceitful. One thing he
never loses sight of--his own interest. But of his own interest he is not the most enlightened
judge. [The Natural History of Scotsmen, in The Argosy, December 1865]    Related: Cannily;
canniness.


canoe (n.)

1550s, originally in a West Indian context, from Spanish canoa, a term used by Columbus, from
Arawakan (Haiti) canaoua. Extended to rough-made or dugout boats generally. Early variants in
English included cano, canow, canoa, etc., before spelling settled down c.1600.


canoe (v.)

1842, from canoe (n.). Related: Canoed; canoing.


canoeing (n.)

1870, verbal noun from canoe (v.). Related: Canoeist.


canola (n.)

rapeseed, a euphemistic name coined 1978, supposedly involving Canada, where it was developed, and
the root of oil (n.).


canon (n.1)

church law, Old English canon, from Old French canon or directly from Late Latin canon Church law,
in classical Latin, measuring line, rule, from Greek kanon any straight rod or bar; rule; standard
of excellence, perhaps from kanna reed (see cane (n.)). Taken in ecclesiastical sense for decree of
the Church. General sense of standard of judging is from c.1600. Harold Bloom writes that The
secular canon, with the word meaning a catalog of approved authors, does not actually begin until
the middle of the eighteenth century .... [The Western Canon, 1994]. Related: Canonicity.


canon (n.2)

clergyman, c.1200, from Anglo-French canun, from Old North French canonie (Modern French chanoine),
from Church Latin canonicus clergyman living under a rule, noun use of Latin adjective canonicus
according to rule (in ecclesiastical use, pertaining to the canon), from Greek kanonikos, from kanon
rule (see canon (n.1)).


canonical (adj.)

early 15c., according to ecclesiastical law, from Medieval Latin canonicalis, from Late Latin
canonicus according to rule, in Church Latin, pertaining to the canon (see canon (n.1)). Earlier was
canonial (early 13c.).


canonization (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin canonizationem (nominative canonizatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of canonizare (see canonize).


canonize (v.)

late 14c., to place in the canon or calendar of saints, from Old French cannonisier and directly
from Medieval Latin canonizare, from Late Latin canon church rule (see canon (n.1)). Related:
Canonized; cannonizing.


canoodle (v.)

to indulge in caresses and fondling endearments [OED], by 1850s, said to be U.S. slang, of uncertain
origin. The earliest known sources are British, but they tend to identify the word as American. In
the 1830s it seems to have been in use in Britain in a sense of cheat or overpower. Related:
Canoodled; canoodling.


Canopus (n.)

bright southern star, 1550s, ultimately from Greek Kanopos, Kanobos perhaps from Egyptian Kahi Nub
golden earth. The association with weight found in the name of the star in some northern tongues may
reflect the fact that it never rises far above the horizon in those latitudes. Also the name of a
town in ancient lower Egypt (famous for its temple of Serapis), hence canopic jar, canopic vase,
which often held the entrails of embalmed bodies (1878).


canopy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French conope bed-curtain (Modern French canap&eacute;), from Medieval Latin
canopeum, dissimilated from Latin conopeum, from Greek konopeion Egyptian couch with mosquito
curtains, from konops mosquito, gnat, of unknown origin. The same word (canape) in French, Spanish,
and Portuguese now means sofa, couch. Italian canape is a French loan word.


canopy (v.)

c.1600, from canopy (n.). Related: Canopied; canopying.


cant (n.1)

insincere talk, 1709, earlier it was slang for whining of beggars (1640s), from the verb in this
sense (1560s), from Old North French canter (Old French chanter) to sing, chant, from Latin cantare,
frequentative of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Sense in English developed after 1680 to mean the
jargon of criminals and vagabonds, thence applied contemptuously by any sect or school to the
phraseology of its rival.    ... Slang is universal, whilst Cant is restricted in usage to certain
classes of the community: thieves, vagrom men, and -- well, their associates. ... Slang boasts a
quasi-respectability denied to Cant, though Cant is frequently more enduring, its use continuing
without variation of meaning for many generations. [John S. Farmer, Forewords to Musa Pedestris,
1896]


cant (n.2)

slope, slant, late 14c., Scottish, edge, brink, from Old North French cant corner (perhaps via
Middle Low German kante or Middle Dutch kant), from Vulgar Latin *canthus, from Latin cantus iron
tire of a wheel, possibly from a Celtic word meaning rim of wheel, edge (compare Welsh cant
bordering of a circle, tire, edge, Breton cant circle), from PIE *kam-bo- corner, bend, from root
*kemb- to bend, turn, change (cognates: Greek kanthos corner of the eye, Russian kutu corner).


cantabile        (adj.)

1724, from Italian, literally singable, that can be sung, from cantare to sing (see chant (v.)).


Cantabrigian (adj.)

pertaining to Cambridge, 1540s, from Medieval Latin Cantabrigia (see Cambridge) + -an.


cantaloupe (n.)

also cantaloup, 1739, from French, from Italian, from Cantalupo, name of a former Papal summer
estate near Rome, where the melons first were grown in Europe after their introduction (supposedly
from Armenia). The place name seems to be singing wolf and might refer to a spot where wolves
gathered, but this might be folk etymology.


cantankerous (adj.)

1772, said to be a Wiltshire word, probably from an alteration (influenced by raucous) of Middle
English contakour troublemaker (c.1300), from Anglo-French contec discord, strife, from Old French
contechier (Old North French contekier), from con- with + teche, related to atachier hold fast (see
attach). With -ous. Related: Cantankerously; cantankerousness.


cantata (n.)

1724, from Italian cantata, literally that which is sung, past participle of cantare to sing (see
chant (v.)).


canteen (n.)

c.1710, store in a military camp, from French cantine sutler's shop (17c.), from Italian cantina
wine cellar, vault, which is perhaps another of the many meanings that were attached to Latin canto
corner; in this case, perhaps corner for storage. A Gaulish origin also has been proposed. Extended
to refreshment room at a military base, school, etc. from 1870. Meaning small tin for water or
liquor, carried by soldiers on the march, campers, etc. is from 1744, from a sense in French.


canter (v.)

1706, from a contraction of Canterbury gallop (1630s), easy pace at which pilgrims ride to
Canterbury (q.v.). Related: Cantered; cantering.


canter (n.)

1755, from canter (v.).


Canterbury

Old English Cantware-buruh fortified town of the Kentish people, from Cant-ware the people of Kent
(see Kent). The Roman name was Duroverno, from Romano-British *duro- walled town.    Pope Gregory
the Great intended to make London, as the largest southern Anglo-Saxon city, the metropolitan see of
southern England, but Christianity got a foothold first in the minor kingdom of Kent, whose heathen
ruler Ethelbert had married a Frankish Christian princess. London was in the Kingdom of Essex and
out of reach of the missionaries at first. Therefore, in part perhaps to flatter Ethelbert, his
capital was made the cathedral city. Related: Canterburian.


canticle (n.)

short hymn, early 13c., from Latin canticulum a little song, diminutive of canticum song (also a
scene in Roman comedy enacted by one person and accompanied by music and dancing), from cantus (see
chant (v.)).


cantilever (n.)

1660s, probably from cant (n.2) + lever, but earliest form (c.1610) was cantlapper. First element
also might be Spanish can dog, architect's term for an end of timber jutting out of a wall, on which
beams rested. Related: Cantilevered.


cantina (n.)

bar room, saloon, 1892, Texas and U.S. southwest dialect, from Spanish and Italian form of canteen.


cantle (n.)

early 14c., a part, a portion, also a section cut out of anything (mid-15c.), from Old North French
cantel corner, piece (Old French chantel, Modern French chanteau), from Medieval Latin cantellus,
diminutive of cantus corner (see cant (n.2)).


canto (n.)

1580s, from Italian canto song, from Latin cantus song (see chant (v.)). As a section of a long
poem, used in Italian by Dante, in English first by Spenser.


canton (n.)

1530s, corner, angle, from Middle French canton piece, portion of a country (13c.), from Italian
(Lombard dialect) cantone region, especially in the mountains, augmentative of Latin canto section
of a country, literally corner (see cant (n.2)). Originally in English a term in heraldry and flag
descriptions; applied to the sovereign states of the Swiss republic from 1610s. Related: Cantoned.


Cantonese (n.)

1816, from Canton, former transliteration of the name of the Chinese region now known in English as
Guangzhou. The older form of the name is from the old British-run, Hong Kong-based Chinese postal
system. As an adjective from 1840.


cantonment (n.)

1756, military quarters, from French cantonnement, from  cantonner to divide into cantons (14c.),
from canton (see canton). Meaning action of quartering troops is from 1757.


cantor (n.)

1530s, church song-leader, from Latin cantor singer, poet, actor, agent noun from past participle
stem of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Applied in English to the Hebrew chazan from 1893.


cantrip (n.)

magical spell, 1719, a Scottish word of uncertain origin; despite much speculation it is unclear
even where the word is divided, whether the second element is rope (perhaps a reference to knotted
cords as magical devices) or trappa a step or some other thing.


Canuck (n.)

1835, perhaps a cross between Canada and Chinook, the native people in the Columbia River region. In
U.S., often but not always derogatory. As an adjective from 1853.


canula

variant of cannula.


canvas (n.)

sturdy cloth made from hemp or flax, mid-14c., from Anglo-French canevaz, Old North French canevach,
Old French chanevaz, literally made of hemp, hempen, noun use of Vulgar Latin adjective *cannapaceus
made of hemp, from Latin cannabis, from Greek kannabis hemp, a Scythian or Thracian word (see
cannabis).    Latin adjectives in -aceus sometimes were made in Romanic languages into nouns of
augmentative or pejorative force. Especially as a surface for oil paintings from c.1700; hence an
oil painting (1764).


canvas-back (n.)

also canvasback, 1785 as a type of North American duck. Earlier as an adjective for a type of
garment made of expensive stuff in front and cheap canvas in the back (c.1600); from canvas (n.) +
back (n.).


canvass (v.)

c.1500, from alternative spelling of canvas (n.) and probably meaning, originally, to toss or sift
in a canvas sheet, hence to shake out, examine carefully (1520s); to solicit votes (1550s). The
spelling with a double -s- dates from 16c. Compare Old French canabasser to examine carefully,
literally to sift through canvas. Related: Canvassed; canvassing. As a noun related to this,
attested from c.1600.


canyon (n.)

narrow valley between cliffs, 1834, from Mexican Spanish ca&ntilde;on, extended sense of Spanish
ca&ntilde;on a pipe, tube; deep hollow, gorge, augmentative of cano a tube, from Latin canna reed
(see cane (n.)). But earlier spelling callon (1560s) might suggest a source in calle street.


canzone (n.)

1580s, from Italian canzone, from Latin cantionem (nominative cantio) singing, song (also source of
Spanish cancion, French chanson), noun of action from past participle stem of canere to sing (see
chant (v.)). In Italian or Proven&ccedil;al, a song resembling the madrigal but less strict in
style.


cap (n.)

late Old English c&aelig;ppe hood, head-covering, cape, from Late Latin cappa a cape, hooded cloak
(source of Spanish capa, Old North French cape, French chape), possibly a shortened from capitulare
headdress, from Latin caput head (see head (n.)).    Meaning women's head covering is early 13c. in
English; extended to men late 14c. Figurative thinking cap is from 1839 (considering cap is 1650s).
Of cap-like coverings on the ends of anything (such as hub-cap) from mid-15c. Meaning contraceptive
device is first recorded 1916. That of cap-shaped piece of copper lined with gunpowder and used to
ignite a firearm is c.1826; extended to paper version used in toy pistols, 1872 (cap-pistol is from
1879).    The Late Latin word apparently originally meant a woman's head-covering, but the sense was
transferred to hood of a cloak, then to cloak itself, though the various senses co-existed. Old
English took in two forms of the Late Latin word, one meaning head-covering, the other
ecclesiastical dress (see cape (n.1)). In most Romance languages, a diminutive of Late Latin cappa
has become the usual word for head-covering (such as French chapeau).


cap (v.)

c.1400, to put a cap on, from cap (n.). Meaning cover as with s cap is from c.1600. Figurative sense
of go one better is from 1580s. Related: Capped; capping.


cap-a-pie (adj.)

1520s, from Middle French cap-&agrave;-pie, literally head to foot. The more usual French form is de
pied en cap. The French words are from Latin  caput head (see head (n.)) + pedem foot (see foot
(n.)).


capability (n.)

1580s, from capable + -ity. Capabilities undeveloped faculty or property is attested from 1778.


capable (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French capable or directly from Late Latin capabilis receptive; able to grasp or
hold, used by theologians, from Latin capax able to hold much, broad, wide, roomy; also receptive,
fit for; adjectival form of capere to grasp, lay hold, take, catch; undertake; take in, hold; be
large enough for; comprehend, from PIE *kap- to grasp (cognates: Sanskrit kapati two handfuls; Greek
kaptein to swallow, gulp down; Lettish kampiu seize; Old Irish cacht servant-girl, literally
captive; Welsh caeth captive, slave; Gothic haban have, hold; Old English h&aelig;ft handle, habban
to have, hold, Modern English have). Related: Capably.


capacious (adj.)

1610s, able to contain, from Latin capax (genitive capacis) able to take in, from capere to take
(see capable) + -ous. Meaning able to hold much is from 1630s. Related: Capaciously; capaciousness.


capacitance (n.)

1893, from capacity + -ance.


capacitate (v.)

1650s, from Latin capacitas (see capacity) + -ate (2). Related: Capacitation.


capacitor (n.)

device which stores electricity, 1926, from capacity with Latinate agent-noun ending.


capacity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French capacit&eacute; ability to hold (15c.), from Latin capacitatem
(nominative capacitas) breadth, capacity, capability of holding much, noun of state from capax
(genitive capacis) able to hold much, from capere to take (see capable). Meaning largest audience a
place can hold is 1908.


caparison        (n.)

1570s, cloth spread over a saddle, also personal dress and ornaments, from Middle French caparasson
(15c., Modern French capara&ccedil;on), from Spanish caparaz&#243;n, perhaps from augmentative of
Old Proven&ccedil;al caparasso a mantle with a hood, or Medieval Latin caparo, the name of a type of
cape worn by women, literally chaperon (see chaperon). Past participle adjective caparisoned is
attested from c.1600, from a verb caparison (1590s), from French capara&ccedil;onner, from
capara&ccedil;on.


cape (n.1)

garment, late Old English capa, c&aelig;ppe, from Late Latin cappa hooded cloak (see cap (n.)). The
modern word and meaning (sleeveless cloak) are a mid-16c. reborrowing from French cape, from
Spanish, in reference to a Spanish style.


cape (n.2)

promontory, late 14c., from Middle French cap cape; head, from Latin caput headland, head (see
capitulum). The Cape of Good Hope in southern Africa has been the Cape since 1660s. Sailors called
low cloud banks that could be mistaken for landforms on the horizon Cape fly-away (1769).


Cape Cod

named 1602 by English navigator Bartholomew Gosnold for the abundance of fish his men caught there.
Cape Cod, in reference to houses reminiscent of New England architecture, is attested from 1916.


capeesh

variant spelling of capiche (q.v.).


Capella

bright northern star, the alpha of the constellation Auriga, by 17c., from Latin capella, literally
little she-goat (Greek kinesai kheimonas), diminutive of capra she-goat, fem. of caper goat.


caper (v.)

1580s, apparently short for obsolete capriole to leap, skip, probably from Italian capriolare jump
in the air (see cab). Related: Capered; capering.


caper (n.1)

type of prickly Mediterranean bush, also in reference to the plant's edible buds, late 14c., from
Latin capparis (source of Italian cappero, French c&acirc;pre, German Kaper), from Greek kapparis
the caper plant or its fruit, of uncertain origin. Arabic kabbar, Persian kabar are from Greek.
Perhaps reborrowed into English 16c. The final -s was mistaken for a plural inflection in English
and dropped.


caper (n.2)

by 1590s, playful leap or jump, from caper (v.); meaning prank is from 1840; that of crime is from
1926. To cut capers dance in a frolicsome way is from c.1600.


capias (n.)

writ of arrest issued by a court, mid-15c., from Latin capias, literally thou mayest take, typical
first word of such a writ; properly 2nd person singular present subjunctive of capere to catch,
seize, hold (see capable).


capiche

1940s slang, from Italian capisci? do you understand? from capire to understand, from Latin capere
seize, grasp, take (see capable). Also spelled coppish, kabish, capeesh, etc.


capillarity (n.)

1806, from French capillarit&eacute;, from Latin capillaris (see capillary).


capillary (adj.)

1650s, of or pertaining to the hair, from Latin capillaris of hair, from capillus hair (of the
head); perhaps related to caput head (but de Vaan finds this difficult on the formal side and far
from compelling, since capillus is a diminutive, and would mean 'little head', which hardly amounts
to 'hair'). Borrowed earlier as capillar (14c.). Meaning taking place in capillary vessels is from
1809. Capillary attraction attested from 1813. As a noun, capillary blood vessel, from 1660s.


capital (adj.)

early 13c., of or pertaining to the head, from Old French capital, from Latin capitalis of the head,
hence capital, chief, first, from caput (genitive capitis) head (see capitulum). Meaning main,
principal, chief, dominant, most important is from early 15c. in English. Capital letter for an
upper case one is attested from late 14c. The modern informal sense of excellent, first-rate is
dated from 1762 in OED (as an exclamation of approval, OED's first example is 1875), perhaps from
earlier use of the word in reference to ships, first-rate, of the line, attested from 1650s.     A
capital crime (1520s) is one that affects the life or head; capital had a sense of deadly, mortal
from late 14c. in English, a sense also found in Latin. The felt connection between head and life,
mortality also existed in Old English: as in heafodgilt deadly sin, capital offense, heafdes
&thorn;olian to forfeit life. Capital punishment was in Blackstone (1765) and classical Latin
capitis poena. Capital gain is recorded from 1921. Capital goods is recorded from 1899. Related:
Capitally.


capital (n.1)

early 15c., a capital letter, from capital (adj.). The meaning capital city is first recorded 1660s
(the Old English word was heafodstol). The financial sense is from 1610s (Middle English had chief
money principal fund, mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin capitale stock, property, noun use of neuter of
capitalis capital, chief, first. (The noun use of this adjective in classical Latin was for a
capital crime.)    [The term capital] made its first appearance in medieval Latin as an adjective
capitalis (from caput, head) modifying the word pars, to designate the principal sum of a money
loan. The principal part of a loan was contrasted with the usury--later called interest--the payment
made to the lender in addition to the return of the sum lent. This usage, unknown to classical
Latin, had become common by the thirteenth century and possibly had begun as early as 1100 A.D., in
the first chartered towns of Europe. [Frank A. Fetter, Reformulation of the Concepts of Capital and
Income in Economics and Accounting, 1937, in Capital, Interest, &amp; Rent, 1977]    Also see
cattle, and compare sense development of fee, pecuniary.


capital (n.2)

head of a column or pillar, late 13c., from Anglo-French capitel, Old French chapitel, or directly
from Latin capitellum little head, diminutive of caput (see capitulum).


capital letter (n.)

late 14c.; see capital (adj.). So called because it is at the head of a sentence or word.


capitalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of capitalize (q.v.). For suffix, see -ize.


capitalism (n.)

1854, condition of having capital; from capital (n.1) + -ism. Meaning political/economic system
which encourages capitalists is recorded from 1872.


capitalist (n.)

1791, man of money, from French capitaliste, a coinage of the Revolution and a term of reproach; see
capital (n.1) + -ist. Related: Capitalistic.


capitalization (n.)

1860, act of converting (assets) to capital, noun of action from capitalize in the financial sense.
Meaning act of writing or printing in capital letters is recorded from 1864.


capitalize (v.)

write or print in capital letters, 1764, from capital (n.1) + -ize. Meaning to convert (assets) to
capital is recorded from 1868. Related: Capitalized; capitalizing.


capitate (adj.)

head-shaped, 1660s, from Latin capitatus headed, from caput head (see capitulum).


capitation       (n.)

1610s, counting of heads, from Late Latin capitationem (nominative capitatio), noun of action from
past participle stem of a verb derived from caput head (see capitulum). Meaning levying of a poll
tax is from 1640s.


Capitol (n.)

building where U.S. Congress meets, 1793 (in writings of Thomas Jefferson), from Latin Capitolium,
temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus on the Capitoline Hill in ancient Rome. Used earlier of Virginia
state houses (1699). Its use in American public architecture deliberately evokes Roman republican
imagery. With reference to the Roman citadel, it is recorded in English from late 14c., via Old
North French capitolie. Relationship of Capitoline to capital is likely but not certain.


capitulate (v.)

1570s, to draw up in chapters (i.e., under heads), in part a back-formation from capitulation, in
part from Medieval Latin capitulatus, past participle of capitulare to draw up in heads or chapters,
arrange conditions. Often of terms of surrender, hence meaning to yield on stipulated terms (1680s).
Related: Capitulated; capitulating.


capitulation (n.)

1530s, an agreement, from Middle French capitulation, noun of action from capituler agree on
specified terms, from Medieval Latin capitulare to draw up in heads or chapters, arrange conditions,
from capitulum chapter, in classical Latin heading, literally a little head, diminutive of caput
(genitive capitis) head (see capitulum). Meaning narrowed by mid-17c. to make terms of surrender.


capitulum (n.)

used in various senses in English; Latin, literally little head, diminutive of caput head, also
leader, guide, chief person; summit; capital city; origin, source, spring, figuratively life,
physical life; in writing a division, paragraph; of money, the principal sum, from PIE *kaput- head
(see head (n.)).


capnomancy (n.)

divination by smoke, c.1600, from Latinized form of Greek kapnos smoke + -mancy.


capo (n.1)

leader of a Mafia 'family,'  1952, Italian, literally head (see head (n.)).


capo (n.2)

pitch-altering device for a stringed instrument, 1946, short for capo tasto (1876), from Italian,
literally head stop (see head (n.)).


capon (n.)

a castrated cock, late Old English capun, from Latin caponem (nominative capo) castrated cock (also
source of French chapon, Spanish capon, Italian cappone), perhaps literally to strike off, from PIE
root *(s)kep- to cut (see hatchet (n.)). Probably reinforced in Middle English by cognate Old North
French capon.


capote (n.)

long cloak with a hood, 1812, from French capote, fem. of capot (17c.), diminutive of cape (see cape
(n.1)).


Cappadocia (n.)

ancient name for the region roughly corresponding to modern Turkey, from Greek Kappadok&iacute;a,
perhaps ultimately from Persian Hvaspadakhim land of fine horses. In ancient Athens, Cappadocians
were notorious as knaves and cowards, but the region's horses were celebrated.


cappella

see a cappella.


cappuccino (n.)

1948, from Italian cappuccino, from Capuchin in reference to the beverage's color and its supposed
resemblance to that of the brown hoods of the Friars Minor Capuchins (see Capuchin).


Capri

island in the Bay of Naples, of unknown origin: Latin capra she-goat, Greek kapros boar, Etruscan
capra burial place all have been suggested. As a type of wine, 1877; as a type of pants, 1956 (see
Capri pants).


Capri pants

1956 (said to have been designed c.1948), from Capri, Italian island; so called perhaps because they
were first popular in Capri, which was emerging as a European holiday destination about this time
(compare Bermuda shorts).


capriccio (n.)

1690s as a term in music for a kind of free composition, from Italian capriccio sudden start or
motion (see caprice). Earlier it meant prank, trick (1660s); caprice (c.1600).


caprice (n.)

sudden change of mind, 1660s, from French caprice whim (16c.), from Italian capriccio whim,
originally a shivering, possibly from capro goat, with reference to frisking, from Latin capreolus
wild goat (see cab). But another theory connects the Italian word with capo head + riccio curl,
frizzled, literally hedgehog (from Latin ericius). The notion in this case would be of the hair
standing on end in horror, hence the person shivering in fear.


capricious (adj.)

1590s, from French capricieux whimsical (16c.), from Italian capriccioso, from capriccio (see
caprice). Related: Capriciously; capriciousness.


Capricorn

zodiac sign, late Old English, from Latin Capricornus, literally horned like a goat, from caper
(genitive capri) goat (see cab) + cornu horn (see horn (n.)); a loan-translation of Greek
Aigokheros, the name of the constellation. Extended 1894 to persons born under the sign.


caprine (adj.)

goat-like, c.1600, from Latin caprinus, from caper goat (see cab) + adjectival suffix -inus.


capris (n.)

Capri pants, 1966, see Capri pants.


capsaicin

from capsicum, from which it is extracted + chemical suffixes.


Capsicum (n.)

genus of pepper plants, 1660s, of unknown origin, a word said to have been chosen by French botanist
Joseph Pitton de Tournefort (1656-1708); perhaps irregularly formed from Latin capsa box (see case
(n.2)).


capsid (adj.)

1889 in biology, pertaining to capsidae, a type of insect, from Latin capsa box (see case (n.2)).


capsize (v.)

1780 (transitive); 1792 (intransitive), a nautical word of obscure origin, perhaps (as Skeat
suggests) from Spanish capuzar to sink by the head, from cabo head, from Latin caput (see
capitulum). For sense, compare French chavirer to capsize, upset, faire capot capsize;
Proven&ccedil;al cap virar to turn the head. Related: Capsized; capsizing.


capstan (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cabestant, from Old Proven&ccedil;al cabestan, from capestre pulley cord,
from Latin capistrum halter, from capere to hold, take (see capable).


capstone (n.)

also cap-stone, topmost stone in a construction, 1680s, from cap + stone (n.). Earliest use is
figurative.


capsule (n.)

1650s, from French capsule a membranous sac (16c.), from Latin capsula small box or chest,
diminutive of capsa box, case, chest (see case (n.2)). Medicinal sense is 1875; shortened form cap
is from 1942. Sense in space capsule is first recorded 1954. As an adjective from 1938. Related:
Capsular.


capsulize (v.)

of news, etc., 1950, from capsule + -ize. Related: Capsulized; capsulizing.


captain (n.)

late 14c., capitayn, a leader, chief, one who stands at the head of others, from Old French
capitaine captain, leader, from Late Latin capitaneus chief, noun use of adjective capitaneus
prominent, chief, from Latin caput (genitive capitis) head (see capitulum).    Military sense of
officer who commands a company (rank between major and lieutenant) is from 1560s; naval sense of
officer who commands a man-of-war is from 1550s, extended to master or commander of a vessel of any
kind by 1704. Sporting sense is first recorded 1823.


captain (v.)

1590s, from captain (n.). Related: Captained; captaining.


captaincy (n.)

1818, from captain (n.) on the model of lieutenancy or some similar word where the -c- is
etymologically justified.


captation (n.)

1520s, from Middle French captation, from Latin captationem (nominative captatio) a reaching after,
a catching at, noun of action from past participle stem of captare (see catch (v.)).


caption (n.)

late 14c., taking, seizure, from Old French capcion arrest, capture, imprisonment, or directly from
Latin captionem (nominative capito) a catching, seizing, holding, taking, noun of action from past
participle stem of capere to take (see capable).    From 17c. used especially in law, and there via
its appearance at the head of legal document involving seizure (Certificate of caption, etc.), the
word's sense was extended to the beginning of any document; thus heading of a chapter or section of
an article (1789), and, especially in U.S., description or title below an illustration (1919).


caption (v.)

by 1901, from caption (n.). Related: Captioned; captioning.


captious (adj.)

c.1400, capcyus, from Middle French captieux (15c.) or directly from Latin captiosus fallacious,
from captionem (nominative captio) a deceiving, fallacious argument, literally a taking (in), from
captus, past participle of capere to take, catch (see capable). Related: Captiously; captiousness.


captivate (v.)

1520s, to enthrall with charm, from Late Latin captivatus, past participle of captivare to take,
capture, from captivus (see captive). Literal sense (1550s) is rare or obsolete in English, which
uses capture (q.v.). Latin captare to take, hold also had a transferred sense of to entice, entrap,
allure. Related: Captivated; captivating; captivatingly.


captive (adj.)

late 14c., imprisoned, enslaved, from Latin captivus caught, taken prisoner, from captus, past
participle of capere to take, hold, seize (see capable). As a noun from c.1400; an Old English noun
was h&aelig;ftling, from h&aelig;ft taken, seized.


captivity (n.)

late 14c., Old French *captivite or directly from Latin captivitatem (nominative captivitas), from
captivus (see captive (n.)). An Old English cognate word for it was geh&aelig;ftnes (see haft).


captor (n.)

1680s, from Latin captor a catcher, agent noun from captus, past participle of capere to take (see
capable). Earlier it meant censor (1640s). Fem. form captress recorded from 1867.


capture (n.)

1540s, from Middle French capture a taking, from Latin captura a taking (especially of animals),
from captus (see captive).


capture (v.)

1795, from capture (n.); in chess, checkers, etc., 1820. Related: Captured; capturing. Earlier verb
in this sense was captive (early 15c.).


Capuchin (n.)

1520s, from Middle French capuchin (16c., Modern French capucin), from Italian capuccino, diminutive
of capuccio hood, augmentative of cappa (see cap (n.)). Friar of the Order of St. Francis, under the
rule of 1528, so called from the pointed hoods on their cloaks. As a type of monkey, 1785, from the
shape of the hair on its head, thought to resemble a cowl.


caput (n.)

head, in various senses, from Latin caput (see capitulum).


capybara (n.)

South American rodent, 1774, from some Tupi (Brazilian) native name.


car (n.)

c.1300, wheeled vehicle, from Anglo-French carre, Old North French carre, from Vulgar Latin *carra,
related to Latin carrum, carrus (plural carra), originally two-wheeled Celtic war chariot, from
Gaulish karros, a Celtic word (compare Old Irish and Welsh carr cart, wagon, Breton karr chariot),
from PIE *krsos, from root *kers- to run (see current (adj.)).    From 16th to 19th c. chiefly
poetic, with associations of dignity, solemnity, or splendour ... [OED]. Used in U.S. by 1826 of
railway freight carriages and of passenger coaches on a railway by 1830; by 1862 of a streetcar or
tramway car. Extension to automobile is by 1896, but from 1831 to the first decade of 20c. the cars
meant railroad train. Car bomb first 1972, in reference to Northern Ireland. The Latin word also is
the source of Italian and Spanish carro, French char.


car-pool (n.)

also carpool, 1942, American English, from car + pool (n.2). As a verb from 1962. Related:
Carpooled; carpooling.


carabineer (n.)

mounted soldier armed with a carbine, 1670s, from French carabinier (17c.), from carabine carbine
(see carbine). Italian carabinieri soldiers serving as a police force is the same word.


carabinieri (n.)

Italian police (plural), from Italian carabinieri, plural of carabiniere, from French carabinier
(see carabineer).


carafe (n.)

1786, from French carafe (17c.), from Italian caraffa (or Spanish garrafa), probably from Arabic
gharraf drinking cup, or Persian qarabah a large flagon.


caramba

exclamation of dismay or surprise, 1835, from Spanish, said to be a euphemism for carajo penis, from
Vulgar Latin *caraculum little arrow.


caramel (n.)

1725, from French caramel burnt sugar (17c.), via Old Spanish caramel (modern caramelo), ultimately
from Medieval Latin cannamellis, traditionally from Latin canna (see cane (n.)) + mellis, genitive
of mel honey (see Melissa). But some give the Medieval Latin word an Arabic origin, or trace it to
Latin calamus reed, cane.


caramelize (v.)

1837, from caramel + -ize. Earlier was past participle adjective carameled (1727). Related:
Caramelized; caramelizing.


carapace (n.)

1836, from French carapace tortoise shell (18c.), from Spanish carapacho or Portuguese
carapa&ccedil;a, of uncertain origin, perhaps somehow from Latin capa (see cape (n.1)).


carat (n.)

also karat, mid-15c., from Middle French carat measure of the fineness of gold (14c.), from Italian
carato or Medieval Latin carratus, both from Arabic qirat fruit of the carob tree, also weight of 4
grains, from Greek keration carob seed, also the name of a small weight of measure (one-third obol),
literally little horn diminutive of keras horn (see kerato-).    Carob beans were a standard for
weighing small quantities. As a measure of diamond weight, from 1570s in English. The Greek measure
was the equivalent of the Roman siliqua, which was one-twentyfourth of a golden solidus of
Constantine; hence karat took on a sense of a proportion of one twentyfourth and became a measure of
gold purity (1550s). Eighteen carat gold is eighteen parts gold, six parts alloy. It is unlikely
that the classical carat ever was a measure of weight for gold.


caravan (n.)

1580s, from Middle French caravane, from Old French carvane, carevane caravan (13c.), or Medieval
Latin caravana, picked up during the Crusades from Persian karwan group of desert travelers (which
Klein connects to Sanskrit karabhah camel). Used in English for vehicle 17c., especially for a
covered cart. Hence, in modern British use (from 1930s), often a rough equivalent of the U.S. mobile
home.


caravansary (n.)

alternative spelling of caravanserai.


caravanserai (n.)

1590s, carvanzara, Eastern inn (with a large central court) catering to caravans, ultimately from
Persian karwan-sarai, from karwan (see caravan) + sara'i palace, mansion; inn, from Iranian base
*thraya- to protect (see seraglio).


caravel (n.)

1520s, from Middle French caravelle (15c.), from Spanish carabela or Portuguese caravela, diminutive
of caravo small vessel, from Late Latin carabus small wicker boat covered with leather, from Greek
karabos, literally beetle, lobster (see scarab). Earlier form carvel (early 15c.) survives in
carvel-built (adj.).


caraway (n.)

late 13c., from Old Spanish alcarahuaya, alcaravea, from Arabic al-karawiya, of unknown origin but
suspected to be somehow from Greek karon cumin. Also as Anglo-Latin carvi, Old French carvi.


carb (n.)

1942 as an abbreviation of carburetor; c.2000 as short for carbohydrate.


carbide (n.)

compound formed by combination of carbon and another element, 1848, from carb-, comb. form of carbon
+ chemical suffix -ide. The earlier word was carburet.


carbine (n.)

short rifle, 1580s, from French carabine (Middle French carabin), used of light horsemen and also of
the weapon they carried, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Medieval Latin Calabrinus Calabrian
(i.e., rifle made in Calabria). A less-likely theory (Gamillscheg, etc.) connects it to Old French
escarrabin corpse-bearer during the plague, literally (probably) carrion beetle, said to have been
an epithet for archers from Flanders.


carbo-

before vowels carb-, comb. form meaning Carbon, abstracted 1810 from carbon.


carbohydrate (n.)

1851, from carbo-, comb. form of carbon, + hydrate (n.), denoting compound produced when certain
substances combine with water, from Greek hydor water (see water (n.1)).    The name carbohydrate
was given to these compounds because, in composition, they are apparently hydrates of carbon. In
structure, however, they are far more complex. [Flood]


carbolic (adj.)

1836, from carb-, comb. form of carbon + -ol oil + -ic.


carbon (n.)

non-metallic element, 1789, coined 1787 in French by Lavoisier as charbone, from Latin carbonem
(nominative carbo) a coal, glowing coal; charcoal, from PIE root *ker- (4) heat, fire, to burn
(cognates: Latin cremare to burn; Sanskrit krsna black, burnt, kudayati singes; Lithuanian kuriu to
heat, kar&#353;tas hot, krosnis oven; Old Church Slavonic kurjo to smoke, krada fireplace, hearth;
Russian ceren brazier; Old High German harsta roasting; Gothic hauri coal; Old Norse hyrr fire; Old
English heor&eth; hearth).   Carbon 14, long-lived radioactive isotope used in dating organic
deposits, is from 1936. Carbon dating (using carbon 14) is recorded from 1958. Carbon cycle is
attested from 1912. Carbon footprint was in use by 2001. Carbon paper (soon to be obsolete) is from
1895.


carbon copy (n.)

1895, from carbon (paper) + copy (n.). A copy on paper made using carbon paper. The figurative sense
is from 1944. Also as a verb, send a carbon copy (of something), and as such often abbreviated c.c.


carbon dioxide (n.)

1869, so called because it consists of one carbon and two oxygen atoms. The chemical was known since
mid-18c. under the name fixed air; later as carbonic acid gas (1791). The term dioxide for an oxide
containing two atoms of oxygen came into use in the middle of the 19th century. [Flood].


carbon monoxide (n.)

1869, so called because it consists of one carbon and one oxygen atom (as opposed to carbon dioxide,
which has two of the latter). An older name for it was carbonic oxide gas.


carbonate (n.)

1794, from French carbonate salt of carbonic acid (Lavoisier), from Modern Latin carbonatem a
carbonated (substance), from Latin carbo (see carbon).


carbonate (v.)

1805, to form into a carbonate, from carbonate (n.) by influence of French carbonater transform into
a carbonate. Meaning to impregnate with carbonic acid gas (i.e. carbon dioxide) is from 1850s.
Related: Carbonated; carbonating.


carbonated (adj.)

containing carbon dioxide, 1858, past participle adjective from carbonate (v.).


carbonation (n.)

1881, from carbonic acid, an old name for carbon dioxide (see carbonate (n.)) + -ation.


Carboniferous (adj.)

1830 with reference the geological period, from a word formed in English in 1799 to mean coal-
bearing, from Latin carbo (genitive carbonis) coal (see carbon) + -ferous producing, containing,
bearing, from ferre to bear (see infer). The great coal beds of Europe were laid down during this
period. As a stand-alone noun (short for Carboniferous Period) from 1940s.


Carborundum (n.)

silicon carbide used as an abrasive, (reg. trademark U.S. June 21, 1892, by Carborundum Co. of
Monongahela City, Pa.), from carbon + corundum.


carboy (n.)

large globular bottle covered with basketwork, 1753, probably ultimately from Persian qarabah large
flagon.


carbs (n.)

see carb.


carbuncle (n.)

early 13c., fiery jewel, from Old North French carbuncle (Old French charbocle, charboncle)
carbuncle-stone, also carbuncle, boil, from Latin carbunculus red gem, also red, inflamed spot,
literally a little coal, from carbo (genitive carbonis) coal (see carbon). Originally of rubies,
garnets, and other red jewels; in English the word was applied to tumors from late 14c.


carbuncular (adj.)

1737, from Latin carbunculus (see carbuncle) + -ar.


carburetor (n.)

device to enhance a gas flame, 1866, from carburet compound of carbon and another substance (1795,
now displaced by carbide), also used as a verb, to combine with carbon (1802); from carb-, comb.
form of carbon, + -uret, an archaic suffix formed from Modern Latin -uretum to parallel French words
in -ure. Motor vehicle sense is from 1896.


carcass (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French carcois, from or influenced by Old French charcois (Modern French
carcasse) trunk of a body, chest, carcass, and Anglo-Latin carcosium dead body, all of uncertain
origin. Not used of humans after c.1750, except contemptuously. Italian carcassa probably is a
French loan word.


carceral (adj.)

pertaining to prisons or a prison, 1570s, from Latin carceralis, from carcer prison, jail; starting
place in a race course (see incarceration).


carcinogen (n.)

cancer-causing substance, 1853, from carcinoma + -gen.


carcinogenic (adj.)

1926, from carcinogen + -ic.


carcinoma (n.)

malignant tumor, 1721, from Latin carcinoma, from Greek karkinoma a cancer, from karkinos cancer,
literally crab (see cancer) + -oma.


card (n.1)

c.1400, playing card, from Middle French carte (14c.), from Latin charta leaf of paper, tablet, from
Greek khartes layer of papyrus, probably from Egyptian. Form influenced after 14c. by Italian carta
(see chart (n.)).    Sense of playing cards also is oldest in French. Sense in English extended by
1590s to similar small, flat, stiff bits of paper. Meaning printed ornamental greetings for special
occasions is from 1869. Application to clever or original persons (1836, originally with an
adjective, as in smart card) is from the playing-card sense, via expressions such as sure card an
expedient certain to attain an object (c.1560).   Card table is from 1713. Card-sharper is 1859.
House of cards in the figurative sense is from 1640s, first attested in Milton. To have a card up
(one's) sleeve is 1898; to play the _______ card is from 1886, originally the Orange card, meaning
appeal to Northern Irish Protestant sentiment (for political advantage).


card (v.1)

to comb wool, late 14c., from card (n.2) or else from Old French carder, from Old Proven&ccedil;al
cardar to card, from Vulgar Latin *caritare, from Latin carrere to clean or comb with a card,
perhaps from PIE root *kars- to scrape  (see harsh). Related: Carded; carding.


card (v.2)

1540s, to play cards (now obsolete), from card (n.1). From 1925 as to write (something) on a card
for filing. Meaning require (someone) to show ID is from 1970s. Related: Carded; carding.


card (n.2)

machine for combing, late 14c. (mid-14c. in surname Cardmaker), from Old French carde card, teasel,
from Old Proven&ccedil;al cardo or some other Romanic source (compare Spanish and Italian carda
thistle, tease, card, back-formation from cardar to card (see card (v.1)). The English word probably
also comes via Anglo-Latin cardo, from Medieval Latin carda a teasel, from Latin carduus.


card-carrying (adj.)

1948, used frequently during Cold War in U.S. (typically in reference to official membership in the
communist party), from card (n.1) + present participle of carry (v.).


cardamom (n.)

1550s, from French cardamome, from Latin cardamomum, from Greek kardamomon, from kardamon cress (of
unknown origin) + amomon spice plant. The word was in English from late 14c. in Latin form.


cardboard (n.)

1848, from card (n.) + board (n.1). Figurative sense is from 1893. An earlier word for the same
stuff was card paper (1777).


cardiac (adj.)

c.1600, from French cardiaque (14c.) or directly from Latin cardiacus, from Greek kardiakos
pertaining to the heart, from kardia heart (see heart (n.)). Cardiac arrest is attested from 1950.
Greek kardia also could mean stomach and Latin cardiacus pertaining to the stomach. This terminology
continues somewhat in modern medicine. Confusion of heart and nearby digestive organs also is
reflected in Breton kalon heart, from Old French cauldun bowels, and English heartburn for
indigestion.


cardigan (n.)

1868, from James Thomas Brudenell (1797-1868), 7th Earl of Cardigan, English general distinguished
in the Crimean War, who set the style, in one account supposedly wearing such a jacket while leading
the Charge of the Light Brigade at Balaclava (1854). The place name is an anglicization of Welsh
Ceredigion, literally Ceredig's land. Ceredig lived 5c.


cardinal (n.)

early 12c., one of the ecclesiastical princes who constitute the sacred college (short for
cardinalis ecclesiae Romanae or episcopus cardinalis), from Latin cardinalis principal, chief,
essential (see cardinal (adj.)).    Ecclesiastical use began for the presbyters of the chief
(cardinal) churches of Rome. The North American songbird (Cardinalis virginianus) is attested from
1670s, so named for its resemblance to the cardinals in their red robes.


cardinal (adj.)

chief, pivotal, early 14c., from Latin cardinalis principal, chief, essential, from cardo (genitive
cardinis) that on which something turns or depends; pole of the sky, originally door hinge, of
unknown origin. Related: Cardinally.    The cardinal points (1540s) are north, south, east, west.
The cardinal sins (c.1600) are too well known to require rehearsal. The cardinal virtues (c.1300)
were divided into natural (justice prudence, temperance, fortitude) and theological (faith, hope,
charity). The natural ones were the original classical ones, which were amended by Christians. But
typically in Middle English only the first four were counted as the cardinal virtues:    Of &#254;e
uour uirtues cardinales speke&#254; moche &#254;e yealde philosofes. [Ayenbite of Inwyt, c.1340]
By analogy of this, and cardinal points, cardinal winds, cardinal signs (four zodiacal signs marking
the equinoxes and the solstices), the adjective in Middle English acquired an association with the
number four.


cardinal number (n.)

1590s, one, two, three, etc. as opposed to ordinal numbers first, second, third, etc.; so called
because they are the principal numbers and the ordinals depend on them (see cardinal (adj.)).


cardinality (n.)

1520s, condition of being a cardinal, from cardinal (n.) + -ity. Mathematical sense is from 1935
(see cardinal (adj.)).


carding (n.)

wool-dressing, late 15c., verbal noun from card (v.1).


cardio-

before vowels cardi-, word-forming element meaning pertaining to the heart, from Latinized form of
Greek kardia heart (see heart (n.)).


cardiogram (n.)

1876, from cardio- + -gram.


cardiograph (n.)

1867, from cardio- + -graph something written.    Although the work does not treat of the recent
means of diagnosis--the thermometer, laryngoscope, cardiograph, etc.,--still it is complete as far
as it goes. [book review in Medical Investigator, May 1867, p.94]


cardiology (n.)

1847, from cardio- + -logy. Cardiologist attested from 1885.


cardiopulmonary (adj.)

1908, from cardio- + pulmonary.


cardiovascular (adj.)

1879, from cardio- + vascular. Cardiovascular system is recorded by 1918.


cardoon (n.)

1610s, from French cardon, from Proven&ccedil;al cardon, properly thistle, from Late latin cardonem
(nominative cardo thistle, related to Latin carduus thistle, artichoke (see harsh).


care (n.)

Old English caru, cearu sorrow, anxiety, grief, also burdens of mind; serious mental attention, from
Proto-Germanic *karo (cognates: Old Saxon kara sorrow; Old High German chara wail, lament; Gothic
kara sorrow, trouble, care; German Karfreitag Good Friday), from PIE root *gar- cry out, call,
scream (cognates: Irish gairm shout, cry, call; see garrulous).    Different sense evolution in
related Dutch karig scanty, frugal, German karg stingy, scanty. The sense development in English is
from cry to lamentation to grief. Meaning charge, oversight, protection is attested c.1400, the
sense in care of in addressing. To take care of take in hand, do is from 1580s.


care (v.)

Old English carian, cearian be anxious, grieve; to feel concern or interest, from Proto-Germanic
*karo- lament, hence grief, care (cognates: Old High German charon to lament, Old Saxon karon to
care, to sorrow), from the same source as care (n.). OED emphasizes that it is in no way related to
L. cura. Related: Cared; caring.    To not care as a negative dismissal is attested from mid-13c.
Phrase couldn't care less is from 1946; could care less in the same sense (with an understood
negative) is from 1957. Care also figures in many similies of indifference in the form don't care a
_____, with the blank filled by fig, pin, button, cent, straw, rush, point, farthing, snap, etc.,
etc.    Positive senses, such as have an inclination (1550s); have fondness for (1520s) seem to have
developed later as mirrors to the earlier negative ones.


care package (n.)

1945, originally CARE package, supplies sent out by Cooperative for American Remittances to Europe,
established 1945 by U.S. private charities to coordinate delivery of aid packages to displaced
persons in Europe after World War II and obviously named for the sake of the acronym. Name
reupholstered late 1940s to Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere, to reflect its
expanded mission.


care-free (adj.)

also carefree, free from cares, 1795, from care (n.) + free (adj.). In Old English and Middle
English this idea was expressed by careless.


care-taker (n.)

also caretaker, 1858, from care (n.) + agent noun of take (v.). The back-formed verb caretake is
attested by 1893.


care-worm (n.)

a word listed in 2nd print edition OED, whose editors found it once, in the 1598 edition of W.
Phillip's translation of John Huyghen van Linschoten's account of his voyage to the East Indies, and
marked it ? error for EAREWORM. But care-worm could be a useful word.


careen (v.)

1590s, to turn a ship on its side (with the keel exposed), from French cariner, literally to expose
a ship's keel, from Middle French carene keel (16c.), from Italian (Genoese dialect) carena, from
Latin carina keel of a ship, originally nutshell, possibly from PIE root *kar- hard (see hard
(adj.)).     Intransitive sense of to lean, to tilt is from 1763, specifically of ships; in general
use by 1883. In sense to rush headlong, confused with career (v.) since at least 1923. [To career is
to move rapidly; to careen is to lurch from side to side (often while moving rapidly).] Earlier
figurative uses of careen were to be laid up; to rest. Related: Careened; careening.


career (n.)

1530s, a running (usually at full speed), a course (especially of the sun, etc., across the sky),
from Middle French carriere road, racecourse (16c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al or Italian carriera,
from Vulgar Latin *(via) cararia carriage (road), track for wheeled vehicles, from Latin carrus
chariot (see car). Sense of course of a working life first attested 1803.


career (v.)

1590s, to charge at a tournament, from career (n.). The meaning move rapidly, run at full speed
(1640s) is from the image of a horse passing a career on the jousting field, etc. Related: Careered;
careering.


careerist (n.)

1917, from career (n.) + -ist.


careful (adj.)

Old English cearful mournful, sad, also full of care or woe; anxious; full of concern (for someone
or something), thus applying attention, painstaking, circumspect; from care (n.) + -ful.


carefully (adv.)

Old English carful-lice; see careful + -ly (2).


carefulness (n.)

Old English carfulnys; see careful + -ness.


caregiver (n.)

by 1974, from care (n.) + giver. It has, in many senses, the same meaning as care-taker, which ought
to be its antonym.


careless (adj.)

Old English carleas free from anxiety; unconcerned, from care (n.) + -less; a compound probably from
Proto-Germanic. Original senses extinct by mid-17c.; main modern meaning not paying attention,
inattentive, not taking due care is first recorded 1560s (in carelessly).


carelessness (n.)

Old English carleasnes; see careless + -ness.


cares (n.)

anxieties, late Old English, from care (n.).


caress (n.)

1640s, show of endearment, display of regard, from French caresse (16c.), back-formation from
caresser or else from Italian carezza endearment, from caro dear, from Latin carus dear, costly,
beloved (see whore (n.)). Meaning affectionate stroke attested in English from 1650s.


caress (v.)

1650s, from French caresser, from Italian carezzare to cherish, from carezza endearment (see caress
(n.)). Related: Caressed; caressing.


caret (n.)

mark in writing to show where something is to be inserted, 1680s, from Latin caret there is lacking,
3rd person singular indicative of carere to lack (see caste).


careworn (adj.)

1828, from care (n.) + worn.


carfax (n.)

see carrefour.


cargo (n.)

1650s, freight loaded on a ship, from Spanish cargo burden, from cargar to load, impose taxes, from
Late Latin carricare to load on a cart (see charge (v.)). South Pacific cargo cult is from 1949.
Cargo pants attested from 1977.


Carib (n.)

1550s, from Spanish Caribe, from Arawakan kalingo or kalino, said to mean brave ones or else strong
men. As an adjective by 1881.


Caribbean

from Carib, indigenous people's name for themselves, + -ean.


caribou (n.)

also cariboo, 1660s, from Canadian French caribou, from Micmac (Algonquian) kaleboo or a related
Algonquian name, literally pawer, scratcher, from its kicking snow aside to feed on moss and grass.


caricature (v.)

1749, from caricature (n.). Related: Caricatured; caricaturing.


caricature (n.)

1748 (figurative), 1750 (literal), from French caricature (18c.), from Italian caricatura satirical
picture; an exaggeration, literally an overloading, from caricare to load, exaggerate, from Vulgar
Latin carricare to load a car (see charge (v.)). The Italian form had been used in English from
1680s and was common 18c.


caricaturist (n.)

1754, from caricature (n.) + -ist.


caries (n.)

1630s, from Latin caries rottenness, decay, from Proto-Italic *kas-, usually said to be from PIE
root *kere- to injure, break apart (cognates: Greek ker death, destruction, Old Irish krin withered,
faded). Related: Carious. But de Vaan writes that semantically, caries may just as well belong to
careocared 'to lack' as 'defect, state of defectiveness' ....


carillon (n.)

1775, from French carillon, which, according to French sources, is from Old French carignon set of
four bells, an alteration of quarregon, from Vulgar Latin *quadrinionem, from Latin quaternionem set
of four, from quater four times, from PIE *kwetrus, from root *kwetwer- four (see four).


caring (n.)

1550s, verbal noun from care (v.).


caring (adj.)

compassionate, 1966, present participle adjective from care (v.). Related: Caringly; caringness.


carious (adj.)

1670s, from French carieux (16c.), from Latin cariosus full of decay, from caries rottenness, decay
(see caries).


caritas (n.)

Latin, literally charity (see charity).


cark (v.)

to be weighed down or oppresssed by cares or worries, be concerned about, early 12c., a figurative
use, via Anglo-French from Old North French carkier to load, burden, from Late Latin carcare (see
charge (v.)). Compare Old North French carguer charger, corresponding to Old French chargier. The
literal sense in English, to load, put a burden on, is from c.1300. Related: Carked; carking. Also
as a noun in Middle English and after, charge, responsibility; anxiety, worry; burden on the mind or
spirit, (c.1300), from Anglo-French karke, from Old North French form of Old French carche, variant
of charge load, burden, imposition.


carl (n.)

c.1300, bondsman; common man, man of low birth, from Old Norse karl man, male, freeman, from Proto-
Germanic *karlon-, the same root that produced Old English ceorl man of low degree (see churl).
The Mellere was a stout carle for the nones [Chaucer]


Carl

masc. proper name, from Middle High German Karl man, husband (see carl).


Carlisle

Carleol (c.1100), earlier Lugovalio (4c.), from a Celtic proper name *Luguvalos. The Celtic cair
fortified town was added in the Middle Ages.


Carlos

Spanish form of the Germanic masculine proper name that is represented in English by Charles.


Carlovingian (adj.)

1781, from French Carlovingien, an alteration of Carolingien (see Carolingian) on model of
M&eacute;rovingien (see Merovingian).


Carmel

mountain in northern Israel, from Latin Carmel, from Greek Karmel, from Hebrew karmel garden,
fertile field.


Carmelite (n.)

c.1500, from Medieval Latin Carmelites, member of an order of mendicant friars (White Friars)
founded 12c. by Berthold of Calabria on Mount Carmel in what is now northwest Israel.


Carmen (n.)

French opera by Georges Bizet (1838-1875), premiered in Paris March 3, 1875. As a proper name, it
can represent (especially in Italian and Spanish) a diminutive of Carmel/Carmelo or Latin carmen
song, poem, incantation, oracle (see charm (n.)).


carminative (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin carminat- (past participle stem of carminare to card, from carmen, genitive
carminis, a card for wool or flax, which is related to carrere to card; see card (v.2)) + -ive. As a
noun from 1670s.    A medical term from the old theory of humours. The object of carminatives is to
expel wind, but the theory was that they dilute and relax the gross humours from whence the wind
arises, combing them out like knots in wool. [Hensleigh Wedgwood, A Dictionary of English Etymology,
1859-65]


carmine (n.)

1712, originally of the dyestuff, from French carmin (12c.), from Medieval Latin carminium, from
Arabic qirmiz crimson (see kermes). Form influenced in Latin by minium red lead, cinnabar, a word
said to be of Iberian origin. As an adjective from 1737; as a color name from 1799.


Carnaby Street (n.)

street in Soho, London (Westminster), in mid-1960s lined with fashionable boutiques and clothing
shops, hence used figuratively from 1964 for English 1960s stylishness. It was named for Karnaby
House, built 1683, from a surname or transferred from Carnaby in Yorkshire, which is from a
Scandinavian personal name + -by (see by).


carnage (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French carnage (16c.), from Old Italian carnaggio slaughter, murder, from
Medieval Latin carnaticum flesh, from Latin carnaticum slaughter of animals, from carnem (nominative
caro) flesh, originally a piece of flesh, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)). In
English always used more of slaughters of men than beasts. Southey (1795) tried to make a verb of
it.


carnal (adj.)

c.1400, physical, human, mortal, from Old French carnal and directly from Medieval Latin carnalis
natural, of the same blood, from Latin carnis of the flesh, genitive of caro flesh, meat (see
carnage). Meaning sensual is from early 15c.; that of worldly, sinful is from mid-15c. Carnal
knowledge is attested from early 15c. and was in legal use by 1680s.


carnalite (n.)

worldly minded man, one addicted to fleshly practices, 1570s, from carnal + -ite (1).


carnality (n.)

early 15c., sensuality, from Late Latin carnalitas, from Latin carnalis (see carnal). Meaning state
of being flesh, fleshliness is from mid-15c.


carnalize (v.)

despiritualize, sensualize, 1680s, from carnal + -ize.


carnally (adv.)

late 15c., sexually; 1530s, corporeally, from carnal + -ly (2).


carnation (n.)

Dianthus Caryophyllus, commonly also called pink, herbaceous perennial flowering plant native to
southern Europe and abundant in Normandy, 1530s, of uncertain origin. The early forms are confused;
perhaps (on evidence of early spellings) it is a corruption of coronation, from the flower's being
used in chaplets or from the toothed crown-like look of the petals.    Or it might be called for its
pinkness and derive from Middle French carnation person's color or complexion (15c.), which probably
is from Italian dialectal carnagione flesh color, from Late Latin carnationem (nominative carnatio)
fleshiness, from Latin caro flesh (see carnage). This carnation had been borrowed separately into
English as color of human flesh (1530s) and as an adjective meaning flesh-colored (1560s; the
earliest use of the word in English was to mean the incarnation of Christ, mid-14c.). OED points out
that not all the flowers are this color.


carnelian (n.)

red variety of chalcedony, variant of cornelian, altered by influence of Latin carnem flesh because
of its color.


carnival (n.)

1540s, time of merrymaking before Lent, from French carnaval, from Italian carnevale Shrove Tuesday,
from older Italian forms such as Milanese *carnelevale, Old Pisan carnelevare to remove meat,
literally raising flesh, from Latin caro flesh (see carnage) + levare lighten, raise, remove (see
lever (n.)). Folk etymology is from Medieval Latin carne vale  'flesh, farewell!'  Meaning a circus
or fair is attested by 1931 in North America.


Carnivora (n.)

order of mammals, 1830, from Latin (animalia) carnivora flesh-eating (animals), neuter plural of
carnivorus (see carnivorous). Applied as the scientific name of a large order of flesh-eating
mammals by French naturalist Georges L&eacute;opole Chr&eacute;tien Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Dagobert,
Baron Cuvier (1769-1832).


carnivore (n.)

flesh-eating animal, 1839, from French carnivore (16c.), from Latin carnivorus flesh-eating (see
carnivorous).


carnivorous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin carnivorus flesh-eating, feeding on flesh, from caro (genitive carnis) flesh (see
carnage) + vorare to devour (see voracity).


carny (n.)

1931, U.S. slang, short for carnival worker (see carnival).


carob (n.)

1540s, from French carobe, ultimately from Arabic kharrub locust bean pod (also in Persian as
khirnub), perhaps from Assyrian kharubu or Aramaic kharubha carob tree, carob, related to Hebrew
harubh.


carol (n.)

c.1300, joyful song, also dance in a ring, from Old French carole kind of dance in a ring, round
dance accompanied by singers, perhaps from Medieval Latin choraula a dance to the flute, from Latin
choraules flute-player, from Greek khoraules flute player who accompanies the choral dance, from
khoros chorus (see chorus) + aulein to play the flute, from aulos reed instrument (see alveolus).
The meaning Christmas hymn of joy is attested from c.1500.


Carol

masc. proper name, from Medieval Latin Carolus (see Charles). As a fem. proper name, an abbreviation
of Caroline. The masc. name never has been popular in U.S.; the fem. form was common after c.1900
and was a top-10 name for U.S. girls born 1936-1950.


carol (v.)

c.1300, to dance in a ring, from Old French caroler, from carole (see carol (n.)). As to sing from
late 14c. Related: Caroled; caroling.


Carolina

1663, North American colony named for King Charles II (the Latin form of the male proper name is
Carolus). Earlier French colonists called the region Caroline (1564) in honor of Charles IX, King of
France. A 1629 grant here by Charles I of England was named Carolana. The original site of the name
is modern South Carolina and the tract originally included North Carolina and Georgia; North
Carolina first used 1691, in reference to settlements made from Virginia. The official division into
north and south dates from 1710. Used generically in forming species names in botany and zoology
from 1734.


caroline (adj.)

1650s, of or pertaining to a Charles, from French, from Latin Carolus Charles (see Charles).
Especially of Charlemagne, or, in English history, Charles I and Charles II.


Caroline

fem. proper name, from French, from Italian Carolina, originally a fem. adjective from Medieval
Latin Carolus Charles (see Charles).


caroling (n.)

c.1300, verbal noun from carol (v.).


Carolingian (adj.)

1881, belonging to the dynasty founded by Carl the Great (French Charlemagne), from Latin Carolus
Charles; also compare Carlovingian.


carom (n.)

1779, earlier carambole (1775), from French carambole the red ball in billiards, from Spanish
carombola the red ball in billiards, perhaps originally fruit of the tropical Asian carambola tree,
which is round and orange and supposed to resemble a red billiard ball; from Marathi (southern
Indian) karambal. Originally a type of stroke involving the red ball:    If the Striker hits the Red
and his Adversary's Ball with his own Ball he played with, he wins two Points; which Stroke is
called a Carambole, or for Shortness, a Carrom. [Hoyle's Games Improved, London, 1779]


carom (v.)

1860, from carom (n.). Related: Caromed; caroming.


carotene (n.)

hydrocarbon found in carrots and other plants, 1861, from German carotin, coined 1831 by German
chemist H.W.F. Wackenroder (1789-1854) from Latin carota carrot (see carrot) + German form of
chemical suffix -ine (2), denoting a hydrocarbon.


carotenoid (n.)

1913, from German carotino&#239;de (1911), from carotin (see carotene) + -oid.


carotid (adj.)

1540s, pertaining to the two great arteries of the neck, from Greek karotides great arteries of the
neck, plural of karotis, from karoun plunge into sleep or stupor, because compression of these
arteries was believed to cause unconsciousness (Galen). But if this is folk etymology, the Greek
word could be from kara head, related to kranion skull, upper part of the head, from PIE root *ker-
(1) horn, head (see horn (n.)).


carousal (n.)

1735, from carouse (v.) + -al (2). The earlier noun was simply carouse a drinking bout (1550s).


carouse (v.)

1550s, from Middle French carousser drink, quaff, swill, from German gar aus quite out, from gar
austrinken; trink garaus to drink up entirely. Frequently also as an adverb in early English usage
(to drink carouse).


carousel (n.)

merry-go-round, 1670s, earlier playful tournament of knights in chariots or on horseback (1640s),
from French carrousel a tilting match, from Italian carusiello, possibly from carro chariot, from
Latin carrus (see car).A new and rare invencon knowne by the name of the royalle carousell or
tournament being framed and contrived with such engines as will not only afford great pleasure to us
and our nobility in the sight thereof, but sufficient instruction to all such ingenious young
gentlemen as desire to learne the art of perfect horsemanshipp. [letter of 1673]


carp (n.)

type of freshwater fish, late 14c., from Old French carpe carp (13c.) and directly from Vulgar Latin
carpa (source also of Italian carpa, Spanish carpa), from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch
carpe, Dutch karper, Old High German karpfo, German Karpfen carp); possibly the immediate source is
Gothic *karpa. A Danube fish (hence the proposed East Germanic origin of its name), introduced in
English ponds 14c. Lithuanian karpis, Russian karp are Germanic loan words.


carp (v.)

complain, early 13c., originally to talk, from Old Norse karpa to brag, of unknown origin; meaning
turned toward find fault with (late 14c.), probably by influence of Latin carpere to slander,
revile, literally to pluck (see harvest (n.)). Related: Carped; carping.


carpaccio (n.)

raw meat or fish served as an appetizer, late 20c., from Italian, often connected to the name of
Renaissance painter Vittore Carpaccio (c.1460-1526) but without any plausible explanation except
perhaps that his pictures often feature an orange-red hue reminiscent of some raw meat.


carpal (adj.)

of the wrist, 1743, from Modern Latin carpalis, from carpus wrist (see carpus). Carpal tunnel
syndrome attested by 1970, from carpal tunnel, the tunnel-like passage that carries nerves through
the wrist.


Carpathian

1670s, in reference to the mountain range of Eastern Europe, from Thracian Greek Karpates oros,
literally Rocky Mountain; related to Albanian karpe rock.


carpe diem

1786, Latin, enjoy the day, literally pluck the day (while it is ripe), an aphorism from Horace
(Odes I.xi), from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)).


carpel (n.)

1835, from Modern Latin carpellum (1817 in French), a diminutive form from Greek karpos fruit (also
returns, profit), literally that which is plucked, from PIE root *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest
(see harvest (n.)).


carpenter (n.)

wood-worker, c.1300 (attested from early 12c. as a surname), from Anglo-French carpenter, Old North
French carpentier (Old French and Modern French charpentier), from Late Latin (artifex) carpentarius
wagon (maker), from Latin carpentum wagon, two-wheeled carriage, cart, from Gaulish, from Old Celtic
*carpentom (compare Old Irish carpat, Gaelic carbad carriage), probably related to Gaulish karros
(see car).    Also from the Late Latin word are Spanish carpentero, Italian carpentiero. Replaced
Old English treowwyrhta, literally tree-wright. German Zimmermann carpenter is from Old High German
zimbarman, from zimbar wood for building, timber, cognate with Old Norse timbr (see timber). First
record of carpenter bee is from 1844. A carpenter's rule (1690s) is foldable, suitable for carrying
in the pocket.


carpentry (n.)

late 14c., carpentrie, from Old French carpenterie, charpenterie carpentry (Modern French
charpenterie), from Latin carpentaria (fabrica) carriage-maker's (workshop); see carpenter.


carper (n.)

mid-15c., talker, agent noun from carp (v.).


carpet (n.)

late 13c., coarse cloth; mid-14c., tablecloth, bedspread; from Old French carpite heavy decorated
cloth, carpet, from Medieval Latin or Old Italian carpita thick woolen cloth, probably from Latin
carpere to card, pluck, probably so called because it was made from unraveled, shreded, plucked
fabric; from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)). Meaning shifted 15c. to floor
coverings.    From 16c.-19c. as an adjective often with a tinge of contempt, when used of men (as in
carpet-knight, 1570s) by association with luxury, ladies' boudoirs, and drawing rooms. On the carpet
summoned for reprimand is 1900, U.S. colloquial (but compare carpet (v.) call (someone) to be
reprimanded, 1823, British servants' slang). To sweep or push something under the carpet in the
figurative sense is first recorded 1953.


carpet (v.)

to cover with a carpet, 1620s, from carpet (n.). Meaning call to reprimand is from 1840. Related:
Carpeted; carpeting.


carpetbag (n.)

also carpet-bag, soft-cover traveling case made of carpet fabric, 1830, from carpet (n.) + bag (n.).


carpetbagger (n.)

also carpet-bagger, 1868, American English, scornful appellation for Northerners who went South
after the fall of the CSA seeking private gain or political advancement. The name is based on the
image of men arriving with all their worldly goods in a big carpetbag. Sense later extended to any
opportunist from out of the area.


carpeting (n.)

1758, verbal noun from carpet (v.).


carpo- (1)

word-forming element meaning fruit, from Latinized form of Greek karpo-, comb. form of karpos fruit
(see carpel).


carpo- (2)

word-forming element meaning wrist, from comb. form of Latin carpus, from Greek karpos wrist (see
carpus).


carport (n.)

also car-port, 1939, American English, from car + port (n.1).


carpus (n.)

1670s, from Modern Latin carpus, from Greek karpos wrist, from PIE *kwerp- to turn, revolve (see
wharf).


carrack (n.)

merchant ship, late 14c., from Old French caraque large, square-rigged sailing vessel, from Spanish
carraca, related to Medieval Latin carraca, Italian caracca, all of uncertain origin, perhaps from
Arabic qaraqir, plural of qurqur merchant ship. The Arabic word perhaps was from Latin carricare
(see charge (v.)) or Greek karkouros boat, pinnacle.


carrefour (n.)

late 15c., place where four ways meet, from Old French carrefor (13c., quarrefour), from Latin
quadrifurcus four-forked, from quatuor four (see four) + furca fork (see fork (n.)). Formerly quite
naturalized, but now treated only as French [OED]. Englished variant carfax is from Middle English
carfourkes.


carrel (n.)

1590s, study in a cloister, from Medieval Latin carula small study in a cloister, of unknown origin;
perhaps from Latin corolla little crown, garland, used in various senses of ring (for example, a
c.1330 description of Stonehenge: &thorn;is Bretons renged about &thorn;e feld, &thorn;e karole of
&thorn;e stones beheld); extended to precincts and spaces enclosed by rails, etc. Specific sense of
private cubicle in a library is from 1919.


carriage (n.)

late 14c., act of carrying, means of conveyance; wheeled vehicles collectively, from Anglo-French
and Old North French cariage cart, carriage, action of transporting in a vehicle (Old French
charriage, Modern French charriage), from carier to carry (see carry (v.)). Meaning individual
wheeled vehicle is c.1400; specific sense of horse-drawn, wheeled vehicle for hauling people first
attested 1706; extended to railway cars by 1830. Meaning way of carrying one's body is 1590s.
Carriage-house attested from 1761.


carrier (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from carry (v.). Meaning person or animal that carries and disseminates
infection without suffering obvious disease is from 1899; genetic sense is 1933. As a short form of
aircraft carrier it dates from 1917. Carrier pigeon is from 1640s.


carrion (n.)

early 13c., carione, from Anglo-French carogne (Old North French caroigne; Old French charogne,
12c., carrion, corpse, Modern French charogne), from Vulgar Latin *caronia carcass (source of
Italian carogna, Spanish carro&ntilde;a carrion), from Latin caro meat (see carnage).


carrot (n.)

1530s, from Middle French carrotte, from Latin carota, from Greek karoton carrot, probably from PIE
*kre-, from root *ker- (1) horn, head (see horn (n.)); so called for its horn-like shape.
Originally white-rooted and a medicinal plant to the ancients, who used it as an aphrodisiac and to
prevent poisoning. Not entirely distinguished from parsnips in ancient times. Reintroduced in Europe
by Arabs c.1100. The orange carrot, which existed perhaps as early as 6c., probably began as a
mutation of the Asian purple carrot and was cultivated into the modern edible plant 16c.-17c. in the
Netherlands. Thus the word is used as a color name but not before 1670s in English, originally of
red hair.


carroty (adj.)

1690s, red-haired, from carrot (n.) + -y (2).


carrousel (n.)

variant of carousel.


carry (v.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French carier to transport in a vehicle or Old North French carrier to cart,
carry (Modern French charrier), from Gallo-Roman *carrizare, from Late Latin carricare, from Latin
carrum (see car).    Meaning take by force is from 1580s. Sense of gain victory in an election is
from 1610s. Of sound, to be heard at a distance by 1896. Carrying capacity is attested from 1836.
Carry on continue to advance is from 1640s; carryings-on questionable doings is from 1660s. Carry-
castle (1590s) was an old descriptive term for an elephant.


carry (n.)

c.1600, vehicle for carrying, from carry (v.). U.S. football sense attested by 1949.


carry-all (n.)

1714 as a type of carriage; in the baggage sense from 1884; from carry (v.) + all (n.).


carry-out (adj.)

1935, from the verbal phrase, from carry (v.) + out (adv.).


carsick (adj.)

also car-sick, 1908, on model of seasick, from car (n.) + sick (adj.). Related: Carsickness.


cart (n.)

c.1200, from Old Norse kartr or a similar Scandinavian source, akin to and replacing Old English
cr&aelig;t cart, wagon, chariot, perhaps originally body of a cart made of wickerwork, hamper and
related to Middle Dutch cratte woven mat, hamper, Dutch krat basket, Old English cradol (see cradle
(n.)). To put the cart before the horse in a figurative sense is from 1510s in those words; the
image in other words dates to mid-14c.


cart (v.)

to carry in a cart, late 14c., from cart (n.). Related: Carted; carting.


cart-way (n.)

also cart-way, mid-14c., from cart (n.) + way (n.).


cartage (n.)

c.1300, from cart + -age.


carte blanche (n.)

1707, blank paper, French, literally white paper (see card (n.) + blank (adj.)); figurative sense of
full discretionary power is from 1766.


carte de visite (n.)

1861, French, literally visiting card (see card (n.1)); photograph portrait mounted on a 3.5 by 2.5
inch card.


cartel (n.)

1550s, a written challenge, from Middle French cartel (16c.), from Italian cartello placard,
diminutive of carta card (see card (n.1)). It came to mean written agreement between challengers
(1690s) and then a written agreement between challengers (1889). Sense of a commercial trust, an
association of industrialists comes 1902, via German Kartell, which is from French. The older U.S.
term for that is trust (n.). The usual German name for them was Interessengemeinschaft, abbreviated
IG.


carter (n.)

cart-driver, late 12c., from Anglo-French careter, and in part an agent noun from cart (v.).


Cartesian (adj.)

1650s, from Cartesius, Latinized form of the name of French philosopher and mathematician
Ren&eacute; Descartes (1596-1650), + -ian.


Carthage

ancient city of North Africa, from Phoenician quart khadash new town. Related: Carthaginian.


Carthusian (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin Cartusianus, in reference to an austere order of monks founded 1086 by St.
Bruno at Chartreux, village in Dauphin&eacute;, France.


cartilage (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French cartilage (16c.) and directly from Latin cartilaginem (nominative
cartilago) cartilage, gristle, possibly related to Latin crates wickerwork.


cartilaginous (adj.)

1540s, from French cartilagineux and directly from Latin cartilaginosus, from cartilago (genitive
cartilaginis) cartilage, gristle (see cartilage).


cartography (n.)

1843, from French cartographie, from Medieval Latin carta (see card (n.)) + French -graphie, from
Greek -graphein to write, to draw (see -graphy). Related: Cartographer; cartographic.


carton (n.)

1816, from French carton pasteboard (17c.), from Italian cartone pasteboard, augmentative of
Medieval Latin carta paper (see card (n.)). Originally the material for making paper boxes; extended
1906 to the boxes themselves. As a verb, from 1921.


cartoon (n.)

1670s, a drawing on strong paper (used as a model for another work), from French carton, from
Italian cartone strong, heavy paper, pasteboard, thus preliminary sketches made by artists on such
paper (see carton). Extension to comical drawings in newspapers and magazines is 1843.  Punch has
the benevolence to announce, that in an early number of his ensuing Volume he will astonish the
Parliamentary Committee by the publication of several exquisite designs, to be called Punch's
Cartoons! [Punch, June 24, 1843]  Also see -oon.


cartoon (v.)

1864 (implied in cartooned), from cartoon (n.). Related: Cartooning.


cartoonist (n.)

1855, from cartoon (n.) + -ist.


cartouche (n.)

1610s, scroll-like ornament, also paper cartridge, from French cartouche, the French form of
cartridge (q.v.). Application to Egyptian hieroglyphics dates from 1830, on resemblance to rolled
paper cartridges.


cartridge (n.)

1570s, cartage, corruption of French cartouche a full charge for a pistol, originally wrapped in
paper (16c.), from Italian cartoccio roll of paper, an augmentative form of Medieval Latin carta
paper (see card (n.)). The notion is of a roll of paper containing a charge for a firearm. The
modern form of the English word is recorded from 1620s. Extended broadly 20c. to other small
containers and their contents.


cartwheel (n.)

late 14c., wheel of a cart, from cart (n.) + wheel (n.). Meaning lateral somersault is recorded from
1861; as a verb from 1907. Related: Cartwheeled; cartwheeling.


cartwright (n.)

carpenter who makes carts, early 15c. (late 13c. as a surname), from cart (n.) + wright (n.).


carve (v.)

Old English ceorfan (class III strong verb; past tense cearf, past participle corfen) to cut, cut
down, slay; to carve, cut out, engrave, from West Germanic *kerfan (cognates: Old Frisian kerva,
Middle Dutch and Dutch kerven, German kerben to cut, notch), from PIE root *gerbh- to scratch,
making carve the English cognate of Greek graphein to write, originally to scratch on clay tablets
with a stylus.    Once extensively used, most senses now usurped by cut (v.). Meaning specialized to
sculpture, meat, etc., by 16c. Related: Carved; carving. Original strong conjugation has been
abandoned, but archaic carven lingers.


carver (n.)

late 14c. (late 13c. as a surname), one who carves (in some sense); agent noun from carve (v.). In a
set of dining chairs, the one with the arms, usually at the head of the table, is the carver (1927),
reserved for the one who carves.


carving (n.)

c.1200, verbal noun from carve.


caryatid (n.)

carved female figure used as a column, 1560s, from Middle French cariatide, from Latin caryatides,
from Greek Karyatides (singular Karyatis) priestesses of Artemis at Caryae (Greek Karyai), a town in
Laconia where dance festivals were held in Artemis' temple. Male figures in a like situation are
Atlantes, plural of Atlas.


casaba (n.)

1889, from Kasaba, old name of Turgutlu, in Aegean Turkey, whence the melons were imported to U.S.
The old name is literally the town.


Casablanca

city in Morocco, Spanish, literally white house (see casino, blank (adj.)).


Casanova (n.)

man of carnal adventures, connoisseur of seduction, 1888, from Giacomo Girolamo Casanova de Seignalt
(1725-1798), the infamous debaucher. His name could be Englished as Jacob Jerome Newhouse, which is
somewhat less romantic.


casbah (n.)

1738, from French casbah, from North African Arabic dialect kasba fortress.


cascade (n.)

1640s, from French cascade (17c.), from Italian cascata waterfall, from cascare to fall, from Vulgar
Latin *casicare, frequentative of Latin casum, casus, past participle of cadere to fall (see case
(n.1)).


cascade (v.)

1702, from cascade (n.). In early 19c. slang, to vomit. Related: Cascaded; cascading.


case (n.1)

early 13c., what befalls one; state of affairs, from Old French cas an event, happening, situation,
quarrel, trial, from Latin casus a chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, mishap, literally a
falling, from cas-, past participle stem of cadere to fall, sink, settle down, decline, perish (used
widely: of the setting of heavenly bodies, the fall of Troy, suicides), from PIE root *kad- to lay
out, fall or make fall, yield, break up (cognates: Sanskrit sad- to fall down, Armenian chacnum to
fall, become low, perhaps also Middle Irish casar hail, lightning). The notion being that which
falls as that which happens (compare befall).    Meaning instance, example is from c.1300. Meaning
actual state of affairs is from c.1400. Given widespread extended and transferred senses in English
in law (16c.), medicine (18c.), etc.; the grammatical sense (late 14c.) was in Latin. U.S. slang
meaning person is from 1848. In case in the event is recorded from mid-14c. Case history is from
1879, originally medical; case study study of a particular case is from 1879, originally legal.


case (n.2)

receptacle, early 14c., from Anglo-French and Old North French casse (Old French chasse case,
reliquary; Modern French ch&acirc;sse), from Latin capsa box, repository (especially for books),
from capere to take, hold (see capable).    Meaning outer protective covering is from late 14c. Also
used from 1660s with a sense frame (as in staircase, casement). Artillery sense is from 1660s, from
case-shot small projectiles put in cases (1620s). Its application in the printing trade (first
recorded 1580s) to the two trays where compositors keep their types in separate compartments for
easy access led to upper-case letter for a capital (1862) and lower-case for small letters.    The
cases, or receptacles, for the type, which are always in pairs, and termed the 'upper' and the
'lower,' are formed of two oblong wooden frames, divided into compartments or boxes of different
dimensions, the upper case containing ninety-eight and the lower fifty-four. In the upper case are
placed the capital, small capital, and accented letters, also figures, signs for reference to notes
&amp;c.; in the lower case the ordinary running letter, points for punctuation, spaces for
separating the words, and quadrats for filling up the short lines. [The Literary Gazette, Jan. 29,
1859]


case (v.)

enclose in a case, 1570s, from case (n.2). Related: Cased; casing. Meaning examine, inspect (usually
prior to robbing) is from 1915, American English slang, perhaps from the notion of giving a place a
look on all sides (compare technical case (v.) cover the outside of a building with a different
material, 1707).


case-work (n.)

1896, from case (n.1) in the clinical sense + work (n.). Related: Case-worker (1909).


casein (n.)

principal protein-constituent of milk, forming the basis of cheese, 1841, from French
cas&eacute;ine, from Latin caseus cheese (see cheese (n.1)) + chemical suffix -ine (2).


casement (n.)

type of hinged sash-window that swings open like doors, early 15c., hollow molding, probably a
shortening of Old French dialectal enchassement window frame (Modern French ench&#226;ssement), from
en- in, prefix forming verbs, + casse case, frame (see case (n.2)) + -ment. Or possibly from Anglo-
Latin cassementum, from casse. The window sense is from 1550s in English. Old folk etymology tended
to make it gazement.    The Irish surname is originally Mc Casmonde (attested from 1429), from Mac
Asmundr, from Irish mac son of + Old Norse Asmundr god protector.


caseous (adj.)

cheese-like, 1660s, from Latin caseus cheese (see cheese (n.1)) + -ous.


cash (n.)

1590s, money box; also money in hand, coin, from Middle French caisse money box (16c.), from
Proven&ccedil;al caissa or Italian cassa, from Latin capsa box (see case (n.2)); originally the
money box, but the secondary sense of the money in it became sole meaning 18c. Cash crop is attested
from 1831; cash flow from 1954; the mechanical cash register from 1878.    Like many financial terms
in English (bankrupt, etc.), ultimately from Italian. Not related to (but influencing the form of)
the colonial British cash Indian monetary system, Chinese coin, etc., which is from Tamil kasu,
Sanskrit karsha, Sinhalese kasi.


cash (v.)

to convert to cash (as a check, etc.), 1811, from cash (n.). Related: Cashed; cashing.


cashew (n.)

1703, a shortening of French acajou, from older Portuguese acaj&uacute; from Tupi (Brazil) acajuba,
name of the tree that produces the nut.


cashier (n.)

person in charge of money, 1590s, from Middle French caissier treasurer, from caisse money box (see
cash (n.)). The immediate source of the English word might be Middle Dutch kassier.


cashier (v.)

dismiss, 1590s, from Middle Dutch casseren, kaseeren to cast off, discharge, from French casser to
discharge, annul, from Late Latin cassare annul, from Latin cassus void, empty (see caste (n.)).
Related: Cashiered; cashiering.


cashmere (n.)

1680s, shawl made of cashmere wool, from the old spelling of Kashmir, Himalayan kingdom where wool
was obtained from long-haired goats. As a name for this kind of woolen fabric, favored for shawls,
etc., it is attested from 1822.


Casimir

masc. proper name, from Medieval Latin Casimirus from Polish Kazimierz, literally proclaimer of
peace, from kaza&#263; to preach + mir peace (see Mir).


casing (n.)

1570s, action of fitting with a case, verbal noun from case (v.). Meaning a covering is from 1839.


casino (n.)

1744, public room for music or dancing, from Italian casino, literally a little house, diminutive of
casa house, from Latin casa hut, cottage, cabin, of uncertain origin. The card game (also cassino)
is attested by that name from 1792. Specifically as building for aristocratic gambling by 1820,
first in an Italian context.    [T]he term Casino [is] indiscriminately applied to a set of farm
offices, a country-seat, a gambling house, and a game of cards ... [Jane Waldie Watts, Sketches
Descriptive of Italy in the Years 1816 and 1817, London 1820]


cask (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French casque cask; helmet, from Spanish casco skull, cask, helmet, originally
potsherd, from cascar to break up, from Vulgar Latin *quassicare, frequentative of Latin quassare to
shake, shatter (see quash). The sense evolution is unclear.


casket (n.)

mid-15c., small box for jewels, etc., possibly a diminutive of English cask, or from a corruption of
Middle French casset (see cassette). Meaning coffin is American English, probably euphemistic,
attested by 1832.Caskets! a vile modern phrase, which compels a person ... to shrink ... from the
idea of being buried at all. [Hawthorne, Our Old Home, 1863]


Caspian

inland sea of central Asia, 1580s, from Latin Caspius, from Greek Kaspios, named for native people
who lived on its shores (but who were said to be originally from the Caucasus), Latin Caspii, from a
native self-designation, perhaps literally white.


casque (n.)

armor for the head, 1570s, from French casque (see cask).


Cassandra

fem. proper name, from Greek Kasandra, Kassandra, daughter of Priam of Troy, seduced by Apollo who
gave her the gift of prophecy, but when she betrayed him he amended it so that, though she spoke
truth, none would believe her. Used figuratively since 1660s.    The name is of uncertain origin,
though the second element looks like a fem. form of Greek andros of man, male human being. Watkins
suggests PIE *(s)kand- to shine as source of second element, hence possibly praise of men.


cassation (n.)

anullment, early 15c., from Old French cassation, from casser, from Late Latin cassare, from Latin
quassare (see quash).


cassava (n.)

1560s, from French cassave, Spanish casabe, or Portuguese cassave, from Taino (Haiti) ca&ccedil;abi.
Earlier in English as cazabbi (1550s).


casserole (n.)

1706, stew pan, from French casserole sauce pan (16c.), diminutive of Middle French casse pan
(14c.), from Proven&ccedil;al cassa melting pan, from Medieval Latin cattia pan, vessel, possibly
from Greek kyathion, diminutive of kyathos cup for the wine bowl. Originally the pan, since c.1930
also of the dishes cooked in it, via cookery phrases such as en casserole, &agrave; la casserole.


cassette (n.)

1793, little box, from French cassette, from Middle French casset, diminutive of Old North French
casse box (see case (n.2)). Meaning magnetic tape recorder cartridge is from 1960.


cassia (n.)

cinnamon-like plant, late Old English, from Latin cassia, from Greek kasia, from Hebrew q'tsi-ah
cassia, from qatsa to cut off, strip off bark.


Cassiopeia (n.)

northern constellation, in Greek mythology queen of Ethiopia and mother of Andromeda, from Latinized
form of Greek Kassiepeia, Kassiopeia, of unknown etymology. Related: Cassiopeian.


cassis (n.)

black currant liquor, 1907, from French cassis (16c.) black currant, apparently from Latin cassia
(see cassia). The modern liqueur dates from mid-19c.


Cassius

Roman gens, one of the oldest families of Rome. The conspirator against Caesar was C. Cassius
Longinus.


cassock (n.)

1540s, long loose gown, from Middle French casaque long coat (16c.), probably ultimately from
Turkish quzzak nomad, adventurer, (the source of Cossack), from their typical riding coat. Or
perhaps from Arabic kazagand, from Persian kazhagand padded coat, from kazh raw silk + agand
stuffed. Chiefly a soldier's cloak 16c.-17c.; ecclesiastical use is from 1660s.


cassowary (n.)

1610s, via French or Dutch, from Malay kasuari.


cast (v.)

c.1200, to throw, fling, hurl, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse kasta to throw (cognate
with Swedish kasta, Danish kaste, North Frisian kastin), of uncertain origin. Meaning to form in a
mold is late 15c. In the sense of warp, turn it replaced Old English weorpan (see warp (v.)), and
itself largely has been superseded now by throw, though cast still is used of fishing lines and
glances. Meaning calculate, find by reckoning; chart (a course) is from c.1300.


cast (n.)

mid-13c., a throw, an act of throwing, from cast (v.). In early use especially of dice, hence
figurative uses relating to fortune or fate. Meaning that which is cast is from c.1550s. Meaning
dash or shade of color is from c.1600. The sense of a throw carried an idea of the form the thing
takes after it has been thrown, which led to widespread and varied meanings, such as group of actors
in a play (1630s). OED finds 42 distinct noun meaning and 83 verbal ones, with many sub-definitions.
Many of the figurative senses converged in a general meaning sort, kind, style (mid-17c.). A cast in
the eye (early 14c.) preserves the older verbal sense of warp, turn.


cast iron (n.)

1660s, from cast (past participle adjective) made by melting and being left to harden in a mold
(1530s), from past participle of cast (v.) in sense to throw something in a particular way (c.1300),
especially form metal into a shape by pouring it molten (1510s). From 1690s as an adjective, cast-
iron.


cast-off (n.)

1741, from verbal phrase (c.1400), from cast (v.) + off (adv.). From 1746 as a past participle
adjective.


castanet (n.)

usually castanets, 1640s, from French castagnette or directly from Spanish casta&ntilde;eta
diminutive of casta&ntilde;a chestnut, from Latin castanea (see chestnut).


castaway (n.)

late 15c., one who is rejected, from the verbal phrase (c.1300, literal and figurative), from cast
(v.) + away (adv.). Specific sense one adrift at sea is from 1799. The adjective is first recorded
1540s.


caste (n.)

1550s, a race of men, from Latin castus chaste, from castus cut off, separated; pure (via notion of
cut off from faults), past participle of carere to be cut off from (and related to castration), from
PIE *kas-to-, from root *kes- to cut (cognates: Latin cassus empty, void). Originally spelled cast
in English and later often merged with cast (n.) in its secondary sense sort, kind, style.
Application to Hindu social groups was picked up by English in India 1610s from Portuguese casta
breed, race, caste, earlier casta ra&ccedil;a, unmixed race, from the same Latin word. The current
spelling of of the English word is from this reborrowing. Caste system is first recorded 1840.


castellan (n.)

late 14c., from Old North French castelain (Modern French ch&acirc;telaine; see chatelaine).


castellated (adj.)

furnished with turrets and battlements, 1670s, from Medieval Latin castellatus built like a castle,
past participle of castellare to fortify as a castle, from Latin castellum fort (see castle (n.)).
Related: Castellation.


caster (n.1)

person or thing that casts, late 14c. (also sometimes castor), agent noun from cast (v.). Meaning
pepper shaker, small perforated container is from 1670s, on notion of throwing.


caster (n.2)

wheel and swivel attached to furniture, 1748, agent noun from cast (v.) in the old sense of turn.
Also sometimes castor.


castigate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin castigatus, past participle of castigare to correct, set right; purify; chastise,
punish, from castus pure (see caste) + agere to do (see act (n.)). The notion behind the word is
make someone pure by correcting or reproving him.If thou didst put this soure cold habit on To
castigate thy pride, 'twere well. [Shakespeare, Timon IV.iii (1607)]  Related: Castigated;
castigating; castigator; castigatory.


castigation (n.)

late 14c., castigacioun, from Latin castigationem (nominative castigatio) a correcting, reproof,
chastizing, noun of action from past participle stem of castigare (see castigate).


Castile

medieval Spanish county and later kingdom, from Vulgar Latin castilla, from Latin castella, plural
of castellum castle, fort, citadel, stronghold (see castle (n.)); so called in reference to the many
fortified places there during the Moorish wars. The name in Spanish is said to date back to c.800.
Related: Castilian. As a fine kind of soap, in English from 1610s.


casting (n.)

c.1300, a throwing; late 14c., a metal casting, a product of a cast; verbal noun from cast (v.).
Theatrical sense is from 1814. Casting couch in the naughty-Hollywood sense is from 1948.


castle (n.)

late Old English castel village (this sense from a biblical usage in Vulgar Latin); later large
fortified building, stronghold, in this sense from Old North French castel (Old French chastel,
12c.; Modern French ch&acirc;teau), from Latin castellum a castle, fort, citadel, stronghold;
fortified village, diminutive of castrum fort, from Proto-Italic *kastro- part, share; cognate with
Old Irish cather, Welsh caer town (and perhaps related to castrare via notion of cut off; see
caste). In early bibles, castle was used to translate Greek kome village.    This word also had come
to Old English as ceaster and formed the -caster and -chester in place names. Spanish alcazar castle
is from Arabic al-qasr, from Latin castrum. Castles in Spain translates 14c. French chastel en
Espaigne (the imaginary castles sometimes stood in Brie, Asia, or Albania) and probably reflects the
hopes of landless knights to establish themselves abroad. The statement that an (English) man's home
is his castle is from 16c.


castle (v.)

move in chess, recorded under this name from 1650s, from castle (n.), as an old alternative name for
the rook, one of the pieces moved. Related: Castled; castling.


castor (n.)

late 14c., beaver, from Old French castor (13c.), from Latin castor beaver, from Greek Kastor,
literally he who excels, name of one of the divine twins (with Pollux), worshipped by women in
ancient Greece as a healer and preserver from disease.    His name was given to secretions of the
animal (Latin castoreum), used medicinally in ancient times. (Through this association his name
replaced the native Latin word for beaver, which was fiber.) In English, castor is attested in this
sense from c.1600. Modern castor oil is first recorded 1746; it is made from seeds of the plant
Ricinus communis but supposedly possesses laxative qualities (and taste) similar to those of beaver
juice, and thus so named.


castrate (v.)

1610s (implied in castrated), back-formation from castration (q.v.), or from Latin castratus, past
participle of castrare. The figurative sense is attested earlier (1550s). Related: Castrating.


castrati (n.)

plural of castrato.


castration (n.)

early 15c., castracioun, from Latin castrationem (nominative castratio), noun of action from past
participle stem of castrare to castrate, emasculate, supposedly from a noun *castrum knife,
instrument that cuts, from PIE root *kes- to cut (see caste). Freud's castration complex is attested
from 1914 in English (translating German Kastrationsangst).


castrato (n.)

1763, from Italian castrato, from Latin castratus (see castration).


casual (adj.)

late 14c., subject to or produced by chance, from Middle French casuel (15c.), from Late Latin
casualis by chance, from Latin casus chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, event (see case
(n.1)).    Of persons, in the sense of not to be depended on, unmethodical, it is attested from
1883; meaning showing lack of interest is from 1916. Of clothes, informal, from 1939. Related:
Casually.


casualness (n.)

1730, from casual (adj.) + -ness.


casualty (n.)

early 15c., chance, accident; incidental charge, from casual (adj.) on model of royalty, penalty,
etc. Casuality had some currency 16c.-17c. but is now obsolete. Meaning losses in numbers from a
military or other troop is from late 15c. Meaning an individual killed,  wounded, or lost in battle
is from 1844.


casuist (n.)

c.1600, one who studies and resolves cases of conscience, from French casuiste (17c.) or Spanish
casuista (the French word also might be from Spanish), Italian casista, all from Latin casus (see
case (n.1)) in its Medieval Latin sense case of conscience. Often since 17c. in a sinister or
contemptuous sense. Related: Casuistic; casuistical; casuistically; casuistry.  Casuistry ...
destroys, by distinctions and exceptions, all morality, and effaces the essential difference between
right and wrong. [Bolingbroke, 1736]


casus belli (n.)

1849, from Latin casus case (see case (n.1)) + belli, genitive of bellum war (see bellicose). An act
justifying war.


cat (n.)

Old English catt (c.700), from West Germanic (c.400-450), from Proto-Germanic *kattuz (cognates: Old
Frisian katte, Old Norse k&ouml;ttr, Dutch kat, Old High German kazza, German Katze), from Late
Latin cattus.    The near-universal European word now, it appeared in Europe as Latin catta
(Martial, c.75 C.E.), Byzantine Greek katta (c.350) and was in general use on the continent by
c.700, replacing Latin feles. Probably ultimately Afro-Asiatic (compare Nubian kadis, Berber
kadiska, both meaning cat). Arabic qitt tomcat may be from the same source. Cats were domestic in
Egypt from c.2000 B.C.E., but not a familiar household animal to classical Greeks and Romans. The
nine lives have been proverbial since at least 1560s.    The Late Latin word also is the source of
Old Irish and Gaelic cat, Welsh kath, Breton kaz, Italian gatto, Spanish gato, French chat (12c.).
Independent, but ultimately from the same source are words in the Slavic group: Old Church Slavonic
kotuka, kotel'a, Bulgarian kotka, Russian ko&#353;ka, Polish kot, along with Lithuanian kate and
non-Indo-European Finnish katti, which is from Lithuanian.    Extended to lions, tigers, etc.
c.1600. As a term of contempt for a woman, from early 13c. Slang sense of prostitute is from at
least c.1400. Slang sense of fellow, guy, is from 1920, originally in U.S. Black English; narrower
sense of jazz enthusiast is recorded from 1931.   Cat's paw (1769, but cat's foot in the same sense,
1590s) refers to old folk tale in which the monkey tricks the cat into pawing chestnuts from a fire;
the monkey gets the nuts, the cat gets a burnt paw. Cat bath hurried or partial cleaning is from
1953. Cat burglar is from 1907, so called for stealth. Cat-witted small-minded, obstinate, and
spiteful (1670s) deserved to survive. For Cat's meow, cat's pajamas, see bee's knees.


CAT

1975, medical acronym for computerized axial tomography or something like it. Related: CAT scan.


cat-o&#039;-nine-tails (n.)

1690s, probably so called in reference to its claws. It was a legal instrument of punishment in
British Navy until 1881.


cata-

word-forming element from Latinized form of Greek kata-, before vowels kat-, from kata down from,
down to. Its principal sense is down, but occasionally it has senses of against (catapult)or wrongly
(catachresis). Also sometimes used as an intensive or with a sense of completion of action
(catalogue). Very active in ancient Greek, this prefix is found in English mostly in words borrowed
through Latin after c.1500.


catabolic (adj.)

1876; see catabolism + -ic.


catabolism (n.)

1876, katabolism, destructive metabolism, from Greek katabole a throwing down (also a foundation),
from kataballein to throw down, from kata- down (see cata-) + ballein to throw (see ballistics).
Barnhart says probably formed in English on the model of metabolism. Spelling Latinized from 1889.


catachresis (n.)

1580s, from Latin catachresis, from Greek katakhresis misuse (of a word), from katakhresthai to
misuse, from kata- down (here with a sense of perversion; see cata-) + khresthai to use (see
hortatory). Related: Catachrestic; catachrestical; catachrestically.


cataclysm (n.)

1630s, from French cataclysme (16c.), from Latin cataclysmos or directly from Greek kataklysmos
deluge, flood, inundation, from kataklyzein to deluge, from kata down (see cata-) + klyzein to wash,
from PIE *kleue- to wash, clean (see cloaca).


cataclysmic (adj.)

1837, from cataclysm + -ic. Related: Cataclysmical (1857); cataclysmically.


catacomb (n.)

usually catacombs, from Old English catacumbas, from Late Latin (400 C.E.) catacumbae (plural),
originally the region of underground tombs between the 2nd and 3rd milestones of the Appian Way
(where the bodies of apostles Paul and Peter, among others, were said to have been laid), origin
obscure, perhaps once a proper name, or dissimilation from Latin cata tumbas at the graves, from
cata- among + tumbas. accusative plural of tumba tomb (see tomb).    If so, the word perhaps was
altered by influence of Latin -cumbere to lie. From the same source are French catacombe, Italian
catacomba, Spanish catacumba. Extended by 1836 in English to any subterranean receptacle of the dead
(as in Paris). Related: Catacumbal.


catafalque (n.)

1640s, from French catafalque (17c.), from Italian catafalco scaffold, from Vulgar Latin
*catafalicum, from Greek kata- down (see cata-), used in Medieval Latin with a sense of beside,
alongside + fala scaffolding, wooden siege tower, a word said to be of Etruscan origin. The Medieval
Latin word also yielded Old French chaffaut, chafaud (Modern French &#233;chafaud) scaffold.


Catalan (adj.)

pertaining to Catalonia, also as a noun, person from Catalonia, late 15c., from the indigenous name,
which is of Celtic origin and probably means chiefs of battle. As a noun meaning a Catalan, Middle
English used Catelaner (mid-14c.), Catellain (early 15c., from French). As a language name in
English by 1792. Related: Catalonian (1707).


catalectic (adj.)

1580s, in a line of verse, wanting an unaccented syllable in the last foot, from Late Latin
catalecticus, from Greek katalektikos leaving off, from kata- down (see cata-) + legein to leave
off, cease from, from PIE *(s)leg- to be slack, be languid (see lax). A complete line is said to be
acatalectic.


catalepsy (n.)

late 14c., cathalempsia, from Medieval Latin catalepsia, from Late Latin catalepsis, from Greek
katalepsis a seizure, a seizing upon, a taking possession, from kataleptos seized, from
katalambanein to seize upon, from kata- down (see cata-) + lambanein to take (see analemma).


cataleptic (adj.)

1680s, from Late Latin catalepticus, from Greek kataleptikos, from kataleptos (see catalepsy). The
noun meaning one affected by catalepsy is from 1851.


catalog

see catalogue.


catalogue (n.)

early 15c., from Old French catalogue list, index (14c.), and directly from Late Latin catalogus,
from Greek katalogos a list, register, enrollment (such as the katalogos neon, the catalogue of
ships in the Iliad), from kata down; completely (see cata-) + legein to say, count (see lecture
(n.)).


catalogue (v.)

1590s, to make a catalogue; see catalogue (n.). From 1630s as to enter into a catalogue. Related:
Catalogued; cataloguing.


catalpa (n.)

c.1740, from an American Indian language of the Carolinas, perhaps Creek (Muskogean) /katalpa/,
literally head-wing.


catalyse (v.)

variant spelling of catalyze (q.v.); for spelling, see -ize. Related: Catalysed; catalysing.


catalysis (n.)

1650s, dissolution, from Latinized form of Greek katalysis dissolution, a dissolving (of
governments, military units, etc.), from katalyein to dissolve, from kata- down (or completely), see
cata-, + lyein to loosen (see lose). Chemical sense change caused by an agent which itself remains
unchanged is attested from 1836, introduced by Swedish chemist J&ouml;ns Jakob Berzelius
(1779-1848).


catalyst (n.)

substance which speeds a chemical reaction but itself remains unchanged, 1902, formed in English (on
analogy of analyst) from catalysis. Figurative use by 1943.


catalytic (adj.)

1836, from Latinized form of Greek katalytikos able to dissolve, from katalyein (see catalysis).


catalyze (v.)

1890, back-formation from catalysis on model of analyze/analysis. Related: Catalyzed; catalyzing.
Probably influenced by French catalyser (1842).


catamaran (n.)

East Indies log raft, 1670s, from Tamil kattu-maram tied wood, from kattu tie, binding + maram wood,
tree.


catamite (n.)

boy used in pederasty, 1590s, from Latin Catamitus, corruption of Ganymedes, the name of the beloved
cup-bearer of Jupiter (see Ganymede). Cicero used it as a contemptuous insult against Antonius.


catamount (n.)

1660s, shortening of cat-o'-mountain (1610s), from cat of the mountain (early 15c.), a name aplied
to various types of wildcat.


cataphract (n.)

coat of mail, Middle English, from Latin cataphractes breastplate of iron scales, from Greek
kataphraktes coat of mail, from kataphraktos covered up, from kataphrassein to fortify, from kata
entirely (see cata-) + phrassein to fence around, enclose, defend (see diaphragm).


cataplexy (n.)

the state of an animal when it is feigning death, 1883, from German kataplexie, from Greek
kataplexis stupefaction, amazement, consternation, from kataplessein to strike down (with fear,
etc.), from kata- down (see cata-) + plessein to strike, hit, from PIE *plak- (2) to strike (see
plague (n.)). Related: Cataplectic.


catapult (n.)

1570s, from Middle French catapulte and directly from Latin catapulta war machine for throwing, from
Greek katapeltes, from kata against (see cata-) + base of pallein to toss, hurl (see pulse (n.1)).
As an airplane-launching device on an aircraft-carrier by 1927.


catapult (v.)

1848, to throw with a catapult, from catapult (n.). Intransitive sense by 1928. Related: Catapulted;
catapulting.


cataract (n.)

early 15c., a waterfall, floodgate, from Latin cataracta waterfall, from Greek katarhaktes
waterfall, broken water; a kind of portcullis, noun use of an adjective compound meaning swooping,
down-rushing, from kata down (see cata-). The second element is traced either to arhattein to strike
hard (in which case the compound is kat-arrhattein), or to rhattein to dash, break.    Its
alternative sense in Latin of portcullis probably was passed through French to form the English
meaning eye disease (early 15c.), on the notion of obstruction (to eyesight).


catarrh (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin catarrus, from Late Latin catarrhus, from Greek katarrhous a catarrh,
a head cold, literally a flowing down, earlier kata rrhoos, ultimately from kata- down (see cata-) +
rhein to flow (see rheum). Related: Catarrhalcatarrhous.


catastrophe (n.)

1530s, reversal of what is expected (especially a fatal turning point in a drama), from Latin
catastropha, from Greek katastrophe an overturning; a sudden end, from katastrephein to overturn,
turn down, trample on; to come to an end, from kata down (see cata-) + strephein turn (see strophe).
Extension to sudden disaster is first recorded 1748.


catastrophic (adj.)

1824, from catastrophe + -ic. Related: Catastrophical; catastrophically.


catastrophism (n.)

as a geological or biological theory, 1869, coined by Huxley from catastrophe + -ism.    By
CATASTROPHISM I mean any form of geological speculation which, in order to account for the phenomena
of geology, supposes the operation of forces different in their nature, or immeasurably different in
power, from those which we at present see in action in the universe. [T.H. Huxley, Address to the
Geological Society of London, Feb. 19, 1869]    Related: Catastrophist.


catatonia (n.)

1888, from medical Latin catatonia; replacing katatonia (1880s), which was formed directly from
Greek kata- down (see cata-) + tonos tone (see tenet).


catatonic (adj.)

1899, from catatonia + -ic. As a noun from 1902.


catawampus (adj.)

also catawampous, cattywampus, catiwampus, etc. (see Dictionary of American Slang for more),
American colloquial. First element perhaps from obsolete cater to set or move diagonally (see catty-
cornered); second element perhaps related to Scottish wampish to wriggle, twist, or swerve about. Or
perhaps simply the sort of jocular pseudo-classical formation popular in the slang of those times,
with the first element suggesting Greek kata-.    Earliest use seems to be in adverbial form,
catawampusly (1834), expressing no certain meaning but adding intensity to the action: utterly,
completely; with avidity, fiercely, eagerly. It appears as a noun from 1843, as a name for an
imaginary hobgoblin or fright, perhaps from influence of catamount. The adjective is attested from
the 1840s as an intensive, but this is only in British lampoons of American speech and might not be
authentic. It was used in the U.S. by 1864 in a sense of askew, awry, wrong and by 1873 (noted as a
peculiarity of North Carolina speech) as in a diagonal position, on a bias, crooked.


Catawba (n.)

type of American grape, 1857, the name is that of a river in South Carolina, U.S., where the grape
was found. The river is named for the Katahba Indian group and language (Siouan), from katapu fork
of a stream, itself a Muskogean loan-word.


catbird (n.)

1731, common name for the North American thrush (Dumetella Carolinensis), so called from its warning
cry, which resembles that of a cat; from cat (n.) + bird (n.1). Catbird seat is a 19c. Dixieism,
popularized by Brooklyn Dodgers baseball announcer Red Barber and by author James Thurber (1942).She
must be a Dodger fan, he had said. Red Barber announces the Dodger games over the radio and he uses
those expressions--picked 'em up down South. Joey had gone on to explain one or two. Tearing up the
pea patch meant going on a rampage; sitting in the catbird seat means sitting pretty, like a batter
with three balls and no strikes on him. [James Thurber, The Catbird Seat, The New Yorker, Nov. 14,
1942]


catcall (n.)

1650s, a type of noisemaker (Johnson describes it as a squeaking instrument) used to express
dissatisfaction in play-houses, from cat (n.) + call (n.); presumably because it sounded like an
angry cat. As a verb, attested from 1734.


catch (v.)

c.1200, to take, capture, from Anglo-French or Old North French cachier catch, capture (animals)
(Old French chacier hunt, pursue, drive (animals), Modern French chasser to hunt; making it a
doublet of chase (v.)), from Vulgar Latin *captiare try to seize, chase (also source of Spanish
cazar, Italian cacciare), from Latin captare to take, hold, frequentative of Latin capere to take,
hold (see capable).    Senses in early Middle English also included chase, hunt, which later went
with chase (v.). Of infections from 1540s; of fire from 1734; of sleep, etc., from early 14c.
Related: Catched (obsolete); catching; caught.    Meaning act as a catcher in baseball recorded from
1865. To catch on apprehend is 1884, American English colloquial. To catch (someone's) eye is first
attested 1813, in Jane Austen. Catch as catch can first attested late 14c.


catch (n.)

late 14c., device to hold a latch of a door, also a trap; also a fishing vessel, from catch (v.).
Meaning action of catching attested from 1570s. Meaning that which is caught or worth catching
(later especially of spouses) is from 1590s. Sense of hidden cost, qualification, etc. is slang
first recorded 1855 in P.T. Barnum.


Catch-22 (n.)

from the title of Joseph Heller's 1961 novel. In widespread use only after release of the movie
based on the book in 1970. The catch is that a bomber pilot is insane if he flies combat missions
without asking to be relieved from duty, and is thus eligible to be relieved from duty. But if he
asks to be relieved from duty, that means he's sane and has to keep flying.  There was only one
catch and that was Catch-22, which specified that a concern for one's safety in the face of dangers
that were real and immediate was the process of a rational mind. Orr was crazy and could be
grounded. All he had to do was ask; and as soon as he did, he would no longer be crazy and would
have to fly more missions. Orr would be crazy to fly more missions and sane if he didn't, but if he
was sane he had to fly them. If he flew them he was crazy and didn't have to; but if he didn't want
to he was sane and had to. Yossarian was moved very deeply by the absolute simplicity of this clause
of Catch-22 and let out a respectful whistle.  That's some catch, that Catch-22, he observed.It's
the best there is, Doc Daneeka agreed.  See catch (n.).


catch-all (n.)

also catchall, 1838, from catch (v.) + all.


catch-up (n.)

a working to overtake a leading rival, by 1971, probably a figurative use from U.S. football in
reference to being behind in the score. From verbal phrase catch up, which was used from early 14c.
in sense raise aloft and from 1855 in sense overtake; see catch (v.) + up (adv.).


catcher (n.)

one who catches, in any sense, mid-14c., agent noun from catch (v.).


catching (adj.)

1580s, of diseases, present participle adjective from catch (v.). From 1650s as captivating.
Related: Catchingly.


catchment (n.)

1844, from catch (v.) + -ment.


catchphrase (n.)

also catch-phrase, 1837, from catch (v.) + phrase (n.). The notion is of words that will catch in
the mind (compare catchword).


catchpoll (n.)

Old English *k&aelig;cepol tax-gatherer, from Old North French cachepol (Old French chacepol), from
Medieval Latin cacepollus a tax gatherer, literally chase-chicken. For first element see chase (v.),
for second see pullet. In lieu of taxes they would confiscate poultry. Later in English more
specifically as a sheriff's officer whose duty was to make arrests for debt. Compare Old French
chacipolerie tax paid to a nobleman by his subjects allowing them and their families to shelter in
his castle in wartime.


catchup (n.)

see ketchup.


catchword (n.)

1730, the first word of the following page inserted at the lower right-hand corner of each page of a
book, from catch (v.) + word (n.); extended to word caught up and repeated (especially in the
political sense) by 1795. The literal sense is extinct; the figurative sense thrives.


catchy (adj.)

1831, from catch (v.) + -y (2). Considered colloquial at first. Related: Catchiness.


catechesis (n.)

from Greek katekhesis instruction by word of mouth, from katekhein to instruct orally, originally to
resound (with sense evolution via to sound (something) in someone's ear; to teach by word of mouth.
From kata- down (in this case, thoroughly) + ekhein to sound, ring, from ekhe sound, from PIE
*(s)wagh- to resound (see echo (n.)). Related: Catachectic; catachectical.


catechise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of catechize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Catechised;
catechising.


catechism (n.)

c.1500, instruction in Christian principles, also elementary question-and-answer book of religious
instruction, from French cat&#233;chisme (14c.) and directly from Church Latin catechismus book of
instruction, from Greek katekhismos, from katekhizein to teach orally (see catechize). Related:
Catechismal.


catechist (n.)

1560s, from Church Latin catechista, from Greek katekhistes one who catechizes, from katekhizein to
teach orally (see catechize). Related: Catechistic; catechistical.


catechize (v.)

early 15c., from Church Latin catechizare to teach by word of mouth (also source of French
cat&#233;chiser, Spanish catequizar, Italian catechizzare), from Greek katekhizein teach orally,
instruct by word of mouth, from katekhein to resound (see catechesis). Related: Catechized;
catechizing.


catecholamine (n.)

type of hormone, from catechol (1880), from catechu, 17c. name for an astringent substance used in
medicines, dyeing, etc., which apparently is from Malay kachu.


catechumen (n.)

new convert, 15c., from French cat&eacute;chum&egrave;ne, from Church Latin catechumenus, from Greek
katekhoumenos one being instructed, passive present participle of katekhein (see catechesis).


categorical (adj.)

1590s, as a term in logic, unqualified, asserting absolutely, from Late Latin categoricus, from
Greek kategorikos accusatory, affirmative, categorical, from kategoria (see category). General sense
of explicit, unconditional is from 1610s. Categorical imperative, from the philosophy of Kant, first
recorded 1827. Related: Categorically.


categorization (n.)

1866, noun of action from categorize. Perhaps influenced by French cat&eacute;gorisation (1845).


categorize (v.)

1705, from category + -ize. Related: Categorized; categorizing.


category (n.)

1580s, from Middle French cat&eacute;gorie, from Late Latin categoria, from Greek kategoria
accusation, prediction, category, verbal noun from kategorein to speak against; to accuse, assert,
predicate, from kata down to (or perhaps against; see cata-) + agoreuein to harangue, to declaim (in
the assembly), from agora public assembly (see agora). Original sense of accuse weakened to assert,
name by the time Aristotle applied kategoria to his 10 classes of things that can be named.
<b>category</b> should be used by no-one who is not prepared to state (1) that he does not mean
class, &amp; (2) that he knows the difference between the two .... [Fowler]


catenary (adj.)

1872, from Latin catenarius relating to a chain, from catenanus chained, fettered, from catena
chain, fetter, shackle (see chain (n.)). As a noun from 1788 in mathematics. Related: Catenarian.


cater (v.)

provide food for, c.1600, from Middle English catour (n.) buyer of provisions (c.1400; late 13c. as
a surname), a shortening of Anglo-French achatour buyer (Old North French acatour, Old French
achatour, 13c., Modern French acheteur), from Old French achater to buy, originally to buy
provisions, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *accaptare, from Latin ad- to + captare to take, hold,
frequentative of capere to take (see capable).    Or else from Vulgar Latin *accapitare to add to
one's capital, with second element from verbal stem of Latin caput (genitive capitis); see capital
(adj.). Figuratively from 1650s. Related: Catered; catering.


caterer (n.)

mid-15c., earlier simply cater (see cater (v.)). With redundant -er (compare poulterer, sorcerer,
upholsterer).


caterpillar (n.)

mid-15c., catyrpel, probably altered (by association with Middle English piller plunderer; see
pillage) from Old North French caterpilose caterpillar (Old French chatepelose), literally shaggy
cat (probably in reference to the wooly-bear variety), from Late Latin catta pilosa, from catta cat
(see cat (n.)) + pilosus hairy, shaggy, covered with hair, from pilus hair (see pile (n.3)). Compare
also French chenille caterpillar, literally little dog. A Swiss German name for it is teufelskatz
devil's cat. The caterpillar has in many idioms received the name of other animals [Kitchin, who
cites also Milanese cagnon little dog, Italian dialectal gattola little cat, Kentish hop-dog, hop-
cat, Portuguese lagarta lizard. Compare also American English wooly-bear for the hairy variety. An
Old English name for it was cawelworm cole-worm. Caterpillar tractor is from 1908.


caterwaul (v.)

late 14c., caterwrawen, perhaps from Low German katerwaulen cry like a cat, or formed in English
from cater, from Middle Dutch cater tomcat + Middle English waul to yowl, apparently from Old
English *wrag, *wrah angry, of uncertain origin but all somehow imitative. Related: Caterwauled;
caterwauling.


catfish (n.)

1610s, from cat (n.) + fish (n.). Probably so called for its whiskers.


catgut (n.)

1590s, altered from kitgut, probably from obsolete kit (n.2) fiddle + gut (n.). It was made from the
intestines of sheep.


Cathar (n.)

1570s, religious puritan (implied in Catharism), from Medieval Latin Cathari the Pure, name taken by
Novatians and other Christian sects, from New Testament Greek katharezein to make clean, from Greek
katheros pure. Related: Catharist.


catharsis (n.)

1803, bodily purging, from Latinized form of Greek katharsis purging, cleansing, from stem of
kathairein to purify, purge, from katharos pure, clear of dirt, clean, spotless; open, free; clear
of shame or guilt; purified (with most of the extended senses now found in Modern English clear,
clean, pure), of unknown origin. Originally medical in English; of emotions from 1872; psychotherapy
sense first recorded 1909, in Brill's translation of Freud.


cathartic (adj.)

1610s, of medicines, from Latin catharticus, from Greek kathartikos fit for cleansing, purgative,
from katharsis purging, cleansing (see catharsis). General sense is from 1670s. Related:
Cathartical.


Cathay (n.)

1560s, poetic name for China, from Medieval Latin Cataya, from Turkish Khitai, from Uighur Khitai,
name of a Tatar dynasty that ruled Beijing 936-1122.


cathected (adj.)

1936, psychoanalysis jargon, back-formation from cathectic (1927), from Greek kathektikos, from
kathexis (see cathexis).


cathedra (n.)

seat of a bishop in his church, Latin, literally chair (see cathedral).


cathedral (n.)

1580s, church of a bishop, from phrase cathedral church (c.1300), partially translating Late Latin
ecclesia cathedralis church of a bishop's seat, from Latin cathedra an easy chair (principally used
by ladies), also metonymically, as in cathedrae molles luxurious women; also a professor's chair;
from Greek kathedra seat, bench, from kata down (see cata-) + hedra seat, base, chair, face of a
geometric solid, from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    It was born an adjective, and
attempts to cobble further adjectivization onto it in 17c. yielded cathedraical (1670s), cathedratic
(1660s), cathedratical (1660s), after which the effort seems to have been given up.


Catherine

fem. proper name, from French Catherine, from Medieval Latin Katerina, from Latin Ecaterina, from
Greek Aikaterine. The -h- was introduced 16c., probably a folk etymology from Greek katheros pure.
The initial Greek vowel is preserved in Russian form Ekaterina.    As the name of a type of pear,
attested from 1640s. Catherine wheel (early 13c.) is named for St. Catherine of Alexandria,
legendary virgin martyr from the time of Maximinus who was tortured on a spiked wheel. Her name day
is Nov. 25. A popular saint in the Middle Ages, which accounts for the popularity of the given name.


catheter (n.)

c.1600, from French cath&eacute;ter, from Late Latin catheter a catheter, from Greek katheter
surgical catheter, literally anything let down, from stem of kathienai to let down, thrust in, from
kata down (see cata-) + stem of hienai to send (see jet (v.)). Earlier was cathirum (early 15c.),
directly from Medieval Latin. Related: Catheterization; catheterized; catheterizing.


cathexis (n.)

1922, from Latinized form of Greek kathexis holding, retention, from PIE root *segh- to hold (see
scheme (n.)). Used by psychologists to render Freud's (libido)besetzung.


cathode (n.)

1834, from Latinized form of Greek kathodos a way down, from kata- down (see cata-) + hodos way (see
cede). Proposed by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English polymath, and published by English
chemist and physicist Michael Faraday (1791-1867). So called from the path the electric current was
supposed to take. Related: Cathodic; cathodal. Cathode ray first attested 1880, but the phenomenon
known from 1859; cathode ray tube is from 1905.


catholic (adj.)

mid-14c., of the doctrines of the ancient Church, literally universally accepted, from French
catholique, from Church Latin catholicus universal, general, from Greek katholikos, from phrase
kath' holou on the whole, in general, from kata about + genitive of holos whole (see safe (adj.)).
Applied to the Church in Rome c.1554, after the Reformation began. General sense of of interest to
all, universal is from 1550s.


Catholic (n.)

member of the Roman Catholic church, 1560s, from Catholic (adj.).


Catholicism (n.)

faith and practice of the Catholic church, 1610s, from Catholic + -ism.


catholicity (n.)

1830, catholicism, from catholic + -ity. Meaning quality of being inclusive or comprehensive is by
1843.


Catiline (adj.)

from Lucius Sergius Catilina, Roman official who plotted an uprising 63 B.C.E. and was exposed by
Cicero in a famous oration, taken since 1590s as a type of a reckless conspirator.


cation (n.)

1834, from Greek kation going down, neuter present participle of katienai to go down, from kata down
(see cata-) + ienai to go (see ion). Proposed by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English
polymath, and published by English physicist Michael Faraday.


catkin (n.)

1570s, from Dutch katteken flowering stem of willow, birch, hazel, etc., literally kitten,
diminutive of katte cat (see cat (n.)). So called for their soft, furry appearance.


catnap (n.)

also cat-nap, cat's nap, by 1823, from cat (n.) + nap (n.). A nap such as a cat takes. As a verb
from 1859.


catnip (n.)

1712, American English, from cat (n.) + nip, from Old English nepte catnip, from Latin nepta, name
of an aromatic herb. The older name is Middle English catmint (mid-13c.).


catoblepas (n.)

late 14c., from Latin catoblepas, from Greek katobleps, from kato downward (related to kata-) +
blepein to look, but this might be ancient folk etymology. Name given by ancient authors to some
African animal.A wylde beest that hyghte Catoblefas and hath a lytyll body and nyce in all membres
and a grete heed hangynge alway to-warde the erth. [John of Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de
Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


catoptric (adj.)

pertaining to mirrors or a mirror, 1774, from Latinized form of Greek katoptrikos, from katoptron
mirror, from kata- against (see cata-) + stem of optos seen, visible (see optic) + instrumental
suffix -tron. Related: Catoptrics; catoptrical.


catoptromancy (n.)

divination by means of a mirror, 1610s, from Latinized comb. form of Greek katoptron mirror (see
catoptric) + -mancy.


catsuit (n.)

also cat-suit, 1960, from cat (n.) + suit (n.).


cattail (n.)

also cat's tail, type of plant, mid-15c., from cat (n.) + tail (n.).


cattish (adj.)

1590s, cat-like, from cat (n.) + -ish. From 1883 as catty. Related: Cattishly; cattishness.


cattle (n.)

mid-13c., property, from Anglo-French catel property (Old North French catel, Old French chatel),
from Medieval Latin capitale property, stock, noun use of neuter of Latin adjective capitalis
principal, chief (see capital (n.1)). Compare sense development of fee, pecuniary. Sense originally
was of movable property, especially livestock; it began to be limited to cows and bulls from late
16c.


catty (adj.)

1886, devious and spiteful, from cat (n.) + -y (2). Slightly earlier was cattish. Meaning pertaining
to cats is from 1902. Related: Cattily; cattiness.


catty-cornered (adj., adv.)

1838, earlier cater-cornered (1835, American English), from now-obsolete cater to set or move
diagonally (1570s), from Middle French catre four, from Latin quattuor (see four). Compare
carrefour.


catwalk (n.)

1885, long, narrow footway, from cat (n.) + walk (n.); in reference to such narrowness of passage
one has to cross carefully, as a cat walks. Originally of ships and theatrical back-stages.
Application to fashion show runways is by 1942.


Caucasian (adj.)

1807, from Caucasus Mountains, between the Black and Caspian seas; applied to the white race 1795
(in German) by German anthropologist Johann Blumenbach, because its supposed ancestral homeland lay
there; since abandoned as a historical/anthropological term. (See Aryan).


Caucasian (n.)

resident or native of the Caucasus, 1843; see Caucasus + -ian. Meaning one of the 'white' race is
from 1958 (earlier Caucasoid, 1956).


Caucasus (n.)

mountain range between Europe and the Middle East, from Latin Caucasus, from Greek kaukasis, said by
Pliny (Natural History, book six, chap. XVII) to be from a Scythian word similar to kroy-khasis,
literally (the mountain) ice-shining, white with snow. But possibly from a Pelasgian root *kau-
meaning mountain.


caucus (v.)

1850, from caucus (n.), but caucusing is attested from 1788.


caucus (n.)

private meeting of party leaders, 1763, American English (New England), perhaps from an Algonquian
word caucauasu counselor, elder, adviser in the dialect of Virginia, or from the Caucus Club of
Boston, a 1760s social &amp; political club whose name possibly derived from Modern Greek kaukos
drinking cup. Another old guess is caulker's (meeting) [Pickering, 1816], but OED finds this
dismissable.    caucus: This noun is used throughout the United States, as a cant term for those
meetings, which are held by the different political parties, for the purpose of agreeing upon
candidates for office, or concerting any measure, which they intend to carry at the subsequent
public, or town meetings. [John Pickering, A Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases Which
Have Been Supposed to be Peculiar to the United States of America, Boston, 1816]   <hr />   The word
caucus, and its derivative caucusing, are often used in Boston. The last answers much to what we
stile parliamenteering or electioneering. All my repeated applications to different gentlemen have
not furnished me with a satisfactory account of the origin of caucus. It seems to mean, a number of
persons, whether more or less, met together to consult upon adopting and prosecuting some scheme of
policy, for carrying a favorite point. [William Gordon, History, Rise, Progress, and Establishment
of the Independence of the United States of America, London, 1788]


caudal (adj.)

1660s, from Latin cauda tail of an animal, of unknown origin, + -al (1).


caudillo (n.)

dictator in Spain or Latin America, 1852, from Spanish caudillo, cabdillo leader, chief, from Late
Latin capitellum, diminutive of caput (genitive capitis) head (see capitulum). Later in Spain taken
by Franco as a title in imitation of German F&uuml;hrer, Italian Duce.


caudle (n.)

hot drink, late 13c., from Old North French caudel (Old French chaudel, 12c., Modern French
chaudeau), from Medieval Latin caldellum, diminutive of caldum, neuter of Latin caldus warm (see
calorie).


caught

past tense and past participle of catch (v.), attested from 14c., predominant after c.1800,
replacing earlier catched. A rare instance of English strong verb with a French origin. This might
have been by influence of Middle English lacchen (see latch (v.)), which also then meant to catch
and was a synonym of catch (as their noun forms remain), and which then had past tense forms lahte,
lauhte, laught. The influence happened before latch switched to its modern weak conjugation.


caul (n.)

early 14c., close-fitting cap worn by women, from French cale cap, back-formation from calotte, from
Italian callotta, from Latin calautica type of female headdress with pendent lappets, a foreign word
of unknown origin. Medical use, in reference to various membranes, dates to late 14c. Especially of
the amnion enclosing the fetus before birth from 1540s. This, if the child is born draped in it, was
supersititously supposed to protect against drowning (cauls were advertised for sale in British
newspapers through World War I).


cauldron (n.)

c.1300, caudron, from Anglo-French caudrun, Old North French cauderon (Old French chauderon
cauldron, kettle), from augmentative of Late Latin caldaria cooking pot (source of Spanish calderon,
Italian calderone), from Latin calidarium hot bath, from calidus warm, hot (see calorie). The -l-
was inserted 15c. in imitation of Latin.


cauliflower (n.)

1590s, originally cole florye, from Italian cavoli fiori flowered cabbage, plural of cavolo cabbage
+ fiore flower (from Latin flora; see flora).    First element is from Latin caulis cabbage
(originally stem, stalk) which was borrowed into Germanic and is the source of cole in cole-slaw and
of Scottish kale. The front end of the word was re-Latinized from 18c.; the back end was influenced
by flower (n.). The boxer's cauliflower ear is from 1907.


cauline (adj.)

pertaining to or growing on a stem, 1756, from Latin caulis stalk (see cole).


caulis (n.)

stem or stalk of a plant, Latin; see cole.


caulk (v.)

late 14c., to stop up crevices or cracks, from Old North French cauquer, from Late Latin calicare to
stop up chinks with lime, from Latin calx (2) lime, limestone (see chalk). Original sense is
nautical, of making ships watertight. Related: Caulked; caulking. As a noun, caulking material, by
1980 (caulking in this sense was used from 1743). Related: Caulker.


causal (adj.)

1530s, from Latin causalis relating to a cause, from causa (see cause (n.)).


causality (n.)

c.1600, from causal + -ity.


causation (n.)

1640s, from Latin causationem (nominative causatio) excuse, pretext, in Medieval Latin action of
causing, from causa (see cause).


causative (adj.)

early 15c. (as a noun), from French causatif, from Latin causativus, from causa (see cause (n.)).


cause (n.)

c.1200, reason for action, grounds for action; motive, from Old French cause cause, reason; lawsuit,
case in law (12c.), and directly from Latin causa a cause; a reason; interest; judicial process,
lawsuit, of unknown origin.    In English, sense of matter of concern; side taken in controversy is
from c.1300; that of the source of an effect is early 14c.; meaning reason for something taking
place is late 14c. Cause c&eacute;l&egrave;bre celebrated legal case is 1763, from French. Cause
why? for what reason? is in Chaucer.


cause (v.)

late 14c., produce an effect, also impel, compel, from Old French causer to cause (13c.) and
directly from Medieval Latin causare, from Latin causa a cause; a reason; interest; judicial
process, lawsuit, of unknown origin. Related: Caused; causing. Classical Latin causari meant to
plead, to debate a question.


causeway (n.)

1570s, from Middle English cauceweye raised road (mid-15c.), first element from Anglo-French cauce,
Old North French cauciee (12c., Modern French chauss&#233;e), from Vulgar Latin *via calciata paved
way, from Latin calcis, genitive of calx (2) limestone, or Late Latin calciare to stamp with the
heels, tread (on notion of a road or mound across marshy ground made firm by treading down), from
Latin calx (1) heel. For second element, see way (n.).


caustic (adj.)

c.1400, burning, corrosive, from Latin causticus burning, caustic, from Greek kaustikos capable of
burning; corrosive, from kaustos combustible; burnt, verbal adjective from kaiein, the Greek word
for to burn (transitive and intransitive) in all periods, of uncertain origin with no certain
cognates outside Greek. Figurative sense of sarcastic is attested from 1771. As a noun, early 15c.,
from the adjective.


cauterization (n.)

c.1400, from Old French cauterisation (14c.) and directly from Late Latin cauterizationem
(nominative cauterizatio), noun of action from past participle stem of  cauterizare (see cauterize).


cauterize (v.)

c.1400, from Old French cauterisier, from Late Latin cauterizare to burn or brand with a hot iron,
from Greek kauteriazein, from kauter burning or branding iron, from kaiein to burn (see caustic).
Related: Cauterized; cauterizing.


cautery (n.)

1540s, from Latin cauterium branding iron, from Greek kauterion (see cauterize).


caution (n.)

c.1300, bail, guarantee, pledge, from Old French caution security, surety (13c.), from Latin
cautionem (nominative cautio) caution, care, foresight, precaution, noun of action from past
participle stem of cavere to be on one's guard (see caveat). The Latin sense re-emerged in English
16c.-17c. Meaning word of warning is from c.1600.


caution (v.)

to warn, 1640s, from caution (n.). Related: Cautioned; cautioning.


cautionary (adj.)

conveying a warning, 1590s, from caution (n.) + -ary.


cautious (adj.)

1640s, from caution + -ous. The Latin word for this was cautus careful, heedful. Related:
Cautiously; cautiousness.


cavalcade (n.)

1590s, via Middle French cavalcade (15c.), from Italian cavalcata, from cavalcare to ride on
horseback, from Vulgar Latin *caballicare (also source of Spanish cabalgada, Portuguese cavalgata),
from Latin caballus (see cavalier). Literally, a procession on horseback; in 20c. -cade came to be
regarded as a suffix and taken to form motorcade (1913), etc.


cavalier (n.)

1580s, from Italian cavalliere mounted soldier, knight; gentleman serving as a lady's escort, from
Late Latin caballarius horseman, from Vulgar Latin caballus, the common Vulgar Latin word for horse
(and source of Italian cavallo, French cheval, Spanish caballo, Irish capall, Welsh ceffyl),
displacing Latin equus (see equine).    Sense advanced in 17c. to knight, then courtly gentleman
(but also, pejoratively, swaggerer), which led to the adjectival senses, especially disdainful
(1650s). Meaning Royalist adherent of Charles I is from 1641. Meaning one who devotes himself solely
to attendance on a lady is from 1817, roughly translating Italian cavaliere-servente. In classical
Latin caballus was work horse, pack horse, sometimes, disdainfully, hack, nag. Not a native Lat.
word (as the second -a- would show), though the source of the borrowing is uncertain [Tucker].
Perhaps from some Balkan or Anatolian language, and meaning, originally, gelding. The same source is
thought to have yielded Old Church Slavonic kobyla.


cavalier (adj.)

disdainful, 1650s, from cavalier (n.). Earlier it meant gallant (1640s). Related: Cavalierly.


cavalry (n.)

1540s, from Middle French cavalerie (16c.), from Italian cavalleria mounted militia, from cavaliere
(see cavalier (n.)). An Old English word for it was horshere.


cave (n.)

early 13c., from Old French cave a cave, vault, cellar (12c.), from Latin cavea hollow (place), noun
use of neuter plural of adjective cavus hollow, from PIE root *keue- a swelling, arch, cavity (see
cumulus). Replaced Old English eor&eth;scrafu. First record of cave man is 1865.


cave (v.)

early 15c., caven, to hollow something out, from cave (n.). Modern sense to collapse in or down is
1707, American English, presumably from East Anglian dialectal calve collapse, fall in, perhaps from
Flemish; subsequently influenced by cave (n.). Transitive sense by 1762. Related: Caved; caving.
Figurative sense of yield to pressure is from 1837.


caveat (n.)

1540s, from Latin, literally let him beware, 3rd person singular present subjunctive of cavere to
beware, take heed, watch, guard against, from PIE root *skeue- to pay attention, perceive (cognates:
Sanskrit kavih wise, sage, seer, poet; Lithuanian kavoti tend, safeguard; Armenian cucanem I show;
Latin cautio wariness; Greek koein to mark, perceive, hear, kydos glory, fame, literally that which
is heard of; Old Church Slavonic chujo to feel, perceive, hear, cudo wonder, literally that which is
heard of; Czech (z)koumati to perceive, be aware of; Serbian chuvati watch, heed; Old English
sceawian to look at (source of show (v.)); Middle Dutch schoon beautiful, bright, properly showy;
Gothic hausjan hear).


caveat emptor

Latin, literally let the buyer beware; see caveat and second element of exempt (adj.).


cavern (n.)

late 14c., from Old French caverne (12c.) cave, vault, cellar, from Late Latin caverna cave, from
Latin cavus hollow (see cave (n.)). In Old English such a land feature might be called an
eor&eth;scr&aelig;f.


cavernous (adj.)

c.1400, full of caverns, from Latin cavernosus full of cavities (source also of Italian cavernoso,
French caverneux), from caverna (see cavern). Meaning hollow is recorded from 1830.


caviar (n.)

also caviare, 1550s, from French caviar (16c.), from Italian caviaro (modern caviale) or Turkish
khaviar, from Persian khaviyar, from khaya egg (from Middle Persian khayak egg, from Old Iranian
*qvyaka-, diminutive of *avya-, from PIE *owyo-/*oyyo- egg see egg (n.)) + dar bearing.


cavil (v.)

1540s, from Middle French caviller to mock, jest, from Latin cavillari to jeer, mock; satirize,
argue scoffingly (also source of Italian cavillare, Spanish cavilar), from cavilla jest, jeering,
related to calumnia (see calumny).


cavitate (v.)

1892 (implied in cavitated), back-formation from cavitation. Related: Cavitating.


cavitation (n.)

formation of bubbles in fluid, 1895, from cavity + -ation. Earlier as a medical term (1868).


cavity (n.)

1540s, from Middle French cavit&eacute; (13c.), from Late Latin cavitatem (nominative cavitas)
hollowness, from Latin cavus hollow (see cave (n.)).


cavort (v.)

1793, cauvaut, American English, of uncertain origin, sometimes said to be an alteration of curvet a
leap by a horse, from French and related to curve (v.). Or perhaps from ca- colloquial intensive
prefix + vault to jump, leap. Modern form attested by 1829. Related: Cavorted; cavorting.


caw (v.)

make a sound like a crow, raven, etc., 1580s, imitative. Related: Cawed; cawing.


caw (n.)

1660s, from caw (v.).


cay (n.)

low island, 1707, from Spanish cayo; see key (n.2).


cayenne (n.)

pungent dried pepper, 1756, from Tupi (Brazil) kyynha capsicum, mistakenly associated with town of
Cayenne in French Guyana. The town name is the French form of Guyana.


cayuse (n.)

horse, Indian pony, 1841, American English, said to be a Chinook (native Pacific Northwest) word;
also the name of an Indian group and language (1825), of unknown origin.


CB

1959, abbreviation of citizens' band (radio).


cc

1936 as abbreviation of carbon copy in business correspondence.


CD

1979 as an abbreviation of compact disc as a system of information storage.


CD-ROM

1983, in computer jargon; also cd-rom; from compact disc read-only memory.


CDC

abbreviation of Centers for Disease Control, renamed 1970 from earlier U.S. federal health lab,
originally Communicable Diseases Center (1946). Since 1992, full name is Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, but the usual initialism (acronym) remains CDC.


cease (v.)

c.1300, cesen, from Old French cesser to come to an end, stop, cease; give up, desist, from Latin
cessare to cease, go slow, give over, leave off, be idle, frequentative of cedere (past participle
cessus) go away, withdraw, yield (see cede). Related: Ceased; ceasing. Old English in this sense had
geswican, blinnan.


cease (n.)

cessation, stopping, c.1300, from cease (n.) or else from Old French cesse cease, cessation, from
cesser.


cease-fire (n.)

also ceasefire, a cessation of shooting, 1916, from verbal phrase cease fire, 1847 as a military
command (formerly also signaled by bugles), from cease (v.) + fire (n.) in the gunnery sense.
Generally two words until after mid-20c.


ceaseless (adj.)

1580s, from cease (n.) + -less. Related: Ceaselessly; ceaselessness.


Cecil

masc. proper name, from Latin Caecilius (fem. Caecilia), name of a Roman gens, from caecus blind.


Cecilia

fem. proper name, fem. of Cecil (q.v.).


cecum (n.)

variant of caecum.


cedar (n.)

Old English ceder, blended in Middle English with Old French cedre, both from Latin cedrus, from
Greek kedros cedar, juniper, origin uncertain. Cedar oil was used by the Egyptians in embalming as a
preservative against decay and the word for it was used figuratively for immortality by the Romans.
Cedar chest attested from 1722. Related: Cedrine.


cede (v.)

1630s, from French c&#233;der or directly from Latin cedere to yield, give place; to give up some
right or property, originally to go from, proceed, leave, from Proto-Italic *kesd-o- to go away,
avoid, from PIE root *sed- (2) to go, yield (cognates: Sanskrit sedhati to drive; chase away;
Avestan apa-had- turn aside, step aside; Greek hodos way, hodites wanderer, wayfarer; Old Church
Slavonic chodu a walking, going, choditi to go). Related: Ceded; ceding. The sense evolution in
Latin is via the notion of to go away, withdraw, give ground.


cedilla (n.)

c.1600, from Spanish cedilla, zedilla, literally little z, from a Latin-like diminutive of Greek
zeta the letter 'z'. The mark (formerly also used in Spanish) was derived from that letter and
indicates a soft sound in letters in positions where normally they have a hard sound. See zed.


Cedric

masc. proper name, modern, apparently introduced by Sir Walter Scott (Cedric the Saxon is a
character in Ivanhoe); apparently a mistake for Old English name Cerdic.


cee (n.)

name of the letter C, 1540s.


ceilidh (n.)

1875, from Irish c&#233;ilidhe, from Old Irish c&#233;le companion, from PIE *kei-liyo-, from root
*kei- beloved, dear, primarily to lie; bed, couch (see cemetery).


ceiling (n.)

mid-14c., celynge, act of paneling a room, noun formed (with -ing) from Middle English verb ceil put
a cover or ceiling over, later cover (walls) with wainscoting, panels, etc. (early 15c.); probably
from Middle French celer to conceal, also cover with paneling (12c.), from Latin celare (see cell).
Probably influenced by Latin caelum heaven, sky (see celestial).    Extended to the paneling itself
from late 14c. The meaning top surface of a room is attested by 1530s. Figurative sense upper limit
is from 1934. Colloquial figurative phrase hit the ceiling lose one's temper, get explosively angry
attested by 1908; earlier it meant to fail (by 1900, originally U.S. college slang). Glass ceiling
in the figurative sense of invisible barrier that prevents women from advancing in management, etc.,
is attested from 1988.


cel (n.)

celluloid sheet for an animated cartoon, from celluloid; became current by c.1990 when they became
collectible.


celadon (n.)

pale grayish-green, 1768, from French C&eacute;ladon, name of a character in the romance of
l'Astr&eacute;e by Honor&eacute; d'Urf&eacute; (1610); an insipidly sentimental lover who wore
bright green clothes, he is named in turn after Greek Keladon, a character in Ovid's Metamorphoses,
whose name is said to mean sounding with din or clamor. The mineral celadonite (1868) is so called
for its color.


celeb (n.)

colloquial shortening of celebrity celebrated person, by 1908, American English.


Celebes

old name for modern Sulawesi (which itself might be a native corruption of Celebes) in Indonesia,
first used by Portuguese, 1512, perhaps from Os C&#233;lebres the famous ones, a name given by
navigators to the dangerous capes on the island's northeast coast.


celebrant (n.)

1731, from French c&eacute;l&eacute;brant officiating clergyman or directly from Latin celebrantem
(nominative celebrans), present participle of celebrare (see celebrate).


celebrate (v.)

mid-15c., originally of the Mass, from Latin celebratus much-frequented; kept solemn; famous, past
participle of celebrare assemble to honor, also to publish; sing praises of; practice often,
originally to frequent in great numbers, from celeber frequented, populous, crowded; with
transferred senses of well-attended; famous; often-repeated. Related: Celebrated; celebrating.


celebrated (adj.)

much-talked-about, 1660s, past participle adjective from celebrate (v.).


celebration (n.)

1520s, honoring of a day or season by appropriate festivities, formed in English from celebrate, or
else from Latin celebrationem (nominative celebratio) numerous attendance (especially upon a
festival celebration), noun of action from past participle stem of celebrare. Meaning performance of
a religious ceremony (especially the Eucharist) is from 1570s; that of extolling in speeches, etc.
is from 1670s.


celebratory (adj.)

1855, from celebrate + -ory.


celebrity (n.)

late 14c., solemn rite or ceremony, from Old French celebrit&eacute; celebration or directly from
Latin celibritatem (nominative celebritas) multitude, fame, from celeber frequented, populous (see
celebrate). Meaning condition of being famous is from c.1600; that of famous person is from 1849.
When the old gods withdraw, the empty thrones cry out for a successor, and with good management, or
even without management, almost any perishable bag of bones may be hoisted into the vacant seat.
[E.R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational]


celerity (n.)

late 15c., from Old French celeritee (14c., Modern French c&eacute;l&eacute;rit&eacute;), from Latin
celeritatem (nominative celeritas) swiftness, from celer swift, from possible PIE root *kel- to
drive, set in swift motion (cognates: Sanskrit carati goes, Greek keles fast horse or ship,
keleuthos journey, road, Lithuanian sulys a gallop, Old High German scelo stallion).


celery (n.)

1660s, from French c&eacute;leri (17c., originally sceleri d'Italie), said by French sources to be
from Italian (Lombard dialect) seleri (singular selero), from Late Latin selinon, from Greek selinon
parsley, of uncertain origin.    [O]ne day, in a weak and hungry moment, my roommate and I succumbed
to a bit of larceny. A greengrocer's truck had parked down the street and was left unattended. We
grabbed the first crate we could off the back. It turned out to be celery. For two days we ate
nothing but celery and used up more calories chewing than we realized in energy. Damn it, I said to
my roommate, What're we going to do? We can't starve. That's funny, he replied. I thought we could.
[Chuck Jones, Chuck Amuck, 1989]


Celeste

fem. proper name, from French c&eacute;leste (11c.) sky, heaven, from Latin caelestis heavenly (see
celestial).


celestial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to heaven, from Old French celestial celestial, heavenly, sky-blue, from Latin
caelestis heavenly, pertaining to the sky, from caelum heaven, sky; abode of the gods; climate, of
uncertain origin; perhaps from PIE *kaid-slo-, perhaps from a root also found in Germanic and Baltic
meaning bright, clear (compare Lithuanian skaidrus shining, clear; Old English hador, German heiter
clear, shining, cloudless, Old Norse hei&#240; clear sky).    The Latin word is the source of the
usual word for sky in most of the Romance languages, such as French ciel, Spanish cielo, Italian
cielo. General sense of heavenly, very delightful in English is from early 15c.


Celia

fem. proper name, from Italian Celia, from Latin Caelia, fem. of Caelius, name of a Roman gens.
Sheila is a variant.


celiac (adj.)

alternative spelling of coeliac (q.v.); also see oe.


celibacy (n.)

1660s, formed in English, with -cy + Latin caelibatus state of being unmarried, from caelebs
unmarried, probably from PIE root *kaiwelo- alone + lib(h)s- living.


celibate (n.)

1610s, state of celibacy (especially as mandated to clergy in the Catholic church) from French
c&eacute;libat (16c.), from Latin caelibatus (see celibacy). This was the only sense until early
19c. The adjective meaning unmarried, sworn to remain single is recorded from 1825. As a noun, one
who is sworn to such a condition, from 1838.


cell (n.)

early 12c., small monastery, subordinate monastery (from Medieval Latin in this sense), later small
room for a monk or a nun in a monastic establishment; a hermit's dwelling (c.1300), from Latin cella
small room, store room, hut, related to Latin celare to hide, conceal.    The Latin word represents
PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (cognates: Sanskrit cala hut, house, hall; Greek kalia hut,
nest, kalyptein to cover, koleon sheath, kelyphos shell, husk; Latin clam secret; Old Irish cuile
cellar, celim hide, Middle Irish cul defense, shelter; Gothic hulistr covering, Old English heolstor
lurking-hole, cave, covering, Gothic huljan cover over, hulundi hole, hilms helmet, halja hell, Old
English hol cave, holu husk, pod).    Sense of monastic rooms extended to prison rooms (1722). Used
in 14c., figuratively, of brain compartments; used in biology by 17c. of various cavities (wood
structure, segments of fruit, bee combs), gradually focusing to the modern sense of basic structure
of living organisms (which OED dates to 1845).    Electric battery sense is from 1828, based on
original form. Meaning small group of people working within a larger organization is from 1925. Cell
body is from 1851; cell division from 1846; cell membrane from 1837 (but cellular membrane is 1732);
cell wall from 1842.


cellar (n.)

early 13c., store room, from Anglo-French celer, Old French celier cellar, underground passage
(12c., Modern French cellier), from Latin cellarium pantry, storeroom, literally group of cells;
which is either directly from cella (see cell), or from noun use of neuter of adjective cellarius
pertaining to a storeroom, from cella. The sense in late Middle English gradually shifted to
underground room. Cellar door attested by 1640s.


celled (adj.)

in compounds, having cells (of a certain number or type), from late 18c., from cell (n.).


cellist (n.)

1880, short for violoncellist on model of cello.


cello (n.)

1857, shortening of violoncello (q.v.).


cellophane (n.)

1912, trademark name for a flexible, transparent product made from regenerated cellulose, coined by
the inventor, Swiss chemist Jacques E. Brandenberger (1872-1954), probably from cellulose +
connective o + -phane.


cellphone (n.)

also cell phone, 1984, short for cellular phone.


cellular (adj.)

1753, with reference to cellular tissue, from Modern Latin cellularis of little cells, from cellula
little cell, diminutive of cella (see cell). Of mobile phone systems (in which the area served is
divided into cells of a few square miles served by transmitters), 1977. Related: Cellularity.


cellulite (n.)

lumpy, dimpled fat, 1968, from French cellulite, from cellule a small cell (16c., from Latin cellula
little cell, diminutive of cella; see cell) + -ite (see -ite (1)).


cellulitis (n.)

1832, from Latin cellula, diminutive of cella cell (see cell) + -itis.


celluloid (n.)

transparent plastic made from nitro-celluloses and camphor, 1871, trademark name (reg. U.S.), a
hybrid coined by U.S. inventor John Wesley Hyatt (1837-1900) from cellulose + Greek-based suffix
-oid. Used figuratively for motion pictures from 1934. Abbreviated form cell sheet of celluloid is
from 1933 (see cel).


cellulose (n.)

1840, from French cellulose, coined c.1835 by French chemist Anselme Payen (1795-1871) and confirmed
1839, from noun use of adjective cellulose consisting of cells, 18c., from Latin cellula (see
cellulite) + -ose (see -ose (2)).


Celsius

1850, for Swedish astronomer Anders Celsius (1701-1744) inventor of the centigrade scale in 1742.


celt (n.)

stone chisel, 1715, from a Latin ghost word (apparently a misprint of certe) in Job xix:24 in
Vulgate: stylo ferreo, et plumbi lamina, vel celte sculpantur in silice; translated, probably
correctly, in KJV as, That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever. But
assumed by others to be a genuine carving tool, partly because it was in the Bible, and thereafter
adapted by archaeologists as a name for a class of prehistoric implements.


Celt (n.)

also Kelt, c.1600, from Latin Celta, singular of Celtae, from Greek Keltoi, Herodotus' word for the
Gauls (who also were called Galatai). Used by the Romans of continental Gauls but apparently not of
the British Celtic tribes. Originally in English in reference to ancient peoples; extention to their
modern descendants is from mid-19c., from French usage.


Celt-Iberian (adj.)

also Celtiberian, c.1600, from Celt + Iberian.


Celtic (adj.)

also Keltic, 1650s, of archaeology or history, from French Celtique or Latin Celticus pertaining to
the Celts (see Celt). In reference to languages, from 1707; of other qualities, 19c. The Boston
basketball team was founded 1946. Celtic twilight is from Yeats's name for his collection of adapted
Irish folk tales (1893).


cement (n.)

c.1300, from Old French ciment cement, mortar, pitch, from Latin c&aelig;menta stone chips used for
making mortar (singular caementum), from caedere to cut down, chop, beat, hew, fell, slay (see
-cide). The sense evolution from small broken stones to powdered stones used in construction took
place before the word reached English.


cement (v.)

c.1400, from cement (n.) or Old French cimenter. Figurative use from c.1600. Related: Cemented;
cementing.


cementation (n.)

1590s, from cement + -ation.


cemetery (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cimetiere graveyard (12c.), from Late Latin coemeterium, from Greek
koimeterion sleeping place, dormitory, from koiman to put to sleep, keimai I lie down, from PIE root
*kei- to lie, rest, also bed, couch, hence secondary sense of beloved, dear (cognates: Greek
keisthai to lie, lie asleep, Old Church Slavonic semija family, domestic servants, Lithuanian
&#353;eima domestic servants, Lettish sieva wife, Old English hiwan members of a household, higid
measure of land, Latin cunae a cradle,  Sanskrit Sivah propitious, gracious). Early Christian
writers were the first to use it for burial ground, though the Greek word also had been anciently
used in reference to the sleep of death. An Old English word for cemetery was licburg.


cenacle (n.)

c.1400, from Old French cenacle, variant of cenaille (14c., Modern French c&eacute;nacle), from
Latin cenaculum dining room, from cena mid-day meal, afternoon meal, literally portion of food, from
PIE *kert-sna-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)). Latin cenaculum was used in the
Vulgate for the upper room where the Last Supper was eaten.


cenobite (n.)

also coenobite, member of a communal religious order, 1630s, from Church Latin coenobita a cloister
brother, from coenobium a convent, from Greek koinobion life in community, monastery, from koinos
common (see coeno-) + bios life (see bio-).


cenotaph (n.)

c.1600, from French c&eacute;notaphe (16c.), from Latin cenotaphium, from Greek kenotaphion, from
kenos empty (see keno-) + taphos tomb, burial, funeral, from PIE root *dhembh- to bury.


Cenozoic (adj.)

1841, Cainozoic, from Latinized form of Greek kainos new, fresh, recent, novel (see recent) + zoon
animal (see zoo). The era that began with the demise of the dinosaurs and the rise of recent
species.


cense (v.)

to perfume with burning incense, late 14c., a shortened form of incense. Related: Censed; censing.


censer (n.)

vessel used for burning incense, mid-13c., from Old French censier, a shortened form of encensier,
from encens incense (see incense (n.)).


censor (n.)

1530s, Roman magistrate who took censuses and oversaw public morals, from Middle French censor and
directly from Latin censor, from censere to appraise, value, judge, from PIE root *kens- speak
solemnly, announce (cognates: Sanskrit &#347;amsati recites, praises, &#347;asa song of praise).
There were two of them at a time in classical times, usually patricians, and they also had charge of
public finances and public works. Transferred sense of officious judge of morals and conduct in
English is from 1590s. Roman censor also had a transferred sense of a severe judge; a rigid
moralist; a censurer. Of books, plays (later films, etc.), 1640s. By the early decades of the 19c.
the meaning of the English word had shaded into state agent charged with suppression of speech or
published matter deemed politically subversive. Related: Censorial.


censor (v.)

1833 of media, from censor (n.). Related: Censored; censoring.


censorious (adj.)

fond of criticizing, 1530s, from Latin censorius pertaining to a censor, also rigid, severe, from
censor (see censor (n.)). Related: Censoriously; censoriousness.


censorship (n.)

1590s, office of a censor, from censor (n.) + -ship. Meaning action of censoring is from 1824.


censurable (adj.)

1630s, from censure + -able. Related: Censurability.


censure (n.)

late 14c., originally ecclesiastical, from Latin censura judgment, opinion, also office of a censor,
from census, past participle of censere appraise, estimate, assess (see censor (n.)). General sense
of a finding of fault and an expression of condemnation is from c.1600.


censure (v.)

1580s, from censure (n.) or else  from French censurer, from censure (n.). Related: Censured;
censuring.    Such men are so watchful to censure, that the have seldom much care to look for
favourable interpretations of ambiguities, to set the general tenor of life against single failures,
or to know how soon any slip of inadvertency has been expiated by sorrow and retractation; but let
fly their fulminations, without mercy or prudence, against slight offences or casual temerities,
against crimes never committed, or immediately repented. [Johnson, Life of Sir Thomas Browne, 1756]


census (n.)

1610s, from Latin census the enrollment of the names and property assessments of all Roman citizens,
originally past participle of censere to assess (see censor (n.)). The modern census begins in the
U.S., 1790., and Revolutionary France. Property for taxation was the primary purpose in Rome, hence
Latin census also was used for one's wealth, one's worth, wealthiness.


cent (n.)

late 14c., from Latin centum hundred (see hundred). Middle English meaning was one hundred, but it
shifted 17c. to hundredth part under influence of percent. Chosen in this sense in 1786 as a name
for a U.S. currency unit by Continental Congress. The word first was suggested by Robert Morris in
1782 under a different currency plan. Before the cent, Revolutionary and colonial dollars were
reckoned in ninetieths, based on the exchange rate of Pennsylvania money and Spanish coin.


centaur (n.)

late 14c., from Latin centaurus, from Greek Kentauros, origin disputed. In early Greek literature
they were a savage, horse-riding tribe from Thessaly; later they were monsters half horse, half man.
The southern constellation of Centaurus is attested in English from 1550s but was known by that name
to the Romans and known as a centaur to the Greeks. It has often been confused since classical times
with Sagittarius.


centaury (n.)

small plant with red flowers (now usually erythraea Centaureum), late 14c., from Medieval Latin
centaurea, from Latin centaureum, from Greek kentaureion, from kentauros centaur (see centaur), so
called according to Pliny because the plant's medicinal properties were discovered by Chiron the
centaur.    German Tausendg&uuml;ldenkraut is based on a mistranslation of the Latin word, as if
from centum + aurum (the similarity might be the result of Roman folk etymology).


centenarian (n.)

1805, person 100 years old, from centenary + -ian. As an adjective, pertaining to a person 100 years
old, recorded from 1806.


centenary (adj.)

c.1600, period of 100 years, from Latin centenarius of a hundred, relating to a hundred, from
centenai a hundred each, from centum hundred (see hundred). As a noun, 100th anniversary,  from
1788.


centennial (adj.)

1789, from Latin centum one hundred (see hundred) + ending from biennial. As a noun, hundredth
anniversary celebration, from 1876; the older noun is centenary.


center (n.)

late 14c., middle point of a circle; point round which something revolves, from Old French centre
(14c.), from Latin centrum center, originally fixed point of the two points of a drafting compass,
from Greek kentron sharp point, goad, sting of a wasp, from kentein stitch, from PIE root *kent- to
prick (cognates: Breton kentr a spur, Welsh cethr nail, Old High German hantag sharp, pointed).
Figuratively from 1680s. Meaning the middle of anything attested from 1590s. Spelling with -re
popularized in Britain by Johnson's dictionary (following Bailey's), though -er is older and was
used by Shakespeare, Milton, and Pope. Center of gravity is recorded from 1650s. Center of attention
is from 1868.


center (v.)

1590s, to concentrate at a center, from center (n.). Related: Centered; centering. Meaning to rest
as at a center is from 1620s. Sports sense of to hit toward the center is from 1890. To be centered
on is from 1713. In combinations, -centered is attested by 1958.


centerfield (n.)

also center field, 1857 in baseball, from center (n.) + field (n.). Related: Center-fielder.


centerfold (n.)

also center-fold, fold-out center spread of a magazine or newspaper, 1950, from center (n.) + fold
(n.2). Playboy debuted December 1953, and the word came to be used especially for illustrations of
comely women, hence woman who poses as a centerfold model (by 1965).


centerpiece (n.)

also center-piece, 1800, from center + piece (n.). Figurative sense is recorded from 1937.


centi-

word-forming element meaning one hundred or one hundredth part, used in English from c.1800, from
the French metric system, from Latin centi-, comb. form of centum one hundred (see hundred).


centigrade (adj.)

1799, from French; see centi- hundred + Latin gradus degree (see grade (n.)).


centigram (n.)

also centigramme, 1801, from French centigramme; see centi- + gram.


centiliter (n.)

also centilitre, 1801, from French centilitre; see centi- + liter.


centillion (n.)

1846, from centi- + ending from million, etc. Compare French centillion (by 1841). Related:
Centillionth.


centime (n.)

1801, from French centime, from cent (see centi-) on analogy of d&#233;cime (pars).


centimeter (n.)

also centimetre, 1801, from French centim&egrave;tre (18c.), coined from Latin centum hundred (see
hundred) + French m&egrave;tre (see meter (n.2)).


centipede (n.)

1640s, from French centip&egrave;de, from Latin centipeda many-footed insect, from centum hundred
(see hundred) + pedis, genitive of pes foot (see foot (n.)).


central (adj.)

1640s, from French central  or directly from Latin centralis pertaining to a center, from centrum
(see center (n.)). Centrally is attested perhaps as early as early 15c., which might imply a usage
of central earlier than the attested date.    Slightly older is centric (1580s). As a U.S.
colloquial noun for central telephone exchange, first recorded 1889 (hence, Hello, Central?).
Central processing unit attested from 1961. Central America is attested from 1826.


centrality (n.)

1640s; see central (adj.) + -ity.


centralization (n.)

1801, especially of administrative power, originally with reference to Napoleonic France and on
model of French centralisation. See centralize + -ation.


centralize (v.)

1795, to bring to a center; 1800, come to a center, from central + -ize, on model of French
centraliser (1790). A word from the French Revolution. Related: Centralized; centralizing.
Government should have a central point throughout its whole periphery. The state of the monthly
expences amounted to four hundred millions; but within these seven months, it is reduced to one
hundred and eighty millions. Such is the effect of the centralization of government; and the more we
centralize it, the more we shall find our expenses decrease. [Saint-Just, Discourse on the State of
the Finances]


centre

chiefly British English spelling of center (q.v.); for ending, see -re.


centrifugal (adj.)

1690s, with adjectival suffix -al (1) + Modern Latin centrifugus, 1687, coined by Sir Isaac Newton
(who wrote in Latin) in Principia (which is written in Latin), from Latin centri- alternative comb.
form of centrum center (see center (n.)) + fugere to flee (see fugitive). Centrifugal force is
Newton's vis centrifuga.


centrifuge (n.)

1887, a centrifuge machine, originally a machine for separating cream from milk, from French
centrifuge, from noun use of adjective meaning centrifugal (1801), from Modern Latin centrifugus
(see centrifugal).


centriole (n.)

1896, from German centriol (1895), from Modern Latin centriolum, diminutive of centrum (see center
(n.)).


centripetal (adj.)

1709, from Modern Latin, coined 1687 by Sir Isaac Newton (who wrote in Latin), from Latin centri-
alternative comb. form of centrum center (see center (n.)) + petere to make for, go to; seek, strive
after (see petition (n.)). Centripetal force is Newton's vim ... centripetam.


centrism (n.)

1935, from centre + -ism (also see centrist).


centrist (n.)

1872, from French centriste, from centre (see center (n.)). Originally in English with reference to
French politics; general application to other political situations is from 1890.    Where M. St.
Hilaire is seen to most advantage, however, is when quietly nursing one of that weak-kneed
congregation who sit in the middle of the House, and call themselves Centrists. A French Centrist is
--exceptis eoccipiendis--a man who has never been able to make up his mind, nor is likely to. [Men
of the Third Republic, London, 1873]


centrosome (n.)

1889, from German centrosoma (1888), coined by German zoologist Theodor Boveri (1862-1915), from
centro- (see center (n.)) + -some (3)).


centurion (n.)

late 13c., from Latin centurionem (nominative centurio), Roman army officer, head of a centuria (a
group of one hundred); see century.


century (n.)

1530s, one hundred (of anything), from Latin centuria group of one hundred of things of one kind
(including a measure of land and a division of the Roman army, one-sixteenth of a legion, headed by
a centurion), from centum hundred (see hundred) on analogy of decuria a company of ten.    Used in
Middle English from late 14c. as a division of land, from Roman use. The Modern English meaning is
attested from 1650s, short for century of years (1620s). The older, general sense is preserved in
the meaning score of 100 points in cricket and some other sports. Related: Centurial.


CEO (n.)

by 1984; abbreviation of chief executive officer.


cephalic (adj.)

pertaining to the head, early 15c., from Latin cephalicus, from Greek kephalikos pertaining to the
head, from kephale (see cephalo-).


cephalization (n.)

1864, coined by U.S. zoologist James D. Dana (1813-1895) from Greek kephale head (see cephalo-) on
model of specialization, etc.


cephalo-

before vowels, cephal-, word-forming element meaning head, skull, brain, Modern Latin combining form
of Greek kephale head, perhaps from PIE *ghebh-el-.


cephalopod (n.)

1825, from French cephalopode, from Modern Latin Cephalopoda (the class name), from Greek kephale
head (see cephalo-) + pod-, stem of pous foot (see foot (n.)).


cephalothorax (n.)

1829, from cephalo- + thorax. Perhaps from French or German.


Cepheid (n.)

type of variable star, 1904, from Delta Cephi, the name of the first such star identified, which is
in the dim northern constellation Cephus, named for Greek Kepheus, a mythical king. With -id.


ceraceous (adj.)

waxy, 1738, from Latin cera wax (see cere (n.)) + -aceous.


ceramic (adj.)

1850, keramic, from Greek keramikos, from keramos potter's clay, pottery, tiles, perhaps from a pre-
Hellenic word. Watkins suggests possible connection with Latin cremare to burn, but Klein's sources
are firmly against this. Spelling influenced by French c&#233;ramique (1806). Related: ceramist
(1855). Ceramics is attested from 1857.


cerato-

word-forming element meaning horn, from Latinized comb. form of Greek keras horn (see kerato-).


ceratosaurus (n.)

1884, from cerato- + -saurus.


Cerberus

watch-dog guardian of Hades, late 14c., Latinized form of Greek Kerberos, of unknown origin,
according to Klein perhaps cognate with Sanskrit karbarah, sabalah spotted, speckled; Sabalah was
the name of one of the two dogs of Yama.


cere (n.)

late 15c., from French cire wax (12c.), from Latin cera wax, wax seal, wax writing tablet, related
to Greek keros beeswax, of unknown origin.


cereal (n.)

1832, grass yielding edible grain, originally an adjective (1818) having to do with edible grain,
from French c&eacute;r&eacute;ale (16c., of Ceres; 18c. in grain sense), from Latin Cerealis of
grain, originally of Ceres, from Ceres, Italic goddess of agriculture, from PIE *ker-es-, from root
*ker- (3) to grow (see crescent). The application to breakfast food cereal made from grain is
American English, 1899.


cerebellum (n.)

1560s, from Latin cerebellum a small brain, diminutive of cerebrum brain (see cerebral).


cerebral (adj.)

1816, pertaining to the brain, from French c&eacute;r&eacute;bral (16c.), from Latin cerebrum the
brain (also the understanding), from PIE *keres-, from root *ker- (1) top of the head (see horn
(n.)). Meaning intellectual, clever is from 1929. Cerebral palsy attested from 1824, originally a
general term for cases of paralysis that seemed to be traceable to a morbid state of the encephalon.
Later used in a more specific sense from c.1860, based on the work of English surgeon Dr. William
Little.


cerebration (n.)

1853, coined by English physiologist Dr. William B. Carpenter (1813-1885) from Latin cerebrum brain
(see cerebral) + -ation. Related: Cerebrate (v.); cerebrated.


cerebrovascular (adj.)

1935, from cerebro-, comb. form of Latin cerebrum (see cerebral) + vascular.


cerebrum (n.)

1610s, from Latin cerebrum brain (see cerebral).


ceremonial (adj.)

c.1400, belonging to (religious) ritual, also as a noun, a ceremonial practice, from Late Latin
caerimonialis pertaining to ceremony, from caerimonia (see ceremony). Related: Ceremonially.


ceremonious (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French c&eacute;r&eacute;monieux or directly from Late Latin caerimoniosus, from
Latin caerimonia (see ceremony). Meaning full of show and ceremony is from 1610s. Related:
Ceremoniously; ceremoniousness.


ceremony (n.)

late 14c., cerymonye, from Old French ceremonie and directly from Medieval Latin ceremonia, from
Latin caerimonia holiness, sacredness; awe; reverent rite, sacred ceremony, an obscure word,
possibly of Etruscan origin, or a reference to the ancient rites performed by the Etruscan pontiffs
at Caere, near Rome. Introduced in English by Wyclif.


Ceres

Roman goddess of agriculture (identified with Greek Demeter), also the name given to the first-found
and largest asteroid (discovered 1801); see cereal. Her festival, Cerealia, was April 10.


Cereus (n.)

cactus genus, 1730, from Latin cereus waxen, waxy, from cera wax (see cere (n.)). So called from its
shape, which suggests a candle.


ceriph (n.)

lines at the top or bottom of a letter; see sans-serif.


cerise (n.)

shade of red, 1858, from French cerise, from rouge-cerise cherry-red, from cerise cherry (see
cherry).


cerium (n.)

element, first isolated in pure form in 1875, named for ceria, the name of the earth from which it
was taken, which was discovered in 1803 and named by Berzelius and Hissinger for Ceres, the minor
planet, which had been discovered in 1801 and named for the Roman goddess Ceres.


cero-

word-forming element meaning waxy, from Latinized form of Greek kero-, comb. form of keros (see cere
(n.)).


ceromancy (n.)

divination by means of melted wax dripped in water (the shapes supposedly previsioning a future
spouse, etc.), 1650s, from French ceromancie, Medieval Latin ceromantia; see cere (n.) + -mancy.


cert

colloquial abbreviation of certain or certainty, attested from 1889.


certain (adj.)

c.1300, determined, fixed, from Old French certain reliable, sure, assured (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
*certanus, from Latin certus sure, fixed, settled, determined (also source of Italian certo, Spanish
cierto), originally a variant past participle of cernere to distinguish, decide, literally to sift,
separate (see crisis).    Of persons, full of confidence in one's knowledge or judgment, from mid-
14c. Euphemistic use (of a certain age, etc.) attested from mid-18c. Certainer, certainest were
common to c.1750, but have fallen from proper use for some reason. Expression for certain assuredly
is attested by early 14c.


certainly (adv.)

c.1300, in all main modern senses, from certain + -ly (2).


certainty (n.)

c.1300, certeynte, surety, pledge, from Anglo-French certeint&eacute; (late 13c.), Old French
certainete certainty, from Latin or Vulgar Latin *certanitatem (source of Old Spanish certanedad);
see certain. Meaning that which is certain is attested from early 14c.; meaning quality of being
certain is from mid-14c.


certes (adv.)

mid-13c., from Old French certes, from Vulgar Latin certas, from Latin certe, adverb from certus
(see certain).


certifiable (adj.)

1846, from certify + -able. Meaning so deranged as to be certifiably insane is recorded from 1912.


certificate (n.)

early 15c., action of certifying, from French certificat, from Medieval Latin certificatum thing
certified, noun use of neuter past participle of certificare (see certify). Of documents, from mid-
15c., especially a document which attests to someone's authorization to practice or do something
(1540s).


certificated (adj.)

1610s, past participle adjective from obsolete certificate (v.), from Medieval Latin certificatus,
past participle of certificare (see certify).


certification (n.)

early 15c., notification; mid-15c., demonstration, proof, from Medieval Latin certificationem
(nominative certificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Late Latin certificare (see
certify). Meaning act of providing with a legal certificate is from 1881.


certify (v.)

mid-14c., to declare the truth of, also to vouch for or confirm (an official record, etc.), from Old
French certefiier make certain, witness the truth of (12c.), from Late Latin certificare to certify,
to make certain, from Latin certus (see certain) + root of facere to make, do (see factitious). Also
used in Middle English in broader senses of inform, give notice; instruct, to direct; to designate.
Related: Certified; certifying. Certified public accountant attested from 1896.


certiorari

legal Latin, to be certified, to be informed or shown, from a word figuring in the opening phrase of
such writs from superior to inferior courts seeking the records of a case. Passive present
infinitive of certorare to certify, inform, from certior, comp. of certus sure (see certain).


certitude (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French certitude certainty (16c.), from Late Latin certitudinem (nominative
certitudo) that which is certain, from Latin certus sure, certain (see certain).


cerulean (adj.)

1660s, with -an + Latin caeruleus blue, dark blue, blue-green, perhaps dissimilated from caelulum,
diminutive of caelum heaven, sky, of uncertain origin (see celestial). The Latin word was applied by
Roman authors to the sky, the Mediterranean, and occasionally to leaves or fields. As a noun, from
1756.


cerumen (n.)

earwax, 1741, medical Latin cerumen, coined by Swiss anatomist Gaspard Bauhin (1560-1624) from Latin
cera wax (see cere (n.)) on model of albumen; or else from Greek keroumenos formed of wax.


cerveza (n.)

Spanish for beer, from Latin cervisia beer (related to Latin cerea a Spanish beer), from a Celtic
*kerb- (compare Gaulish curmi, Old Irish cuirm, Middle Irish coirm, Welsh cwrwf, Old Cornish coref
beer), from Proto-Celtic *kormi-, perhaps from PIE root *krem-, also source of Latin cremare to burn
(see cremation). Connection with ceres (as a drink from grain) is very dubious [Tucker].


cervical (adj.)

1680s, of the neck, from French cervical, from Latin cervix (see cervix). Meaning of the neck of the
womb attested by 1860. Related: Cervically.


cervix (n.)

early 15c., ligament in the neck, from Latin cervix the neck, nape of the neck, from PIE *kerw-o-,
from root *ker- (1) (see horn (n.)). Applied to various neck-like structures of the body, especially
that of the uterus (by 1702), where it is shortened from medical Latin cervix uteri (17c.).
Sometimes in medical writing 18c.-19c. cervix of the uterus to distinguish it from the neck sense.


Cesar

Spanish form of masc. proper name Caesar.


cesarean

alternative spelling of caesarian (see also &aelig;).


cesarian

alternative spelling of caesarian.


cesium (n.)

also caesium, rare alkaline metal, 1861, coined by Bunsen and Kirchhoff in 1860 in Modern Latin
(caesium), from Latin caesius blue-gray (especially of eyes), in reference to the two prominent blue
lines in its spectrum, by which it was first identified.


cess (n.)

tax, levy, 1530s, short for assess (q.v.).


cessation (n.)

mid-15c., cessacyoun interruption, abdication, from Latin cessationem (nominative cessatio) a
delaying, ceasing, tarrying, noun of action from past participle stem of cessare delay (see cease
(n.)).


cession (n.)

late 14c., a relinquishing, from Old French cession cession; death (13c.), from Latin cessionem
(nominative cessio) a giving up, surrendering, noun of action from past participle stem of cedere to
go away, yield (see cede). Related: Cessionary.


cesspit (n.)

1864, from cess (see cesspool) + pit (n.).


cesspool (n.)

also cess-pool, 1670s, the first element perhaps an alteration of cistern, perhaps a shortened form
of recess [Klein]; or the whole may be an alteration of suspiral (c.1400), drainpipe, from Old
French sospiral a vent, air hole, from sospirer breathe, from Latin suspirare breathe deep
[Barnhart]. Meaning extended to tank at the end of the pipe, which would account for a possible
folk-etymology change in final syllable.    Other possible etymologies: Italian cesso privy, from
Latin secessus place of retirement (in Late Latin privy, drain); dialectal suspool, from suss, soss
puddle; or cess a bog on the banks of a tidal river.


Cestrian

1703, from Cester, Old English form of Chester, + -ian.


Cetacea (n.)

order of marine mammals containing whales, 1830, Modern Latin, from Latin cetus any large sea
creature (whales, seals, dolphins), from Greek ketos a whale, a sea monster, of unknown origin, +
-acea. Hence cetology the study of whales, first attested 1851 in Moby Dick.


cetacean (n.)

1836, from Cetacea, name of the order of marine mammals, + -an. As an adjective from 1839.


ceteris paribus

Modern Latin, literally other things being equal.


cetyl (n.)

univalent alcohol radical found in spermaceti, beeswax, etc., 1842, from Latin cetus whale (see
Cetacea) + -yl.


Ceylon

Portuguese form of Sri Lanka (q.v.). Related: Ceylonese.


cf

see cf.


cf.

abbreviation of Latin confer compare (see confer).


cgi

by 2004, initialism (acronym) for computer-generated imagery.


ch

digraph used in Old French for the tsh sound. In some French dialects, including that of Paris (but
not that of Picardy), Latin ca- became French tsha. This was introduced to English after the Norman
Conquest, in words borrowed from Old French such as chaste, charity, chief (adj.). Under French
influence, -ch- also was inserted into Anglo-Saxon words that had the same sound (such as bleach,
chest, church) which in Old English still was written with a simple -c-, and into those that had
formerly been spelled with a -c- and pronounced k such as chin and much.    As French evolved, the t
sound dropped out of it, so in later loan-words from France ch- has only the sound sh- (chauffeur,
machine (n.), chivalry, etc.).    It turns up as well in words from classical languages (chaos,
echo, etc.). Most uses of -ch- in Roman Latin were in words from Greek, which would be pronounced
correctly as k + h, as in blockhead, but most Romans would have said merely k. Sometimes ch- is
written to keep -c- hard before a front vowel, as still in modern Italian.    In some languages
(Welsh, Spanish, Czech) ch- can be treated as a separate letter and words in it are alphabetized
after -c- (or, in Czech and Slovak, after -h-). The sound also is heard in more distant languages
(as in cheetah, chintz), and the digraph also is used to represent the sound in Scottish loch.


cha (n.)

tea, 1590s, also chaw, ultimately from the Mandarin ch'a tea; used in English alongside tea when the
beverage was introduced.


cha-cha (n.)

also cha-cha-cha, type of Latin-American 3-beat ballroom dance, 1954, echoic of the music.


Chablis (n.)

light, white Burgundy wine, 1660s, named for town of Chablis southeast of Paris. Made only of
Chardonnay grapes. The French word chablis (16c.) is literally deadwood, fallen from a tree through
age or brought down by wind, short for bois chablis, from Old French *chableiz.


chad (n.1)

also Mr. Chad, graffiti drawing of a head peering over a fence or wall, with the caption, Wot, no
______? (the U.S. version usually had Kilroy was here), in reaction to shortages and rationing,
1945, British, of unknown origin.


Chad (n.2)

African nation, former French colony (Tchad), independent since 1960, named for Lake Chad, which is
from a local word meaning lake, large expanse of water. An ironic name for such a desert country.


chad (n.3)

hanging flap or piece after a hole is punched in paper, a word unknown to most people until the 2000
U.S. presidential election (when the outcome hinged on partially punched paper ballots in some
Florida counties), attested by 1930, of unknown origin.


chador (n.)

cloth worn as a shawl by Muslim women, from Persian chadar tent, mantle, scarf, veil, sheet, table-
cloth.


chaeto-

before vowels chaet-, word-forming element meaning hair, also, in scientific use, spine, bristle,
from Latinized form of Greek khaite long, flowing hair  (of persons, also of horses, lions), related
to Avestan  gaesa- curly hair.


chaetophobia (n.)

fear of hair, from chaeto- hair; bristle + -phobia fear.


chafe (v.)

early 14c., chaufen, c.1300, be provoked; late 14c. in literal sense to make warm, to heat, also
intransitive, to grow warm or hot, especially (early 15c.) to warm by rubbing, from Old French
chaufer heat, warm up, become warm (12c., Modern French chauffer), from Vulgar Latin *calefare, from
Latin calefacere to make hot, make warm, from calere be warm (see calorie) + facere to make, do (see
factitious).    Figurative sense from late 14c. include now-obsolete kindle (joy), inspire, make
passionate as well as provoke, vex, anger. Sense of make sore by rubbing first recorded 1520s.
Related: Chafed; chafing.


chafer (n.)

kind of beetle, Old English ceafor beetle, cock-chafer, from Proto-Germanic *kabraz- (cognates: Old
Saxon kevera, Dutch kever, Old High German chevar, German K&auml;fer), literally gnawer, from PIE
*gep(h)- jaw, mouth (see jowl (n.1)).


chaff (n.)

husks, Old English ceaf chaff, probably from Proto-Germanic *kaf- to gnaw, chew (cognates: Middle
Dutch and Dutch kaf, German Kaff), from PIE root *gep(h)- jaw, mouth (see jowl (n.1)). Used
figuratively for worthless material from late 14c.


chaffer (n.)

a bargain, early 13c., cheffare buying and selling, also (14c.) cheapfare, probably from Old English
ceap bargain, traffic, gain, sale (see cheap) + faru faring, going (see fare (n.)). In later use,
haggling. The verb is recorded from mid-14c.


chaffinch (n.)

Fringilla c&aelig;lebs, Old English ceaffinc, literally chaff-finch, so called for its habit of
eating waste grain among the chaff on farms. See chaff + finch.


chagrin (n.)

1650s, melancholy, from French chagrin melancholy, anxiety, vexation (14c.), from Old North French
chagreiner or Angevin dialect chagraigner sadden, of unknown origin, perhaps [Gamillscheg] from Old
French graignier grieve over, be angry, from graigne sadness, resentment, grief, vexation, from
graim sorrowful, of unknown origin, perhaps from a Germanic source (compare Old High German gram
angry, fierce). But OED and other sources trace it to an identical Old French word, borrowed into
English phonetically as shagreen, meaning rough skin or hide, of uncertain origin, the connecting
notion being roughness, harshness. Modern sense of feeling of irritation from disappointment is
1716.


chagrin (v.)

1660s (implied in chagrined), from chagrin (n.). Related: Chagrined; chagrining.


chai (n.)

tea, 1919, from the Russian or Arabic word for tea (see tea, and compare cha). Now used especially
of spiced teas.


chain (n.)

c.1300, from Old French chaeine chain (12c., Modern French cha&icirc;ne), from Latin catena chain
(source also of Spanish cadena, Italian catena), of unknown origin, perhaps from PIE root *kat- to
twist, twine (cognates: Latin cassis hunting net, snare).    Figurative use from c.1600. As a type
of ornament worn about the neck, from late 14c. Chain of stores is American English, 1846. Chain
gang is from 1834; chain reaction is from 1916 in physics, specific nuclear physics sense is from
1938; chain mail first recorded 1822, in Scott, from mail (n.2). Before that, mail alone sufficed.
Chain letter recorded from 1892; usually to raise money at first; decried from the start as a
nuisance.Nine out of every ten givers are reluctant and unwilling, and are coerced into giving
through the awful fear of breaking the chain, so that the spirit of charity is woefully absent. [St.
Nicholas magazine, vol. XXVI, April 1899] Chain smoker is attested from 1886, originally of Bismarck
(who smoked cigars), thus probably a loan-translation of German Kettenraucher. Chain-smoking is from
1930.


chain (v.)

late 14c., to bar with a chain; to put (someone) in chains, also to link things together, from chain
(n.). Related: Chained; chaining.


chainsaw (n.)

also chain saw, chain-saw; 1818 as a surgical apparatus; 1835 in the saw mill sense, from chain (n.)
+ saw (n.).


chair (n.)

early 13c., chaere, from Old French chaiere chair, seat, throne (12c.; Modern French chaire pulpit,
throne; the more modest sense having gone since 16c. with variant form chaise), from Latin cathedra
seat (see cathedral).    Figurative sense of authority was in Middle English, of bishops and
professors. Meaning office of a professor (1816) is extended from the seat from which a professor
lectures (mid-15c.). Meaning seat of a person presiding at  meeting is from 1640s. As short for
electric chair from 1900.


chair (v.)

mid-15c., install in a chair or seat (implied in chairing), from chair (n.); meaning preside over (a
meeting, etc.) is attested by 1921. Related: Chaired.


chairman (n.)

1650s, occupier of a chair of authority, from chair (n.) + man (n.). Meaning member of a corporate
body chosen to preside at meetings is from c.1730. Chairwoman in this sense first attested 1752;
chairperson 1971.


chairperson (n.)

1971, American English, from chair (n.) + person.


chairwoman (n.)

woman who leads a formal meeting, 1752, from chair (n.) + woman.


chaise (n.)

1701, pleasure carriage, from French chaise chair (15c.), dialectal variant of chaire (see chair
(n.)) due to 15c.-16c. Parisian accent swapping of -r- and -s-, a habit often satirized by French
writers. French chair and chaise then took respectively the senses of high seat, throne, pulpit and
chair, seat. Chaise lounge (1800) is corruption of French chaise longue long chair, the second word
confused in English with lounge.


chakra (n.)

1888 in yoga sense, from Sanskrit cakra circle, wheel, from PIE root *kwel- (1) wheel (see cycle
(n.)).


chalazion (n.)

small tumor in the eyelid, 1708, from Greek khalazion, diminutive of khalaza hail, hailstone; small
lump or knot; pimple, from PIE root *gheled- hail.


chalcedony (n.)

c.1300, from Latin calcedonius, in Vulgate translating Greek khalkedon in Rev. xxi:19, found nowhere
else. Connection with Chalcedon in Asia Minor is very doubtful [OED]. The city name is from
Phoenician and means new town.


Chaldean (adj.)

with + -an + Latin Chaldaeus, from Greek Khaldaios, from Aramaic Kaldaie, from Akkadian (mat)Kaldu
the Chaldeans.


chalet (n.)

1782, from Swiss-French chalet herdsman's hut, Alpine cottage, probably a diminutive of Old French
chasel farmhouse, house, abode, hut, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *casalis belonging to a house, from
Latin casa house; or from Old Proven&ccedil;al cala small shelter for ships, from a pre-Latin
language [Barnhart].


chalice (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French chalice, from Old French chalice, collateral form of calice (Modern
French calice), from Latin calicem (nominative calix) cup, cognate with Greek kylix cup, drinking
cup, cup of a flower, from PIE root *kal- (1) cup. Ousted Old English cognate c&aelig;lic, an
ecclesiastical borrowing of the Latin word, and earlier Middle English caliz, from Old North French.


chalk (n.)

Old English cealc chalk, lime, plaster; pebble, a West Germanic borrowing from Latin calx (2)
limestone, lime (crushed limestone), small stone, from Greek khalix small pebble, which many trace
to a PIE root for split, break up. In most Germanic languages still with the limestone sense, but in
English transferred to the opaque, white, soft limestone found abundantly in the south of the
island. Modern spelling is from early 14c. The Latin word for chalk was creta, which also is of
unknown origin.


chalk (v.)

1570s, to mix with chalk; 1590s as to mark with chalk, from chalk (n.). Related: Chalked; chalking.
Old English had cealcian to whiten. Certain chalk marks on shipped objects meant admitted or shipped
free, hence some figurative senses. Chalk boards also were commonly used in keeping credit, score,
etc., hence figurative use of chalk it up (1903).


chalk-mark (n.)

1767, from chalk (n.) + mark (n.). As a verb from 1866.


chalkboard (n.)

also chalk-board, 1816, from chalk (n.) + board (n.1).


chalky (adj.)

c.1400, from chalk (n.) + -y (2). Related: Chalkiness.


challah (n.)

from Yiddish khale, from Hebrew chala loaf of bread.


challenge (n.)

early 14c., something one can be accused of, a fault, blemish; mid-14c., false accusation, malicious
charge; accusation of wrong-doing, also act of laying claim (to something), from Anglo-French
chalenge, Old French chalonge calumny, slander; demand, opposition, in legal use, accusation, claim,
dispute, from Anglo-French chalengier, Old French chalongier to accuse, to dispute (see challenge
(v.)). Accusatory connotations died out 17c. Meanings an objection in law, etc.; a calling to fight
are from mid-15c. Meaning difficult task is from 1954.


challenge (v.)

c.1200, to rebuke, from Old French chalongier complain, protest; haggle, quibble, from Vulgar Latin
calumniare to accuse falsely, from Latin calumniari to accuse falsely, misrepresent, slander, from
calumnia trickery (see calumny).    From late 13c. as to object to, take exception to; c.1300 as to
accuse, especially to accuse falsely, also to call to account; late 14c. as to call to fight. Also
used in Middle English with sense claim, take to oneself. Related: Challenged; challenging.


challenged (adj.)

as a euphemism for disabled, 1985, past participle adjective from challenge (v.).


challenger (n.)

late 13c., a claimant; mid-14c., one who makes false charges; mid-15c., one who disputes something,
objector, from Anglo-French chalengeour (Old French chalongeor slanderer, petitioner, plaintiff),
agent noun from challenge (v.). Specific sense of one who calls out another in a contest is from
1510s.


challis (n.)

type of fabric for ladies' dresses, 1849, of unknown origin, perhaps from the surname.


cham (n.)

old alternative form of khan, 1550s, from French cham, Medieval Latin cham, alternative forms of
chan, can.


chamber (n.)

c.1200, room, usually a private one, from Old French chambre room, chamber, apartment, also used in
combinations to form words for latrine, privy (11c.), from Late Latin camera a chamber, room (see
camera). In anatomy from late 14c.; of machinery from 1769. Gunnery sense is from 1620s. Meaning
legislative body is from c.1400. Chamber music (1789) was that meant to be performed in private
rooms instead of public halls.


chamber (v.)

late 14c., to restrain, also to furnish with a chamber (inplied in chambered, from chamber (n.).
Related: Chambering.


chamber-lye (n.)

urine used as a detergent, 1570s, from chamber (n.) in the privy sense + lye.


chamber-pot (n.)

also chamberpot, 1560s, from chamber (n.) + pot (n.1).


chambered (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from chamber (v.).


chamberlain (n.)

early 13c., from Old French chamberlenc chamberlain, steward, treasurer (Modern French chambellan),
from a Germanic source (perhaps Frankish *kamerling; compare Old High German chamarling, German
K&auml;mmerling), from Latin camera chamber, room (see camera) + Germanic diminutive suffix -ling.


chambermaid (n.)

1580s, from chamber + maid.


chambray (n.)

1814, American English, alteration of Cambrai, city in France (formerly Flanders) where the cloth
originally was made. Compare cambric.


chameleon (n.)

mid-14c., camelion, from Old French cam&eacute;l&eacute;on, from Latin chamaeleon, from Greek
khamaileon the chameleon, from khamai on the ground (also dwarf), akin to chthon earth (see
chthonic) + leon lion (see lion). Perhaps the large head-crest on some species was thought to
resemble a lion's mane. The classical -h- was restored in English early 18c. Figurative sense of
variable person is 1580s. It formerly was supposed to live on air (as in Hamlet III.ii.98).


chamfer (n.)

c.1600, small groove cut in wood or stone, from Middle French chanfraindre (15c., Modern French
chanfreiner), past participle of chanfraint. The second element seems to be from Latin frangere to
break (see fraction); perhaps the whole word is cantum frangere to break the edge. Meaning bevelled
surface of a square edge or corner is attested from c.1840, of uncertain connection to the other
sense.


chamfered (adj.)

1560s, channelled, fluted, from the verb form of chamfer (v.); see chamfer (n.)). Meaning bevelled
off is from c.1790.


chamois (n.)

1550s, Alpine antelope; 1570s, soft leather, originally skin of the chamois, from Middle French
chamois Alpine antelope (14c.), from Late Latin camox (genitive camocis), perhaps from a pre-Latin
Alpine language that also produced Italian camoscio, Spanish camuza, Old High German gamiza, German
Gemse (though some of these might be from Latin camox). As a verb, to polish with chamois, from
1934.


chamomile (n.)

obsolete form of camomile.


Chamorro

indigenous people of Guam and the Marianas Islands, from Spanish Chamorro, literally shorn, shaven,
bald. Supposedly because the men shaved their heads, but the name also has been connected to native
Chamoru, said to mean noble, so perhaps Chamorro is a Spanish folk etymology.


champ (n.)

1868, American English abbreviation of champion (n.).


champ (v.)

to chew noisily, 1520s, probably echoic; OED suggests a connection with jam (v.). Earlier also cham,
chamb, etc. To champ on (or at) the bit, as an eager horse will, is attested in figurative sense by
1640s. Related: Champed; champing. As a noun in this sense, attested from c.1600.


champagne (n.)

1660s, from French, short for vin de Champagne   wine made in Champagne, former province in
northwest France, literally open country (see campaign (n.)). Originally any wine from this region,
focused to the modern meaning late 18c.


champaign (n.)

open country, plain, c.1400, from Old French champagne country, countryside, from Latin campania
plain, level country, especially that near Rome (see campaign (n.)).


champertous (adj.)

1640s, from champart, from French champart portion of produce received by a feudal lord from land
held in lease from him (13c.), from Old North French campart-, probably from Latin campi pars part
of the field (see campus + part (n.)). In later use often with reference to champerty (early 14c.),
the illegal act whereby a person makes a bargain to maintain a litigant in return for a share of the
gains if the case succeeds.


champignon (n.)

mushroom, 1570s, from Middle French champignon (14c.), with change of suffix, from Old French
champegnuel, from Vulgar Latin *campaniolus that which grows in the field, from Late Latin campaneus
pertaining to the fields, from campania level country (see campaign (n.)).


champion (n.)

early 13c., doughty fighting man, valorous combatant, also (c.1300) one who fights on behalf of
another or others, from Old French champion combatant, champion in single combat (12c.), from Late
Latin campionem (nominative campio) gladiator, fighter, combatant in the field, from Latin campus
field (of combat); see campus. Had been borrowed earlier by Old English as cempa. Sports sense in
reference to first-place performer in some field is recorded from 1730.


champion (v.)

to fight for, defend, protect, 1820 (Scott) in a literal sense, from champion (n.). Figurative use
by 1830. Earlier it meant to challenge (c.1600). Related: Championed; championing.


championship (n.)

1812, position of a champion, from champion (n.) + -ship. Meaning competition to determine a
champion is recorded from 1893.


chance (v.)

late 14c., to come about, to happen, from chance (n.). Meaning to risk attested from 1859. Related:
Chanced; chancing.


chance (n.)

c.1300, something that takes place, what happens, an occurrence (good or bad, but more often bad),
from Old French cheance accident, chance, fortune, luck, situation, the falling of dice (12c.,
Modern French chance), from Vulgar Latin *cadentia that which falls out, a term used in dice, from
neuter plural of Latin cadens, present participle of cadere to fall (see case (n.1)).    In English
frequently in plural, chances. The word's notions of opportunity and randomness are as old as the
record of it in English and now all but crowd out the word's original notion of mere occurrence.
Main chance thing of most importance is from 1570s, bearing the older sense. The mathematical (and
hence odds-making) sense is attested from 1778. To stand a chance (or not) is from 1796.    To take
(one's) chances accept what happens (early 14c.) is from the old, neutral sense; to take a
chance/take chances is originally (by 1814) participate in a raffle or lottery or game; extended
sense of take a risk is by 1826.


chancel (n.)

c.1300, part of the church around the altar, from Old French chancel, from Late Latin cancellus
lattice, from Latin cancelli (plural) grating, bars (see cancel); sense extended in Late Latin from
the lattice-work that separated the choir from the nave in a church to the space itself.


chancellery (n.)

see chancery.


chancellor (n.)

early 12c., from Old French chancelier (12c.), from Late Latin cancellarius keeper of the barrier,
secretary, usher of a law court, so called because he worked behind a lattice (Latin cancellus) at a
basilica or law court (see chancel). In the Roman Empire, a sort of court usher; the post gradually
gained importance in the Western kingdoms. A variant form, canceler, existed in Old English, from
Old North French, but was replaced by this central French form.


chancery (n.)

late 14c., court of the Lord Chancellor of England, contracted from chancellery (c.1300), from Old
French chancelerie (12c.), from Medieval Latin cancellaria (see chancellor).


chancre (n.)

also chanker, venereal ulcer, c.1600, from French chancre (15c.), literally cancer, from Latin
cancer (see cancer).


chancy (adj.)

1510s, lucky, foreboding good fortune, from chance (n.) + -y (2). Meaning uncertain, subject to risk
is recorded from 1860. The possible sense full of opportunity seems to have been used regularly only
in cricket (1875).


chandelier (n.)

late 14c., chaundeler candlestick, chandelier, from Old French chandelier (n.1), 12c., earlier
chandelabre candlestick, candelabrum (10c.), from Latin candelabrum, from candela candle (see
candle). Re-spelled mid-18c. in French fashion; during 17c. the French spelling referred to a
military device.


chandler (n.)

maker or seller of candles, late 14c., attested as a surname from late 13c. (also, from early 14c.
candle-holder; see chandelier), from Old French chandelier (n.2) candle-maker, candle-seller; person
in charge of lighting a household, monastery, etc., from Latin candelarius, from candela candle (see
candle). Native candleman is attested from mid-13c.


chandlery (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French chandelerie, from chandelier (see chandler).


Chanel

Paris fashion house, founded by Gabrielle 'Coco' Chanel (1883-1971), French fashion designer and
perfumier, who opened her first shop in 1909. The perfume Chanel No. 5 debuted in 1921.


change (v.)

early 13c., to substitute one for another; to make (something) other than what it was (transitive);
from late 13c. as to become different (intransitive), from Old French changier to change, alter;
exchange, switch, from Late Latin cambiare to barter, exchange, from Latin cambire to exchange,
barter, of Celtic origin, from PIE root *kemb- to bend, crook (with a sense evolution perhaps from
to turn to to change, to to barter); cognate with Old Irish camm crooked, curved; Middle Irish cimb
tribute, cimbid prisoner; see cant (n.2). Meaning to take off clothes and put on other ones is from
late 15c. Related: Changed; changing. To change (one's) mind is from 1610s.


change (n.)

c.1200, act or fact of changing, from Anglo-French chaunge, Old French change exchange, recompense,
reciprocation, from changier (see change (v.)).    Meaning a different situation is from 1680s.
Meaning something substituted for something else is from 1590s. The financial sense of balance
returned when something is paid for is first recorded 1620s; hence to make change (1865). Bell-
ringing sense is from 1610s. Related: changes. Figurative phrase change of heart is from 1828.


changeable (adj.)

mid-13c., unstable, inconstant, unreliable, from Old French changeable inconstant, from changier
(see change (v.)) + -able (see -able). Meaning subject to variation is from late 14c. Related:
Changeably.


changeling (n.)

1550s, one given to change, from change (n.) + diminutive suffix -ling. Meaning person or thing left
in place of one secretly taken is from 1560s; specific reference to an infant or young child
(usually stupid or ugly) supposedly left by the faeries in place of one they took is from 1580s. An
earlier word for it was oaf or auf.


changer (n.)

early 14c., agent noun from change (v.), or else from Old French changeour money-changer, barterer,
from changier.


channel (v.)

1590s, to wear channels in, from channel (n.). Meaning convey in a channel is from 1640s. Related:
Channeled; channeling.


channel (n.)

early 14c., bed of running water, from Old French chanel bed of a waterway; tube, pipe, gutter, from
Latin canalis groove, channel, waterpipe (see canal). Given a broader, figurative sense 1530s (of
information, commerce, etc.); meaning circuit for telegraph communication (1848) probably led to
that of band of frequency for radio or TV signals (1928). The Channel Islands are the French
&#206;les Anglo-Normandes.


chanson (n.)

c.1600, from French chanson, from Old French chan&#231;on song, epic poem (12c.), from Latin
cantionem (nominative cantio) song, from past participle stem of canere (see chant (v.)).


chant (v.)

late 14c., from Old French chanter to sing, celebrate (12c.), from Latin cantare to sing, originally
frequentative of canere sing (which it replaced), from PIE root *kan- to sing (cognates: Greek
eikanos cock, Old English hana cock, both literally bird who sings for sunrise; Old Irish caniaid
sings, Welsh canu sing). The frequentative quality of the word was no longer felt in Latin, and by
the time French emerged the word had entirely displaced canere. Related: Chanted; chanting.


chant (n.)

1670s, from chant (v.), or else from French chant (12c.), from Latin cantus song, a singing; bird-
song, from past participle stem of canere.


chanter (n.)

singer, composer, late 14c., from Old French chanteor (Modern French chanteur), from Latin cantorem
singer, from cantare to sing (see chant (v.)).


chanteuse (n.)

female singer of popular songs, 1888, from French chanteuse (16c.), fem. agent noun of chanter to
sing (see chant (v.)). In Old French, the word was chanteresse.


chanticleer (n.)

a cock, c.1300, from Old French Chantecler sing-loud (Modern French Chanteclair), name of the cock
in medieval stories of Reynard the Fox; from chanter to sing (see chant (v.)) + cler (see clear
(adj.)).


Chantilly

town in France near Paris; as a kind of porcelain made there, 1774; in reference to a delicate lace
originally made there, 1831. The place name is Medieval Latin Chantileium, from the Gallo-Roman
personal name Cantilius.


chanty (n.)

1856, also shanty, chantey; probably an alteration of French chanter to sing (see chant (v.));
perhaps from French chantez, imperative of chanter.


Chanukah

also Chanukkah, 1891, from Hebrew hanukkah consecration.


chaos (n.)

late 14c., gaping void, from Old French chaos (14c.) or directly from Latin chaos, from Greek khaos
abyss, that which gapes wide open, is vast and empty, from *khnwos, from PIE root *gheu- to gape,
yawn (cognates: Greek khaino I yawn, Old English ginian, Old Norse ginnunga-gap; see yawn (v.)).
Meaning utter confusion (c.1600) is extended from theological use of chaos for the void at the
beginning of creation in Vulgate version of Genesis (1530s in English). The Greek for disorder was
tarakhe, however the use of chaos here was rooted in Hesiod (Theogony), who describes khaos as the
primeval emptiness of the Universe, begetter of Erebus and Nyx (Night), and in Ovid (Metamorphoses),
who opposes Khaos to Kosmos, the ordered Universe. Meaning orderless confusion in human affairs is
from c.1600. Chaos theory in the modern mathematical sense is attested from c.1977.


chaotic (adj.)

1713, in a state of primordial chaos, irregularly formed in English from chaos + -ic, probably on
model of eros/erotic, demos/demotic, hypnos/hypnotic, etc. Transferred or figurative meaning
confused, disordered is from 1747.


chap (n.)

1570s, customer, short for obsolete chapman purchaser, trader (see cheap). Colloquial sense of lad,
fellow is first attested 1716 (compare slang tough customer).


chap (v.)

to crack, mid-15c., chappen (intransitive) to split, burst open; cause to crack (transitive);
perhaps a variant of choppen (see chop (v.), and compare strap/strop), or related to Middle Dutch
kappen to chop, cut, Danish kappe, Swedish kappa to cut. Related: Chapped; chapping. The noun
meaning fissure in the skin is from late 14c.


chaparral (n.)

shrub thicket, 1850, American English, from Spanish chaparro evergreen oak, perhaps from Basque
txapar little thicket, diminutive of sapar heath, thicket.    In Spain, a chaparral   is a bush of a
species of oak. The termination al signifies a place abounding in; as, chaparral, a place of oak-
bushes, almendral, an almond orchard; parral, a vineyard; cafetal, a coffee plantation, etc., etc.
This word, chaparral, has been introduced into the language since our acquisition of Texas and New
Mexico, where these bushes abound. It is a series of thickets, of various sizes, from one hundred
yards to a mile through, with bushes and briars, all covered with thorns, and so closely entwined
together as almost to prevent the passage of any thing larger than a wolf or hare. [John Russell
Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1859]


chapbook (n.)

also chap-book, 1824, shortened from chap(man) book, so called because chapmen (see cheap) once sold
such books on the street. A modern word for a type of old book.


chapeau (n.)

1520s, from Middle French chapeau (Old French capel, 12c.) hat, from Vulgar Latin *cappellus, from
Late Latin capellum (also source of Italian cappello, Spanish capelo, Portuguese chapeo), diminutive
of cappa (see cap (n.)).


chapel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French chapele (12c., Modern French chapelle), from Medieval Latin cappella
chapel, sanctuary for relics, literally little cape, diminutive of Late Latin cappa cape (see cap
(n.)); by tradition, originally in reference to the sanctuary in France in which the miraculous cape
of St. Martin of Tours, patron saint of France, was preserved; meaning extended in most European
languages to any sanctuary. (While serving Rome as a soldier deployed in Gaul, Martin cut his
military coat in half to share it with a ragged beggar. That night, Martin dreamed Christ wearing
the half-cloak; the half Martin kept was the relic.)


chaperon (n.)

1720, woman accompanying a younger, unmarried lady in public, from French chaperon protector,
especially female companion to a young woman, earlier head covering, hood (c.1400), from Old French
chaperon hood, cowl (12c.), diminutive of chape cape (see cap (n.)). ... English writers often
erroneously spell it chaperone, app. under the supposition that it requires a fem. termination
[OED]. The notion is of covering the socially vulnerable one.  May I ask what is a chaperon?    A
married lady; without whom no unmarried one can be seen in public. If the damsel be five and forty,
she cannot appear without the matron; and if the matron be fifteen, it will do.    [Catharine
Hutton, The Welsh Mountaineer, London, 1817]    The word had been used in Middle English in the
literal sense hooded cloak.


chaperon (v.)

act as a chaperon, 1792, also chaperone, from chaperon (n.), or from French chaperonner, from
chaperon (n.). Related: Chaperoned; chaperoning.


chaplain (n.)

mid-14c., minister of a chapel, from Old French chapelein clergyman (Modern French chapelain), from
Medieval Latin cappellanus clergyman, originally custodian of St. Martin's cloak (see chapel).
Replaced Old English capellane (from the same Medieval Latin source) clergyman who conducts private
religious services, originally in great households, later in military regiments, prisons, etc.


chaplet (n.)

late 14c., from Old French chapelet (Old North French capelet) garland, rosary, properly a small
hat, diminutive of chape, chapeau headdress, hood, hat (see chapeau).


Chaplinesque (adj.)

1921, from Charlie Chaplin (1889-1977), British-born silent movie star. The surname is attested from
c.1200, from Old French chapelain priest.


chapman (n.)

peddler, itinerant tradesman, Middle English form of Old English ceapman tradesman, from West
Germanic compound *kaupman- (cognates: Old High German choufman, German Kauffman, Middle Dutch and
Dutch koopman), formed with equivalents of man (n.) + West Germanic *kaup- (cognates: Old Saxon cop,
Old Frisian kap trade, purchase, Middle Dutch coop, Dutch koop trade, market, bargain, kauf trader,
Old English ceap barter, business; a purchase), from Proto-Germanic *kaupoz- (cognates: Danish
kj&oslash;b purchase, bargain, Old Norse kaup bargain, pay; compare also Old Church Slavonic kupiti
to buy, a Germanic loan-word), probably an early Germanic borrowing from Latin caupo (genitive
cauponis) petty tradesman, huckster, of unknown origin. Compare also cheap (adj.).


Chappaquiddick

place in Dukes County, Mass., from a native New England Algonquian language, literally island
adjacent to the mainland.


chaps (n.1)

1844, American English, short for chaparejos, from Mexican Spanish chaparreras, overalls worn to
protect from chaparro (see chaparral).


chaps (n.2)

jaws, cheeks, from chap (n.), 1550s, of unknown origin. Hence, chap-fallen (1590s).


chapter (n.)

c.1200, main division of a book, from Old French chapitre (12c.) chapter (of a book), article (of a
treaty), chapter (of a cathedral), alteration of chapitle, from Late Latin capitulum, diminutive of
caput (genitive capitis) head (see capitulum). Sense of local branch (1815) is from cathedral sense
(late 15c.), which seems to trace to convocations of canons at cathedral churches, during which the
rules of the order by chapter, or a chapter (capitulum) of Scripture, were read aloud to the
assembled. Chapter and verse in full and thoroughly (1620s) is a reference to Scripture.


char (v.)

to reduce to charcoal, 1670s, probably a back-formation from charcoal (q.v.). Related: Charred;
charring.


charabanc (n.)

British for sightseeing bus, 1811, originally in a Continental context (especially Swiss), from
French char-&agrave;-bancs, literally benched carriage, from char wagon, from Latin carrus (see car)
+ &agrave; to (see ad-) + banc bench (see bench (n.)).


character (n.)

mid-14c., carecter, symbol marked or branded on the body; mid-15c., symbol or drawing used in
sorcery, from Old French caratere feature, character (13c., Modern French caract&egrave;re), from
Latin character, from Greek kharakter engraved mark, also symbol or imprint on the soul, also
instrument for marking, from kharassein to engrave, from kharax pointed stake, from PIE root *gher-
(4) to scrape, scratch. Meaning extended in ancient times by metaphor to a defining quality.You
remember Eponina, who kept her husband alive in an underground cavern so devotedly and heroically?
The force of character she showed in keeping up his spirits would have been used to hide a lover
from her husband if they had been living quietly in Rome. Strong characters need strong nourishment.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]Meaning sum of qualities that define a person is from 1640s. Sense of
person in a play or novel is first attested 1660s, in reference to the defining qualities he or she
is given by the author. Meaning a person in the abstract is from 1749; especially eccentric person
(1773). Colloquial sense of chap, fellow is from 1931. The Latin ch- spelling was restored from
1500s. Character actor attested from 1861; character assassination from 1888; character-building
(n.) from 1886.


characterisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of characterization; for spelling, see -ize.


characterise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of characterize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Characterised;
characterising.


characteristic

adjective and noun both first attested 1660s, from character + -istic on model of Greek
kharakteristikos. Earlier in the adjectival sense was characteristical (1620s). Related:
Characteristically (1640s). Characteristics distinctive traits also attested from 1660s.


characterization (n.)

1560s, marking out of a precise form; see characterize + -ation. Meaning description of essential
features is from 1814.


characterize (v.)

1590s, to engrave, write, back-formation from characterization, or else from Medieval Latin
characterizare, from Greek kharakterizein to designate by a characteristic mark, from kharakter (see
character). Meaning to describe the qualities of is recorded from 1630s; that of to be
characteristic is from 1744. Related: Characterized; characterizing.


charade (n.)

1776, from French charade (18c.), probably from Proven&ccedil;al charrado long talk, chatter, of
obscure origin, perhaps from charrar to chatter, gossip, of echoic origin. Compare Italian ciarlare,
Spanish charlar to talk, prattle. Originally not silent, but relying rather on enigmatic
descriptions of the words or syllables.    As we have ever made it a Rule to shew our Attention to
the Reader, by 'catching the Manners living, as they rise,' as Mr. Pope expresses it, we think
ourselves obliged to give Place to the following Specimens of a new Kind of SMALL WIT, which, for
some Weeks past, has been the Subject of Conversation in almost every Society, from the Court to the
Cottage. The CHARADE is, in fact, a near Relation of the old Rebus. It is usually formed from a Word
of two Syllables; the first Syllable is described by the Writer; then the second; they are
afterwards united and the whole Word marked out .... [supplement to The Universal Magazine of
Knowledge and Pleasure, volumes 58-59, 1776]    Among the examples given are:    My first makes all
nature appear of one face;  At the next we find music, and beauty and grace;  And, if this Charade
is most easily read,  I think that the third shou'd be thrown at my head.  [The answer is snow-
ball.]    The silent form, the main modern form, was at first a variant known as dumb charades and
at first it was not a speed contest; rather it adhered to the old pattern, and the performing team
acted out all the parts in order before the audience team began to guess.    There is one species of
charade which is performed solely by dumb motions, somewhat resembling the child's game of trades
and professions; but the acting charade is a much more amusing. and more difficult matter. [Goldoni,
and Modern Italian Comedy, in The Foreign And Colonial Quarterly Review, Volume 6, 1846]    An 1850
book, Acting Charades, reports that Charades en Action were all the rage in French society, and that
Lately, the game has been introduced into the drawing-rooms of a few mirth-loving Englishmen. Its
success has been tremendous.  Welsh siarad obviously is a loan-word from French or English, but its
meaning of speak, a talk is closer to the Proven&ccedil;al original.


charcoal (n.)

mid-14c., charcole, first element is either Old French charbon charcoal, or, on the current theory,
obsolete charren to turn (from Old English cerran) + cole coal, thus, to turn to coal.


charcuterie (n.)

1858, from French charcuterie, literally pork-butcher's shop, from charcuter (16c.), from obsolete
char (Modern French chair) cuite cooked flesh, from chair meat (Old French char, from Latin carnem;
see carnage) + cuit, past participle of cuire to cook. Compare French charcutier pork butcher; meat
roaster, seller of cooked (not raw) meat.


chard (n.)

1650s, from French carde chard (14c.), perhaps via Proven&ccedil;al, from Latin carduus thistle,
artichoke (see harsh).


Chardonnay (n.)

type of wine, 1907, from French chardonnay, originally the type of grape used to make the wine,
supposedly named for the town of Chardonnay, Sa&ocirc;ne-et-Loire, in eastern France. The name is
said to be from Latin Cardonnacum.


charette (n.)

also charrette, c.1400, a chariot, a cart, from Old French charrete wagon, small cart (12c.),
diminutive of charre (see car). Meaning collaborative session is by 1982.


charge (v.)

early 13c., to load, fill, from Old French chargier to load, burden, weigh down, from Late Latin
carricare to load a wagon or cart, from Latin carrus wagon (see car). Senses of entrust, command,
accuse all emerged in Middle English and were found in Old French. Sense of rush in to attack is
1560s, perhaps through earlier meaning load a weapon (1540s). Meaning impose a burden of expense is
from mid-14c. Meaning fill with electricity is from 1748. Related: Charged; charging. Charg&eacute;
d'affaires was borrowed from French, 1767, literally (one) charged with affairs.


charge (n.)

c.1200, a load, a weight, from Old French charge load, burden; imposition, from chargier to load, to
burden (see charge (v.)). Meaning responsibility, burden is mid-14c. (as in take charge, late 14c.;
in charge, 1510s), which progressed to pecuniary burden, cost, burden of expense (mid-15c.), and
then to price demanded for service or goods (1510s). Legal sense of accusation is late 15c.; earlier
injunction, order (late 14c.). Electrical sense is from 1767. Slang meaning thrill, kick (American
English) is from 1951.


chargeable (adj.)

late 15c., burdensome, from charge (v.) + -able. Sense of subject to a tax or payment is from 1610s;
that of liable to be made an expense is from 1640s; that of liable to be charged (with an offense,
etc.) is from 1660s.


charger (n.)

late 15c., one who loads, agent noun from charge (v.). Meaning horse ridden in charging is from
1762.


chariot (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French charriot wagon (13c.), augmentative of char car, from Late Latin carrum
chariot (see car).


charioteer (n.)

late 14c., from Old French charioteur, from charriot (see chariot). As a verb from 1802. Related:
Charioteered; charioteering.


charisma (n.)

gift of leadership, power of authority, c.1930, from German, used in this sense by Max Weber
(1864-1920) in Wirtschaft u. Gesellschaft (1922), from Greek kharisma favor, divine gift, from
kharizesthai to show favor to, from kharis grace, beauty, kindness (Charis was the name of one of
the three attendants of Aphrodite) related to khairein to rejoice at, from PIE root *gher- (5) to
desire, like (see hortatory). More mundane sense of personal charm recorded by 1959.    Earlier, the
word had been used in English with a sense of grace, talent from God (1875), directly from Latinized
Greek; and in the form charism (plural charismata) it is attested with this sense in English from
1640s. Middle English, meanwhile, had karisme spiritual gift, divine grace (c.1500).


charismatic (adj.)

1851, in Bible commentary and theology, in reference to the operation of the Holy Spirit and
prophetic ecstasy in the early Church (from the use of Greek kharismata in Rom. xii), from Latin
stem of charisma + -ic. As a movement in modern Christian churches which believes in divine gifts of
healing, etc., attested by 1936, reflecting the older sense of charisma.


charitable (adj.)

c.1200, in reference to the Christian virtue, from Old French charitable, from charit&eacute; (see
charity). Meaning liberal in treatment of the poor is from c.1400; that of inclined to impute
favorable motives to others is from 1620s. Related: Charitableness; charitably.


charity (n.)

mid-12c., benevolence for the poor, from Old French charit&eacute; (Christian) charity, mercy,
compassion; alms; charitable foundation (12c., Old North French carit&eacute;), from Latin caritatem
(nominative caritas) costliness, esteem, affection (in Vulgate often used as translation of Greek
agape love -- especially Christian love of fellow man -- perhaps to avoid the sexual suggestion of
Latin amor), from carus dear, valued, from PIE *karo-, from root *ka- to like, desire (see whore
(n.)).    Vulgate also sometimes translated agape by Latin dilectio, noun of action from diligere to
esteem highly, to love (see diligence).  Wyclif and the Rhemish version regularly rendered the
Vulgate dilectio by 'love,' caritas by 'charity.' But the 16th c. Eng. versions from Tindale to
1611, while rendering agape sometimes 'love,' sometimes 'charity,' did not follow the dilectio and
caritas of the Vulgate, but used 'love' more often (about 86 times), confining 'charity' to 26
passages in the Pauline and certain of the Catholic Epistles (not in I John), and the Apocalypse
.... In the Revised Version 1881, 'love' has been substituted in all these instances, so that it now
stands as the uniform rendering of agape. [OED]  Sense of charitable foundation or institution in
English attested by 1690s.


charivari (n.)

rough music, especially as a community way of expressing disapproval of a marriage match, 1735, from
French charivari, from Old French chalivali discordant noise made by pots and pans (14c.), from Late
Latin caribaria a severe headache, from Greek karebaria headache, from kare head + barys heavy (see
grave (adj.)).


charlatan (n.)

1610s, from French charlatan mountebank, babbler (16c.), from Italian ciarlatano a quack, from
ciarlare to prate, babble, from ciarla chat, prattle, perhaps imitative of ducks' quacking. Related:
Charlatanism; charlatanical; charlatanry.


Charlemagne

king of the Franks (742-814), literally Carl the Great, from French form of Medieval Latin Carolus
Magnus (see Charles + Magnus).


Charles

masc. proper name, from French Charles, from Medieval Latin Carolus, from Middle High German Karl,
literally man, husband (see carl).


Charles&#039;s Wain (n.)

Old English Carles w&aelig;gn, a star-group associated in medieval times with Charlemagne, but
originally with the nearby bright star Arcturus, which is linked by folk etymology to Latin Arturus
Arthur. Which places the seven-star asterism at the crux of the legendary association (or confusion)
of Arthur and Charlemagne. Evidence from Dutch (cited in Grimm, Teutonic Mythology) suggests that it
might originally have been Woden's wagon. More recent names for it are the Plough (by 15c., chiefly
British) and the Dipper (19c., chiefly American).    The seven brights stars in the modern
constellation Ursa Major have borne a dual identity in Western history at least since Homer's time,
being seen as both a wagon and a bear: as in Latin plaustrum freight-wagon, ox cart and arctos bear,
both used of the seven-star pattern, as were equivalent Greek amaxa (Attic hamaxa) and arktos.
The identification with a wagon is easy to see, with four stars as the body and three as the pole.
The identification with a bear is more difficult, as the figure has a tail longer than its body. As
Allen writes, The conformation of the seven stars in no way resembles the animal,--indeed the
contrary .... But he suggests the identification may have arisen from Aristotle's idea that its
prototype was the only creature that dared invade the frozen north. The seven stars never were below
the horizon in the latitude of the Mediterranean in Homeric and classical times (though not today,
due to precession of the equinoxes). See also Arctic for the identification of the bear and the
north in classical times.     A variety of French and English sources from the early colonial period
independently note that many native North American tribes in the northeast had long seen the seven-
star group as a bear tracked by three hunters (or a hunter and his two dogs).    Among the Teutonic
peoples, it seems to have been only a wagon, not a bear. A 10c. Anglo-Saxon astronomy manual uses
the Greek-derived Aretos, but mentions that the unlearned call it Charles's Wain:    Arheton hatte
an tungol on nor&eth; d&aelig;le, se haef&eth; seofon steorran, &amp; is for &eth;i o&thorn;rum
naman ge-hatan septemtrio, &thorn;one hata&eth; l&aelig;wede meon carles-w&aelig;n. [Anglo-Saxon
Manual of Astronomy]    [Septemtrio, the seven oxen, was another Roman name.] The star picture was
not surely identified as a bear in English before late 14c.    The unlearned of today are corrected
that the seven stars are not the Great Bear but form only a part of that large constellation. But
those who applied the name Bear apparently did so originally only to these seven stars, and from
Homer's time down to Thales, the Bear meant just the seven stars. From Rome to Anglo-Saxon England
to Arabia to India, ancient astronomy texts mention a supposed duplicate constellation to the
northern bear in the Southern Hemisphere, never visible from the north. This perhaps is based on
sailors' tales of the Southern Cross.


Charleston

dance style characterized by side-kicks from the knee, 1923 (as title of a song), 1925 as a dance,
from the U.S. city of Charleston, South Carolina, which was named for King Charles II of
England.Whether the Charleston (dance) has come to stay or not, it behooves every open-minded
hostess and musician to try it out anyhow. [Ethel P. Peyser, The Rotarian, July 1926]


charley horse (n.)

1887, sporting slang, origin obscure, probably from somebody's long-forgotten lame racehorse.
Charley horse seems to have been a name for a horse or a type of horse (perhaps especially a lame
one) around that time.


Charlie

masc. proper name, familiar form of Charles (also see -y (3)); 1965 in Vietnam War U.S. military
slang for Vietcong, Vietcong soldier, probably suggested by Victor Charlie, military communication
code for V.C. (as abbreviation of Viet Cong), perhaps strengthened by World War II slang use of
Charlie for Japanese soldiers, which itself is probably an extension of the 1930s derogatory
application of Charlie to any Asian man, from fictional Chinese detective Charlie Chan.    Other
applications include a night watchman (1812); a goatee beard (1834, from portraits of King Charles I
and his contemporaries); a fox (1857); a woman's breasts (1874); an infantryman's pack (World War
I); and a white man (Mr. Charlie), 1960, American English, from black slang.


Charlotte

fem. proper name, from the French fem. of Charlot, a diminutive of Charles. Meaning apple marmalade
covered with bread-crumbs is attested from 1796, presumably from French (where, however, the dessert
name is attested only from 1804), possibly from the fem. proper name, but the connection is obscure.
Perhaps from some French dialect word. Compare Middle English charlette (mid-14c.) dish containing
meat, eggs, milk, etc., said to be probably from Old French char lait&#233; meat with milk.    The
city in North Carolina, U.S., was settled c.1750 and named for Princess Charlotte Sophia
(1744-1818), who married George III of England in 1761; Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada,
also was named for her (1763).


charm (n.)

c.1300, incantation, magic charm, from Old French charme (12c.) magic charm, magic, spell;
incantation, song, lamentation, from Latin carmen song, verse, enchantment, religious formula, from
canere to sing (see chant (v.)), with dissimilation of -n- to -r- before -m- in intermediate form
*canmen (for a similar evolution, see Latin germen germ, from *genmen). The notion is of chanting or
reciting verses of magical power.    A yet stronger power than that of herb or stone lies in the
spoken word, and all nations use it both for blessing and cursing. But these, to be effective, must
be choice, well knit, rhythmic words (verba concepta), must have lilt and tune; hence all that is
strong in the speech wielded by priest, physician, magician, is allied to the forms of poetry.
[Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology (transl. Stallybrass), 1883]    Sense of pleasing quality evolved
17c. Meaning small trinket fastened to a watch-chain, etc. first recorded 1865. Quantum physics
sense is from 1964. To work like a charm (figuratively) is recorded by 1824.


charm (v.)

c.1300, to recite or cast a magic spell, from Old French charmer (13c.) to enchant, to fill
(someone) with desire (for something); to protect, cure, treat; to maltreat, harm, from Late Latin
carminare, from Latin carmen (see charm (n.)). In Old French used alike of magical and non-magical
activity. In English, to win over by treating pleasingly, delight from mid-15c. Related: Charmed;
charming. Charmed (short for I am charmed) as a conventional reply to a greeting or meeting is
attested by 1825.


charnel (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French charnel (12c.) fleshly, from Late Latin carnale graveyard, properly
neuter of adjective carnalis (see carnal). As an adjective from 1813. The Late Latin word was
glossed in Old English as fl&aelig;schus flesh-house. Charnel house is attested from 1550s.


Charon

ferryman of the dead over the river Styx, from Greek Kharon, of unknown origin.


chart (n.)

1570s, map for the use of navigators, from Middle French charte card, map, from Late Latin charta
paper, card, map (see card (n.1)).   Charte is the original form of the French word in all senses,
but after 14c. (perhaps by influence of Italian cognate carta), carte began to supplant it. English
used both carte and card 15c.-17c. for chart, map, and in 17c. chart could mean playing card, but
the words have gone their separate ways and chart has predominated since in the map sense. In the
music score sense from 1957.


chart (v.)

1837, to enter onto a map or chart, from chart (n.). In the commercial recording sense, a reference
to appearing on the Billboard magazine music popularity chart is by 1961. The chart itself was
printed from c.1942. Related: Charted; charting.


charter (v.)

early 15c., provide with a charter, from charter (n.). Meaning to hire is attested from 1806.
Related: Chartered; chartering.


charter (n.)

c.1200, from Old French chartre (12c.) charter, letter, document, covenant, from Latin chartula,
literally little paper, diminutive of charta, carta paper, document (see chart (n.)).


charter school

older uses refer to schools in Ireland begun 1733 by the Charter Society to provide Protestant
education to poor Catholic children. Modern use in U.S. began c.1988, as an alternative to state-run
public education.


Charterhouse

great English public school founded in London in 1611, a folk etymology alteration of chartreux (see
chartreuse); it was founded upon the site of a Carthusian monastery.


Chartism (n.)

1839 in English political history, in reference to the reform party active 1836-48, from The
People's Charter, which contained their principles. Related: Chartist (1838).


Chartres

cathedral city in central France, said to be named for the Carnutes, Gaulish people who had a sacred
place there, whose name is said to be from a root meaning rock, stone, but there is a famous Druid
Stone at the church.


chartreuse (n.)

type of liqueur, 1866, from la Grande-Chartreuse, chief monastery of the Carthusian order, which was
founded 11c. and named for the massif de la Chartreuse (Medieval Latin Carthusianus) mountain group
in the French Alps, where its first monastery was built. The liqueur recipe dates from early 17c.;
the original now marketed as Les P&egrave;res Chartreux. The color (1884) is so called from
resemblance to the pale apple-green hue of the best type of the liqueur.


chartulary (n.)

collection of charters, from Medieval Latin chartularium, from Latin chartula (see charter (n.)).


charwoman (n.)

1590s, from Middle English char, cherre turn of work (see chore) + woman. An Alicia Charwoman
appears in the Borough of Nottingham records in 1379.


chary (adj.)

Old English cearig sorrowful (see care (n.)). Sense evolved 16c. from full of care to careful.
Cognate with Old Saxon carag, Old High German charag sorrow, trouble, care. Related: Charily;
chariness.


Charybdis

whirlpool off the coast of Sicily, from Latinized form of Greek Kharybdis, of unknown origin.
Compare Scylla.


chase (n.1)

mid-13c., chace, a hunt, from Old French chace a hunt, a chase; hunting ground (12c.), from chacier
(see chase (v.)). Meaning a pursuit (of an enemy, etc.) is early 14c.


chase (v.)

c.1300, chacen to hunt; to cause to go away; put to flight, from Old French chacier to hunt, ride
swiftly, strive for (12c., Modern French chasser), from Vulgar Latin *captiare (source of Italian
cacciare, Catalan casar, Spanish cazar, Portuguese ca&ccedil;ar to chase, hunt; see catch (v.)).
Meaning run after developed mid-14c. Related: Chased; chasing. Older European words for pursue often
also cover persecute (Greek dioko, Old English ehtan); modern ones often derive from words used
primarily for the hunting of animals.


chase (n.2)

bore of a gun barrel, 1640s, from French chas eye of a needle; enclosure, from Vulgar Latin *capsum,
variant of Latin capsa box (see case (n.2)).


chaser (n.)

c.1300, horse trained for chasing, agent noun from chase (v.), probably in some cases from Old
French chaceor huntsman, hunter. Meaning water or mild beverage taken after a strong drink is 1897,
U.S. colloquial. French had chasse (from chasser to chase) a drink of liquor taken (or said to be
taken) to kill the aftertaste of coffee or tobacco, used in English from c.1800.


chasm (n.)

1590s, deep crack in the earth, from Latin chasma, from Greek khasma yawning hollow, gulf, related
to khaskein to yawn, and thus to chaos. In English in 17c. often spelled chasma. Figurative use from
1640s. Related: Chasmal; chasmic.


chasse (n.)

from French chass&eacute; chase, chasing, past participle of chasser to chase, hunt (see chase
(v.)); borrowed 19c. in a variety of senses and expressions, such as chaser (in the drinking sense),
short for chasse-caf&eacute;, literally coffee-chaser. Also as a dance step (1867).


chassepot (n.)

bolt-action breechloading rifle used by French forces in the Franco-Prussian War, 1870, named for
French inventor Antonine-Alphonse Chassepot (1833-1905).


chasseur (n.)

mobile foot-soldier, 1796, French, literally huntsman, from Old French chaceor huntsman, hunter,
from chacier to chase (see chase (v.)).


chassis (n.)

base frame of an automobile, 1903, American English; earlier window frame (1660s), from French
ch&acirc;ssis frame, Old French chassiz (13c.) frame, framework, setting, from chasse case, box, eye
socket, snail's shell, setting (of a jewel), from Latin capsa box, case; see case (n.2) + French
-is, collective suffix for a number of parts taken together. Compare sash (n.2).


chaste (adj.)

c.1200, virtuous, pure from unlawful sexual intercourse (as defined by the Church), from Old French
chaste morally pure (12c.), from Latin castus clean, pure, morally pure (see caste). Transferred
sense of sexually pure is by 15c., perhaps by influence of chastity, though chaste as a noun meaning
virgin person is recorded from early 14c. Related: Chastely.


chasten (v.)

1520s, with -en (1) + the word it replaced, obsolete verb chaste to correct (someone's) behavior
(Middle English chastien, c.1200), from Old French chastiier to punish (see chastise). Related:
Chastened; chastening.


chastise (v.)

c.1300, chastisen, from Old French chastiier to warn, advise, instruct; chastise, admonish; punish;
dominate, tame (12c., Modern French ch&acirc;tier), from Latin castigare to set or keep right, to
reprove, chasten, to punish, literally to make pure (see castigate). Or perhaps from Middle English
chastien (see chasten) + -ise, though this would be early for such a native formation. The form of
the modern word is not easily accounted for [OED]. Related: Chastised; chastising.  He alone may
chastise who loves. [Rabindranath Tagore, The Crescent Moon, 1913]


chastisement (n.)

c.1300, from chastise + -ment.


chastity (n.)

c.1200, chastete, sexual purity (as defined by the Church), including but not limited to virginity
or celibacy, from Old French chastete chastity, purity (12c., Modern French chastet&eacute;), from
Latin castitatem (nominative castitas) purity, chastity from castus (see caste).


chasuble (n.)

ecclesiastical vestment, c.1300, cheisible, from Old French chesible (12c., Modern French chasuble),
from Medieval Latin casubla, from Late Latin *casubula, unexplained alteration of Latin casula a
little hut, diminutive of casa cottage, house (see casino), used by c.400 in transferred sense of
outer garment. From the notion that hooded garments resembled or suggested little houses. The
English form conformed to French from c.1600.


chat (v.)

mid-15c., talk idly, babble, short for chatter (v.). Meaning to converse familiarly is from 1550s.
Sense of flirt with, ingratiate oneself with (in later use often with up (adv.)) is from 1898.
Related: Chatted; chatting.


chat (n.)

1520s, chatter, frivolous talk; see chat (v.). Meaning familiar conversation is from 1570s. Chat
show, for what in U.S. is a talk show, attested from 1969.  Chat room in the online sense is
attested by 1994, from the days when AOL ruled the Web.


chateau (n.)

c.1739, from French ch&acirc;teau, from Old French chastel (12c.), from Latin castellum castle (see
castle (n.)).


chateaubriand (n.)

grilled beef steak, garnished with herbs, 1877, named, for some reason, for French writer
Fran&ccedil;ois Ren&eacute;, Vicomte de Chateaubriand (1768-1848).


chatelaine (n.)

1845, from French ch&acirc;telaine a female castellan; wife of a castellan; mistress of a castle or
country house; fem. of ch&acirc;telain, from Old French chastelain owner and lord of a castle,
castellan, nobleman, from chastel (see chateau). In fashion, as a type of ornamental belt, from
1851; supposed to resemble a chain of keys.


Chattahoochee

river between Georgia and Alabama, from Muskogee cato-hocce hvcce marked-rock river, from cvto rock,
hocce marked + hvcce stream.


Chattanooga

city in Tennessee, of uncertain origin, said to be either Cherokee or Muskogee; compare Muskogee
cvto rock (in Chattahoochee, etc.); the entire name is said to mean rock rising to a point, which
might describe nearby Lookout Mountain.


chattel (n.)

early 13c., chatel property, goods, from Old French chatel chattels, goods, wealth, possessions,
property; profit; cattle, from Late Latin capitale property (see cattle, which is the Old North
French form of the same word). Application to slaves (1640s) is a rhetorical figure of
abolitionists, etc.


chatter (v.)

early 13c., chateren to twitter, gossip, earlier cheateren, chiteren, of echoic origin. Compare
Dutch koeteren jabber, Danish kvidre twitter, chirp. Related: Chattered; chattering. Phrase
chattering class in use by 1893, with a reference perhaps from 1843:    Such was the most
interesting side of the fatal event to that idle chattering class of London life to whom the
collision of heaven and earth were important only as affording matter for news! [Catherine Grace F.
Gore (Mrs. Gore), The Banker's Wife, 1843]


chatter (n.)

mid-13c., originally of birds, from chatter (v.).


chatterbox (n.)

1774, from chatter (n.) + box (n.1).


chatty (adj.)

fond of chatting, 1746, from chat + -y (2). Related: Chattily; chattiness.


Chaucer

family name, from Old French chaucier maker of chausses, from chauces clothing for the legs,
breeches, pantaloons, hose (related to case (n.2)). Middle English chawce was a general term for
anything worn on the feet. Related: Chaucerian.


chauffer (n.)

small portable stove, 1825, variant of chafer a vessel for heating, agent noun from chafe; form
influenced by French chauffoir a heater, from chauffer to heat, which also is ultimately from chafe
(see chauffeur).


chauffeur (n.)

1896, originally a motorist, from French chauffeur, literally stoker, operator of a steam engine,
French nickname for early motorists, from chauffer to heat, from Old French chaufer to heat, warm
up; to become hot (see chafe). The first motor-cars were steam-driven. Sense of professional or paid
driver of a private motor car is from 1902.    The '95 Duryea wagon, which won the Chicago contest
Fall, was exhibited at the Detroit Horse Show last week. Charles B. King, treasurer of the American
Motor League, acted as chauffeur, as the French say. [The Horseless Age, April 1896]


chauffeur (v.)

1902, from chauffeur (n.). Related: Chauffeured; chauffeuring.


Chautauqua

assembly for popular education, 1873, from town in New York, U.S., where an annual Methodist summer
colony featured lectures. The name is from ja'dahgweh, a Seneca (Iroquoian) name, possibly one has
taken out fish there, but an alternative suggested meaning is raised body.


chauvinism (n.)

1840, exaggerated, blind patriotism, from French chauvinisme (1839), from the character Nicholas
Chauvin, soldier of Napoleon's Grand Armee, notoriously attached to the Empire long after it was
history, in the Cogniards' popular 1831 vaudeville La Cocarde Tricolore.   Meaning extended to
sexism via male chauvinism (1969). The name is a French form of Latin Calvinus and thus Calvinism
and chauvinism are, etymologically, twins. The name was a common one in Napoleon's army, and if
there was a real person at the base of the character in the play, he has not been certainly
identified by etymologists, though memoirs of Waterloo (one published in Paris in 1822) mention one
of our principal piqueurs, named Chauvin, who had returned with Napoleon from Elba, which implies
loyalty.


chauvinist (n.)

1877, from French chauviniste, from Chauvin (see chauvinism). Related: Chauvinistic (1870).


chav (n.)

British slang, antisocial youth, by 2004, of unknown origin.


chaw (v.)

1520s, unexplained phonetic variant of chew (v.). OED points out the variant form chow was very
common in 16-17th c. Bartlett's Dictionary of Americanisms [1859] says chaw, Although found in good
authors, ... is retained, in this country as in England, only by the illiterate. Related: Chawed;
chawing. The noun meaning that which is chewed (especially a quid of tobacco) first recorded 1709.


Che

nickname of Argentine Marxist revolutionary Ernesto Guevara (1928-1967), acquired when he was
working with Cuban exiles in Guatemala in mid-1950s, from his dialectal use of Argentine che, a
slang filler word in speech.


cheap (adj.)

low in price, that may be bought at small cost, c.1500, ultimately from Old English noun ceap
traffic, a purchase, from ceapian (v.) trade, probably from an early Germanic borrowing from Latin
caupo petty tradesman, huckster (see chapman).    The sense evolution is from the noun meaning a
barter, a purchase to a purchase as rated by the buyer, hence adjectival meaning inexpensive, the
main modern sense, via Middle English phrases such as god chep favorable bargain (12c., a
translation of French a bon march&eacute;).    Sense of lightly esteemed, common is from 1590s
(compare similar evolution of Latin vilis). The meaning low in price was represented in Old English
by undeor, literally un-dear (but deop ceap, literally deep cheap, meant high price).    The word
also was used in Old English for market (as in ceapd&aelig;g market day), a sense surviving in place
names Cheapside, East Cheap, etc. Related: Cheaply. Expression on the cheap is first attested 1888.
Cheap shot originally was U.S. football jargon for a head-on tackle; extended sense unfair hit in
politics, etc. is by 1970. German billig cheap is from Middle Low German billik, originally fair,
just, with a sense evolution via billiger preis fair price, etc.


cheapen (v.)

1570s, ask the price of, from cheap (adj.) + -en (1). Meaning lower the price of is from 1833, but
figuratively, to lower in estimation is from 1650s. Related: Cheapened; cheapening.


cheapie (n.)

something inexpensive, 1891, from cheap (adj.) + -ie.


cheaply (adv.)

1550s, from cheap (adj.) + -ly (2).


cheapo (adj.)

1967, from cheap (adj.) + -o.


cheapskate (n.)

also cheap skate, miserly person, 1896, from cheap (adj.), second element perhaps from American
English slang skate worn-out horse (1894), of uncertain origin.


chear

obsolete spelling of cheer (n.).


cheat (v.)

mid-15c., to escheat, a shortening of Old French escheat, legal term for revision of property to the
state when the owner dies without heirs, literally that which falls to one, past participle of
escheoir befall by chance, happen, devolve, from Vulgar Latin *excadere to fall away, from Latin ex-
out (see ex-) + cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). Also compare escheat. The royal officers evidently
had a low reputation. Meaning evolved through confiscate (mid-15c.) to deprive unfairly (1580s). To
cheat on (someone) be sexually unfaithful first recorded 1934. Related: Cheated; cheating.


cheat (n.)

late 14c., forfeited property, from cheat (v.). Meaning a deceptive act is from 1640s; earlier, in
thieves' jargon, it meant a stolen thing (late 16c.), and earlier still dice (1530s). Meaning a
swindler is from 1660s.


cheater (n.)

early 14c., royal officer in charge of the king's escheats, agent noun from cheat (v.). Meaning
dishonest player is recorded from 1530s.


cheating (n.)

deceptiveness, swindling, 1530s, verbal noun from cheat (v.).


check (n.1)

c.1300, a call in chess noting one's move has placed his opponent's king (or another major piece) in
immediate peril, from Old French eschequier a check at chess (also chess board, chess set), from
eschec the game of chess; chessboard; check; checkmate, from Vulgar Latin *scaccus, from Arabic
shah, from Persian shah king, the principal piece in a chess game (see shah; also compare checkmate
(n.)). Also c.1300 in a generalized sense, harmful incident or event.    When the king is in check
that player's choices are severely limited. Hence, sudden stoppage (early 14c.), and by c.1700 to a
token of ownership used to check against, and prevent, loss or theft (surviving in hat check) and a
check against forgery or alteration, which gave the modern financial use of bank check, money draft
(first recorded 1798 and often spelled cheque), probably influenced by exchequer. Checking account
is attested from 1897, American English. Blank check in the figurative sense attested by 1849.
Checks and balances is from 1782, perhaps originally suggesting machinery.


check (v.1)

late 15c., in chess, to attack the king; to put (the opponent's king) in check; earlier (late 14c.),
to stop, arrest; block, barricade; see check (n.).    A player in chess limits his opponent's
ability to move when he places his opponent's king in check. All the other senses seem to have
developed from the chess sense: To arrest, stop; then to hold in restraint (1620s); and finally to
hold up or control (an assertion, a person, etc.) by comparison with some authority or record,
1690s.    Hence, to check off (1839); to check up (1889); to check in or out (in a hotel, of a
library book, etc., by 1918). To check out (something) to look at, investigate is from 1959.
Related: Checked; checking.


check (v.2)

mark like a chessboard, incise with a pattern of squares or checks, late 14c. (implied in checked),
from check (n.1). Related: Checking.


check (n.2)

pattern of squares, cross-like pattern, c.1400, short for checker (n.1).


checked (adj.)

early 15c., ornamented with a checkered design, past participle adjective from check (v.2).


checker (n.1)

mid-13c., game of chess (or checkers); c.1300, a chessboard, board with 64 squares for playing chess
or similar games; a set of chessmen a shortening of Old French eschequier chessboard; a game of
chess, from Medieval Latin scaccarium (see check (n.)).    Meaning pattern of squares is late 14c.
Meaning a man or marker in the game of checkers is from 1864. British prefers chequer. From late
14c. as a checked design. The word had earlier senses of table covered with checked cloth for
counting (late 12c. in Anglo-Latin), a sense also in Old French (see checker (n.2)).


checker (v.)

to ornament with a checked or chackered design, late 14c. (implied in checkered), from Old French
eschequerÃ© and from checker (n.1). Related: Checkering.


checker (n.2)

table covered with a checked cloth, specialized sense of checker (n.1), late 14c. (in Anglo-Latin
from c.1300); especially a table for counting money or keeping accounts (revenue reckoned with
counters); later extended to the fiscal department of the English Crown; the Exchequer (mid-14c.; in
Anglo-Latin from late 12c.).


checkered (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from checker (v.). Checkered past attested by 1831.


checkers (n.)

U.S. name for the game known in Britain as draughts, 1712, from plural of checker (n.1). So called
for the board on which the game is played.


checklist (n.)

also check-list, 1853, American English, from check + list (n.). Two words until c.1880; hyphenated
until late 20c.


checkmate (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French eschec mat (Modern French &eacute;chec et mat), which (with Spanish jaque
y mate, Italian scacco-matto) is from Arabic shah mat the king died (see check (n.1)), which
according to Barnhart is a misinterpretation of Persian mat be astonished as mata to die, mat he is
dead. Hence Persian shah mat, if it is the ultimate source of the word, would be literally the king
is left helpless, the king is stumped.


checkmate (v.)

late 14c.; see checkmate (n.). Related: Checkmated; checkmating.


checkout (n.)

1944, from check (v.) + out (adv.). Originally training given to a pilot for using a specific
aircraft; hotel sense is from 1958.


checkpoint (n.)

1940, from check (v.) + point (n.). Originally an aviator's term for landforms or structures of
known height against which the craft's altitude could be visually checked. The vehicle stop sense is
recorded from 1950.


checkup (n.)

also check-up, careful examination, 1921, American English, from check (v.) + up (adv.), on notion
of a checklist of things to be examined. The verbal phrase check up (on) is attested from 1889.


cheddar (n.)

type of cheese, 1660s (but the cheese presumably was made long before that), from Cheddar, village
in Somerset, England, where it originally was made, from Old English Ceodre (c.880), probably from
ceodor ravine (there is a gorge nearby).


cheek (n.)

Old English ceace, cece jaw, jawbone, in late Old English also the fleshy wall of the mouth. Perhaps
from the root of Old English ceowan chew (see chew (v.)), or from Proto-Germanic *kaukon (cognates:
Middle Low German kake jaw, jawbone, Middle Dutch kake jaw, Dutch kaak), not found outside West
Germanic.    Words for cheek, jaw, and chin tend to run together in IE languages (compare PIE
*genw-, source of Greek genus jaw, cheek, geneion chin, and English chin); Aristotle considered the
chin as the front of the jaws and the cheeks as the back of them. The other Old English word for
cheek was ceafl (see jowl).    A thousand men he [Samson] slow eek with his hond,  And had no wepen
but an asses cheek.  [Chaucer, Monk's Tale]    In reference to the buttocks from c.1600. Sense of
insolence is from 1840, perhaps from a notion akin to that which led to jaw insolent speech, mouth
off, etc. To turn the other cheek is an allusion to Matt. v:39 and Luke vi:29.


cheeks (n.)

the buttocks, c.1600; see cheek.


cheeky (adj.)

1859, from cheek in its sense of insolence + -y (2). Related: Cheekily; cheekiness.


cheep (v.)

1510s, of imitative origin, originally Scottish. Related: Cheeped; cheeping; cheeper. The noun is
attested by 1774.


cheer (n.)

c.1200, the face, especially as expressing emotion, from Anglo-French chere the face, Old French
chiere face, countenance, look, expression, from Late Latin cara face (source of Spanish cara),
possibly from Greek kara head, from PIE root *ker- (1) head (see horn (n.)). From mid-13c. as frame
of mind, state of feeling, spirit; mood, humor.    By late 14c. the meaning had extended
metaphorically to mood, mental condition, as reflected in the face. This could be in a good or bad
sense (The feend ... beguiled her with treacherye, and brought her into a dreerye cheere, Merline,
c.1500), but a positive sense (probably short for good cheer) has predominated since c.1400. Meaning
shout of encouragement first recorded 1720, perhaps nautical slang (compare earlier verbal sense, to
encourage by words or deeds, early 15c.). The antique English greeting what cheer (mid-15c.) was
picked up by Algonquian Indians of southern New England from the Puritans and spread in Indian
languages as far as Canada.


cheer (v.)

late 14c., to cheer up, humor, console; c.1400 as entertain with food or drink, from cheer (n.).
Related: Cheered; cheering. Sense of to encourage by words or deeds is early 15c. Which had focused
to salute with shouts of applause by late 18c. Cheer up (intransitive) first attested 1670s.


cheerful (adj.)

c.1400, full of cheer, from cheer (n.) + -ful. Meaning elevating the spirits is from mid-15c.
Related: Cheerfully; cheerfulness.


cheerio

upbeat parting exclamation, British, 1910, from cheer.


cheerleader (n.)

also cheer-leader, 1900, American English, from cheer (n.) + leader. Cheerleading is attested from
1906.


cheerless (adj.)

devoid of comfort, 1570s, from cheer (n.) + -less. Related: Cheerlessly; cheerlessness.


cheers

salute or toast when taking a drink, British, 1919, from plural of cheer (also see cheerio). Earlier
it is recorded as a shout of support or encouragement (1720).


cheery (adj.)

mid-15c., from cheer (n.) + -y (2). The colloquial alternative to cheerful. Related: Cheerily;
cheeriness.


cheese (n.1)

Old English cyse (West Saxon), cese (Anglian) cheese, from West Germanic *kasjus (cognates: Old
Saxon kasi, Old High German chasi, German K&auml;se, Middle Dutch case, Dutch kaas), from Latin
caseus cheese (source of Italian cacio, Spanish queso, Irish caise, Welsh caws).    Of unknown
origin; perhaps from a PIE root *kwat- to ferment, become sour (cognates: Prakrit chasi buttermilk;
Old Church Slavonic kvasu leaven; fermented drink, kyselu sour, -kyseti to turn sour; Czech kysati
to turn sour, rot; Sanskrit kvathati boils, seethes; Gothic hwa&thorn;jan foam). Also compare
fromage. Old Norse ostr, Danish ost, Swedish ost are related to Latin ius broth, sauce, juice.
Earliest references would be to compressed curds of milk used as food; pressed or molded cheeses
with rinds are 14c. Transferred to other cheese-like substances by 1530s. As a photographer's word
to make subjects hold a smile, it is attested from 1930, but in a reminiscence of schoolboy days,
which suggests an earlier use. Probably for the forced smile involved in making the -ee- sound.
Green cheese is that newly made; the notion that the moon is made of green cheese as a type of a
ridiculous assertion is from 1520s. To make cheeses was a schoolgirls' amusement (1835) of wheeling
rapidly so one's petticoats blew out in a circle then dropping down so they came to rest inflated
and resembling a wheel of cheese; hence, used figuratively for a deep curtsey.


cheese (n.2)

the proper thing, from Urdu chiz a thing, from Persian chiz, from Old Persian *ci&#353;-ciy
something, from PIE pronomial stem *kwo- (see who). Picked up by British in India by 1818 and used
in the sense of a big thing (especially in the phrase the real chiz).    This perhaps is behind the
expression big cheese important person (1914), but that is American English in origin and likely
rather belongs to cheese (n.1). To cut a big cheese as a figurative expression for look important is
recorded from 1915, and overlarge wheels of cheese, especially from Wisconsin, were commonly
displayed 19c. as publicity stunts by retailers, etc.    The cheese will be on exhibition at the
National Dairy Show at Chicago next week. President Taft will visit the show the morning of Monday,
October thirtieth, and after his address he will be invited to cut the big cheese, which will then
be distributed in small lots to visitors at the show. [The Country Gentleman, Oct. 28, 1911]


cheese (v.)

stop (what one is doing), run off, 1812, thieves' slang, of uncertain origin. Meaning to smile is
from 1930 (see cheese (n.1)). For meaning to annoy, see cheesed.    CHEESE IT. Be silent, be quiet,
don't do it. Cheese it, the coves are fly; be silent, the people understand our discourse.
[Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]


cheese cloth (n.)

1650s, originally cloth in which curds were pressed, from cheese (n.1) + cloth.


cheeseburger (n.)

1938, American English, from cheese (n.1) + ending abstracted from hamburger.


cheesecake (n.)

also cheese-cake, mid-15c., from cheese (n.1) + cake (n.). In figurative uses for soft, effeminate
from 18c. Slang meaning dates from 1934, when a Time magazine article defined it as leg-pictures of
sporty females. In its early years this sense of the word often was associated with Marlene
Dietrich.


cheesed (adj.)

disgruntled, exasperated, 1941, British slang, origin obscure, connections uncertain. See cheese
(n.1), cheese (n.2), cheesy.


cheesy (adj.)

cheese-like, late 14c., from cheese (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning cheap, inferior is attested from 1896,
perhaps originally U.S. student slang, along with cheese (n.) an ignorant, stupid person. In late
19c. British slang, cheesy was fine, showy (1858), probably from cheese (n.2) and some suggest the
modern derogatory use is an ironic reversal of this. The word was in common use in medical writing
in the late 19c. to describe morbid substances found in tubers, decaying flesh, etc.


cheetah (n.)

1704, from Hindi chita leopard, from Sanskrit chitraka hunting leopard, tiger, literally speckled,
from chitra-s distinctively marked, variegated, many-colored, bright, clear (from PIE *kit-ro-, from
root *(s)kai- (1) bright, shining; see shine (v.)) + kayah body, from PIE *kwei- to build, make (see
poet).


chef (n.)

head cook, 1830, from French chef, short for chef de cuisine, literally head of the kitchen, from
Old French chief leader, ruler, head (see chief (n.)).


Cheka

early Soviet secret police, 1921, from Russian initials of Chrezvychainaya Komissiya Extraordinary
Commission (for Combating Counter-Revolution); set up 1917, superseded 1922 by G.P.U.


chelate (adj.)

having pincer-like claws, 1826 as a term in zoology; 1920 in chemistry, from Modern Latin chela claw
(from Greek khele claw, talon, cloven hoof; see chelicerae) + -ate (2). Related: Chelated;
chelating; chelation.


chelicerae (n.)

1831, plural of Modern Latin chelicera, from Greek khele claw, talon, cloven hoof, from PIE *ghel-
wo-, from root *ghel-una- jaw, + keras horn (see kerato-). Earlier chelicer (1835), from French
ch&eacute;lic&egrave;re.


cheliped (n.)

1859, Modern Latin, from chela claw, from Greek khele claw (see chelicerae) + Latin pod-, stem of
pes foot (see foot (n.)).


Chelsea

district in southwest London, Chelchuthe (1300), Old English Chelchede (1086), Celchyth (789),
Caelichyth (767), probably literally chalk landing place, from Old English cealc chalk (see chalk
(n.)) + hyth landing place. Perhaps chalk or limestone was unloaded here from Chalk near Gravesend
in Kent. Chelsea Hospital founded by Charles II, built 1680s, as a home for aged veterans. As a fem.
proper name, not in the top 1,000 names in U.S. until 1969, then in the top 100 among girls born
1984 to 1998, peaking at number 15 in 1992.


chemical (adj.)

1570s, relating to chemistry, from chemic of alchemy (a worn-down derivative of Medieval Latin
alchimicus; see alchemy) + -al (1). In early use also of alchemy. Related: Chemically.


chemical (n.)

1747, from chemical (adj.). Related: Chemicals.


chemise (n.)

late Old English, cemes shirt, from Old French chemise shirt, undertunic, shift, or directly from
Late Latin camisia shirt, tunic (Jerome; also source of Italian camicia, Spanish camisa); originally
a soldier's word, probably via Gaulish, from Proto-Germanic *hamithjan (cognates: Old Frisian
hemethe, Old Saxon hemithi, Old English heme&eth;e, German hemd shirt), of uncertain origin (see
heaven). The French form took over after c.1200. Related: Chemisette.


chemist (n.)

1560s, chymist, alchemist, from Middle French chimiste, from Medieval Latin chimista, reduced from
alchimista (see alchemy). Modern spelling is from c.1790. Meaning chemical scientist is from 1620s;
meaning dealer in medicinal drugs (mostly in British English) is from 1745.


chemistry (n.)

c.1600, alchemy, from chemist + -ry; also see chemical (adj.). The meaning natural physical process
is 1640s, and the scientific study not so called until 1788. The figurative sense of instinctual
attraction or affinity is attested slightly earlier, from the alchemical sense.


chemo-

before vowels chem-, word-forming element denoting relation to chemical action or chemicals, from
comb. form of chemical (adj.), used to form scientific compound words from c.1900.


chemosynthesis (n.)

1898, from chemo- + synthesis.


chemotaxis (n.)

1891, coined in German, 1888, by German botanist Wilhelm Pfeffer (1845-1920) from chemo- + Greek
taxis arrangement (see tactics).


chemotherapy (n.)

1906, from German Chemotherapie, coined by German biochemist Paul Ehrlich (1854-1915), from chemo- +
therapie (see therapy).


chenille (n.)

velvety cord, 1738, from French chenille, properly caterpillar, literally little dog (13c.), from
Latin canicula a dog (also a violent woman; the star Sirius; the worst throw in dice), diminutive of
canis dog (see canine (n.)). So called for its furry look. Compare caterpillar.


cheque (n.)

see check.


chequer

see checker (n.2).


Cher

U.S. pop performer, born Cherilyn Sarkisian (1946). As a given name for girls in U.S., it hit a bump
of popularity 1972-73 around the time she starred in a popular TV variety show.


cherchez la femme

French, literally seek the woman, on the notion that a woman is the cause for whatever crime has
been committed, first used by Alexandre Dumas p&egrave;re in Les Mohicans de Paris (1864) in the
form cherchons la femme. French chercher is from Latin circare, in Late Latin to wander hither and
thither, from circus circle (see circus).


cherish (v.)

early 14c., cherischen, from Old French cheriss-, present participle stem of chierir to hold dear
(12c., Modern French ch&eacute;rir), from chier dear, from Latin carus dear, costly, beloved (see
whore). The Latin word also is the source of Italian, Spanish, Portuguese caro; Old
Proven&ccedil;al, Catalan car. Related: Cherished; cherishing.


Chernobyl

city in Ukraine (Ukrainian Chornobyl), from Russian chernobylnik mugwort. Site of 1986 nuclear
disaster.


chernozem (n.)

1842, from Russian chernozem, literally black earth, from chernyi black, from PIE *kers- dark, dirty
(see Krishna) + zemlya earth, soil, from Old Russian zemi land, earth, from PIE *dhghem- earth (see
chthonic).


Cherokee

1670s, from Cherokee Tsaragi.


cheroot (n.)

late 17c., probably from Portuguese charuto cigar, from Tamil curuttu roll (of tobacco), from curul
to roll. Originally a cigar from southern India; later a cigar of a certain shape.


cherry (n.)

c.1300, earlier in surname Chyrimuth (1266, literally Cherry-mouth); from Anglo-French cherise, from
Old North French cherise (Old French, Modern French cerise, 12c.), from Vulgar Latin *ceresia, from
late Greek kerasian cherry, from Greek kerasos cherry tree, possibly from a language of Asia Minor.
Mistaken in Middle English for a plural and stripped of its -s (compare pea).     Old English had
ciris cherry from a West Germanic borrowing of the Vulgar Latin word (cognate with German Kirsch),
but it died out after the Norman invasion and was replaced by the French word. Meaning maidenhead,
virginity is from 1889, U.S. slang, from supposed resemblance to the hymen, but perhaps also from
the long-time use of cherries as a symbol of the fleeting quality of life's pleasures.


cherry-pick (v.)

to select the very best selfishly, 1959 (implied in cherry-picking), American English (Billboard), a
pejorative figurative sense,from cherry (n.) + pick (v.). Related: Cherry-picked.


Chersonese

from Greek khersonesos peninsula, from khersos dry land + nesos island, which is of uncertain
origin; perhaps from *na-sos, literally that which swims, from PIE root sna- to swim (see
natatorium).


chert (n.)

flint-like quartz, 1670s, of unknown origin. Apparently a local term, which has been taken into
geological use [OED].


cherub (n.)

late 14c. as an order of angels, from Late Latin cherub, from Greek cheroub, from Hebrew kerubh
(plural kerubhim) winged angel, perhaps related to Akkadian karubu to bless, karibu one who blesses,
an epithet of the bull-colossus. Old English had cerubin, from the Greek plural.    The cherubim, a
common feature of ancient Near Eastern mythology, are not to be confused with the round-cheeked
darlings of Renaissance iconography. The root of the terms either means hybrid or, by an inversion
of consonants, mount, steed, and they are winged beasts, probably of awesome aspect, on which the
sky god of the old Canaanite myths and of the poetry of Psalms goes riding through the air. [Robert
Alter, The Five Books of Moses, 2004, commentary on Gen. iii:24]


cherubic (adj.)

1620s, from cherub + -ic. Earlier was cherubical (c.1600).


chervil (n.)

type of herb, Old English cerfelle chervil, from Latin chaerephyllum, from Greek khairephyllon;
second element  phyllon leaf (see folio); first element perhaps from khairein to rejoice (see
hortatory).


Cheryl

fem. proper name, popular in U.S. for girls born 1944-1975.


Chesapeake

from an Algonquian language, perhaps literally great shellfish bay. Early spellings include
Chesepiooc and Chesupioc.


Cheshire

1086, Cestre Scire, from Chester + scir district (see shire). Cheshire cat and its proverbial grin
are attested from 1770, but the signification is obscure.    I made a pun the other day, and palmed
it upon Holcroft, who grinned like a Cheshire cat. (Why do cats grin in Cheshire?--Because it was
once a county palatine, and the cats cannot help laughing whenever they think of it, though I see no
great joke in it.) I said that Holcroft, on being asked who were the best dramatic writers of the
day, replied, HOOK AND I. Mr Hook is author of several pieces, Tekeli, &amp;c.; You know what hooks
and eyes are, don't you? They are what little boys do up their breeches with. [Charles Lamb, letter
to Thomas Manning, Feb. 26, 1808]


chess (n.)

13c., from Old French esches chessmen, plural of eschec game of chess, chessboard; checkmate (see
check (n.)), from the key move of the game. Modern French still distinguishes &eacute;chec check,
blow, rebuff, defeat, from plural &eacute;checs chess.    The original word for chess is Sanskrit
chaturanga four members of an army -- elephants, horses, chariots, foot soldiers. This is preserved
in Spanish ajedrez, from Arabic (al) shat-ranj, from Persian chatrang, from the Sanskrit word.The
chess pieces are the block alphabet which shapes thoughts; and these thoughts, although making a
visual design on the chessboard, express their beauty abstractly, like a poem. [Marcel Duchamp,
address to New York State Chess Association, Aug. 30, 1952]


chess-board (n.)

mid-15c., from chess + board (n.1).


chessmen (n.)

also chess-men, late 15c., from chess + men.


chest (n.)

Old English cest box, coffer, casket, from Proto-Germanic *kista (cognates: Old Norse and Old High
German kista, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, German kiste, Dutch kist), an early borrowing from Latin
cista chest, box, from Greek kiste a box, basket, from PIE *kista woven container. Meaning extended
to thorax 1520s, replacing breast (n.), on the metaphor of the ribs as a box for the organs. Chest
of drawers is from 1590s.


Chester

Cestre (1086), from Old English Legac&aelig;stir (735) City of the Legions, from Old English ceaster
Roman town or city, from Latin castrum fortified place (see castle (n.)). It was the base of the
Second Legion Adiutrix in the 70s C.E. and later the 20th Legion Valeria Victrix. But the town's
name in Roman times was Deoua (c.150 C.E.), from its situation on the River Dee, a Celtic river name
meaning the goddess, the holy one.


Chesterfield

Derbyshire town, Old English Cesterfelda, literally open land near a Roman fort, from ceaster fort
(see Chester) + feld open land  (see field (n.)). The cigarette brand was named for Chesterfield
County, Virginia, U.S. As a kind of overcoat and a kind of sofa (both 19c.), the name comes from
earls of Chesterfield. Philip Stanhope, the fourth Earl of Chesterfield (1694-1773) was the writer
on manners and etiquette.


chestnut (n.)

1560s, from chesten nut (1510s), with superfluous nut (n.) + Middle English chasteine, from Old
French chastain (12c., Modern French ch&acirc;taigne), from Latin castanea chestnut, chestnut tree,
from Greek kastaneia, which the Greeks thought meant either nut from Castanea in Pontus, or nut from
Castana in Thessaly, but probably both places are named for the trees, not the other way around, and
the word is borrowed from a language of Asia Minor (compare Armenian kask chestnut, kaskeni chestnut
tree). In reference to the dark reddish-brown color, 1650s. Applied to the horse-chestnut by 1832.
Slang sense of venerable joke or story is from 1885, explained 1888 by Joseph Jefferson (see
Lippincott's Monthly Magazine, January 1888) as probably abstracted from the 1816 melodrama The
Broken Sword by William Dimond where an oft-repeated story involving a chestnut tree figures in an
exchange between the characters Captain Zavior and Pablo:   Zav. Let me see--ay! it is exactly six
years since that peace being restored to Spain, and my ship paid off, my kind brother offered me a
snug hammock in the dwelling of my forefathers. I mounted a mule at Barcelona and trotted away for
my native mountains. At the dawn of the fourth day's journey, I entered the wood of Collares, when,
suddenly, from the thick boughs of a cork-tree--   Pab. [Jumping up.] A chesnut, Captain, a chesnut!
Zav. Bah, you booby! I say, a cork!   Pab. And I swear, a chesnut. Captain, this is the twenty-
seventh time 1 have heard you relate this story, and you invariably said, a chesnut, till now.
Jefferson traced the connection through William Warren, the veteran comedian of Boston who often
played Pablo in the melodrama.


chesty (adj.)

aggressively self-assured, 1898, American English slang, from chest (n.) in the body sense + -y (2).
Of a woman, bosomy, full-breasted, by 1955.


chetnik (n.)

member of a Balkan guerrilla force, 1904, from Serbian &#269;etnik, from &#269;eta band, troop.


cheval de frise (n.)

1680s, from French, literally horse of Frisia, supposedly because it was first employed there as a
defense against cavalry; from French cheval horse (see cavalier (n.)). Plural chevaux de frise.


chevalier (n.)

late 13c., Anglo-French chivaler mounted knight, Old French chevalier knight, horseman, knight in
chess (12c., Modern French chevaler), from Late Latin caballarius horseman (source of
Proven&ccedil;al cavallier, Spanish caballero, Portuguese cavalleiro, Italian cavaliere; see
cavalier (n.)). The word formerly was nativized, but has been given a French pronunciation since
16c.


Cheviot (n.)

range of hills between Scotland and England, named for one of them, The Cheviot, attested from 12c.
as Chiviet; of uncertain origin; the second element is perhaps Old English geat gate.


chevron (n.)

late 14c., from Old French chevron rafter; chevron (13c.), the accent mark so called because it
looks like rafters of a shallow roof, from Vulgar Latin *caprione, from Latin caper goat (see cab);
the hypothetical connection between goats and rafters being the animal's angular hind legs. Compare
Latin capreolus props, stays, short pieces of timber for support, lit. wild goat, chamoix.


Chevy (n.)

by 1938, popular form of Chevrolet, U.S. automobile brand, which was founded by Louis Chevrolet and
William Durant in 1911; acquired by General Motors in 1917.


chew (v.)

Old English ceowan to bite, gnaw, chew, from West Germanic *keuwwan (cognates: Middle Low German
keuwen, Dutch kauwen, Old High German kiuwan, German kauen), from PIE root *gyeu- to chew (cognates:
Old Church Slavonic &#382;ivo to chew, Lithuanian &#382;iaunos jaws, Persian javidan to chew).
Figurative sense of to think over is from late 14c.; to chew the rag discusss some matter is from
1885, apparently originally British army slang. Related: Chewed; chewing. To chew (someone) out
(1948) probably is military slang from World War II. Chewing gum is by 1843, American English,
originally hardened secretions of the spruce tree.


chew (n.)

c.1200, an act of chewing, from chew (v.). Meaning wad of tobacco chewed at one time is from 1725;
as a kind of chewy candy, by 1906.


chewable (adj.)

1827, from chew (v.) + -able.


Cheyenne

1778, from French Canadian, from Dakota Sahi'yena, a diminutive of Sahi'ya, a Dakotan name for the
Cree people.


chez

1740, from French chez at the house of, from Old French chiese house (12c.), from Latin casa house.
Used with French personal names, meaning house of _____.


chi (n.)

22nd letter of the Greek alphabet, representing a -kh- sound (see ch). The letter is shaped like an
X, and so the Greek letter name was used figuratively to signify such a shape or arrangement (as in
khiasma two things placed crosswise; khiastos arranged diagonally; marked with an X; khiazein to
mark with an 'X', to write the letter 'X'). Some dialects used chi to represent the -ks- sound
properly belonging to xi; Latin picked this up and the sound value of chi in Latin-derived alphabets
is now that of English X.


chi-chi (adj.)

also chichi, extremely chic, sophisticated, also pretentious fussiness, 1908, from French chichi
airs, fuss. Perhaps, like frou-frou, imitative.


Chian (adj.)

pertaining to the Greek island of Chios, 1630s. The island name is of uncertain origin, perhaps
related to Greek khion snow.


Chiang Mai

city in northwest Thailand, founded in 1292; the name is Thai northern dialect chiang town + mai
new.


chianti (n.)

also chiante, kind of dry red wine, 1833, from Chianti Mountains of Tuscany, where the wine was
made. [L]oosely applied to various inferior Italian wines [OED].


chiaroscuro (n.)

1680s, disposition of light and dark in a picture, literally bright-dark, from Italian chiaro clear,
bright (from Latin clarus; see clear (adj.)) + oscuro (from Latin obscurus; see obscure (adj.)).
Related: Chiaroscurist.


chiasm (n.)

anglicized form of chiasmus or chiasma.


chiasma (n.)

a crossing, 1832, medical Latin, from Greek khiasma two things placed crosswise, which is related to
khiasmos  (see chiasmus). In cytology from 1911.


chiasmus (n.)

in grammar, inversion of word order, 1871, Latinized from Greek khiasmos a placing crosswise,
diagonal arrangement (see chi).    Adam, first of men,  To first of women, Eve.  [Paradise Lost]


chiastic (adj.)

1856, from Latinized fdorm of Greek khiastos arranged diagonally; marked with an X (i.e., resembling
the Greek letter chi) + -ic.


chic

1856, as a noun, style, artistic skill, from French chic, 19c. in stylishness sense, originally
subtlety (16c.), of unknown origin, perhaps [Klein] related to German Schick tact, skill, from
Middle Low German schikken arrange appropriately, or Middle High German schicken to arrange, set in
order; or from French chicane, from chicanerie (see chicanery). The adjectival meaning stylish is
from 1879 in English, Not so used in F[rench]. [OED].


chica (n.)

young girl, U.S. slang, c.2002, from American Spanish chica girl, fem. of chico boy, noun use of
adjective meaning small (here used as an affectionate term of address), from Latin ciccum, literally
chick-pea, figurative of an object of little value (compare Old French chiche).


Chicago (n.)

town founded in 1833, named from a Canadian French form of an Algonquian word, either Fox
/sheka:ko:heki place of the wild onion, or Ojibwa shika:konk at the skunk place (sometimes rendered
place of the bad smell). The Ojibwa skunk word is distantly related to the New England Algonquian
word that yielded Modern English skunk (n.). Related: Chicagoan.


chicane (n.)

in English in various senses, including act of chicanery (1670s), obstacles on a roadway (1955),
also a term in bridge (1880s), apparently all ultimately from an archaic verb chicane to trick
(1670s), from French chicane (16c.), from chicaner to pettifog, quibble (15c., see chicanery).


chicanery (n.)

c.1600, legal quibbling, sophistry, from French chicanerie trickery, from Middle French chicaner to
pettifog, quibble (15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle Low German schikken to arrange,
bring about, or from the name of a golf-like game once played in Languedoc. Thornton's American
Glossary has shecoonery (1845), which it describes as probably a corruption of chicanery.


Chicano (n.)

1947, from Mexican Spanish dialectal pronunciation of Mexicano Mexican, with loss of initial
unaccented syllable [Barnhart]. Said to have been in use among Mexican-Americans from c.1911.
Probably influenced by Spanish chico boy, also used as a nickname. The adjective in English is
attested by 1967. Fem. form is Chicana.


chick (n.)

mid-14c. shortening of chicken (n.). Extended to human offspring (often in alliterative pairing
chick and child) and thence used as a term of endearment. As slang for young woman it is first
recorded 1927 (in Elmer Gantry), supposedly from U.S. black slang. In British use in this sense by
c.1940; popularized by Beatniks late 1950s. Chicken in this sense is from 1711. Sometimes
c.1600-1900 chicken was taken as a plural, chick as a singular (compare child/children) for the
domestic fowl.


chick-pea (n.)

1712, false singular back-formation from chich-pease (1540s), from French pois chiche, from Latin
cicer pea, of uncertain origin, but with likely cognates in Greek kikerroi pale, Armenian sisern
chick-pea, Albanian thjer lentil. For second element, see pease. The Latin plural, cicera, is also
the source of Italian cece and was borrowed into Old High German as chihhra (German Kichererbse).


chickadee (n.)

black-capped titmouse, 1834, American English, echoic of its cry.


Chickasaw

1670s, from Chickasaw Chikasha, the people's name for themselves.


chicken (n.)

Old English cicen (plural cicenu) young fowl, which by early Middle English had came to mean young
chicken, then later any chicken, from Proto-Germanic *kiukinam (cognates: Middle Dutch kiekijen,
Dutch kieken, Old Norse kjuklingr, Swedish kyckling, German K&uuml;ken chicken), from root *keuk-
(echoic of the bird's sound and possibly also the root of cock (n.1)) + diminutive suffixes.
Applied to the young of other bird species from early 13c. Adjective sense of cowardly is at least
as old as 14c. (compare hen-herte a chicken-hearted person, mid-15c.). As the name of a game of
danger to test courage, it is first recorded 1953. Chicken feed paltry sum of money is by 1897,
American English slang; literal use (it is made from the from lowest quality of grain) by 1834.
Chicken lobster young lobster, is from c.1960s, American English, apparently from chicken in its
sense of young. Generic words for chicken in Indo-European tend to be extended uses of hen words, as
hens are more numerous among domestic fowl, but occasionally they are from words for the young, as
in English and in Latin pullus.


chicken (v.)

to back down or fail through cowardice, 1943, U.S. slang, from chicken (n.), almost always with out
(adv.).


chicken hawk (n.)

type of hawk that is believed to prey on domestic fowl, 1802, American English. Figuratively, from
the secondary senses of both words, public person who advocates war but who declined significant
opportunity to serve in uniform during wartime, at least 1988, American English. From chicken (n.) +
hawk (n.).


chicken pox (n.)

c.1730, from chicken (n.) + pox. Perhaps so called for its mildness compared to smallpox [Barnhart].


chicken-shit

1947 (n.) contemptible cowardly person; 1948 (adj.); from chicken + shit (n.).


chickweed (n.)

late 14c., chekwede, from chick + weed (n.). In Old English it was cicene mete chicken food.


chicle (n.)

1889, American English (in chicle-gum), from Mexican Spanish chicle, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) tzictli.


Chicom (adj.)

1962, American English, Cold War jargon, from Chinese + communist.


chicory (n.)

late 14c., cicoree (modern form from mid-15c.), from Middle French cichor&eacute;e endive, chicory
(15c., Modern French chicor&eacute;e), from Latin cichoreum, from Greek kikhorion (plural kikhoreia)
endive, of unknown origin. Klein suggests a connection with Old Egyptian keksher. The modern English
form is from French influence.


chide (v.)

late 12c., scold, nag, rail, originally intransitive, from Old English cidan to contend, quarrel,
complain. Not found outside Old English (though Liberman says it is probably related to OHG
*k&icirc;dal 'wedge,' with a sense evolution from brandishing sticks to scold, reprove). Past tense,
past participle can be chided or chid or even (past participle) chidden (Shakespeare used it);
present participle is chiding.


chief (adj.)

c.1300, highest in rank or power; most important or prominent; supreme, best, from Old French chief
chief, principal, first (10c., Modern French chef), from Vulgar Latin *capum (also source of Spanish
and Portuguese cabo, Italian capo, Proven&ccedil;al cap), from Latin caput head, also leader, guide,
chief person; summit; capital city (see capitulum).


chief (n.)

c.1300, head, leader, captain; the principal or most important part of anything; from Old French
chief leader, ruler, head of something, capital city (10c., Modern French chef), from Vulgar Latin
*capum, from Latin caput head, also leader, chief person; summit; capital city (see capitulum).
Meaning head of a clan is from 1570s; later extended to American Indian tribes. Commander-in-chief
attested from 1660s.


chiefdom (n.)

1570s, from chief (n.) + -dom.


chiefly (adv.)

pre-eminently, mid-14c., from chief + -ly (2). Adjectival meaning pertaining to a chief is from 1870
(from -ly (1)).


chieftain (n.)

early 14c., cheftayne ruler, chief, head of something, from Anglo-French chiefteyn, Old French
chevetain captain, chief, leader, from Late Latin capitaneus commander, from Latin capitis, genitive
of caput head (see capitulum). According to Rob Roy (1818) a Highland chieftain was the head of a
branch of a clan, a chief was the head of the whole name. Related: Chieftainship.


chifferobe (n.)

also chifforobe; article of furniture having drawers as well as space for hanging clothes, c.1917,
from merger of chiffonier + wardrobe (n.).


chiffon (n.)

feminine finery, sheer silk fabric, 1765, from French chiffon (17c.), diminutive of chiffe a rag,
piece of cloth (17c.), of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of English chip (n.1) or one of its
Germanic cousins. Klein suggests Arabic. Extension to pastry is attested by 1929.


chiffonade (n.)

also chiffonnade, food preparation technique, 1877, from French chiffonade, from chiffon (see
chiffon) + -ade. In reference to the condition of the leafy stuff after it is so treated.


chiffonier (n.)

piece of furniture with drawers for women's needlework, cloth, etc., 1806, from French chiffonnier,
a transferred use, literally rag gatherer, from chiffon, diminutive of chiffe rag, piece of cloth,
scrap, flimsy stuff (see chiffon).


chigger (n.)

1756, from West Indies chigoe (1660s), possibly from Carib, or from or influenced by words from
African languages (such as Wolof and Yoruba jiga insect).


chignon (n.)

knot or coil of hair worn at the back of the neck, from French chignon nape of the neck, from Old
French chaignon iron collar, shackles, noose (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *catenionem (nominative
*catenio), from Latin catena chain, fetter, restraint (see chain (n.)). Popular 1780s, 1870s, 1940s.
Form influenced in French by tignon coil of hair.


Chihuahua (n.)

dog breed, 1858, from the city and state in Mexico, said to be from a lost native word that meant
dry place.


chilblain (n.)

1540s, from chill (n.) + blain inflamed swelling or sore on skin. Related: Chilblains.


child (n.)

Old English cild fetus, infant, unborn or newly born person, from Proto-Germanic *kiltham (cognates:
Gothic kil&thorn;ei womb, inkil&thorn;o pregnant; Danish kuld children of the same marriage; Old
Swedish kulder litter; Old English cildhama womb, lit. child-home); no certain cognates outside
Germanic. App[arently] originally always used in relation to the mother as the 'fruit of the womb'
[Buck]. Also in late Old English, a youth of gentle birth (archaic, usually written childe). In
16c.-17c. especially girl child.     The wider sense young person before the onset of puberty
developed in late Old English. Phrase with child pregnant (late 12c.) retains the original sense.
The sense extension from infant to child also is found in French enfant, Latin infans. Meaning one's
own child; offspring of parents is from late 12c. (the Old English word was bearn; see bairn).
Figurative use from late 14c. Most Indo-European languages use the same word for a child and one's
child, though there are exceptions (such as Latin liberi/pueri).    The difficulty with the plural
began in Old English, where the nominative plural was at first cild, identical with the singular,
then c.975 a plural form cildru (genitive cildra) arose, probably for clarity's sake, only to be re-
pluraled late 12c. as children, which is thus a double plural. Middle English plural cildre survives
in Lancashire dialect childer and in Childermas.   Child abuse is attested by 1963; child-molester
from 1950. Child care is from 1915. Child's play, figurative of something easy, is in Chaucer (late
14c.).


child-bearing (n.)

also childbearing, bringing forth of a child, late 14c., from child + verbal noun of bear (v.). As
an adjective from late 14c.


child-proof (adj.)

1933, from child (n.) + proof (n.). As a verb by 1951.


childbed (n.)

also child-bed, c.1200, state of being in labor, from child + bed (n.). In reference to a bed, real
or metaphorical, on which something is born, from 1590s.


childbirth (n.)

also child-birth, mid-15c., from child + birth (n.).


childe (n.)

youth of gentle birth, used as a kind of title, late Old English, variant spelling of child (q.v.).


Childermas (n.)

festival of the Holy Innocents (Dec. 28), late Old English *cildram&aelig;sse (c.1000), from
obsolete plural of child (q.v.) + mass (n.2).


childhood (n.)

period of life from birth to puberty, Old English cildhad; see child + -hood.


childish (adj.)

Old English cildisc proper to a child; see child + -ish. Meaning puerile, immature, like a child in
a bad sense is from early 15c. Related: Childishly; childishness.


childless (adj.)

c.1200, from child (n.) + -less. Related: Childlessness.


childlike (adj.)

1580s, proper to a child, from child + like (adj.). Meaning like a child in a good sense
(distinguished from childish) is from 1738.


children (n.)

plural of child (q.v.)


Chile

South American country, probably named from a local native word subsequently confused with Mexican
Spanish chile chili pepper (see chili). Suggestions are that the native word means land's end or
else cold, winter, which would make a coincidental convergence with English chilly. Related:
Chilean.


chili (n.)

also chilli, 1660s, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) chilli, native name for the peppers. Not named for the
South American country. As short for chile con carne and similar dishes, attested by 1846.


chiliad (n.)

group of 1,000 (of the same sort), 1590s, from Latinized form of Greek khiliados, from khilioi a
thousand; the number 1,000 (see chiliasm).


chiliasm (n.)

c.1600, from Latinized form of Greek khiliasmos, from khilias, from khilioi a thousand, the number
1,000, of unknown origin; supposed by some to be related to Latin mille. The doctrine of the
millennium, the opinion that Christ will reign in bodily presence on earth for 1,000 years. Related:
Chiliast; chiliastic.


chill (n.)

Old English ciele, cele cold, coolness, chill, frost, from Proto-Germanic *kal- to be cold, from PIE
root *gel- cold (see cold). According to OED, the word seems to have been obsolete after c.1400
(displaced by cold) and the modern use is a back-formation since c.1600 from the verb.


chill (v.)

late 14c., intransitive, to feel cold, grow cold; c.1400, transitive, to make cold, from chill (n.).
Related: Chilled; chilling; chillingly. Figurative use from late 14c. Meaning hang out first
recorded 1985; from earlier chill out relax (1979).   <b>Sheila E.</b> sizzles in the new flick,
Krush Groove, but some New York critics couldn't groove with it because many of the terms are
unfamiliar to them. Examples: breakin' out (slang for leaving), chill (for cool down) and death (for
something that's really good). [Jet, Nov. 11, 1985]


chilly (adj.)

1560s, causing a sensation of cold, from chill (n.) + -y (2). Meaning feeling coldish is attested
from 1610s; figurative use is recorded by 1841. Related: Chilliness.


chime (v.)

mid-14c., chyme, from chime (n.). Originally of metal, etc.; of voices from late 14c. To chime in
originally was musical, join harmoniously; of conversation by 1838. Related: Chimed; chiming.


chime (n.)

c.1300, chymbe cymbal, from Old English cymbal, cimbal, also perhaps through Old French chimbe or
directly from Latin cymbalum (see cymbal, the modern word for what this word originally meant).
Evidently the word was misinterpreted as chymbe bellen (c.1300) and its sense shifted to chime
bells, a meaning attested from mid-15c.


chimenea (n.)

free-standing fireplace, 20c., from Mexican Spanish, literally chimney, from Spanish, ultimately
from Latin caminata (see chimney).


chimera (n.)

fabulous monster, late 14c., from Old French chimere or directly from Medieval Latin chimera, from
Latin Chimaera, from Greek khimaira, name of a mythical creature, slain by Bellerophon, with a
lion's head, a goat's body, and a serpent's tail (supposedly personification of snow or winter);
literally year-old she-goat (masc. khimaros), from kheima winter season (see hibernation).
Figurative meaning wild fantasy first recorded 1580s in English (attested 13c. in French).Beestis
clepid chymeres, that han a part of ech beest, and suche ben not, no but oonly in opynyoun. [Wyclif,
Prologue]


chimerical (adj.)

1630s, from chimera + -ical. Related: Chimeric (1650s).


chimichanga (n.)

deep-fried burrito, by 1964; the thing and the name for it seem to have originated somewhere along
the western U.S.-Mexico border (Arizona, Sonora), but beyond that all is obscure.


chimney (n.)

late 13c., furnace; early 14c., chimney stack of a fireplace; late 14c., fireplace in a residential
space; from Old French cheminee fireplace; room with a fireplace; hearth; chimney stack (12c.,
Modern French chemin&eacute;e), from Late Latin (camera) caminata fireplace; room with a fireplace,
from Latin caminatus, adjective of caminus furnace, forge; hearth, oven; flue, from Greek kaminos
furnace, oven, brick kiln. Jamieson [1808] notes that in vulgar use in Scotland it always is
pronounced chimley. Chimney sweep attested from 1610s, earlier chimney sweeper (c.1500).


chimpanzee (n.)

1738, from a Bantu language of Angola (compare Tshiluba  kivili-chimpenze ape). Short form chimp
first attested 1877.


chin (n.)

Old English cin, cinn chin (but in some compounds suggesting an older, broader sense of jawbone); a
general Germanic word (compare Old Saxon and Old High German kinni; Old Norse kinn; German Kinn
chin; Gothic kinnus cheek), from PIE root *genu- chin, jawbone (cognates: Sanskrit hanuh, Avestan
zanu- chin; Armenian cnawt jawbone, cheek; Lithuanian &#382;&#225;ndas jawbone; Greek genus lower
jaw, geneion chin; Old Irish gin mouth, Welsh gen jawbone, chin).


chin (v.)

1590s, to press (affectionately) chin to chin, from chin (n.). Meaning to bring to the chin (of a
fiddle) is from 1869. Slang meaning talk, gossip is from 1883, American English. Related: Chinned;
chinning. Athletic sense of raise one's chin over (a raised bar, for exercise) is from 1880s.


chin-strap (n.)

1805, from chin (n.) + strap (n.).


chin-up (n.)

also chinup, type of exercise, 1951, from chin (v.) + up (adv.). Earlier it was called chinning the
bar and under names such as this is described by 1883.


china (n.)

porcelain imported from China, 1570s, short for Chinaware, China dishes, etc.; from the country name
(see China).


China (n.)

Asian country name, 1550s, of uncertain origin, probably ultimately from Sanskrit Cina-s the Chinese
(earliest European usage is in Italian, by Marco Polo), perhaps from Qin dynasty, which ruled 3c.
B.C.E. Latinized as Sina, hence sinologist. The Chinese word for the country is Chung-kuo (Wade-
Giles), Zhongguo (Pinyin).


Chinaman (n.)

1711, native of China, from China + man (n.). Also in 18c., dealer in china wares (1728).


Chinatown (n.)

1857 in California, from China + town. But from 1852 in a St. Helena context.


chinch (n.)

bedbug, 1610s, from Spanish/Portuguese chinche (diminutive chinchilla) bug, from Latin cimicem
(nominative cimex) bedbug. Related: Chinch-bug.


chinchilla (n.)

small South American rodent, 1590s, from Spanish, literally little bug, diminutive of chinche (see
chinch); perhaps a folk-etymology alteration of a word from Quechua or Aymara.


chine (adj.)

in Chinese fashion, French Chin&#233;, past participle of chiner to color in Chinese fashion, from
Chine China (see China).


Chinese (adj.)

1570s, from China + -ese. As a noun from c.1600. Chinee (n.) is a vulgar back-formation from this
word on the mistaken notion that the word is a plural. As an adjective, Chinish also was used 16c.
Chinese fire-drill chaotic situation of many people rushing around futilely is attested by 1962,
U.S. military slang. The game Chinese checkers is attested from 1938.


chink (n.1)

a split, crack, 1530s, with parasitic -k + Middle English chine (and replacing this word) fissure,
narrow valley, from Old English cinu, cine fissure, related to cinan to crack, split, gape, common
Germanic (compare Old Saxon and Old High German kinan, Gothic uskeinan, German keimen to germinate;
Middle Dutch kene, Old Saxon kin, German Keim germ; ), from PIE root *geie- to sprout, split open.
The connection being in the notion of bursting open.


chink (n.2)

a Chinaman, 1901, derogatory, perhaps derived somehow from China, or else from chink (n.1) with
reference to eye shape.


chink (n.3)

sharp sound (especially of coin), 1580s, probably imitative. As a verb from 1580s. Related: Chinked;
chinking.


chinky (adj.)

full of chinks, 1640s, from chink (n.1) + -y (2). As a noun by 1879, variant of chink (n.2),
derogatory term for Chinese person; chiefly British.


chinned (adj.)

having a chin or chins (of a certain kind or number), used in combinations from c.1600.


chino (n.)

type of cotton twill cloth, 1943, from American Spanish chino, literally toasted; so called in
reference to its usual color. Earlier (via notion of skin color) chino meant child of one white
parent, one Indian (fem. china), perhaps from Quechua &#269;ina female animal, servant. Sources seem
to disagree on whether the racial sense or the color sense is original.


Chinook

name for a group of related native people in the Columbia River region of Washington and Oregon,
from Salishan /&#269;inuk/, name of a village site. Name also extended to a type of salmon (1851)
and warm spring wind. Chinook jargon was a mishmash of native (Chinook and Nootka), French, and
English words; it once was lingua franca in the Pacific Northwest, and it is the earliest attested
use of the word (1840).


chinos (n.)

(plural) 1943, from American Spanish chino, the name of the fabric from which they are made (see
chino).


chintz (n.)

1719, plural of chint (1610s), from Hindi chint, from Sanskrit chitra-s clear, bright (compare
cheetah). The plural (the more common form of the word in commercial use) became regarded as
singular by late 18c., and for unknown reason shifted -s to -z; perhaps after quartz. Disparaging
sense, from the commonness of the fabric, is first recorded 1851 in George Eliot (in chintzy).


chintzy (adj.)

1851, from chintz + -y (2).


chiono-

before vowels chion-, word-forming element meaning snow, from Latinized form of Greek khion snow,
related to kheima, kheimon winter (see hibernation).


chip (v.)

early 15c., to chip (intransitive, of stone); from Old English forcippian to pare away by cutting,
cut off, verbal form of cipp small piece of wood (see chip (n.)). Transitive meaning to cut up, cut
or trim is from late 15c. Sense of break off fragments is 18c. To chip in contribute (1861) is
American English, perhaps from card-playing. Related: Chipped; chipping. Chipped beef attested from
1826.


chip (n.1)

Old English cipp piece of wood, perhaps from PIE root *keipo- sharp post (cognates: Dutch kip small
strip of wood, Old High German kipfa wagon pole, Old Norse keppr stick, Latin cippus post, stake,
beam; the Germanic words perhaps borrowed from Latin).    Meaning counter used in a game of chance
is first recorded 1840; electronics sense is from 1962. Used for thin slices of foodstuffs
(originally fruit) since 1769; specific reference to potatoes is found by 1859 (in A Tale of Two
Cities); potato chip is attested by 1879. Meaning piece of dried dung first attested 1846, American
English.   Chip of the old block is used by Milton (1642); earlier form was chip of the same block
(1620s); more common modern phrase with off in place of of is early 20c. To have a chip on one's
shoulder is 1830, American English, from the custom of a boy determined to fight putting a wood chip
on his shoulder and defying another to knock it off.


chip (n.2)

break caused by chipping, 1889, from chip (v.).


chipmunk (n.)

1829 (also chitmunk, 1832), from Algonquian, probably Ojibwa ajidamoo (in the Ottawa dialect
ajidamoonh) red squirrel, literally head first, or one who descends trees headlong (containing ajid-
upside down), probably influenced by English chip and mink. Other early names for it included ground
squirrel and striped squirrel.


chipotle (n.)

smoke-dried jalape&ntilde;o chili, from Mexican Spanish, ultimately a Nahuatl (Aztecan) word, said
to be a compound of chilli chili pepper (see chili) + poctli smoke.


Chippendale

piece of furniture by, or in the style of, Chippendale, by 1871, from Thomas Chippendale
(c.1718-1779), English cabinetmaker. The family name (13c.) is from Chippingdale, Lancashire
(probably from Old English ceaping a market, marketplace, related to cheap). Chippendales beefcake
dance revue, began late 1970s in a Los Angeles nightclub, the name said to have been chosen for its
suggestion of elegance and class.


chipper (adj.)

1834, lively, nimble, American English, from northern British dialectal kipper nimble, frisky, the
origin of which is obscure.


Chippewa

see Ojibwa.


chippy (n.)

promiscuous young woman; prostitute, 1880, U.S. slang, earlier (1864) short for chipping-bird
sparrow, perhaps ultimately a variant of cheep.


chiral (adj.)

1894, a hybrid coined by Lord Kelvin from Latinized comb. form of Greek kheir hand (from PIE *ghes-
hand; see chiro-) + -al (1).


chiro-

before verbs chir-, word-forming element meaning hand, from Latinized form of Greek kheiro-, comb.
form of kheir (genitive kheiros) the hand, from PIE *ghes- hand (cognates: Hittite keshshar,
Armenian jern hand).


chirography (n.)

handwriting, 1650s, from chiro- + -graphy. Chirograph formal written legal document is attested from
late 13c. in Anglo-French, from Latin chirographum, from Greek kheirographia written testimony.


chiromancy (n.)

divination by the hand, palmistry, 1520s, from French chiromancie (14c.), from Medieval Latin
chiromantia, from Late Greek kheiromanteia, from kheiro-, comb. form of kheir hand (see chiro-) +
-mantia (see -mancy). Related: Chiromancer; chiromantic.


Chiron

wisest of the centaurs, from Latin Chiron, from Greek Kheiron, of unknown origin; Klein compares
Greek kheirourgos surgeon.


chiropodist (n.)

1785, from chiro- hand + pod-, stem of Greek pous foot (see foot (n.)) + -ist. Probably coined by
Canadian-born U.S. healer Daniel Palmer (1845-1913); originally they treated both hands and feet. A
much-maligned word among classicists, who point out it could mean having chapped feet but probably
doesn't, and in that case it is an etymological garble and no one can say for sure what it is meant
to signify. Related: Chiropody.


chiropractic

coined in American English, 1898 (adj.); 1899 (n.), from chiro- hand + praktikos practical (see
practical), the whole of it loosely meant as done by hand.


chiropractor (n.)

1904, agent noun in Latin form from chiropractic (q.v.).


chirp (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in chirping), echoic, or else a variant of Middle English chirken to twitter (late
14c.), from Old English cearcian to creak, gnash. Related: Chirped. As a noun, attested from 1802.


chirpy (adj.)

cheerfully perky, 1825, from chirp + -y (2). The notion is perhaps of birds fluttering and
chattering.


chirr (v.)

c.1600, echoic of a grasshopper's trill. Related: Chirred; chirring.


chirrup (v.)

1570s, alternative form chirp (v.).


chirurgeon (n.)

1530s, representing a failed Renaissance attempt to restore Greek spelling to the word that had got
into English as surgeon; now, thank the gods, archaic. Related: Chirurgery. Compare French
chirurgien.


chisel (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French cisel, Old French cisel chisel, in plural, scissors, shears (12c.,
Modern French ciseau), from Vulgar Latin *cisellum cutting tool, from Latin caesellum, diminutive of
caesus, past participle of caedere to cut (see -cide). Related: Chiseled; chiseling.


chisel (v.)

c.1500, to break with a chisel, from chisel (n.). Slang sense of to cheat, defraud is first recorded
in 1808 as chizzel; origin and connection to the older word are obscure (compare slang sense of
gouge); chiseler in this sense is from 1918. Related: Chiseled; chiseling.


chiseled (adj.)

having sharp outlines, 1821, figurative past participle adjective from chisel (v.).


chiseler (n.)

1824, one who works with a chisel, agent noun from chisel (v.). In slang sense of swindler, attested
from 1918.


Chisholm Trail

1866, from Jesse Chisholm (c.1806-1868), halfbreed Cherokee trader and government agent who first
plied it. The surname is from a barony in England, probably from Old English cisel gravel.


chit (n.1)

note, 1776, short for chitty, from Mahrati (Hindi) chitthi letter, note, from Sanskrit chitra-s
distinctively marked (see cheetah).


chit (n.2)

small child, 1620s, originally young of a beast (late 14c.); unrelated to chit (n.1); perhaps a
playful deformation of kitten, but the Middle English Dictionary compares Old High German kizzin
kid.


chitchat (n.)

also chit-chat, 1710, diminishing reduplicated form of chat. The verb is attested from 1821.
Related: Chitchatting.


chitin (n.)

1836, from French chitine, from Greek khiton frock, tunic, of soldiers, coat of mail, used
metaphorically for any coat or covering. Probably an Oriental word [Liddell &amp; Scott]. Klein
compares Hebrew kuttoneth coat, Aramaic kittana, Arabic kattan linen.


chiton (n.)

mollusc genus, 1816, from Latinized form of Greek khiton frock (worn by both sexes), tunic, mail
coat (see chitin). Used in English in literal sense of ancient Greek tunic from 1850. The molluscs
also are known as coat-of-mail shells for their mail-like covering.


chitter (v.)

c.1200, imitative of birds. Related: Chittered; chittering.


chitter-chatter (n.)

1712, reduplicated form of chatter (n.). As a verb from 1804. Related: Chitter-chattering.


chitterlings (n.)

late 13c., cheterlingis entrails, souse (early 13c. in surnames), origins obscure, but probably from
an unrecorded Old English word having something to do with entrails (related to Old English cwi&eth;
womb; compare German Kutteln guts, bowels, tripe, chitterlings, Gothic qi&thorn;us womb). Variants
chitlins (1842) and chitlings (1880) both also had a sense of shreds, tatters.    While I was in
this way rollin' in clover, by picturin' what was to be, they wur tarin' my character all to
chitlins up at home. [John S. Robb, Streaks of Squatter Life, Philadelphia, 1843]


chivalresque (adj.)

1800, from chivalry on analogy of French chevalresque, from chevalier (see chevalier).


chivalric (adj.)

1797, from chivalry + -ic. Pronounced by poets with accent on the middle syllable, and because they
are the only ones who need it, that pronunciation might as well be accepted.


chivalrous (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French chevaleros knightly, noble, chivalrous, from chevalier (see chevalier;
also compare chivalry). According to OED, obsolete in English and French from mid-16c. Not revived
in French, but brought back in English late 18c. by romantic writers fond of medieval settings.


chivalry (n.)

c.1300, body or host of knights; knighthood in the feudal social system; bravery in war, warfare as
an art, from Old French chevalerie knighthood, chivalry, nobility, cavalry, art of war, from
chevaler knight, from Medieval Latin caballarius horseman, from Latin caballus nag, pack-horse (see
cavalier). From late 14c. as the nobility as one of the estates of the realm, also as the word for
an ethical code emphasizing honor, valor, generosity and courtly manners. Modern use for social and
moral code of medieval feudalism probably is an 18c. historical revival.


chive (n.)

c.1400, from Old North French chive (Old French, Modern French cive, 13c.), from Latin cepa onion
(see onion).


chivvy (v.)

harass, 1918, from alternative form of chevy (1830) to chase, from a noun chevy (1824, also used as
a hunting cry, c.1785), from chevy chase a running pursuit, probably from the Ballad of Chevy Chase,
popular song from 15c. describing a hunting party on the borderland that turned into a battle
between the English and the Scots (the incident probably late 14c.). The place is probably
originally Cheviot Chase.    The old song of Chevy-Chase is the favourite ballad of the common
people of England, and Ben Jonson used to say, he had rather have been the author of it than of all
his works. [Addison, spectator No. 70, May 21, 1711]


chlamydia (n.)

type of genital infection, 1984, from the name of the bacteria that causes it (1945), which is
formed from Latinized comb. form of Greek khlamys (genitive khlamydos) short mantle, military cloak,
of unknown origin, + -ia.


Chloe

fem. proper name, Latin, from Greek Khloe, literally young green shoot; related to khloros greenish-
yellow, from PIE *ghlo- variant of root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright
materials and gold, and bile or gall (such as Latin helvus yellowish, bay, Gallo-Latin gilvus light
bay; Lithuanian geltonas yellow; Old Church Slavonic zlutu, Polish &#380;&oacute;&#322;ty, Russian
zeltyj yellow; Sanskrit harih yellow, tawny yellow, hiranyam gold; Avestan zari yellow; Old English
geolu, geolwe, Modern English yellow, German gelb yellow) and green (such as Latin galbus greenish-
yellow; Greek khloros greenish-yellow color, kholos bile; Lithuanian zalias green, zelvas greenish;
Old Church Slavonic zelenu, Polish zielony, Russian zelenyj green; Old Irish glass, Welsh and Breton
glas green, also gray, blue).    Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is perhaps
because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to
yellow. It is possible that this whole group of yellow-green words is related to PIE root *ghlei- to
shine, glitter, glow, be warm (see gleam (n.)).


chloral (n.)

colorless liquid formed by the action of chlorine on alcohol, apparently coined by German chemist
Justus von Liebig in 1833 from elements from chlorine + alcohol. Later chiefly in chloral hydrate
(1874).


chloride (n.)

compound of chlorine and another element, 1812, coined by Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829) from
chlorine + -ide on the analogy of oxide.


chlorinate (v.)

1836 (implied in chlorinated), from chlorine (n.) + -ate (2). Related: Chlorinating.


chlorination (n.)

1854, noun of action from chlorinate (v.).


chlorine (n.)

nonmetallic element, the name coined 1810 by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) from
Latinized form of Greek khloros pale green (see Chloe) + chemical suffix -ine (2). Named for its
color. Discovered 1774, but known at first as oxymuriatic acid gas, or dephlogisticated marine acid.


chloro-

before vowels chlor-, word-forming element used in chemistry, usually indicating the presence of
chlorine in a compound, but sometimes green, from Latinized comb. form of Greek khloros (see Chloe);
also compare chlorine.


chlorofluorocarbon (n.)

by 1946, from chloro- + fluorocarbon, from fluor + connective -o- + carbon.


chloroform (n.)

trichloromethane, volatile liquid used as an anaesthetic, 1835, from French chloroforme, a hybrid
coined 1834 by French chemist Jean-Baptiste Dumas (1800-1884) from chlor-, comb. form meaning
chlorine + formique formic (acid) (see formic (adj.)). As a verb, from 1848, the year its
anaesthetic properties were discovered. Related: Chloroformed.


chlorophyll (n.)

green-colored stuff in plants, 1819, from French chlorophyle (1818), coined by French chemists
Pierre-Joseph Pelletier (1788-1842) and Joseph Bienaim&eacute; Caventou (1795-1877) from Greek
khloros pale green (see Chloe) + phyllon a leaf (see folio).


chloroplast (n.)

1887, from German chloroplast (1884, E. Strasburger), shortened from chloroplastid (1883, F.W.
Schimper); see chloro- + -plast.


choad (n.)

also chode, penis, c.1968, U.S. teen slang, of unknown origin. Guesses include supposed Navajo
chodis penis [Cassell's Dictionary of Slang 2005], or a supposed Hindi, Bengali or Gujarati
vernacular word for copulate [New Hacker's Dictionary, 1996].


choate (adj.)

finished, complete, mistaken back-formation from inchoate (q.v.) as though that word contained in-
not. First attested 1878 in letter from Oliver Wendell Holmes lamenting barbarisms in legal case
writing (he said he found choate in a California report).


chock (n.)

1670s, lumpy piece of wood, possibly from Old North French choque a block (Old French &ccedil;oche
log, 12c.; Modern French souche stump, stock, block), from Gaulish *tsukka a tree trunk, stump.


chock (adv.)

tightly, close up against, 1799, back formation from chock-full.


chock-a-block (adj.)

nautical, said of two blocks of tackle run so closely they touch; from chock + block (n.).


chock-full (adj.)

c.1400, chokkeful crammed full, possibly from choke cheek (see cheek (n.)). Or it may be from Old
French choquier collide, crash, hit (13c., Modern French choquer), which is probably from Germanic
(compare Middle Dutch schokken; see shock (n.1)).


chocolate (n.)

c.1600, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) xocolatl, possibly from xocolia to make bitter + atl water. Brought
to Spain by 1520, from thence to the rest of Europe. Originally a drink; as a paste or cake made of
ground, roasted, sweetened cacao seeds, 1640s.  To a Coffee-house, to drink jocolatte, very good
[Pepys, Diary, Nov. 24, 1664].  As a color from 1776. Chocolate chip is from 1940; chocolatier is
attested from 1888.


chocolatey (adj.)

1922, chocolate-y, from chocolate + -y (2). Related: Choclatiness.


Choctaw

1722, from Choctaw Chahta, of uncertain meaning, but also said to be from Spanish chato flattened,
for the tribe's custom of flattening the heads of male infants. As a figure skating step, first
recorded 1892. Sometimes used in 19c. American English as typical of a difficult or incomprehensible
language (compare Greek in this sense from c.1600).


choice (n.)

mid-14c., that which is choice, from choice (adj.) blended with earlier chois (n.) action of
selecting (c.1300); power of choosing (early 14c.), someone or something chosen (late 14c.), from
Old French chois one's choice; fact of having a choice (12c., Modern French choix), from verb
choisir to choose, distinguish, discern; recognize, perceive, see, from a Germanic source related to
Old English ceosan to choose, taste, try; see choose. Late Old English chis fastidious, choosy, from
or related to ceosan, probably also contributed to the development of choice.   Replaced Old English
cyre choice, free will, from the same base, probably because the imported word was closer to choose
[see note in OED].


choice (adj.)

worthy to be chosen, distinguished, excellent, mid-14c., from choice (n.). Related: Choiceness.


choir (n.)

c.1300, queor part of the church where the choir sings, from Old French cuer, quer choir of a church
(architectural); chorus of singers (13c., Modern French choeur), from Latin chorus choir (see
chorus). Meaning band of singers is c.1400, quyre. Re-spelled mid-17c. on Latin model.


choir-boy (n.)

also choir boy, 1769, from choir + boy. As a type of innocence, by 1885.


chokage (n.)

1847, from choke (n.) + -age.


choke (v.)

c.1300, transitive, to strangle; late 14c., to make to suffocate, of persons as well as swallowed
objects, a shortening of acheken (c.1200), from Old English aceocian to choke, suffocate (with
intensive a-), probably from root of ceoke jaw, cheek (see cheek (n.)).    Intransitive sense from
c.1400. Meaning gasp for breath is from early 15c. Figurative use from c.1400, in early use often
with reference to weeds stifling the growth of useful plants (a Biblical image). Meaning to fail in
the clutch is attested by 1976, American English. Related: Choked; choking. Choke-cherry (1785)
supposedly so called for its astringent qualities. Johnson also has choke-pear Any aspersion or
sarcasm, by which another person is put to silence. Choked up overcome with emotion and unable to
speak is attested by 1896. The baseball batting sense is by 1907.


choke (n.)

1560s, quinsy, from choke (v.). Meaning action of choking is from 1839. Meaning valve which controls
air to a carburetor first recorded 1926.


choke-hold (n.)

1962, from choke + hold (n.).


choker (n.)

1550s, one who chokes, agent noun from choke (v.). From 1848 as large neckerchief; as a kind of
necklace, 1928.


cholecyst (n.)

gall bladder, 1846, from medical Latin cholecystis, incorrectly formed from Greek khole gall (see
cholera) + kystis bladder, cyst (see cyst). Related: Cholecystectomy.


cholecystitis (n.)

1846, from cholecyst + -itis.


choler (n.)

late 14c., bile, as one of the humors, supposed to cause irascibility or temper, from Old French
colere bile, anger, from Late Latin cholera bile (see cholera).


cholera (n.)

late 14c., bile, melancholy (originally the same as choler), from Middle French cholera or directly
from Late Latin cholera, from Greek kholera a type of disease characterized by diarrhea, supposedly
caused by choler (Celsus), from khole gall, bile, from khloazein to be green, from khloros (see
Chloe). But another sense of khole was drainpipe, gutter.    Revived 1560s in classical sense as a
name for a severe digestive disorder (rarely fatal to adults); and 1704 (especially as cholera
morbus), for a highly lethal disease endemic in India, periodically breaking out in global
epidemics, especially that reaching Britain and America in the early 1830s.


choleraic (adj.)

pertaining to cholera, 1832, from cholera + -ic.


choleric (adj.)

mid-14c., colrik, bilious of temperament or complexion, from Old French colerique, from Late Latin
cholericus, from Greek kholerikos (see choler). Meaning easily angered, hot-tempered is from 1580s
(from the supposed effect of excess choler); that of pertaining to cholera is from 1834.


cholesterol (n.)

white, solid substance present in body tissues, 1894, earlier cholesterin, from French cholestrine
(Chevreul, 1827), from Greek khole bile (see cholera) + steros solid, stiff (see sterility). So
called because originally found in gallstones (Conradi, 1775). The name was changed to the modern
form (with chemical suffix -ol, denoting an alcohol) after the compound was discovered to be a
secondary alcohol.


cholinergic (adj.)

1934, from choline (coined in German, 1862, from Greek khole bile; see cholera) + Greek ergon work
(see organ) + -ic.


Cholo

Indian or mixed-race person of Latin America (fem. Chola), 1851, from American Spanish (c.1600),
said to be from Nahuatl (Aztecan) xolotl dog, mutt. Proposed derivation from Mexican city of Cholula
seems too late, if this is the same word. In U.S., used of lower-class Mexican immigrants, but by
1970s the word began to be embraced in Latino gang slang in a positive sense.


chomp (v.)

1640s, dialectal and American English variant of champ (v.). Related: Chomped; chomping.


chondro-

word-forming element meaning cartilage, from Latinized form of Greek khondros cartilage (of the
breastbone); see grind (v.).


choo-choo (n.)

Child's name for steam-engine locomotive, 1895, echoic (choo-choo cars is attested from 1891).


choose (v.)

Old English ceosan choose, seek out, select; decide, test, taste, try; accept, approve (class II
strong verb; past tense ceas, past participle coren), from Proto-Germanic *keus- (cognates: Old
Frisian kiasa, Old Saxon kiosan, Dutch kiezen, Old High German kiosan, German kiesen, Old Norse
kjosa, Gothic kiusan choose, Gothic kausjan to taste, test), from PIE root *geus- to taste, relish
(see gusto). Only remotely related to choice. Variant spelling chuse is Middle English, very
frequent 16c.-18c. The irregular past participle leveled out to chosen by 1200.


choosy (adj.)

1862, American English, from choose + -y (2). Also sometimes choosey. Related: Choosiness.


chop (v.1)

to cut with a quick blow, mid-14c., of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old North French choper (Old
French coper to cut, cut off, 12c., Modern French couper), from Vulgar Latin *cuppare to behead,
from a root meaning head, but influenced in Old French by couper to strike. Related: Chopped;
chopping.


chop (v.2)

shift quickly, 1530s, earlier to bargain (early 15c.), ultimately from Old English ceapian to
bargain (see cheap); here with a sense of changing back and forth, probably from common expressions
such as to chop and change barter. To chop logic is recorded from 1570s. Related: Chopped; chopping.


chop (n.)

act of chopping, mid-14c., from chop (v.1). Meaning piece cut off is mid-15c.; specifically slice of
meat from mid-17c. Sense of a blow, strike is from 1550s.


chop suey (n.)

1885, American English, from Chinese (Cantonese dialect) tsap sui odds and ends, mixed bits.


chop-chop (adv.)

quickly, Pidgin English, from Chinese k'wa-k'wa (see chopstick).    CHOP. A Chinese word signifying
quality; first introduced by mariners in the Chinese trade, but which has now become common in all
our seaports. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


chop-house (n.)

1680s, a mean house of entertainment, where provision ready dressed is sold [Johnson], from chop
(n.) in the meat sense + house (n.).


chopper (n.)

1550s, one who chops, agent noun from chop (v.1). Meaning meat cleaver is by 1818. Meaning
helicopter is from 1951, Korean War military slang (compare egg-beater); as a type of stripped-down
motorcycle (originally prefered by Hell's Angels) from 1965.


chopping (adj.)

large and thriving, 1560s, past participle adjective from chop (v.). Compare strapping, whopping in
similar sense.   <b>chopping</b>. An epithet frequently applied to infants, by way of ludicrous
commendation: imagined by Skinner to signify lusty, from cas Sax. by others to mean a child that
would bring money at a market. Perhaps a greedy, hungry child, likely to live. [Johnson]


choppy (adj.)

1830 (of seas), from chop (v.2) + -y (2). Earlier in this sense was chopping (1630s).


chops (n.)

jaws, sides of the face, c.1500, perhaps a variant of chaps (n.2) in the same sense, which is of
unknown origin.


chopstick (n.)

also chop-stick, 1690s, sailors' partial translation of Chinese k'wai tse, variously given as fast
ones or nimble boys, first element from pidgin English chop, from Cantonese kap urgent. Chopsticks,
the two-fingered piano exercise, is first attested 1893, probably from the resemblance of the
fingers to chopsticks.


choral (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French choral or directly from Medieval Latin choralis belonging to a chorus or
choir, from Latin chorus (see chorus).


chorale (n.)

1828, sacred choral song, from German Choral metrical hymn in Reformed church, shortened from
Choralgesang choral song, translating Medieval Latin cantus choralis, from Latin cantus (see chant
(v.)) + choralis (see choral). The -e was added to indicate stress. Meaning group of singers is
1942.


chord (n.1)

related notes in music, 1590s, ultimately a shortening of accord (or borrowed from a similar
development in French) and influenced by Latin chorda catgut, a string of a musical instrument (see
cord (n.)). Spelling with an -h- first recorded c.1600, from confusion with chord (n.2). Originally
two notes; of three or more from 18c.


chord (n.2)

structure in animals resembling a string, 1540s, alteration of cord (n.), by influence of Greek
khorde gut-string, string of a lyre, tripe, from PIE *ghere- gut, entrail (see yarn). The geometry
sense is from 1550s; meaning feeling, emotion first attested 1784.


Chordata

1880, Modern Latin, from Latin chorda cord, string (see cord (n.)) + ending from Vertebrata.


chordate

1885, noun and adjective, from Chordata.


chore (n.)

1751, American English, variant of char, from Middle English cherre odd job, from Old English cerr,
cierr turn, change, time, occasion, affair business.   Chore, a corruption of char, is an English
word, still used in many parts of England, as a char-man, a char-woman; but in America, it is
perhaps confined to New England. It signifies small domestic jobs of work, and its place cannot be
supplied by any other single word in the language. [Noah Webster, Dissertations on the English
Language, 1789]


chorea (n.)

1806, from Modern Latin chorea Sancti Viti St. Vitus dance (originally a mass hysteria in 15c.
Europe characterized by uncontrolled dancing); from Latin chorea a dance, from Greek khoreia dance
(see chorus). Extension to the nerve disorder is from 1620s.


choreograph (v.)

1943, American English, back-formation from choreography, or else from French chor&eacute;ographier
(1827). Figurative sense from c.1965. Related: choreographed.


choreographer (n.)

1829, from choreography + -er (1). Choreographist (1857) did not thrive. In Greek, a person who
trained a chorus was a khorodidaskelikos.


choreography (n.)

1789, from French chor&eacute;graphie, coined from Latinized form of Greek khoreia dance (see
chorus) + graphein to write (see -graphy). Related: Choreographic.


choreology (n.)

the study of dancing, 1964, from Latinized form of Greek khoreia dance (see chorus) + connective -o-
+ -logy.


choric (adj.)

1749, from Latin choricus, from Greek khorikos, from khoros (see chorus).


chorine (n.)

chorus girl, 1924, from chorus + fem. ending -ine.


chorion (n.)

outer membrane of the fetus, 1540s, medical Latin, from Greek khorion membrane enclosing the fetus,
afterbirth, perhaps from PIE *ghere- gut, entrail (see yarn).


chorister (n.)

member of a choir, mid-14c., queristre, from Anglo-French cueriste, French choriste, from Church
Latin chorista, from Latin chorus (see chorus) + -ster. Modern form is from late 16c.


chorizo (n.)

spiced pork sausage, 1846, from Spanish chorizo.


chork (v.)

mid-15c., now Scottish, to make the noise which the feet do when the shoes are full of water
[Jamieson]. Related: Chorked; chorking.


choroid (adj.)

1680s, from Latinized form of Greek khoroeides, a corruption of khorioeides, from khorion (see
chorion) + eidos resemblance (see -oid).


chortle (v.)

coined 1872 by Lewis Carroll in Through the Looking Glass, perhaps from chuckle and snort. Related:
Chortled; chortling. As a noun, from 1903.


chorus (n.)

1560s, from Latin chorus a dance in a circle, the persons singing and dancing, the chorus of a
tragedy, from Greek khoros band of dancers or singers, dance, dancing ground, perhaps from PIE
*gher- to grasp, enclose, if the original sense of the Greek word is enclosed dancing floor.
Extension from dance to voice is because Attic drama arose from tales inserted in the intervals of
the dance. In Attic tragedy, the khoros (of 12 or 15 (tragic) or 24 (comedic) persons) gave
expression, between the acts, to the moral and religious sentiments evoked by the actions of the
play.    When a Poet wished to bring out a piece, he asked a Chorus from the Archon, and the
expenses, being great, were defrayed by some rich citizen (the khoregos): it was furnished by the
Tribe and trained originally by the Poet himself [Liddell &amp; Scott]  Originally in English used
in theatrical sense; meaning of a choir first attested 1650s. Meaning the refrain of a song (which
the audience joins in singing) is 1590s. As a verb, 1703, from the noun. Chorus girl is 1894.


chose

past tense of choose (q.v.).


chosen (n.)

the elect, the select, especially those selected by God, c.1200, from past participle of choose
(v.). Chosen people for the Jews is recorded from 1530s.


chou (n.)

fashionable knot in a woman's dress or hat, 1883; earlier small, round, cream-filled pastry (1706),
from French chou, literally cabbage (12c.), from Latin caulis cabbage, literally stalk (see cole).


chouse (n.)

swindler, swindle, 1650s, said to be from Turkish chaush sergeant, herald, messenger, but the sense
connection is obscure.


chow (n.)

food, 1856, American English (originally in California), from Chinese pidgin English chow-chow
(1795) food, reduplication of Chinese cha or tsa mixed. The dog breed of the same name is from 1886,
of unknown origin, but some suggest a link to the Chinese tendency to see dogs as edible.


chow mein (n.)

1903, American English, from Chinese ch'ao mien fried flour.


chowder (n.)

1751, American English, apparently named for the pot it was cooked in: French chaudi&egrave;re a pot
(12c.), from Late Latin caldaria (see caldron). The word and the practice introduced in Newfoundland
by Breton fishermen, and spreading thence to New England.    CHOWDER. A favorite dish in New
England, made of fish, pork, onions, and biscuit stewed together. Cider and champagne are sometimes
added. Pic-nic parties to the sea-shore generally have a dish of chowder, prepared by themselves in
some grove near the beach, from fish caught at the same time. [John Russell Bartlett, Dictionary of
Americanisms, 1859]    The derogatory chowderhead (1819) is a corruption of cholter-head (16c.),
from jolthead, of unknown origin.


chrestomathy (n.)

collection of literary passages, 1774, from French chrestomathie, from Latinized form of Greek
khrestomatheia desire of learning; book containing selected passages, lit. useful learning, from
khrestos useful (verbal adjective of khresthai to make use of; see hortatory) + manthanein to learn
(see mathematic). Related: Chrestomathic.


Chris

pet or familiar form of masc. proper name Christopher or fem. proper name Christine, Christina, etc.


chrism (n.)

oil mingled with balm, Old English chrisma, from Church Latin chrisma, from Greek khrisma an
unguent, anointing, unction, from khriein to anoint, from PIE root *ghrei- to rub (cognates:
Lithuanian griej&#249; to skim the cream off). Chrisom baptismal robe, is a c.1200 variant of this.
Related: Chrismal; chrismatory.


Christ (n.)

title given to Jesus of Nazareth, Old English crist (by 830, perhaps 675), from Latin Christus, from
Greek khristos the anointed (translation of Hebrew mashiah; see messiah), noun use of verbal
adjective of khriein to rub, anoint (see chrism). The Latin term drove out Old English H&aelig;land
healer, savior, as the preferred descriptive term for Jesus.    A title, treated as a proper name in
Old English, but not regularly capitalized until 17c. Pronunciation with long -i- is result of Irish
missionary work in England, 7c.-8c. The ch- form, regular since c.1500 in English, was rare before.
Capitalization of the word begins 14c. but is not fixed until 17c. The 17c. mystical sect of the
Familists edged it toward a verb with Christed made one with Christ.


Christ-like (adj.)

1670s, from Christ + like (adj.). Old English had cristlic, but the modern word appears to be a more
recent formation.


Christabel

fem. proper name, probably a combination of Christ + Belle.


christen (v.)

c.1200, from Old English cristnian to baptize, literally to make Christian, from cristen Christian
(see Christian). General meaning of to name is attested from mid-15c. Related: Christened;
christening.


Christendom (n.)

Old English cristendom Christianity, state of being a Christian, from cristen (see Christian) +
-dom, suffix of condition or quality. The native formation, crowded out by Latinate Christianity
except for sense lands where Christianity is the dominant religion (late 14c.). Similar formations
in Scandinavian languages.


Christening (n.)

act or ceremony of baptizing, c.1300, verbal noun from christen (v.). Old English had cristnung.


Christer (n.)

overly-zealous Christian, 1910, originally sailors' slang, from Christ + -er (1).


Christian (n., adj.)

16c., forms replacing earlier Christen, from Old English cristen (noun and adjective), from a West
Germanic borrowing of Church Latin christianus, from Ecclesiastical Greek christianos, from Christos
(see Christ). First used in Antioch, according to Acts xi:25-26. Christian Science as the name of a
religious sect is from 1863.


Christianism (n.)

1560s, Christianity, from Christian + -ism. From c.2004 in reference to politicized fundamentalist
Christianity in the U.S. Related: Christianist.


Christianity (n.)

c.1300, cristente, Christians as a whole; state of being a Christian, from Old French
crestient&eacute; Christendom; spiritual authority; baptism (Modern French
chr&eacute;tient&eacute;), from Church Latin christianitatem (nominative christianitas), noun of
state from christianus (see Christian). Gradually respelled to conform with Latin. Christendom is
the older word for it. Old English also had cristennes.


christianize (v.)

1590s, from Christian + -ize. Originally intransitive as well as transitive. Related: Christianized;
christianizing; christianization.


Christina

see Cristina.


Christless (adj.)

1650s, from Christ + -less.


Christmas (n.)

late Old English Cristes m&aelig;sse, from Christ (and retaining the original vowel sound) + mass
(n.2).    Written as one word from mid-14c. As a verb from 1590s. Father Christmas first attested in
a carol attributed to Richard Smart, Rector of Plymtree (Devon) from 1435-77. Christmas tree in
modern sense first attested 1835 in American English, from German Weihnachtsbaum. Christmas cards
first designed 1843, popular by 1860s. Christmas Eve is Middle English Cristenmesse Even (c.1300).


Christmassy (adj.)

1852, from Christmas + -y (2).


Christmastide (n.)

1620s, from Christmas + tide (n.).


Christology (n.)

1670s, from Christ + connective -o- + -logy.


Christopher

masc. proper name, Church Latin Christophoros, from Ecclesiastical Greek khristophoros, literally
Christ-bearing; from phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer). In medieval legend he was a
giant (one of the rare virtuous ones) who aided travellers by carrying them across a river.
Medallions with his image worn by travellers are known from the Middle Ages (Chaucer's Yeoman had
one). Not a common name in medieval England.


Christy Minstrels

a blackface troupe originated c.1843 by Edwin P. Christy in Buffalo, N.Y.; one of the first (along
with Dan Emmett) to expand blackface from a solo act to a full minstrel show and bring it into the
mainstream of American entertainment.


chroma (n.)

quality or intensity of color, 1889, from Latinized form of Greek khroma surface of the body, skin,
color of the skin, also used generically for color and, in plural, ornaments, embellishments,
related to khros surface of the body, skin, khrozein to touch the surface of the body, to tinge, to
color; the root is explained as being somehow from PIE *ghreu- to rub, grind (see grit (n.)).


chromatic (adj.)

1590s (of music), progressing by half-tones; 1831 as pertaining to color, from Latin chromaticus,
from Greek khromatikos relating to color, suited for color, from khroma (genitive khromatos) color,
complexion, character, but chiefly used metaphorically of embellishments in music, originally skin,
surface (see chroma).


chromatin (n.)

protoplasm in cell nuclei, 1882, from German, coined 1879 by German anatomist Walther Flemming
(1843-1905), from Latinized form of Greek khromat-, the correct combinational form of khroma color
(see chroma) + chemical suffix -in (2). Related: Chromatid. Compare chromosome.


chromato-

before vowels chromat-, word forming element indicating color; chromatin, from Latinized form of
Greek khromato-, from khroma (see chroma).


chromatography (n.)

1731, from chromato-, Latinized comb. form of Greek khroma (genitive khromatos) color (see chroma),
denoting color or chromatin + -graphy. Related: Chromatograph.


chromatophore (n.)

pigment cell, 1864, from chromato- + Greek -phoros bearing, bearer, from pherein to carry (see
infer).


chrome (n.)

1800, chromium, from French chrome, the name proposed by Fourcroy and Ha&uuml;y for a new element,
from Greek khroma color (see chroma); so called because it makes colorful compounds. The name was
given to the metallic element now known as chromium (which had been isolated 1798 by French chemist
Nicolas-Louis Vauquelin); it continued in commercial use in English for chrome steel (steel with 2
percent or so chrome) after the chemical name was changed internationally. As a short form of
chromium plating it dates from 1937. Related: Chromic.


chromium (n.)

metallic element, 1807, with metallic elemental suffix -ium + French chrome (Fourcroy and
Ha&uuml;y), from Greek chroma color (see chrome; also see chroma). So called for its colorful
compounds. Related: Chromite.


chromosome (n.)

1889, from German Chromosom, coined 1888 by German anatomist Wilhelm von Waldeyer-Hartz (1836-1921),
from Latinized form of Greek khroma color (see chroma) + -some (3)). So called because the
structures contain a substance that stains readily with basic dyes.


chromosphere (n.)

1868, coined by English astronomer Sir Joseph Norman Lockyer (1836-1920), from chromo-, from Greek
khroma color (see chroma) + sphere. So called for its redness.


chronic (adj.)

early 15c., of diseases, lasting a long time, from Middle French chronique, from Latin chronicus,
from Greek khronikos of time, concerning time, from khronos time (see chrono-). Vague disapproving
sense (from 17c.) is from association with diseases and later addictions.


chronicle (n.)

c.1300, cronicle, from Anglo-French cronicle, from Old French cronique chronicle (Modern French
chronique), from Latin chronica (neuter plural mistaken for fem. singular), from Greek ta khronika
(biblia) the (books of) annals, chronology, neuter plural of khronikos of time, concerning time,
from khronos time (see chrono-). Ending modified in Anglo-French, perhaps by influence of article.
Old English had cranic chronicle, cranicwritere chronicler. The classical -h- was restored in
English from 16c.


chronicle (v.)

c.1400, croniclen, from chronicle (n.). Related: Chronicled; chronicling.


chronicler (n.)

early 15c., agent noun from chronicle (v.).


chrono-

before vowels chron-, word-forming element meaning time, from Latinized form of Greek khrono-, comb.
form of khronos time, a defined time, a lifetime, a season, a while, which is of uncertain origin.


chronograph (n.)

precise time-measuring device, 1868, from chrono- time + -graph instrument for recording; something
written. Compare Greek khronographos recording time and events (adj.); a chronicler (n.).


chronological (adj.)

arranged in order by time, 1610s, from chronology + -ical. Chronological order is attested by 1754.
Related: Chronologic (1610s); chronologically.


chronology (n.)

1590s, from Middle French chronologie or directly from Modern Latin chronologia; see chrono- +
-logy. Related: Chronologer (1570s).


chronometer (n.)

1735, from chrono- time + -meter. Related: Chronometric.


chrysalid (adj.)

pertaining to a chrysalis, c.1810, see chrysalis. As a noun variant of chrysalis, 1620s, perhaps
from Middle French chrysalide.


chrysalis (n.)

c.1600, from Latin chrysallis, from Greek khrysallis (genitive khrysallidos) golden colored pupa of
the butterfly, from khrysos gold, perhaps of Semitic origin (compare Hebrew and Phoenician harutz
gold) + second element meaning something like sheath. Seeking a plural, OED leans toward the
classically correct chrysalides.


chrysanthemum (n.)

1550s, from Latin chrysanthemum, from Greek khrysanthemon marigold, literally golden flower, from
khrysos gold (see chrysalis) + anthemon a flower, from PIE *andh- bloom (see anther).


chryselephantine (adj.)

overlaid with gold and ivory, 1816, probably via German, from Latinized form of Greek
khryselephantinos, from khrysos gold (see chrysalis) + elephantinos made of ivory, from elephans
(genitive elephantos) elephant; ivory (see elephant).


Chrysler

U.S. automobile corporation, organized 1925 as Chrysler Corporation by Walter P. Chrysler
(1875-1940) out of the old Maxwell Motor Co. (Maxwell produced a car named Chrysler in 1924). The
name is a spelling variant of German Kreisler, perhaps related to kreisel spinning top, but the
sense connection is unclear.


chthonian (adj.)

1804, from Latinized form of Greek khthonios (see chthonic) + -an.


chthonic (adj.)

1882, with suffix -ic, from Greek khthonios of the earth, in the earth, from khthon the earth, solid
surface of the earth (mostly poetic) from PIE root *dhghem- (cognates: Greek khamai on the ground,
first element in chameleon; also Latin humus earth, soil, humilis low; Lithuanian &#382;eme, Old
Church Slavonic zemlja earth; Sanskrit ksam- earth (opposed to sky); Old Irish du, genitive don
place, earlier earth).


chub (n.)

type of river fish, mid-15c., chubbe, of unknown origin. In Europe, a kind of carp; in U.S., the
black bass.


chubbiness (n.)

1805, from chubby + -ness.


chubby (adj.)

1610s, literally resembling a chub, from chub, the short, thick type of fish + -y (2). Perhaps
influenced by Old Norse kumba log, kumben stumpy.    ME chubbe ... was also used of a lazy,
spiritless fellow; a rustic, simpleton; dolt, fool (1558), whilst Bailey has Chub, a Jolt-head, a
great-headed, full-cheeked Fellow, a description reminiscent of that of the chevin, another name for
the chub ... Thus the nickname may have meant either short and thick, dumpy like a chub, or of the
nature of a chub, dull and clownish. [Dictionary of English Surnames]


chuck (v.1)

to throw, 1590s, variant of chock give a blow under the chin (1580s), possibly from French choquer
to shock, strike against, imitative (see shock (n.1)). Related: Chucked; chucking.


chuck (n.1)

piece of wood or meat, 1670s, probably a variant of chock (n.) block. Chock and chuck appear to have
been originally variants of the same word, which are now somewhat differentiated [OED]. Specifically
of shoulder meat from early 18c. American English chuck wagon (1880) is from the meat sense.
Chock and Chuck, Are low terms, very frequently used before full,--as the coach was chock full of
passengers. The house was chuck full. [Daniel Powers, A Grammar on an Entirely New System, West
Brookfield, 1845]


chuck (n.2)

slight blow under the chin, 1610s, from chuck (v.1). Meaning a toss, a throw is from 1862. Related:
Chucked; chucking.


chuckle (v.)

1590s, frequentative of Middle English chukken make a clucking noise (late 14c.), of echoic origin.
It originally meant noisy laughter. Related: Chuckled; chuckling.


chuckle (n.)

1754, from chuckle (v.).


chucklehead (n.)

also chuckle-head, blockhead, dolt, (18c.), with head (n.), the first element perhaps from chuck
(n.1).


chuff

pleased, happy, c.1860, British dialect, from obsolete chuff swollen with fat (1520s). A second
British dialectal chuff has an opposite meaning, displeased, gruff (1832), from chuff rude fellow,
or, as Johnson has it, a coarse, fat-headed, blunt clown (mid-15c.), of unknown origin. Related:
Chuffed.


chug (n.)

1866, echoic of a working steam engine. As a verb, from 1884. Related: Chugged; chugging. Drinking
sense attested by 1940s (chug-a-lug), probably imitative of the sound of swallowing.


chukker (n.)

also chucker, period in a polo game, 1898, from Hindi chakkar, from Sanskrit cakra circle, wheel
(see chakra).


chum (n.1)

friend, 1680s, originally university slang for roommate, from alternative spelling of cham, short
for chamber(mate); typical of the late-17c. fondness for clipped words. Among derived forms used
19c. were chumship; chummery shared bachelor quarters, chummage system of quartering more than one
to a room.


chum (n.2)

fish bait, 1857, perhaps from Scottish chum food.


chummy (adj.)

1874, from chum (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Chumminess. Previously it was a noun, a common name for a
chimney sweep, as a corruption of chinmey.


chump (n.)

1703, short, thick lump of wood, akin to Old Norse kumba block of wood. Meaning blockhead is first
attested 1883. Chump change attested by 1950.


chunder (v.)

vomit, 1950, Australian slang, of unknown origin.


chunk (n.)

thick block of something, 1690s, probably a nasalized variant of chuck (n.1) cut of meat; meaning
large amount is 1883, American English.


chunk (v.)

to throw, 1835, American English, from chunk (n.) or by similar mutation from chuck (v.1). Related:
Chunked; chunking.


chunky (adj.)

thickset, 1751, from chunk + -y (2). Originally U.S. colloquial. Related: Chunkiness.


Chunnel (n.)

1928, a blend of (English) Channel + tunnel (n.).


church (n.)

Old English cirice, circe church, public place of worship; Christians collectively, from Proto-
Germanic *kirika (cognates: Old Saxon kirika, Old Norse kirkja, Old Frisian zerke, Middle Dutch
kerke, Dutch kerk, Old High German kirihha, German Kirche), probably [see note in OED] from Greek
kyriake (oikia), kyriakon doma Lord's (house), from kyrios ruler, lord, from PIE root *keue- to
swell (swollen, hence strong, powerful); see cumulus. Phonetic spelling from c.1200, established by
16c. For vowel evolution, see bury. As an adjective from 1570s.    Greek kyriakon (adj.) of the Lord
was used of houses of Christian worship since c.300, especially in the East, though it was less
common in this sense than ekklesia or basilike. An example of the direct Greek-to-Germanic progress
of many Christian words, via the Goths; it probably was used by West Germanic people in their pre-
Christian period.    Also picked up by Slavic, probably via Germanic (Old Church Slavonic criky,
Russian cerkov). Finnish kirkko, Estonian kirrik are from Scandinavian. Romance and Celtic languages
use variants of Latin ecclesia (such as French &eacute;glise, 11c.).   Church-bell was in late Old
English. Church-goer is from 1680s. Church key is early 14c.; slang use for can or bottle opener is
by 1954, probably originally U.S. college student slang. Church-mouse, proverbial in many languages
for its poverty, is 1731 in English.


church (v.)

to bring or lead to church, mid-14c., from church (n.). Related: Churched.


churchman (n.)

mid-13c., from church (n.) + man (n.).


churchyard (n.)

early 12c., from church + yard (n.1).


churl (n.)

Old English ceorl peasant, freeman, man without rank, from Proto-Germanic *kerlaz, *karlaz
(cognates: Old Frisian zerl man, fellow, Middle Low German kerle, Dutch kerel freeman of low degree,
German Kerl man, husband, Old Norse karl old man, man).    It had various meaning in early Middle
English, including man of the common people, a country man, husbandman, free peasant; by 1300, it
meant bondman, villain, also fellow of low birth or rude manners. For words for common man that
acquire an insulting flavor over time, compare boor, villain. In this case, however, the same word
also has come to mean king in many languages (such as Lithuanian karalius, Czech kral, Polish
kr&#243;l) via Charlemagne.


churlish (adj.)

late Old English cierlisc of or pertaining to churls, from churl + -ish. Meaning deliberately rude
is late 14c. Related: Churlishly; churlishness.


churn (n.)

Old English cyrin, from Proto-Germanic *kernjon (cognates: Old Norse kirna, Swedish k&auml;rna,
Danish kjerne, Dutch karn, Middle High German kern); probably akin to cyrnel kernel (see kernel) and
describing the grainy appearance of churned cream.


churn (v.)

mid-15c., chyrnen, from churn (n.). Extended senses are from late 17c. Intransitive sense is from
1735. Related: Churned; churning. To churn out, of writing, is from 1902.


chute (n.1)

1725, American English, fall of water (earlier shoot, 1610s), from French chute fall, from Old
French cheoite a fall, fem. past participle of cheoir to fall, from Latin cadere (see case (n.1)).
Meaning inclined tube, trough is from 1804; that of narrow passage for cattle, etc. first recorded
1881. In North America, absorbing some senses of similar-sounding shoot (n.1).


chute (n.2)

short for parachute (n.), attested from 1920.


chutney (n.)

1813, from Hindi chatni.


chutzpah (n.)

also hutzpah, 1892, from Yiddish khutspe impudence, gall. from Hebrew hutspah. The classic
definition is that given by Leo Rosten: that quality enshrined in a man who, having killed his
mother and father, throws himself on the mercy of the court because he is an orphan.


chyle (n.)

1540s, from Late Latin chylus, from Greek khylos juice (of plants, animals, etc.), from stem of
khein to pour, gush forth, from PIE *ghus-mo-, from root *gheu- to pour, pour a libation (see found
(v.2)). Compare also chyme.


chyme (n.)

early 15c., bodily fluid; c.1600 in specific sense of mass of semi-liquid food in the stomach, from
Latin chymus, from Greek khymos, nearly identical to khylos (see chyle) and meaning essentially the
same thing. Differentiated by Galen, who used khymos for juice in its natural or raw state, and
khylos for juice produced by digestion, hence the modern distinction.


CIA

U.S. civilian espionage agency, initialism (acronym) of Central Intelligence Agency, founded 1947 as
successor to the Office of Strategic Services (OSS).


ciabatta (n.)

type of Italian bread, c.1990, from Italian ciabatta, literally carpet slipper, so called for its
shape; from the same source that produced French sabot, Spanish zapata (see sabotage (n.)).


ciao

parting salutation, 1929, dialectal variant of Italian schiavo (your obedient) servant, literally
slave, from Medieval Latin sclavus slave (see slave (n.)).


cicada (n.)

late 14c., from Latin cicada cicada, tree cricket, not a native Latin word; perhaps a loan-word from
a lost Mediterranean language.


cicatrix (n.)

1640s, from Latin cicatrix (accusative cicatricem ) a scar, of unknown origin. Earlier in English as
cicatrice (mid-15c.). Related: cicatrical.


Cicely

fem. proper name, an alteration or nativization of Cecilia. The plant (late 16c.) is Latin seselis,
from Greek seselis.


cicerone (n.)

a local guide in Italy, 1726, from Italian cicerone, from Latin Ciceronem, from the name of the
great Roman orator (see Ciceronian). Perhaps in reference to the loquacity of the guides.


Ciceronian (adj.)

eloquent, a reference to Roman statesman and orator Marcus Tullius Cicero (106-43 B.C.E.); also
often known as Tully in early Modern English writers; Cicero being a cognomen of the genus Tullia.


cicisbeo (n.)

1718, from Italian cicisbeo the recognized gallant of a married woman. Perhaps from older French
chiche beau little man, or from Venetian dialect cici the chattering of women (imitative, attested
in 18c.).


Cid

1680s, from Spanish cid chief, commander, from Arabic sayyid lord. A title given in Spanish
literature to Castilian nobleman and warlord Ruy Diaz, Count of Bivar (c.1040-1099).


cider (n.)

late 13c., from Old French cidre, cire pear or apple cider (12c., Modern French cidre), variant of
cisdre, from Late Latin sicera, Vulgate rendition of Hebrew shekhar, a word used for any strong
drink (translated in Old English as beor, taken untranslated in Septuagint Greek as sikera), related
to Arabic sakar strong drink, sakira was drunk. Meaning gradually narrowed in English to mean
exclusively fermented drink made from apples, though this sense also was in Old French.


cif

also c.i.f., abbreviation of cost, insurance, freight, a trade term.


cig (n.)

slang abbreviation of cigarette or cigar, attested from 1889. Elaborated form ciggy attested from
1962.


cigar (n.)

1730, from Spanish cigarro (source also of French cigare), probably from Maya sicar to smoke rolled
tobacco leaves, from si'c tobacco; or from or influenced by Spanish cigarra grasshopper, cicada (on
resemblance of shape), from Vulgar Latin *cicala (source also of French cigale, Italian cigala).
Cigar-box is from 1819; cigar-store from 1839; the wooden cigar-store Indian is from 1879, American
English, but wooden images of feathered Indians or Negroes are mentioned outside tobacconists' shops
in England by 1852, and are said to have been in earlier use on the Continent.    Blackamoors and
other dark-skinned foreigners have always possessed considerable attractions as signs for
tobacconists, and sometimes also for public-houses. Negroes, with feathered headdresses and kilts,
smoking pipes, are to be seen outside tobacco shops on the Continent, as well as in England. [Jacob
Larwood and John Camden Hotten, The History of Signboards From the Earliest Times to the Present
Day, London, 1867]


cigarette (n.)

1835, American English, from French cigarette (by 1824), diminutive of cigare cigar (18c.), from
Spanish cigarro (see cigar). Spanish form cigarito, cigarita also was popular in English mid-19c.
Cigarette heart heart disease caused by smoking is attested from 1884. Cigarette lighter attested
from 1884.


cigarillo (n.)

1829, from Spanish cigarillo, diminutive of cigarro (see cigar).


cilantro (n.)

by 1907, from Spanish cilantro, variant of culantro, from Latin coriandrum coriander (see
coriander).


cilia (n.)

1715, from Latin cilia, plural of cilium eyelid, eyelash, perhaps related to celare to cover, hide,
from PIE root *kel- to conceal (see cell), but words for this part of the face can be tricky (see
brow). It sometimes is pluralized in English, which is an error. Related: Ciliated; ciliary;
ciliate.


cilice (n.)

Old English cilic, from Latin cilicium a covering, a type of coarse garment (used especially by
soldiers and sailors), originally one of Cilician goat hair, from Greek kilikion coarse cloth, from
Kilikia Cilicia in Asia Minor. By tradition in Greek mythology the place was named for Cilix, a son
of the Phoenician king Agenor.


cill

alternative spelling of sill.


cimex (n.)

Latin, bug, bedbug, also a term of reproach, of uncertain origin. Related: Cimiceous buggy; cimicine
smelling of bugs.


Cimmerian (adj.)

late 16c., pertaining to the Cimmerii, an ancient nomadic people who, according to Herodotus,
inhabited the region around the Crimea, and who, according to Assyrian sources, overran Asia Minor
7c. B.C.E.; from Latin Cimmerius, from Greek Kimmerios. Homer described their land as a place of
perpetual mist and darkness beyond the ocean, but whether he had in mind the same people Herodotus
did, or any real place, is unclear.


cinch (n.)

1859, American English, saddle-girth, from Spanish cincha girdle, from Latin cingulum a girdle, a
swordbelt, from cingere to surround, encircle, from PIE root *kenk- (1) to gird, encircle (cognates:
Sanskrit kankate binds, kanci girdle; Lithuanian kinkau to harness horses). Replaced earlier
surcingle. Sense of an easy thing is 1898, via notion of a sure hold (1888).


cinch (v.)

1866, to pull in, from cinch (n.). Figurative meaning make certain is from 1891, American English
slang. Related: Cinched; cinching.


Cincinnati

city on the Ohio River in Ohio, U.S., founded 1789 and first called Losantiville, name changed 1790
by territorial Gov. Arthur St. Clair, in honor of the Society of the Cincinnati, a fraternal
veterans' organization founded 1783 by former Revolutionary War officers (St. Clair was a member)
and named for Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, 5c. B.C.E. Roman hero who saved the city from crisis and
then retired to his farm rather than rule. His name is a cognomen in the gens Quinctia, literally
with curly hair, from Latin cincinnus curl, curly hair. Related: Cincinnatian.


cincture (n.)

1580s, from Latin cinctura a girdle, from cinctus, past participle of cingere to surround, encircle
(see cinch (n.)). The verb is recorded from 1757 (implied in Cinctured).


cinder (n.)

Old English sinder dross of iron, slag, from Proto-Germanic *sendra- slag (cognates: Old Saxon
sinder slag, dross, Old Norse sindr, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch sinder, Dutch sintel, Old
High German sintar, German Sinter), from PIE root *sendhro- coagulating fluid (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic sedra cinder).    Initial s- changed to c- under influence of unrelated French cendre
ashes, from Latin cinerem (nominative cinis) ashes, from or related to Greek konis dust (see
incinerate). The French word also apparently shifted the sense of the English one to small piece of
burnt coal (16c.). Volcanic cinder cone is recorded from 1849.


Cinderella (n.)

pseudo-translation of French Cendrillon, from cendre ashes (see cinder). Used figuratively for
something unappreciated or something that ends at midnight. A widespread Eurasian folk tale, the
oldest known version is Chinese (c.850 C.E.); the English version is based on Perrault's Cendrillon
(1697), translated from French 1729 by Robert Sambler, but native versions probably existed (such as
Scottish Rashin Coatie). The German form is Aschenbr&ouml;del, literally scullion, from asche ash
(see ash (n.1)) + brodeln bubble up, to brew.


Cindy

fem. proper name, often a familiar or diminutive form of Cynthia, but as a name in its own right
among the top 100 for girls born in the U.S. c.1953-1973.


cine

abbreviation of cinema used in compounds or as a stand-alone, 1928, perhaps partly from French
cin&eacute; (1917).


cinema (n.)

1899, a movie hall, from French cin&eacute;ma, shortened from cin&eacute;matographe motion picture
projector and camera, coined 1890s by Lumiere brothers, who invented it, from Latinized form of
Greek kinemat-, comb. form of kinema movement, from kinein to move (see cite) + graphein to write
(see -graphy). Meaning movies collectively, especially as an art form recorded by 1914.
Cin&eacute;ma v&eacute;rit&eacute; is 1963, from French.


cinematic (adj.)

1914, in the movies sense, from French cin&eacute;matique (1917), from cin&eacute;ma (see cinema).
Related: Cinematically.


cinematographer (n.)

1897, agent noun from cinematograph (see cinematography).


cinematography (n.)

1896, from cinematograph (1896), which has been displaced in English by its shortened form, cinema;
from French c&iacute;n&eacute;matographe + -graphy.


Cinerama (n.)

proprietary name, 1951, from cinema + -rama. Purists point out that the proper formation would be
*Cinorama.


cinnabar (n.)

mid-15c., red or crystalline form of mercuric sulphide, also applied to other ores of mercury,
originally with reference to its use as a pigment; from Old French cinabre (13c.), from Late Latin
cinnabaris, from Greek kinnabari, of oriental origin (compare Persian zanjifrah in the same sense).
Also used 14c.-17c. of red resinous juice of a certain Eastern tree, which was believed to be a
mixture of dragon's and elephant's blood.


cinnamon (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cinnamone (13c.), from Latin cinnamum, cinnamomum cinnamon (also used as
a term of endearment), from Greek kinnamomon, from a Phoenician word akin to Hebrew qinnamon.
Stripped from the bark of a tree in the avocado family. Ceylon cinnamon, the true cinnamon, is used
in Britain, but American cinnamon is almost always from the related cassia tree of Southeast Asia
and is stronger and sweeter.


cinquain (n.)

collection of five, 1711, from French cinquain bundle of five objects, from cinq five (see five).
Originally in English of military orders of battle; of five-lined stanzas of verse from 1882 (give a
more specific form in English than usual in French).


cinque (n.)

used for five in English in some situations, especially at cards or dice, late 14c., from French
cinq, dissimilated from Latin quinque five, in Late Latin also cinque (see five).


Cinque Ports (n.)

late 12c. (in Anglo-Latin), late 13c. (in English), from Latin quinque portus (see cinque + port
(n.1)). Hastings, Sandwich, Dover, Romney, and Hythe, granted special privileges from the crown in
return for defense of the Channel in the days before England had a navy.


cinquecento (n.)

sixteenth century (in Italian art and literature), from Italian cinquecento, short for mil
cinquecento one thousand five hundred. See cinque + cent.


cinquefoil (n.)

from Latin quinquefolium, from quinque (see five) + folium (see folio).


cipher (n.)

late 14c., arithmetical symbol for zero, from Old French cifre nought, zero, Medieval Latin cifra,
with Spanish and Italian cifra, ultimately from Arabic sifr zero, literally empty, nothing, from
safara to be empty; loan-translation of Sanskrit sunya-s empty. The word came to Europe with Arabic
numerals. Originally in English zero, then any numeral (early 15c.), then (first in French and
Italian) secret way of writing; coded message (a sense first attested in English 1520s), because
early codes often substituted numbers for letters. Klein says Modern French chiffre is from Italian
cifra.


cipher (v.)

to do arithmetic (with Arabic numerals), 1520s, from cipher (n.). Meaning to write in code is from
1560s. Related: Ciphered; ciphering.


circa (prep.)

1856, from Latin circa around, round about, near; in the region of; about the time of, alternative
form of circum round about (see circum-).


circadian (adj.)

coined 1959 from Latin circa about (see circa) + diem, accusative singular of dies day (see
diurnal). The original use is in circadian rhythm.


Circe (n.)

enchantress of the isle of Aea who transformed into swine those who drank from her cup (Odyssey),
late 14c., from Latin Circe, from Greek Kirke. Related: Circean.


circle (n.)

c.1300, figure of a circle, from Old French cercle circle, ring (for the finger); hoop of a helmet
or barrel (12c.), from Latin circulus circular figure; small ring, hoop; circular orbit (also source
of Italian cerchio), diminutive of circus ring (see circus).    Replaced Old English trendel and
hring. Late Old English used circul, from Latin, but only in an astronomical sense. Meaning group of
persons surrounding a center of interest is from 1714 (it also was a secondary sense of Latin
circulus); that of coterie is from 1640s (a sense also found in Latin circulus). To come full circle
is in Shakespeare.


circle (v.)

late 14c., cerclen, to shape like a globe, also to encompass or surround, from circle (n.). From
c.1400 as to set in a circular pattern; mid-15c. as to move in a circle. Related: Circled; circling.
To circle the wagons, figuratively, assume an alert defensive stance is from 1969, from old Western
movies.


circlet (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French cerclet, diminutive of cercle (see circle (n.)).


circuit (n.)

late 14c., a going around; a line going around, from Old French circuit (14c.) a circuit; a journey
(around something), from Latin circuitus a going around, from stem of circuire, circumire go around,
from circum round (see circum-) + ire to go (see ion). Electrical sense is from 1746. Of judicial
assignments, from 1570s; of venues for itinerant entertainers, from 1834. Circuit breaker is
recorded from 1874. Related: Circuital.


circuit (v.)

to go around, early 15c., from circuit (n.). Related: Circuited; circuiting.


circuitous (adj.)

1660s, from Medieval Latin circuitous full of roundabout ways, from Latin circuitus a going round
(see circuit (n.)). Related: Circuitously; circuitousness.


circuitry (n.)

1946, from circuit (n.)+ -ry.


circular (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French circuler, Old French circuler circular (14c., Modern French
circulaire), from Latin circularis, from circulus (see circle (n.)). The metaphoric circular firing
squad is attested by 1990.


circular (n.)

1550s, circular figure, from circular (adj.). Meaning a notice circulated is from 1818.


circularity (n.)

1580s, from circular (adj.) + -ity.


circulate (v.)

1540s (late 15c. as a past participle adjective), as a chemical term for alternating vaporization
and condensation, from Latin circulatus, past participle of circulare to form a circle, from
circulus (see circle (n.)). Meaning to move around, revolve is from 1670s; of blood, from 1650s; of
persons, to mingle in a social gathering, from 1863. Sense of to pass about freely is from 1660s; of
newspapers from 1885. Related: Circulated; circulating.


circulation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French circulation or directly from Latin circulationem (nominative
circulatio), noun of action from past participle stem of circulare to form a circle, from circulus
small ring (see circle (n.)). Used of blood first by William Harvey, 1620s.


circulator (n.)

one who puts (something) in circulation, 1755, agent noun in Latin form from circulate (v.).
Classical Latin circulator meant peddler, hawker, a sense attested occasionally in English 17c. and
after.


circulatory (adj.)

c.1600, of blood, from French circulatoire or directly from Latin circulatorius, from circulator,
agent noun from circulare (see circulate). Circulatory system is recorded from 1862.


circum-

word-forming element meaning around, all around, on all sides, from Latin circum- a common element
in word-formation, from adverb and preposition circum around, round about, literally in a circle,
probably accusative form of circus ring (see circus). In French, the element became circon-; Kitchin
points out that con for cum is common even in classical Latin.


circumambient (adj.)

1630s, from circum- + ambient.


circumambulate (v.)

1650s, from Latin circumambulatus, past participle of circumambulare to walk around, from circum
around (see circum-) + ambulare to walk (see amble). Related: Circumambulated; circumambulating;
circumambulation.


circumcise (v.)

mid-13c., to cut off the foreskin, from Old French circoncisier circumcise (12c., Modern French
circoncire), from Latin circumcisus, past participle of circumcidere to cut round, to cut trim, to
cut off (see circumcision). Related: Circumcised; circumcising.


circumcision (n.)

late 12c., from Latin circumcisionem (nominative circumcisio), noun of action from past participle
stem of circumcidere to cut around; cut, clip, trim, from circum around (see circum-) + caedere to
cut (see -cide).


circumduction (n.)

1570s, from Latin circumductionem (nominative circumductio), noun of action from past participle
stem of circumducere to lead around, move or drive around, from circum around (see circum-) + ducere
to lead (see duke (n.)). Related: Circumduce.


circumference (n.)

late 14c., from Latin circumferentia, neuter plural of circumferens, present participle of
circumferre to lead around, take around, carry around, from circum around (see circum-) + ferre to
carry (see infer). A loan-translation of Greek periphereia periphery, the line round a circular
body, literally a carrying round (see periphery). Related: Circumferential.


circumflex (n.)

1570s, from Latin (accentus) circumflexus, bent around, past participle of circumflectere to bend
around, of a charioteer, turn around (from circum around; see circum-, + flectere to bend; see
flexible); used as a loan-translation of Greek (prosodia) perispomenos (Dionysius of Halicarnassus),
literally drawn-around, with reference to shape.


circumfluent (adj.)

1570s, from Latin circumfluentem (nominative circumfluens), present participle of circumfluere to
flow around, from circum- (see circum-) + fluere (see fluent).


circumjacent (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin circumiacens, present participle of circumiacere to border upon, to lie round
about, enjoin, from circum- around (see circum-) + iacere to throw, cast, hurl (see jet (v.)).
Related: Circumjacence; circumjacency.


circumlocution (n.)

c.1400, from Latin circumlocutionem (nominative circumlocutio) a speaking around (the topic), from
circum- around (see circum-) + locutionem (nominative locutio) a speaking, noun of action from past
participle stem of loqui to speak (see locution). A loan-translation of Greek periphrasis (see
periphrasis).


circumnavigate (v.)

1630s, from Latin circumnavigatus, past participle of circumnavigare to sail round, from circum
around (see circum-) + navigare (see navigation). Related: Circumnavigated; circumnavigating;
circumnavigable.


circumnavigation (n.)

1705, from circumnavigate + -ion.


circumpolar (adj.)

1680s in astronomy; 1690s in geography, from circum- + polar.


circumscribe (v.)

late 14c., from Latin circumscribere to make a circle around, encircle, draw a line around; limit,
restrain, confine, set the boundaries of, from circum- around (see circum-) + scribere write (see
script (n.)). Related: Circumscribed; circumscribing.


circumscription (n.)

1530s, from Latin circumscriptionem (nominative circumscriptio) an encircling; fact of being held to
set limits, noun of action from past participle stem of circumscribere (see circumscribe).
Figurative sense of setting limits of meaning is earliest in English.


circumspect (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin circumspectus deliberate, guarded, well-considered, past participle of
circumspicere look around, take heed, from circum- around (see circum-) + specere to look (see scope
(n.1)). Related: Circumspectly; circumspectness.


circumspection (n.)

late 14c., careful observation of one's surroundings, from Old French circumspection (Modern French
circonspection), from Latin circumspectionem (nominative circumspectio) a looking around; foresight,
caution, noun of action from past participle stem of circumspicere to look around (see circumspect).


circumstance (n.)

early 13c., conditions surrounding and accompanying an event, from Old French circonstance
circumstance, situation, also literally, outskirts (13c., Modern French circonstance), from Latin
circumstantia surrounding condition, neuter plural of circumstans (genitive circumstantis), present
participle of circumstare stand around, surround, encompass, occupy, take possession of from circum
around (see circum-) + stare to stand from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). The Latin word is a
loan-translation of Greek peristasis.    Meaning a person's surroundings, environment is from mid-
14c. Meaning a detail is from c.1300; sense of that which is non-essential is from 1590s. Obsolete
sense of formality about an important event (late 14c.) lingers in Shakespeare's phrase pomp and
circumstance (Othello III, iii).


circumstances (n.)

condition of life, material welfare (usually with a qualifying adjective), 1704, from circumstance.


circumstantial (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin circumstantia (see circumstance) + -al (1). Related: Circumstantially.
Circumstantial evidence is attested by 1691.


circumstantiate (v.)

1650s, from Latin circumstantia surrounding condition (see circumstance) + -ate (2). Related:
Circumstantiated; circumstantiating; circumstantiation.


circumvent (v.)

mid-15c., to surround by hostile stratagem, from Latin circumventus, past participle of circumvenire
to get around, be around, encircle, surround, in figurative sense to oppress, assail, cheat, from
circum around (see circum-) + venire to come (see venue). Meaning to go round is from 1840. Related:
Circumvented; circumventing.


circumvention (n.)

early 15c., from Latin circumventionem (nominative circumventio), noun of action from past
participle stem of circumvenire to get around (see circumvent).


circumvolution (n.)

mid-15c., noun of action from past participle stem of Latin circumvolvere to revolve through, to
roll around (see circumvolve).


circumvolve (v.)

1640s, from Latin circumvolvere to roll round, revolve, from circum- (see circum-) + volvere to turn
around, roll (see volvox). Related: Circumvolved; circumvolving.


circus (n.)

late 14c., in reference to ancient Rome, from Latin circus ring, circular line, which was applied by
Romans to circular arenas for performances and contests and oval courses for racing (especially the
Circus Maximus), from or cognate with Greek kirkos a circle, a ring, from PIE *kirk- from root
*(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.)).    In reference to modern large arenas for performances
from 1791; sense then extended to the performing company, hence traveling show (originally traveling
circus, 1838). Extended in World War I to squadrons of military aircraft. Meaning lively uproar,
chaotic hubbub is from 1869. Sense in Picadilly Circus and other place names is from early 18c.
sense buildings arranged in a ring, also circular road. The adjective form is circensian.


cire (adj.)

1921, from French cir&eacute;, literally waxed (12c.), from Latin cera wax (see cere (n.)). Often
short for cir&eacute; silk.


cirque (n.)

c.1600, a circus, from French cirque (14c.), from Latin circus (see circus). Compare Italian and
Spanish circo.


cirrhosis (n.)

1827, coined in Modern Latin by French physician Ren&eacute;-Th&eacute;ophile-Hyacinthe Laennec
(1781-1826) with -osis and Greek kirrhos tawny, of unknown origin. So called for the orange-yellow
appearance of the diseased liver. Related: Cirrhotic.


cirro-

word-forming element meaning involving cirrus clouds, from comb. form of Latin cirrus (see cirrus).


cirrocumulus (n.)

1803, from cirrus + cumulus.


cirrous (adj.)

1650s in biology; 1815 in meteorology, from Latin cirrus (see cirrus) + -ous.


cirrus (n.)

1708, curl-like fringe or tuft, from Latin cirrus a lock of hair, tendril, curl, ringlet of hair;
the fringe of a garment. In meteorology, cirrus clouds attested from 1803. So called from fancied
resemblance of shape.


cis-

word-forming element meaning on the near side of, on this side, from Latin preposition cis on this
side (in reference to place or time), related to citra (adv.) on this side, from PIE *ki-s, from
root *ko- this (cognates: Old Church Slavonic si, Lithuanian &#353;is, Hittite ki this, Old English
hider, Gothic hidre hither; see he). Opposed to trans- or ultra-. Originally only of place,
sometimes 19c. of time; 21c. of life situations (such as cis-gender, by 2011).


cisalpine (adj.)

1540s, from Latin cisalpinus on this side of the Alps (from the Roman point of view), from cis- (see
cis-) + Alpinus Alpine (see Alpine). Compare ultramontane.


ciseaux (n.)

1892 in dance, French (plural), literally scissors (see scissors).


cismontane (adj.)

from Latin cis- on this side of (see cis-) + stem of mons (see mount (n.)).


cissy (n.)

chiefly British English variant of sissy (q.v.).


cist (n.)

sepulchral chest or chamber, 1804, in some cases from Latin cista wickerwork basket, box, from Greek
kiste box, chest (see chest); according to OED, in some cases from Welsh cist in cist faen stone
coffin, the first element of which is from the Latin word.


Cistercian (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to the Cistercian order of monks, with -an + Medieval Latin Cistercium (French
C&icirc;teaux), site of an abbey near Dijon, where the monastic order was founded 1098 by Robert of
Molesme. As a noun, monk of the Cistercian order, from 1610s.


cistern (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French cisterne cistern; dungeon, underground prison (12c., Modern French
citerne), from Latin cisterna underground reservoir for water, from cista chest, box, from Greek
kiste box, chest (see chest).


cit (n.)

colloquial shortening of citizen, 1640s; contrasted to a countryman or a gentleman, usually with
some measure of opprobrium (Johnson defines it as A pert low townsman; a pragmatical trader).


citadel (n.)

1580s, fortress commanding a city, from Middle French citadelle (15c.), from Italian cittadella,
diminutive of Old Italian cittade city (Modern Italian citta), from Latin civitatem (nominative
civitas; also source of Portuguese citadella, Spanish ciuadela; see city).


citation (n.)

c.1300, summons, written notice to appear, from Old French citation or directly from Latin
citationem (nominative citatio) a command, noun of action from past participle stem of citare to
summon, urge, call; put in sudden motion, call forward; rouse, excite (see cite). Meaning passage
cited, quotation is from 1540s. From 1918 as a mention in an official dispatch.


cite (v.)

mid-15c., to summon, from Old French citer to summon (14c.), from Latin citare to summon, urge,
call; put in sudden motion, call forward; rouse, excite, frequentative of ciere to move, set in
motion, stir, rouse, call, invite from PIE root *keie- to set in motion, to move to and fro
(cognates: Sanskrit cyavate stirs himself, goes; Greek kinein to move, set in motion; change, stir
up, kinymai move myself; Gothic haitan call, be called; Old English hatan command, call). Sense of
calling forth a passage of writing is first attested 1530s. Related: Cited; citing.


citified (adj.)

1819, American English, from city + past participle ending from words in -fy.


citify (v.)

1865, probably a back formation from citified. Related: Citifying.


citizen (n.)

early 14c., inhabitant of a city, from Anglo-French citezein (spelling subsequently altered,
probably by influence of denizen), from Old French citeien city-dweller, town-dweller, citizen
(12c., Modern French citoyen), from cite (see city) + -ain (see -ian). Replaced Old English
burhsittend and ceasterware. Sense of inhabitant of a country is late 14c. Citizen's arrest recorded
from 1941; citizen's band (radio) from 1947. Citizen of the world (late 15c.) translates Greek
kosmopolites.


citizenry (n.)

citizens collectively, 1795, from citizen + -ry.


citizenship (n.)

status, rights, privileges, and responsibilities of a citizen, 1610s, from citizen + -ship.


citric (adj.)

1800, from Modern Latin citricum (in acidum citricum citric acid, discovered by Scheele in 1784; see
citrus + -ic. The classical adjective was citreus.


citrine (adj.)

lemon-colored, late 14c., from French citrin, from Latin citrus (see citrus). From 1879 as a color
name.


citron (n.)

late 14c., also citrine (early 15c.), from Old French citron citron, lemon (14c.), possibly from Old
Proven&ccedil;al citron, from Latin citrus and influenced by lemon; or else from augmentative of
Latin *citrum, related to citrus citron tree, citreum (malum) citron (see citrus).


citronella (n.)

1858 in reference to a type of fragrant grass, and especially to the oil it yields, from French
citronelle lemon liquor, from citron (see citrus). Originally an Asiatic grass used in perfumes,
later applied to a substance found in lemon oil, etc.


citrus (adj.)

1825, from Modern Latin genus name, from Latin citrus citron tree, name of an African tree with
aromatic wood and lemon-like fruit, the first citrus fruit to become available in the West. The
name, like the tree, is probably of Asiatic origin [OED]. But Klein traces it to Greek kedros cedar,
and writes that the change of dr into tr shows that the word came from Greek into Latin through the
medium of the Etruscans. As a noun, tree of the genus Citrus, from 1885.


city (n.)

early 13c., in medieval usage a cathedral town, but originally any settlement, regardless of size
(distinction from town is 14c., though in English it always seems to have ranked above borough),
from Old French cite town, city (10c., Modern French cit&eacute;), from earlier citet, from Latin
civitatem (nominative civitas; in Late Latin sometimes citatem) originally citizenship, condition or
rights of a citizen, membership in the community, later community of citizens, state, commonwealth
(used, for instance of the Gaulish tribes), from civis townsman, from PIE root *kei- to lie; bed,
couch; homestead; beloved, dear (see cemetery).    The sense has been transferred from the
inhabitants to the place. The Latin word for city was urbs, but a resident was civis. Civitas seems
to have replaced urbs as Rome (the ultimate urbs) lost its prestige. Loss of Latin -v- is regular in
French in some situations (compare alleger from alleviare; neige from nivea; jeune from juvenis. A
different sound evolution from the Latin word yielded Italian citta, Catalan ciutat, Spanish ciudad,
Portuguese cidade.    Replaced Old English burh (see borough). London is the city from 1550s. As an
adjective from c.1300. City hall first recorded 1670s to fight city hall is 1913, American English;
city slicker first recorded 1916 (see slick); both American English. City limits is from 1825. The
newspaper city desk attested from 1878. Inner city first attested 1968. City state (also city-state)
is attested from 1877.


civet (n.)

1530s, from Middle French civette (15c.), ultimately (with Italian zibetto, Medieval Latin zibethum,
Medieval Greek zapetion) via lost intermediate forms from Arabic zabad civet, said to be related to
zabad foam, froth, zubd cream.


civic (adj.)

1540s, originally mostly in civic crown (Latin corona civica), a chaplet of oak leaves awarded to
one who saved the life of a fellow citizen in battle, from Latin civicus of a citizen, adjectival
derivation of civis townsman (see city). Sense of having to do with citizens is from 1790.


civics (n.)

study of the rights and responsibilities of a citizen, 1886, originally American English, from
civic, by analogy with politics (see -ics).


civil (adj.)

late 14c., relating to civil law or life; pertaining to the internal affairs of a state, from Old
French civil civil, relating to civil law (13c.) and directly from Latin civilis relating to a
citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen, hence by extension popular, affable,
courteous; alternative adjectival derivation of civis townsman (see city).    The sense of polite
was in classical Latin, from the courteous manners of citizens, as opposed to those of soldiers. But
English did not pick up this nuance of the word until late 16c. Courteous is thus more commonly said
of superiors, civil of inferiors, since it implies or suggests the possibility of incivility or
rudeness [OED]. Civil case (as opposed to criminal) is recorded from 1610s. Civil liberty is by
1640s. Civil service is from 1772, originally in reference to the East India Company.


civil disobedience (n.)

coined 1866 by Thoreau as title of an essay originally published (1849) as Resistance to Civil
Government.


civil rights (n.)

1721, American English; specifically of black U.S. citizens from 1866.


civil service (n.)

c.1785, originally in reference to non-military staff of the East India Company. Civil servant is
from 1800.


civil union (n.)

by 2000, the usual U.S. term for legally recognized same-sex unions short of marriage.


civil war (n.)

battles among fellow citizens or within a community, from civil in a sense of occurring among fellow
citizens attested from late 14c. in batayle ciuile civil battle, etc. The exact phrase civil war is
attested from late 15c. (the Latin phrase was bella civicus).    Early use typically was in
reference to ancient Rome. Later, in England, to the struggle between Parliament and Charles I
(1641-1651); in U.S., to the War of Secession (1861-1865), an application often decried as wholly
inaccurate but in use (among other names) in the North during the war and boosted by the use of the
term in the popular Battles and Leaders of the Civil War series published 1884-87 in Century
Magazine.    The war between the States, which a good many Southerners prefer, is both bookish and
inexact. Civil war is an utter misnomer. It was used and is still used by courteous people, the same
people who are careful to say Federal and Confederate. War of the rebellion, which begs the very
question at issue, has become the official designation of the struggle, but has found no acceptance
with the vanquished. To this day no Southerner uses it except by way of quotation .... The war of
secession is still used a good deal in foreign books, but it has no popular hold. The war, without
any further qualification, served the turn of Thucydides and Aristophanes for the Peloponnesian war.
It will serve ours, let it be hoped, for some time to come. [Basil L. Gildersleeve, The Creed of the
Old South, 1915]


civilian (n.)

late 14c., judge or authority on civil law, from Old French civilien of the civil law, created from
Latin civilis relating to a citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen; popular, affable,
courteous (see civil). Sense of non-military person is attested by 1819 (earlier in this sense was
civilian, attested from c.1600 as non-soldier). The adjective is from 1640s.


civilisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of civilization. Also see -ize.


civility (n.)

late 14c., status of a citizen, from Old French civilite (14c.), from Latin civitatem (nominative
civitas) the art of governing; courteousness, from cvilis relating to a citizen, relating to public
life, befitting a citizen; popular, affable, courteous (see civil). Later especially good
citizenship (1530s). Also state of being civilized (1540s); behavior proper to civilized persons
(1560s).


civilization (n.)

1704, law which makes a criminal process civil, from civilize + -ation. Sense of civilized condition
first recorded 1772, probably from French civilisation, to be an opposite to barbarity and a
distinct word from civility. Sense of a particular human society in a civilized condition,
considered as a whole over time, is from 1857. Related: Civilizational.


civilize (v.)

c.1600, to bring out of barbarism, from French civiliser, verb from Old French civil (adj.), from
Latin civilis relating to a citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen; popular, affable,
courteous (see civil). Meaning become civilized is from 1868. Related: Civilized; civilizing.


civilized (adj.)

1610s, past participle adjective from civilize.


civilly (adv.)

1550s, with reference to citizenship or civil matters, also in a well-bred manner; from civil + -ly
(2).


civvy (n.)

1889, civvies, short for civilian clothes (see civilian (adj.)); in reference to civilian clothes of
military men.


clabber (n.)

mud, 1824, from Irish and Gaelic clabar mud. Also often short for bonnyclabber.


clachan (n.)

small village (Scottish and Irish), early 15c., from Gaelic clach (plural clachan) stone.


clack (v.)

mid-13c., not in Old English, from Old Norse klaka to chatter, of echoic origin; compare Dutch
klakken to clack, crack, Old High German kleken, French claquer to clap, crack (see claque).
Related: Clacked; clacking.


clack (n.)

mid-15c., from clack (v.).


clad (adj.)

clothed, c.1300, mid-13c., from clad, alternative past tense and past participle of clothe. Old
English had gecl&aelig;&thorn;d, past participle of cl&aelig;&thorn;an.


claddagh

in Claddagh ring (Irish f&aacute;inne Chladach), from village of  Claddagh, County Gallway. The
village name is literally stony beach.


clade (n.)

group of organisms evolved from a common ancestor, 1957, from Greek klados young branch, offshoot of
a plant, shoot broken off, from PIE *kele-, possibly from root *kel- (1) to strike, cut (see holt).


cladism (n.)

1966, from clade + -ism. Related: Cladist.


cladistic (adj.)

1960, from clade + -istic. Related: Cladistics systematic classification of life forms (1965; see
-ics).


claim (v.)

c.1300, to call, call out; to ask or demand by virtue of right or authority, from accented stem of
Old French clamer to call, name, describe; claim; complain; declare, from Latin clamare to cry out,
shout, proclaim, from PIE *kele- (2) to shout, imitative (compare Sanskrit usakala cock, literally
dawn-calling; Latin calare to announce solemnly, call out; Middle Irish cailech cock; Greek kalein
to call, kelados noise, kledon report, fame; Old High German halan to call; Old English hlowan to
low, make a noise like a cow; Lithuanian kalba language). Related: Claimed; claiming.    Meaning to
maintain as true is from 1864; specific sense to make a claim (on an insurance company) is from
1897. Claim properly should not stray too far from its true meaning of to demand recognition of a
right.


claim (n.)

early 14c., a demand of a right; right of claiming, from Old French claime claim, complaint, from
clamer (see claim (v.)). Meaning thing claimed or demanded is from 1792; specifically piece of land
allotted and taken (chiefly U.S. and Australia, in reference to mining) is from 1851. Insurance
sense is from 1878.


claimant (n.)

1747, from claim (v.), on model of appellant, defendant, etc., or from French noun use of present
participle of clamer.


clair-de-lune (n.)

1877, French, literally moonlight, also used as color of moonlight. See clear (adj.) + Luna.


clairaudience (n.)

1864, from French clair (see clear (adj.)) + audience; on model of clairvoyance.


Claire

fem. proper name, from French claire, fem. of clair literally light, bright, from Latin clarus
clear, bright, distinct (see clear (adj.); also compare Clara).


clairvoyance (n.)

paranormal gift of seeing things out of sight, 1837, from special use of French clairvoyance (Old
French clerveans, 13c.) quickness of understanding, sagacity, penetration, from clairvoyant (see
clairvoyant). A secondary sense in French is the main sense in English.


clairvoyant (n.)

1834 in the psychic sense; see clairvoyant (adj.). Earlier it was used in the sense clear-sighted
person (1794). Fem. form was Clairvoyante.


clairvoyant (adj.)

having psychic gifts, 1837, earlier having insight (1670s), from special use of French clairvoyant
clear-sighted, discerning, judicious (13c.), from clair (see clear (adj.)) + voyant seeing, present
participle of voir, from Latin videre to see (see vision).


clam (n.)

bivalve mollusk, c.1500, in clam-shell, originally Scottish, apparently a particular use from Middle
English clam pincers, vice, clamp (late 14c.), from Old English clamm bond, fetter, grip, grasp,
from Proto-Germanic *klam- to press or squeeze together (cognates: Old High German klamma cramp,
fetter, constriction, German Klamm a constriction). If this is right then the original reference is
to the shell. Clam-chowder attested from 1822. To be happy as a clam is from 1833, but the earliest
uses do not elaborate on the notion behind it, unless it be self-containment.


clam (v.)

to dig for clams, 1630s, American English, from clam (n.). Clam up be quiet is 1916, American
English, but clam was used in this sense as an interjection mid-14c.


clam-shell (n.)

c.1500; see clam (n.) + shell (n.). As hinged iron box or bucket used in dredging, from 1877.


clambake (n.)

1835, American English, from clam (n.) + bake (n.). By 1937 in jazz slang transferred to an
enjoyable time generally, especially jam session.


clamber (v.)

to climb with difficulty using hands and feet, late 14c., possibly frequentative of Middle English
climben to climb (preterit clamb), or akin to Old Norse klembra to hook (oneself) on. Related:
Clambered; clambering.


clamjamphry (n.)

contemptuous word for a collection of persons, mob, 1816, of unknown origin; first in Scott, so
perhaps there's a suggestion of clan in it.


clammy (adj.)

soft and sticky, late 14c., probably from Middle English clam viscous, sticky, muddy (mid-14c.),
from Old English cl&aelig;m mud, sticky clay, from Proto-Germanic *klaimaz clay (cognates: Flemish
klammig, Low German klamig sticky, damp, Old English cl&aelig;man to smear, plaster; cognates:
clay). With -y (2). Related: Clammily; clamminess.


clamor (n.)

late 14c., from Old French clamor call, cry, appeal, outcry (12c., Modern French clameur), from
Latin clamor a shout, a loud call (either friendly or hostile), from clamare to cry out (see claim
(v.)).


clamor (v.)

late 14c., from clamor (n.). Related: Clamored; clamoring.


clamorous (adj.)

c.1400, from Middle French clamoreux or directly from Medieval Latin clamorosus, from Latin clamor a
shout (see clamor (n.)). Related: Clamorously; clamorousness.


clamour

chiefly British English spelling of clamor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or. Related: Clamoured;
clamouring; clamourous.


clamp (n.)

device for fastening, c.1300, probably from clamb, perhaps originally past tense of climb (v.), or
from Middle Dutch clampe (Dutch klamp), from West Germanic *klamp- clamp, cleat; cognate with Middle
Low German klampe clasp, hook, Old High German klampfer clip, clamp; also probably related to Middle
Dutch klamme a clamp, hook, grapple, Danish klamme a clamp, cramp, Old English clamm fetter; see
clam (n.).


clamp (v.)

to fasten with a clamp, 1670s, from clamp (n.). Related: Clamped; clamping.


clamp-down (n.)

also clampdown, 1940 in the figurative sense, from verbal phrase clamp down use pressure to keep
down (1924). The verbal phrase in the figurative sense is recorded from 1941. See clamp (v.) + down
(adv.).


clan (n.)

early 15c., from Gaelic clann family, stock, offspring, akin to Old Irish cland offspring, tribe,
both from Latin planta offshoot (see plant (n.)). The Goidelic branch of Celtic (including Gaelic)
had no initial p-, so it substituted k- or c- for Latin p-. The same Latin word in (non-Goidelic)
Middle Welsh became plant children.


clandestine (adj.)

1560s, from Latin clandestinus secret, hidden, from clam secretly, from adverbial derivative of base
of celare to hide (see cell), perhaps on model of intestinus internal. Related: Clandestinely. As a
noun form, there is awkward clandestinity (clandestineness apparently being a dictionary word).


clang (v.)

1570s, echoic (originally of trumpets and birds), akin to or from Latin clangere resound, ring, and
Greek klange sharp sound, from PIE *klang-, nasalized form of root *kleg- to cry, sound. Related:
Clanged; clanging.


clang (n.)

1590s, from clang (v.).


clangor (n.)

1590s, from Latin clangor sound of trumpets (Virgil), birds (Ovid), etc., from clangere to clang,
echoic (compare clang).


clangorous (adj.)

1712, from Medieval Latin clangorosus, from Latin clangor, or else from clangor + -ous. Related:
Clangorously; clangorousness.


clank (v.)

1610s, perhaps echoic, perhaps a blend of clang (v.) and clink (v.), perhaps from a Low German
source (compare Middle Dutch clank, Dutch klank, Old High German klanc, Middle Low German klank,
German Klang).


clank (n.)

1650s, from clank (v.). Reduplicated form clankety-clank attested from 1895.


clannish (adj.)

disposed to adhere closely to one another, 1747, from clan + -ish. Related: Clannishly;
clannishness.


clansman (n.)

1810, member of a clan, from genitive of clan + man (n.).


clap (v.)

Old English cl&aelig;ppan to throb, beat, common Germanic, echoic (cognate with Old Frisian klapa to
beat, Old Norse klappa, Old High German klaphon, German klappen, Old Saxon klapunga). Meaning to
strike or knock is from c.1300. Meaning to make a sharp noise is late 14c. Of hands, to beat them
together to get attention or express joy, from late 14c. To clap (someone) on the back is from
1520s. Related: Clapped; clapping.


clap (n.1)

loud noise, c.1200, from clap (v.). Of thunder, late 14c. Meaning sudden blow is from c.1400;
meaning noise made by slapping the palms of the hands together is from 1590s.


clap (n.2)

gonorrhea, 1580s, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English clapper rabbit-hole, from Old
French clapoire (Modern French clapier), originally rabbit burrow (of uncertain origin), but given a
slang extension to brothel and also the name of a disease of some sort. In English originally also a
verb, to infect with clap. Related: Clap-doctor.


clapboard (n.)

1520s, partial translation of Middle Dutch klapholt (borrowed into English late 14c. as clapholt),
from klappen to fit + Low German holt wood, board (see holt). Compare German Klappholz. Originally
small boards of split oak, imported from northern Germany and cut by coopers to make barrel staves;
the meaning long, thin board used for roofing or to cover the exterior of wooden buildings is from
1640s, American English.


clapper (n.)

late 13c., agent noun from clap (v.). Meaning tongue of a bell is from late 14c. Old English had
clipur. Meaning hinged board snapped in front of a camera at the start of filming to synchronize
picture and sound is from 1940.


clapperclaw (v.)

to fight at arm's length with the hands and nails, 1590s, from clap (v.) + claw (v.). Related:
Clapperclawed; clapperclawing.


claptrap (n.)

c.1730, trick to 'catch' applause, a stage term; from clap (v.) + trap (n.). Extended sense of
cheap, showy language is from 1819; hence nonsense, rubbish.


claque (n.)

1860, from French claque band of claqueurs, agent noun from claquer to clap (16c.), echoic (compare
clap (v.)). Modern sense of band of political followers is transferred from that of organized
applause at theater. Claqueur audience memeber who gives pre-arranged responses in a theater
performance is in English from 1837.    This method of aiding the success of public performances is
very ancient; but it first became a permanent system, openly organized and controlled by the
claquers themselves, in Paris at the beginning of the nineteenth century. [Century Dictionary]


Clara

fem. personal name, from Latin Clara, from fem. of clarus bright, shining, clear (see clear (adj.)
and compare Claire). Derivatives include Clarisse, Clarice, Clarabel, Claribel. The native form
Clare was common in medieval England, perhaps owing to the popularity of St. Clare of Assisi.


Clarence

surname, from Medieval Latin Clarencia, name of dukedom created 1362 for Lionel, third son of Edward
III, so called from town of Clare, Suffolk, whose heiress Lionel married. Used as a masc. proper
name from late 19c. As a type of four-wheeled closed carriage, named for the Duke of Clarence, later
William IV.


clarendon (n.)

a thickened Roman type face, 1845, evidently named for the Clarendon press at Oxford University,
which was set up 1713 in the Clarendon Building, named for university Chancellor Edward Hyde, 1st
Earl of Clarendon.


claret (n.)

mid-15c., light-colored wine, from Old French (vin) claret clear (wine), light-colored red wine
(also sweetened wine, a sense in English from late 14c.), from Latin clarus clear (see clear
(adj.)). Narrowed English meaning red wine of Bordeaux (excluding burgundy) first attested 1700.
Used in pugilistic slang for blood from c.1600.


clarification (n.)

1610s, act of clearing or refining (especially of liquid substances), from French clarification,
from Late Latin clarificationem (nominative clarificatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of clarificare (see clarify). The meaning statement revising or expanding an earlier statement but
stopping short of a correction is attested by 1969, originally in newspapers.


clarify (v.)

early 14c., make illustrious, make known, from Old French clarifiier clarify, make clear, explain
(12c.), from Late Latin clarificare to make clear, also to glorify, from Latin clarificus brilliant,
from clarus clear, distinct (see clear (adj.)) + root of facere to make, do (see factitious).
Meaning make clear, purify is from early 15c. in English; intransitive sense of grow or become clear
is from 1590s. Figurative sense of to free from obscurity is from 1823. Related: Clarified;
clarifying.


clarinet (n.)

1768, from French clarinette (18c.), diminutive of clarine little bell (16c.), noun use of fem. of
adjective clarin (which also was used as a noun, trumpet, clarion), from clair, cler (see clear
(adj.)). Alternative form clarionet is attested from 1784.    The instrument, a modification of the
medieval shawm, said to have been invented c.1700 by J.C. Denner of Nuremberg, Germany. A recognized
orchestral instrument from c.1775. Ease of playing increased greatly with a design improvement from
1843 based on Boehm's flute.    After the hautboy came the clarinet. This instrument astonished
every beholder, not so much, perhaps, on account of its sound, as its machinery. One that could
manage the keys of a clarinet, forty five years ago, so as to play a tune, was one of the wonders of
the age. Children of all ages would crowd around the performer, and wonder and admire when the keys
were moved. [Nathaniel D. Gould, Church Music in America, Boston, 1853]    German Clarinet, Swedish
klarinett, Italian clarinetto, etc. all are from French. Related: Clarinettist.


clarion (n.)

small, high-pitched type of trumpet, early 14c., from Old French clarion (high-pitched) trumpet,
bugle and directly from Medieval Latin clarionem (nominative clario) a trumpet, from Latin clarus
clear (see clear (adj.)). Clarion call is attested from 1838.


Clarisse

fem. proper name, often a diminutive of Clara and its relatives. Also, a nun of the order of St.
Clare (1790s); the Franciscan order also known as the Poor Clares (c.1600).


clarity (n.)

c.1300, clarte brightness, from Old French clart&eacute; clarity, brightness, from Latin claritas
brightness, splendor, also, of sounds, clearness; figuratively celebrity, renown, fame, from clarare
make clear, from clarus clear (see clear (adj.)). Modern form is early 15c., perhaps a reborrowing
from Latin. Meaning clearness is from 1610s.


Clark

surname, from common Middle English alternative spelling of clerk (n.). In many early cases it is
used of men who had taken minor orders.


clash (v.)

c.1500, to make a loud, sharp sound, of imitative origin, or a blend of clap and crash. Compare
Dutch kletsen splash, clash, German klatschen, Danish klaske clash, knock about. Figurative sense,
in reference to non-physical strife or battle, is first attested 1620s. Of things, to come into
collision, from 1650s; of colors, to go badly together, first recorded 1894. Related: Clashed;
clashing.


clash (n.)

1510s, sharp, loud noise of collision, from clash (v.). Especially of the noise of conflicting metal
weapons. Meaning hostile encounter is from 1640s; meaning conflict of opinions, etc. is from 1781.


clasp (n.)

c.1300, claspe, metal catch or hook used to hold things together, perhaps a metathesis of clapse,
and thus from or related to Old English clyppan clasp (see clip (v.2)).


clasp (v.)

late 14c., from clasp (n.). Related: Clasped; clasping.


clasp-hook (n.)

1841, from clasp (n.) + hook (n.).


class (n.)

c.1600, group of students, from French classe (14c.), from Latin classis a class, a division; army,
fleet, especially any one of the six orders into which Servius Tullius divided the Roman people for
the purpose of taxation; traditionally originally the people of Rome under arms (a sense attested in
English from 1650s), and thus akin to calare to call (to arms), from PIE root *kele- (2) to shout
(see claim (v.)). In early use in English also in Latin form classis.    School and university sense
of course, lecture (1650s) is from the notion of a form or lecture reserved to scholars who had
attained a certain level. Natural history sense is from 1753. Meaning a division of society
according to status (upper, lower, etc.) is from 1772. Meaning high quality is from 1847. Class-
consciousness (1903) is from German klassenbewusst.


class (v.)

1705, to divide into classes, from class (n.) or French classer. Sense of to place into a class is
from 1776. Related: Classed; classing.


classic (adj.)

1610s, of the highest class; approved as a model, from French classique (17c.), from Latin classicus
relating to the (highest) classes of the Roman people, hence, superior, from classis (see class).
Originally in English, of the first class; meaning belonging to standard authors of Greek and Roman
antiquity is attested from 1620s.


classic (n.)

a Greek or Roman writer or work, 1711, from classic (adj.). So, by mid-19c., any work in any context
held to have a similar quality or relationship. In classical Latin noun use of classicus meant a
Marine (miles classicus) from the military division sense of classis.


classical (adj.)

1590s, of the highest rank (originally in literature), from classic + -al (1). Classical music
(1836) was defined originally against romantic music.    [I]n general, as now used, the term
classical includes the composers active in instrumental music from somewhere about 1700 to say 1830.
Hence the list includes among the great names those of Bach, his sons, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven,
Clementi, Dussek, Pleyel, Cramer, etc. The next step beyond the term classical is modern romantic,
the composers of which school may be taken to include all the writers for pianoforte from about 1829
(when Mendelssohn published the first Songs without Words) down to the present. The term romantic in
this sense means strongly marked, extraordinary, intending to tell stories and the like. [Music, Its
Ideals and Methods, W.S.B. Mathews, 1897]    But already by 1880s it was acknowledged the term had a
double sense: Music that had withstood the test of time, as well as music of a style contrasted to
romantic. Later (early 20c.) it was contrasted to jazz (in this sense more often with reference to
the orchestras than to the music itself). Still later in contrast to popular music generally (mid-
20c.).


classicism (n.)

classical style in art or literature, 1830, from classic + -ism. Related: Classicist.


classics (n.)

Greek and Roman writers and works, 1711, from classic (adj.).


classifiable (adj.)

1820, from classify + -able.


classification (n.)

1772, action of classifying, noun of action from Latin stem of classify, or from French
classification. Meaning result of classifying is from 1789.


classificatory (adj.)

1825, from Latin stem of classify + -ory.


classified (adj.)

arranged in classes, 1828, past participle adjective from classify. Meaning secret (of government
information) is from 1941, American English. Classifieds (n.) newspaper advertisements arranged by
classes, 1913, is short for classified advertisements


classify (v.)

1782, from French classifier, from classe (see class (n.)) + -fier (see -fy). Related: Classified;
classifying.


classism (n.)

distinction of class, 1842, from class (n.) + -ism.


classless (adj.)

1874 in the social sense (1863 in reference to class generally), from class (n.) in the social order
sense + -less. As lacking the sophistication of high class, by 1979. Related: Classlessly;
classlessness.


classmate (n.)

one of the same class at school or college, 1713, from class (n.) + mate (n.).


classroom (n.)

also class-room, 1811, from class (n.) + room (n.).


classy (adj.)

pertaining to or characteristic of a (high) class, 1891, from class (n.) + -y (2). Related:
Classily; classiness.


clastic (adj.)

consisting of broken pieces, 1875, in geology, from Latinized form of Greek klastos broken in
pieces, from klan, klaein to break, from PIE *kla-, variant of root *kel- (1) to strike (see holt).


clatter (v.)

late Old English clatrung clattering, noise, verbal noun implying an Old English *clatrian, of
imitative origin. Compare Middle Dutch klateren, East Frisian klatern, dialectal German klattern.
The noun is attested from mid-14c.


Claude

masc. proper name, from French form of Claudius.


Claudia

fem. proper name, from Latin Claudius (m.).


claudication (n.)

1550s, from Middle French claudication (13c.) or directly from Latin claudicationem (nominative
claudicatio) a limping, noun of action from past participle stem of claudicare to limp, be lame,
from claudus limping, halting, lame. Related: Claudicant (adj.); claudicate.


Claudius

masc. proper name, from the name of two Roman gentes, perhaps related to claudus lame, which is of
unknown origin. Related: Claudian.


clausal (adj.)

1870, from clause + -al (1).


clause (n.)

c.1200, a sentence, a brief statement, a short passage, from Old French clause stipulation (in a
legal document), 12c., from Medieval Latin clausa conclusion, used in the sense of classical Latin
clausula the end, a closing, termination, also end of a sentence or a legal argument, from clausa,
fem. noun from past participle of claudere to close, to shut, to conclude (see close (v.)).
Grammatical sense is from c.1300. Legal meaning distinct condition, stipulation, or proviso is
recorded from late 14c. in English. The sense of ending seems to have fallen from the word between
Latin and French.


claustral (adj.)

resembling a cloister, early 15c., from Middle French claustral (15c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin claustralis pertaining to a claustrum (see cloister).


claustration (n.)

1863, act of shutting up in a cloister, as if from a noun of action formed in Latin from Latin
claustrare, from claustrum (see cloister).


claustrophilia (n.)

morbid desire to be shut up in a confined space, 1884, from claustro-, abstracted from
claustrophobia, + -philia.


claustrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of being shut up in a confined space, coined 1879 (in article by Italian-born, French-
naturalized Swiss-English physician Dr. Benjamin Ball (1834-1892)) from Latin claustrum a bolt, a
means of closing; a place shut in, confined place, frontier fortress (in Medieval Latin cloister),
past participle of claudere to close (see close (v.)) + -phobia fear.


claustrophobic (adj.)

1889, from claustrophobia + -ic. As a noun, person who has claustrophobia, it is recorded from 1953.


claves (n.)

pair of hardwood sticks used in making music, 1928, from American Spanish claves (plural), from
Spanish clave keystone, from Latin clavis key (see slot (n.2)).


clavichord (n.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin clavicordium (15c.), from Latin clavis a key (see slot (n.2)) + chorda
a string (see cord).


clavicle (n.)

collarbone, 1610s, from Middle French clavicule collarbone (16c.), also small key, from Medieval
Latin clavicula collarbone (used c.980 in a translation of Avicenna), special use of classical Latin
clavicula, literally small key, bolt, diminutive of clavis key (see slot (n.2)); in the anatomical
sense a loan-translation of Greek kleis key, collarbone. So called supposedly from its function as
the fastener of the shoulder. Related: Clavicular.


clavier (n.)

1708, keyboard, from French clavier, originally a key-bearer, from Latin clavis key (see slot
(n.2)). The French word also is the source of German Klavier, Dutch klavier, Danish klaver, etc. The
German word is the direct source of the name of the musical instrument, a sense attested from 1845
in English.


claviger (n.)

one who carries a club, c.1600, from Latin claviger (an epithet of Hercules), from clava club,
knotty branch + stem of gerere to bear (see gest).


claw (n.)

Old English clawu, earlier clea, claw, talon, iron hook, from Proto-Germanic *klawo (cognates: Old
Frisian klawe claw, hoe, Middle Dutch klouwe, Dutch klauw, Old High German klawa, German Klaue
claw).   Claw-foot in reference to furniture is from 1823; claw-and-ball attested from 1893. Claw-
hammer attested from 1769.


claw (v.)

Old English clawian to scratch, claw, from the same root as claw (n.). Related: Clawed; clawing.
Compare Dutch klaauwen, Old High German klawan, German klauen. To claw backregain by great effort is
from 1953; as a noun, an act of this, from 1969.


clay (n.)

Old English cl&aelig;g stiff, sticky earth; clay, from Proto-Germanic *klaijaz (cognates: Old High
German kliwa bran, German Kleie, Old Frisian klai clay, Old Saxon klei, Middle Dutch clei, Danish
kl&aelig;g clay; also Old English cl&aelig;man, Old Norse kleima, Old High German kleiman to cover
with clay), from PIE root *glei- clay (cognates: Greek gloios sticky matter; Latin gluten glue; Old
Church Slavonic glina clay, glenu slime, mucus; Old Irish glenim I cleave, adhere).    in Scripture,
the stuff from which the body of the first man was formed; hence human body (especially when dead).
Clay pigeon is from 1888. Feet of clay fundamental weakness is from Dan. ii:33.


clayey (adj.)

Old English cl&#230;ig, from contracted compound of cl&#230;g (see clay) + -ig (see -y (2)).


claymore (n.)

1749, two-edged broadsword of ancient Scottish Highlanders, from Gaelic claidheamh mor great sword,
from claidheb sword (compare Welsh cleddyf), possibly from PIE root *kel- (1) to strike (see holt) +
mor great (compare Welsh mawr; see more). An antiquarian word made familiar again by Scott's novels;
modern military application to pellet-scattering anti-personnel mine is first attested 1962.


clean (adj.)

Old English cl&aelig;ne free from dirt or filth; pure, chaste, innocent; open, in the open, of
beasts, ritually safe to eat, from West Germanic *klainoz clear, pure (cognates: Old Saxon kleni
dainty, delicate, Old Frisian klene small, Old High German kleini delicate, fine, small, German
klein small; English preserves the original Germanic sense), from PIE root *gel- bright, gleaming
(cognates: Greek glene eyeball, Old Irish gel bright).    Largely replaced by clear, pure in the
higher senses [Weekley], but as a verb (mid-15c.) it has largely usurped what once belonged to
cleanse. Meaning whole, entire is from c.1300 (clean sweep in the figurative sense is from 1821).
Sense of innocent is from c.1300; that of not lewd is from 1867; that of not carrying anything
forbidden is from 1938; that of free of drug addiction is from 1950s. To come clean confess is from
1919, American English.


clean (v.)

mid-15c., make clean, from clean (adj.). Related: Cleaned; cleaning. From clean out clean by
emptying comes sense of to leave bare (1844); cleaned-out left penniless by losses is from 1812.


clean (adv.)

Old English cl&aelig;ne dirtlessly, also clearly, fully, entirely; see clean (adj.). Compare similar
use of German rein clean.


clean-cut (adj.)

precise, 1829 (of turf), from clean (adv.) + past participle of cut (v.).


clean-living (adj.)

1920, from clean (adv.) + live (v.).


clean-up (n.)

also cleanup, 1856, act of cleaning up, from clean + up. Meaning a profit is recorded from 1878.
Verbal phrase clean up make a large profit is from 1929. The adjective, in the baseball sense, is
recorded by 1910.


cleaner (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from clean (v.). Meaning shop that cleans clothes is from 1873. To take
(someone) to the cleaners get all of (someone's) money is from 1921.


cleanliness (n.)

early 15c., from cleanly + -ness.    Cleanliness is indeed next to godliness. [John Wesley, Sermon
On Dress, c.1791]


cleanly (adj.)

Old English cl&aelig;nlic morally pure, innocent, from cl&aelig;ne (see clean (adj.)). Of persons,
habitually clean, from c.1500.


cleanly (adv.)

Old English cl&aelig;nlice; see clean (adj.) + -ly (2).


cleanness (n.)

Old English cl&#230;nnes (moral) cleanness, purity, chastity; see clean (adj.) + -ness. Meaning
absence of dirt or filth is late 14c.


cleanse (v.)

Old English cl&aelig;nsian to cleanse, purge, purify, chasten, justify, from West Germanic
*klainson, from *klainoz (see clean (adj.)). Despite its modern spelling (16c.), it retains its
Middle English pronunciation. Related: Cleansed; cleansing.


cleanser (n.)

1520s, a purgative; 1560s, one who cleans, agent noun from cleanse (v.). Meaning thing that cleanses
is from late 14c. Old English had cl&aelig;nsere priest.


cleansing (n.)

Old English cl&aelig;nsunge cleansing, purifying, castigation; chastity, purity, verbal noun from
the root of cleanse. As a present participle adjective, attested from c.1300.


clear (adj.)

late 13c., bright, from Old French cler clear (of sight and hearing), light, bright, shining; sparse
(12c., Modern French clair), from Latin clarus clear, loud, of sounds; figuratively manifest, plain,
evident, in transferred use, of sights, bright, distinct; also illustrious, famous, glorious (source
of Italian chiaro, Spanish claro), from PIE *kle-ro-, from root *kele- (2) to shout (see claim
(v.)).    The sense evolution involves an identification of the spreading of sound and the spreading
of light (compare English loud, used of colors; German hell clear, bright, shining, of pitch,
distinct, ringing, high). Of complexion, from c.1300; of the weather, from late 14c.; of meanings or
explanations, manifest to the mind, comprehensible, c.1300. (An Old English word for this was
sweotol distinct, clear, evident.) Sense of free from encumbrance, apparently nautical, developed
c.1500. Phrase in the clear attested from 1715. Clear-sighted is from 1580s (clear-eyed is from
1529s); clear-headed is from 1709.


clear (v.)

late 14c., to fill with light, from clear (adj.). Of weather, from late 14c. Meaning make clear in
the mind is mid-15c., as is sense of to remove what clouds. Meaning to prove innocent is from late
15c. Meaning get rid of is from 1530s.    Meaning to free from entanglement is from 1590s; that of
pass without entanglement is from 1630s. Meaning to leap clear over is first attested 1791. Meaning
get approval for (a proposal, etc.) is from 1944; meaning establish as suitable for national
security work is from 1948. Related: Cleared; clearing.    To clear (one's) throat is from 1881;
earlier clear (one's) voice (1701). To clear out depart, leave (1825), perhaps is from the notion of
ships satisfying customs, harbor regulations, etc., then setting sail. To clear up is from 1620s, of
weather; 1690s as make clear to the mind. Clear the decks is what is done on a ship before it moves.


clear (adv.)

quite, entirely, wholly, c.1300, from clear (adj.).


clearance (n.)

1560s, action of clearing, from clear (v.) + -ance. Meaning a clear space is from 1788. Meaning
approval, permission (especially to land or take off an aircraft) is from 1944, American English;
national security sense recorded from 1948. Clearance sale attested by 1843.


clearing (n.)

late 14c., action of making clear, verbal noun from clear (v.). Meaning land cleared of wood is from
1818, American English.


clearing-house (n.)

also clearinghouse, 1832, from clearing + house (n.). The original was established 1775 in London by
the bankers for the adjustment of their mutual claims for checks and bills; later the word was
extended to similar institutions.


clearly (adv.)

c.1300, of vision and speech, from clear (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning evidently is from 1560s; as a
parenthetical expression in argument, it is clear, recorded from 1867.


cleat (n.)

c.1300, clete wedge, from Old English *cleat a lump, from West Germanic *klaut firm lump (cognates:
Middle Low German klot, klute, Middle Dutch cloot, Dutch kloot, Old High German kloz, German
klo&szlig; clod, dumpling). In Middle English, a wedge of wood bolted to a spar, etc., to keep it
from slipping (late 14c.). Meaning thin metal plate for shoes, etc. is c.1825.


cleavage (n.)

1816, in geology, action of splitting (rocks or gems) along natural fissures, from cleave (v.1) +
-age. General meaning action or state of cleaving or being cleft is from 1867.    The sense of cleft
between a woman's breasts in low-cut clothing is first recorded 1946, defined in a Time magazine
article [Aug. 5] as the Johnston Office trade term for the shadowed depression dividing an actress'
bosom into two distinct sections; traditionally first used in this sense by U.S. publicist Joseph I.
Breen (1888-1965), head of the Production Code Administration (replaced 1945 by Eric Johnston),
enforcers of Hollywood self-censorship, in reference to Jane Russell's costumes and poses in The
Outlaw.


cleave (v.1)

to split, Old English cleofan, cleven, cliven to split, separate (class II strong verb, past tense
cleaf, past participle clofen), from Proto-Germanic *kleuban (cognates: Old Saxon klioban, Old Norse
kljufa, Danish kl&ouml;ve, Dutch kloven, Old High German klioban, German klieben to cleave, split),
from PIE root *gleubh- to cut, slice (see glyph).    Past tense form clave is recorded in Northern
writers from 14c. and was used with both verbs (see cleave (v.2)), apparently by analogy with other
Middle English strong verbs. Clave was common to c.1600 and still alive at the time of the KJV; weak
past tense cleaved for this verb also emerged in 14c.; cleft is still later. The past participle
cloven survives, though mostly in compounds.


cleave (v.2)

to adhere, Middle English cleven, clevien, cliven, from Old English clifian, cleofian, from West
Germanic *klibajan (cognates: Old Saxon klibon, Old High German kliban, Dutch kleven, Old High
German kleben, German kleben to stick, cling, adhere), from PIE *gloi- to stick (see clay). The
confusion was less in Old English when cleave (v.1) was a class 2 strong verb; but it has grown
since cleave (v.1) weakened, which may be why both are largely superseded by stick (v.) and split
(v.).


cleaver (n.)

late 15c., one who splits, agent noun from cleave (v.1). Originally one who splits boards with a
wedge instead of sawing; attested as part of a surname from mid-14c. Meaning butcher's chopper is
from mid-15c.    This last [Marrowbones and Cleaver] is a sign in Fetter Lane, originating from a
custom, now rapidly dying away, of the butcher boys serenading newly married couples with these
professional instruments. Formerly, the band would consist of four cleavers, each of a different
tone, or, if complete, of eight, and by beating their marrowbones skilfully against these, they
obtained a sort of music somewhat after the fashion of indifferent bell-ringing. When well
performed, however, and heard from a proper distance, it was not altogether unpleasant. ... The
butchers of Clare market had the reputation of being the best performers. ... This music was once so
common that Tom Killigrew called it the national instrument of England.  [Larwood &amp; Hotten, The
History of Signboards from the Earliest Times to the Present Day, London, 1867]


clechy (adj.)

also cleche, pierced through with a figure of the same kind, from French cl&eacute;ch&eacute;
(17c.), from Latin *clavicatus key-holed, or clavicella little key, from clavis key (see slot
(n.2)).


cledonism (n.)

avoidance of words deemed unlucky, 1885, from Latinized form of Greek kledon omen or presage
contained in a word or sound, also report, rumor, tidings; fame (see claim (v.)) + -ism.


clef (n.)

1570s in a musical sense, character on a staff to indicate its name and pitch, from Middle French
clef (12c.) key, musical clef, trigger, from a figurative or transferred use of classical Latin
clavis, which had only the literally sense key (see slot (n.2)). In the Middle Ages, the Latin word
was used in the Guidonian system for the lowest note of a scale, which is its basis (see keynote).
The most common is the treble, violin, or G-clef, which crosses on the second line of the staff,
denoting that as the G above middle C on the piano.


cleft (n.)

1570s, alteration (by influence of cleft, new weak past participle of cleave (v.1)), of Middle
English clift (early 14c.), from Old English geclyft (adj.) split, cloven, from Proto-Germanic
*kluftis (cognates: Old High German and German kluft, Danish kl&oslash;ft cleft), from PIE *gleubh-
(see glyph). In Middle English anatomy, it meant the parting of the thighs (early 14c.).


cleft (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from cleave (v.1)). Cleft palate attested from 1828.


Clematis (n.)

plant genus, 1550s, periwinkle, from Latin Clematis, from Greek klematis, in Dioscorides as the name
of a climbing or trailing plant (OED says probably the periwinkle) with long and lithe branches,
diminutive of klema vine-branch, shoot or twig broken off (for grafting), from klan to break (see
clastic).


clemency (n.)

1550s, mildness or gentleness shown in exercise of authority, from Latin clementia calmness,
gentleness, from clemens calm, mild, related to clinare to lean (see lean (v.)) + participial suffix
-menos (also in alumnus). For sense evolution, compare inclined in secondary meaning disposed
favorably. Earlier in same sense was clemence (late 15c.).    Meaning mildness of weather or climate
is 1660s (a sense also in Latin); clement (adj.) is older in both senses, late 15c. and 1620s
respectively, but now is used only in negation and only of the weather.


clement (adj.)

mid-15c., mild, of persons (attested from early 13c. as a surname), from Old French clement, from
Latin clementem (nominative clemens) mild, placid, gentle (see clemency). Of weather, 1620s. Taken
as a name by several early popes and popular in England as a masculine given name from mid-12c.,
also in fem. form Clemence.


clementine (n.)

cross between tangerine and sour orange, 1926, from French cl&eacute;mentine (1902). Originally an
accidental hybrid said to have been discovered by (and named for) Father Clement Rodier in the
garden of his orphanage in Misserghin, near Oran, Algeria. Introduced into U.S. and grown at Citrus
Research Center in Riverside, Calif., as early as 1909.


Clementine (adj.)

1705, in reference to various popes who took the name Clement (see clement (adj.)), especially of
the edition of the Vulgate issued due to Pope Clement V (1309-14).


Clementine

fem. proper name, from fem. of Clement (see clement (adj.)).


clench (v.)

Old English (be)clencan to hold fast, make cling, causative of clingan (see cling); compare
stench/stink. Related: Clenched; clenching.


clench (n.)

part of a nail that clinchers, 1590s, from clench (v.). Meaning a grasp, grip is from 1779.


Cleon

masc. proper name, from Latinized form of Greek kleon, kleos fame (see Clio).


Cleopatra

common name of sister-queens in Egypt under the Ptolemaic Dynasty. The name is Greek, probably
meaning key to the fatherland, from kleis key (see clavicle) + patris, genitive of pater father (see
father (n.)). The famous queen was the seventh of that name.


clepe (v.)

to call; to name (archaic), from Old English cleopian, clipian to speak, call; summon, invoke;
implore.


clepsydra (n.)

ancient Greek water clock, 1640s, from Latinized form of Greek klepsydra, from stem of kleptein to
steal, to hide (see kleptomania) + hydor water (see water (n.1)).


cleptomaniac (n.)

Latinized variant of kleptomaniac. Related: cleptomania.


clerestory (n.)

early 15c., probably from clere clear, in a sense light, lighted (see clear (adj.)), and story
(n.2), though this sense of that word is not otherwise found so early. Originally the upper part of
the nave, transepts, and choir of a large church; so called because pierced with windows. Related:
Clerestorial.


clergy (n.)

c.1200, clergie office or dignity of a clergyman, from two Old French words: 1. clergi&eacute;
clerics, learned men, from Medieval Latin clericatus, from Late Latin clericus (see clerk (n.)); 2.
clergie learning, knowledge, erudition, from clerc, also from Late Latin clericus. Meaning persons
ordained for religious work is from c.1300.


clergyman (n.)

1570s, from clergy + man (n.).


clergywoman (n.)

1670s, a nun, from clergy + man (n.). Not seriously as woman pastor until 1871; in between it was
used humorously for old woman or domineering wife of a clergyman. Compare clergyman.


cleric (n.)

1620s (also in early use as an adjective), from Church Latin clericus clergyman, priest, noun use of
adjective meaning priestly, belonging to the clerus; from Ecclesiastical Greek klerikos pertaining
to an inheritance, but in Greek Christian jargon by 2c., of the clergy, belonging to the clergy, as
opposed to the laity; from kleros a lot, allotment; piece of land; heritage, inheritance, originally
a shard or wood chip used in casting lots, related to klan to break (see clastic).   Kleros was used
by early Greek Christians for matters relating to ministry, based on Deut. xviii:2 reference to
Levites as temple assistants: Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren: the
Lord is their inheritance, kleros being used as a translation of Hebrew nahalah inheritance, lot. Or
else it is from the use of the word in Acts i:17. A word taken up in English after clerk (n.)
shifted to its modern meaning.


clerical (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the clergy, from cleric + -al (1), or from French cl&#233;rical, from Old
French clerigal learned, from Latin clericalis, from clericus (see cleric). Meaning pertaining to
clerks is from 1798.


clerihew (n.)

humorous verse form, 1928, from English humorist Edmund Clerihew Bentley (1875-1956), who described
it in a book published 1906 under the name E. Clerihew.


clerisy (n.)

1818, on model of German clerisei, from Late Latin clericia, related to clericus (see cleric);
coined by Coleridge to express a notion no longer associated with CLERGY [OED].


clerk (n.)

man ordained in the ministry, c.1200, from Old English cleric and Old French clerc clergyman,
priest; scholar, student, both from Church Latin clericus a priest, noun use of adjective meaning
priestly, belonging to the clerus (see cleric).    Modern bureaucratic usage is a reminder of the
dark ages when clergy alone could read and write and were employed for that skill by secular
authorities. In late Old English the word can mean king's scribe; keeper of accounts; by c.1200
clerk took on a secondary sense in Middle English (as the cognate word did in Old French) of anyone
who can read or write. This led to the sense assistant in a business (c.1500), originally a keeper
of accounts, later, especially in American English, a retail salesman (1790). Related: Clerkship.


clerk (v.)

act as a clerk, 1550s, from clerk (n.). Related: Clerked, clerking.


cleromancy (n.)

divination by dice, c.1600, from French cl&#233;romancie, from Latinized form of Greek kleros lot
(see clerk (n.)) + manteia oracle, divination (see -mancy).


Cleveland

city in Ohio, U.S., laid out 1796 by Gen. Moses Cleaveland (1754-1806) and later named for him. His
descendants included U.S. President Grover Cleveland (1837-1908). The family name is from place
names in England based on Middle English cleove, a variant of cliff.


clever (adj.)

1580s, handy, dexterous, apparently from East Anglian dialectal cliver expert at seizing, perhaps
from East Frisian kl&#252;fer skillful, or Norwegian dialectic klover ready, skillful, and perhaps
influenced by Old English clifer claw, hand (early usages seem to refer to dexterity). Or perhaps
akin to Old Norse kleyfr easy to split and from a root related to cleave to split. Extension to
intellect is first recorded 1704.    This is a low word, scarcely ever used but in burlesque or
conversation; and applied to any thing a man likes, without a settled meaning. [Johnson, 1755]
The meaning has narrowed since, but clever also often in old use and dialect meant well-shaped,
attractive-looking and in 19c. American English sometimes good-natured, agreeable. Related:
Cleverly; cleverness.


clevis (n.)

U-shaped iron bar with holes for a bolt or pin, used as a fastener, 1590s, of unknown origin,
perhaps from the root of cleave (v.2). Also uncertain is whether it is originally a plural or a
singular.


clew (n.)

ball of thread or yarn, northern English and Scottish relic of Old English cliewen sphere, ball,
skein, ball of thread or yarn, probably from West Germanic *kleuwin (cognates: Old Saxon cleuwin,
Dutch kluwen), from Proto-Germanic *kliwjo-, from PIE *gleu- gather into a mass, conglomerate (see
clay).


cliche (n.)

1825, electrotype, stereotype, from French clich&eacute;, a technical word in printer's jargon for
stereotype block, noun use of past participle of clicher to click (18c.), supposedly echoic of the
sound of a mold striking molten metal. Figurative extension to trite phrase, worn-out expression is
first attested 1888, following the course of stereotype. Related: Cliched (1928).


click (v.)

1580s, of imitative origin (compare Dutch and East Frisian klikken to click; Old French clique tick
of a clock). The figurative sense, in reference usually to persons, hit it off at once, become
friendly upon meeting is from 1915, perhaps based on the sound of a key in a lock. Related: Clicked;
clicking.


click (n.)

1610s, from click (v.). Click-beetle attested from 1830.


client (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French clyent (c.1300), from Latin clientem (nominative cliens) follower,
retainer, perhaps a variant of present participle of cluere listen, follow, obey (see listen); or,
more likely, from clinare to incline, bend, from suffixed form of PIE root *klei- to lean (see lean
(v.)).    The ground sense apparently is of one who leans on another for protection. In ancient
Rome, a plebian under protection of a patrician (called patronus in this relationship; see patron);
in English originally a lawyer's customer, by c.1600 extended to any customer.


clientele (n.)

1560s, body of professed adherents, from French client&egrave;le (16c.), from Latin clientela
relationship between dependent and patron, body of clients, from clientem (nominative cliens; see
client). Meaning customers, those who regularly patronize a business or professional is from 1857,
perhaps a reborrowing from French (it was used in English in italics as a foreign word from 1836).


cliff (n.)

Old English clif rock, promontory, steep slope, from Proto-Germanic *kliban (cognates: Old Saxon
clif, Old Norse klif, Middle Dutch klippe, Dutch klip, Old High German klep, German Klippe cliff,
promontory, steep rock).   Clift has been a variant spelling since 15c. and was common in early
Modern English, influenced by or merged with clift, a variant of cleft (n.). Cliff-dweller first
attested 1889, American English.


cliff-hanger (n.)

also cliffhanger, suspenseful situation, 1937, in reference to U.S. cinema serials, agent noun from
cliff + agent noun from hang (v.). In some cases, especially Westerns, the hero or heroine literally
was dangling from a cliff at the end of an episode.


climacteric

c.1600 (adj.), 1620s (n.), from Latin climactericus, from Greek klimakterikos of a critical period,
from klimakter rung of a ladder (see climax (n.)). A critical stage in human life, a period supposed
to be especially liable to change. By some, held to be the years that are multiples of 7 (7, 14, 21,
etc.), by others only the odd multiples (7, 21, 35, etc.), and by still others the multiples of 9.
The Great Climacteric was the 63rd year (7x9), supposed to be especially critical.


climactic (adj.)

pertaining to a climax, 1832, from climax, apparently on the analogy of syntax/syntactic. Related:
Climactical.


climate (n.)

late 14c., horizontal zone of the earth, Scottish, from Old French climat region, part of the earth,
from Latin clima (genitive climatis) region; slope of the Earth, from Greek klima region, zone,
literally an inclination, slope, thus slope of the Earth from equator to pole, from root of klinein
to slope, to lean (see lean (v.)).    The angle of sun on the slope of the Earth's surface defined
the zones assigned by early geographers. Early references in English, however, are in astrology
works, as each of the seven (then) climates was held to be under the influence of one of the
planets. Shift from region to weather associated with a region perhaps began in Middle English,
certainly by c.1600.


climate change (n.)

1983, in the modern global warming sense.


climatic (adj.)

1828, from climate + -ic. There is a 1650 citation for climatical in OED. Related: Climatically.


climatography (n.)

1813, from comb. form of climate + -graphy. Related: Climatographic.


climatological (adj.)

1827, from climatology + -ical. Related: Climatologically.


climatologist (n.)

1844, from climatology + -ist.


climatology (n.)

scientific study of climates, 1803, from climate + -ology.


climax (n.)

1580s, in the rhetorical sense (a chain of reasoning in graduating steps from weaker to stronger),
from Late Latin climax (genitive climacis), from Greek klimax propositions rising in effectiveness,
literally ladder, from root of klinein to slope, from PIE root *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)).
The rhetorical meaning evolved in English through series of steps by which a goal is achieved, to
escalating steps, to (1789) high point of intensity or development, a usage credited by the OED to
popular ignorance. The meaning sexual orgasm is recorded by 1880 (also in terms such as climax of
orgasm), said to have been promoted from c.1900 by birth-control pioneer Marie Stopes (1880-1958)
and others as a more accessible word than orgasm (n.).


climax (v.)

1835, to reach the highest point, from climax (n.). Related: Climaxed; climaxing.


climb (v.)

Old English climban raise oneself using hands and feet; rise gradually, ascend; make an ascent of
(past tense clamb, past participle clumben, clumbe), from West Germanic *klimban go up by clinging
(cognates: Dutch klimmen to climb, Old High German klimban, German klimmen). A strong verb in Old
English, weak by 16c. Most other Germanic languages long ago dropped the -b. Meaning to mount as if
by climbing is from mid-14c. Figurative sense of rise slowly by effort is from mid-13c. Related:
Climbed; climbing.


climb (n.)

1580s, act of climbing, from climb (v.). Meaning an ascent by climbing is from 1915, originally in
aviation.


climbable (adj.)

1610s, from climb (v.) + -able.


climber (n.)

early 15c., one who climbs, agent noun from climb (v.). Of plants, from 1630s.


clime (n.)

1540s, shortening of climate (or a nativization of Latin clima). It might usefully take up the old,
abandoned horizontal region of the earth sense of climate, but it is used chiefly by the poets and
with no evident agreement on just what they mean by it.


clinch (v.)

1560s, clasp, interlock, especially with a bent nail, variant of clench. The sense of settle
decisively is first recorded 1716, from the notion of clinching the point of a nail to keep it fast.
Boxing sense is from 1860. Related: Clinched; clinching.


clinch (n.)

1620s, method of fastening, from clinch (v.). Meaning a fastening by bent nail is from 1650s. In
pugilism, from 1875.


clincher (n.)

early 14c., person or thing that clinches (i.e., secures nails by bending down or riveting the
pointed end), late 15c. as a class of shipyard worker; agent noun from clinch (v.). As a type of
nail, from 1735; as a conclusive statement, argument, etc., 1737.


cline (n.)

1938, in biological use, back-formation from incline or from Greek klinein to slope, to lean (see
lean (v.)). Middle English had clinen (v.) to bend, bow, from Old French cliner, from Latin clinare.


cling (v.)

Old English clingan hold fast, adhere closely; congeal, shrivel (strong verb, past tense clang, past
participle clungen), from Proto-Germanic *klingg- (cognates: Danish klynge to cluster; Old High
German klinga narrow gorge; Old Norse klengjask press onward; Danish klinke, Dutch klinken to
clench; German Klinke latch).    The main sense shifted in Middle English to adhere to (something
else), stick together. Of persons in embrace, c.1600. Figuratively (to hopes, outmoded ideas, etc.),
from 1580s. Of clothes from 1792. Related: Clung; clinging.


clingstone (n.)

fruit having the pulp adhering firmly to the stone, 1722, from cling (v.) + stone (n.). Also as an
adjective.


clingy (adj.)

1680s, of things, from cling + -y (2). Of persons (especially children) from 1969, though the image
of a clingy vine in a relationship goes back to 1896. Related: Clinginess.


clinic (n.)

1620s, from French clinique (17c.), from Latin clinicus physician that visits patients in their
beds, from Greek klinike (techne) (practice) at the sickbed, from klinikos of the bed, from kline
bed, couch, that on which one lies, from suffixed form of PIE root *kli- lean, slope (see lean
(v.)).    Originally in English bedridden person; sense of hospital is 1884, from German Klinik in
this sense, itself from French clinique, via the notion of bedside medical education. The modern
sense is thus reversed from the classical, when the clinic came to the patient. General sense of
conference for group instruction in something is from 1919.


clinical (adj.)

1780, pertaining to hospital patients or hospital care, from clinic + -al (2). Meaning coldly
dispassionate (like a medical report) is recorded from 1928. Related: Clinically.


clinician (n.)

1844, from French clinicien, from Latin clinicus (see clinic).


clink (v.)

early 14c., echoic (compare Dutch klinken, Old High German klingan, German klingen). Related:
Clinked; clinking. The noun in the sound sense is from c.1400.


clink (n.2)

prison, 1770s, apparently originally (early 16c.) the Clynke on Clink Street in Southwark, on the
estate of the bishops of Winchester. To kiss the clink to be imprisoned is from 1580s, and the word
and the prison name might be cognate derivatives of the sound made by chains or metal locks (see
clink (v.)).


clink (n.1)

sharp, ringing sound made by collision of sonorous (especially metallic) bodies, c.1400, from clink
(v.).


clinker (n.)

mass of slag, 1769, from klincard (1640s), a type of paving brick made in Holland, from Dutch
klinkaerd, from klinken to ring (as it does when struck), of imitative origin. Also a clinch-nail;
hence clinker-built (1769). The meaning stupid mistake is first recorded 1950 in American English;
originally (1942) a wrong note in music.


clino-

before vowels clin-, word-forming element meaning slope, slant, incline, from Latinized comb. form
of Greek klinein to lean, slope (see lean (v.)).


clinometer (n.)

measurer of slopes and elevations, 1811, from clino- + -meter. Related: Clinometric.


Clio

muse of history, muse who sings of glorious actions, usually represented with a scroll and
manuscript case, from Latin Clio, from Greek Kleio, literally the proclaimer, from kleiein to tell
of, celebrate, make famous, from kleos rumor, report, news; good report, fame, glory, from PIE
*klew-yo-, from root *kleu- to hear (see listen). Related to the -kles in Damocles, etc.


clip (v.1)

to cut or sever with a sharp instrument, c.1200, from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse
klippa, Swedish klippa, Danish klippe clip, shear, cut) probably echoic. Related: Clipped; clipping.
Meaning to pronounce short is from 1520s. The verb has a long association with shady activities,
originally especially in reference to cutting or shaving metal from coins (c.1400), but later
extended to swindles from the sense to shear sheep, hence clip-joint place that overcharges
outrageously (1933, American English, a term from Prohibition). To clip (someone's) wings
figuratively (1590s) is from the method of preventing a captive bird from flying.


clip (v.2)

fasten, hold together by pressure, also (mostly archaic) to embrace, from Old English clyppan to
embrace, clasp; surround; prize, honor, cherish; related to Old Frisian kleppa to embrace, love, Old
High German klaftra, German klafter fathom (on notion of outstretched arms). Also compare Lithuanian
glebys armful, globiu to embrace, support. Meaning to fasten, bind is early 14c. Meaning to fasten
with clips is from 1902. Related: Clipped; clipping. Original sense of the verb is preserved in U.S.
football clipping penalty.


clip (n.1)

something for attaching or holding, mid-14c., probably from clip (v.2). Meaning receptacle
containing several cartridges for a repeating firearm is from 1901. Meaning piece of jewelry
fastened by a clip is from 1937. This is also the source of paper clip (1854). Old English had clypp
an embrace.


clip (n.2)

mid-15c., shears, from clip (v.1). Meaning act of clipping is from 1825, originally of sheep-
shearing, later of haircuts. Meaning rate of speed is 1867 (compare clipper). Meaning an extract
from a movie is from 1958.


clip-clop

sound as of a horse's hooves, 1884, imitative.


clip-on (adj.)

1909, from clip (v.2) + on.


clipboard (n.)

1904, from clip (n.1) + board (n.1). Portable board with a hinged clip at the top to hold papers.


clipper (n.)

late 14c., sheepshearer; early 15c., a barber; c.1300 as a surname; agent noun from Middle English
clippen shorten (see clip (v.1)). The type of fast sailing ship so called from 1823 (in Cooper's The
Pilot), probably from clip (v.1) in sense of to move or run rapidly, hence early 19c. sense person
or animal who looks capable of fast running. Perhaps originally simply fast ship, regardless of
type:    Well, you know, the Go-along-Gee was one o' your flash Irish cruisers -- the first o' your
fir-built frigates -- and a clipper she was! Give her a foot o' the sheet, and she'd go like a witch
--but somehow o'nother, she'd bag on a bowline to leeward. [Naval Sketch-Book, by An officer of
rank, London, 1826]    The early association of the ships was with Baltimore, Maryland. Perhaps
influenced by Middle Dutch klepper swift horse, echoic (Clipper appears as the name of an English
race horse in 1831). In late 18c., the word principally meant one who cuts off the edges of coins
for the precious metal.


clippers (n.)

shears-like cutting tool for hair, etc., 1876, agent noun from clip (v.1). Earlier they were
clipping shears (mid-15c.).


clipping (n.1)

early 13c., clasping, embracing, verbal noun from clip (v.2). As a U.S. football penalty (not in
OED), from 1920.   Clipping or Cutting Down from Behind. -- This is to be ruled under unnecessary
roughness, and penalized when it is practiced upon a man obviously out of the play. This clipping is
a tendency in the game that the committee is watching anxiously and with some fear. [Colliers, April
10, 1920]


clipping (n.2)

a cutting, early 14c., verbal noun from clip (v.1). Sense of a small piece cut off is from late 15c.
Meaning an article cut from a newspaper is from 1857.


clique (n.)

1711, a party of persons; a small set, especially one associating for exclusivity, from obsolete
French clique, originally (14c.) a sharp noise, also latch, bolt of a door, from Old French cliquer
click, clatter, crackle, clink, 13c., echoic. Apparently this word was at one time treated in French
as the equivalent of claque (q.v.) and partook of that word's theatrical sense.


cliquish (adj.)

1839, from clique + -ish. Related: Cliquishly; cliquishness.


clit (n.)

by 1969, slang shortening of clitoris.


clitellum (n.)

raised band around an earthworm, 1816, Modern Latin, from Latin clitellae a pack-saddle, diminutive
of *clitra litter, from PIE *klei-tro-, from root *klei- (see lean (v.)). Related: Clitellar.


clitoral (adj.)

1887, from stem of clitoris + -al (1). Related: Clitorally. Alternative form clitorial is attested
from 1879.


clitoridectomy (n.)

1866, from Greek klitorid- (see clitoris) + -ectomy. Originally in reference to a proposed cure for
hysteria.


clitoris (n.)

erectile organ of female mammals, 1610s, coined in Modern Latin from Late Greek kleitoris, a
diminutive, but the exact sense intended by the coiners is uncertain. Perhaps from Greek kleiein to
sheathe, also to shut, in reference to its being covered by the labia minora. The related Greek noun
form kleis has a second meaning of a key, a latch or hook (to close a door); see close (v.), and
compare slot (n.2).    Alternatively, perhaps related to Greek kleitys, a variant of klitys side of
a hill, itself related to klinein to slope, from the same root as climax (see lean (v.)), and with a
sense of little hill. Some ancient medical sources give a supposed Greek verb kleitoriazein to touch
or titillate lasciviously, to tickle (compare German slang der Kitzler clitoris, literally the
tickler), but the verb is likely from the anatomy in this case.    The anatomist Mateo Renaldo
Colombo (1516-1559), professor at Padua, claimed to have discovered it (De re anatomica, 1559, p.
243). He called it amor Veneris, vel dulcedo the love or sweetness of Venus. It had been known
earlier to women.


cloaca (n.)

1650s, euphemism for underground sewer, from Latin cloaca public sewer, drain, from cluere to
cleanse, from PIE root *kleue- to wash, clean (cognates: Greek klyzein to dash over, wash off, rinse
out, klysma liquid used in a washing; Lithuanian &#353;luoju to sweep; Old English hlutor, Gothic
hlutrs, Old High German hlutar, German lauter pure, clear). Use in biology, in reference to
eliminatory systems of lower animals, is from 1834. Related: Cloacal (1650s); cloacinal (1857).


cloak (n.)

late 13c., long, loose outer garment, from Old North French cloque (Old French cloche, cloke)
travelling cloak, from Medieval Latin clocca travelers' cape, literally a bell, so called from the
garment's bell-like shape (the word is thus a doublet of clock (n.1)). An article of everyday wear
in England through 16c., somewhat revived 19c. as a fashion garment. Cloak-and-dagger (adj.)
attested from 1848, said to be ultimately translating French de cape et d'&eacute;p&eacute;e,
suggestive of stealthy violence and intrigue.    Other cloak and dagger pieces, as Bouterwek tells
us the Spaniards call their intriguing comedies, might be tried advantageously in the night, ....
[Levana; or the Doctrine of Education, English translation, London, 1848]


cloak (v.)

c.1500, from cloak (n.). Figuratively from 1540s. Related: Cloaked; cloaking.


cloak-room (n.)

also cloakroom, 1852, from cloak (n.) + room (n.).


clobber (v.)

1941, British air force slang, probably related to bombing; possibly echoic. Related: Clobbered;
clobbering. In late 19c. British slang the word principally had to do with clothing, as in clobber
(n.) clothes, (v.) to dress smartly; clobber up to patch old clothes for reuse.


cloche (n.)

type of bell jar, 1882, from French cloche bell, bell glass (12c.), from Late Latin clocca bell (see
clock (n.1)). As a type of women's hat, recorded from 1907, so called from its shape.


clock (n.1)

late 14c., clokke, originally clock with bells, probably from Middle Dutch clocke (Dutch klok) a
clock, from Old North French cloque (Old French cloke, Modern French cloche), from Medieval Latin
(7c.) clocca bell, probably from Celtic (compare Old Irish clocc, Welsh cloch, Manx clagg a bell)
and spread by Irish missionaries (unless the Celtic words are from Latin); ultimately of imitative
origin.    Replaced Old English d&aelig;gm&aelig;l, from d&aelig;g day + m&aelig;l measure, mark
(see meal (n.1)). The Latin word was horologium; the Greeks used a water-clock (klepsydra, literally
water thief). Image of put (or set) the clock back return to an earlier state or system is from
1862. Round-the-clock (adj.) is from 1943, originally in reference to bomber air raids.


clock (v.)

to time by the clock, 1883, from clock (n.1). The slang sense of hit, sock is 1941, originally
Australian, probably from earlier slang clock (n.) face (1923). Related: Clocked; clocking.


clock (n.2)

ornament pattern on a stocking, 1520s, probably identical with clock (n.1) in its older sense and
meaning bell-shaped ornament.


clock-radio (n.)

1946, from clock (n.1) + radio (n.).


clock-watcher (n.)

employee habitually prompt in leaving, 1887, from clock (n.1) + agent noun from watch (v.). Related:
Clock-watching. Compare earlier tell-clock idler (c.1600).


clockwise (adv.)

also clock-wise, in the direction of the hands of a clock, 1879, from clock (n.1) + wise (n.).


clockwork (n.)

also clock-work, 1660s, mechanism of a clock, from clock (n.1) + work (n.). Figurative sense of
anything of unvarying regularity is recorded earlier (1620s).


clod (n.)

lump of earth or clay, Old English clod- (in clodhamer the fieldfare, a kind of thrush, literally
field-goer), from Proto-Germanic *kludda-, from PIE *gleu- (see clay).    Synonymous with collateral
clot until meaning differentiated 18c. Meaning person (mere lump of earth) is from 1590s; that of
blockhead is from c.1600 (compare clodpate, clodpoll, etc.). It also was a verb in Middle English,
meaning both to coagulate, form into clods and to break up clods after plowing.


cloddish (adj.)

1844, from clod (n.) + -ish. Related: Clodishly; clodishness.


clodhopper (n.)

1690s, slang, one who works on plowed land, a rustic, from clod (n.) + agent noun from hop (v.).
Compare in a similar sense clod-breaker, clod-crusher; in this word perhaps a play on grasshopper.
Sense extended by 1836 to the shoes worn by such workers.


clog (n.)

early 14c., clogge a lump of wood, origin unknown. Also used in Middle English of large pieces of
jewelry and large testicles. Compare Norwegian klugu knotty log of wood. Meaning anything that
impedes action is from 1520s. The sense of wooden-soled shoe is first recorded late 14c.; they were
used as overshoes until the introduction of rubbers c.1840. Originally all wood (hence the name),
later wooden soles with leather uppers for the front of the foot only. Later revived in fashion
(c.1970), primarily for women. Clog-dancing is attested from 1863.


clog (v.)

late 14c., hinder, originally by fastening a block of wood to something, from clog (n.). Meaning
choke up with extraneous matter is 17c. Related: Clogged; clogging.


cloison (n.)

a partition, a dividing band, 1690s, from French cloison, from Vulgar Latin *clausionem (nominative
*clausio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin claudere to close, shut (see clause).
Related: Cloisonnage.


cloisonne (adj.)

divided into compartments, 1863, from French cloisonn&eacute;, from cloison a partition (12c., in
Old French, enclosure), from Proven&ccedil;al clausio, from Vulgar Latin *clausio, noun of action
from past participle stem of claudere to close, shut (see clause).


cloister (n.)

early 13c., from Old French cloistre monastery, convent; enclosure (12c., Modern French
clo&icirc;tre), from Medieval Latin claustrum portion of monastery closed off to laity, from Latin
claustrum (usually in plural, claustra) place shut in, enclosure; bar, bolt, means of shutting in,
from past participle stem of claudere (see close (v.)).    The original purpose of cloisters was to
afford a place in which the monks could take exercise and recreation [Century Dictionary]. Spelling
in French influenced by cloison partition. Old English had clustor, clauster in the sense prison,
lock, barrier, directly from Latin, and compare, from the same source, Dutch klooster, German
Kloster, Polish klasztor.


cloister (v.)

c.1400 (implied in cloistered), from cloister (n.). Figurative use from c.1600. Related: Cloistered;
cloistering.


cloistral (adj.)

c.1600, from cloister + -al (1).


clomp (v.)

to walk as with clogs, 1829, probably a variant of clump (v.). Related: Clomped; clomping.


clone (n.)

1903, in botany, from Greek klon a twig, spray, related to klados sprout, young branch, offshoot of
a plant, possibly from PIE root *kel- (1) to strike, cut (see holt). Figurative use by 1978.


clone (v.)

1959, from clone (n.). Related: Cloned; cloning. Extension to genetic duplication of animals and
human beings is from 1970.


clonk (v.)

1930, imitative. Related: Clonked; clonking.


clonus (n.)

violent muscular spasms, 1817, from Modern Latin, from Greek klonos turmoil, any violent motion;
confusion, tumult, press of battle, from PIE *kel- to drive, set in motion. Related: Clonic;
clonicity.


Clootie (n.)

also Clutie, the devil, 1785, Scottish, literally hoofed, from cloot hoof, division of a hoof, from
Old Norse klo claw (see claw (n.)).


clop (v.)

1897, echoic of the sound of boots or hoofs on the ground. Related: Clopped; clopping.


Cloris

fem. proper name, from Chloris, Latin form of Greek Khloris, goddess of flowers (later identified
with Roman Flora), literally greenness, freshness, poetic fem. of khloros greenish-yellow, fresh,
related to khloe young green shoot (see Chloe).


close (v.)

c.1200, to shut, cover in, from Old French clos- (past participle stem of clore to shut, to cut off
from), 12c., from Latin clausus, past participle of claudere to shut, close; to block up, make
inaccessible; put an end to; shut in, enclose, confine (always -clusus, -cludere in compounds).
The Latin word might be from the possible PIE root *klau- hook, peg, crooked or forked branch (used
as a bar or bolt in primitive structures); cognates: Latin clavis key, clavus nail, claustrum bar,
bolt, barrier, claustra dam, wall, barricade, stronghold; Greek kleidos (genitive) bar, bolt, key,
klobos cage; Old Irish clo nail, Middle Irish clithar hedge, fence; Old Church Slavonic klju&#269;i
hook, key, klju&#269;iti shut; Lithuanian kliuti to catch, be caught on, kliaudziu check, hinder,
kliuvu clasp, hang; Old High German sliozan shut, German schlie&szlig;en to shut, Schl&uuml;ssel
key.    Also partly from Old English beclysan close in, shut up. Intransitive sense become shut is
from late 14c. Meaning draw near to is from 1520s. Intransitive meaning draw together, come together
is from 1550s, hence the idea in military verbal phrase close ranks (mid-17c.), later with
figurative extensions. Meaning bring to an end, finish is from c.1400; intransitive sense come to an
end is from 1826. Of stock prices, from 1860. Meaning bring together the parts of (a book, etc.) is
from 1560s. Related: Closed; closing.


close (adj.)

late 14c., strictly confined, also secret, from Old French clos confined; concealed, secret;
taciturn (12c.), from Latin clausus close, reserved, past participle adjective from claudere stop
up, fasten, shut (see close (v.)); main sense shifting to near (late 15c.) by way of closing the gap
between two things. Related: Closely.    Meaning narrowly confined, pent up is late 14c. Meaning
near in a figurative sense, of persons, from 1560s. Meaning full of attention to detail is from
1660s. Of contests, from 1855. Close call is from 1866, in a quotation in an anecdote from 1863,
possibly a term from the American Civil War; close shave in the figurative sense is 1820, American
English. Close range is from 1814. Close-minded is attested from 1818. Close-fisted penurious,
miserly is from c.1600.


close (n.)

late 14c., act of closing, conclusion, termination, from close (v.). Also in early use enclosure,
enclosed space (late 13c.), from Old French clos, noun use of past participle.


close (adv.)

tightly, with no opening or space between, from close (adj.).


close quarters

1753, originally nautical, also close-fights, bulkheads fore and aft for men to stand behind in
close engagements to fire on the enemy, it reflects the confusion of close (v.) and close (adj.);
now understood of proximity, but orig. 'closed' space on ship-board where last stand could be made
against boarders [Weekley]. Compare also closed-minded, a variant of close-minded attested from
1880s, with a sense of shut rather than tight.


close-up (n.)

1913, in photography, etc.; see close (adv.) + up (adv.).


closed (adj.)

c.1200, past participle adjective from close (v.). Closed circuit is attested from 1827; closed shop
in union sense from 1904; closed system first recorded 1896 in William James.


closely (adv.)

1550s, secretly, from close (adj.) + -ly (2). From 1560s as compactly, 1590s as so as to enclose;
1630s as nearly.


closeness (n.)

mid-15c., confined condition, from close (adj.) + -ness. Meaning stuffiness (of air) is from 1590s;
meaning nearness is from 1716.


closer (n.)

one who closes anything, 1610s, agent noun from close (v.).


closet (n.)

late 14c., from Old French closet small enclosure, private room, diminutive of clos enclosure, from
Latin clausum closed space, enclosure, confinement, from neuter past participle of claudere to shut
(see close (v.)). In Matt. vi:6 it renders Latin cubiculum bedchamber, bedroom, Greek tamieion
chamber, inner chamber, secret room; thus originally in English a private room for study or prayer.
Modern sense of small side-room for storage is first recorded 1610s.    The adjective is from 1680s,
private, secluded; meaning secret, unknown recorded from 1952, first of alcoholism, but by 1970s
used principally of homosexuality; the phrase come out of the closet admit something openly first
recorded 1963, and lent new meanings to the word out.


closet (v.)

shut up as in a closet (originally usually for purposes of concealment or private consultation),
1680s, from closet (v.). Related: Closeted; closeting.


closing (n.)

late 14c., act of closing; that which closes, verbal noun from close (v.).


closure (n.)

late 14c., a barrier, a fence, from Old French closure enclosure; that which encloses, fastening,
hedge, wall, fence, also closture barrier, division; enclosure, hedge, fence, wall (12c., Modern
French cl&ocirc;ture), from Late Latin clausura lock, fortress, a closing (source of Italian
chiusura), from past participle stem of Latin claudere to close (see close (v.)). Sense of act of
closing, bringing to a close is from early 15c. In legislation, especially closing or stopping of
debate. Sense of tendency to create ordered and satisfying wholes is 1924, from Gestalt psychology.


clot (n.)

Old English clott a round mass, lump, akin to Dutch kloot ball, Danish klods a block, lump, German
Klotz lump, block; probably related to cleat and clod.


clot (v.)

early 15c., from clot (n.). Of fluids from 1590s. Related: Clotted; clotting.


cloth (n.)

Old English cla&#254; a cloth, sail, cloth covering, woven or felted material to wrap around one,
hence, also, garment, from Proto-Germanic *kalithaz (cognates: Old Frisian klath cloth, Middle Dutch
cleet, Dutch kleed garment, dress, Middle High German kleit, German Kleid garment), of obscure
origin. As an adjective from 1590s. The cloth the clerical profession is from 17c. in reference to
characteristic dress.


clothe (v.)

Old English cla&#240;ian, from cla&#254; (see cloth). Related: Clothed, clothing. Other Old English
words for this were scrydan and gew&aelig;dian.


clothes (n.)

Old English cla&eth;as cloths, clothes, originally plural of cla&eth; cloth (see cloth), which, in
19c., after the sense of article of clothing had mostly faded from it, acquired a new plural form,
cloths, to distinguish it from this word.


clothes-horse (n.)

also clothes horse, upright wooden frame for hanging clothes to dry, 1788, from clothes + horse
(n.). Figurative sense of person whose sole function seems to be to show off clothes is 1850.


clothes-line (n.)

also clothesline, 1830, from clothes + line (n.). As a kind of high tackle in U.S. football (the
effect is similar to running into a taut clothesline) attested by 1970; as a verb in this sense by
1959.


clothes-pin (n.)

also clothespin, by 1834, American English, from clothes + pin (n.). Clothes-peg in the same sense
attested from 1812.


clothier (n.)

mid-14c., clother; late 15c., clothyer (late 13c. as a surname) Middle English agent noun from
cloth; also see -ier, which is unetymological in this word and probably acquired by bad influence.


Clothilde

fem. proper name, via French, from German Klothilde, literally famous in battle, from Old High
German *klod famous (related to Old English hlud; see loud (adj.)) + hild battle (see Hilda).


clothing (n.)

c.1200, action of dressing in clothes, verbal noun from clothe. From late 13c. as clothes
collectively; 1590s as an adjective.


Clotho

one of the three Fates, from Latin Clotho, from Greek Klotho, literally the spinner, from klothein
to spin. The three Fates together sometimes were called Klothes the spinners.


cloture (n.)

1871, the French word for closure, the action of closing, applied to debates in the French Assembly
(action of closing (debate) by will of a majority), then to the House of Commons and U.S. Congress,
from French cl&ocirc;ture, from Old French closture (see closure). It was especially used in English
by those opposed to the tactic.    In foreign countries the Cl&ocirc;ture has been used notoriously
to barricade up a majority against the pestilent criticism of a minority, and in this country every
whip and force is employed by the majority to re-assert its continued supremacy and to keep its
ranks intact whenever attacked. How this one-sided struggle to maintain solidarity can be construed
into good for all is inexplicable in the sense uttered. [The cl&ocirc;ture and the Recent Debate, a
Letter to Sir J. Lubbock, London, 1882]


cloud (n.)

Old English clud mass of rock, hill, related to clod. Metaphoric extension to raincloud, mass of
evaporated water in the sky is attested by c.1200 based on similarity of cumulus clouds and rock
masses. The usual Old English word for cloud was weolcan. In Middle English, skie also originally
meant cloud.    The four fundamental types of cloud classification (cirrus, cumulus, stratus,
nimbus) were proposed by British amateur meteorologist Luke Howard (1772-1864) in 1802.
Figuratively, as something that casts a shadow, from early 15c.; hence under a cloud (c.1500). In
the clouds removed from earthly things; obscure, fanciful, unreal is from 1640s. Cloud-compeller
translates (poetically) Greek nephelegereta, a Homeric epithet of Zeus.


cloud (v.)

early 15c., overspread with clouds, cover, darken, from cloud (n.). From 1510s as to render dim or
obscure; 1590s as to overspread with gloom. Intransitive sense of become cloudy is from 1560s.
Related: Clouded; clouding.


Cloud Cuckoo Land

Imaginary city built in air, translating Aristophanes' Nephelokokkygia in The Birds (414 B.C.E.).


cloud nine (n.)

by 1950, sometimes also cloud seven (1956, perhaps by confusion with seventh heaven), American
English, of uncertain origin or significance. Some connect the phrase with the 1895 International
Cloud-Atlas (Hildebrandsson, Riggenbach and Teisserenc de Bort), long the basic source for cloud
shapes, in which, of the ten cloud types, cloud No. 9, cumulonimbus, was the biggest, puffiest, most
comfortable-looking. Shipley suggests the sense in this and other expressions might be because, As
the largest one-figure integer, nine is sometimes used for emphasis. The phrase might appear in the
1935 aviation-based play Ceiling Zero by Frank Wilbur Wead.


cloudburst (n.)

also cloud-burst, 1817, American English, from cloud (n.) + burst (n.). Parallels German
Wolkenbruch.


cloudless (adj.)

1590s, from cloud (n.) + -less.


cloudlet (n.)

1788, from cloud (n.) + diminutive suffix -let.


cloudy (adj.)

Old English cludig rocky, hilly, full of cliffs; see cloud (n.). Meaning of the nature of clouds is
recorded from c.1300; meaning full of clouds is late 14c.; that of not clear is from 1580s.
Figurative sense of gloomy is late 14c. Related: Cloudiness; cloudily.


clough (n.)

ravine with a river, Old English cloh (in place names), of uncertain origin.


clout (n.)

Old English clut lump of something, also patch of cloth put over a hole to mend it, from Proto-
Germanic *klutaz (cognates: Old Norse klute kerchief, Danish klud rag, tatter, Frisian klut lump,
Dutch kluit clod, lump); perhaps related to clot (v.).    In later use a handkerchief, also a
woman's sanitary napkin. Sense of a blow is from c.1400 early 14c., from the verb. Sense of personal
influence is 1958, on the notion of punch, force.


clout (v.)

to beat, strike, early 14c., from clout (n.), perhaps on the notion of hitting someone with a lump
of something, or from the patch of cloth sense of that word (compare clout (v.) to patch, mend, mid-
14c.). Related: Clouted; clouting.


clove (n.1)

dried flowerbud of a certain tropical tree, used as a spice, late 15c., earlier clowes (14c.), from
Anglo-French clowes de gilofre (c.1200), Old French clou de girofle nail of gillyflower, so called
from its shape, from Latin clavus a nail (see slot (n.2)). For second element, see gillyflower. The
two cloves were much confused in Middle English. The clove pink is so called from the scent of the
flowers.


clove (n.2)

slice of garlic, Old English clufu clove (of garlic), bulb, tuber, from Proto-Germanic *klubo cleft,
thing cloven, from PIE *gleubh- to tear apart, cleave (see cleave (v.1)). Its Germanic cognates
mostly lurk in compounds that translate as clove-leek, such as Old Saxon clufloc, Old High German
chlobilouh. Dissimilation produced Dutch knoflook, German knoblauch.


cloven (adj.)

divided, split, Old English clofen, past participle adjective from cleave (v.1).


clover (n.)

Old English clafre, cl&aelig;fre clover, from Proto-Germanic *klaibron (cognates: Old Saxon kle,
Middle Low German klever, Middle Dutch claver, Dutch klaver, Old High German kleo, German Klee
clover), of uncertain origin.    Klein and Liberman write that it is probably from West Germanic
*klaiwaz- sticky pap (see clay), and Liberman adds, The sticky juice of clover was the base of the
most popular sort of honey. First reference in English to the suposed luck of a four-leaf clover is
from c.1500. To be in clover live luxuriously is 1710, clover being extremely delicious and
fattening to cattle [Johnson].


cloverleaf (n.)

1882, from clover + leaf (n.). Highway interchange sense attested by 1933.


Clovis

type of prehistoric stone spearpoints, 1943, from Clovis, New Mexico, U.S., near which place they
were found. The town is said to have been named for the Frankish king Clovis (Latinized from
Frankish Chlodovech, from Germanic masc. proper name *hluda-wigaz famous in battle, cognate with
Ludwig and Louis).


clowder

1811, variant of clutter.


clown (n.)

1560s, clowne, also cloyne, rustic, boor, peasant, origin uncertain. Perhaps from Scandinavian
dialect (compare Icelandic klunni clumsy, boorish fellow; Swedish kluns a hard knob; a clumsy
fellow, Danish klunt log, block), or akin to North Frisian kl&ouml;nne clumsy person. Or, less
likely, from Latin colonus colonist, farmer, though awareness of this word might have influenced the
sense development in English.    Meaning professional fool, professional or habitual jester is
c.1600. The pantomime clown represents a blend of the Shakes[pearean] rustic with one of the stock
types of the It. comedy [Weekley]. Meaning contemptible person is from 1920s. Fem. form clowness
attested from 1801.


clown (v.)

c.1600, to play the clown onstage, from clown (n.); colloquial sense of to behave inappropriately
(as in clown around, 1932) attested by 1928, perhaps from theatrical slang sense of play a (non-
comical) part farcically or comically (1891). Related: Clowned; clowning.


clownage (n.)

function or manners of a clown or jester, 1580s, from clown (n.) + -age.


clownery (n.)

1580s, from clown (n.) + -ery.


clownify (v.)

1610s, from clown (n.) + -ify. Related: Clownified; clownifying.


clowning (n.)

1861, verbal noun from clown (v.).


clownish (adj.)

1560s, rustic; 1580s, boorish, ungainly, awkward, from clown (n.) + -ish. Related: Clownishly;
clownishness.


cloy (v.)

weary by too much, fill to loathing, surfeit, 1520s, from Middle English cloyen hinder movement,
encumber (late 14c.), a shortening of accloyen (early 14c.), from Old French encloer to fasten with
a nail, grip, grasp, figuratively to hinder, check, stop, curb, from Late Latin inclavare drive a
nail into a horse's foot when shoeing, from Latin clavus a nail (see slot (n.2)).    Accloye is a
hurt that cometh of shooing, when a Smith driveth a nail in the quick, which make him to halt.
[Edward Topsell, The History of Four-footed Beasts, 1607]    The figurative meaning fill to a
satiety, overfill is attested for accloy from late 14c. Related: Cloyed; cloying.


cloying (adj.)

1640s, present participle adjective from cloy (v.). Related: Cloyingly; cloyingness.


cloze (n.)

1953, in psychological writing, evidently abstracted from the pronunciation of closure.


club (n.)

c.1200, thick stick used as a weapon, from Old Norse klubba cudgel or a similar Scandinavian source
(compare Swedish klubba, Danish klubbe), assimilated from Proto-Germanic *klumbon, related to clump
(n.). Old English words for this were sagol, cycgel. Specific sense of bat used in games is from
mid-15c.    The club suit in the deck of cards (1560s) bears the correct name (Spanish basto,
Italian bastone), but the pattern adopted on English cards is the French trefoil. Compare Danish
kl&#337;ver, Dutch klaver a club at cards, literally a clover.    The social club (1660s) apparently
evolved from this word from the verbal sense gather in a club-like mass (1620s), then, as a noun,
association of people (1640s).    We now use the word clubbe for a sodality in a tavern. [John
Aubrey, 1659]   <hr />   Admission to membership of clubs is commonly by ballot. Clubs are now an
important feature of social life in all large cities, many of them occupying large buildings
containing reading-rooms, libraries, restaurants, etc. [Century Dictionary, 1902]   <hr />   I got a
good mind to join a club and beat you over the head with it. [Rufus T. Firefly] Club sandwich
recorded by 1899, apparently as a type of sandwich served in clubs; club soda is 1877, originally a
proprietary name.


club (v.)

to hit with a club, 1590s, from club (v.). Meaning gather in a club-like mass is from 1620s.
Related: Clubbed; clubbing.   <b>CLUB</b>, verb (military). -- In manoeuvring troops, so to blunder
the word of command that the soldiers get into a position from which they cannot extricate
themselves by ordinary tactics. [Farmer &amp; Henley]


club-fist (n.)

1570s, a large fist, hence, a brutal fellow, from club (n.) + fist (n.).


club-foot (n.)

also clubfoot, deformed foot, 1530s, from club (n.) + foot (n.).


club-house (n.)

also clubhouse, place of meeting and refreshment always open to those who sre members of the club,
1818, from club (n.) in the associative sense + house (n.). Clubhouse lawyer is baseball slang by
1940s.


clubbed (adj.)

late 14c., shaped like a club, from club (n.). Specifically of defects of the foot by c.1500;
meaning formed into a club is from 1620s.


clubby (adj.)

of a social disposition, 1859, from club (n.) in the associative sense + -y (2). Related: Clubbily;
clubbiness.


cluck (v.)

Old English cloccian originally echoic. Compare Turkish culuk, one of the words for turkey; Greek
klozein, Latin glocire, German glucken. Related: Clucked; clucking.


cluck (n.)

1703, sound made by a hen, from cluck (v.). Slang meaning stupid person (turkeys are famously
foolish) is from 1927.


clue (n.)

1590s, spelling variant of clew a ball of thread or yarn, in this sense with reference to the one
Theseus used as a guide out of the Labyrinth. The purely figurative sense of that which points the
way is from 1620s. As something which a bewildered person does not have, by 1948.


clue (v.)

to inform someone of the important facts, usually with in, 1934, from clue (n.). Related: Clued;
cluing. Earlier in now-obsolete sense of follow or track by clues (1660s). In nautical use, to haul
up (a sail) by means of the clue-lines, from clue (n.) in the wound ball of yarn sense.


clueless (adj.)

1862, trackless, from clue (n.) + -less. Meaning ignorant, uninformed is from 1943, said to be RAF
slang from 1930s. Student slang use by 1985 is perhaps an independent extension along the same line.
Related: Cluelessly; cluelessness.


clump (n.)

1580s, lump; cluster of trees, from Middle English clompe a lump (c.1300), from Dutch klomp lump,
mass, or Middle Low German klumpe clog, wooden shoe. Old English had clympre lump, mass of metal.


clump (v.2)

walk heavily, 1660s, imitative. Related: Clumped; clumping.


clump (v.1)

to heap or gather in clumps (transitive), 1824, from clump (n.). Related: Clumped; clumping.
Intransitive sense to form a clump or clumps is recorded from 1896.


clumperton (n.)

clown, clodhopper, 1530s, from clump (n.), probably on model of simpleton.


clumpy (adj.)

1820, from clump (n.) + -y (2). Also noted 1881 in an Isle of Wight glossary as a noun meaning a
stupid fellow. Related: Clumpily; clumpiness. Compare also clumperton clown, clodhopper (1530s).


clumsy (adj.)

1590s, acting as if benumbed, alteration of Middle English clumsid numb with cold (14c.), past
participle of clumsen to benumb, stiffen or paralyze with cold or fear, from a Scandinavian source
akin to Old Norse klumsa make speechless, palsy; prevent from speaking, intensive of kluma to make
motionless. For insertion of -s-, see flimsy.    Not in general use until 18c., with senses
manifesting awkwardness; so made as to be unwieldy. Related: Clumsily; clumsiness. Compare Swedish
dialectal klummsen benumbed with cold, Norwegian klumsad (past participle) speechless, palsied by a
spasm or by fear or witchery; German verklammen grow stiff or numb with cold. Also compare clumse
(n.) a stupid fellow.


clung

Old English clungen, past tense and past participle of cling.


clunk (v.)

1796, to make the sound of a cork being pulled from a bottle; imitative. This was the main sense
through most of 19c. Meaning to hit, strike is attested from 1940s. Related: Clunked; clunking.


clunker (n.)

anything inferior, 1940s, agent noun from clunk (v.), probably in imitation of the sounds made by
old machinery. Specific sense of old car was in use by 1951 (clunk in the sense old worn-out machine
is from 1940s).


clunky (adj.)

blocky, ungraceful, by 1968 (when it was the name of a style of women's shoe), from clunk + -y (2).
Related: Clunkily; clunkiness.


cluster (n.)

Old English clyster cluster, probably from the same root as clot (n.). Of stars, from 1727. Cluster-
bomb attested from 1967.


cluster (v.)

late 14c. (transitive), from cluster (n.). Intransitive sense from 1540s. Related: Clustered;
clustering.


clusterfuck (n.)

bungled or confused undertaking, 1969, U.S. military slang, from cluster + fuck, probably in the
bungle sense. Earlier the compound meant orgy (1966).


clutch (v.)

Old English clyccan bring together, bend (the fingers), clench, from PIE *klukja- (cognates: Swedish
klyka clamp, fork; related to cling). Meaning to grasp is early 14c.; that of to seize with the
claws or clutches is from late 14c. Sense of hold tightly and close is from c.1600. Influenced in
meaning by Middle English cloke a claw. Related: Clutched; clutching.


clutch (n.3)

a brood, a nest in reference to chickens, eggs, 1721, from clekken to hatch (c.1400). Said by OED to
be apparently a southern England dialect word. Compare batch/bake. Probably from a Scandinavian
source (such as Old Norse klekja to hatch), perhaps of imitative origin (compare cluck (v.)).


clutch (n.1)

a claw, grip, grasp, c.1300, from cloche claw, from cloke (c.1200), related to clucchen, clicchen
(see clutch (v.)). Meaning grasping hand (1520s) led to that of tight grasp (1784). Related:
Clutches.


clutch (n.2)

movable mechanical part for transmitting motion, 1814, from clutch (v.), with the seizing sense
extended to device for bringing working parts together. Originally of mill-works, first used of
motor vehicles 1899. Meaning moment when heroics are required is attested from 1920s.


clutter (v.)

1550s, to collect in heaps, variant of clotern to form clots, to heap on (c.1400); related to clot
(n.). Sense of to litter is first recorded 1660s. Related: Cluttered; cluttering.


clutter (n.)

1570s, things lying in heaps or confusion, from clutter (v.); the litter sense is from 1660s.


Clyde

masc. proper name, from the family name, from the region of the Clyde River in Scotland (see
Clydesdale). Most popular in U.S. for boys c.1890-1910, falling off rapidly thereafter, hence
probably its use in 1940s teenager slang for a square, one not versed in popular music or culture.


Clydesdale

breed of heavy draught horses, 1786, so called because they were bred in the valley of the Clyde in
Scotland. The river name is perhaps literally cleansing, from a Celtic root akin to Latin cloaca
(see cloaca).


clyster (n.)

from French clyst&egrave;re (Old French clistre, 13c.) or directly from Latin clyster, from Greek
klyster, from klyzein to wash out (see cloaca).


Clytaemnestra

also Clytemnestra, wife and murderess of Agamemnon, from Greek Klytaimnestra, from klytos
celebrated, heard of (see loud) + mnester wooer, suitor, literally willing to mind, mindful of,
related to mnasthai to remember, from PIE root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).


cn-

consonant group used in Old English (the Clark Hall dictionary has 82 entries under cn-) but in
Middle English all lost or turned to kn-. Also common in Greek, and retained in the spelling of some
English words from Greek but not now admitted in speech, the n- only being sounded.


Cnidaria (n.)

phylum of stinging invertebrates, from Modern Latin cnida, from Greek knide nettle, from stem of
knizein to scratch scrape. Related: Cnidarian.


co-

in Latin, the form of com- in compounds with stems beginning in vowels and h- and gn- (see com-).
Taken in English from 17c. as a living prefix meaning together, mutually, in common, and used
promiscuously with native words and Latin-derived words not beginning with vowels, sometimes even
with words already having it (such as co-conspiritor).


co-ed (n.)

also coed, 1886, American English, (first in Louisa Mae Alcott's Jo's Boys); short for co-
educational system; 1889 as an adjective, short for coeducational; 1893 as a noun meaning girl or
woman student at a co-educational institution.


co-op (n.)

1861, abbreviation of cooperative. The hyphen is needed to avoid confusion with coop (n.).


co-opt (v.)

1650s, to select (someone) for a group or club by a vote of members, from Latin cooptare to elect,
to choose as a colleague or member of one's tribe, from com- together (see com-) + optare choose
(see option (n.)). For some reason this defied the usual pattern of Latin-to-English adaptation,
which should have yielded *cooptate. Sense of take over is first recorded c.1953. Related: Co-opted;
co-opting.


co-ordinate

see coordinate.


co-star

also costar, 1919 as a verb; 1926 as a noun, from co- + star (v.).


co.

abbreviation of company, attested by 1670s.


coach (n.)

1550s, large kind of carriage, from Middle French coche (16c.), from German kotsche, from Hungarian
kocsi (szek&eacute;r) (carriage) of Kocs, village where it was first made. In Hungary, the thing and
the name for it date from 15c., and forms are found in most European languages (Spanish and
Portuguese coche, Italian cocchino, Dutch koets). Applied to railway cars 1866, American English.
Sense of economy or tourist class is from 1949. Meaning instructor/trainer is c.1830 Oxford
University slang for a tutor who carries a student through an exam; athletic sense is 1861.


coach (v.)

1610s, to convey in a coach, from coach (n.). Meaning to prepare (someone) for an exam is from 1849.
Related: Coached; coaching.


coachman (n.)

1570s, from coach (n.) + man (n.).


coagulant (n.)

1770, from Latin coagulantem (nominative coagulans), present participle of coagulare (see
coagulate).


coagulate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin coagulatus, past participle of coagulare to cause to curdle, from cogere to
curdle, collect (see cogent). Earlier coagule, c.1400, from Middle French coaguler. Related:
Coagulated; coagulating.


coagulation (n.)

c.1400, from Latin coagulationem (nominative coagulatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of coagulare (see coagulate).


coal (n.)

Old English col charcoal, live coal, from Proto-Germanic *kula(n) (cognates: Old Frisian kole,
Middle Dutch cole, Dutch kool, Old High German chol, German Kohle, Old Norse kol), from PIE root
*g(e)u-lo- live coal (cognates: Irish gual coal).    Meaning mineral consisting of fossilized carbon
is from mid-13c. First mentioned (370 B.C.E.) by Theophrastus in his treatise On Stones under the
name lithos anthrakos (see anthrax). Traditionally good luck, coal was given as a New Year's gift in
England, said to guarantee a warm hearth for the coming year. The phrase drag (or rake) over the
coals was a reference to the treatment meted out to heretics by Christians. To carry coals do dirty
work, also submit to insult is from 1520s. To carry coals to Newcastle (c.1600) Anglicizes Greek
glauk eis Athenas owls to Athens.


coalesce (v.)

1540s, from Latin coalescere to unite, grow together, become one in growth, from com- together (see
co-) + alescere to grow up (see adolescent). Related: Coalesced; coalescing; coalescence;
coalescent.


coalition (n.)

1610s, the growing together of parts, from French coalition (1540s), from Late Latin coalitus
fellowship, originally past participle of Latin coalescere (see coalesce). First used in a political
sense 1715.


coaming (n.)

1610s, nautical, of unknown origin.


coarse (adj.)

early 15c., cors ordinary (modern spelling is from late 16c.), probably adjectival use of noun cours
(see course (n.)), originally referring to rough cloth for ordinary wear. Developed a sense of rude
c.1500 and obscene by 1711. Perhaps related, via metathesis, to French gros, which had a similar
sense development. Related: Coarsely; coarseness.


coarsen (v.)

1805, from coarse + -en (2). Related: Coarsened; coarsening.


coast (n.)

margin of the land, early 14c.; earlier rib as a part of the body (early 12c.), from Old French
coste rib, side, flank; slope, incline; later coast, shore (12c., Modern French c&ocirc;te), from
Latin costa a rib, perhaps related to a root word for bone (compare Old Church Slavonic kosti bone,
also see osseous).    Latin costa developed a secondary sense in Medieval Latin of the shore, via
notion of the side of the land, as well as side of a hill, and this passed into Romanic (Italian
costa coast, side, Spanish cuesta slope, costa coast), but only in the Germanic languages that
borrowed it is it fully specialized in this sense (Dutch kust, Swedish kust, German K&uuml;ste,
Danish kyst). French also used this word for hillside, slope, which led to verb meaning sled
downhill, first attested 1775 in American English. Expression the coast is clear (16c.) is an image
of landing on a shore unguarded by enemies.


coast (v.)

late 14c., to skirt, to go around the sides, to go along the border of something (as a ship does the
coastline), from Anglo-French costien, from the French source of coast (n.). The meaning sled
downhill, first attested 1775 in American English, is a separate borrowing. Of motor vehicles, to
move without thrust from the engine, by 1925; figurative use, of persons, not to exert oneself, by
1934. Related: Coasted; coasting.


coastal (adj.)

1883, from coast (n.) + -al (1). The proper Latin form costal is used only of ribs.


coaster (n.)

1570s, one who sails along coasts, agent noun from coast (v.) in its original sense to go around the
sides or border of something. Applied to vessels for such sailing from 1680s. Tabletop drink stand
(c.1887), originally round tray for a decanter, so called from a resemblance to a sled, or because
it coasted around the perimeter of the table to each guest in turn after dinner.


coastline (n.)

1860, from coast (n.) + line (n.).


coat (n.)

early 14c., outer garment, from Old French cote coat, robe, tunic, overgarment, from Frankish *kotta
coarse cloth or some other Germanic source (compare Old Saxon kot woolen mantle, Old High German
chozza cloak of coarse wool, German Kotze a coarse coat), of unknown origin. Transferred to animal's
natural covering late 14c. Extended 1660s to a layer of any substance covering any surface. Spanish,
Portuguese cota, Italian cotta are Germanic loan-words.


coat (v.)

late 14c., to provide with a coat, from coat (n.). Meaning to cover with a substance is from 1753.
Related: Coated; coating.


coat of arms (n.)

mid-14c., originally a tunic embroidered with heraldic arms (worn over armor, etc); see from coat
(n.) + arm (n.2) and compare Old French cote a armer. Sense transferred to the heraldic arms
themselves by 1560s. Hence turncoat, one who put his coat on inside-out to hide the badge of his
loyalty.


coati (n.)

Brazilian raccoon, 1670s, from Tupi (Brazil), from cua belt, cincture + tim nose.


coating (n.)

layer over a surface, 1768, verbal noun from coat (v.).


coattails (n.)

also coat-tail, c.1600, from coat (n.) + tail (n.). In 17c., to do something on one's own coattail
meant at one's own expense. Meaning power of one person, especially in politics, is from 1848 (in a
Congressional speech by Abraham Lincoln, in reference to Andrew Jackson); expression riding
(someone's) coattails into political office is from 1949.


coauthor (n.)

also co-author, from co- + author. From 1948 as a verb. Related: Coauthored; coauthoring.


coax (v.)

1580s, originally in slang phrase to make a coax of, from earlier noun coax, cox, cokes a fool,
ninny, simpleton (1560s); modern spelling is 1706. Origin obscure, perhaps related to cock (n.1).
Related: Coaxed; coaxing.


coaxial (adj.)

having a common axis, 1904, as a term in mathematics; coaxial cable is 1934. See co- + axial.


cob (n.)

a word or set of identical words with a wide range of meanings, many seeming to derive from notions
of heap, lump, rounded object, also head and its metaphoric extensions. With cognates in other
Germanic languages; of uncertain origin and development. The N.E.D. recognizes eight nouns cob, with
numerous sub-groups. Like other monosyllables common in the dial[ect] its hist[ory] is inextricable
[Weekley]. In the 2nd print edition, the number stands at 11. Some senses are probably from Old
English copp top, head, others probably from Old Norse kubbi or Low German, all perhaps from a
Proto-Germanic base *kubb- something rounded. Among the earliest attested English senses are
headman, chief, and male swan, both early 15c., but the surname Cobb (1066) suggests Old English
used a form of the word as a nickname for big, leading man. The corn shoot sense is attested by
1680s.


cobalt (n.)

1680s, from German kobold household goblin, Harz Mountains silver miners' term for rock laced with
arsenic and sulfur (so called because it degraded the ore and made the miners ill), from Middle High
German kobe hut, shed + *holt goblin, from hold gracious, friendly, a euphemistic word for a
troublesome being. The metallic element was extracted from this rock. It was known to Paracelsus,
but discovery is usually credited to the Swede George Brandt (1733), who gave it the name. Extended
to a blue color 1835 (a mineral containing it had been used as a blue coloring for glass since
16c.). Compare nickel.


cobble (n.)

paving stone; worn, rounded stone, c.1600, earlier cobblestone, probably a diminutive of cob in some
sense. The verb in this sense is from 1690s. Related: Cobbled; cobbling.


cobble (v.)

to mend clumsily, late 15c., perhaps a back-formation from cobbler (n.1), or from cob, via a notion
of lumps. Related: Cobbled; cobbling.


cobbler (n.1)

late 13c., cobelere one who mends shoes, of uncertain origin. It and cobble (v.) evidently go
together etymologically [OED], but the historical record presents some difficulties. The cobbler
should stick to his last (ne sutor ultra crepidam) is from the anecdote of Greek painter Apelles.
On one occasion a cobbler noticed a fault in the painting of a shoe, and remarking upon it to a
person standing by, passed on. As soon as the man was out of sight Apelles came from his hiding-
place, examined the painting, found that the cobbler's criticism was just, and at once corrected the
error. ... The cobbler came by again and soon discovered that the fault he had pointed out had been
remedied; and, emboldened by the success of his criticism, began to express his opinion pretty
freely about the painting of the leg! This was too much for the patience of the artist, who rushed
from his hiding place and told the cobbler to stick to his shoes. [William Edward Winks, Lives of
Illustrious Shoemakers, London, 1883]    [The quote is variously reported: Pliny (Natural History
XXXV.x.36) has ne supra crepidam judicaret, while Valerius Maximus (VIII.xiii.3) gives supra plantam
ascendere vetuit.]


cobbler (n.2)

deep-dish fruit pie, 1859, American English, perhaps related to 14c. cobeler wooden bowl.


cobblestone (n.)

late 14c., kobilstane; see cobble (n.) + stone (n.).


COBOL (n.)

1960, U.S. Defense Department acronym, from Common Business-Oriented Language.


cobra (n.)

1802, short for cobra capello (1670s), from Portuguese cobra de capello serpent (of the hood), from
Latin colubra a snake, female serpent (source of French couleuvre adder), of uncertain origin. So
called for the expandable loose skin about its neck. The word came to English via Portuguese
colonies in India, where the native name is nag (see naga).


cobweb (n.)

early 14c., coppewebbe; the first element is Old English -coppe, in atorcoppe spider, literally
poison-head (see attercop). Spelling with -b- is from 16c., perhaps from cob. Cob as a stand-alone
for a spider was an old word nearly dead even in dialects when J.R.R. Tolkien used it in The Hobbit
(1937).


coca (n.)

South American plant, 1570s, from Spanish coca, from Quechua cuca, which is perhaps ultimately from
Aymara, a native language of Bolivia.


Coca-Cola

invented 1886 in Atlanta, Georgia, U.S., by druggist Dr. John S. Pemberton. So called because
original ingredients were derived from coca leaves and cola nuts. It contained minute amounts of
cocaine until 1909.  Drink the brain tonic and intellectual soda fountain beverage Coca-Cola.
[Atlanta Evening Journal, June 30, 1887] Coca-colanization, also Coca-colonization coined 1950
during an attempt to ban the beverage in France, led by the communist party and the wine-growers.
France's Communist press bristled with warnings against US Coca-Colonization. Coke salesmen were
described as agents of the OSS and the U.S. State Department. Tremble, roared Vienna's Communist Der
Abend, Coca-Cola is on the march! [Time Magazine, 1950]   Coca-colonialism attested by 1956.


cocaine (n.)

1874, from Modern Latin cocaine (1856), coined by Albert Niemann of Gottingen University from coca
(from Quechua cuca) + chemical suffix -ine (2). A medical coinage, the drug was used 1870s as a
local anaesthetic for eye surgery, etc. It is interesting to note that although cocaine is
pronounced as a disyllabic word it is trisyllabic in its formation. [Flood]


cocci (n.)

spherical-shaped bacteria, plural of Latin coccus, from Greek kokkos berry (see cocco-).


coccidiosis (n.)

Modern Latin, from Greek *kokkidion, diminutive of kokkis, diminutive of kokkos berry + -osis.


cocco-

word-forming element meaning berry, seed, or something shaped like them, from Latinized form of
Greek kokkos a grain, a seed, especially kermes-berry, gall of the kermes oak (actually an insect),
which yields scarlet dye, of unknown origin, perhaps from a non-Greek source.


coccus (n.)

1763 as an insect genus (including the cochineal bug); 1883 as a type of bacterium, from Greek
kokkos grain, seed, berry (see cocco-).


coccyx (n.)

1610s, from Latin coccyx, from Greek kokkyx cuckoo (from kokku, like the bird's English name echoic
of its cry), so called by ancient Greek physician Galen because the bone in humans supposedly
resembles a cuckoo's beak.


Cochin-china

old name of a region and French colony in southern Vietnam, from French Cochin-China, from
Portuguese corruption of Ko-chen, of uncertain meaning; the China added to distinguish it from the
town and port of Cochin in southwest India, the name of which is Tamil, perhaps from koncham little,
in reference to the river there.


cochineal (n.)

1580s, from French cochenille (16c.), probably from Spanish cochinilla, from a diminutive of Latin
coccinus (adj.) scarlet-colored, from coccum berry (actually an insect) yielding scarlet dye (see
kermes). But some sources identify the Spanish source word as cochinilla wood louse (a diminutive
form related to French cochon pig).    The insect (Coccus Cacti) lives on the prickly pear cactus in
Mexico and Central America and is a relative of the kermes and has similar, but more intense, dying
qualities. Aztecs and other Mexican Indians used it as a dyestuff. It first is mentioned in Europe
in 1523 in Spanish correspondence to Hern&aacute;n Cort&eacute;s in Mexico. Specimens were brought
to Spain in the 1520s, and cloth merchants in Antwerp were buying cochineal in insect and powdered
form in Spain by the 1540s. It soon superseded the use of kermes as a tinetorial substance. Other
species of coccus are useless for dye and considered mere pests, such as the common mealy bug.


Cochise

(c.1815-1874), leader of the Chiricahua Apache people; his name is Athabaskan, perhaps from chizh
firewood (compare ko-chizh his firewood), or from ch'izhi the rough one.


cochlea (n.)

spiral cavity of the inner ear, 1680s, from Latin cochlea snail shell, from Greek kokhlias snail,
screw, etc., from kokhlos spiral shell, perhaps related to konkhos mussel, conch.


cock (n.1)

male chicken, Old English cocc male bird, Old French coc (12c., Modern French coq), Old Norse kokkr,
all of echoic origin. Old English cocc was a nickname for one who strutted like a cock, thus a
common term in the Middle Ages for a pert boy, used of scullions, apprentices, servants, etc.    A
common personal name till c.1500, it was affixed to Christian names as a pet diminutive, as in
Wilcox, Hitchcock, etc. Slang sense of penis is attested since 1610s (but compare pillicock penis,
from c.1300); cock-teaser is from 1891. A cocker spaniel (1823) was trained to start woodcocks.
Cock-and-bull is first recorded 1620s, perhaps an allusion to Aesop's fables, with their incredible
talking animals, or to a particular story, now forgotten. French has parallel expression
coq-&agrave;-l'&acirc;ne.


cock (n.2)

in various mechanical senses, such as cock of a faucet (early 15c.) is of uncertain connection with
cock (n.1), but German has hahn cock in many of the same senses. The cock of an old matchlock
firearm is 1560s, hence half-cocked with the cock lifted to the first catch, at which position the
trigger does not act (by 1809).


cock (v.)

mid-12c., cocken, to fight; 1570s, to swagger; seeming contradictory modern senses of to stand up
(as in cock one's ear), c.1600, and to bend (1898) are from the two cock nouns. The first is
probably in reference to the posture of the bird's head or tail, the second to the firearm position.
To cock ones hat carries the notion of defiant boastfulness.


cock-a-doodle-doo

1570s, imitative; compare French cocorico, German kikeriki, Latin cucurire, Russian kikareku,
Vietnamese cuc-cu, Arabic ko-ko, etc.


cockade (n.)

1709, earlier cockard (1650s), from French cocarde (16c.), fem. of cocard (Old French cocart)
foolishly proud, cocky, as a noun, idiot, fool; an allusive extension from coq (see cock (n.1)).


Cockaigne (n.)

c.1300, from Old French Cocaigne (12c.) lubberland, imaginary country, abode of luxury and idleness.
Of obscure origin, speculation centers on words related to cook (v.) and cake (compare Middle Dutch
kokenje, a child's honey-sweetened treat; also compare Big Rock Candy Mountain). The German
equivalent is Schlaraffenland.


cockamamie (adj.)

American English slang word attested by 1946, popularized c.1960, but said to be New York City
children's slang from mid-1920s; perhaps an alteration of decalcomania (see decal).


cockatoo (n.)

1610s, from Dutch kaketoe, from Malay kakatua, possibly echoic, or from kakak elder brother or
sister + tua old. Also cockatiel (1880), from Dutch diminutive kaketielje (1850), which is perhaps
influenced by Portuguese. Spelling influenced by cock (n.1).


cockatrice (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cocatriz, altered (by influence of coq) from Late Latin *calcatrix, from
Latin calcare to tread (from calx (1) heel), as translation of Greek ikhneumon, literally tracker,
tracer.    In classical writings, an Egyptian animal of some sort, the mortal enemy of the
crocodile, which it tracks down and kills. This vague sense became hopelessly confused in the
Christian West, and in England the word ended up applied to the equivalent of the basilisk. A
serpent hatched from a cock's egg, it was fabled to kill by its glance and could be slain only by
tricking it into seeing its own reflection. Belief in them persisted even among the educated because
the word was used in the KJV several times to translate a Hebrew word for serpent. In heraldry, a
beast half cock, half serpent.


cockchaffer (n.)

from cock (n.1), in reference to its size, + chaffer.


cockerel (n.)

young cock, mid-15c. (late 12c. as a surname), apparently a diminutive of cock (n.1). Despite the
form, no evidence that it is from French.


cockeyed (adj.)

1821, squint-eyed, perhaps from cock (v.) in some sense + eye (n.). Figurative sense of absurd,
askew, crazy is from 1896; that of drunk is attested from 1926.


cockle (n.1)

type of mollusk, early 14c., from Old French coquille (13c.) scallop, scallop shell; mother of
pearl; a kind of hat, altered (by influence of coque shell) from Vulgar Latin *conchilia, from Latin
conchylium mussel, shellfish, from Greek konkhylion little shellfish, from konkhe mussel, conch.
Phrase cockles of the heart (1660s) is perhaps from similar shape, or from Latin corculum,
diminutive of cor heart.


cockle (n.2)

flowering weed that grows in wheat fields, Old English coccel darnel, used in Middle English to
translate the Bible word now usually given as tares (see tare (n.1)). It is in no other Germanic
language and may be from a diminutive of Latin coccus grain, berry.


cockney (n.)

c.1600, usually said to be from rare Middle English cokenei, cokeney spoiled child, milksop (late
14c.), originally cokene-ey cock's egg (mid-14c.). Most likely disentangling of the etymology is to
start from Old English cocena cock's egg -- genitive plural of coc cock + &aelig;g egg -- medieval
term for runt of a clutch, extended derisively c.1520s to town dweller, gradually narrowing
thereafter to residents of a particular neighborhood in the East End of London. Liberman, however,
disagrees:    [I]n all likelihood, not the etymon of ME cokeney 'milksop, simpleton; effeminate man;
Londoner,' which is rather a reshaping of [Old French] acoquin&eacute; 'spoiled' (participle).
However, this derivation poses some phonetic problems that have not been resolved.    The accent so
called from 1890, but the speech peculiarities were noted from 17c. As an adjective in this sense,
from 1630s.


cockpit (n.)

1580s, a pit for fighting cocks, from cock (n.1) + pit (n.1). Used in nautical sense (1706) for
midshipmen's compartment below decks; transferred to airplanes (1914) and to cars (1930s).


cockroach (n.)

1620s, folk etymology (as if from cock + roach) of Spanish cucaracha chafer, beetle, from cuca kind
of caterpillar. Folk etymology also holds that the first element is from caca excrement.A certaine
India Bug, called by the Spaniards a Cacarootch, the which creeping into Chests they eat and defile
with their ill-sented dung [Capt. John Smith, Virginia, 1624].


cockscomb (n.)

c.1400, comb or crest of a cock, from possessive of cock (n.1) + comb (n.). Meaning cap worn by a
professional fool is from 1560s; hence conceited fool (1560s), a sense passing into the derivative
coxcomb. As a plant name, from 1570s.


cocksucker (n.)

1890s, one who does fellatio (especially a male homosexual); 1920s as contemptible person, American
English, from cock (n.1) in phallic sense + sucker (n.). Used curiously for aggressively obnoxious
men; the ancients would have recoiled at this failure to appreciate the difference between passive
and active roles; Catullus, writing of his boss, employs the useful Latin insult irrumator, which
means someone who forces others to give him oral sex, hence one who treats people with contempt.


cocksure (adj.)

1520s, certain, from cock (n.1) + sure (adj.). Probably as assured as a cock. The word was
originally perfectly dignified, and habitually used in the most solemn connexions [OED].


cocktail (n.)

first attested 1806; H.L. Mencken lists seven versions of its origin, perhaps the most durable
traces it to French coquetier egg-cup (15c.; in English cocktay). In New Orleans, c.1795, Antoine
Am&eacute;d&eacute;e Peychaud, an apothecary (and inventor of Peychaud bitters) held Masonic social
gatherings at his pharmacy, where he mixed brandy toddies with his own bitters and served them in an
egg-cup. On this theory, the drink took the name of the cup. Used from 1920s of any mix of
substances (fruit, Molotov). Cocktail party first attested 1928.


cocky (adj.)

arrogantly pert, 1768; originally lecherous (1540s); from cock (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Cockiness.


coco (n.)

palm tree, mid-16c., from Spanish and Portuguese coco grinning face, on resemblance of the three
holes at the base of the shell to a human face. The earlier word for it was the Latinized form
cocus, which sometimes was anglicized as cocos.


cocoa (n.)

powder from cacao seeds, 1707, corruption (by influence of coco) of cacao. The printing of Johnson's
dictionary ran together the entries for coco and cocoa, fostering a confusion that never has been
undone.


coconut (n.)

1610s, from coco + nut. Meaning the head is slang from 1834.


cocoon (n.)

1690s, from Middle French coucon (16c., Modern French cocon), from coque clam shell, egg shell, nut
shell (7c.), from Old French coque shell, from Latin coccum berry, from Greek kokkos berry, seed
(see cocco-). The sense of one's interior comfort place is from 1986. Also see -oon.


cocoon (v.)

1986, to stay inside and be inactive, from coccoon (n.).    A lady with an enchanting name, Faith
Popcorn, has identified a menacing new American behavior that she gives the sweet name of
'cocooning.' It threatens the nation's pursuit of happiness, sometimes called the economy. [George
Will, April 1987]    Related: Cocooned; cocooning.


cocotte (n.)

type of cooking vessel, 1907, from French cocotte saucepan (19c.), a diminutive from cocasse,
ultimately from Latin cucama. Sense of prostitute, 1867, is from French cocotte, originally a
child's name for little hen (18c.), hence sweetie, darling.


cod (n.)

large sea fish, mid-14c. (late 13c. in a surname, Thomas cotfich), of unknown origin; despite
similarity of form it has no conclusive connection to the widespread Germanic word for bag
(represented by Old English codd, preserved in codpiece). Cod-liver oil known since at least 1610s,
was recommended medicinally since 1783, but not popular as a remedy until after 1825.


coda (n.)

concluding passage in a musical composition, 1753, from Latin cauda tail of an animal.


coddle (v.)

c.1600, boil gently, probably from caudle warm drink for invalids (c.1300), from Anglo-French caudel
(c.1300), ultimately from Latin calidium warm drink, warm wine and water, neuter of calidus hot,
from calere be warm (see calorie). Verb meaning treat tenderly first recorded 1815 (in Jane Austen's
Emma). Related: Coddled; coddling.


code (n.)

c.1300, systematic compilation of laws, from Old French code system of laws, law-book (13c.), from
Latin codex, earlier caudex book, book of laws, literally tree trunk, hence, book made up of wooden
tablets covered with wax for writing. Meaning cipher (the sense in secret code) is from 1808.


code (v.)

1815, from code (n.). Specifically in the computer sense from 1947. Related: Coded; coding.


codec (n.)

by 1970, an abbreviation from compressor-decompressor or coder-decoder, on model of modem.


codefendant (n.)

also co-defendant, 1640s, from co- + defendant.


codeine (n.)

alkaloid present in opium, 1838, from French cod&eacute;ine, coined, with chemical suffix -ine (2),
from Greek kodeia poppy head, related to kooz prison, literally hollow place; kodon bell, mouth of a
trumpet; koilos hollow, from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell). Originally codeina;
modern form is from 1881.


codependent (adj.)

also co-dependent, by 1905, in various senses, from co- + dependent. Modern psycological sense is
attested from c.1983. Related: Codependence, codependency.


codex (n.)

manuscript volume (especially an ancient one), 1845, from Latin codex (see code (n.)).


codger (n.)

1756, probably a variant of cadger beggar (see cadge (v.)), which is of unknown origin.


codicil (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French codicille, from Latin codicillus a short writing, a small writing
tablet, diminutive of codex (genitive codicis), see code (n.).


codify (v.)

c.1800, from code (n.) + -fy. Related: codified; codifying; codification.


codominant (adj.)

also co-dominant, 1926, from co- + dominant.


codon (n.)

1962, from code (n.) + -on.


codpiece (n.)

mid-15c., a bagged appendage to the front of the breeches; often conspicuous [OED], from Old English
codd a bag, pouch, husk, in Middle English, testicles (cognate with Old Norse koddi pillow, scrotum)
+ piece (n.).


codswallop (n.)

said to be from 19c. (but first attested 1963), perhaps from wallop, British slang for beer, and cod
in one of its various senses, perhaps testicles.


coe (n.)

hut built over a mine shaft, 1650s, from some source akin to Dutch kouw, German kaue in the same
sense, from West Germanic *kauja-, an early borrowing of Latin cavea hollow, from cavus a hollow
(see cave (n.)).


coeducational (adj.)

also co-educational, 1881, from co-education (1852), from co- + education.


coefficient (n.)

also co-efficient, c.1600, from co- + efficient. Probably influenced by Modern Latin coefficiens,
which was used in mathematics in 16c., introduced by French mathematician Fran&ccedil;ois
Vi&egrave;te (1540-1603). As an adjective from 1660s.


coelacanth (n.)

1857, from Modern Latin Coelacanthus (genus name, 1839, Agassiz), from Greek koilos hollow (from PIE
root *kel- (2); see cell) + akantha spine (see acrid). So called from the hollow fin rays supporting
the tail. Known only as a fossil, the most recent one from 70 million years ago, until discovered
living in the sea off the east coast of South Africa Dec. 22, 1938. The specimen was described by
Marjorie Courtney-Latimer, who wrote about it to S.African ichthyologist J.L.B. Smith.    I stared
and stared, at first in puzzlement. I did not know any fish of our own, or indeed of any seas like
that; it looked more like a lizard. And then a bomb seemed to burst in my brain, and beyond that
sketch and the paper of the letter, I was looking at a series of fishy creatures that flashed up as
on a screen, fishes no longer here, fishes that had lived in dim past ages gone, and of which only
fragmentary remains in rock are known. [J.L.B. Smith, Old Fourlegs: The Story of the Coelacanth,
1956]


coeliac (adj.)

1660s, from Latin coeliacus, from Greek koiliakos pertaining to the bowels, also pain in the bowels,
from koilia bowels, abdominal cavity, intestines, tripe from koilos hollow, from PIE root *keue- to
swell; vault, hole (see cumulus).


coelomate (n.)

1883, from Coelomata (1877), from Modern Latin neuter plural of coelomatus, from Greek koilomat-
hollow, cavity, from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).


coeno-

word-forming element meaning common, Latinized from Greek koinos common, public, shared, general,
ordinary, from PIE *kom beside, near, by, with (see com-).


coequal (adj.)

late 14c.; see co- + equal.


coerce (v.)

mid-15c., cohercen, from Middle French cohercer, from Latin coercere to control, restrain, shut up
together, from com- together (see co-) + arcere to enclose, confine, contain, ward off, from PIE
*ark- to hold, contain, guard (see arcane). Related: Coerced; coercing. No record of the word
between late 15c. and mid-17c.; its reappearance 1650s is perhaps a back-formation from coercion.


coercion (n.)

early 15c., from Old French cohercion (Modern French coercion), from Medieval Latin coercionem, from
Latin coerctionem, earlier coercitionem, noun of action from past participle stem of coercere (see
coerce).


coercive (adj.)

c.1600, from coerce + -ive. Form coercitive (attested from 1630s) is more true to Latin.


coetaneous (adj.)

having the same age, c.1600, from Late Latin coaetanus one of the same age, from com- with, together
with (see co-) + aetat- age (see age (n.)) + adjectival suffix -aneus.


coeval (adj.)

having the same age, formed in English early 17c. from Late Latin coaevus, from Latin com- equal
(see co-) + aevum an age (see eon). As a noun from c.1600.


coevolution (n.)

also co-evolution, 1965, from co- + evolution; supposedly introduced by Paul Ehrlich and Peter Raven
in a study of the relationship between caterpillars and plants.


coexist (v.)

1670s, from co- + exist. Of political/economic systems (especially with reference to communism and
the West) from 1931. Related: Coexisted; coexisting.


coexistence (n.)

also co-existence, mid-15c., joint existence; see co- + existence. As peaceful relations between
states of different ideologies, 1954, a Cold War term.


coextensive (adj.)

1771, from co- + extensive.


coffee (n.)

c.1600, from Italian caffe, from Turkish kahveh, from Arabic qahwah coffee, said originally to have
meant wine, but perhaps rather from Kaffa region of Ethiopia, a home of the plant (coffee in Kaffa
is called buno, which was borrowed into Arabic as bunn raw coffee). Much initial diversity of
spelling, including chaoua.    Yemen was the first great coffee exporter and to protect its trade
decreed that no living plant could leave the country. In 16c., a Muslim pilgrim brought some coffee
beans from Yemen and raised them in India. Appeared in Europe (from Arabia) c.1515-1519. Introduced
to England by 1650, and by 1675 the country had more than 3,000 coffee houses. Coffee plantations
established in Brazil 1727. Meaning a light meal at which coffee is served is from 1774. Coffee
break attested from 1952, at first often in glossy magazine advertisements by the Pan-American
Coffee Bureau. Coffee pot from 1705.    Did you drink a cup of coffee on company time this morning?
Chances are that you did--for the midmorning coffee break is rapidly becoming a standard fixture in
American offices and factories. [The Kiplinger Magazine, March 1952]


coffer (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French cofre a chest (12c., Modern French coffre), from Latin cophinus basket
(see coffin).


coffin (n.)

early 14c., chest or box for valuables, from Old French cofin sarcophagus, earlier basket, coffer
(12c., Modern French coffin), from Latin cophinus basket, hamper (source of Italian cafano, Spanish
cuebano basket), from Greek kophinos a basket, of uncertain origin.    Funeral sense in English is
1520s; before that it was the literal Latin one and had also a meaning of pie crust (late 14c.).
Meaning vehicle regarded as unsafe is from 1830s. Coffin nail cigarette is slang from 1880; nail in
(one's) coffin thing that contributes to one's death is from 1792.


cog (n.)

c.1300, cog wheel; late 14c., tooth on a wheel, probably a borrowing from a Scandinavian language
(compare Norwegian kugg cog) and cognate with Middle High German kugel ball.


cogency (n.)

1680s, from cogent + -cy.


cogenial (adj.)

1774, variant of congenial.


cogent (adj.)

1650s, from French cogent necessary, urgent (14c.), from Latin cogentem (nominative cogens), present
participle of cogere to curdle; to compel; to collect, literally to drive together, from com-
together (see co-) + agere to drive (see act (n.)).


cogitate (v.)

late 16c., from Latin cogitatus, past participle of cogitare to think (see cogitation). Related:
Cogitated; cogitating.


cogitation (n.)

c.1200, thought, idea, notion, from Old French cogitacion thought, consideration, reflection, from
Latin cogitationem (nominative cogitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of cogitare to
think, reflect, consider, turn over in the mind, apparently from co-agitare, from com- together (see
co-) + agitare, here in a sense of to turn over in the mind, literally to put in constant motion,
drive, impel, frequentative of agere to move, drive (see agitation).


cogitative (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French cogitatif (14c.), from Medieval Latin cogitativus, from Latin cogitare
(see cogitation).


cognac (n.)

1590s, Coniacke, wine produced in Cognac, the region in western France. The sense of brandy is 1755,
shortened from 17c. cognac brandy, which was distilled from cognac wine. The place name is from
Medieval Latin Comniacum, from the personal name Cominius and the Gallo-Roman suffix -acum.


cognate (adj.)

1640s, from Latin cognatus of common descent, from com- together (see co-) + gnatus, past participle
of gnasci, older form of nasci to be born (see genus). Words that are cognates are cousins, not
siblings. As a noun, from 1754.


cognisance (n.)

alternative spelling of cognizance (q.v.); also see -ize.


cognisant (adj.)

alternative spelling of cognizant (q.v.); also see -ize.


cognition (n.)

mid-15c., ability to comprehend, from Latin cognitionem (nominative cognitio) a getting to know,
acquaintance, knowledge, noun of action from past participle stem of cognoscere (see cognizance).


cognitive (adv.)

1580s, from Latin cognit-, past participle stem of cognoscere (see cognizance) + -ive. Taken over by
psychologists and sociologists after c.1940. Related: Cognitively.


cognitive dissonance (n.)

1957, developed and apparently coined by U.S. social psychologist Leon Festinger (1919-1989).


cognizable (adj.)

1670s, capable of being known, also liable to be tried in a given court or jurisdiction, from stem
of cognizance + -able.


cognizance (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French conysance recognition, later, knowledge, from Old French conoissance
acquaintance, recognition; knowledge, wisdom (Modern French connaissance), from past participle of
conoistre to know, from Latin cognoscere to get to know, recognize, from com- together (see co-) +
gnoscere to know (see notice (n.)). The -g- was restored in English spelling 15c. and has gradually
affected the pronunciation, which was always con-. The old pronunciation lingered longest in legal
use.


cognizant (adj.)

1820, back-formation from cognizance.


cognize (v.)

1650s, back-formation from cognizance. Related: Cognized; cognizing.


cognomen (n.)

1809, from Latin com- with (see co-) + (g)nomen name (see name (n.)). Third or family name of a
Roman citizen (Caius Julius C&aelig;sar).


cognoscence (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin cognoscere to know (see cognizance).


cognoscente (n.)

connoisseur, 1778, from Italian cognoscente, Latinized from conoscente connoisseur, literally
knowing man, from Latin cognoscentum (nominative cognoscens), present participle of cognoscere to
know (see cognizance).


cognoscenti (n.)

plural of cognoscente (q.v.).


cohabit (v.)

euphemism since 1530s to describe a couple living together without benefit of marriage; back-
formation from cohabitation. Related: Cohabited; cohabiting.


cohabitate (v.)

1630s, from Late Latin cohabitatus, past participle of cohabitare (see cohabitation). Related:
Cohabitated; cohabitating.


cohabitation (n.)

mid-15c., action or state of living together (especially as husband and wife), from Middle French
cohabitation (Old French cohabitacion cohabitation, sexual intercourse), from Late Latin
cohabitationem (nominative cohabitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of cohabitare to
dwell together, from co- with, together (see co-) + habitare to live, dwell (see habitat).


Cohen

Jewish surname indicating priestly descent, from Hebrew kohen priest, from base of kihen he acted as
priest, related to Arabic kahana he divined, prophesied.


cohere (v.)

1590s, from Latin cohaerere to cleave together, in transferred use, be coherent or consistent, from
com- together (see co-) + haerere to stick (see hesitation). Related: Cohered; cohering.


coherence (n.)

late 16c., from Middle French coh&eacute;rence (16c.), from Latin cohaerentia, noun of state from
cohaerentem (see coherent). Related: Coherency.


coherent (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French coh&eacute;rent (16c.), from Latin cohaerentem (nominative cohaerens),
present participle of cohaerere cohere, from com- together (see co-)  + haerere to stick (see
hesitation).


cohesion (n.)

1670s, from French coh&eacute;sion, from Latin cohaesionem (nominative cohaesio) a sticking
together, noun of action from past participle stem of cohaerere to stick together (see cohere).


cohesive (adj.)

c.1730 (implied in cohesiveness), from Latin cohaes-, past participle stem of cohaerere (see cohere)
+ -ive. Related: Cohesively.


cohort (n.)

early 15c., company of soldiers, from Middle French cohorte (14c.) and directly from Latin cohortem
(nominative cohors) enclosure, meaning extended to infantry company in Roman army (a tenth part of a
legion) through notion of enclosed group, retinue, from com- with (see co-) + root akin to hortus
garden, from PIE *ghr-ti-, from root *gher- (1) to grasp, enclose (see yard (n.1)). Sense of
accomplice is first recorded 1952, American English, from meaning group united in common cause
(1719).


coif (n.)

late 13c., close-fitting cap, from Old French coife skull-cap, cap worn under a helmet, headgear
(12c., Modern French coiffe), from Late Latin coifa a cap, hood (source of Italian cuffia, Spanish
cofia, escofia), of West Germanic origin (compare Old High German kupphia, Middle High German kupfe
cap).


coif (v.)

mid-15c., to cover with a cap, from Middle French coiffer, from Old French coife (see coif (n.));
sense of to arrange the hair is attested in English from 1835. Related: Coifed; coifing.


coiffeur (n.)

1847, from French coiffeur hairdresser, from coiffer to dress hair, from Old French coife,
originally, inner part of the helmet (see coif (n.)). A woman hairdresser would be properly a
coiffeuse.


coiffure (n.)

style or fashion of wearing the hair, 1630s, from French coiffure, from coiffer (see coiffeur).


coign (n.)

archaic spelling of quoin (q.v.), surviving only in Shakespeare's coign of vantage (Macbeth I.vi.),
popularized by Sir Walter Scott, properly a projecting corner (for observation).


coil (v.)

to wind, 1610s, from Middle French coillir to gather, pick, from Latin colligere to gather together
(see collect). Meaning specialized perhaps in nautical usage. Related: Coiled; coiling.


coil (n.)

1620s, from coil (v.). Related: Coils.


coin (n.)

c.1300, a wedge, from Old French coing (12c.) a wedge; stamp; piece of money; corner, angle, from
Latin cuneus a wedge. The die for stamping metal was wedge-shaped, and the English word came to mean
thing stamped, a piece of money by late 14c. (a sense that already had developed in French). Compare
quoin, which split off from this word 16c. Modern French coin is corner, angle, nook. Coins were
first struck in western Asia Minor in 7c. B.C.E.; Greek tradition and Herodotus credit the Lydians
with being first to make and use coins of silver and gold.


coin (v.)

to coin money, mid-14c., from coin (n.). Related: Coined; coining. To coin a phrase is late 16c. A
Middle English word for minter was coin-smiter.


coinage (n.)

late 14c., currency, money, from Old French coignage, from coignier to coin (see coin (n.)). Meaning
act or proces of coining money is from early 15c.; sense deliberate formation of a new word is from
1690s, from a general sense of something invented (c.1600).


coincide (v.)

1715, from French coincider (14c.), from Medieval Latin coincidere (in astrological use), literally
to fall upon together, from Latin com- together (see co-) + incidere to fall upon (in- upon + cadere
to fall; see case (n.1)). Related: Coincided; coinciding.


coincidence (n.)

c.1600, exact correspondence, from French coincidence, from coincider (see coincide). Meaning a
concurrence of events with no apparent connection is from 1680s.


coincident (adj.)

late 16c., from French coincident, from coincider (see coincide).


coincidental (adj.)

c.1800, from coincident + -al (1).


coincidentally (adv.)

1837, from coincidental + -ly (2).


coincidently

1620s, from coincident + -ly (2).


Cointreau (n.)

orange-flavored liqueur, named for founders Adolphe and Edouard-Jean Cointreau, brothers from
Angers, France, who set up Cointreau Distillery in 1849. The orange liqueur dates from 1875.


coir (n.)

prepared coconut fiber, 1580s, from Malayalam kayar cord, from kayaru to be twisted.


coit (n.)

coition, 1670s, from Latin coitus going together, also coition, from coire to go together (see
coitus).


coition (n.)

1540s, going together, coming together, from Late Latin coitionem (nominative coitio), noun of
action from coitus, past participle of coire to go together, come together (see coitus). Meaning
sexual copulation is attested in English from 1610s.


coitus (n.)

copulation, 1713, scientific Latin, from Latin coitus a meeting together; sexual union, past
participle of coire, from com- together (see co-) + ire come, go, (see ion). In Middle English as
coite (early 15c.). Used in English in general senses of meeting, uniting, and also of magnetic
force, planetary conjunction, etc., before sexual sense came to predominate.


coitus interruptus (n.)

1900, first attested in Havelock Ellis.


cojones (n.)

courage, literally balls, 1932, from Spanish cojon testicle, from Latin coleus, culleus (source of
Italian coglione), literally a leather sack, related to Greek koleos sheath, scabbard (see cell). In
English, first attested in Hemingway.


coke (n.2)

shortened form of cocaine, 1908, American English.


coke (n.1)

residue of fuel, 1690s, northern English dialect, perhaps a variant of Middle English colke core,
charcoal (c.1400), itself possibly related to -colc, an Old English word for pit, which perhaps
would give it a sense of what is left in the pit after a fire.


Coke

soft drink, 1909, shortening of brand name Coca-Cola.


col-

form of Latin com- before stems beginning in -l- (see com-).


cola (n.)

1795, genus of trees native to west Africa and introduced in New World tropics, Latinized form of a
West African name of the tree (compare Temne kola, Mandingo kolo). Meaning carbonated soft drink is
1920, short for Coca-Cola, Pepsi-Cola.


colander (n.)

mid-14c., coloundour, probably altered from Medieval Latin colatorium strainer (with parasitic -n-)
from Latin colatus, past participle of colare to strain, from colum sieve, strainer, wicker fishing
net, of uncertain origin. Cognate with French couloir, Spanish colador, Italian colatojo.


cold (adj.)

Old English cald (Anglian), ceald (West Saxon) cold, cool (adj.), coldness, from Proto-Germanic
*kaldaz (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon kald, Old High German and German kalt, Old Norse kaldr,
Gothic kalds cold), possibly a past participle adjective of *kal-/*kol-, from PIE root *gel-/*gol-
cold (cognates: Latin gelare to freeze, gelu frost, glacies ice).    Meaning not strong (in
reference to scent) is 1590s, from hunting. Cold front in weather is from 1921. Cold-call in the
sales pitch sense first recorded 1972. Japanese has two words for cold: samui for coldness in the
atmosphere or environment; tsumetai for things which are cold to touch, and also in the figurative
sense, with reference to personalities, behaviors, etc.


cold (n.)

c.1300, coldness, from cold (adj.). Sense in common cold is 1530s, from symptoms resembling those of
exposure to cold; compare earlier senses indisposition caused by exposure to cold (early 14c.);
discomfort caused by cold (c.1300).


cold feet (n.)

1893, American English; the presumed Italian original (avegh minga frecc i pee) is a Lombard proverb
meaning to have no money, but some of the earliest English usages refer to gamblers, so a connection
is possible.


cold shoulder (n.)

1816, in the figurative sense of icy reception, first in Sir Walter Scott, probably originally a
literal figure, but commonly used with a punning reference to cold shoulder of mutton, considered a
poor man's dish and thus, perhaps, something one would set out for an unwanted guest with deliberate
intention to convey displeasure.    How often have we admired the poor knight, who, to avoid the
snares of bribery and dependence, was found making a second dinner from a cold shoulder of mutton,
above the most affluent courtier, who had sold himself to others for a splendid pension! [No
Fiction, 1820]


cold turkey

without preparation, 1910; narrower sense of withdrawal from an addictive substance (originally
heroin) first recorded 1921. Cold turkey is a food that requires little preparation, so to quit like
cold turkey is to do so suddenly and without preparation. Compare cold shoulder.


cold war (n.)

used in print October 1945 by George Orwell; popularized in U.S. c.1947 by Bernard Baruch.    More
than any other time in history, mankind faces a crossroads. One path leads to despair and utter
hopelessness. The other, to total extinction. Let us pray we have the wisdom to choose correctly.
[Woody Allen, My Speech to the Graduates, 1979]


cold-blooded (adj.)

also cold blooded; 1590s, of persons, without emotion, unfeeling; of actions, from 1828. The phrase
refers to the old notion that blood temperature rose with excitement. In the literal sense, of
reptiles, etc., from c.1600. From cold (adj.) + blood (n.). Related: Cold-bloodedly; cold-
bloodedness.


cold-hearted (adj.)

c.1600, from cold (adj.) + hearted. Originally in Shakespeare. Old English had cealdheort (adj.)
cruel.


cole (n.)

cabbage, late Old English cawel, perhaps via Old Norse kal, from Latin caulis stem, stalk, which in
Vulgar Latin replaced brassica as the usual word for cabbage (source also of Italian cavolo, Spanish
col, Old French chol, French chou; also borrowed elsewhere in Germanic, for example Swedish kal,
Danish kaal, German kohl, Dutch kool).


colectomy (n.)

1882, from colon (n.2) + -ectomy.


coleoptera (n.)

1763, from Modern Latin, from Greek koleopteros, literally sheath-wing, used by Aristotle to
describe beetles, from koleos sheath (see cell) + pteron wing (see pterodactyl). Related:
Coleopterous.


coleslaw (n.)

also cole-slaw, cole slaw, 1794, American English, partial translation of Dutch koolsla, from kool
cabbage (see cole) + sla salad (see slaw). Commonly cold slaw in English until 1860s, when Middle
English cole cabbage was revived.


colic (n.)

disease characterized by severe abdominal pain, early 15c., from Late Latin colicus pertaining to
colic, from Greek kolikos, belonging to the kolon lower intestine (see colon (n.2)). The word was
used in English late 14c. as an adjective, affecting the colon. Related: Colicky (1742).


coliform (adj.)

1850s, resembling a sieve, from Latin colum strainer; meaning resembling a bacillus of the coli
group is from 1906, from coli + form.


Colin

masc. proper name, from French Colin, a diminutive of Col, itself a diminutive of Nicolas. A common
shepherd's name in pastoral verse.


coliseum (n.)

music hall, c.1710, Modern Latin variant of Latin colosseum, amphitheater of Vespasian at Rome (see
Colosseum).


colitis (n.)

1860, from comb. form of colon (n.2) + -itis.


collaborate (v.)

1871, back-formation from collaborator. Given a bad sense in World War II. Related: Collaborated;
collaborating.


collaboration (n.)

1860, from French collaboration, noun of action from Latin collaborare (see collaborate). In a bad
sense, tratorious cooperation with an occupying enemy, it is recorded from 1940; earliest references
are to the Vichy Government of France.


collaborator (n.)

1802, from French collaborateur, from Latin collaboratus, past participle of collaborare work with,
from com- with (see com-) + labore to work (see labor (v.)).


collage (n.)

1919, from French collage a pasting, from Old French coller to glue, from Greek kolla glue. Earliest
reference is in Wyndham Lewis.


collagen (n.)

structural protein of connective tissue, 1843, from French collag&egrave;ne, from Greek kolla glue +
-gen giving birth to (see -gen).


collapsable (adj.)

1843, from collapse (v.) + -able.


collapse (v.)

1732, from Latin collapsus, past participle of collabi fall together, from com- together (see com-)
+ labi to fall, slip (see lapse (n.)). The adjective collapsed is attested from c.1600, from Latin
collapsus, and perhaps this suggested a verb. Related: Collapsing.


collapse (n.)

1801, from collapse (v.).


collapsible (adj.)

1875, alternative spelling of collapsable.


collar (n.)

c.1300, neck armor, gorget, from Old French coler neck, collar (12c., Modern French collier), from
Latin collare necklace, band or chain for the neck, from collum the neck, from PIE *kwol-o- neck
(cognates: Old Norse and Middle Dutch hals neck), literally that on which the head turns, from root
*kwel- (1) move round, turn about (see cycle (n.)). Late 14c. as border at the neck of a garment.


collar (v.)

1550s, to grab (someone) by the collar or neck, from collar (n.). Meaning to capture is attested
from 1610s. Related: Collared; collaring. As a past participle adjective, collared wearing a collar
is from late 14c.


collarbone (n.)

c.1500, from collar (n.) + bone (n.).


collard (n.)

1755, American English, corruption of colewort (Middle English) cabbage, later especially kale,
greens; first element related to the cole in coleslaw; for second element, see wort.


collate (v.)

1610s, from Latin collatus, irregular past participle of conferre to bring together, from com-
together (see com-) + latus (see oblate (n.)), serving as past participle of ferre to bear (see
infer). Related: Collated; collating.


collateral (adj.)

late 14c., accompanying, also descended from the same stock, from Old French collateral (13c.), from
Medieval Latin collateralis accompanying, literally side by side, from Latin com- together (see
com-) + lateralis of the side, from latus a side (see oblate (n.)). Literal sense of parallel, along
the side of attested in English from mid-15c.  Related: Collaterally.


collateral (n.)

16c., colleague, associate, from collateral (adj.). Meaning thing given as security is from 1832,
American English, from phrase collateral security (1720).


collateral damage (n.)

by 1873 in legal cases; in modern use, generally a euphemism for the coincidental killing of
civilians, U.S. coinage, c.1968, at first generally with reference to nuclear weapons.


collation (n.)

late 14c., act of bringing together, from Old French collation (13c.) collation, comparison,
discussion (also a light supper), from Latin collationem (nominative collatio), noun of action from
collatus, irregular past participle of conferre to bring together (see collate). The word has had
many meanings over the centuries. As the title of a popular 5c. religious work by John Cassian,
Collation was sometimes translated into Old English as &THORN;urhtogenes.


colleague (n.)

1530s, from Middle French coll&egrave;gue (16c.), from Latin collega partner in office, from com-
with (see com-) + leg-, stem of legare to choose (see legate). So, one chosen to work with another,
or one chosen at the same time as another.


collect (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), from Old French collecter to collect (late 14c.), from Latin collectus,
past participle of colligere gather together, from com- together (see com-) + legere to gather (see
lecture (n.)). The intransitive sense is attested from 1794. Related: Collected; collecting. As an
adjective meaning paid by the recipient it is attested from 1893, originally with reference to
telegrams.


collectible (adj.)

also collectable, 1650s, that may be collected, from collect + -ible. Meaning sought-after by
collectors of relics, souveniers, etc. is recorded from 1888.


collectibles (n.)

also collectables, things worth collecting, 1952, American English, from collectible.


collection (n.)

late 14c., action of collecting, from Old French collection (14c.), from Latin collectionem
(nominative collectio) a gathering together, noun of action from colligere (see collect). Especially
of money gathered for religious or charitable purposes from 1530s. Meaning a group of objects viewed
as a whole is from c.1400.


collective (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French collectif, from Latin collectivus, from collectus (see collect). As a
noun, short for collective farm (in the USSR) it dates from 1925. collective farm first attested
1919 in translations of Lenin. Collective bargaining coined 1891 by Beatrice Webb; defined in U.S.
1935 by the Wagner Act. Collective noun is recorded from 1510s; collective security first attested
1934 in speech by Winston Churchill.


collectivism (n.)

1880, in socialist theory, from collective + -ism. Related: Collectivist (1882 as both noun and
adjective); collectivization (1890).


collector (n.)

late 14c., gatherer of taxes, etc., from Anglo-French collectour collector (of money or taxes; Old
French collector, Modern French collecteur), from Late Latin collector, agent noun from colligere
(see collect). Fem. form collectress is attested from 1825.


Colleen

fem. proper name, from Irish cailin girl, diminutive of caile girl, woman.


college (n.)

body of scholars and students within a university, late 14c., from Old French college collegiate
body (14c.), from Latin collegium community, society, guild, literally association of collegae (see
colleague). At first meaning any corporate group, the sense of academic institution attested from
1560s became the principal sense in 19c. via use at Oxford and Cambridge.


collegial (adj.)

mid-14c., from Middle French coll&eacute;gial, from Latin collegialis, from collegium (see college).
Related: Collegially; collegiality.


collegian (n.)

late 14c., from college + -ian.


collegiate (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin collegiatus member of a college or corporation, in Medieval Latin, of or
pertaining to a college, from collegium (see college).


collet (n.)

1520s, from French collet little collar, diminutive of col neck, from Latin collum (see collar
(n.)).


collide (v.)

1620s, from Latin collidere strike together, from com- together (see com-) + laedere to strike,
injure by striking, of unknown origin. For Latin vowel change, see acquisition. Related: Collided;
colliding.


collie (n.)

1650s, possibly from dialectal coaly coal-black, the color of some breeds (compare colley, sheep
with black face and legs, attested from 1793; Middle English colfox, coal-fox, a variety of fox with
tail and both ears tipped with black; and colley, Somerset dialectal name for blackbird). Or from
Scandinavian proper name Colle, which is known to have been applied to dogs in Middle English (Ran
Colle our dogge, and Talbot, and Gerlond [Chaucer]); or perhaps a convergence of the two.


collier (n.)

late 13c., collere charcoal maker and seller, agent noun from Middle English col (see coal). They
were notorious for cheating their customers. Sense of ship for hauling coal is from 1620s.


colliery (n.)

1630s, coal mine, see collier + -y (1).


colligate (v.)

1540s, from Latin colligatus, past participle of colligare to bind together, from com- together (see
com-) + ligare to bind (see ligament). As a concept in logic, from 1837; in linguistics, from 1953.
Related: Colligation.


collin (n.)

1882, from Greek kolla glue + chemical suffix -in (2).


collinear (adj.)

1863, from col- + linear.


Collins (n.)

iced gin drink served in a tall glass (called a Collins glass), 1940, American English; earlier Tom
Collins (by 1878), of uncertain origin. Popular in early 1940s; bartending purists at the time
denied it could be based on anything but gin. The surname (12c.) is from a masc. proper name, a
diminutive of Col, itself a pet form of Nicholas.


collision (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French collision (15c.), from Latin collisionem (nominative collisio) a
dashing together, noun of action from collidere (see collide).


collocate (v.)

1510s, from Latin collocatus, past participle of collocare to arrange, place together, set in a
place, from com- together (see com-) + locare to place (see locate). Meaning conference,
consultation is mid-14c. Related: collocated; collocating.


collocation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin collocationem (nominative collocatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of collocare (see collocate). Linguistics sense is attested from 1940.


collogue (v.)

1590s (implied in colloguing) to flatter, curry favor, of unknown origin; perhaps from French
colloque conference, consultation (16c., from Latin colloquium) and influenced by dialogue.


colloid (n.)

1847, from French colloide (1845), from Greek kolla glue + -oeides form (see -oid).


colloidal (adj.)

1861, from colloid + -al (1).


colloquia (n.)

Latin plural of colloquium (q.v.).


colloquial (adj.)

1751, from colloquy a conversation + -al (1). Related: Colloquially.


colloquialism (n.)

1810, a colloquial word or phrase, from colloquial + -ism.


colloquium (n.)

early 17c., conversation, dialogue, from Latin colloquium conversation (see colloquy). Also as a
legal term; meaning meeting, assembly, conference, seminar is attested from 1844.


colloquy (n.)

mid-15c., discourse, from Latin colloquium conference, conversation, literally a speaking together,
from com- together (see com-) + -loquium speaking, from loqui to speak (see locution). Meaning
conversation is attested in English from 1580s.


collude (v.)

1520s, from Latin colludere act collusively, literally to play with (see collusion). Related:
Colluded; colluding.


collusion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French collusion, from Latin collusionem (nominative collusio) act of colluding,
from colludere, from com- together (see com-) + ludere to play, from ludus game (see ludicrous). The
notion of fraud or underhandedness is essential to collusion [Fowler].


collusive (adj.)

1670s, from Latin collus-, past participle stem of colludere (see collude) + -ive.


collywobbles (n.)

1823, fanciful formation from colic and wobble.


cologne (n.)

1814, Cologne water, loan-translation of French eau de Cologne, literally water from Cologne, from
the city in Germany (German K&ouml;ln, from Latin Colonia Agrippina) where it was made, first by
Italian chemist Johann Maria Farina, who had settled there in 1709.


Colombia

South American nation, independent from 1819 as part of Gran Colombia (after its breakup in 1850, as
New Granada, then Colombia from 1863); named for Italian explorer Christopher Columbus (Italian
Colombo, Portuguese Colom, Spanish Col&oacute;n).


colon (n.1)

punctuation mark, 1540s, from Latin colon part of a poem, from Greek kolon (with a long initial -o-)
part of a verse, literally limb, member (especially the leg, but also of a tree limb), also,
figuratively, a clause of a sentence, from PIE root *(s)kel- (3) bent, crooked (see scoliosis).
Meaning evolved from independent clause to punctuation mark that sets it off.


colon (n.2)

large intestine, late 14c., from Greek kolon (with a short initial -o-) large intestine, of unknown
origin.


colonel (n.)

1540s, coronell, from Middle French coronel (16c.), modified by dissimilation from Italian
colonnella commander of a column of soldiers at the head of a regiment, from compagna colonella
little column company, from Latin columna pillar (see column). English spelling modified 1580s in
learned writing to conform with the Italian form (via translations of Italian military manuals), and
pronunciations with r and l coexisted 17c.-18c., but the earlier pronunciation prevailed. Spanish
coronel, from Italian, shows a similar evolution by dissimilation.


colonial (adj.)

1756, from Latin colonia (see colony) + -al (1), or directly from colony on model of baronoinal.
Meaning from or characteristic of America during colonial times is from 1776. The noun meaning
inhabitant of a colony is recorded from 1865.


colonialism (n.)

1853, ways or speech of colonial persons, from colonial + -ism. Meaning the system of colonial rule
is from 1886.


colonialist (n.)

1813, from colonial + -ist; compare colonist.


colonialization (n.)

1965, noun of action from colonialize (1964); see colonial + -ize. Related: Decolonialize;
decolonialization.


colonic (adj.)

1906, from colon (n.2) + adjectival ending -ic.


colonisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of colonization; see also -ize.


colonist (n.)

1701, colonizer, from colony + -ist.


colonization (n.)

1766, noun of action from colonize.


colonize (v.)

1620s, to settle with colonists, from stem of Latin colonus tiller of the soil, farmer (see colony);
in sense to make another place into a national dependency without regard for settlement there by
1790s (such as in reference to French activity in Egypt or British work in India), and probably
directly from colony.    No principle ought ever to be tolerated or acted upon, that does not
proceed on the basis of India being considered as the temporary residence of a great British
Establishment, for the good government of the country, upon steady and uniform principles, and of a
large British factory, for the beneficial management of its trade, upon rules applicable to the
state and manners of the country. [Henry Dundas, Chairman of the East-India Company, letter, April
2, 1800]    Related: Colonized; colonizing.


colonnade (n.)

1718, from French colonnade, from Italian colonnato, from colonna column, from Latin columna pillar
(see column).


colonoscopy (n.)

by 1902 (earlier procto-colonoscopy, 1896; colonoscope attested from 1884), from colon (n.2) +
-oscopy (see -scope).


colony (n.)

late 14c., ancient Roman settlement outside Italy, from Latin colonia settled land, farm, landed
estate, from colonus husbandman, tenant farmer, settler in new land, from colere to inhabit,
cultivate, frequent, practice, tend, guard, respect, from PIE root *kwel- (1) move around (source of
Latin -cola inhabitant; see cycle (n.)). Also used by the Romans to translate Greek apoikia people
from home. Modern application dates from 1540s.


colophon (n.)

1774, publisher's inscription at the end of a book, from Latin colophon, from Greek kolophon summit,
final touch (see hill).


color (n.)

early 13c., skin color, complexion, from Old French color color, complexion, appearance (Modern
French couleur), from Latin color color of the skin; color in general, hue; appearance, from Old
Latin colos, originally a covering (akin to celare to hide, conceal), from PIE root *kel- (2) to
cover, conceal (see cell).    For sense evolution, compare Sanskrit varnah covering, color, related
to vrnoti covers, and also see chroma. Meaning visible color, color of something is attested in
English from c.1300. As color as a property of things, from late 14c. Old English words for color
were hiw (hue), bleo.


color (v.)

late 14c.; see color (n.); earliest use is figurative. Related: Colored; coloring.


color blindness (n.)

1844, replacing Daltonism (after English chemist John Dalton, 1766-1844, who published a description
of it in 1794); in figurative use, with reference to race or ethnicity, attested from 1866, American
English. Related: color blind (adj.).


Colorado

U.S. state (organized as a territory 1861, admitted as a state 1876), named for the river, Spanish
Rio Colorado, from colorado ruddy, reddish, literally colored, past participle of colorar to color,
dye, paint, from Latin colorare (see coloration).


coloration (n.)

1620s, from French coloration (16c.), from Late Latin colorationem (nominative coloratio) act or
fact of coloring, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin colorare to color, to get
tanned, from color (see color (n.)).


coloratura (n.)

Ornamental passages, roulades, embellishments, etc., in vocal music [Elson], 1740, from Italian
coloratura, literally coloring, from Late Latin coloratura, from colorare to color, from color (see
color (n.)).


colorectal (adj.)

by 1918, from comb. form of colon (n.2) + rectal.


colored (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from color (v.); in reference to non-white skin, 1610s.


colorful (adj.)

1889, in figurative sense of interesting, from color (n.) + -ful. Related: Colorfully.


coloring (n.)

late 14c., action of applying color, noun of action from color (v.). Figurative use by 1540s.
Meaning way something is colored is early 15c. Coloring book is from 1931.


colorless (adj.)

late 14c., from color (n.) + -less. Figurative sense of lacking vividness is recorded from 1861.
Related: Colorlessness.


colors (n.)

flag of a regiment or ship 1580s, from color (n.).


colossal (adj.)

1712 (colossic in the same sense is recorded from c.1600), from French colossal, from colosse, from
Latin colossus, from Greek kolossos (see colossus).


Colosseum (n.)

1560s, Medieval Latin name for the classical Amphitheatrum Flavium (begun c.70 C.E.), noun use of
neuter of adjective colosseus gigantic; perhaps a reference to the colossal statue of Nero that long
stood nearby (see colossus).


colossus (n.)

gigantic statue, late 14c., from Latin colossus a statue larger than life, from Greek kolossos
gigantic statue, of unknown origin, used by Herodotus of giant Egyptian statues, and used by Romans
of the bronze Apollo at the entrance to the harbor of Rhodes. Figurative sense of any thing of
awesome greatness or vastness is from 1794.


colostomy (n.)

1888, from colon (n.2) +  Modern Latin -stoma opening, orifice, from Greek stoma opening, mouth (see
stoma).


colostrum (n.)

1570s, from Latin colostrum first milk from an animal, of unknown origin.


colour

chiefly British English spelling of color (q.v.); for ending see -or. Related: Coloured; colouring;
colourful; colours.


colposcopy (n.)

1940, from colpo-, Latinized comb. form of Greek kolpos womb (used from c.1900 in medical compounds
in sense vagina; see gulf (n.)) + -oscopy (see -scope).


colt (n.)

Old English colt colt, originally young ass, in Biblical translations also used for young camel,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *kultaz (cognates: Swedish dialectal kult young boar, piglet; boy,
Danish kuld offspring, brood) and akin to child. Applied to persons from early 13c.    COLT'S TOOTH
An old fellow who marries, or keeps a young girl, is &#383;aid to have a colt's tooth in his head.
[Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


Colt (n.)

type of revolver, 1838, originally the manufacture of U.S. gunsmith Samuel Colt (1814-1862).


coltish (adj.)

late 14c., wild, frisky, also in early use lustful, lewd, from colt + -ish. Lit. sense of pertaining
to a colt is recorded from 1540s.


columbarium (n.)

subterranean sepulchre in ancient Roman places with niches for urns holding remains, neuter of Latin
columbarius, dove-cote (so called from resemblance), literally pertaining to doves; from columba
dove. Literal sense of dove-cote is attested in English from 1881.


Columbia

poetic name for United States of America, earlier for the British colonies there, 1730s, also the
nation's female personification, from name of Christopher Columbus (also see Colombia) with Latin
country ending -ia. A popular name for places and institutions in the U.S. in the post-Revolutionary
years, when former tributes to king and crown were out of fashion: such as Columbia University (New
York, U.S.) founded in 1754 as King's College; re-named 1784. Also District of Columbia (1791, as
Territory of Columbia); Hail, Columbia (Joseph Hopkinson, 1798), Barlow's Columbiad (1809).


columbine (n.)

c.1300, from Old French columbine columbine, or directly from Medieval Latin columbina, from Late
Latin columbina verbena, fem. of Latin columbinus, literally dove-like, from columba dove. The
inverted flower supposedly resembles a cluster of five doves. Also a fem. proper name; in Italian
comedy, the name of the mistress of Harlequin.


Columbus

his name is Latinized from his native Italian Cristoforo Colombo, in Spanish Christobal Colon.
America was discovered accidentally by a great seaman who was looking for something else, and most
of the exploration for the next fifty years was done in the hope of getting through or around it.
[S.E. Morison, The Oxford History of the United States, 1965]


column (n.)

mid-15c., vertical division of a page, also a pillar, post, from Old French colombe (12c., Modern
French colonne column, pillar), from Latin columna pillar, collateral form of columen top, summit,
from PIE root *kel- (4) to project, be prominent (see hill). Sense of matter written for a newspaper
dates from 1785.


columnar (adj.)

1728, from Late Latin columnaris rising in the form of a pillar, from columna column (see column).


columnist (n.)

1920, from column in the newspaper sense + -ist.


com-

word-forming element usually meaning with, together, from Latin com, archaic form of classical Latin
cum together, together with, in combination, from PIE *kom- beside, near, by, with (compare Old
English ge-, German ge-). The prefix in Latin sometimes was used as an intensive.    Before vowels
and aspirates, reduced to co-; before -g-, assimilated to cog- or con-; before -l-, assimilated to
col-; before -r-, assimilated to cor-; before -c-, -d-, -j-, -n-, -q-, -s-, -t-, -v- assimilated to
con-.


coma (n.1)

state of prolonged unconsciousness, 1640s, from Latinized form of Greek koma (genitive komatos) deep
sleep, of uncertain origin.


coma (n.2)

head of a comet, 1765, from Latin coma, from Greek kome hair of the head, of unknown origin. Earlier
in English as a botanical term for a tuft of hairs (1660s).


Comanche (n.)

1819, from Spanish, from a word in a Shoshonean language, such as Ute kim&aacute;nci enemy,
foreigner. Comanchero was a 19c. name given to Hispanic and American traders who dealt with the
Comanches.


comatose (adj.)

1755, from Latinized form of Greek komat-, comb. form of koma (genitive komatos; see coma) + -ose
(1). Perhaps immediately from French comateux. Transferred sense of lethargic is from 1828.


comb (n.)

Old English camb comb, crest, honeycomb (later Anglian comb), from Proto-Germanic *kambaz (cognates:
Old Saxon and Old High German camb, German Kamm, Middle Dutch cam, Dutch kam, Old Norse kambr),
literally toothed object, from PIE *gombhos, from root *gembh- to bite, tooth (cognates: Greek
gomphos a molar tooth, Sanskrit gambha-s tooth).


comb (v.)

late 14c. (implied in past participle kombid), verb derived from comb (n.); replacing the former
verb, Old English cemban, which however survives in unkempt. Related: Combed; combing.


combat (v.)

1560s, from Middle French combat (16c.), from Old French combattre (12c.), from Late Latin
combattere, from Latin com- with (each other) (see com-) + battuere to beat, fight (see batter
(v.)). Related: Combated; combating; combatted; combatting.


combat (n.)

1560s, from Middle French combat (16c.), from combattre (see combat (v.)).


combatant

mid-15c. (adj.), late 15c. (n.), from Old French combatant (Modern French combattant) skilled at
fighting, warlike (also used as a noun in Old French), present participle adjective of combattre
(see combat (v.)).


combative (adj.)

1819, from combat + -ive. In 1820s-30s, much associated with phrenology. Related: Combatively;
combativeness (1815).


comber (n.)

c.1200, one who cards wool, agent noun from comb (v.).


combination (n.)

late 14c., combinacyoun, from Old French combination (14c., Modern French combinaison), from Late
Latin combinationem (nominative combinatio) a joining two by two, noun of action from past
participle stem of combinare (see combine (v.)).


combine (n.)

machine that cuts, threshes and cleans grain (short for combine harvester), 1857, from combine (v.).


combine (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French combiner (14c.), from Late Latin combinare to unite, yoke together,
from Latin com- together (see com-) + bini two by two, adverb from bi- twice (see binary). Related:
Combinative; combined; combining.


combo (n.)

1929, U.S. slang, originally in entertainment (jazz groups, dance teams), short for combination.


combust

late 14c. as an adjective, burnt, from Old French combust (14c.), from Latin combustus, past
participle of combuere to burn up, consume (see combustion). Also an astrological term for planets
when near the sun. The verb is attested from late 15c. Related: Combusted; combusting.


combustible (adj.)

1520s, from Middle French combustible, or directly from Late Latin combustibilis, from Latin
combustus, past participle of combuere to burn up, consume (see combustion). Figurative sense is
from 1640s; as a noun, from 1680s. Related: Combustibility (late 15c.).


combustion (n.)

early 15c., from Old French combustion (13c.), from Latin combustionem (nominative combustio) a
burning, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin comburere to burn up, consume, from com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + *burere, faulty separation of amburere to burn around, actually ambi-
urere, from urere to burn, singe, from PIE root *eus- to burn (see ember).


come (v.)

Old English cuman come, approach, land; come to oneself, recover; arrive; assemble (class IV strong
verb; past tense cuom, com, past participle cumen), from Proto-Germanic *kwem- (cognates: Old Saxon
cuman, Old Frisian kuma, Middle Dutch comen, Dutch komen, Old High German queman, German kommen, Old
Norse koma, Gothic qiman), from PIE root *gwa-, *gwem- to go, come (cognates: Sanskrit gamati he
goes, Avestan jamaiti goes, Tocharian kakmu come, Lithuanian gemu to be born, Greek bainein to go,
walk, step, Latin venire to come).    The substitution of Middle English -o- for Old English -u-
before -m-, -n-, or -r- was a scribal habit before minims to avoid misreading the letters in the old
style handwriting, which jammed letters. The practice similarly transformed some, monk, tongue,
worm. Modern past tense form came is Middle English, probably from Old Norse kvam, replacing Old
English cuom.    Remarkably productive with prepositions (NTC's Dictionary of Phrasal Verbs lists
198 combinations); consider the varied senses in come to regain consciousness, come over possess (as
an emotion), come at attack, come on (interj.) be serious, and come off occur. For sexual senses,
see cum.


comeback (n.)

verbal retort, 1889, from come + back (adj.). Meaning recovery, return to former position or
condition after retirement or loss is attested from 1908, American English.


comedian (n.)

1580s, comic poet, later (c.1600) stage actor in comedies, also, generally, actor, from Middle
French com&eacute;dien, from com&eacute;die (see comedy). Meaning professional joke-teller, etc. is
from 1898.


comedic (adj.)

1630s, from Latin comoedicus, from Greek komoidikos pertaining to comedy, from komoidia (see
comedy).


comedienne (n.)

1860, from French com&eacute;dienne, fem. of com&eacute;dien (see comedian).


comedo (n.)

blackhead, etc., 1866, from Latin comedo glutton, from comedere to eat up (see comestible). A name
formerly given to worms that devour the body; transferred in medical use to secretions that resemble
them.


comedy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comedie (14c., a poem, not in the theatrical sense), from Latin comoedia,
from Greek komoidia a comedy, amusing spectacle, probably from komodios actor or singer in the
revels, from komos revel, carousal, merry-making, festival, + aoidos singer, poet, from aeidein to
sing, related to oide (see ode).    The passage on the nature of comedy in the Poetic of Aristotle
is unfortunately lost, but if we can trust stray hints on the subject, his definition of comedy
(which applied mainly to Menander) ran parallel to that of tragedy, and described the art as a
purification of certain affections of our nature, not by terror and pity, but by laughter and
ridicule. [Rev. J.P. Mahaffy, A History of Classical Greek Literature, London, 1895]    The
classical sense of the word, then, was amusing play or performance, which is similar to the modern
one, but in the Middle Ages the word came to mean poems and stories generally (albeit ones with
happy endings), and the earliest English sense is narrative poem (such as Dante's Commedia).
Generalized sense of quality of being amusing dates from 1877.   Comedy aims at entertaining by the
fidelity with which it presents life as we know it, farce at raising laughter by the outrageous
absurdity of the situation or characters exhibited, &amp; burlesque at tickling the fancy of the
audience by caricaturing plays or actors with whose style it is familiar. [Fowler]


comely (adj.)

beautiful, handsome, c.1400, probably from Old English cymlic lovely, splendid, finely made, from
cyme exquisite, glorious, delicate, from West Germanic *kumi- delicate, feeble (cognates: Old High
German chumo with difficulty, chumig weak, delicate; German kaum hardly, scarcely). Or perhaps the
modern word is from Middle English bicumelic (c.1200) suitable, exquisite, literally becomely
(compare becoming).


comer (n.)

visitor, mid-14c., agent noun from come. Meaning one showing promise is attested from 1879. Phrase
all comers everyone who chooses to come is recorded from 1560s.


comestible (n.)

1837, article of food, from French comestible (14c.), from Late Latin comestibilis, from Latin
comestus, past participle of comedere eat up, consume, from com- thoroughly (see com-) + edere to
eat (see edible). It was attested earlier as an adjective (late 15c.) meaning fit to eat but seems
to have fallen from use 17c., and the word was reintroduced from French.


comet (n.)

c.1200, from Old French comete (12c., Modern French com&egrave;te), from Latin cometa, from Greek
(aster) kometes, literally long-haired (star), from kome hair of the head (compare koman let the
hair grow long), of unknown origin. So called from resemblance of a comet's tail to streaming hair.


cometh (v.)

obsolete or poetic 2nd and 3rd person singular of come, from Old English cyme&eth;.


comeuppance (n.)

also comeupance, 1859, presumably rooted in verbal phrase come up present oneself for judgment
before a tribunal + -ance.


comfit (n.)

early 14c., sugarplum, from Old French confit preserved fruit, from Latin confectum, from
confectionem (see confection).


comfort (v.)

late 13c., conforten to cheer up, console, from Old French conforter to comfort, to solace; to help,
strengthen, from Late Latin confortare to strengthen much (used in Vulgate), from Latin com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + fortis strong (see fort). Change of -n- to -m- began in English 14c.
Related: Comforted; comforting.


comfort (n.)

c.1200, feeling of relief (as still in to take comfort in something); also source of alleviation or
relief; from Old French confort (see comfort (v.)). Replaced Old English frofor. Comforts (as
opposed to necessities and luxuries) is from 1650s.


comfortable (adj.)

mid-14c., affording mental comfort, from Anglo-French confortable, from conforter to comfort (see
comfort (v.)); also see -able. Meaning offering physical comfort is attested from 1769; that of in a
state of tranquil enjoyment is from 1770.


comfortably (adv.)

late 14c., pleasantly, enjoyably, from comfortable + -ly (2). Meaning in a state of comfort is
1630s.


comforter (n.)

mid-14c., one who consoles or comforts, from Anglo-French confortour (Old French comforteor), from
Vulgar Latin *confortatorem, agent noun from Late Latin confortare (see comfort (v.)). As a kind of
scarf, from 1823; as a kind of coverlet, from 1832.


comfy (adj.)

1829, colloquial shortening of comfortable.


comic (adj.)

late 14c., of comedy in the dramatic sense, from Latin comicus of comedy, represented in comedy, in
comic style, from Greek komikos of or pertaining to comedy, from komos (see comedy). Meaning
intentionally funny first recorded 1791, and comedic (1630s) has since picked up the older sense of
the word.Speaking of the masters of the comedic spirit (if I call it, as he does, the Comic Spirit,
this darkened generation will suppose me to refer to the animal spirits of tomfools and
merryandrews) .... [G.B. Shaw, 1897]  Something that is comic has comedy as its aim or origin;
something is comical if the effect is comedy, whether intended or not.


comic (n.)

a comedian is from 1580s, from comic (adj.). Latin adjective comicus also meant a comic poet, writer
of comedies. Meaning a comic book or comic strip is from 1889 (Comic strip first attested 1920;
comic book is from 1941). Comic relief is attested from 1825.


comical (adj.)

early 15c., comic, from comic (or Latin comicus) + -al (1). Meaning funny is from 1680s. Earlier
Middle English had an identical word meaning epileptic, from Latin morbus comitialis epilepsy.


coming (n.)

late 13c., verbal noun from come (v.). From mid-15c. as a past participle adjective.


comingle (v.)

c.1600, the better (because mingle is not from Latin), but less-used, English form of commingle.
Related: comingled; comingling.


Comintern (n.)

Third International, 1919, from contraction of Communist International.


comitatus

Latin collective of comes, comitem a companion, an associate (see count (n.)).


comity (n.)

early 15c., association, from French comit&eacute;, from Latin comitas courtesy, friendliness,
kindness, affability, from comis courteous, friendly, kind, of uncertain origin. Meaning courtesy in
English is from 1540s. Phrase comity of nations attested from 1862: The obligation recognized by
civilized nations to respect each other's laws and usages as far as their separate interests allow.


comma (n.)

1520s as a Latin word, nativized by 1590s, from Latin comma short phrase, from Greek komma clause in
a sentence, literally piece which is cut off, from koptein to cut off, from PIE root *kop- to beat,
strike (see hatchet (n.)). Like colon (n.1) and period, originally a Greek rhetorical term for a
part of a sentence, and like them it has been transferred to the punctuation mark that identifies
it.


command (v.)

c.1300, from Old French comander to order, enjoin, entrust (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *commandare,
from Latin commendare to recommend, entrust to (see commend), altered by influence of Latin mandare
to commit, entrust (see mandate (n.)). Replaced Old English bebeodan. Related: Commanded;
commanding.


command (n.)

c.1400, order, command, from Old French comand (14c.), from comander (see command (v.)). Meaning
control, authority is from mid-15c.


commandant (n.)

1680s, from French commandant the one commanding originally commanding, present participle of
commander (Old French comander) to order, enjoin; see command (v.). Similar formation in Spanish and
Italian comandante.


commandeer (v.)

1881, from Dutch (especially Afrikaans) kommandeeren to command (for military service), from French
commander (see command (v.)). Related: Commandeered; commandeering.


commander (n.)

early 14c., comandur, from Old French comandeor, from comander (see command (v.)). Commander in
chief attested from 1650s.


commanding (adj.)

late 15c. (in astronomy), present participle adjective from command (v.). Meaning nobly dignified is
from 1590s. Meaning dominant by virtue of size or position is from 1630s. Related: Commandingly
(mid-15c.).


commandment (n.)

late 13c., an order from an authority, from Old French comandement order, command, from Latin
*commandamentum, from *commandare (see command (v.)). Pronounced as four syllables until 17c.    Of
&thorn;e x commandements ... &thorn;e first comondement is &thorn;is, O God we ssul honuri [c.1280]


commandments (n.)

short for The Ten Commandments, attested from late 13c. In Old English they were &eth;a bebodu.


commando (n.)

Afrikaans, a troop under a commander, from Portuguese, literally party commanded (see command (v.));
in use c.1809 during the Peninsula campaign, then from 1834, in a South African sense, of military
expeditions of the Boers against the natives; modern sense is from 1940 (originally shock troops to
repel the threatened German invasion of England), first attested in writings of Winston Churchill,
who could have picked it up during the Boer War. Phrase going commando not wearing underwear
attested by 1996, U.S. slang, perhaps on notion of being ready for instant action.


comme il faut

1756, French, literally as it should be; from comme as, like, how, from Old French com, from Vulgar
Latin quomo, from Latin quomodo how? in what way?, pronomial adverb of manner, related to quam how
much?, qui who (see who).


commedia dell&#039;arte (n.)

1877, Italian, literally comedy of art; see comedy + art (n.).


commemorate (v.)

1590s, from Latin commemoratus, past participle of commemorare bring to remembrance (see
commemoration). Related: Commemorated; commemorates; commemorating.


commemoration (n.)

late 14c., a calling to mind, also service or church festival commemorating something, from Old
French comemoration, from Latin commemorationem (nominative commemoratio) reminding, mention, noun
of action from past participle stem of commemorare to call to mind, from com-, intensive prefix (see
com-), + memorare to remind, from memor mindful of (see memory).


commemorative (adj.)

1610s, from commemorate + -ive. As a noun meaning means of commemoration it is recorded from 1630s;
as short for commemorative postage stamp from 1916.


commen

obsolete spelling of common.


commence (v.)

c.1300, from Old French comencier to begin, start (10c., Modern French commencer), from Vulgar Latin
*cominitiare, originally to initiate as priest, consecrate, from Latin com- together (see com-) +
initiare to initiate, from initium (see initial (adj.)). Spelling with double -m- began in French
and was established in English by 1500. Related: Commenced; commencing.


commencement (n.)

late 13c., beginning, from Old French comencement beginning, start (Modern French commencement),
from comencier (see commence). Meaning school graduation ceremony attested by 1850, American
English. (Sense entrance upon the privileges of a master or doctor in a university is from late
14c.)    I know what you are thinking of -- the class members grouped in a semicircle on the stage,
the three scared boys in new ready-made black suits, the seventeen pretty girls in fluffy white
dresses (the gowns of the year), each senior holding a ribbon-tied manuscript bulging with thoughts
on Beyond the Alps Lies Italy, Our Ship is Launched -- Whither Shall it Sail? and similar topics.
[Charles Moreau Harger, The Real Commencement, New Outlook, May 8, 1909]


commend (v.)

mid-14c., comenden, from Latin commendare to commit to the care or keeping (of someone), to entrust
to; to commit to writing; hence to set off, render agreeable, praise, from com-, intensive prefix
(see com-), + mandare to commit to one's charge (see mandate (n.)). In some senses, a shortening of
recommend. Related: Commended; commending.


commendable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Middle French commendable, from Latin commendabilis praiseworthy, from commendare
(see commend). Related: Commendably.


commendation (n.)

expression of approval, late 14c. (from c.1200 as the name of one of the Offices of the Dead), from
Old French commendacion approval, praise, from Latin commendationem (nominative commendatio)
recommendation, commendation, noun of action from past participle stem of commendare (see commend).


commensal (n.)

one who eats at the same table (as another), c.1400, from Old French commensal (15c.), from Medieval
Latin commensalis, from com- together (see com-) + mensa (genitive mensalis) table (see mesa).
Biological sense attested from 1870.


commensalism (n.)

1870, from commensal + -ism.


commensurable (adj.)

1550s, from Late Latin commensurabilis having a common measure, from com- together with (see com-) +
Latin mensurabilis that can be measured, from mensurare to measure, from mensura measure (see
measure (v.)).


commensurate (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin commensuratus, from Latin com- with (see com-) + Late Latin mensuratus, past
participle of mensurare to measure, from mensura (see measure (v.)).


comment (n.)

late 14c., from Old French coment commentary or directly from Late Latin commentum comment,
interpretation, in classical Latin invention, fabrication, fiction, neuter past participle of
comminisci to contrive, devise, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + base of meminisse to
remember, related to mens (genitive mentis) mind (see mind (n.)). The Latin word meaning something
invented was taken by Isidore and other Christian theologians for interpretation, annotation. No
comment as a stock refusal to answer a journalist's question is first recorded 1950, from Truman's
White House press secretary, Charles Ross.


comment (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French commenter (15c.), from Latin commentari, from commentum (see comment
(n.)). Related: Commented; commenting.


commentary (n.)

1530s, from Middle French commentaire, or directly from Latin commentarius notebook, annotation;
diary, memoir, noun use of adjective, relating to comments, from commentum (see comment (n.)).
Perhaps the Latin noun is short for volumen commentarium. Originally in English as an adjective
(early 15c.).


commentate (v.)

1794, to comment, back-formation from commentator. Meaning to deliver commentary is attested from
1939 (implied in commentating). Related: Commentated; commentating.


commentator (n.)

late 14c., writer of commentaries, agent noun in Latin form from comment or commentary (Latin
commentator meant inventor, author). Middle English also had a noun commentate, attested from early
15c. Meaning writer of notes or expository comments is from 1640s; sense of one who gives commentary
(originally in sports) is from 1928.    Well, Jem, what is a commentator?[]--Why, was Jem's reply, I
suppose it must be the commonest of all taturs. [Smart Sayings of Bright Children, collected by
Howard Paul, 1886]


commerce (n.)

1530s, from Middle French commerce (14c.), from Latin commercium trade, trafficking, from com-
together (see com-) + merx (genitive mercis) merchandise (see market (n.)).


commercial (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to trade, from commerce + -al (1). Meaning paid for by advertisements (in
reference to radio, TV, etc.) is from 1932; meaning done for the sake of financial profit (of art,
etc.) is from 1871. Related: Commercially.


commercial (n.)

an advertisement broadcast on radio or TV, 1935, from commercial (adj.).


commercialism (n.)

principles and practice of commerce, 1849, from commercial (adj.) + -ism.


commercialization (n.)

1889, from commercialize + -ation.


commercialize (v.)

1830, from commercial (adj.) + -ize. Related: Commercialized; commercializing.


commingle (v.)

1620s, from com- + mingle. See comingle. Related: Commingled; commingling.


comminute (v.)

1620s, from Latin comminutus, past participle of comminuere to lessen, break into smaller parts,
from com- together (see com-) + minuere to make smaller (see minus). Related: Comminuted;
comminuting.


commiserate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin commiseratus, past participle of commiserari to pity, bewail (see commiseration).
Related: Commiserated; commiserating. An Old English loan-translation of commiserate was
efensargian.


commiseration (n.)

1580s, from Middle French commis&eacute;ration, from Latin commiserationem (nominative commiseratio)
act or fact of pitying, noun of action from past participle stem of commiserari to pity, from com-
intensive prefix (see com-) + miserari bewail, lament, from miser wretched (see miser).


commissar (n.)

1918, from Russian komissar, from German Kommissar commissioner, from French, ultimately from
Medieval Latin commissarius (see commissary).


commissariat (n.)

c.1600, in Scottish law, commissary court, from French commissariat, from Medieval Latin
*commissariatus, from commissarius (see commissary). Military use is from 1779. In reference to the
USSR, ministry, from 1918.


commissary (n.)

mid-14c., one to whom special duty is entrusted by a higher power, from Medieval Latin commissarius,
from Latin commissus entrusted, past participle of committere (see commit). Originally
ecclesiastical; the military sense of official in charge of supply of food, stores, transport dates
to late 15c. Hence storeroom (1882) and dining room in a larger facility (1929, American English).


commission (n.)

mid-14c., authority entrusted to someone, from Latin commissionem (nominative commissio) delegation
of business, noun of action from past participle stem of committere (see commit). Meaning body of
persons charged with authority is from late 15c.


commission (v.)

1660s, from commission (n.). Related: Commissioned; commissioning.


commissioner (n.)

early 15c., one appointed by a commission, from Anglo-French commissionaire, from Medieval Latin
commissionarius, from commissionem (see commission (n.)). Meaning member of a commission is from
1530s.


commit (v.)

late 14c., to give in charge, entrust, from Latin committere to unite, connect, combine; to bring
together, from com- together (see com-) + mittere to put, send (see mission). Evolution into modern
range of meanings is not entirely clear. Sense of perpetrating was ancient in Latin; in English from
mid-15c. The intransitive use (in place of commit oneself) first recorded 1982, probably influenced
by existentialism use (1948) of commitment to translate Sartre's engagement emotional and moral
engagement.


commitment (n.)

1610s, action of officially consigning to the custody of the state, from commit + -ment. (Anglo-
French had commettement.) Meaning the committing of oneself, pledge, promise is attested from 1793;
hence, an obligation, an engagement (1864).


committal (n.)

1620s, from commit + -al (2). As an adjective, attested from 1884, apparently a back-formation from
non-committal.


committed (adj.)

1590s, entrusted, delegated, past participle adjective from commit (v.). Meaning locked into a
commitment is from 1948.


committee (n.)

1620s, from commit + -ee, or else a revival of Anglo-French commite, past participle of commettre to
commit, from Latin committere to unite, connect (see commit). Originally person to whom something is
committed (late 15c.); from 17c. in reference to a body of such people.


commode (n.)

1786, chest of drawers, earlier (1680s) name of a type of fashionable ladies' headdress, from French
commode, noun use of adjective meaning convenient, suitable, from Latin commodus proper, fit,
appropriate, convenient, satisfactory, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + modus measure,
manner (see mode (n.1)). Meaning chair housing a chamber pot first attested 1851 from notion of
convenience.


commodification (n.)

1968, from commodity + -fication. Originally in Marxist political theory, the assignment of a market
value, often to some quality or material the user of the word feels would be better without it.


commodify (v.)

1971, back-formation from commodification. Related: Commodified; commodifying.


commodious (adj.)

early 15c., beneficial, convenient, from Medieval Latin commodiosus convenient, useful, from Latin
commodus (see commode). Meaning roomy, spacious first attested 1550s. Related: Commodiously;
commodiousness.


commoditization (n.)

1965, from commodity + -ization; the businessman's word; the Marxist's is commodification.


commodity (n.)

early 15c., benefit, profit, welfare; later a convenient or useful product, from Middle French
commodit&eacute; benefit, profit, from Latin commoditatem (nominative commoditas) fitness,
adaptation, convenience, advantage, from commodus suitable, convenient (see commode). General sense
property possession is from c.1500.


commodore (n.)

1690s, probably via Dutch kommandeur from French commandeur, from Old French comandeor (see
commander). In U.S. Navy, above a captain, below a rear-admiral.


common (adj.)

c.1300, belonging to all, general, from Old French comun common, general, free, open, public (9c.,
Modern French commun), from Latin communis in common, public, shared by all or many; general, not
specific; familiar, not pretentious, from PIE *ko-moin-i- held in common, compound adjective formed
from *ko- together + *moi-n-, suffixed form of root *mei- (1) change, exchange (see mutable), hence
literally shared by all.    Second element of the compound also is the source of Latin munia duties,
public duties, functions, those related to munia office. Perhaps reinforced in Old French by the
Germanic form of PIE *ko-moin-i- (compare Old English gem&aelig;ne common, public, general,
universal; see mean (adj.)), which came to French via Frankish.    Used disparagingly of women and
criminals since c.1300. Common pleas is 13c., from Anglo-French communs plets, hearing civil actions
by one subject against another as opposed to pleas of the crown. Common prayer is contrasted with
private prayer. Common stock is attested from 1888.


common (n.)

late 15c., land held in common, from common (adj.). Commons the third estate of the English people
as represented in Parliament, is from late 14c. Latin communis also served as a noun meaning common
property, state, commonwealth.


common good (n.)

late 14c., translating Latin bonum publicum the common weal.


common law (n.)

mid-14c., the customary and unwritten laws of England as embodied in commentaries and old cases (see
common (adj.)), as opposed to statute law. Phrase common law marriage is attested from 1909.


common sense (n.)

14c., originally the power of uniting mentally the impressions conveyed by the five physical senses,
thus ordinary understanding, without which one is foolish or insane (Latin sensus communis, Greek
koine aisthesis); meaning good sense is from 1726. Also, as an adjective, commonsense.


commonality (n.)

late 14c., a community, from common (adj.), as if from Latin *communalitas. A respelling of
commonalty (late 13c.). Meaning the common people is attested from 1580s; that of state or quality
of being shared is from 1954.


commoner (n.)

early 14c. (in commoners), from common (adj.).


commonly (adv.)

c.1300, in a way common to all, also common to all; also usually, from common (adj.) + -ly (2).


commonplace (n.)

1540s, a statement generally accepted, literal translation of Latin locus communis, from Greek
koinos topos general topic. See common (adj.) + place (n.). The adjectival sense of having nothing
original dates from c.1600.


commonsensical (adj.)

1860, from common sense, with ending as in nonsensical, etc.


commonwealth (n.)

late 15c., public welfare, general good, from common (adj.) + wealth (n.); meaning the state is
attested from 1510s; applied specifically to the government of England in the period 1649-1660.


commotion (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French commocion violent motion, agitation (12c., Modern French commotion),
from Latin commotionem (nominative commotio) violent motion, agitation, noun of action from past
participle stem of commovere to move, disturb, from com- together, or thoroughly (see com-) + movere
to move (see move (v.)).


communal (adj.)

1811 in reference to communes; 1843 in reference to communities, from French communal (Old French
comunal, 12c.), from Late Latin communalis, from communa (see commune (n.)).


communalism (n.)

1871 (in reference to Paris), from communal + -ism.


commune (v.)

c.1300, have dealings with, from Old French comuner to make common, share (10c., Modern French
communier), from comun (see common (adj.)). Meaning to talk intimately is late 14c. Related:
Communed; communing.


commune (n.)

1792, from French commune small territorial divisions set up after the Revolution, from Middle
French commune free city, group of citizens (12c.), from Medieval Latin communia, noun use of neuter
plural of Latin adjective communis, literally that which is common, from communis (see common
(adj.)). The Commune of Paris usurped the government during the Reign of Terror. The word later was
applied to a government on communalistic principles set up in Paris in 1871. Adherents of the 1871
government were Communards.


communicable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French communicable, from Late Latin communicabilis, from communicare (see
communication).


communicate (v.)

1520s, to impart (information, etc.), from Latin communicatus, past participle of communicare
impart, inform (see communication). Meaning to share, transmit (diseases, etc.) is from 1530s.
Related: Communicated; communicating.


communication (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comunicacion (14c., Modern French communication), from Latin
communicationem (nominative communicatio), noun of action from past participle stem of communicare
to share, divide out; communicate, impart, inform; join, unite, participate in, literally to make
common, from communis (see common (adj.)).


communicative (adj.)

late 14c., that communicates, from French communicatif, from Latin communicat-, past participle stem
of communicare impart, inform (see communication). Meaning talkative is recorded from 1650s.


communicator (n.)

1660s, from Latin communicator, agent noun from communicare (see communication).


communion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comunion community, communion (12c.), from Latin communionem (nominative
communio) fellowship, mutual participation, a sharing, used in Late Latin ecclesiastical language
for participation in the sacrament, from communis (see common (adj.)). Used by Augustine, in belief
that the word was derived from com- with, together + unus oneness, union.


communique (n.)

1852, from French communiqu&eacute;, originally past participle of communiquer to communicate
(14c.), from Latin communicare impart, inform (see communication). Originally the heading of
official statements from the French government. Better, if it must be used in English, to print it
with the accent.


communism (n.)

social system based on collective ownership, 1843, from French communisme (c.1840) from commun (Old
French comun; see common (adj.)) + -isme (see -ism). Originally a theory of society; as name of a
political system, 1850, a translation of German Kommunismus (itself from French), in Marx and
Engels' Manifesto of the Communist Party. Compare communist. In some cases in early and mid-20c., a
term of abuse implying anti-social criminality without regard to political theory.    Each [i.e.
socialism, communism, anarchism] stands for a state of things, or a striving after it, that differs
much from that which we know; &amp; for many of us, especially those who are comfortably at home in
the world as it is, they have consequently come to be the positive, comparative, &amp; superlative,
distinguished not in kind but in degree only, of the terms of abuse applicable to those who would
disturb our peace. [Fowler]


communist

1841, as both a noun and adjective, from French communiste (see communism). First attested in
writing by John Goodwin Barmby (1820-1881), British Owenite and utopian socialist who founded the
London Communist Propaganda Society in 1841. Main modern sense emerged after publication of
Communist Manifesto (Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei) in 1848. Shortened form Commie attested
from 1940. Related: Communistic.


communitarian (n.)

1841, member of a commune, from community + ending from utilitarian, etc. The adjective is attested
from 1909.


community (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comunit&eacute; community, commonness, everybody (Modern French
communaut&eacute;), from Latin communitatem (nominative communitas) community, society, fellowship,
friendly intercourse; courtesy, condescension, affability, from communis common, public, general,
shared by all or many, (see common (adj.)). Latin communitatem was merely a noun of quality ...
meaning 'fellowship, community of relations or feelings,' but in med.L. it was, like universitas,
used concretely in the sense of 'a body of fellows or fellow-townsmen'  [OED].    An Old English
word for community was gem&aelig;nscipe community, fellowship, union, common ownership, from
m&aelig;ne common, public, general, probably composed from the same PIE roots as communis. Community
service as a criminal sentence is recorded from 1972, American English. Community college is
recorded from 1959.


commutation (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French commutacion change, transformation, exchange, barter (13c., Modern French
commutation), from Latin commutationem (nominative commutatio) a change, alteration, noun of action
from past participle stem of commutare to change, alter entirely (see commute (v.)).


commutative (adj.)

1530s, from Medieval Latin commutativus, from Latin commutat-, past participle stem of commutare
(see commute (v.)).


commutator (n.)

1839, agent noun in Latin form from Latin commutare (see commute (v.)).


commute (v.)

mid-15c., to change, transform, from Latin commutare to often change, to change altogether, from
com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + mutare to change (see mutable). Sense of make less severe is
1630s. Sense of go back and forth to work is 1889, from commutation ticket season pass (on a
railroad, streetcar line, etc.), from commute in its sense of to change one kind of payment into
another (1795), especially to combine a number of payments into a single one. Related: Commuted;
commuting.


commuter (n.)

1865, American English, holder of a commutation ticket, agent noun from commute (v.).


Como

lake in Italy, named for the town along its shore, which is Roman Comum, from Celtic cumba valley
(compare coomb). Its ancient name was Lacus Larius; Lacus Comacinus begins to appear 4c. It is
associated with Virgil and the two Plinys.


comorbidity (n.)

1985, from co- along with + morbidity diseased condition. Comorbid (adj.) is a 1990 back-formation.


comp (n.)

complimentary ticket, 1885, short for complimentary. Meaning nonpaying guest is attested by 1930s;
generalized to anything given free by 1960s. As a verb, by 1974. Related: Comped; comping. As a
shortening of compensation (especially worker's/workman's) it was in use by 1970s.


compact (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle French compact (14c.) or directly from Latin compactus concentrated, past
participle of compingere to fasten together, construct, from com- with, together (see com-) +
pangere to fix, fasten (see pact). Compact car is 1960. Compact disc is from 1979.


compact (n.1)

agreement, 1590s, from Latin compactum agreement, noun use of neuter past participle of compacisci
come to agreement, from com- together (see com-) + pacisci to covenant, contract (see pact).


compact (v.)

early 15c., from Latin compactus, past participle of compingere to fasten together (see compact
(adj.)). Related: Compacted; compacting.


compact (n.2)

make-up case, 1921, from compact (adj.), based on its containing compacted face powder.


compaction (n.)

late 14c., from Old French compaction, from Latin compactionem (nominative compactio) a putting or
joining together, noun of action from past participle stem of compingere (see compact (adj.)).


compadre (n.)

companion, 1834, American English, from Spanish compadre godfather, hence benefactor, friend, from
Medieval Latin compater, from com- with (see com-) + pater father (see father (n.). Compare compere,
also gossip (n.).


companion (n.)

c.1300, from Old French compagnon fellow, mate, friend, partner (12c.), from Late Latin companionem
(nominative companio), literally bread fellow, messmate, from Latin com- with (see com-) + panis
bread (see food).    Found first in 6c. Frankish Lex Salica, and probably a translation of a
Germanic word (compare Gothic gahlaiba messmate, from hlaib loaf of bread). Replaced Old English
gefera traveling companion, from faran go, fare.


companionable (adj.)

1620s, from companion + -able. Related: Companionably; companionability.


companionship (n.)

1540s, from companion + -ship.


company (n.)

mid-12c., large group of people, from Old French compagnie society, friendship, intimacy; body of
soldiers (12c.), from Late Latin companio (see companion). Meaning companionship is from late 13c.
Sense of business association first recorded 1550s, having earlier been used in reference to trade
guilds (c.1300). Meaning subdivision of an infantry regiment is from 1580s. Abbreviation co. dates
from 1670s.


comparable (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French comparable, from Latin comparabilis capable of comparison, from
comparare (see comparison). Related: Comparably; comparability.


comparation (n.)

late 15c., from Latin comparationem a putting together, hence, a comparing, noun of action from
comparare (see comparison).


comparative (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French comparatif, from Latin comparativus pertaining to comparison, from
comparat-, past participle stem of comparare (see comparison). Originally grammatical; general sense
is from c.1600; meaning involving different branches of a subject is from 1670s. Related:
Comparatively.


comparator (n.)

1883, agent noun in Latin form from compare.


compare (v.)

late 14c., from Old French comparer (12c., Modern French comparer), from Late Latin comparare to
liken, to compare (see comparison). Related: Compared; comparing. To compare notes is from 1708.
Phrase without compare (attested from 1620s, but similar phrasing dates to 1530s) seems to be
altered by folk etymology from compeer rival.


comparison (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French comparaison (12c.), from Latin comparationem (nominative comparatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of comparare make equal with, liken, bring together for a
contest, literally to couple together, to form in pairs, from com- with (see com-) + parare prepare
(see pare).


compartment (n.)

1560s, from Middle French compartiment part partitioned off (16c.), through Italian compartimento,
from Late Latin compartiri to divide, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + partis, genitive of
pars part (see part (n.)).


compartmental (adj.)

1831, from compartment + -al (1).


compartmentalization (n.)

1923, from compartmentalize + -ation.


compartmentalize (v.)

1918, from compartmental + -ize. Related: Compartmentalized; compartmentalizing.


compass (n.)

c.1300, space, area, extent, circumference, from Old French compas circle, radius, pair of compasses
(12c.), from compasser to go around, measure, divide equally, from Vulgar Latin *compassare to pace
out (source of Italian compassare, Spanish compasar), from Latin com- together (see com-) + passus a
step (see pace (n.)).    The mathematical instrument so called from mid-14c. The mariners'
directional tool (so called since early 15c.) took the name, perhaps, because it's round and has a
point like the mathematical instrument. The word is in most European languages, with a mathematical
sense in Romance, a nautical sense in Germanic, and both in English.


compass (v.)

c.1300, to devise, plan; early 14c. as to surround, contain, envelop, enclose; from Anglo-French
cumpasser, from compass (n.). Related: Compassed; compassing.


compassion (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French compassion sympathy, pity (12c.), from Late Latin compassionem (nominative
compassio) sympathy, noun of state from past participle stem of compati to feel pity, from com-
together (see com-) + pati to suffer (see passion).    Latin compassio is an ecclesiastical loan-
translation of Greek sympatheia (see sympathy). An Old English loan-translation of compassion was
efen&eth;rowung.


compassionate (adj.)

1580s, from compassion + -ate (1). Related: Compassionately. Phrase compassionate conservatism in
American political language recorded by 1992, popularized, if not coined, by Marvin Olasky,
University of Texas at Austin instructor.


compatible (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French compatible (15c.), from Medieval Latin compatibilis, from Late Latin
compati (see compassion). Related: Compatibility.


compatriot (n.)

1610s, from French compatriote (16c.), from Latin compatriota, from com- with (see com-) + patriota
countryman (see patriot).


comped (adj.)

given or admitted free, 1960s, see comp.


compeer (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French comper, from com- with (see com-) + Latin parem equal (see par).


compel (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French compellir, from Latin compellere to drive together, drive to one place (of
cattle), to force or compel (of persons), from com- together (see com-) + pellere to drive (see
pulse (n.1)). Related: Compelled; compelling.


compelling (adj.)

c.1600, present participle adjective from compel. Meaning irresistible is from 1901. Related:
Compellingly.


compendious (adj.)

concise, late 14c., from Old French compendieux, from Latin compendiosus advantageous, abridged,
brief, from compendium (see compendium).


compendium (n.)

1580s, from Latin compendium a shortening, saving, literally that which is weighed together, from
compendere to weigh together, from com- together (see com-) + pendere to weigh (see pendant).
Borrowed earlier as compendi (mid-15c.).


compensable (adj.)

1660s, from French compensable (16c.), from compenser, from Latin compensare (see compensate).


compensate (v.)

1640s, to be equivalent; 1650s, to counterbalance, make up for, from Latin compensatus, past
participle of compensare to weigh one thing (against another), thus, to counterbalance, from com-
with (see com-) + pensare, frequentative of pendere to weigh (see pendant). Meaning to recompense,
remunerate is from 1814. Related: Compensated; compensating.


compensation (n.)

late 14c., action of compensating, from Latin compensationem (nominative compensatio) a weighing one
thing against another, a balancing, noun of action from past participle stem of compensare (see
compensate). Meaning what is given in recompense is from c.1600; meaning amends for loss or damages
is from 1804; meaning salary, wages is attested from 1787, American English. The psychological sense
is from 1914.


compensatory (adj.)

c.1600, from French compensatoire, from Latin compensatus, past participle of compensare (see
compensate). Psychological sense is from 1921.


compere (n.)

1738, from French comp&egrave;re a godfather, from Old French compere (13c., from Medieval Latin
compater) godfather, also a friendly greeting, friend, brother, hence fellow, familiar, intimate
(see compadre).


compete (v.)

1610s,  to enter or be put in rivalry with, from Middle French comp&eacute;ter be in rivalry with
(14c.), or directly from Late Latin competere strive in common, in classical Latin to come together,
agree, to be qualified, later, strive together, from com- together (see com-) + petere to strive,
seek, fall upon, rush at, attack (see petition (n.)).    Rare 17c., revived from late 18c. in sense
to strive (alongside another) for the attainment of something and regarded early 19c. in Britain as
a Scottish or American word. Market sense is from 1840s (perhaps a back-formation from competition);
athletics sense attested by 1857. Related: Competed; competing.


competence (n.)

1590s, rivalry (based on compete); c.1600 adequate supply; 1630s, sufficiency of means for living at
ease, from French comp&eacute;tence, from Latin competentia meeting together, agreement, symmetry,
from competens, present participle of competere, especially in its earlier sense of fall together,
come together, be convenient or fitting (see compete). Meaning sufficiency to deal with what is at
hand is from 1790.


competency (n.)

1590s, rivalry; c.1600, sufficiency to satisfy the wants of life, from Latin competentia meeting
together, agreement, symmetry, from competens, present participle of competere (see compete).
Meaning sufficiency of qualification is recorded from 1797.


competent (adj.)

late 14c., suitable, from Old French competent sufficient, appropriate, suitable, from Latin
competentem (nominative competens), present participle of competere coincide, agree (see compete).
Meaning able, fit is from 1640s. Legal sense is late 15c.


competition (n.)

c.1600, action of competing, from Latin competitionem (nominative competitio) agreement, rivalry,
noun of action from past participle stem of competere (see compete). Meaning a contest for something
is from 1610s. Sense of rivalry in the marketplace attested from 1793; that of entity or entities
with which one competes is from 1961, especially in business.


competitive (adj.)

1826, from Latin competit-, past participle stem of competere (see compete) + -ive. Related:
Competitively; competitiveness.


competitor (n.)

1530s, from Middle French comp&eacute;titeur (16c.), or directly from Latin competitor rival, agent
noun from competere (see compete).


compilation (n.)

early 15c., that which is compiled, also action of compiling, from Middle French compilation, from
Latin compilationem (nominative compilatio) a compilation, literally a pillaging, noun of action
from compilare (see compile).


compile (v.)

early 14c., from Old French compiler compile, collect (13c.), from Latin compilare to plunder, rob,
probably originally bundle together, heap up; hence to pack up and carry off, from com- together
(see com-) + pilare to compress, ram down. Related: Compiled; compiling.


compiler (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French compilour, Old French compileur author, chronicler, from Latin
compilatorem, agent noun from compilare (see compile). Another form of the word current in early
Modern English was compilator, directly from the Latin.


complacence (n.)

mid-15c., pleasure, from Medieval Latin complacentia satisfaction, pleasure, from Latin complacentem
(nominative complacens), present participle of complacere to be very pleasing, from com-, intensive
prefix (see com-), + placere to please (see please). Sense of pleased with oneself is 18c.


complacency (n.)

1640s, from same source as complacence but with the later form of the suffix (see -cy).


complacent (adj.)

1650s, pleasing, from Latin complacentem (nominative complacens) pleasing, present participle of
complacere be very pleasing (see complacence). Meaning pleased with oneself is from 1767. Related:
Complacently.


complain (v.)

late 14c., find fault, lament, from stem of Old French complaindre to lament (12c.), from Vulgar
Latin *complangere, originally to beat the breast, from Latin com-, intensive prefix (see com-), +
plangere to strike, beat the breast (see plague (n.)). Older sense of lament died out 17c. Related:
Complained; complaining.


complainant (n.)

early 15c., from Old French complaignant, present participle of complaindre (see complain). The
present participle also was used as a noun in Middle French.


complaint (n.)

late 14c., lamentation, grief, from Old French complainte (12c.) complaint, lament, noun use of fem.
past participle of complaindre (see complain). Meaning bodily ailment is from 1705 (often in U.S.
colloquial use generalized as complaints).


complaisance (n.)

1650s, from French complaisance (14c.), in Middle French care or desire to please, from Medieval
Latin complacentia (see complacence).


complaisant (adj.)

1640s, from French complaisant (16c.), in Middle French, pleasing, present participle of complaire
acquiesce to please, from Latin complacere be very pleasing (see complacent, with which it
overlapped till mid-19c.). Possibly influenced in French by Old French plaire gratify.


compleat (adj.)

archaic spelling of complete (adj.).


complected (adj.)

1806, American English, complexioned, a variant derivation from complexion, which, intentionally or
not, shows the Latin root.


complement (n.)

late 14c., that which completes, from Old French compliement accomplishment, fulfillment (14c.,
Modern French compl&eacute;ment), from Latin complementum that which fills up or completes, from
complere fill up (see complete (adj.)). Originally also having senses which were taken up
c.1650-1725 by compliment.


complement (v.)

1610s, exchange courtesies, from complement (n.). Meaning make complete is from 1640s. Related:
Complemented; complementing.


complementarity (n.)

1908, a term in physics, from complementary + -ity.


complementary (adj.)

1620s, ceremonious, from complement + -ary. Sense forming a complement attested from 1829, earliest
in complementary colors.


complete (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French complet full, or directly from Latin completus, past participle of
complere to fill up, complete the number of (a legion, etc.), transferred to to fill, to fulfill, to
finish (a task), from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + plere to fill (see pleio-).


complete (v.)

late 14c.; see complete (adj.). Related: Completed; completing.


completely (adv.)

1520s, from complete (adj.) + -ly (2).


completion (n.)

late 14c., from Latin completionem (nominative completio), noun of action from past participle stem
of complere to fill up, complete (see complete (adj.)).


complex (adj.)

1650s, composed of parts, from French complexe complicated, complex, intricate (17c.), from Latin
complexus surrounding, encompassing, past participle of complecti to encircle, embrace, in
transferred use, to hold fast, master, comprehend, from com- with (see com-) + plectere to weave,
braid, twine, entwine, from PIE *plek-to-, from root *plek- to plait (see ply (v.1)). The meaning
not easily analyzed is first recorded 1715. Complex sentence is attested from 1881.


complex (n.)

1650s, a whole comprised of parts, from complex (adj.). Psychological sense of connected group of
repressed ideas was established by C.G. Jung, 1907.


complexion (n.)

mid-14c., bodily constitution, from Old French complexion, complession combination of humors, hence
temperament, character, make-up, from Latin complexionem (nominative complexio) combination (in Late
Latin, physical constitution), from complexus (see complex (adj.)). Meaning appearance of the skin
of the face is first recorded mid-15c. In medieval physiology, the color of the face indicated
temperament or health.


complexity (n.)

1721, composite nature, from complex (adj.) + -ity. Meaning intricacy is from 1790. Meaning a
complex condition is from 1794.


compliance (n.)

1640s, from comply + -ance. Related: Compliancy.


compliant (adj.)

1640s, from comply + -ant.


complicate (v.)

1620s, to intertwine (as a past participle adjective, early 15c.), from Latin complicatus folded
together; confused, intricate, past participle of complicare (see complication). Meaning to make
more complex is recorded from 1832, from earlier sense to combine in a complex way (17c.). Related:
Complicated; complicating.


complicated (adj.)

1640s, tangled, from past participle adjective from complicate. Figurative meaning not easy to
solve, intricate, confused, difficult to unravel is from 1650s.


complication (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French complication, from Latin complicationem (nominative complicatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of complicare to fold together, fold up, roll up, from com-
together (see com-) + plicare to fold, weave (see ply (v.1)). Meaning something that complicates
first recorded 1903.


complicity (n.)

1650s, from French complicit&eacute;, from Old French complice accomplice, comrade, companion
(14c.), from Late Latin complicem, accusative of complex partner, confederate, from Latin complicare
to fold together (see complicate; also compare accomplice).


compliment (n.)

An act, or expression of civility, usually understood to include some hypocrisy, and to mean less
than it declares [Johnson], 1570s, complement, via French compliment (17c.), from Italian
complimento expression of respect and civility, from Vulgar Latin *complire, for Latin complere to
complete (see complete (adj.)), via notion of complete the obligations of politeness. Same word as
complement but by a different etymological route; differentiated by spelling after 1650.


compliment (v.)

1610s, from French complimenter, from compliment (see compliment (n.)). Related: Complimented;
complimenting.


complimentary (adj.)

1620s, conveying a compliment, from compliment (n.) + -ary. In later use loosely meaning free of
charge.


compline (n.)

the last canonical service of the day, early 13c., cumplie, compelin, from Old French complie
(12c.), from Latin completa (hora), from completus (see complete (adj.)); with unexplained -n-.


comply (v.)

early 14c., to fulfill, carry out, from Old French compli, past participle of complir to accomplish,
fulfill, carry out, from Vulgar Latin *complire, from Latin complere to fill up (see complete
(adj.)). Meaning influenced by ply (v.2). Sense of to consent began c.1600 and might have been a
reintroduction from Italian, where complire had come to mean satisfy by 'filling up' the forms of
courtesy.


component (n.)

1640s, constitutional element (earlier one of a group of persons, 1560s), from Latin componentem
(nominative componens), present participle of componere to put together (see composite). As an
adjective, from 1660s.


componentry (n.)

1956, from component + -ry.


comport (v.)

late 14c., from Old French comporter endure, admit, behave (13c.), from Latin comportare to bring
together, collect, from com- together (see com-) + portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Meaning to
agree with, suit (with with) is from 1580s. Related: Comported; comporting.


comportment (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French comportement bearing, behavior, from comporter (13c.) to be disposed,
arranged, laid out, from Latin comportare (see comport).


compos mentis

Latin, literally in command of one's mind; from compos having the mastery of, from com- with (see
com-) + stem of potis powerful, master (see potent); + mentis, genitive of mens mind (see mind
(n.)).


compose (v.)

c.1400, compousen, from Old French composer put together, arrange, write a work (12c.), from com-
with (see com-) + poser to place, from Late Latin pausare to cease, lay down, ultimately from Latin
ponere to put, place (see position (n.)). Meaning influenced in Old French by componere (see
composite). Musical sense is from 1590s. Related: Composed; composing.


composed (adj.)

calm, tranquil, c.1600, past participle adjective frome compose (v.). Related: Composedly;
composedness.


composer (n.)

one who writes and arranges music, 1590s, agent noun from compose. Used in general sense of one who
combines into a whole from 1640s, but the music sense remains the predominant one.


composite (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French composite, from Latin compositus placed together, past participle of
componere to put together, to collect a whole from several parts, from com- together (see com-) +
ponere to place (see position (n.)). The noun is attested from c.1400. Composite number is from
1730s.


composition (n.)

late 14c., action of combining, also manner in which a thing is composed, from Old French
composicion (13c., Modern French composition) composition, make-up, literary work, agreement,
settlement, from Latin compositionem (nominative compositio) a putting together, connecting,
arranging, noun of action from past participle stem of componere (see composite). Meaning art of
constructing sentences is from 1550s; that of literary production (often also writing exercise for
students) is from c.1600. Printing sense is 1832; meaning arrangement of parts in a picture is from
1706.


compositional (adj.)

1815, from composition + -al (1).


compositor (n.)

a typesetter engaged in picking up arranging and distributing letters or type in a printing office,
1560s, agent noun from past participle stem of Latin componere (see composite).


compost (n.)

late 14c., compote, from Old French composte mixture of leaves, manure, etc., for fertilizing land
(13c.), also condiment, from Vulgar Latin *composita, noun use of fem. of Latin compositus, past
participle of componere to put together (see composite). The fertilizer sense is attested in English
from 1580s, and the French word in this sense is a 19th century borrowing from English.


compost (v.)

make into compost, 1829, from compost (n.). Related: Composted; composting.


composure (n.)

c.1600, composition (also, in early use, with many senses now given to compound), from compose +
-ure. Sense of tranquility, calmness is first recorded 1660s, from composed calm (1620s). For sense,
compare colloquial to fall apart to lose one's composure.


compote (n.)

1690s, from French compote stewed fruit, from Old French composte (13c.) mixture, compost, from
Vulgar Latin *composita, fem. of compositus (see composite). Etymologically the same word as compost
(n.).


compound (v.)

to put together, late 14c., compounen to mix, combine, from Old French compondre, componre arrange,
direct, from Latin componere to put together (see composite). The -d appeared 1500s in English on
model of expound, etc. Related: Compounded; compounding.


compound (n.2)

a compound thing, mid-15c., from compound (adj.).


compound (n.1)

1670s, via Dutch (kampoeng) or Portuguese, from Malay kampong village, group of buildings. Spelling
influenced by compound (v.). Originally, the enclosure for a factory or settlement of Europeans in
the East, later used of South African diamond miners' camps (1893), then of large fenced-in spaces
generally (1946).


compound (adj.)

late 14c., originally compouned, past participle of compounen (see compound (v.)). Compound eye is
attested from 1836; compound sentence is from 1772.


comprehend (v.)

mid-14c., to understand, from Latin comprehendere to take together, to unite; include; seize (of
catching fire or the arrest of criminals); also to comprehend, perceive (to seize or take in the
mind), from com- completely (see com-) + prehendere to catch hold of, seize (see prehensile).
Related: Comprehended; comprehending.


comprehendible (adj.)

1814 (rare), from comprehend + -ible; a native formation alongside comprehensible.


comprehensible (adj.)

1520s, able to be contained, from Latin comprehensibilis, from comprehensus, past participle of
comphrehendere (see comprehend). Meaning able to be understood is from c.1600. Related:
Comprehensibly; comprehensibility.


comprehension (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French compreh&eacute;nsion (15c.), from Latin comprehensionem (nominative
comprehensio) a seizing, laying hold of, arrest, figuratively perception, comprehension, noun of
action from past participle stem of comprehendere (see comprehend). In reading education, from 1921.


comprehensive (adj.)

containing much, 1610s, from French compreh&eacute;nsif, from Late Latin comprehensivus, from
comprehens-, past participle stem of Latin comprehendere (see comprehend). Related: Comprehensively
(mid-15c.); comprehensiveness.


compress (v.)

late 14c., to press (something) together, from Old French compresser compress, put under pressure,
from Latin compressare to press together, frequentative of comprimere to squeeze, from com- together
(see com-) + premere to press (see press (v.1)). Related: Compressed; compressing.


compress (n.)

1590s in the surgical sense, from compress (v.).


compression (n.)

c.1400, from Middle French compression (14c.), from Latin compressionem (nominative compressio) a
pressing together, noun of action from past participle stem of comprimere (see compress (v.)).
Related: Compressional. Compressional wave is attested from 1887.


compressor (n.)

1839, from Latin compressor, agent noun from comprimere (see compress (v.)). As a type of surgical
instrument, from 1870. As short for air compressor, from 1874.


comprise (v.)

early 15c., to include, from Old French compris, past participle of comprendre to contain, comprise
(12c.), from Latin comprehendere (see comprehend). Related: Comprised; comprising.


compromise (n.)

early 15c., a joint promise to abide by an arbiter's decision, from Middle French compromis (13c.),
from Latin compromissus, past participle of compromittere to make a mutual promise (to abide by the
arbiter's decision), from com- together (see com-) + promittere (see promise). The main modern sense
of a coming to terms is from extension to the settlement itself (late 15c.).


compromise (v.)

mid-15c., from compromise (n.). Related: Compromised; compromising.


Compsognathus (n.)

genus of small dinosaurs, Modern Latin, from Greek kompsos refined, elegant + gnathos jaw (see
gnathic).


comptroller (n.)

c.1500, variant of controller, with bad spelling due to influence of unrelated French compte an
account, from Latin computare.


compulsion (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French compulsion, from Latin compulsionem (nominative compulsio) a driving,
urging, noun of action from past participle stem of compellere compel (see compel). Psychological
sense is from 1909 in A.A. Brill's translation of Freud's Selected Papers on Hysteria, where German
Zwangsneurose is rendered as compulsion neurosis.


compulsive (adj.)

c.1600, from French compulsif, from Latin compulsus, past participle of compellere (see compel).
Psychological sense is from 1902. As a noun, attested from 1630s; psychological sense from 1957.
Related: Compulsively; compulsiveness.


compulsory (adj.)

1580s, from Medieval Latin compulsorius, from Latin compulsus, past participle of compellere (see
compel).


compunction (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French compunction (12c., Modern French componction), from Late Latin
compunctionem (nominative compunctio) remorse; a pricking (of conscience), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin compungere to severely prick, sting, from com-, intensive prefix (see
com-), + pungere to prick (see pungent). Used in figurative sense by early Church writers.
Originally a much more intense feeling, similar to remorse, or contrition.


compunctious (adj.)

c.1600, from stem of compunction + -ous. Related: Compunctiously; compunctiousness.


computation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French computation, from Latin computationem (nominative computatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of computare to sum up, reckon, compute (see compute).


computational (adj.)

1857, from computation + -al (1). Related: Computationally.


compute (v.)

1630s, from French computer, from Latin computare to count, sum up, reckon together, from com- with
(see com-) + putare to reckon, originally to prune (see pave). Related: Computed; computing.


computer (n.)

1640s, one who calculates, agent noun from compute (v.). Meaning calculating machine (of any type)
is from 1897; in modern use, programmable digital electronic computer (1945 under this name;
theoretical from 1937, as Turing machine). ENIAC (1946) usually is considered the first. Computer
literacy is recorded from 1970; an attempt to establish computerate (adjective, on model of
literate) in this sense in the early 1980s didn't catch on. Computerese the jargon of programmers is
from 1960, as are computerize and computerization.    WASHINGTON (AP) -- A New York Congressman says
the use of computers to record personal data on individuals, such as their credit background, is
just frightening to me. [news article, March 17, 1968]


comrade (n.)

1590s, one who shares the same room, from Middle French camarade (16c.), from Spanish camarada
chamber mate, originally chamberful, from Latin camera (see camera). In Spanish, a collective noun
referring to one's company. In 17c., sometimes jocularly misspelled comrogue. Related: Comradely;
comradeship.


comradery (n.)

1879, an attempt to nativize camaraderie.


Comstockery (n.)

1905, from Anthony Comstock (1844-1915), founder of New York Society for the Suppression of Vice
(1873) and self-appointed crusader against immorality, + -ery. Coined by George Bernard Shaw after
Comstock objected to Mrs. Warren's Profession. Comstockery is the world's standing joke at the
expense of the United States [Shaw, New York Times, Sept. 26, 1905]. The Comstock lode, silver vein
in Nevada, was discovered 1859 and first worked by U.S. prospector H.T.P. Comstock (1820-1870).


Comus (n.)

Greek god of joy and revelry, from Latin, from Greek komos revel, merrymaking (see comedy).


con (n.1)

negation (mainly in pro and con), 1570s, short for Latin contra against (see contra).


con (n.2)

study, early 15c., from Old English cunnan to know, know how (see can (v.1)).


con (adj.)

swindling, 1889, American English, from confidence man (1849), from the many scams in which the
victim is induced to hand over money as a token of confidence. Confidence with a sense of assurance
based on insufficient grounds dates from 1590s.


con (n.3)

a slang or colloquial shortening of various nouns beginning in con-, such as, from the 19th century,
confidant, conundrum, conformist, convict, contract, and from the 20th century, conductor,
conservative.


con (v.1)

to guide ships, 1620s, from French conduire to conduct, lead, guide (10c.), from Latin conducere
(see conduce). Related: Conned; conning.


con (v.2)

to swindle, 1896, from con (adj.). Related: Conned; conning.


con-

word-forming element meaning together, with, sometimes merely intensive; the form of com- used in
Latin before consonants except -b-, -p-, -l-, -m-, or -r-. In native English formations (such as
costar), co- tends to be used where Latin would use con-.


conation (n.)

in philosophical use from 1836, from Latin conationem (nominative conatio) an endeavoring, effort,
noun of action from past participle stem of conari to endeavor, to try, from PIE *kona-, from root
*ken- (1) to set oneself in motion (see deacon).


conative (adj.)

1836, from Latin conat-, past participle stem of conari to endeavor, to try (see conation) + -ive.


concatenate (v.)

c.1600, from Late Latin concatenatus, past participle of concatenare to link together (see
concatenation). Related: Concatenated; concatenating.


concatenation (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin concatenationem (nominative concatenatio) a linking together, noun of action
from past participle stem of concatenare to link together, from com- together (see com-) + catenare,
from catena a chain (see chain (n.)).


concave (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French concave (14c.) or directly from Latin concavus hollow, arched, vaulted,
curved, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + cavus hollow (see cave (n.)).


concavity (n.)

c.1400, from Old French concavit&eacute; hollow, concavity (14c.) or directly from Latin
concavitatem (nominative concavitas), from Latin concavus hollow (see concave).


conceal (v.)

early 14c., concelen, from Old French conceler to hide, conceal, dissimulate, from Latin concelare
to hide, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + celare to hide, from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover,
conceal (see cell). Replaced Old English deagan. Related: Concealed; concealing.


concealment (n.)

early 14c. (late 13c. in Anglo-French), from Old French concelement concealment, secrecy, from
conceler to hide (see conceal). Originally a term in law; general sense is from c.1600.


concede (v.)

1630s, from Middle French conc&eacute;der or directly from Latin concedere give way, yield, go away,
depart, retire, figuratively agree, consent, give precedence, from com-, intensive prefix (see
com-), + cedere to go, grant, give way (see cede). Related: Conceded; conceding.


conceit (n.)

late 14c., something formed in the mind, thought, notion, from conceiven (see conceive) based on
analogy of deceit and receipt. Sense evolved from something formed in the mind, to fanciful or witty
notion (1510s), to vanity (c.1600) through shortening of self-conceit (1580s).


conceited (adj.)

c.1600, having an overweening opinion of oneself (short for self-conceited, 1590s); earlier having
intelligence (1540s); past participle adjective from conceit (q.v.).


conceivable (adj.)

mid-15c. (implied in conceivableness), from conceive + -able. Originally in a now-obsolete sense
that can be received. Meaning that can be imagined is attested from 1620s (in conceivably).


conceive (v.)

late 13c., conceiven, take (seed) into the womb, become pregnant, from stem of Old French conceveir
(Modern French concevoir), from Latin concipere (past participle conceptus) to take in and hold;
become pregnant, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + comb. form of capere to take, from PIE
*kap- to grasp (see capable). Meaning take into the mind is from mid-14c., a figurative sense also
found in the Old French and Latin words. Related: Conceived; conceiving.


concent (n.)

harmony, 1580s, from Latin concentus a singing together, harmony, from concinere to sing or sound
together, from com- with, together (see com-) + canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Often misspelled
consent or confused with that word.


concentrate (v.)

1630s, to bring or come to a common center, from concenter (1590s), from Italian concentrare, from
Latin com- together (see com-) + centrum center (see center (n.)). Meaning condense is from 1680s.
Sense of mentally focus is c.1860. Related: Concentrated; concentrating.


concentrate (n.)

1883, from concentrate (v.).


concentration (n.)

1630s, action of bringing to a center, noun of action from verb concentrate (v.). Meaning a mass so
collected is from 1670s; continuous focus of mental activity is from 1846.


concentration camp (n.)

1901, compound for noncombatants in a war zone (see concentration); a term for a controversial idea
in the second Boer War (1899-1902), and the term emerged with a bad odor.    The concentration camp
now definitely taken its place side by side with Black Hole of Calcutta as one of those of horror at
which humanity will never cease shudder. [The Review of Reviews, London, March 1902]    It also was
used 1902 in reference to then-current U.S. policies in the Philippines, and retroactively in
reference to Spanish policies in Cuba during the insurrection there of 1896-98. The phrase was used
in U.S. during the Spanish-American war, but in reference to designated rendezvous points for U.S.
troops headed overseas. In reference to prisons for dissidents and minorities in Nazi Germany from
1934, in Soviet Russia from 1935.


concentric (adj.)

c.1400, from Middle French concentrique, from Medieval Latin concentricus, from com- together (see
com-) + centrum circle, center (see center (n.)).


concept (n.)

1550s, from Medieval Latin conceptum draft, abstract, in classical Latin (a thing) conceived, from
concep-, past participle stem of concipere to take in (see conceive). In some 16c. cases a
refashioning of conceit (perhaps to avoid negative connotations).


conception (n.)

early 14c., act of conceiving, from Old French concepcion (Modern French conception) conception,
grasp, comprehension, from Latin conceptionem (nominative conceptio) a comprehending, conception,
noun of action from stem of concipere (see conceive). Originally in the womb sense (also with
reference to Conception Day in the Church calendar); mental sense process of forming concepts is
late 14c. Meaning that which is conceived in the mind is from 1520s; general notion is from 1785.


conceptive (adj.)

1630s, from Latin conceptivus, from conceptus, past participle of concipere (see conceive).


conceptual (adj.)

1820, pertaining to mental conception (there is an isolated use from 1662), from Medieval Latin
conceptualis, from Latin conceptus a collecting, gathering, conceiving, past participle of concipere
(see conceive). Related: Conceptualism; conceptualist.


conceptualisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of conceptualization; for spelling, see -ize.


conceptualise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of conceptualize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Conceptualised;
conceptualising.


conceptualization (n.)

1866; see conceptual + -ization. Perhaps based on French conceptualisation (1862).


conceptualize (v.)

1892, from conceptual + -ize. Related: Conceptualized; conceptualizing.


conceptually (adv.)

1842, from conceptual + -ly (2).


concern (v.)

early 15c., perceive, distinguish, also refer to, relate to, from Middle French concerner, from
Medieval Latin concernere concern, touch, belong to, figurative use of Late Latin concernere to
sift, mix, as in a sieve, from Latin com- with (see com-) + cernere to sift, hence perceive,
comprehend (see crisis). Apparently the sense of the prefix shifted to intensive in Medieval Latin.
Meaning worry is 17c. Related: Concerned; concerning. Letter opening to whom it may concern attested
by 1740.


concern (n.)

1580s, from concern (v.).


concert (n.)

1660s, agreement, accord, harmony, from French concert (16c.), from Italian concerto concert,
harmony, from concertare bring into agreement, in Latin to contend, contest, dispute, from com- with
(see com-) + certare to contend, strive, frequentative of certus, variant past participle of cernere
separate, decide (see crisis).    Before the word entered English, meaning shifted from to strive
against to to strive alongside. Sense of public musical performance is 1680s. But Klein considers
this too much of a stretch and suggests Latin concentare to sing together (from con- + cantare to
sing) as the source of the Italian word in the musical sense.


concertina (n.)

1835, from concert + fem. ending -ina. Portable musical instrument invented 1829 by Sir Charles
Wheatstone. Concertina wire attested by 1917, so called from similarity to the musical instrument.


concerto (n.)

1730, from Italian concerto (see concert). Concerto grosso is from 1724.


concession (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French concession (14c.) or directly from Latin concessionem (nominative
concessio) an allowing, conceding, noun of action from past participle stem of concedere (see
concede). Meaning right or privilege granted by government is from 1650s. Refreshment stand sense is
from 1910.


concessionaire (n.)

1862, from French concessionaire person to whom a concession has been granted, from concession, from
Latin concessionem (see concession).


conch (n.)

type of shell, early 15c., from Latin concha shellfish, mollusk, from Greek konkhe mussel, shell,
from PIE root *konkho-. The name for natives of Florida Keys since at least 1833; the prefered
pronunciation there (kongk) preserves the classical one.


concierge (n.)

1640s, from French concierge caretaker, doorkeeper, porter (12c.), probably from Vulgar Latin
*conservius, from Latin conservus fellow slave, from com- with (see com-) + servius slave (see serve
(v.)).


conciliate (v.)

1540s, from Latin conciliatus, past participle of conciliare to bring together, unite in feelings,
make friendly, from concilium council (see council). Related: Conciliated; conciliating.


conciliation (n.)

1540s, from Middle French conciliation, from Latin conciliationem (nominative conciliatio) a
connection, union, bond, figuratively a making friendly, gaining over, noun of action from past
participle stem of conciliare (see conciliate).


conciliatory (adj.)

1570s, from conciliate + -ory. Related: Conciliator.


concise (adj.)

1580s, from Latin concisus cut off, brief, past participle of concidere to cut off, cut up, cut
through, cut to pieces, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + caedere to cut (see -cide).
Related: Concisely.


conciseness (n.)

expression of much in few words, 1650s, from concise + -ness.    [Conciseness] is the English word
familiar to the ordinary man: concision is the LITERARY CRITIC'S WORD, more recent in English, used
by writers under French influence &amp; often requiring the reader to stop &amp; think whether he
knows its meaning. [Fowler]


concision (n.)

late 14c., cutting away, mutilation, also, from 16c., circumcision, from Latin concisionem a
separation into divisions, literally a cutting up, noun of action from past participle stem of
concidere to cut up (see concise). From 18c. it began to be used in the sense of conciseness (q.v.).


conclave (n.)

late 14c., a place where cardinals meet to elect a pope, from Italian conclave, from Latin conclave
a room, chamber suite, probably originally a room which may be locked, from com- together (see com-)
+ clavis a key (see slot (n.2)). Extended sense of private assembly is first recorded 1560s.


conclude (v.)

early 14c., end an argument, from Latin concludere to shut up, enclose, from com- together (see
com-) + -cludere, comb. form of claudere to shut (see close (v.)). Meaning reach a mental
conclusion, deduce is from late 14c., a sense also in Latin. Related: Concluded; concluding.


conclusion (n.)

late 14c., deduction or conclusion reached by reasoning, from Old French conclusion conclusion,
result, outcome, from Latin conclusionem (nominative conclusio), noun of action from past participle
stem of concludere (see conclude). Also, from late 14c. the end (usually of speech or writing),
closing passages of a speech or writing.


conclusive (adj.)

1610s, occurring at the end, from French conclusif, from Late Latin conclusivus, from conclus-, past
participle stem of concludere (see conclude). Meaning definitive, decisive, convincing (putting an
end to debate) is from 1640s. Related: Conclusiveness.


conclusively (adv.)

1550s, in conclusion, from conclusive + -ly (2). Meaning decisively is recorded from 1748.


conclusory (adj.)

1846, pertaining to a conclusion, from stem of conclusion + -ory. Probably coined because the
secondary decisive sense had come to predominate in conclusive.


concoct (v.)

1530s, to digest, from Latin concoctus, past participle of concoquere to digest; to boil together,
prepare; to consider well, from com- together (see com-) + coquere to cook (see cook (n.)). Meaning
to prepare an edible thing is from 1670s. First expanded metaphorically beyond cooking 1792.
Related: Concocted; concocting.


concoction (n.)

1530s, digestion, from Latin concoctionem (nominative concoctio) digestion, noun of action from past
participle stem of concoquere (see concoct). Meaning preparation of a medicinal potion is from 1851;
sense of a made-up story is from 1823.


concomitance (n.)

1520s, from Middle French concomitance, from Medieval Latin concomitantia, from Late Latin
concomitantem (see concomitant). Related: Concomitancy.


concomitant (adj.)

c.1600, from French concomitant, from Late Latin concomitantem (nominative concomitans), present
participle of concomitari accompany, attend, from com- with, together (see com-) + comitari join as
a companion, from comes (genitive comitis) companion (see count (n.)).


concord (n.)

early 14c., from Old French concorde (12c.) concord, harmony, agreement, treaty, from Latin
concordia agreement, union, from concors (genitive concordis) of the same mind, literally hearts
together, from com- together (see com-) + cor heart (see heart).


concordance (n.)

late 14c., alphabetical arrangement of all the words in a book (especially the Bible), from Old
French concordance (12c.) agreement, harmony, from Late Latin concordantia, from concordantem
(nominative concordans; see concord). Originally a citation of parallel passages. Literal meaning
fact of agreeing attested in English from mid-15c.


concordant (adj.)

late 15c. of persons, 1510s of things, 1550s of music, from French concordant, from Latin
concordantem, present participle of concordare (see concord). Related: Concordantly.


concordat (n.)

agreement between church and state on a mutual matter, 1610s, from French concordat (16c.), from
Medieval Latin concordatum, noun use of Latin concordatum, neuter past participle of concordare to
agree, from concors (genitive concordis) of one mind (see concord).


Concorde (n.)

supersonic passenger airliner, operating from 1976 to 2003, from French concorde, literally harmony,
agreement (see concord), reflecting the Anglo-French collaborative agreement that produced it.


concours (n.)

from French concours (16c.) assemblage of things brought together, also contest (see concourse).
Usually in English in phrase concours d'elegance.


concourse (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French concours, from Latin concursus a running together, from past
participle of concurrere (see concur). Originally the flowing of a crowd of people; sense of open
space in a built-up place is American English, 1862.


concrete (adj.)

late 14c., actual, solid, from Latin concretus condensed, hardened, thick, hard, stiff, curdled,
congealed, clotted, figuratively thick; dim, literally grown together; past participle of
concrescere to grow together, from com- together (see com-) + crescere to grow (see crescent). A
logicians' term until meaning began to expand 1600s. Noun sense of building material made from
cement, etc. is first recorded 1834.


concrete poetry (n.)

1958, from terms coined independently in mid-1950s in Brazil (poesia concreta) and Germany (die
konkrete Dichtung). Related: Concrete poem (1958).


concretion (n.)

by 1670s, from French concr&eacute;tion, from Latin concretionem (nominative concretio), from
concretus (see concrete).


concretize (v.)

1884, from concrete + -ize. Concrete itself sometimes was used as a verb in various senses from
1630s.


concubinage (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French concubinage, from concubin, from Latin concubina (see concubine).


concubine (n.)

c.1300, from Latin concubina (fem.), from concumbere to lie with, to lie together, to cohabit, from
com- with (see com-) + cubare to lie down (see cubicle). Recognized by law among polygamous peoples
as a secondary wife.


concupiscence (n.)

mid-14c., from Latin concupiscentia eager desire, from concupiscens, present participle of
concupiscere, inceptive of concupere to be very desirous of, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-),
+ cupere to long for (see cupidity). Used in Vulgate to translate Greek epithymia.


concupiscent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin concupiscentem (nominative concupiscens), present participle of concupiscere to
long for, covet (see concupiscence).


concur (v.)

early 15c., collide, clash in hostility, from Latin concurrere to run together, assemble hurriedly;
clash, fight, in transferred use, to happen at the same time, from com- together (see com-) +
currere to run (see current (adj.)). Sense of to coincide, happen at the same time is 1590s; that of
to agree in opinion is 1580s in English.


concurrence (n.)

early 15c., from Old French concurrence (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin concurrentia a
running together, from concurrens, present participle of concurrere (see concur).


concurrent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French concurrent or directly from Latin concurrentem (nominative concurrens),
present participle of concurrere (see concur). Related: Concurrency; concurrently. Concurrent
jurisdiction is recorded from 1767.


concurring (adj.)

1590s, from present participle of concur. Concurring opinion is recorded from 1720.


concuss (v.)

1590s, to shake violently, from Latin concuss-, past participle stem of concutere to dash together,
shake violently (see concussion). Meaning to give a concussion to the brain is from 1680s. Related:
Concussed; concussing; concussive.


concussion (n.)

c.1400, from Latin concussionem (nominative concussio) a shaking, noun of action from past
participle stem of concutere shake violently, from com- together (see com-) + quatere to shake (see
quash). Modern brain injury sense is from 1540s.


condemn (v.)

early 14c., condempner to blame, censure, from Old French condamner to condemn (11c.), from Latin
condemnare to sentence, doom, blame, disapprove, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + damnare
to harm, damage (see damn). Replaced Old English fordeman. Related: Condemned; condemning.


condemnation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin condemnationem (nominative condemnatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of condemnare (see condemn).


condemnatory (adj.)

late 16c., from Latin condemnat-, past participle stem of condemnare (see condemn) + -ory.


condemned (adj.)

1540s, found guilty, at fault, past participle adjective from condemn. Of property, found unfit for
use, from 1798.


condensate (v.)

1550s, to make dense, from condens-, past participle stem of Latin condensare (see condense) + -ate
(2). Meaning to become dense is from c.1600.


condensation (n.)

c.1600, action of becoming more dense, from Latin condensationem (nominative condensatio), noun of
action from condensare (see condense). Meaning conversion of a gas to a liquid is from 1610s.


condense (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French condenser (14c.) or directly from Latin condensare to make dense,
from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + densare make thick, from densus dense, thick, crowded, a
word used of crowds, darkness, clouds, etc. (see dense).


condensed (adj.)

c.1600, made more dense, past participle adjective from condense. Of literary works, from 1823.
Condensed milk attested by 1863.


condenser (n.)

1680s, agent noun from condense. Given a wide variety of technical uses in late 18c. and 19c.


condescend (adj.)

mid-14c., to yield deferentially, from Old French condescendere (14c.) to agree, consent, give in,
yield, from Late Latin condescendere to let oneself down, from Latin com- together (see com-) +
descendere descend (see descend). Sense of to sink willingly to equal terms with inferiors is from
mid-15c.


condescendence (n.)

1630s, from French condescendance, from condescendre, from Latin condescendere (see condescend).


condescending (adj.)

1707, present participle adjective from condescend. Originally in a positive sense (of God, the
Savior, etc.) until late 18c. Related: Condescendingly (1650s).


condescension (n.)

1640s, from Late Latin condescensionem, noun of action from past participle stem of condescendere
(see condescend).


condescent (n.)

mid-15c., from condescend on model of descent.


condign (adj.)

late 15c., well-deserved, from Old French condigne deserved, appropriate, equal in wealth, from
Latin condignus wholly worthy, from com- together, altogether (see com-) + dignus worthy (see
dignity). Of punishment, deservedly severe, from 1510s, which by Johnson's day (1755) was the only
use.


condiment (n.)

early 15c., from Old French condiment (13c.), from Latin condimentum spice, seasoning, sauce, from
condire to preserve, pickle, season, variant of condere to put away, store, from com- together (see
com-) + -dere comb. form meaning to put, place, from dare to give (see date (n.1)).


condition (n.)

early 14c., condicioun, from Old French condicion stipulation, state, behavior, social status (12c.,
Modern French condition), from Latin condicionem (nominative condicio) agreement, situation, from
condicere to speak with, talk together, from com- together (see com-) + dicere to speak (see
diction). Evolution of meaning through stipulation, condition, to situation, mode of being.


condition (v.)

late 15c., to make conditions, from condition (n.). Meaning to bring to a desired condition is from
1844. Related: Conditioned; conditioning.


conditional (adj.)

late 14c., condicionel, from Old French condicionel (Modern French conditionnel), from Latin
conditionalis, from condicionem (see condition (n.)). Related: Conditionally.


conditioner (n.)

c.1600, a bargainer, agent noun from condition (v.). Meaning an agent that brings something into
good condition is from 1888; since c.1960 usually in reference to hair care products. For about 20
years before that, it often was short for air conditioner.


condo (n.)

1964, short for condominium.


condole (v.)

late 15c., to sorrow, from Late Latin condolere to suffer with another, from com- with (see com-) +
dolere to grieve. Meaning to express condolences is recorded from 1650s. Related: Condoled;
condoling.


condolence (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin condolere to suffer together (see condole) + -ence. Often in form
condoleance 1600-1800.


condolences (n.)

formal declaration of sympathy, 1670s, plural of condolence. Reason for the plural is unclear;
earliest references are to expressions from groups of persons; perhaps the habit stuck.


condom (n.)

1706, traditionally named for a British physician during reign of Charles II (a story traceable to
1709), but there is no evidence for that. Also spelled condam, quondam, which suggests it may be
from Italian guantone, from guanto a glove. A word omitted in the original OED (c.1890) and not used
openly in the U.S. and not advertised in mass media until November 1986 speech by Surgeon General C.
Everett Koop on AIDS prevention. Compare prophylactic.


condominium (n.)

c.1714, joint rule or sovereignty, from Modern Latin condominium joint sovereignty, apparently
coined in German c.1700 from Latin com- together (see com-) + dominum right of ownership (see
domain). A word in politics and international law until sense of privately owned apartment arose in
American English 1962 as a special use of the legal term.


condonation (n.)

1620s, from Latin condonationem (nominative condonatio) a giving away, noun of action from condonare
(see condone).


condone (v.)

1857, from Latin condonare to give up, remit, permit, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), +
donare to give (see donation). Originally a legal term in the Matrimonial Causes Act, which made
divorce a civil matter in Britain. Related: Condoned; condoning.


condor (n.)

c.1600, from American Spanish, from Quechua cuntur, the native name for the bird.


conduce (v.)

c.1400, from Latin conducere to lead or bring together, contribute, serve, from com- together (see
com-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)).


conducive (adj.)

1640s, from conduce + -ive.


conduct (v.)

early 15c., to guide, from Latin conductus, past participle of conducere to lead or bring together
(see conduce). Sense of convey is from early 15c.; that of to direct, manage is from 1630s; to
behave in a certain way from c.1710; to convey from 1740. Related: Conducted; conducting. Earlier
verb in the same sense was condyten (c.1400), related to conduit. The noun is from mid-15c., guide
(in sauf conducte); sense of behavior is first recorded 1670s.


conduction (n.)

1530s, hiring; 1540s, leading, guidance, from Old French conduction hire, renting, from Latin
conductionem (nominative conductio), noun of action from past participle stem of conducere (see
conduce). Sense of conducting of a liquid through a channel is from 1610s; in physics, of heat,
etc., from 1814.


conductive (adj.)

1520s, from conduct + -ive. Physics sense is from 1840. Related: Conductivity (1837).


conductor (n.)

1520s, one who leads or guides, from Middle French conductour (14c., Old French conduitor), from
Latin conductor one who hires, contractor, in Late Latin a carrier, from conductus, past participle
of conducere (see conduce).    Earlier in same sense was conduitour (early 15c., from Old French
conduitor). Meaning leader of an orchestra or chorus is from 1784; meaning one who has charge of
passengers and collects fares on a railroad is 1832, American English. Physics sense of object or
device that passes heat is from 1745; of electricity from 1737.


conduit (n.)

c.1300, conduyt, from Old French conduit (12c.) escort, protection; pipe, channel, from Latin
conductus a leading, a pipe (see conduct). A doublet of conduct, differentiated in meaning from 15c.


condyle (n.)

1630s, knob at the end of a bone, from French condyle (16c.), from Latin condylus, from Greek
kondylos a knuckle, of unknown origin.


cone (n.)

1560s, from Middle French cone (16c.) or directly from Latin conus a cone, peak of a helmet, from
Greek konos cone, spinning top, pine cone, perhaps from PIE root *ko- to sharpen (cognates: Sanskrit
sanah whetstone, Latin catus sharp, Old English han stone).


Conestoga

1690s, name of an Indian tribe in southcentral Pennsylvania, probably from some Iroquoian language
and sometimes said to mean people of the cabin pole; later a place in Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania. A characteristic type of covered wagon, called Conestoga wagon, was built there from
1750 (about three years before the last of the Conestoga Indians were massacred), but it already was
an established term, as the first reference is to the name of a Philadelphia tavern, and probably
originally meant the type of wagon farmers used on the road from the city to Conestoga. Also a breed
of horses (1824) and a type of boot and cigar (see stogie).


coney (n.)

c.1200, from Anglo-French conis, plural of conil long-eared rabbit (Lepus cunicula) from Latin
cuniculus (source of Spanish conejo, Portuguese coelho, Italian coneglio), the small, Spanish
variant of the Italian hare (Latin lepus), the word perhaps from Iberian Celtic (classical writers
say it is Spanish).   Rabbit arose 14c. to mean the young of the species, but gradually pushed out
the older word 19c., after British slang picked up coney as a punning synonym for cunny cunt
(compare connyfogle to deceive in order to win a woman's sexual favors). The word was in the King
James Bible [Prov. xxx:26, etc.], however, so it couldn't be entirely dropped, and the solution was
to change the pronunciation of the original short vowel (rhyming with honey, money) to rhyme with
boney. In the Old Testament, the word translates Hebrew shaphan rock-badger. Rabbits not being
native to northern Europe, there was no Germanic or Celtic word for them.


Coney Island

community in Brooklyn, N.Y., so called for the rabbits once found there (see coney) and was known to
the Dutch as Konijn Eiland, from which the English name probably derives. It emerged as a resort and
amusement park center after the U.S. Civil War.


confab (n.)

1701, colloquial shortening of confabulation.


confabulate (v.)

1610s, from confabulatus, past participle of Latin confabulari to converse together, from com-
together (see com-) + fabulari to talk, chat, from fabula a tale (see fable). Psychiatric sense is
from 1924.


confabulation (n.)

mid-15c., talking together, from Late Latin confabulationem (nominative confabulatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin confabulari (see confabulate).


confarreation (n.)

c.1600, from Latin confarreationem, from confarreare to unite in marriage by the Ceremony of the
Cake, from com- with, together (see com-) + far, farris spelt, grain, meal (see barley). In ancient
Rome, the most solemn form of marriage, in which an offering of bread was made in the presence of
the Pontifex Maximus and 10 witnesses.


confection (n.)

mid-14c., confescioun, from Old French confeccion (12c., Modern French confection) drawing up (of a
treaty, etc.); article, product, in pharmacology, mixture, compound, from Late Latin confectionem
(nominative confectio) a confection, in classical Latin, a making, preparing, noun of action from
confect-, past participle stem of conficere to prepare, from com- with (see com-) + facere to make,
do (see factitious). Originally the making by means of ingredients, sense of candy or light pastry
predominated from 16c.


confectionary (n.)

c.1600, confection maker, also confection maker's shop, from confection + -ary. As an adjective,
from 1660s.


confectioner (n.)

1590s, agent noun from confection.


confectionery (n.)

1540s, things made or sold by a confectioner, from confection + -ery. Of architectural
ornamentation, from 1861.


confederacy (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French confederacie (Old French confederacie), from stem of Latin
confoederatio, from confoederare (see confederate). Earliest in reference to leagues of classical
Greek states (Aetolian, Achaean, etc.), later of the Netherlands. The word was used of the United
States of America under (and in) the Articles of Confederation (1777-1788). In reference to the
breakaway Confederate States of America (1861-1865) from 1861.   Confederacy now usually implies a
looser or more temporary association than confederation, which is applied to a union of states
organized on an intentionally permanent basis. [OED]


confederate (v.)

late 14c., from Late Latin confoederatus leagued together, past participle of confoederare to unite
by a league, from com- with, together (see com-) + foederare, from foedus (genitive foederis) a
league (see federal). Also used as a past participle adjective from late 14c., as a simple adjective
from 1550s; meaning of or belonging to the Confederate States of America is from 1861. Used as a
noun from late 15c. (Late Latin confoederatus also was used as a noun in its day).


confederation (n.)

early 15c., act of confederating, from Middle French conf&eacute;d&eacute;ration, from Old French
confederacion (14c.), from Late Latin confoederationem (nominative confoederatio), noun of action
from confoederare (see confederate). Meaning states or persons united by a league is from 1620s.


confer (v.)

1530s, from Middle French conf&eacute;rer (14c.) to give, converse, compare, from Latin conferre to
bring together, figuratively to compare; consult, deliberate, talk over, from com- together (see
com-) + ferre to bear (see infer). Sense of taking counsel led to conference. The meaning compare
(common 1530-1650) is largely obsolete, but the abbreviation cf. still is used in this sense.
Related: Conferred; conferring.


conference (n.)

1550s, act of conferring, from Middle French conf&eacute;rence (15c.), from Medieval Latin
conferentia, from Latin conferens, present participle of conferre (see confer). Meaning formal
meeting for consultation is from 1580s.


conferral (n.)

1880, from confer + -al (2).


confess (v.)

late 14c., from Old French confesser (transitive and intransitive), from Vulgar Latin *confessare,
from Latin confess-, past participle stem of confiteri to acknowledge, from com- together (see com-)
+ fateri to admit, akin to fari speak (see fame (n.)).    Its original religious sense was of one
who avows his religion in spite of persecution or danger but does not suffer martyrdom. Old French
confesser thus had a figurative sense of to harm, hurt, make suffer. Related: Confessed; confessing.
An Old English word for it was andettan.


confessed (adj.)

self-acknowledged, 1560s, past participle adjective from confess.


confession (n.)

late 14c., action of confessing, originally in religion, from Old French confession (10c.), from
Latin confessionem (nominative confessio) confession, acknowledgement, noun of action from past
participle stem of confiteri (see confess). In law, from 1570s. Meaning that which is confessed is
mid-15c. An Old English word for it was andettung, also scriftspr&#230;c.


confessional (n.)

place where a priest sits to hear confession, 1727, from French confessional, from Medieval Latin
confessionale, noun use of neuter of confessionalis (adj.), from confiteri (see confess).


confessional (adj.)

pertaining to confession, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin confessionalis (see confessional (n.)).


confessor (n.)

late Old English, one who avows his religion, especially in the face of danger, but does not suffer
martyrdom, from Latin confessor, agent noun from confiteri (see confess). Meaning one who hears
confessions is from mid-14c.; this properly would be Latin confessarius, but Latin confessor was
being used in this sense from the 9th century.   Edward the Confessor (c.1003-1066, canonized 1161),
last Anglo-Saxon king, was pious enough but does not seem to fit his title; perhaps so called to
distinguish him from another Anglo-Saxon saint/king, Edward the Martyr, who does fit his.


confetti (n.)

1815, from Italian plural of confetto sweetmeat, via Old French, from Latin confectum, confectus
(see confection). A small candy traditionally thrown during carnivals in Italy, custom adopted in
England for weddings and other occasions, with symbolic tossing of paper.


confidant (n.)

1610s, confident, (male) person trusted with private affairs, from French confident (16c.), from
Italian confidente a trusty friend, literally confident, trusty, from Latin confidentem (nominative
confidens), present participle of confidere to trust, confide (see confidence). The spelling with
-a- came to predominate 18c. and might reflect the French pronunciation.


confidante (n.)

1709, female confidant, from French confidente, fem. of confident (see confidant).


confide (v.)

mid-15c., to trust or have faith, from Latin confidere to trust in, rely firmly upon, believe (see
confidence). Meaning to share a secret with is from 1735; phrase confide in (someone) is from 1888.
Related: Confided; confiding.


confidence (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French confidence or directly from Latin confidentia, from confidentem
(nominative confidens) firmly trusting, bold, present participle of confidere to have full trust or
reliance, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + fidere to trust (see faith). For sense of
swindle see con (adj.).


confident (adj.)

1570s, self-reliant, sure of oneself, from Middle French confident, from Latin confidentem
(nominative confidens) firmly trusting, reliant, self-confident, bold, daring, present participle of
confidere (see confidence). Related: Confidently.


confidente (n.)

see confidant.


confidential (adj.)

1759, from Latin confidentia (see confidence) + -al (1). Related: Confidentiality; confidentially.


configuration (n.)

1550s, from Latin configurationem (nominative configuratio), noun of action from past participle
stem of configurare (see configure).


configure (v.)

late 14c., from Latin configurare to fashion after a pattern, from con- together (see com-) +
figurare to form, shape, from figura a shape, form, figure (see figure (n.)).


confine (n.)

c.1400, boundary, limit (usually as confines), from Old French confins boundaries, from Medieval
Latin confines, from Latin confinium (plural confinia) boundary, limit, from confine, neuter of
confinis bordering on, having the same boundaries, from com- with (see com-) + finis an end (see
finish (v.)).


confine (v.)

1520s, to border on, from Middle French confiner, from confins (n.); see confine (n.). Sense of
keeping within limits is from 1590s. Related: Confined; confining.


confinement (n.)

1590s, from French confinement (16c.; the Old French word was confinacion), from confiner (see
confine). As a euphemism for childbed it dates from 1774 (the Middle English expression was Our
Lady's bands).


confirm (v.)

mid-13c., confirmyn to ratify, from Old French confermer (13c., Modern French confirmer) strengthen,
establish, consolidate; affirm by proof or evidence; anoint (a king), from Latin confirmare make
firm, strengthen, establish, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + firmare to strengthen, from
firmus (see firm (adj.)). Related: Confirmative; confirmatory.


confirmation (n.)

c.1300, confyrmacyoun, the Church rite, from Old French confirmacion (13c.) strengthening,
confirmation; proof; ratification, from Latin confirmationem (nominative confirmatio) a securing,
establishing; an assurance, encouragement, noun of action from confirmare (see confirm). As a legal
action, verification, proof, from late 14c.; as action of making sure, from late 15c.


confirmed (adj.)

late 14c., of diseases, firmly established, past participle adjective from confirm. Of persons and
their habits, from 1826.


confiscate (v.)

1550s, originally, to appropriate for the treasury, from Latin confiscatus, past participle of
confiscare, from com- together (see com-) + fiscus public treasury, literally money basket (see
fiscal). Related: Confiscated; confiscating.


confiscation (n.)

1540s, from Middle French confiscation, from Latin confiscationem (nominative confiscatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of confiscare (see confiscate).


confit

obsolete form of comfit.


conflagrate (v.)

1650s, to catch fire, from Latin conflagrat-, past participle stem of conflagrare (see
conflagration). Meaning to set on fire is from 1835.


conflagration (n.)

1550s, from Middle French conflagration (16c.) or directly from Latin conflagrationem (nominative
conflagratio), present participle of conflagrare to burn up, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-),
+ flagrare to burn (see flagrant).


conflate (v.)

1540s, from Latin conflat-, past participle stem of conflare to blow up, kindle, light; bring
together, compose, also to melt together, literally to blow together, from com- with (see com-) +
flare to blow (see blow (v.1)).


conflation (n.)

1620s, from Late Latin conflationem (nominative conflatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of conflare (see conflate).


conflict (v.)

early 15c., from Latin conflictus, past participle of confligere to strike together, be in conflict,
from com- together (see com-) + fligere to strike (see afflict). Related: Conflicted; conflicting.


conflict (n.)

early 15c., armed encounter, battle, from Old French conflit and directly from Latin conflictus (see
conflict (v.)). Meaning struggle, quarrel is from mid-15c. Psychological sense of incompatible urges
in one person is from 1859 (hence conflicted, past participle adjective). Phrase conflict of
interest was in use by 1743.


conflictual (adj.)

1950, in psychological writing, from conflict (n.) on model of habitual, etc.


confluence (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin confluentia, from Latin confluentem (nominative confluens), present
participle of confluere to flow together, from com- together (see com-) + fluere to flow (see
fluent).


confluent (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French confluent or directly from Latin confluentem (nominative confluens),
present participle of confluere to flow together (see confluence). The noun meaning a stream which
flows into another is from 1850.


conform (v.)

mid-14c., confourmen, from Old French conformer conform (to), agree (to), make or be similar, be
agreeable (13c.), from Latin conformare to fashion, to form, to shape; educate; modify, from com-
together (see com-) + formare to form (see form (v.)).    Sense of to comply with the usages of the
Church of England is from 1610s; hence conformist (1630s), opposed to non-conformist or dissenter.
Related: Conformance; conformed; conforming.


conformable (adj.)

1510s, from conform + -able.


conformation (n.)

1510s, from Latin conformationem (nominative conformatio) a symmetrical forming, noun of action from
past participle stem of conformare (see conform).


conformism (n.)

1890, tendency or need to conform to some group standard, from conform + -ism. In religion, from
c.1902. In geology from c.1912. Modern, general sociological sense (social conformism) popularized
from c.1948.


conformist (n.)

one who conforms in any way, originally usually with reference to religion; 1630s, from conform +
-ist. Compare conformism.


conformity (n.)

early 15c., conformyte, from Middle French conformit&eacute; (14c.), from Late Latin conformitatem
(nominative conformitas), from conformis similar in shape, from conformare (see conform). Modern
form is from 17c.


confound (v.)

c.1300, make uneasy, abash, from Anglo-French confoundre, Old French confondre (12c.) crush, ruin,
disgrace, throw into disorder, from Latin confundere to confuse, literally to pour together, mix,
mingle, from com- together (see com-) + fundere to pour (see found (v.2)).    The figurative sense
of confuse, fail to distinguish, mix up emerged in Latin, passed into French and thence into Middle
English, where it is mostly found in Scripture; the sense of destroy utterly is recorded in English
from c.1300. Meaning perplex is late 14c. The Latin past participle confusus, meanwhile, became
confused (q.v.).


confounded (adj.)

as an intensive execration, odious, detestable, damned, 1650s, from past participle of confound, in
its older English sense of overthrow utterly.


confraternity (n.)

late 15c., from Old French confraternit&eacute; (14c.), from Medieval Latin confraternitas, from
confrater (see confrere).


confrere (n.)

early 15c., from Old French confrere brother, companion (13c.), from Medieval Latin confrater, from
com- together, with (see com-) + frater brother (see brother). Probably lost in later 17c. and
reborrowed 19c. from French confr&egrave;re.


confront (v.)

1560s, to stand in front of, from Middle French confronter (15c.), from Medieval Latin confrontare
assign limits, adjoin, from Latin com- together (see com-) + frontem (nominative frons) forehead
(see front (n.)). Sense of to face in defiance or hostility is late 16c. Related: Confronted;
confronting.


confrontation (n.)

1630s, action of bringing two parties face to face, from Medieval Latin confrontationem, noun of
action from past participle stem of confrontare (see confront). International political sense is
attested from 1963 and traces to the Cuban missile crisis of the previous year.


confrontational (adj.)

1969, from confrontation + -al (1).


Confucius

1837, Latinization of Chinese K'ung Fu-tzu K'ung the philosopher (or Master) (c.551 B.C.E.-c.479
B.C.E.). The name first appears in a Latin publication of Chinese works (Paris, 1687). Connection
with the martial arts kung-fu is obscure, uncertain. His philosophy based on the Golden Rule: What
you do not like when done to yourself do not do to others. Related: Confucian (adj., 1837);
Confucianism (1846).


confuse (v.)

1550s, in literal sense mix or mingle things so as to render the elements indistinguishable;
attested from mid-18c. in active, figurative sense of discomfit in mind or feeling; not in general
use until 19c., taking over senses formerly belonging to confound, dumbfound, flabbergast etc. The
past participle confused (q.v.) is attested much earlier (serving as an alternative past tense to
confound), and the verb here might be a back-formation from it. Related: Confusing.


confused (adj.)

early 14c., discomfited, routed, defeated (of groups), serving at first as an alternative past
participle of confound, as Latin confusus was the past participle of confundere to pour together,
mix, mingle; to join together; hence, figuratively, to throw into disorder; to trouble, disturb,
upset. The Latin past participle also was used as an adjective, with reference to mental states,
troubled, embarrassed, and this passed into Old French as confus dejected, downcast, undone,
defeated, discomfited in mind or feeling, which passed to Middle English as confus (14c.; for
example Chaucer's I am so confus, that I may not seye), which then was assimilated to the English
past participle pattern by addition of -ed. Of individuals, discomfited in mind, perplexed, from
mid-14c.; of ideas, speech, thought, etc., from 1610s. By mid-16c., the word seems to have been felt
as a pure adj., and it evolved a back-formed verb in confuse. Few English etymologies are more
confused.


confusion (n.)

late 13c., overthrow, ruin, from Old French confusion (11c.) disorder, confusion, shame, from Latin
confusionem (nominative confusio) a mingling, mixing, blending; confusion, disorder, noun of action
from confundere to pour together, also to confuse (see confound). Sense of a putting to shame (a
sort of mental overthrow) is late 14c. in English, while that of mental perplexity is from 1590s.


confusticate (v.)

mid-19c., a fantastical American English coinage from confound or confuse, perhaps originally in
minstrel show comedy, along with confubuscate, conflabberated, etc.


confutation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin confutationem (nominative confutatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of confutare (see confute).


confute (v.)

1520s, from Middle French confuter, from Latin confutare repress, check; disprove, restrain,
silence, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + *futare to beat, from PIE root *bhau- to strike,
beat (see batter (v.)). Related: Confuted; confuting.


conga (n.)

1935, American Spanish, fem. of (danza) Congo Congo (dance); so called because it was assumed to be
of African origin.


congeal (v.)

late 14c., from Old French congeler (14c.) to freeze, thicken, from Latin congelare to cause to
freeze, to freeze together, from com- together (see com-) + gelare to freeze, from gelu frost, ice
(see cold (adj.)). Related: Congealed; congealing.


congee (n.)

early 14c., from Old French congi&eacute; permission, leave of absence, dismissal, ceremonial leave-
taking (Modern French cong&eacute;), from Latin commeatus passage, going to and fro, hence leave of
absence, from commeare, from com- with, together (see com-) + meare to go, pass (see mutable).
Probably lost 17c. and revived 19c. from Modern French.


congener (n.)

1730s, from French cong&eacute;n&egrave;re (16c.), from Latin congener of the same race or kind,
from com- together (see com-) + gener-, stem of genus kind (see genus).


congenial (adj.)

1620s, kindred, sympathetic, from Latin com- together (see com-) + genialis of birth, thus, kindred
(see genus). Sense of agreeable is first recorded 1711. Related: Congeniality.


congenital (adj.)

existing from birth, 1796, from Latin congenitus, from com- together, with (see com-) + genitus,
past participle of gignere to beget (see genus). The sense formerly belonged to congenial. Related:
Congenitally.


conger (n.)

c.1300, from Latin conger sea-eel, from Greek gongros conger, probably from PIE root *geng-, *gong-
a lump, rounded object.


congeries (n.)

1610s, from Latin congeries heap, pile, collected mass, from congerere to carry together (see
congest). False singular congery is from 1866.    Man should have some sense of responsibility to
the human congeries. As a matter of observation, very few men have any such sense. No social order
can exist very long unless a few, at least a few, men have such a sense. [Ezra Pound, ABC of
Economics, 1933]


congest (v.)

early 15c., to bring together (transitive), from Latin congestus, past participle of congerere to
bring together, pile up, from com- together (see com-) + gerere to carry, perform (see gest).
Medical sense of unnatural accumulation (1758) led to transferred (intransitive) sense of overcrowd
(1859). Related: Congested; congesting.


congested (adj.)

1570s, heaped up, past participle adjective from congest. Meaning overcrowded is recorded from 1862.


congestion (n.)

early 15c., action of gathering together, from Middle French congestion (14c.), from Latin
congestionem (nominative congestio), noun of action from past participle stem of congerere (see
congest). Medical sense is from 1630s; meaning a crowding together of people, traffic, etc. is from
1883.


congestive (adj.)

1846, from congest + -ive. Congestive heart failure is recorded from 1928.


conglomerate (adj.)

1570s, from Latin conglomeratus, past participle of conglomerare to roll together, from com-
together (see com-) + glomerare to gather into a ball, from glomus (genitive glomeris) a ball, from
PIE root *glem-.


conglomerate (n.)

large business group, 1967, from conglomerate (adj.).


conglomerate (v.)

1590s, from Latin conglomeratus, past participle of conglomerare (see conglomerate (adj.)). Related:
Conglomerated; conglomerating.


conglomeration (n.)

1620s, from Latin conglomerationem (nominative conglomeratio), noun of action from past participle
stem of conglomerare (see conglomerate (adj.)).


Congo

African nation, named for the river that runs through it, which is from a Bantu word meaning
mountains (i.e., the river that flows from the mountains). As an adjective, Congoese is native
English (1797) but has been supplanted by Congolese (1900), from French Congolais.


congrats (n.)

1884, colloquial shortening of congratulations. Further colloquialized in British English to
congratters (1906) and among online gamers to grats (by 2000).


congratulate (v.)

1540s, from Latin congratulatus, past participle of congratulari to congratulate (see
congratulation). Related: Congratulated; congratulating.


congratulation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin congratulationem (nominative congratulatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of congratulari wish joy, from com- together, with (see com-) + gratulari give
thanks, show joy, from gratus agreeable (see grace (n.)).


congratulations

1630s, an exclamation conveying a sentiment of congratulation, from congratulation (q.v.).


congratulatory (adj.)

1520s; see congratulate + -ory.


congregate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin congregatus flocking together, past participle of congregare to herd together,
collect in a flock, swarm; assemble, from com- together (see com-) + gregare to collect into a
flock, gather, from grex (genitive gregis) a flock (see gregarious). Related: Congregated;
congregating.


congregation (n.)

mid-14c., a gathering, assembly, from Old French congregacion (12c., Modern French
congr&eacute;gation), from Latin congregationem (nominative congregatio), noun of action from
congregare (see congregate).    Used by Tyndale to translate Greek ekklesia in New Testament and by
some Old Testament translators in place of synagoge. (Vulgate uses a variety of words in these
cases, including congregatio but also ecclesia, vulgus, synagoga, populus.) Protestant reformers in
16c. used it in place of church; hence the word's main modern sense of local society of believers
(1520s).


congregational (adj.)

1630s, in reference to Congregationalism, a Protestant movement in which church congregations were
to be self-governing (the term most used in New England, in Britain they were called Independent);
from congregation + -al (1). Related: Congregationalist.


congress (n.)

c.1400, body of attendants; also meeting of armed forces (mid-15c.); main modern sense of coming
together of people, a meeting is from 1520s; from Latin congressus a friendly meeting; a hostile
encounter, past participle of congredi meet with, fight with, from com- together (see com-) + gradi
to walk, from gradus a step (see grade (n.)).    Sense of meeting of delegates is first recorded
1670s. Meaning sexual union is from 1580s. Used in reference to the national legislative body of the
American states since 1775 (though since 1765 in America as a name for proposed bodies). Congress of
Vienna met Nov. 1, 1814, to June 8, 1815, and redrew the map of Europe with an eye to creating a
balance of powers after the disruptions of Napoleon.


congressional (adj.)

1690s, from Latin congressionem (from congressus, see congress) + -al (1). Originally sometimes
reviled as barbarous, Pickering (1816) quotes an unnamed English correspondent: The term Congress
belonging to America, the Americans may employ its derivatives, without waiting for the assent of
the English.


congressman (n.)

1780, in reference to members of U.S. Congress, and it first appears in a piece of abuse (written by
a Loyalist):    Ye coxcomb Congressmen, declaimers keen,   Brisk puppets of the Philadelphia scene
...    Congresswoman attested from 1918 (Jeannette Rankin (1880-1973) was the first).


Congreve

in reference to rockets or matches, from Sir William Congreve (1772-1828).


congruence (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin congruentia agreement, harmony, congruity, from congruentem (nominative
congruens), present participle of congruere to come together (see congruent). Related: Congruency.


congruent (adj.)

early 15c., suitable, proper, from Latin congruentem (nominative congruens) agreeing, fit, suitable,
present participle of congruere, literally to come together, agree, correspond with, from com- with
(see com-) + a lost verb *gruere, *ruere fall, rush, perhaps from PIE *ghrei- to rub, grind (see
chrism). Geometry sense attested by 1706.


congruity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French congruit&eacute; relevance, appropriateness, from Late Latin congruitatem
(nominative congruens) agreement, from congruus (see congruent).


congruous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin stem congru- (see congruent) + -ous.


conic (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to a cone, from Latin conicus, from Greek konikos cone-shaped, from konos (see
cone).


conical (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to a cone, also having the shape of a cone, from conic + -al (1).


conifer (n.)

1851, from Latin conifer cone-bearing, bearing conical fruit, from conus cone (see cone) + ferre to
bear (see infer).


coniferous (adj.)

1660s, from conifer + -ous.


conject (v.)

late 14c., obsolete verb replaced by conjecture (v.). Also in form congette.


conjectural (adj.)

1550s, from Latin conjecturalis belonging to conjecture, from conjectura (see conjecture). Related:
Conjecturally (mid-15c.).


conjecture (n.)

late 14c., interpretation of signs and omens, from Old French conjecture surmise, guess, or directly
from Latin coniectura conclusion, interpretation, guess, inference, literally a casting together (of
facts, etc.), from coniectus, past participle of conicere to throw together, from com- together (see
com-) + iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Sense of forming of opinion without proof is 1530s.


conjecture (v.)

early 15c., from conjecture (n.). In Middle English also with a parallel conjecte (n.), conjecten
(v.). Related: Conjectured; conjecturing.


conjoin (v.)

late 14c., from Old French conjoindre meet, come together (12c.), from Latin coniungere to join
together, from com- together (see com-) + iungere join (see jugular). Related: Conjoined,
conjoining.


conjoint (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle French conjoint, past participle of conjoindre (see conjoin). Related:
Conjointly (early 14c.).


conjugal (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French conjugal (13c.), from Latin coniugalis relating to marriage, from coniunx
(genitive coniugis) spouse, related to coniugare to join together, from com- together (see com-) +
iugare to join, from iugum yoke (see jugular).


conjugate (v.)

1520s, in grammatical sense; 1560s in literal sense, from Latin coniugatus, past participle of
coniugare to yoke together (see conjugal). Earlier as an adjective (late 15c.). Related: Conjugated;
conjugating.


conjugation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin conjugationem (nominative conjugatio) a combining, connecting, noun of action
from conjugare to join together (see conjugal). Grammatical sense is 1520s.


conjunct (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin coniunctus, past participle of coniugare (see conjugal). A doublet of conjoint.


conjunction (n.)

late 14c., originally of planets, from Old French conjonction union, joining, sexual intercourse
(12c.), from Latin coniunctionem (nominative coniunctio), from past participle stem of coniugare
join together (see conjugal). Compare Italian congiunzione, Spanish conjunci&oacute;n. Grammatical
sense (late 14c.) was in Latin, a loan-translation of Greek syndesmos. The word also had the meaning
sexual union 17c.-18c.


conjunctiva (n.)

1540s, medical Latin, short for membrana conjunctiva conjunctive membrane (see conjunctive).


conjunctive (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin coniunctivus serving to connect, from coniunctus, past participle of
coniungere (see conjoin). Grammatical sense is from 1660s.


conjunctivitis (n.)

1835, inflammation of the conjunctiva; from conjunctiva + -itis.


conjuncture (n.)

c.1600, from French conjoncture (16c.), from Modern Latin *conjunctura, from Latin coniunctus (see
conjunct).


conjuration (n.)

late 14c., coniuracioun, conspiracy (now obsolete), also a calling upon something supernatural, from
Old French conjuracion spell, incantation, formula used in exorcism, from Latin coniurationem
(nominative coniuratio) a swearing together, conspiracy, noun of action from coniurare (see
conjure).


conjure (v.)

late 13c., command on oath, from Old French conjurer invoke, conjure (12c.), from Latin coniurare to
swear together; conspire, from com- together (see com-) + iurare to swear (see jury (n.)). Magical
sense is c.1300, for constraining by spell a demon to do one's bidding. Related: Conjured;
conjuring. Phrase conjure up cause to appear in the mind (as if by magic) attested from 1580s.


conjurer (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French conjurour, Old French conjureur conjurer, magician, exorcist, from
Latin coniurator, from coniurare (see conjure).


conk (v.)

as in conk out, 1918, coined by World War I airmen, perhaps in imitation of the sound of a stalling
motor, reinforced by conk (v.) hit on the head, originally punch in the nose (1821), from conk (n.),
slang for nose (1812), perhaps from fancied resemblance to a conch (pronounced conk) shell.


conker (n.)

snail shell, also horse chestnut, from children's game of conkers (q.v.).


conkers (n.)

child's game played with horse chestnuts, originally with snail shells, 1847, probably a variant of
conquer. The goal was to break the other player's item by hitting it with yours.


conlang (n.)

by 1991, from constructed language.


connate (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin connatus born together, twins, past participle of connasci to be born
together, from com- together (see com-) + nasci to be born (Old Latin gnasci; see genus). Related:
Connation.


connect (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin conectere join together (see connection). Displaced 16c. by connex (1540s),
from Middle French connexer, from Latin *connexare, a supposed frequentative of conectere (past
participle stem connex-). Connect was re-established 1670s.    A similar change took place in
French, where connexer was superseded by connecter. Meaning to establish a relationship (with) is
from 1881. Slang meaning get in touch with is attested by 1926, from telephone connections. Meaning
awaken meaningful emotions, establish rapport is from 1942. Of a hit or blow, to reach the target,
from c.1920. Related: Connected; connecting; connectedness.


Connecticut

U.S. state, originally the name of the river, said to be from Mohican (Algonquian) quinnitukqut at
the long tidal river, from *kwen- long + *-ehtekw tidal river  + *-enk place.


connection (n.)

late 14c., conneccion, later connexioun (mid-15c.), from Old French connexion, from Latin
connexionem (nominative connexio) a binding or joining together, from *connexare, frequentative of
conectere to fasten together, to tie, join together, from com- together (see com-) + nectere to
bind, tie (see nexus).    Spelling shifted from connexion to connection (especially in American
English) mid-18c. under influence of connect, abetted by affection, direction, etc. See -xion.


connective (adj.)

1650s, from connect + -ive (if from Latin, it likely would have been *connexive). Connective tissue
is from 1839.


connectivity (n.)

1893, from connective + -ity.


connector (n.)

1795, tube for connecting other materials, agent noun in Latin form from connect and usefully
distinct from connecter.


connexion (n.)

see connection; also see -xion.


conniption (n.)

1833, American English, origin uncertain; perhaps related to corruption, which was used in a sense
of anger from 1799, or from English dialectal canapshus ill-tempered, captious, probably a
corruption of captious.


connivance (n.)

the main modern form of connivence (q.v.).


connive (v.)

c.1600, from Latin connivere, also conivere to wink, hence, to wink at (a crime), be secretly privy,
from com- together (see com-) + base akin to nictare to wink, from PIE root *kneigwh- (see
nictitate). Related: Connived; conniving.


connivence (n.)

1590s, from Latin conniventia, from conniventem (nominative connivens), present participle of
connivere (see connive). Spelling with  -a- prevailed after early 18c., but is unetymological.


connivent (adj.)

1640s, from Latin conniventem (nominative connivens), present participle of connivere (see connive).


conniving (adj.)

1783, present participle adjective from connive. Earlier in this sense was connivent.


connoisseur (n.)

1714, from French connoisseur (Modern French connaiseur), from Old French conoisseor an expert, a
judge, one well-versed, from conoistre to know, from Latin cognoscere to know, to become well-
acquainted with, from com- with (see com-) + gnoscere recognize (see notice (v.)).


Connor

masc. proper name, little used in U.S. before 1980; in the top 100 names given to boys from 1992;
apparently an alteration and appropriation of the surname Conner (13c.), representing Old English
cunnere examiner, inspector (as in ale-conner (see con (n.2)).


connotate        (v.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin connotatus, past participle of connotare (see connote). Obsolete;
replaced by connote.


connotation (n.)

1530s, from Medieval Latin connotationem (nominative connotatio), from connotat-, past participle
stem of connotare signify in addition to the main meaning, a term in logic, literally to mark along
with, from Latin com- together (see com-) + notare to mark (see note).    A word denotes its primary
meaning, its barest adequate definition -- father denotes one that has begotten. A word connotes the
attributes commonly associated with it -- father connotes male sex, prior existence, greater
experience, affection, guidance.


connote (v.)

1660s, from Medieval Latin connotare to mark along with, (see connotation). A common word in
medieval logic. Related: Connoted; connoting.


connubial (adj.)

1650s, from Latin connubialis, variant of conubialis pertaining to wedlock, from conubium marriage,
from com- together (see com-) + nubere to wed (see nuptial).


conquer (v.)

c.1200, cunquearen, from Old French conquerre conquer, defeat, vanquish, from Vulgar Latin
*conquaerere (for Latin conquirere) to search for, procure by effort, win, from Latin com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + quaerere to seek, gain (see query (v.)). Related: Conquered;
conquering.


conquerer (n.)

obsolete form of conqueror; see -er.


conqueror (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French conquerour, Old French conquereor, from Old French conquerre (see
conquer). Another early form was conquestor. William the Conqueror so called from early 12c. in
Anglo-Latin: Guillelmus Magus id est conqu&aelig;stor rex Anglorum.


conquest (n.)

early 14c., a merged word from Old French conquest acquisition (Modern French conqu&ecirc;t), and
Old French conqueste conquest, acquisition (Modern French conqu&ecirc;te), both from past participle
of conquerre, from Vulgar Latin *conquaerere (see conquer).


conquistador (n.)

1830, from Spanish conquistador, literally conqueror, noun of action from conquistar to conquer,
from Vulgar Latin conquistare, from Latin conquistus, past participle of conquirere to seek for (see
conquer).


Conrad

masc. proper name, from Old High German Kuonrat, literally bold in counsel, from kuon bold + rat
counsel (see read (v.)).


consanguine (adj.)

c.1600, from French consanguin (14c.), from Latin consanguineus of the same blood (see
consanguinity).


consanguineous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin consanguineus of the same blood (see consanguinity).


consanguinity (n.)

c.1400, from Middle French consanguinit&eacute;, from Latin consanguinitatem (nominative
consanguinitas), from consanguineus consanguineous, of the same blood, from com- together (see com-)
+ sanguineus of blood (see sanguine).


conscience (n.)

early 13c., from Old French conscience conscience, innermost thoughts, desires, intentions; feelings
(12c.), from Latin conscientia knowledge within oneself, sense of right, a moral sense, from
conscientem (nominative consciens), present participle of conscire be (mutually) aware, from com-
with, or thoroughly (see com-) + scire to know (see science).    Probably a loan-translation of
Greek syneidesis, literally with-knowledge. Sometimes nativized in Old English/Middle English as
inwit. Russian also uses a loan-translation, so-vest, conscience, literally with-knowledge.


conscient (adj.)

c.1600, conscious, from Latin conscientem, present participle of conscire to be conscious (see
conscience). Also with meaning a conscious being (c.1770).


conscientious (adj.)

1610s, from Middle French conscientieux (16c.; Modern French consciencieux), from Medieval Latin
conscientiosus, from conscientia (see conscience). Related: Conscientiously; conscientiousness.


conscientious objector (n.)

1896, in reference to those with religious scruples about mandatory vaccination. Military sense
predominated from World War I.    After a chequered career full of startling episodes and reversals,
the Vaccination Bill becomes virtually the Vaccination Act. In Parliament the hottest of the contest
centred round the conscientious objector. [The Lancet, Aug. 13, 1898]


conscionable (adj.)

1540s, from conscioned having a conscience (from conscience) + -able; obsolete from early 18c. but
fossilized in its negative, unconscionable.


conscious (adj.)

c.1600, knowing, privy to, from Latin conscius knowing, aware, from conscire (see conscience);
probably a loan-translation of Greek syneidos. A word adopted from the Latin poets and much mocked
at first. Sense of active and awake is from 1837.


consciousness (n.)

1630s, internal knowledge, from conscious + -ness. Meaning state of being aware is from 1746.


conscript (n.)

1800, perhaps a back-formation (influenced by French adjective conscrit) from conscription.


conscript (v.)

1813, American English, from conscript (n.). A word from the militia drafts in the War of 1812.
Popularized (or unpopularized) during U.S. Civil War, when both sides resorted to it in 1862.
Related: Conscripted; conscripting.


conscript (adj.)

1530s, from Latin conscriptus, past participle of conscribere to draw up, list, literally to write
together (see conscription).


conscription (n.)

late 14c., a putting in writing, from Middle French conscription, from Latin conscriptionem
(nominative conscriptio) a drawing up of a list, enrollment, a levying of soldiers, from conscribere
to enroll, from com- with (see com-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)).    Meaning enlistment of
soldiers is from 1520s; the sense compulsory enlistment for military service (1800) is traceable to
the French Republic act of Sept. 5, 1798. Technically, a conscription is the enrollment of a fixed
number by lot, with options of providing a substitute.


consecrate (v.)

late 14c., from Latin consecratus, past participle of consecrare to make holy, devote, from com-
together (see com-) + sacrare (see sacred). Related: Consecrated; consecrating.


consecration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin consecrationem (nominative consecratio), noun of action from consecrat-, past
participle stem of consecrare (see consecrate).


consecutive (adj.)

1610s, from French cons&eacute;cutif (16c.), from Medieval Latin consecutivus, from Latin consecutus
following closely, past participle of consequi (see consequence). Related: Consecutively.


consensual (adj.)

1754, having to do with consent, from stem of Latin consensus (see consensus) + -al (1). Meaning by
consent is attested from 1800.


consensus (n.)

1854 as a term in physiology; 1861 of persons; from Latin consensus agreement, accord, past
participle of consentire (see consent). There is an isolated instance of the word from 1633.


consent (v.)

early 13c., from Old French consentir (12c.) agree, comply, from Latin consentire feel together,
from com- with (see com-) + sentire to feel (see sense (n.)). Feeling together, hence, agreeing,
giving permission, apparently a sense evolution that took place in French before the word reached
English. Related: Consented; consenting.


consent (n.)

c.1300, approval, also agreement in sentiment, harmony, from Old French consente, from consentir
(see consent (v.)). Age of consent is attested from 1809.


consequence (n.)

late 14c., inference, conclusion, from Old French consequence result (13c., Modern French
cons&eacute;quence), from Latin consequentia, from consequentem (nominative consequens), present
participle of consequi to follow after, from com- with (see com-) + sequi to follow (see sequel).
Sense of importance (c.1600) is from notion of being pregnant with consequences.


consequences (n.)

see consequence. As the name of a round game, attested from 1796.


consequent (adj.)

late 14c., in various senses now restricted to consequence, from Middle French cons&eacute;quent
following, resulting, from Latin consequentem (nominative consequens); see consequence. Meaning an
event which follows another is from 1610s. Mathematical sense is from 1560s. Related: Consequently.


consequential (adj.)

1620s, from consequent (Latin consequentia) + -al (1). Meaning pregnant with consequences, important
is recorded from 1728. Related: Consequentially (c.1600).


consequentialism (n.)

1969, from consequential + -ism. The philosophy that the morality of an action is to be judged
solely by its consequences. Related: Consequentialist.


conservancy (n.)

1755, commission with jurisdiction over a port or river, from Latin conservant-, present participle
stem of conservare (see conserve) + -cy. Earlier was conservacy (mid-15c., Anglo-French
conservacie). Meaning official preservation of undeveloped land dates from 1859 (first reference is
to protection of bo trees in Ceylon).


conservation (n.)

late 14c., conservacioun, preservation of one's health and soundness, from Latin conservationem
(nominative conservatio) a keeping, preserving, conserving, noun of action from past participle stem
of conservare (see conserve). Meaning preservation of existing conditions in any sense is from mid-
15c. Since late 15c., in reference to English municipal authorities who had charge of rivers,
sewers, forests, fisheries, etc. Specifically of the environment from 1922.


conservation of energy

apparently coined in French by Leibnitz in 1692; attested in English from early 18c. as conservatio
virum vivarum or partially nativized versions of it. The exact phrase is attested from 1853.


conservationist (n.)

1870, from conservation + -ist. The ecological sense is from 1922.


conservatism (n.)

1835, in reference to the Conservative party in British politics; from conservative + -ism. From
1840 in reference to conservative principles generally.


conservative (adj.)

late 14c., conservatyf, from Middle French conservatif, from Late Latin conservativus, from Latin
conservatus, past participle of conservare (see conserve).    As a modern political tradition,
conservatism traces to Edmund Burke's opposition to the French Revolution (1790), but the word
conservative is not found in his writing. It was coined by his French disciples, (such as
Chateaubriand, who titled his journal defending clerical and political restoration Le Conservateur).
Conservative as the name of a British political faction first appeared in an 1830 issue of the
Quarterly Review, in an unsigned article sometimes attributed to John Wilson Croker. It replaced
Tory (q.v.) by 1843, reflecting both a change from the pejorative name (in use for 150 years) and
repudiation of some reactionary policies. Extended to similar spirits in other parties from
1845.Strictly speaking, conservatism is not a political system, but rather a way of looking at the
civil order. The conservative of Peru ... will differ greatly from those of Australia, for though
they may share a preference for things established, the institutions and customs which they desire
to preserve are not identical. [Russell Kirk (1918-1994)]  Phrases such as a conservative estimate
make no sense etymologically. The noun is attested from 1831, originally in the British political
sense.


conservator (n.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French conservatour, from Latin conservator keeper, preserver, defender, agent
noun of conservare (see conserve).


conservatorship (n.)

1640s, from conservator + -ship.


conservatory (n.)

1560s, preservative; 1660s, greenhouse, from stem of conservation + -ory. In sense school for
performing arts it is recorded from 1842, from Italian conservatorio or French conservatoire,
originally hospital for foundlings in which musical education was given.


conserve (v.)

late 14c., from Old French conserver (9c.), from Latin conservare to keep, preserve, keep intact,
guard, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + servare keep watch, maintain (see observe).
Related: Conserved; conserving. As a noun (often conserves) from late 14c.


consider (v.)

late 14c., from Old French considerer (13c.) reflect on, consider, study, from Latin considerare to
look at closely, observe, perhaps literally to observe the stars, from com- with (see com-) + sidus
(genitive sideris) constellation (see sidereal).    Perhaps a metaphor from navigation, but more
likely reflecting Roman obsession with divination by astrology. Tucker doubts the connection with
sidus, however, because it is quite inapplicable to desiderare, and suggests derivation instead from
the PIE root of English side meaning stretch, extend, and a sense for the full word of survey on all
sides or dwell long upon. Related: Considered; considering.


considerable (adj.)

mid-15c., capable of being considered, from Medieval Latin considerabilis worthy to be considered,
from Latin considerare (see consider). Meaning pretty large is from 1640s (implied in considerably).
CONSIDERABLE. This word is still frequently used in the manner out by Dr. Witherspoon in the
following remark: He is considerable of a surveyor; considerable of it may found in the country.
This manner of speaking in the northern parts. [Pickering, 1816]


considerate (adj.)

1570s, marked by deliberation, from Latin consideratus, past participle of considerare (see
consider). Of persons, deliberate, prudent, 1580s; meaning showing consideration for others is from
c.1700. Related: Considerately; considerateness.


consideration (n.)

mid-14c., a beholding, looking at, also keeping in mind, from Old French consideracion (12c., Modern
French consid&eacute;ration), from Latin considerationem (nominative consideratio) consideration,
contemplation, reflection, noun of action from past participle stem of considerare (see consider).
Meaning a taking into account is from mid-15c.; that of something given in payment is from c.1600.


consign (v.)

early 15c., to ratify by a sign or seal, from Middle French consigner (15c.), from Latin consignare
to seal, register, originally to mark with a sign, from com- together (see com-) + signare to sign,
mark, from signum sign (see sign (n.)). Commercial sense is from 1650s. Related: Consignee;
consignor.


consignment (n.)

1560s, sealing with a sign, from consign + -ment. Meaning delivering over is from 1660s; especially
of goods, for the sake of sale or auction, from c.1700. Meaning quantity of goods so assigned is
recorded from 1720s.


consilience (n.)

1840, concurrence, coincidence, literally a jumping together, formed on model of resilience from
Latin consilient-, from com- together (see com-) + salire to leap (see salient (adj.)).


consist (v.)

1520s, from Middle French consister (14c.) or directly from Latin consistere to stand firm, take a
standing position, stop, halt, from com- together (see com-) + sistere to place, causative of stare
to stand, be standing (see stay (v.)). Related: Consisted; consisting.


consistence (n.)

c.1600, state of standing still; firmness, from Middle French consistence (Modern French
consistance) a standing fast, from Medieval Latin consistentia, from Latin consistentem (nominative
consistens), present participle of consistere (see consist). Meaning coherence, solidity is recorded
from 1620s.


consistency (n.)

1590s, firmness of matter, from Medieval Latin consistentia or directly from Latin consistentem,
from consistere (see consist). Meaning state of being in agreement or harmony (with something) is
from 1650s; meaning self-consistent is from 1716.


consistent (adj.)

1570s, standing firm, standing still, from Latin consistentem (nominative consistens), present
participle of consistere (see consist). Modern sense of agreeing (with with) is first attested
1640s. Older sense survives in consistency. Related: Consistently.


consistory (n.)

c.1300, secular tribunal, from Old North French consistorie (Old French consistoire, 12c.) and
directly from Late Latin consistorium waiting room, meeting place of the imperial council, from
Latin consistere (see consist). Meaning Church council is from early 14c.


consol (n.)

alternative form of console (n.).


consolate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin consolatus, past participle of consolari (see console (v.)); obsolete and
replaced by console (v.).


consolation (n.)

late 14c., act of consoling, from Old French consolacion (11c., Modern French consolation) solace,
comfort; delight, pleasure, from Latin consolationem (nominative consolatio-) consoling, comforting,
noun of action from consolat-, past participle stem of consolari (see console (v.)). Consolation
prize is recorded from 1886.


consolations (n.)

c.1400, act of consolation; see consolation.


consolatory (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin consolatorius, from consolator, agent noun from consolari (see console (v.)).


console (v.)

1690s, from French consoler to comfort, console, from Latin consolari offer solace, encourage,
comfort, cheer, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + solari to comfort (see solace). Or perhaps
a back-formation from consolation. The Latin word is glossed in Old English by frefran. Related:
Consoled; consoling.


console (n.)

1706, a cabinet; an ornamental base structure, from French console a bracket (16c.), of uncertain
origin, possibly from Middle French consolateur, literally one who consoles, word used for carved
human figures supporting cornices, shelves or rails in choir stalls. Another guess connects it to
Latin consolidare. Sense evolved to body of a musical organ (1881), radio cabinet (1925), then
cabinet for a TV, stereo, etc. (1944).


consolidate (v.)

1510s, to compact into one body, from Latin consolidatus, past participle of consolidare to make
solid, from com- together (see com-) + solidare to make solid (see solid). Meaning to make firm or
strong is from mid-16c. Related: Consolidated; consolidating.


consolidated (adj.)

past participle adjective from consolidate. Of money, debt, etc., from 1753; in literal sense of
made firm, unified, from c.1850.


consolidation (n.)

c.1400, from Late Latin consolidationem (nominative consolidatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of consolidare to make firm, consolidate, from com- together (see com-) + solidare
to make solid, from solidus (see solid).


consomme (n.)

1815, from French consomm&eacute;, noun use of past participle of consommer to consume (12c.), from
Latin consummare to complete, finish, perfect (see consummation). The French verb was influenced in
sense by Latin consumere to consume.


consonance (n.)

early 15c., agreement among persons, from Old French consonance (12c.) consonance, rhyme, from Latin
consonantia harmony, agreement, from consonantem (nominative consonans) (see consonant). Meaning
correspondence of sounds is from 1580s.


consonant (n.)

early 14c., sound other than a vowel, from Latin consonantem (nominative consonans), present
participle of consonare to sound together, sound aloud, from com- with (see com-) + sonare to sound
(see sonata). Consonants were thought of as sounds that are only produced together with vowels.


consonant (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French consonant (13c.), from Latin consonantem (nominative consonans), present
participle of consonare (see consonant (n.)).


consort (n.)

early 15c., partner, from Middle French consort colleague, partner, wife (14c., Old French
consorte), from Latin consortem (nominative consors) partner, comrade; wife, brother, sister, noun
use of adjective meaning having the same lot, of the same fortune, from com- with (see com-) + sors
a share, lot (see sort (n.)). Sense of husband or wife (partner in marriage) is 1630s in English.


consort (v.)

1580s, from consort (n.). Related: Consorted; consorting. Confused in form and sense with concert
since 1580s.


consortia (n.)

plural of consortium.


consortium (n.)

1829, from Latin consortium fellowship, participation, society, from consors (genitive consortis;
see consort (n.)). Earlier, in British law, a term for right of husband's access to his wife.


conspecific (adj.)

1859, from conspecies (1837), from con- with + specific, here representing species (n.). From 1962
as a noun.


conspectus (n.)

1836, from Latin conspectus a looking at, sight, view; range or power of vision, from past
participle of conspicere to look at (see conspicuous).


conspicuous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin conspicuus visible, open to view, striking, from conspicere to look at, observe,
see, notice, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + specere (see scope (n.1)). Phrase conspicuous
by its absence (1859) is said to be from Tacitus (Annals iii.76), in a passage about certain images:
sed pr&aelig;fulgebant ... eo ipso quod effigies eorum non visebantur.


conspiracy (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French conspiracie, Old French conspiracie conspiracy, plot, from Latin
conspirationem (nominative conspiratio) agreement, union, unanimity, noun of action from conspirare
(see conspire); earlier in same sense was conspiration (early 14c.), from French conspiration
(13c.), from Latin conspirationem. An Old English word for it was facengecwis. As a term in law,
from 1863. Conspiracy theory is from 1909.


conspirator (n.)

c.1400, conspyratour, from Old French conspirateur, from Latin conspiratorem (nominative
conspiratorio), noun of action from conspirat-, past participle stem of conspirare (see conspire).
Fem. form conspiratress is from mid-18c. Related: Conspiratorial; conspiratorially; conspiratory.


conspire (v.)

late 14c., from Old French conspirer (14c.), from Latin conspirare to agree, unite, plot, literally
to breathe together, from com- together (see com-) + spirare to breathe (see spirit (n.)). Or
perhaps the notion is to blow together musical instruments, i.e., To sound in unison. Related:
Conspired; conspiring.


constable (n.)

c.1200, chief household officer, justice of the peace, from Old French conestable (12c., Modern
French conn&eacute;table), steward, governor, principal officer of the Frankish king's household,
from Late Latin comes stabuli, literally count of the stable (established by Theodosian Code, c.438
C.E.), hence, chief groom. See count (n.). Second element is from Latin stabulum stable, standing
place (see stable (n.)). Probably a translation of a Germanic word. Meaning an officer of the peace
is from c.1600, transferred to police officer 1836. French reborrowed constable 19c. as English
police.


constabulary (n.)

1630s, district under a constable, from Medieval Latin constabularia, from constabulus, Latinized
form of Old French conestable (see constable). Meaning organized body of constables is from 1837.
Earlier (mid-15c.) as an adjective, pertaining to a constable.


constance (n.)

mid-14c., steadfastness, from Old French constance steadfastness, permanence (14c.), from Latin
constantia (source of Italian costanza, Spanish constancia), noun of action from constantem (see
constant (adj.)). Obsolete since 17c. except as a given name for a girl, which enjoyed a mild
popularity in U.S. c.1945-1955.


constancy (n.)

1520s, from constance + -cy.


constant (adj.)

late 14c., steadfast, resolute, from Old French constant (14c.) or directly from Latin constantem
(nominative constans) standing firm, stable, steadfast, faithful, present participle of constare,
from com- together (see com-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Of actions
and conditions from 1650s. Related: Constantly.


constant (n.)

1832 in mathematics and physics, from constant (adj.).


Constantinople

the proper name from 330 C.E. to 1930 C.E. of what is now Istanbul, from Greek Konstantinou polis
Constantine's city, named for Roman emperor Flavius Valerius Aurelius Constantinus, whose name is
derived from Latin constans (see constant (adj.)).


constellation (n.)

early 14c., from Old French constellacion constellation, conjuncture (of planets), from Late Latin
constellationem (nominative constellatio) set with stars, from constellatus, from Latin com- with
(see com-) + past participle of stellare to shine, from stella star (see star). Originally in
astrology, of position of planets (stars) in regard to one another on a given day, usually one's
birth day, as a determination of one's character. I folwed ay myn inclinacioun/By vertu of my
constillacioun (Chaucer, Wife's Prologue, c.1386). Modern astronomical sense is from 1550s.


consternate (v.)

1650s, from Latin consternatus, past participle of consternare (see consternation).


consternation (n.)

1610s, from French consternation dismay, confusion, from Latin consternationem (nominative
consternatio) confusion, dismay, from consternat-, past participle stem of consternare overcome,
confuse, dismay, perplex, terrify, alarm, probably related to consternere throw down, prostrate,
from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + sternere to spread out (see stratum).


constipate (v.)

1530s, in part a back-formation from constipation, in part from Latin constipatus, past participle
of constipare (see constipation). Earlier as an adjective (early 15c.); an earlier verb in this
sense was constipen (late 14c.). Related: Constipated; constipating.


constipation (n.)

c.1400, constriction of tissue, from Late Latin constipationem (nominative constipatio), noun of
state from Latin constipare to press or crowd together, from com- together (see com-) + stipare to
cram, pack (see stiff (adj.)). Specifically of the bowel condition since 1540s.


constituency (n.)

body of constituents, 1806, from constituent + -cy.


constituent (n.)

1620s, one who appoints or elects a representative, from Latin constituentem (nominative
constituens), present participle of constituere (see constitute). The notion is to make up or
compose a body by appointing or electing a representative. As an adjective, essential,
characteristic, from 1660s; that appoints or elects a representative to a body, from 1714.


constitute (v.)

mid-15c., verb use of adjective constitute, made up, formed (late 14c.), from Latin constitutus
arranged, settled, past participle adjective from constituere to cause to stand, set up, fix, place,
establish, set in order; form something new; resolve, of persons, to appoint to an office, from
com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + statuere to set, from PIE root *sta- to stand, with derivatives
meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). Related: Constituted; constituting.


constitution (n.)

mid-14c., law, regulation, edict, from Old French constitucion (12c.) constitution, establishment,
and directly from Latin constitutionem (nominative constitutio) act of settling, settled condition,
anything arranged or settled upon, regulation, order, ordinance, from constitut-, past participle
stem of constituere (see constitute).    Meaning action of establishing is from 1580s; that of way
in which a thing is constituted is from c.1600; that of physical health, strength and vigor of the
body is from 1550s; of the mind, temperament, character from 1580s. Sense of mode of organization of
a state is from c.1600; that of system of principles by which a community is governed dates from
1730s; especially of a document of written laws since the U.S. and French constitutions, late 18c.


constitutional (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to a person's (physical or mental) constitution, from constitution + -al (1).
Meaning beneficial to bodily constitution is from 1750. Meaning authorized or allowed by the
political constitution is from 1765. Constitutional monarchy is recorded from 1801, from French.
Related: Constitutionally.


constitutional (n.)

a constitutional walk, 1829, probably originally among university students, from constitutional
(adj.) in the beneficial to bodily health sense.


constitutionalism (n.)

1832, constitutional system of government; occasionally also constitutionality; from constitutional
(adj.) + -ism.


constitutionality (n.)

1787, quality of being in accord with a constitution, from constitutional (adj.) + -ity.


constitutive (adj.)

c.1600, having the power of establishing, also elemental, essential, from Medieval Latin
*constitutivus, from constitut-, past participle stem of constituere (see constitute). Related:
Constitutively.


constrain (v.)

early 14c., constreyen, from stem of Old French constreindre (Modern French contraindre) restrain,
control, from Latin constringere to bind together, tie tightly, fetter, shackle, chain, from com-
together (see com-) + stringere to draw tight (see strain (v.)). Related: Constrained; constraining.


constraint (n.)

late 14c., distress, oppression, from Old French constreinte binding, constraint, compulsion (Modern
French contrainte), fem. noun from constreint, past participle of constreindre, from Vulgar Latin
*constrinctus, from Latin constrictus (see constrain). Meaning coercion, compulsion is from 1530s.


constrict (v.)

early 15c., from Latin constrictus, past participle of constringere compress (see constrain). A
direct borrowing from Latin of the same word which, via French, became constrain. Related:
Constricted; constricting.


constriction (n.)

c.1400, from Latin constrictionem (nominative constrictio), noun of action from past participle stem
of constringere compress (see constrain).


constrictive (adj.)

c.1400, from Late Latin constrictivus, from Latin constrictus (see constrict).


constrictor (n.)

1735, agent noun in Latin form from constrict.


construct (v.)

early 15c., from Latin constructus, past participle of construere to heap up (see construction).
Related: Constructed; constructing.


construct (n.)

1871 in linguistics, 1890 in psychology, 1933 in the general sense of anything constructed; from
construct (v.).


construction (n.)

late 14c., from Old French construction or directly from Latin constructionem (nominative
constructio), from construct-, past participle stem of construere pile up together, accumulate;
build, make, erect, from com- together (see com-) + struere to pile up (see structure (n.)).


constructionist (n.)

1844, in reference to the U.S. Constitution, from construction + -ist. Usually with strict or loose.


constructive (adj.)

early 15c., derived by interpretation, from Middle French constructif or from Medieval Latin
constructivus, from Latin construct-, past participle stem of construere to heap up (see
construction). Meaning pertaining to construction is from 1817; having the quality of constructing
is from 1841. Related: Constructively. Constructive criticism is attested by 1841.


constructivism (n.)

1924, in reference to an abstract artistic movement begun in Russia c.1920, from Russian
konstruktivizm. Related: Constructivist (1928).


construe (v.)

late 14c., from Late Latin construere to relate grammatically, in classical Latin to build up, pile
together (see construction); also see construct (v.), which is a later acquisition of the same word.
Related: Construed; construing; construal.


consubstantial (adj.)

late 15c., a term in the theology of the trinity, from Church Latin consubstantialis, from com- with
(see com-) + substantia (see substance). In general use from 1570s. Related: Consubstantiality.


consubstantiation (n.)

1590s, from Church Latin consubstantionem (nominative consubstantio), noun of action from past
participle stem of consubstantiare, from com- with (see com-) + substantia (see substance). Related:
Consubstantiate.


consuetude (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French consuetude, from Latin consuetudo, from consuetus, past participle of
consuescere to accustom (see custom).


consul (n.)

late 14c., magistrate in ancient Rome, from Old French consule and directly from Latin consul
magistrate in ancient Rome, probably originally one who consults the Senate, from consulere to
deliberate, take counsel (see consultation).    Modern sense began with use as appellation of
various foreign officials and magistrates, a representative chosen by a community of merchants
living in a foreign country; an agent appointed by a government or ruler to represent the interests
of its subjects and traders in a foreign place (c.1600), an extended sense that developed 13c. in
the Spanish form of the word.


consular (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin consularis, from consul (see consul).


consulate (n.)

late 14c., government of Rome by the consuls, from Latin consulatus office of a consul, from consul
(see consul). Also used in reference to the consular government of France from 1799-1804. In
reference to the office of a modern consul, from 1702.


consult (v.)

1520s, from Middle French consulter (16c.), from Latin consultare consult, take the advice of,
frequentative of consulere to take counsel, meet and consider (see consultation). Related:
Consulted; consulting.


consultant (n.)

1690s, of persons going to oracles, from consult + -ant. Of physicians, from 1878; meaning one
qualified to give professional advice is first attested 1893 in a Sherlock Holmes story. Related:
Consultancy (1955).


consultation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French consultation, from Latin consultationem (nominative consultatio),
from past participle stem of consultare consult, ask counsel of; reflect, consider maturely,
frequentative of consulere to deliberate, consider, originally probably to call together, as in
consulere senatum to gather the senate (to ask for advice), from com- with (see com-) + *selere
take, gather (the Senate) together, from PIE root *sal- to take, seize.


consultative (adj.)

1580s, from Medieval Latin *consultativus, from consultat-, past participle stem of consultare (see
consultation).


consumable (adj.)

1640s, from consume + -able.


consumables (n.)

articles of consumption, 1802, from consumable.


consume (v.)

late 14c., from Old French consumer to consume (12c.) and directly from Latin consumere to use up,
eat, waste, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + sumere to take, from sub- under + emere to
buy, take (see exempt (adj.)).


consumer (n.)

early 15c., one who squanders or wastes, agent noun from consume. In economic sense, one who uses up
goods or articles (opposite of producer) from 1745. Consumer goods is attested from 1890. In U.S.,
consumer price index calculated since 1919, tracking changes in the prices paid by urban consumers
for a representative basket of goods and services [Bureau of Labor Statistics]; abbreviation CPI is
attested by 1971.


consumerism (n.)

1944, protection of the consumer's interest, from consumer + -ism. Also, encouraging consumption as
an economic policy (1960). Related: Consumerist (1965, n.; 1969, adj.).


consummate (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin consummatus perfected, complete, past participle of consummare sum up, complete
(see consummation). Of persons, accomplished, very qualified, from 1640s. Related: Consummately.


consummate (v.)

1520s, to bring to completion, from Latin consummatus, past participle of consummare to sum up, make
up, complete, finish (see consummation). Meaning to bring a marriage to completion (by sexual
intercourse) is from 1530s. Related: Consummated; consummating.


consummated (adj.)

1640s, perfected, past participle adjective from consummate (v.). Of marriage, from 1709; earlier
consummate (adj.) was used in this sense (1530s).


consummation (n.)

late 14c., completion, from Latin consummationem (nominative consummatio), from consummat-, past
participle stem of consummare to sum up, finish, from com- together (see com-) + summa sum, total,
from summus highest (see sum (n.)). Sense of completion of a marriage (by sexual intercourse) is
c.1530.


consumption (n.)

late 14c., wasting of the body by disease; wasting disease (replacing Old English yfeladl the evil
disease), from Old French consumpcion, from Latin consumptionem (nominative consumptio) a using up,
wasting, noun of state from past participle stem of consumere (see consume). Meaning the using up of
material is 1530s.


consumptive (adj.)

early 15c., wasteful, also with reference to pulmonary consumption, from Latin consumpt-, stem of
consumere (see consume) + -ive. As a noun, attested from late 14c.


contact (v.)

1834, put in contact, from contact (n.). Meaning get in touch with is 1927, American English.
Related: Contacted; contacting.


contact (n.)

1620s, action of touching, from Latin contactus a touching, from past participle of contingere to
touch, seize, from com- together (see com-) + tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)).    Figurative
sense of connection, communication is from 1818. As a signal to the person about to spin an aircraft
propeller that the ignition is switched on, the word was in use by 1913. Contact lens is first
recorded 1888; short form contact is from 1961.


contagion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French contagion, from Latin contagionem (nominative contagio) a touching,
contact, contagion, related to contingere touch closely (see contact (n.)).


contagious (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French contagieus (Modern French contagieux), from Late Latin contagiosus, from
Latin contagio (see contact (n.)).


contain (v.)

late 13c., from Old French contein-, stem of contenir, from Latin continere (transitive) to hold
together, enclose, from com- together (see com-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Related: Containable.


container (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from contain.


containment (n.)

1650s, action or fact of containing, from contain + -ment. As an international policy of the West
vs. the Soviet Union, recorded from 1947.


contaminate (v.)

early 15c., from Old French contaminer, from Latin contaminatus, past participle of contaminare to
defile, from contamen contact, pollution, from com- together (see com-) + *tag-, base of tangere to
touch (see tangent (adj.)). Related: Contaminant (1934); contaminable.


contamination (n.)

early 15c., from Latin contaminationem (nominative contaminatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of contaminare (see contaminate). Figurative sense is from c.1620; specifically of
radioactivity from 1913.


contango

1853, a stockbroker's invention, perhaps somehow derived from continue, or from Spanish contengo I
contain, refrain, restrain, check. As a verb, from 1900.


contemn (v.)

mid-15c., from Old French contemner (15c.), from Latin contemnere to despise, scorn (see contempt).


contemplate (v.)

1590s, from Latin contemplatus, past participle of contemplari survey, observe (see contemplation).
Related: Contemplated; contemplating.


contemplation (n.)

c.1200, religious musing, from Old French contemplation or directly from Latin contemplationem
(nominative contemplatio) act of looking at, from contemplat-, past participle stem of contemplari
to gaze attentively, observe, originally to mark out a space for observation (as an augur does).
From com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + templum area for the taking of auguries (see temple
(n.1)).


contemplative (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French contemplatif (12c.), from Latin contemplativus, from contemplat-, past
participle stem of contemplari (see contemplation).


contemporaneous (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin contemporaneus contemporary, from the same source as contemporary but with a
form after Late Latin temporaneous timely. Related: Contemporaneously; contemporaneity.


contemporary (adj.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin contemporarius, from Latin com- with (see com-) + temporarius of time,
from tempus time (see temporal (v.)). Meaning modern, characteristic of the present is from 1866.


contemporary (n.)

one who lives at the same time as another, 1630s, originally cotemporary, from co- + temporary;
modified by influence of contemporary (adj.). Replacing native time-fellow (1570s).


contempt (n.)

late 14c., from Latin contemptus scorn, from past participle of contemnere to scorn, despise, from
com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + *temnere to slight, scorn, of uncertain origin. Phrase contempt
of court is attested from 19c., though the idea is several centuries older.


contemptible (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin contemptibilis worthy of scorn, from contempt-, past participle stem of
contemnere (see contempt). Related: Contemptibility; contemptibly.


contemptuous (adj.)

1590s, from Latin contemptus (see contempt). Related: Contemptuously.


contend (v.)

mid-15c., from Old French contendre, from Latin contendere to stretch out, strive after, from com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + tendere to stretch (see tenet). Related: Contended; contending.


contender (n.)

1540s, agent noun from contend.


content (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French content, satisfied, from Latin contentus contained, satisfied, past
participle of continere (see contain). Related:  Contently (largely superseded by contentedly).


content (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French contenter, from content (adj.) satisfied, from Latin contentus
contained, satisfied, past participle of continere (see contain). Sense evolved through contained,
restrained, to satisfied, as the contented person's desires are bound by what he or she already has.
Related: Contented; contentedly.


content (n.)

that which is contained, early 15c., from Latin contentum, contenta, noun use of past participle of
continere (see contain). Meaning satisfaction is from 1570s; heart's content is from 1590s
(Shakespeare).


contention (n.)

late 14c., strife, from Old French contention, from Latin contentionem (nominative contentio), from
content-, past participle stem of contendere (see contend).


contentious (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle French contentieux, from Latin contentiosus obstinate, quarrelsome, from
contentionem (see contend). Related: Contentiously; contentiousness.


contentment (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French contentment, from contenter (see content (v.)).


contents (n.)

things contained in something (the stomach, a document, etc.), early 15c., Latin contentum (plural
contenta), neuter past participle of continere (see contain). Table of contents is late 15c.


conterminous (adj.)

1670s, from Latin conterminus bordering upon, having a common boundary, from com- together, with
(see com-) + terminus (see terminus).


contessa (n.)

1819, from Italian contessa, from Medieval Latin cometissa (see countess).


contest (v.)

c.1600, from French contester dispute, oppose, from Middle French, from Latin contestari (litem) to
call to witness, bring action, from com- together (see com-) + testari to bear witness, from testis
a witness, (see testament). Calling witnesses as the first step in a legal combat. Related:
Contestable; contested; contesting.


contest (n.)

1640s, from contest (v.).


contestant (adj.)

1660s, from French contestant, present participle of contester (see contest (v.)).


contestant (n.)

one who contests, from contestant (adj.). Popularized in U.S. Civil War, when it was a journalist's
term for the combatants on either side.


contestation (n.)

1540s, from Latin contestationem (nominative contestatio), an attesting, testimony, noun of action
from past participle stem of contestari (see contest (v.)).


contested (adj.)

1670s, past participle adjective from contest (v.). Of elections, from 1771, American English.


contex (v.)

obsolete 16c.-17c. verb from Latin contexere to weave together (see context).


context (n.)

early 15c., from Latin contextus a joining together, originally past participle of contexere to
weave together, from com- together (see com-) + texere to weave, to make (see texture (n.)).


contextual (adj.)

c.1820, from context on model of textual, etc. In philosophy, contextual definition is recorded from
1934, along with contextualization, contextualize. Related: Contextualized.


contextualise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of contextualize (see contextual); for suffix, see -ize. Related:
Contextualised; contextualising.


contiguity (n.)

1640s, from French contiguit&eacute; from Latin contiguitas, from contiguus (see contiguous).


contiguous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin contiguus near, touching, bordering upon, from root of contingere to touch upon
(see contact). Earlier form, now obsolete, was contiguate (mid-15c.).


continence (n.)

late 14c., self-restraint, from Old French continence (14c.), from Latin continentia a holding back,
repression, from continent-, present participle stem of continere (see continent). Especially of
sexual desire from late 14c.; of the body's eliminatory functions, from 1915. Related: Continency.


continent (adj.)

late 14c., self-restraining, from Old French continent and directly from Latin continentem
(nominative continens) holding together, continuous, present participle of continere hold together
(see contain). Meaning moved from exercising self-restraint to chaste 14c., and to bowel and bladder
control 19c.


continent (n.)

large land mass, 1550s, from continent land (mid-15c.), translating Latin terra continens continuous
land, from continens, present participle of continere (see continent (adj.)).


continental (adj.)

1818 as a purely geographical term, from continent + -al (1). In reference to the European mainland
(as opposed to Great Britain), recorded from 1760. Continental breakfast (the kind eaten on the
continent as opposed to the kind eaten in Britain) is attested by 1855. In reference to the British
American colonies from 1774; the Continental Congress is attested from 1775; continental divide in
use by 1865; continental rise in geology from 1959; continental slope from 1907. Continental shelf
first attested 1888.


continental drift

1925, a translation of German Kontinentalverschiebung, proposed 1912 by German scientist Alfred
Wegener (1880-1930); the theory was not widely accepted until after c.1950.


continentality (n.)

1897, a term in meteorology, from German kontinentalit&auml;t (1895), from Latin continentem (see
continent (adj.)).


contingence (n.)

early 16c., from Medieval Latin *contingentia, from contingent- present participle stem of
contingere to touch (see contact (n.)).


contingencies (n.)

unexpected additional expenses, 1660s, from contingency.


contingency (n.)

1560s, quality of being contingent, from contingent + -cy. Meaning a chance occurrence is from
1610s.


contingent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French contingent or directly from Latin contingentem (nominative contingens)
happening, touching, present participle of contingere to touch (see contact). The noun is from
1540s, thing happening by chance; as a group forming part of a larger group from 1727.


continual (adj.)

early 14c., continuell, from Old French continuel (12c.), from Latin continuus (see continue). That
which is continual is that which is either always going on or recurs at short intervals and never
comes to an end; that which is continuous is that in which there is no break between the beginning
and the end. Related: Continually (c.1300, contynuelliche).


continuance (n.)

mid-14c., a keeping up, a going on, from Old French continuance (13c.), from continuer (see
continue).


continuation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French continuation (13c.), or directly from Latin continuationem (nominative
continuatio), noun of action from continuat-, past participle stem of continuare (see continue).


continue (v.)

mid-14c., contynuen, from Old French continuer (13c.), from Latin continuare join together, connect,
make or be continuous, from continuus uninterrupted, from continere (intransitive) to be
uninterrupted, literally to hang together (see contain). Related: Continued; continuing.


continuity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French continuit&eacute;, from Latin continuitatem (nominative continuitas),
from continuus (see continue). Cinematographic sense is recorded from 1921, American English.


continuous (adj.)

1640s, from French continueus or directly from Latin continuus uninterrupted, hanging together (see
continue). Related: Continuously.


continuum (n.)

1640s, from Latin continuum a continuous thing, neuter of continuus (see continue). The plural is
continua.


contort (v.)

early 15c., from Latin contortus, past participle of contorquere to whirl, twist together, from com-
together or intensive (see com-) + torquere to twist (see torque (n.)). Related: Contorted;
contorting.


contortion (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French contorsion or directly from Latin contortionem (nominative
contorsio), noun of action from past participle stem of contorquere (see contort).


contortionist (n.)

1841, from contortion + -ist.


contour (n.)

1660s, a term in painting and sculpture, from French contour circumference, outline, from Italian
and Medieval Latin contornare to go around, from Latin com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + tornare
to turn (on a lathe); see turn (v.).    First recorded application to topography is from 1769.
Earlier the word was used to mean bedspread, quilt (early 15c.) in reference to its falling over the
sides of the mattress. Related: Contoured. Contour line in geography is from 1844.


contra

mid-14c., from Latin contra (prep. and adv.) against, originally in comparison with, ablative
singular feminine of *com-teros, from Old Latin com with, together (see com-) + -tr, zero degree of
the comparative suffix -ter-.


Contra (n.)

1981, anti-Sandinista Nicaraguan, short for Spanish contrarrevolucionario counter-revolutionary.


contra dance

1803, from French contre-danse, altered from English country dance by folk etymology from French
contra against, suggested by the arrangement of the partners in the dance. The dances and the name
were taken up in France c. 1720s and from there passed to Spain and Italy (Spanish, Italian contra
danza) then back to English.


contra-

word-forming element meaning against, in opposition, from Latin adverb and preposition contra (see
contra). The Latin word was used as a prefix in Late Latin. In French, it became contre- and passed
into English as counter-. The Old English equivalent was wi&eth;er (surviving in withers and
widdershins), from wi&eth; with, against.


contraband (n.)

1520s, smuggling; 1590s, smuggled goods; from Middle French contrebande a smuggling, from older
Italian contrabando (modern contrabbando) unlawful dealing, from Latin contra against (see contra) +
Medieval Latin bannum, from Frankish *ban a command or some other Germanic source (see ban (v.)).


contraception (n.)

birth control, coined 1886 from Latin contra (see contra) + ending from conception.


contraceptive

1891 (n.), 1918 (adj.), from stem of contraception + -ive.


contract (v.)

late 14c., make narrow, draw together; early 15c. make an agreement; from Middle French contracter,
from Latin contractus, past participle of contrahere to draw together, combine, make an agreement
(see contract (n.)). Related: Contracted; contracting.


contract (n.)

early 14c., from Old French contract (Modern French contrat), from Latin contractus a contract,
agreement, from past participle of contrahere to draw together, metaphorically, to make a bargain,
from com- together (see com-) + trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). U.S. underworld sense of
arrangement to kill someone first recorded 1940.


contracted (adj.)

c.1600, agreed upon, also shrunken, shortened, past participle adjective from contract (v.).


contractile (adj.)

1706, from French contractile, from Latin contract-, past participle stem of contrahere (see
contract (n.)). Related: Contractility. Contractile vacuole is from 1877.


contraction (n.)

late 14c., action of making a contract (especially of marriage), also action of shrinking or
shortening, from Old French contraction (13c.), or directly from Latin contractionem (nominative
contractio), noun of action from past participle stem of contrahere (see contract (n.)). Meaning
action of acquiring (a disease) is from c.1600. Grammatical sense is from 1706; meaning a contracted
word or words is from 1755. Contractions of the uterus in labor of childbirth attested from 1962.


contractor (n.)

1540s, one who enters into a contract, from Late Latin contractor, agent noun from past participle
stem of Latin contrahere (see contract (n.)); specifically of one who enters into a contract to
provide work, services, or goods from 1724.


contractual (adj.)

1827, from Latin contractus (see contract (n.)) + -al (1).


contracture (n.)

1650s, from French contracture, from Latin contractura a drawing together, from contractus, past
participle of contrahere (see contract (n.)).


contradict (v.)

1570s, speak against, also assert the contrary (1580s), from Latin contradictus, past participle of
contradicere (see contradiction). Related: Contradicted; contradicting; contradictive.


contradiction (n.)

late 14c., from Old French contradiction or directly from Latin contradictionem (nominative
contradictio) a reply, objection, counterargument, noun of action from past participle stem of
contradicere, in classical Latin contra dicere to speak against, from contra against (see contra) +
dicere to speak (see diction).


contradictory (adj.)

1530s, mutually opposed, at variance, from Late Latin contradictorius containing a contradiction or
objection, from contradictus, past participle of contradicere (see contradiction). Meaning fond of
contradicting is from 1891. Used earlier as a noun (late 14c.).


contradistinction (n.)

1640s, from contra- + distinction.


contrail (n.)

1945, from condensation trail.


contraindicate (v.)

1660s, from contra- + indicate. Related: Contraindicated; contraindication (1620s).


contralateral (adj.)

1882, from contra- + lateral.


contralto (n.)

lowest female voice, 1730, from Italian contralto; see contra- against, opposite + alto. The part
next above the alto.


contraposition (n.)

1550s, from Late Latin contrapositionem (nominative contrapositio), noun of action from past
participle stem of contraponere, from contra against (see contra) + ponere to put, place (see
position (n.)).


contrapositive (adj.)

1858 (implied in contrapositively), from Latin contraposit-, past participle stem of contraponere
(see contraposition) + -ive.


contrapposto (n.)

1903, from Italian contrapposto, past participle of contrapporre, from Latin contraponere (see
contraposition).


contraption (n.)

1825, western England dialect, origin obscure, perhaps from con(trive) + trap, or deception.


contrapuntal (adj.)

1845, from Italian contrapunto counterpoint, also backstitch, from contra against (see contra) +
punto point (see point (n.)). Musical use is from Medieval Latin cantus contrapunctis. Compare
counterpoint. Related: Contrapuntally.


contrarian (n.)

1963, from contrary + -ian.    To be in opposition is not to be a nihilist. And there is no decent
or charted way of making a living at it. It is something you are, and not something you do.
[Christopher Hitchens, Letters to a Young Contrarian, 2001]


contrariety (n.)

late 14c., from Old French contrariet&eacute;, from Late Latin contrarietatem (nominative
contrarietas) opposition, noun of quality from contrarius (see contrary).


contrariness (n.)

late 14c., state of being contrary, from contrary + -ness. Meaning fondness of opposition is from
1640s.


contrary (adj.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French contrarie, from Latin contrarius opposite, opposed, from contra against
(see contra).    If we take the statement All men are mortal, its contrary is Not all men are
mortal, its converse is All mortal beings are men, &amp; its opposite is No men are mortal. The
contrary, however, does not exclude the opposite, but includes it as its most extreme form. Thus
This is white has only one opposite, This is black, but many contraries, as This is not white, This
is coloured, This is dirty, This is black; &amp; whether the last form is called the contrary, or
more emphatically the opposite, is usually indifferent. But to apply the opposite to a mere contrary
(e.g. to I did not hit him in relation to I hit him, which has no opposite), or to the converse
(e.g. to He hit me in relation to I hit him, to which it is neither contrary nor opposite), is a
looseness that may easily result in misunderstanding; the temptation to go wrong is intelligible
when it is remembered that with certain types of sentence (A exceeds B) the converse &amp; the
opposite are identical (B exceeds A). [Fowler]    As a noun from late 13c. Related: Contrarily;
contrariwise.


Contras (n.)

see Contra.


contrast (v.)

1690s, from French contraster (Old French contrester), modified by or from Italian contrastare stand
out against, strive, contend, from Vulgar Latin *contrastare to withstand, from Latin contra against
(see contra) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).    Middle English had
contrest to fight against, to withstand, which became extinct. Modern word re-introduced as an art
term. Related: Contrasted; contrasting; contrastive.


contrast (n.)

1711, from contrast (v.).


contrasting (adj.)

1715, present participle adjective from contrast (v.). From 1680s as a verbal noun.


contravene (v.)

1560s, from Middle French contravenir to transgress, decline, depart, from Late Latin contravenire
to come against, in Medieval Latin to transgress, from Latin contra against (see contra) + venire to
come (see venue). Related: Contravened; contravening.


contravening (n.)

1640s, verbal noun from contravene; from 1802 as a present participle adjective.


contravention (n.)

1570s, from Middle French contravention, from Vulgar Latin *contraventionem, noun of action from
past participle stem of contravenire (see contravene).


contretemps (n.)

1680s, a blunder in fencing, from French contre-temps motion out of time, unfortunate accident, bad
times; from Latin contra + tempus (see temporal). As a ballet term, from 1706; as an unfortunate
accident, 1802; as a dispute, from 1961.


contribute (v.)

1520s, from Latin contributus, past participle of contribuere to bring together, add, unite,
collect, contribute (see contribution). Figurative sense is from 1630s. Related: Contributed;
contributing.


contribution (n.)

late 14c., from Old French contribution and directly from Latin contributionem (nominative
contributio), noun of action from past participle stem of contribuere to bring together, add,
contribute, from com- together (see com-) + tribuere to allot, pay (see tribute).


contributor (n.)

also contributer, mid-15c., from Anglo-French contributour, from Vulgar Latin *contributorem, agent
noun from contribut-, stem of contribuere (see contribution). Related: Contributory (early 15c.).


contrite (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French contrit and directly from Latin contritus, literally worn out, ground to
pieces, past participle of conterere to grind, from com- together (see com-) + terere to rub (see
throw (v.)). Used in English in figurative sense of crushed in spirit by a sense of sin. Related:
Contritely.


contrition (n.)

c.1300, contrycyun, from Old French contriciun (Modern French contrition) and directly from Latin
contritionem (nominative contritio), noun of action from past participle stem of conterere (see
contrite).


contrivance (n.)

1620s, from contrive + -ance.


contrive (v.)

early 14c., from Old French controver (Modern French controuver) to find out, contrive, imagine,
from Late Latin contropare to compare (via a figure of speech), from Latin com- with (see com-) +
tropus song, musical mode, from Greek tropos figure of speech (see trope).    Sense evolution (in
French) was from invent with ingenuity to invent falsely. Spelled contreve until unexplained 15c.
sound change that also affected briar, friar, choir. Related: Contrived; contriving.


control (v.)

early 14c., to check, verify, regulate, from Anglo-French contreroller exert authority, from
Medieval Latin contrarotulus a counter, register, from Latin contra- against (see contra) + rotulus,
diminutive of rota wheel (see roll (n.)). From a medieval method of checking accounts by a duplicate
register. Sense of dominate, direct is mid-15c. Related: Controlled; controlling.   Control group in
scientific experiments is attested from 1952 (from a sense of control attested since 1875).


control (n.)

1580s, from control (v.).  Control freak is late 1960s slang.


controllable (adj.)

1570s, from control (v.) + -able.


controlled (adj.)

1580s, past participle adjective from control (v.). Of rent, from c.1930.


controller (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French contrerolleour (late 13c.), Old French contrerelleor (Modern French
contr&ocirc;leur), from Medieval Latin contrarotulator, agent noun from *contra-rotulare (see
control (v.)). Mechanical sense is from 1867.


controlling (adj.)

overbearing, 1570s, present participle adjective from control (v.).


controversal (adj.)

1610s, from Latin controversus turned against (see controversy) + -al (1).


controversary (adj.)

c.1600, from stem of Latin controversus (see controversy) + -ary.


controverse (v.)

c.1600, from French controvers&eacute;, from Latin controversus (see controversy).


controversial (adj.)

1580s, from Late Latin controversialis pertaining to controversy, from Latin controversia (see
controversy).


controversy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French controversie or directly from Latin controversia, from controversus
turned in an opposite direction, disputed, turned against, from contra- against (see contra) +
versus (see verse).


controvert (v.)

c.1600, probably a back-formation from controversy. Related: Controverted; controverting;
controvertible.


contumacious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin contumaci-, stem of contumax haughty, insolent, obstinate (see contumely) + -ous.


contumacy (n.)

late 14c., from Latin contumacia haughtiness, insolence, noun of quality from contumax (see
contumely).


contumelious (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French contumelieus, from Latin contumeliosus reproachful, insolently abusive,
from contumelia (see contumely).


contumely (n.)

late 14c., from Old French contumelie, from Latin contumelia a reproach, insult, probably related to
contumax haughty, stubborn, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + tumere to swell up (see
tumid).    The unhappy man left his country forever. The howl of contumely followed him across the
sea, up the Rhine, over the Alps; it gradually waxed fainter; it died away; those who had raised it
began to ask each other, what, after all, was the matter about which they had been so clamorous, and
wished to invite back the criminal whom they had just chased from them. [Thomas Babington Macaulay,
Lord Byron, 1877]


contusion (n.)

c.1400, from Middle French contusion, from Latin contusionem (nominative contusio) crushing,
bruising, from contus-, past participle stem of contundere to beat, break to pieces, from com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + tundere to beat (see obtuse).


contusive (adj.)

1798, from Latin contus-, past participle stem of contundere (see contusion) + -ive.


conundrum (n.)

1590s, Oxford University slang for pedant, also whim, etc., later (1790) riddle, puzzle. Also
spelled quonundrum. The sort of ponderous pseudo-Latin word that was once the height of humor in
learned circles.


conurbation (n.)

1915, from Latin com- with, together (see com-) + urbs city + -ation. Coined by Scottish biologist
and urban planner Patrick Geddes (1854-1932) in Cities in Evolution.


conus (n.)

1885, from Latin conus cone (see cone).


convalesce (v.)

late 15c., from Latin convalescere thrive, regain health, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), +
valescere to begin to grow strong, inchoative of valere to be strong (see valiant). Only in Caxton
and Scottish writers until 19c. Related: Convalesced; convalescing.


convalescence (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French convalescence (15c.), from Late Latin convalescentia regaining of
health, from convalescentem (nominative convalescens), present participle of convalescere (see
convalesce).


convalescent (adj.)

1650s, from French convalescent, from Latin convalescentem (nominative convalescens), present
participle of convalescere (see convalesce). As a noun, attested from 1758.


convection (n.)

1620s, from Latin convectionem (nominative convectio) the act of carrying, noun of action from past
participle stem of convehere to carry together, from com- together (see com-) + vehere to carry (see
vehicle). Related: Convective. Convection current recorded from 1868.


convenance (n.)

late 15c., from French convenance convention, agreement, convenience, from convenant, present
participle of convenir to come together (see convene).


convene (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French convenir to suit, agree, from Latin convenire unite, be suitable,
agree, assemble, from com- together (see com-) + venire to come (see venue). Related: Convened;
convener; convening.


convenience (n.)

late 14c., agreement, conformity, from Latin convenientia meeting together, agreement, harmony, from
conveniens, present participle of convenire (see convene). Meaning suitable, adapted to existing
conditions is from c.1600; that of personally not difficult is from 1703.


conveniences (n.)

material appliances conducive to personal comfort, 1670s, plural of convenience.


convenient (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin convenientem (nominative conveniens), present participle of convenire (see
convene).


conveniently (adv.)

late 14c., harmoniously, from convenient + -ly (2). Meaning in a way that avoids difficulty is from
c.1500.


convenor (n.)

variant of convener (see convene).


convent (n.)

c.1200, covent, cuvent, from Anglo-French covent, from Old French convent, from Latin conventus
assembly, used in Medieval Latin for religious house, originally past participle of convenire come
together (see convene). Not exclusively feminine until 18c. The form with restored Latin -n- emerged
early 15c. The Middle English form remains in London's Covent Garden district (notorious late 18c.
for brothels), so called because it had been the garden of a defunct monastery.    COVENT GARDEN
ABBESS. A bawd.  COVENT GARDEN AGUE. The venereal di&#383;ea&#383;e.  [Classical Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


conventicle (n.)

from Latin conventiculum a small assembly, diminutive of conventus (see convent).


convention (n.)

early 15c., agreement, from Middle French convention and directly from Latin conventionem
(nominative conventio) meeting, assembly, covenant, noun of action from past participle stem of
convenire (see convene).


conventional (adj.)

late 15c., of the nature of an agreement, from Late Latin conventionalis pertaining to convention or
agreement, from Latin conventionem (see convention). Meaning of the nature of a convention is from
1812, now rare; established by social convention is from 1761; that of following tradition is from
1831; that of non-nuclear is from 1955. Realted: Conventionality; conventionally.


converge (v.)

1690s, from Late Latin convergere to incline together from com- together (see com-) + vergere to
bend (see verge (v.)). Related: Converged; converging.


convergence (n.)

1713, from converge + -ence. Related: Convergent. Convergent evolution was in use among biologists
by 1890.


conversant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French conversant, present participle of converser (see converse (v.)).


conversate (v.)

by 1994, apparently a back-formation from conversation or an elaboration of converse. According to
some, from U.S. black English.


conversation (n.)

mid-14c., living together, having dealings with others, also manner of conducting oneself in the
world; from Old French conversation, from Latin conversationem (nominative conversatio) act of
living with, noun of action from past participle stem of conversari to live with, keep company with,
literally turn about with, from Latin com- with (see com-) + vertare, frequentative of vertere (see
versus).    Specific sense of talk is 1570s. Used as a synonym for sexual intercourse from at least
1511, hence criminal conversation, legal term for adultery from late 18c. Related:
Conversationalist; conversationist.


conversational (adj.)

1779, from conversation + -al (1).


converse (v.)

to communicate (with), 1590s; earlier to move about, live, dwell (mid-14c.), from Old French
converser to talk (12c.), from Latin conversari (see conversation). Related: Conversed; conversing.


converse (adj.)

exact opposite, 1560s, from Latin conversus turn around, past participle of convertere to turn about
(see convert). Originally mathematical. The noun is attested from 1550s in mathematics. Related:
Conversely.


conversion (n.)

mid-14c., originally of religion, from French conversion, from Latin conversionem (nominative
conversatio), noun of action from past participle stem of convertere (see convert (v.)). General
sense of transformation is early 15c. Of buildings, from 1921. Conversion disorder hysteria
(attested from 1946 but said to have been coined by Freud) was in DSM-IV (1994).


convert (v.)

c.1300, from Old French convertir, from Vulgar Latin *convertire, from Latin convertere turn around,
transform, from com- together (see com-) + vertere to turn (see versus). Originally in the religious
sense. The Latin word is glossed in Old English by gecyrren, from cierran to turn, return. Related:
Converted; converting.


convert (n.)

1560s, from convert (v.). Earlier was convers (early 14c.).


converter (n.)

1530s, agent noun from convert (v.). Of machinery, from 1867.


convertible (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French convertible (13c.), from Late Latin convertibilis changeable, from Latin
convertere (see convert (v.)). The noun is recorded from 1610s; meaning automobile with a fold-down
top is from 1916.


convex (adj.)

1570s, from Middle French convexe, from Latin convexus vaulted, arched, past participle of convehere
to bring together, from com- together, or thoroughly (see com-) + vehere to bring (see vehicle).
Possibly from the idea of vaults carried together to meet at the point of a roof. Related:
Convexity. Convex lens is from 1822.


convey (v.)

c.1300, to go along with; late 14c., to carry, transport; from Anglo-French conveier, from Old
French convoier to escort (Modern French convoyer), from Vulgar Latin *conviare to accompany on the
way, from Latin com- together (see com-) + via way, road (see via). It was a euphemism for steal
15c.-17c., which helped broaden its meaning. Related: Conveyed; conveying.


conveyance (n.)

mid-15c., act of conveying, from convey + -ance. Meaning document by which something is legally
conveyed is from 1570s; sense means of transportation is attested from 1590s. Related: Conveyanced;
conveyancing.


conveyer (n.)

1510s, agent noun from convey. Latinate form conveyor is later (1640s).


convict (v.)

mid-14c., from Latin convictus, past participle of convincere to 'overcome' in argument (see
convince). Replaced Old English verb oferst&aelig;lan. Related: Convicted; convicting.


convict (n.)

late 15c., from convict (v). Slang shortening con is from 1893.


conviction (n.)

mid-15c., the proving of guilt, from Late Latin convictionem (nominative convictio) proof,
refutation, noun of action from past participle stem of convincere (see convince). Meaning mental
state of being convinced is from 1690s; that of firm belief, a belief held as proven is from 1841.


convictions (n.)

those ideas which one believes to be true, 1883, plural of conviction.


convince (v.)

1520s, to overcome in argument, from Latin convincere to overcome decisively, from com-, intensive
prefix (see com-), + vincere to conquer (see victor). Meaning to firmly persuade is from c.1600.
Related: Convinced; convincing; convincingly.


convival (adj.)

1640s, from Latin convivalis, from conviva, from convivere (see convivial). Has been replaced in
most uses by convivial.


convive (n.)

1640s, from French convive, from Latin conviva one who feasts with others, from convivere (see
convivial). In mid-19c., also woman 'who lives in the same house with a number of others.'


convivial (adj.)

1660s, pertaining to a feast, from Late Latin convivialis, from Latin convivium a feast, from
convivere to carouse together, from com- together (see com-) + vivere to live (see vital). Meaning
sociable is from 18c. Related: Conviviality.


convocate (v.)

mid-16c., from Latin convocatus, past participle of convocare (see convocation).


convocation (n.)

late 14c., assembly of persons, from Old French convocation and directly from Latin convocationem
(nominative convocatio), noun of action from past participle stem of convocare to call together,
from com- together (see com-) + vocare to call, from vox voice (see voice (n.)). Related:
Convocational.


convoke (v.)

1590s, from Middle French convoquer (14c.), from Latin convocare to call together (see convocation).
Related: Convoked; convoking.


convolute (adj.)

rolled up together, 1794, from Latin convolutus, past participle of convolvere (see convolution).
The noun meaning something convoluted is from 1846.


convoluted (adj.)

1811, past participle adjective from verb convolute (1690s), from Latin convolutus, past participle
of convolvere (see convolution); or perhaps a back-formation from convolution. French has
convolut&eacute; (18c.), in form a past participle adjective, without the verb.


convolution (n.)

1540s, from Latin convolutus, past participle of convolvere to roll together, from com- together
(see com-) + volvere to roll (see volvox).


convoy (n.)

early 16c., the act of guiding or escorting for protection, from convoy (v.), late 14c., from Old
French convoier, from Vulgar Latin *conviare, literally go together on the road (see convey). The
meaning train of ships or wagons carrying munitions or provisions in wartime under protection of
escort is from c.1600.


convulse (v.)

1640s, transitive; 1680s, intransitive; from Latin convulsus, past participle of convellere
(transitive only) to pull away, to pull this way and that, wrench, hence to weaken, overthrow,
destroy (see convulsion). Related: Convulsed (1630s); convulsing.


convulsion (n.)

1580s, from Latin convulsionem (nominative convulsio), noun of action from past participle stem of
convellere to tear loose, from com- together (see com-) + vellere to pluck, pull violently (see
svelte).


convulsive (adj.)

1610s, from French convulsif, from Medieval Latin *convulsivus, from convulsus, past participle of
convellere (see convulse (v.)). Related: Convulsively.


cony (n.)

see coney.


coo (v.)

1660s, echoic of doves; the phrase to bill and coo is first recorded 1816. Related: Cooing. The noun
is recorded from 1729.


cooch (n.)

vagina, slang, c.2003, short for coochie.


coochie (n.)

vagina, slang, by 1991, perhaps from hoochie-coochie, especially in the blues song Hoochie Coochie
Man by Willie Dixon (1954), featuring a sexually suggestive phrase that traces at least to the 1893
World's Fair (see hoochy koochy).


cook (n.)

Old English coc, from Vulgar Latin cocus cook, from Latin coquus, from coquere to cook, prepare
food, ripen, digest, turn over in the mind from PIE root *pekw- to cook (cognates: Oscan popina
kitchen, Sanskrit pakvah cooked, Greek peptein, Lithuanian kepti to bake, roast, Old Church Slavonic
pecenu roasted, Welsh poeth cooked, baked, hot). Germanic languages had no one native term for all
types of cooking, and borrowed the Latin word (Old Saxon kok, Old High German choh, German Koch,
Swedish kock).There is the proverb, the more cooks the worse potage. [Gascoigne, 1575]


cook (v.)

late 14c., from cook (n.); the figurative sense of to manipulate, falsify, doctor is from 1630s.
Related: Cooked, cooking. To cook with gas is 1930s jive talk.


cookbook (n.)

1809, from cook + book (n.). Earlier was cookery book (1630s).


cooker (n.)

type of stove, 1884, from cook (v.) + -er (1).


cookery (n.)

late 14c.; see cook (n.) + -ery.


cookie (n.)

1703, American English, from Dutch koekje little cake, diminutive of koek cake, from Middle Dutch
koke (see cake (n.)). Slang application to persons attested since 1920. Phrase that's the way the
cookie crumbles that's the way things happen is from 1957.


cookout (n.)

also cook-out, 1930, American English, from cook (v.) + out (adv.).


cooky (n.)

variant of cookie.


cool (adj.)

Old English col not warm (but usually not as severe as cold), also, of persons, unperturbed,
undemonstrative, from Proto-Germanic *koluz (cognates: Middle Dutch coel, Dutch koel, Old High
German kuoli, German k&uuml;hl cool, Old Norse kala be cold), from PIE root *gel- cold, to freeze
(see cold (adj.)).    Applied since 1728 to large sums of money to give emphasis to amount. Meaning
calmly audacious is from 1825. Slang use for fashionable is 1933, originally Black English; modern
use as a general term of approval is from late 1940s, probably from bop talk and originally in
reference to a style of jazz; said to have been popularized in jazz circles by tenor saxophonist
Lester Young. Related: Coolly.


cool (n.)

c.1400, coldness, coolness, from cool (adj.). Meaning one's self-control, composure (the thing you
either keep or lose) is from 1966.


cool (v.)

Old English colian, to lose warmth, also figuratively, to lose ardor, from the root of cool (adj.).
Meaning to cause to lose warmth is from late 14c. Related: Cooled; cooling.


coolant (n.)

radiator fluid, 1930, from cool (adj.) + -ant.


cooler (n.)

1570s, a vessel in which something is set to cool, agent noun from cool (v.). Meaning insulated box
to keep things cool is from 1958. Slang meaning jail is attested from 1884.


coolie (n.)

name given by Europeans to hired laborers in India and China, c.1600, from Hindi quli hired servant,
probably from kuli, name of an aboriginal tribe or caste in Gujarat. The name was picked up by the
Portuguese, who used it in southern India (where by coincidence kuli in Tamil meant hire) and in
China.


coolness (n.)

Old English colnesse; see cool (adj.) + -ness. Figurative sense of calmness is from 1650s; that of
absence of warm affection is from 1670s.


coolth (n.)

1540s, from cool on the model of warmth. It persists, and was used by Pound, Tolkien, Kipling, etc.,
but it never has shaken its odor of facetiousness and become standard.


coomb (n.)

also combe, deep hollow or valley, especially on flank of a hill, mainly surviving in place names,
from Old English cumb, probably a British word, from Celtic base *kumbos (compare Welsh cwm in same
sense). Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names says, This is usually taken to be a Celtic loan
... but there was also OE cumb 'vessel, cup, bowl,' which was probably used in a transferred
topographical sense reinforced in western districts by cwm.


coon (n.)

short for raccoon, 1742, American English. It was the nickname of Whig Party members in U.S.
c.1848-60, as the raccoon was the party's symbol, and it also had associations with frontiersmen
(who stereotypically wore raccoon-skin caps), which probably ultimately was the source of the Whig
Party sense (the party's 1840 campaign was built on a false image of wealthy William Henry Harrison
as a rustic frontiersman).    The insulting U.S. meaning black person was in use by 1837, said to be
ultimately from Portuguese barracoos building constructed to hold slaves for sale. No doubt boosted
by the enormously popular blackface minstrel act Zip Coon (George Washington Dixon) which debuted in
New York City in 1834. But it is perhaps older (one of the lead characters in the 1767 colonial
comic opera The Disappointment is a black man named Raccoon). Coon's age is 1843, American English,
probably an alteration of British a crow's age.


coop (n.)

small cage for poultry, mid-14c., from Old English cype, cypa basket, cask, akin to Middle Dutch
kupe, Swedish kupa, and all probably from Latin cupa tub, cask, from PIE *keup- hollow mound (see
cup (n.)).


coop (v.)

1560s, from coop (n.). Related: Cooped; cooping.


cooper (n.)

craftsman who makes wooden vessels, attested from late 12c. as a surname, either from Old English
(unattested) or from a Low German source akin to Middle Dutch cuper, East Frisian kuper, from Low
German kupe (German Kufe) cask, cognate with Medieval Latin cupa (see coop (n.)).    A dry cooper
makes casks, etc., to hold dry goods, a wet cooper those to contain liquids, a white cooper pails,
tubs, and the like for domestic or dairy use. [OED]    The surname Cowper (pronounced cooper)
preserves a 15c. spelling.


cooperate (v.)

also co-operate, c.1600, from Late Latin cooperatus, past participle of cooperari to work together
with (see cooperation). Related: Cooperated; cooperating.


cooperation (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French coop&eacute;ration, or directly from Late Latin cooperationem
(nominative cooperatio) a working together, noun of action from past participle stem of cooperari to
work together, from com- with (see com-) + operari to work (see operation).


cooperative (adj.)

also co-operative, c.1600, from Late Latin cooperat-, past participle stem of cooperari (see
cooperation) + -ive. Political economy sense is from 1808, from the pre-Marx communist movement. The
noun meaning a cooperative store is from 1883; meaning a cooperative society is from 1921.


coopt (v.)

see co-opt.


cooptation (n.)

1530s, election to fill a vacancy, from Latin cooptationem (nominative cooptatio) election, noun of
action from past participle stem of cooptare (see co-opt). Related: Cooptative.


coordinate (adj.)

1640s, of the same order, from Medieval Latin coordinatus, past participle of coordinare to set in
order, arrange (see coordination). Meaning involving coordination is from 1769. Related:
Coordinance.


coordinate (n.)

1823, in the mathematical sense, especially with reference to the system invented by Descartes; from
coordinate (adj.). Hence, coordinates as a means of determining a location on the earth's surface
(especially for aircraft), attested by 1960.


coordinate (v.)

1660s, to place in the same rank, from Latin coordinare (see coordination). Meaning to arrange in
proper position (transitive) is from 1847; that of to work together in order (intransitive) is from
1863. Related: Coordinated; coordinating.


coordination (n.)

also co-ordination, c.1600, orderly combination, from French coordination (14c.) or directly from
Late Latin coordinationem (nominative coordinatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin coordinare to set in order, arrange, from com- together (see com-) + ordinatio arrangement,
from ordo order (see order (n.)). Meaning action of setting in order is from 1640s; that of
harmonious adjustment or action, especially of muscles and bodily movements, is from 1855.


coordinator (n.)

also co-ordinator, 1864, agent noun in Latin form from coordinate (v.).


coot (n.)

c.1300, cote, used for various water fowl (now limited to Fulica atra and, in North America, F.
americana), of uncertain origin. Compare Dutch meercoet lake coot. Meaning silly person, fool is
attested from 1766.


cooter (n.)

name for some types of freshwater terrapin in southern U.S., 1835 (first attested 1827 in phrase
drunk as a cooter, but this probably is a colloquial form of unrelated coot), from obsolete verb
coot to copulate (1660s), of unknown origin. The turtle is said to copulate for two weeks at a
stretch.


cootie (n.)

body lice, 1917, British World War I slang, earlier in nautical use, said to be from Malay kutu dog
tick.


cooties (n.)

1917, see cootie.


cop (v.)

1704, northern British dialect, to seize, to catch, perhaps ultimately from Middle French caper
seize, to take, from Latin capere to take (see capable); or from Dutch kapen to take, from Old
Frisian capia to buy, which is related to Old English ceapian (see cheap). Related: Copped; copping.


cop (n.)

policeman, 1859, abbreviation of earlier copper (n.2), 1846, from  cop (v.).


cop out

by 1942, noun and verb, sneak off, escape, American English slang, probably from cop a plea (c.1925)
plead guilty to lesser charges, probably from northern British slang cop to catch (a scolding,
etc.); as in cop a feel grope someone (1930s); see cop (v.). Sense of evade an issue or problem is
from 1960s.


copacetic (adj.)

1919, but it may have origins in 19c. U.S. Southern black speech. Origin unknown, suspects include
Latin, Yiddish (Hebrew kol b'seder), Italian, Louisiana French (coupe-s&eacute;tique), and Native
American. None is considered convincing by linguists.


copasetic

see copacetic.


cope (v.)

late 14c., come to blows with, from Old French couper, earlier colper hit, punch, from colp a blow
(see coup). Meaning evolved 17c. into handle successfully, perhaps influenced by obsolete cope to
traffic (15c.-17c.), a word in North Sea trade, from the Flemish version of the Germanic source of
English cheap. Related: Coped; coping.


Copenhagen

capital of Denmark, literally merchant's port, from Danish k&oslash;ber merchant, literally buyer
(see cheap (adj.)), + havn port (see haven).


Copernican (adj.)

1660s, pertaining to Copernicus.


Copernicus

Latinized form of name of Mikolaj Koppernigk (1473-1543), physician and canon of the cathedral of
Frauenburg. His great work was De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium.


copesetic (adj.)

see copacetic.


copier (n.)

1590s, agent noun from copy (v.).


copilot (n.)

1927, from co- + pilot (n.).


coping (n.)

c.1600 as an architectural term, from cope (n.), the cape-like vestment worn by priests (14c.), a
variant of cape. Coping saw attested by 1931.


copious (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin copiosus plentiful, from copia an abundance, ample supply, profusion, plenty,
from com- with (see com-) + ops (genitive opis) power, wealth, resources, from PIE root *op- (1) to
work, produce in abundance, (see opus). Related: Copiously.


coplanar (adj.)

1862, from co- + planar.


copout

see cop out.


copper (n.1)

malleable metallic element, Old English coper, from Proto-Germanic *kupar (cognates: Middle Dutch
koper, Old Norse koparr, Old High German kupfar), from Late Latin cuprum, contraction of Latin
Cyprium (aes) Cyprian (metal), after Greek Kyprios Cyprus (see Cyprus).    Latin aes originally was
copper, but this was extended to its alloy with tin, bronze, and as this was far more extensively
used than pure copper, the word's primary sense shifted to the alloy and a new word evolved for
copper, from the Latin form of the name of the island of Cyprus, where copper was mined. Aes passed
into Germanic (which originally did not distinguish copper from its alloys) and became English ore.
In Latin, aes was the common word for cash, coin, debt, wages in many figurative expressions.
Chemical symbol Cu is from cuprum.


copper (n.2)

policeman, 1846; agent noun from cop (v.).


copperhead (n.)

Trigonocephalus contortrix, 1775, American English, so called for color markings between its eyes;
see copper + head (n.). Poisonous sneak snakes (because they bite without warning), the name is said
to have been first used in reference to Northerners suspected of Southern sympathies in Greeley's
New York Tribune, July 20, 1861. Charles H. Coleman, The Use of the Term 'Copperhead' During the
Civil War [Mississippi Valley Historical Review 25 (1938), p.263] traces it to an anonymous letter
against Ohio anti-war Democrats in the Cincinnati Commercial newspaper in the summer of 1861. It
seems not to have been in widespread use until summer 1862.


coppice (n.)

late 14c., small thicket of trees grown for cutting, from Old French copeiz, coupeiz a cut-over
forest, from Vulgar Latin *colpaticium having been cut, ultimately from Latin colaphus a blow with
the fist, from Greek kolaphos blow, cuff (see coup).


copra (n.)

dried kernel of coconut, 1580s, from Portuguese copra (16c.), from Malayalam koppara (cognate with
Hindi khopra) coconut; related to Hindi khopri skull, from Sanskrit kharparah skull.


copro-

word-forming element indicating dung, filth, excrement, before vowels copr-, from Modern Latin
copro-, from Greek kopros dung, from PIE root *kekw-. Hence, coprology study of obscene literature.


coprolalia (n.)

obsessive use of obscene language, either through mental illness or perversion, 1886, from French
coprolalie, coined 1885 by de la Tourette, from copro- dung, filth + Greek lalia talk, prattle, a
speaking, from lalein to speak, prattle, of echoic origin.


coprolite (n.)

fossil dung, 1829, from copro- + -lite, from French, for -lithe, from Greek lithos stone (see
litho-).


coprophagia (n.)

1906, in Havelock Ellis, Latinized from coprophagy (q.v.).


coprophagy (n.)

1891, from Modern Latin coprophagus, from Greek koprophagos dung-eating, from kopros dung (see
copro-) + -phagos (see -phagous). Related: Coprophagous.


coprophilia (n.)

attraction to defecation and feces, 1934, from copro- + -philia.


copse (n.)

1570s, small wood grown for purposes of periodic cutting, contraction of coppice.


Copt (n.)

native monophosyte Christian of Egypt, 1610s, from Modern Latin Coptus, from Arabic quft, probably
from Coptic gyptios, from Greek Agyptios Egyptian. Arabic has no -p- and often substitutes -f- or
-b- for it. Related: Coptic.


copula (n.)

linking verb, 1640s, from Latin copula that which binds, rope, band, bond (see copulate).


copulate (v.)

early 15c., to join, from Latin copulatus, past participle of copulare join together, couple, bind,
link, unite, from copula band, tie, link, from PIE *ko-ap-, from *ko(m)- together + *ap- (1) to
take, reach (see apt). Sexual sense attested from 1630s. Related: Copulated; copulating.


copulation (n.)

late 14c., coupling, from Middle French copulation mating, copulation (14c.), from Latin
copulationem (nominative copulatio), noun of action from past participle stem of copulare (see
copulate). Of the sex act from late 15c., and this became the main sense from 16c.


copy (n.)

early 14c., written account or record, from Old French copie (13c.), from Medieval Latin copia
reproduction, transcript, from Latin copia plenty, means (see copious). Sense extended 15c. to any
specimen of writing (especially MS for a printer) and any reproduction or imitation. Related:
Copyist.


copy (v.)

late 14c., from Old French copier (14c.), from Medieval Latin copiare to transcribe, originally to
write in plenty, from Latin copia (see copy (n.)). Hence, to write an original text many times.
Related: Copied; copying. Figurative sense of to imitate is attested from 1640s.


copycat (n.)

by 1884, American English, probably at least a generation older, from copy (v.) + cat (n.). As a
verb, from 1932.


copyright (n.)

the right to make or sell copies, 1735, from copy + right (n.). As a verb, from 1806 (implied in
past participle adjective copyrighted).


copywriter

writer of copy for advertisements, 1911, from copy + writer. Related: Copywriting.


coquet (n.)

amorous, flirtatious person, 1690s, originally of both sexes (as it was in French), from French
coquet (17c.), diminutive of coq cock (see cock (n.1)). A figurative reference to its strut or its
lust. The distinction of fem. coquette began c.1700, and use in reference to males has faded out
since.


coquetry (n.)

1650s, from French coquetterie, from coqueter (v.), from coquet (see coquet).    Coquetry whets the
appetite; flirtation depraves it .... [Donald Grant Mitchell (1822-1908)]


coquette (n.)

1660s, from French fem. of coquet (male) flirt (see coquet).


Cora

fem. proper name, from Latin, from Greek Kore (see Kore).


coracle (n.)

round boat of wicker, coated with skins, 1540s (the thing is described, but not named, in the Anglo-
Saxon Chronicle from 9c.), from Welsh corwgl, from corwg, cognate with Gaelic curachan, Middle Irish
curach boat, which probably is the source of Middle English currock coracle (mid-15c.). The name is
perhaps from the hides that cover it (see corium).


coral (n.)

c.1300, from Old French coral (12c., Modern French corail), from Latin corallium, from Greek
korallion; perhaps of Semitic origin (compare Hebrew goral small pebble, Arabic garal small stone),
originally just the red variety found in the Mediterranean, hence use of the word as a symbol of
red. Related: Coralline. Coral snake (1760) is so called for the red zones in its markings. Coral
reef is attested from 1745.


corbel (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French corbel, diminutive of corb raven, from Latin corvus (see raven); so called
from its beaked shape.


cord (n.)

c.1300, from Old French corde rope, string, twist, cord, from Latin chorda string of a musical
instrument, cat-gut, from Greek khorde string, catgut, chord, cord, from PIE root *ghere- intestine
(see yarn). As a measure of wood (eight feet long, four feet high and wide) first recorded 1610s, so
called because it was measured with a cord of rope.


cordage (n.)

ropes, especially on a ship, late 15c., from Old French cordage, from corde cord (see cord).


cordial (adj.)

late 14c., of the heart, from Middle French cordial, from Medieval Latin cordialis of or for the
heart, from Latin cor (genitive cordis) heart (see heart). Meaning heartfelt, from the heart is mid-
15c. The noun is late 14c., originally medicine, food, or drink that stimulates the heart. Related:
Cordiality.


cordially (adv.)

late 15c., by heart, from cordial + -ly (2). Meaning heartily is from 1530s; weakened sense of with
friendliness is attested by 1781.


cordillera (n.)

1704, from Spanish, mountain chain, from cordilla, in Old Spanish string, rope, diminutive of
cuerda, from Latin chorda cord, rope (see cord).


cordite (n.)

smokeless explosive, 1889, from cord + -ite (2); so called for its curiously string-like appearance
in the words of a newspaper of the day.


cordon (n.)

mid-15c., cord or ribbon worn as an ornament, from Middle French cordon ribbon, diminutive of Old
French corde cord (see cord). Sense of a line of people or things guarding something is 1758.
Original sense preserved in cordon bleu (1727) the highest distinction, literally blue ribbon, for
the sky-blue ribbon worn by the Knights-grand-cross of the Holy Ghost (highest order of chivalry);
extended figuratively to other persons of distinction, especially, jocularly, to a first-rate cook.
Cordon sanitaire (1857), from French, a guarded line between infected and uninfected districts.


cordon (v.)

1560s, to ornament with a ribbon; 1891 as to guard with a cordon; from cordon (n.). Related:
Cordoned; cordoning.


cordovan (n.)

1590s, fine Spanish leather, from adjective Cordovan, from Spanish cordovan (modern cordoban), from
cordovano (adj.) of Cordova, the Spanish city, former capital of Moorish Spain; a later adoption of
the same word that became cordwain (see cordwainer). The city name is from Phoenician qorteb oil
press.


corduroy (n.)

1780, probably from cord + obsolete 17c. duroy, name of a coarse fabric made in England, of unknown
origin. Folk etymology is from *corde du roi the king's cord, but this is not attested in French,
where the term for the cloth was velours &agrave; c&ocirc;tes. Applied in U.S. to a road of logs
across swampy ground (1780s) on similarity of appearance.    CORDUROY ROAD. A road or causeway
constructed with logs laid together over swamps or marshy places. When properly finished earth is
thrown between them by which the road is made smooth; but in newly settled parts of the United
States they are often left uncovered, and hence are extremely rough and bad to pass over with a
carriage. Sometimes they extend many miles. They derive their name from their resemblance to a
species of ribbed velvet, called corduroy. [Bartlett]


cordwainer (n.)

shoemaker, leatherworker, c.1100, from Anglo-French cordewaner, from Old French cordoan (leather) of
Cordova, the town in Spain whose leather was favored by the upper class for shoes. Compare cordovan,
a later borrowing directly from Spanish.


core (n.)

late 14c., probably from Old French coeur core of fruit, heart of lettuce, literally heart, from
Latin cor heart, from PIE root *kerd- heart (see heart). Nuclear reactor sense is from 1949.


core (v.)

mid-15c., from core (n.). Related: Cored; coring.


corgi (n.)

1926, from Welsh corgi, from cor dwarf + ci dog (see canine).


coriander (n.)

late 14c., from Old French coriandre (14c.), from Latin coriandrum, from Greek koriannon, often said
by botanists to be related to koris bedbug from the bad smell of the unripe fruit, or perhaps a non-
Indo-European word conformed to the Greek insect name.


Corinna

fem. proper name, from Latin Corinna, from Greek Korinna, diminutive of kore maiden, also an epithet
of Persephone; see Kore.


Corinth

city in Greece, from Latin Corinthus, from Greek Korinthos, from Pelasgian *kar- point, peak. The
-nthos identifies it as being from the lost pre-IE language of Greece.


Corinthian

1650s as an architectural order, from Corinth, the ancient Greek city-state. In classical times
Corinth was notorious for its luxury and licentiousness among the Greek states (and for not scorning
trade and profit); hence Corinthian, noun and adjective, in various slang or colloquial sense in
English, especially a swell, a man about town (early to mid-19c. but especially in the 1820s).


Coriolis effect (n.)

1969 (earlier Coriolis force, 1923, and other references back to 1912), from the name of French
scientist Gaspard Gustave de Coriolis (1792-1843) who described it c.1835.


corium (n.)

1650s, from Latin corium skin, hide, leather, related to cortex bark, scortum skin, hide, from PIE
root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (cognates: Sanskrit krtih hide; Old Church Slavonic scora skin, Russian
skora hide, kora bark; Welsh corwg boat made with leather skins; Old English sceran to cut, shear;
see shear (v.)). Related: Coriaceous.


cork (n.)

c.1300, from Spanish alcorque cork sole, probably via Arabic and ultimately from Latin quercus oak
(see Quercus) or cortex (genitive corticis) bark (see corium).


Cork

place in Ireland, anglicized from Irish Corcaigh, from corcach marsh.


cork (v.)

1570s, to put a cork sole on a shoe, from cork (n.)). Meaning to stop with a cork is from 1640s.
Related: Corked; corking.


corker (n.)

1837, slang, something that settles a debate, discussion, conflict, etc.; hence something
astonishing (1880s). Probably an agent noun from cork (v.) on the notion is of putting a cork in a
bottle as an act of finality.


corkscrew (n.)

1720, from cork (n.) + screw (n.). Given various figurative or extended senses from c.1815; the verb
is attested from 1837.


corky (adj.)

early 17c., light, buoyant (as cork is), hence, figuratively, of persons lively; from cork (n.) + -y
(2). Of bottled liquors or wine, having a flavor of cork, from 1889.


corm (n.)

1570s, from French corme, from Latin cornum cornel-cherry (but applied to service-berries in
French); see cornel.


cormorant (n.)

early 14c., from Old French cormarenc (12c., Modern French cormoran), from Late Latin corvus marinus
sea raven + Germanic suffix -enc, -ing. The -t in English probably is from confusion with words in
-ant. It has a reputation for voracity.


corn (n.1)

grain, Old English corn, from Proto-Germanic *kurnam small seed (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon
korn grain, Middle Dutch coren, German Korn, Old Norse korn, Gothic kaurn), from PIE root *gre-no-
grain (cognates: Old Church Slavonic zruno grain, Latin granum seed, Lithuanian &#382;irnis pea).
The sense of the Old English word was grain with the seed still in (as in barleycorn) rather than a
particular plant.    Locally understood to denote the leading crop of a district. Restricted to the
indigenous maize in America (c.1600, originally Indian corn, but the adjective was dropped), usually
wheat in England, oats in Scotland and Ireland, while Korn means rye in parts of Germany. Maize was
introduced to China by 1550, it thrived where rice did not grow well and was a significant factor in
the 18th century population boom there. Cornflakes first recorded 1907. Corned beef so called for
the corns or grains of salt with which it is preserved; from verb corn to salt (1560s).


corn (n.2)

hardening of skin, early 15c., from Old French corne (13c.) horn (of an animal), later, corn on the
foot, from Latin cornu horn (see horn (n.)).


corn row (n.)

also cornrow, 1769 as a row of corn, by 1971 as a style of hair braids. The verb in this sense also
is from 1971.


cornea (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin cornea tela horny web or sheath, from Latin cornu (genitive cornus)
horn (see horn (n.)). So called for its consistency. Related: Corneal.


cornel (n.)

a type of tree or shrub with an edible fruit, 1550s, from German cornel-baum, from Old High German
cornul, from Medieval Latin cornolium, from French cornouille, from Vulgar Latin *cornuculum, from
Latin cornum cornel-cherry, perhaps related to Greek kerasos cherry. Old English also had borrowed
the Latin word, in corntreow. The plant was noted for its hard wood, which was favored by the
ancients for making shafts of spears and arrows.


cornelian (n.)

red variety of chalcedony, a variant of corneline (c.1400), from Old French corneline (Modern French
cornaline), diminutive of corneola, probably from Vulgar Latin *cornea, from Latin cornus, name of a
type of berry (see cornel).


Cornelius

masc. proper name, from the name of a Roman gens.


corner (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French cornere (Old French corniere), from Old French corne horn, corner, from
Vulgar Latin *corna, from Latin cornua, plural of cornu projecting point, end, horn (see horn (n.)).
Replaced Old English hyrne. As an adjective, from 1530s.


corner (v.)

late 14c., to furnish with corners, from corner (n.). Meaning to turn a corner, as in a race, is
1860s; meaning drive (someone) into a corner is American English from 1824. Commercial sense is from
1836. Related: Cornered; cornering.


cornerstone (n.)

late 13c., from corner (n.) + stone (n.). The figurative use is from early 14c.    I endorse without
reserve the much abused sentiment of Governor M'Duffie, that Slavery is the corner-stone of our
republican edifice; while I repudiate, as ridiculously absurd, that much lauded but nowhere
accredited dogma of Mr. Jefferson, that all men are born equal. No society has ever yet existed, and
I have already incidentally quoted the highest authority to show that none ever will exist, without
a natural variety of classes. [James H. Hammond, Letter to an English Abolitionist 1845]


cornet (n.)

c.1400, A wind instrument made of wood and provided with six finger holes [Middle English
Dictionary], from Old French cornet (14c.) a small horn, diminutive of corn a horn, from Latin cornu
horn (see horn (n.)). Modern use is short for cornet-&#224;-pistons cornet with pistons.    The
quality of the tone is penetrating and unsympathetic, by no means equal to that of the trumpet, for
which it is commonly substituted. [cornet entry in Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia, 1902]


cornfield (n.)

late 13c., from corn (n.1) + field (n.).


cornhole (v.)

synonymous with do anal intercourse by 1930s, apparently the reference is to a game played in the
farming regions of the Ohio Valley in the U.S. from 19c., in which players take turns throwing a
small bag full of feed corn at a raised platform with a hole in it; from corn (n.1) + hole (n.).


cornice (n.)

1560s, from Middle French corniche (16c.) or directly from Italian cornice ornamental molding along
a wall, perhaps from Latin coronis curved line, flourish in writing, from Greek koronis curved
object (see crown). Perhaps influenced by (or even from) Latin cornicem, accusative of cornix crow
(compare corbel).


Cornish (adj.)

from first element of Cornwall + -ish.


cornmeal (n.)

1782, from corn (n.1) + meal (n.2).


cornucopia (n.)

c.1500, from Late Latin cornucopia, from Latin cornu copiae horn of plenty, originally the horn of
the goat Amalthea, who nurtured the infant Zeus. See horn (n.) and copious.


Cornwall

Old English Cornwalas (891), Cornubia (c.705), the Corn Welsh, from original Celtic tribal name,
*Cornowii, Latinized as Cornovii, literally peninsula people, the people of the horn (from Celtic
kernou horn, hence headland), in reference to the long horn of land on which they live, to which the
Anglo-Saxons added the plural of Old English walh stranger, foreigner, especially if Celtic (see
Welsh).


corny (adj.)

1570s, full of corn, pertaining to corn, from corn (n.1) + -y (2). Chaucer used it of ale (late
14c.), perhaps to mean malty. American English slang old-fashioned, sentimental is from 1932 (first
attested in Melody Maker), perhaps originally something appealing to country folk (corn-fed in the
same sense is attested from 1929). Related: Cornily; corniness.


corolla (n.)

1670s, crown, from Latin corolla, diminutive of corona crown, garland (see crown (n.)). Botanical
use is from 1753.


corollary (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin corollarium a deduction, consequence, from Latin corollarium, originally
money paid for a garland, hence gift, gratuity, something extra; and in logic, a proposition proved
from another that has been proved. From corolla small garland, diminutive of corona crown (see crown
(n.)).


corollate (adj.)

1864, having a corolla, from corolla + -ate.


corona (n.)

1650s, from Latin corona crown, garland (see crown (n.)).


coronal (adj.)

1540s, pertaining to a crown (or, later, to one of the extended senses of Latin corona), from French
coronal (16c.), from Latin coronalis, from corona (see crown (n.)).


coronary (adj.)

c.1600, suitable for garlands, from Latin coronarius of a crown, from corona crown (see crown (n.)).
Anatomical use is 1670s for structure of blood vessels that surround the heart like a crown. Short
for coronary thrombosis it dates from 1955. Coronary artery is recorded from 1741.


coronation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin coronationem (nominative coronatio) a crowning, from past participle stem
of Latin coronare to crown, from corona crown (see crown (n.)).


coronel (n.)

obsolete form of colonel.


coroner (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-French curuner, from Latin custos placitorum coronae, originally the title of
the officer with the duty of protecting the property of the royal family, from Latin corona,
literally crown (see crown (n.)). The duties of the office gradually narrowed and by 17c. the chief
function was to determine the cause of death in cases not obviously natural.


coronet (n.)

a small crown, late 15c., from Old French coronete, diminutive of corone a crown, from Latin corona
crown (see crown (n.)).


corporal (n.)

lowest noncommissioned army officer, 1570s, from Middle French corporal, from Italian caporale a
corporal, from capo chief, head, from Latin caput head (see capitulum). So called because he was in
charge of a body of troops. Perhaps influenced by Italian corpo, from Latin corps body. Or corps may
be the source and caput the influence, as the OED suggests.


corporal (adj.)

of or belonging to the body, late 14c., from Old French corporal (12c., Modern French corporel) of
the body, physical, strong, from Latin corporalis pertaining to the body, from corpus (genitive
corporis) body (see corps). Corporal punishment punishment of the body (as opposed to fine or loss
of rank or privilege) is from 1580s. Related: Corporality.


corporate (adj.)

early 15c., united in one body, from Latin corporatus, past participle of corporare form into a
body, from corpus (genitive corporis) body (see corporeal).


corporation (n.)

mid-15c., persons united in a body for some purpose, from such use in Anglo-Latin, from Late Latin
corporationem (nominative corporatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin corporare
to embody (see corporate). Meaning legally authorized entity (including municipal governments and
modern business companies) is from 1610s.


corporatism (n.)

1890, from corporate + -ism. Used over the years in various senses of corporate, in 1920s-30s often
with reference to fascist collectivism.


corporative (adj.)

1833, from Late Latin corporativus pertaining to the forming of a body, from past participle stem of
corporare (see corporate).


corporeal (adj.)

early 15c., with adjectival suffix -al (1) + Latin corporeus of the nature of a body, from corpus
body (living or dead), from PIE *kwrpes, from root *kwrep- body, form, appearance, probably from a
verbal root meaning to appear (cognates: Sanskrit krp- form, body, Avestan kerefsh form, body, Old
English hrif belly, Old High German href womb, belly, abdomen).


corps (n.)

late 13c., cors body, from Old French cors body, person, corpse, life (9c.), from Latin corpus body
(see corporeal). Sense in English evolved from dead body (13c.) to live body (14c.) to body of
citizens (15c.) to band of knights (mid-15c.). The modern military sense (1704) is from French corps
d'arm&eacute;e (16c.), picked up in English during Marlborough's campaigns.    French restored the
Latin -p- in 14c., and English followed 15c., but the pronunciation remained corse at first and
corse persisted as a parallel formation. After the -p- began to be sounded (16c. in English), corse
became archaic or poetic only.


corpse (n.)

1540s, variant spelling of corps (q.v.). The -p- originally was silent, as in French, and with some
speakers still is. The terminal -e was rare before 19c. Corpse-candle is attested from 1690s.


corpulence (n.)

late 15c. body size (either large or small, with adjective), from Old French corpulence (14c.)
corpulence; physical size, build, from Latin corpulentia grossness of body, noun of quality from
corpulentus (see corpulent). Restriction to bulkiness, obesity began late 16c. Related: Corpulency.


corpulent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French corpulent stout, fat, from Latin corpulentus fleshy, fat, from corpus
body (see corporeal) + -ulentus full of. Leigh Hunt was sent to prison for two years for calling the
Prince Regent corpulent in print in 1812.


corpus (n.)

(plural corpora), late 14c., from Latin corpus, literally body (see corporeal). The sense of body of
a person (mid-15c. in English) and collection of facts or things (1727 in English) both were present
in Latin. Corpus Christi (late 14c.), feast of the Blessed Sacrament, is the Thursday after Trinity
Sunday. Also used in various medical phrases, such as corpus callosum (1706, literally tough body),
corpus luteum (1788, literally yellow body).


corpus delicti

1832, Latin, literally body of the offense; not the murder victim's body, but the basic elements
that make up a crime; in the case of a murder, including the body of the murdered person.


corpuscle (n.)

1650s, any small particle, from Latin corpusculum a puny body; an atom, particle, diminutive of
corpus body (see corporeal). First applied to blood cells 1845. Related: Corpuscular.


corral (n.)

1580s, from Spanish corral, from corro ring, Portuguese curral, of uncertain origin. Perhaps
ultimately African, or from Vulgar Latin *currale enclosure for vehicles, from Latin currus two-
wheeled vehicle, from currere to run.


corral (v.)

1847, from corral (n.); meaning to lay hold of, collar, is U.S. slang from 1860. Related: Corraled.


correct (v.)

mid-14c., to set right, rectify (a fault or error), from Latin correctus, past participle of
corrigere to put straight, reduce to order, set right; in transferred use, to reform, amend,
especially of speech or writing, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + regere to lead straight,
rule (see regal). Originally of persons; with reference to writing, etc., attested from late 14c.
Related: Corrected; correcting.


correct (adj.)

1670s, from French correct right, proper, from Latin correctus (see correct (v.)). Related:
Correctly; correctness.


correction (n.)

mid-14c., action of correcting, from Old French correccion (13c.) correction, amendment; punishment,
rebuke, from Latin correctionem (nominative correctio), noun of action from past participle stem of
corrigere (see correct (v.)). Meaning chastisement is from late 14c. Meaning an instance of
correction is from 1520s. House of correction was in a royal statute from 1575.


corrective

16c., adjective and noun, from French correctif, from Latin correct-, past participle stem of
corrigere (see correct (v.).


correlate (n.)

1640s, perhaps a back-formation from correlation.


correlate (v.)

1742, back-formation from correlation, or else a verbal use of the noun. Related: Correlated;
correlating; correlative.


correlation (n.)

1560s, from Middle French corr&eacute;lation, from cor- together (see com-) + relation (see
relation).


correspond (v.)

1520s, to be in agreement, to be in harmony with, from Middle French correspondre (14c.) or directly
from Medieval Latin correspondere, from cor- (see com-) together, with each other + respondere to
answer (see respond).    Originally in Medieval Latin of two things in mutual action, but by later
Medieval Latin it could be used of one thing only. In English, sense of to be similar (to) is from
1640s; that of to hold communication with is from c.1600; specifically to communicate by means of
letters from 1640s (in mid-18c. it also could mean have sex). Related: Corresponded; corresponding.


correspondence (n.)

early 15c., harmony, agreement, from Medieval Latin correspondentia, from correspondentem
(nominative correspondens), present participle of correspondere (see correspond). Sense of
communication by letters is first attested 1640s.


correspondent (adj.)

early 15c., having an analogous relationship (to), a sense taken up since 19c. by corresponding;
from Medieval Latin correspondentem, present participle of correspondere (see correspond).


correspondent (n.)

one who communicates with another by letters, 1620s, from correspondent (adj.). The newspaper sense
is from 1711.    THE life of a newspaper correspondent, as may naturally be supposed, is one of
alternate cloud and sunshine--one day basking in an Andalusian balcony, playing a rubber at the club
on the off-nights of the Opera, being very musical when the handsome Prima Donna sings, and very
light fantastic toeish when the lively Prima Ballerina dances; another day roughing it over the
Balkan, amid sleet and snow, or starving at the tail of an ill-conditioned army, and receiving
bullets instead of billets-doux. [New Monthly Magazine, vol. 95, 1852, p.284]


corresponding (adj.)

1570s, past participle adjective from correspond. Not common until 19c., when it took on the
adjectival function of correspondent. Related: Correspondingly (1836).


corridor (n.)

1590s, from French corridor (16c.), from Italian corridore a gallery, literally a runner, from
correre to run, from Latin currere (see current (adj.)). Originally of fortifications, meaning long
hallway is first recorded 1814.


corrigendum (n.)

1850, from Latin corrigendum (plural corrigenda) that which is to be corrected, neuter gerundive of
corrigere to correct (see correct (v.)).


corrigible (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French corrigible, from Medieval Latin corrigibilis that which can be
corrected, from Latin corrigere (see correct). Related: Corrigibility.


corroborate (v.)

1530s, to give (legal) confirmation to, from Latin corroboratus, past participle of corroborare to
strengthen, invigorate, from com- together or thoroughly (see com-) + roborare to make strong, from
robur, robus strength, (see robust).    Meaning to strengthen by evidence, to confirm is from 1706.
Sometimes in early use the word also has its literal Latin sense, especially of medicines. Related:
Corroborated; corroborating; corroborative.


corroboration (n.)

mid-15c., strengthening, support, from Late Latin corroborationem (nominative corroboratio), noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin corroborare to strengthen (see corroborate). Meaning
confirmation attested by 1768.


corrode (v.)

c.1400, from Old French corroder (14c.) or directly from Latin corrodere to gnaw to bits, wear away,
from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + rodere to gnaw (see rodent). Related: Corroded; corroding.


corrosion (n.)

c.1400, from Middle French corrosion or directly from Latin corrosionem (nominative corrosio), noun
of action from past participle stem of corrodere (see corrode).


corrosive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French corrosif (13c.), from corroder (see corrode).


corrugate (v.)

1620s; implied earlier as a past participle adjective (early 15c.), from Latin corrugatus, past
participle of corrugare to wrinkle very much, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + rugare to
wrinkle, of unknown origin.


corrugated (adj.)

1620s, wrinkled (of skin, etc.), past participle adjective from corrugate. Meaning bent into curves
or folds (of iron, cardboard, etc., for elasticity and strength) is from 1853.


corrugation (n.)

1520s, from Latin *corrugationem, noun of action from past participle stem of corrugare (see
corrugate).


corrupt (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French corropt unhealthy, corrupt; uncouth (of language), and directly from Latin
corruptus, past participle of corrumpere to destroy; spoil, figuratively corrupt, seduce, bribe,
from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + rup-, past participle stem of rumpere to break (see
rupture (n.)). Related: Corruptly; corruptness.


corrupt (v.)

mid-14c., contaminate, impair the purity of, from Latin corruptus, past participle of corrumpere
(see corrupt (adj.)). Late 14c. as pervert the meaning of, also putrefy. Related: Corrupted;
corrupting.


corruptible (adj.)

mid-14c., of material things, from Old French corroptible (14c.), from Late Latin corruptibilis
liable to decay, corruptible, from past participle stem of corrumpere (see corrupt (adj.)). Of
persons, from 1670s.


corruption (n.)

mid-14c., of material things, especially dead bodies, also of the soul, morals, etc., from Latin
corruptionem (nominative corruptio), noun of action from past participle stem of corrumpere (see
corrupt). Of public offices from early 15c.; of language from late 15c.


corsage (n.)

late 15c., size of the body, from Old French cors body (see corpse); the meaning body of a woman's
dress, bodice is from 1818 in fashion plates translated from French; 1843 in a clearly English
context. Sense of a bouquet worn on the bodice is 1911, American English, apparently from French
bouquet de corsage bouquet of the bodice.


corsair (n.)

1540s, from Middle French corsaire (15c.), from Proven&ccedil;al cursar, Italian corsaro, from
Medieval Latin cursarius pirate, from Latin cursus course, a running, from currere to run (see
current (adj.)). Meaning of the Medieval Latin verb evolved from course to journey to expedition to
an expedition specifically for plunder.


corse (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French cors, from Latin corpus body (see corps for history and development).
Archaic from 16c.


corset (n.)

c.1300, kind of laced bodice, from Old French corset (13c.) bodice, tunic, diminutive of cors body
(see corps). Meaning stiff supporting and constricting undergarment is from 1795.


cort (n.)

obsolete form of court.


cortege (n.)

1640s, train of attendants, from French cort&egrave;ge (16c.), from Italian corteggio retinue, from
corte court, from Latin cohortem (see court (n.)).


cortes (n.)

1660s, legislative houses of Spain or Portugal, from Spanish and Portuguese plural of corte, from
Latin cortem (see court (n.)).


cortex (n.)

1650s, outer shell, husk, from Latin cortex bark of a tree (see corium). Specifically of the brain,
first recorded 1741.


cortical (adj.)

1670s, from Modern Latin corticalis, from cortex bark of a tree (see cortex).


corticosteroid (n.)

by 1945, from cortico-, word-forming element from comb. form of Latin cortex bark of a tree (see
cortex), applied since c.1890 to various surface structures of plants, animals, or organs + steroid.
So called because they are produced in the adrenal cortex. Related: Corticosterone.


cortisol (n.)

hydrocortisone, 1953, from cortisone + -ol.


cortisone (n.)

1949, coined by its discoverer, Dr. Edward C. Kendall, shortening of chemical name, 17-hydroxy-11
dehydrocorticosterone, ultimately from Latin corticis (genitive of cortex; see cortex). So called
because it was obtained from the cortex of adrenal glands; originally called Compound E (1936).


corundum (n.)

very hard mineral, 1728, from Anglo-Indian, from Tamil kurundam ruby sapphire (Sanskrit kuruvinda),
of unknown origin.


coruscate (v.)

1705, from Latin coruscatus, past participle of coruscare to vibrate, glitter, perhaps from PIE
*(s)ker- (2) leap, jump about (compare scherzo). Related: Coruscated; coruscating.


coruscation (n.)

late 15c., from Latin coruscationem (nominative coruscatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of coruscare to vibrate, glitter (see coruscate).


corvee (n.)

mid-14c., day's unpaid labor due to a lord by vassals under French feudal system (abolished 1776),
from Old French corvee (12c.), from Late Latin corrogata (opera) requested work, from fem. past
participle of Latin corrogare, from com- with (see com-) + rogare to ask (see rogation).


corvette (n.)

1630s, also corvet, from French corvette small, fast frigate (15c.), perhaps from Middle Dutch
korver pursuit ship, or Middle Low German korf meaning both a kind of boat and a basket, or from
Latin corbita (navis) slow-sailing ship of burden, grain ship from corbis basket (Gamillscheg is
against this). The U.S. sports car was so named September 1952, after the warship, on a suggestion
by Myron Scott, employee of Campbell-Ewald, Chevrolet's advertising agency. Italian corvetta,
Spanish corbeta are French loan-words.


Corydon

traditional poetic name for a shepherd or rustic swain, from Latin Corydon, from Greek Korydon, name
of a shepherd in Theocritus and Virgil.


coryza (n.)

1630s, from medical Latin, from Greek koryza running at the nose.


cosa nostra

1963, the Mafia in America, from Italian, literally this thing of ours.


cosecant (n.)

1706, from co, short for complement, + secant.


cosh (n.)

stout stick, 1869, of unknown origin.


cosher (n.)

1630s, phonetic spelling of Irish coisir feast, entertainment.


cosign (v.)

also co-sign, by 1944, from co- + sign (v.). Related: Cosigned; cosigning.


cosigner (n.)

also co-signer, 1946, agent noun from cosign; earlier in this sense was cosignatory (1865).


cosine (n.)

1630s, from co. sinus, abbreviation of Medieval Latin complementi sinus (see complement + sine).


cosmetic (n.)

c.1600, art of beautifying, from Latinized form of Greek kosmetike (tekhne) the art of dress and
ornament, from fem. of kosmetikos (see cosmetic (adj.)). Meaning a preparation for beautifying
attested from 1640s (now often cosmetics).


cosmetic (adj.)

1640s, from French cosm&eacute;tique (16c.), from Greek kosmetikos skilled in adornment or
arrangement, from kosmein to arrange, adorn, from kosmos order (see cosmos). Figurative sense of
superficial is from 1955. Related: Cosmetically.


cosmetologist (n.)

1926, American English, from cosmetology + -ist. Won out over cosmetician.


cosmetology (n.)

1855, from French cosm&eacute;tologie, from Latinized form of Greek kosmetos (see cosmetic) +
-ology.


cosmic (adj.)

1640s, from cosmo- + -ic. Originally of this world (which was the sense of Greek kosmikos); meaning
of the universe is from 1846. Cosmical is attested from 1580s.


cosmo-

before a vowel cosm-, word-forming element from Latinized form of Greek kosmos (see cosmos). In
older use, the world, the universe; since 1950s, especially of outer space.


cosmogony (n.)

1690s as a theory of the creation; 1766 as the creation of the universe, from Latinized form of
Greek kosmogonia creation of the world, from kosmos world, universe (see cosmos) + -gonia a
begetting, from gonos birth  (see genus).


cosmography (n.)

description of the universe, mid-15c., from cosmo- + -graphy. Related: Cosmographic.


cosmological (adj.)

1825, from cosmology + -ical.


cosmology (n.)

1650s, from Modern Latin cosmologia, from Greek kosmos (see cosmos) + -logia discourse (see -logy).
Related: Cosmological; cosmologist.    They cannot scare me with their empty spaces  Between stars--
on stars where no human race is.  I have it in me so much nearer home  To scare myself with my own
desert places.    [Robert Frost, from Desert Places, 1936]


cosmonaut (n.)

1959, Englishing of Russian kosmonavt, ultimately from Greek kosmos (see cosmos) + nautes sailor
(see naval).


cosmopolitan (adj.)

1844, from cosmopolite citizen of the world (q.v.) on model of metropolitan. The U.S. women's
magazine of the same name was first published in 1886. Cosmopolitanism first recorded 1828.


cosmopolite (n.)

late 16c., man of the world; citizen of the world, from Greek kosmopolites citizen of the world,
from kosmos world (see cosmos) + polites citizen (see politic). In common use 17c. in a neutral
sense; it faded out in 18c. but was revived from c.1800 with a tinge of reproachfulness (opposed to
patriot).


cosmos (n.)

c.1200 (but not popular until 1848, as a translation of Humboldt's Kosmos), from Latinized form of
Greek kosmos order, good order, orderly arrangement, a word with several main senses rooted in those
notions: The verb kosmein meant generally to dispose, prepare, but especially to order and arrange
(troops for battle), to set (an army) in array; also to establish (a government or regime); to deck,
adorn, equip, dress (especially of women). Thus kosmos had an important secondary sense of ornaments
of a woman's dress, decoration (compare kosmokomes dressing the hair) as well as the universe, the
world.    Pythagoras is said to have been the first to apply this word to the universe, perhaps
originally meaning the starry firmament, but later it was extended to the whole physical world,
including the earth. For specific reference to the world of people, the classical phrase was he
oikoumene (ge) the inhabited (earth). Septuagint uses both kosmos and oikoumene. Kosmos also was
used in Christian religious writing with a sense of worldly life, this world (as opposed to the
afterlife), but the more frequent word for this was aion, literally lifetime, age.


Cossack (n.)

1590s, from Russian kozak, from Turkish kazak adventurer, guerilla, nomad, from qaz to wander. The
same Turkic root is the source of the people-name Kazakh and the nation of Kazakhstan.


cosset (v.)

1650s, to fondle, caress, indulge, from a noun (1570s) meaning lamb brought up as a pet (applied to
persons from 1590s), perhaps from Old English cot-s&aelig;ta one who dwells in a cot. Related:
Coseted; coseting. Compare German Hauslamm, Italian casiccio.


cost (n.)

c.1200, from Old French cost (12c., Modern French co&#251;t) cost, outlay, expenditure; hardship,
trouble, from Vulgar Latin *costare, from Latin constare, literally to stand at (or with), with a
wide range of figurative senses including to cost. The idiom is the same one used in Modern English
when someone says something stands at X dollars to mean it sells for X dollars. The Latin word is
from com- with (see com-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).


cost (v.)

late 14c., from Old French coster (Modern French co&#251;ter) to cost, from cost (see cost (n.)).


cost-effective (adj.)

also cost effective, 1967, from cost (n.) + effective.


costa (n.)

Spanish costa coast, from same Latin source as English coast (n.). Used in Britain from 1960s in
jocular formations (costa geriatrica, costa del crime, etc.) in imitation of the names of Spanish
tourist destinations.


costal (adj.)

pertaining to the ribs, 1630s, from French costal (16c.), from Medieval Latin costalis, from costa a
rib (see coast (n.)).


costard (n.)

late 13c., coster, perhaps from Anglo-French or Old French coste rib (from Latin costa a rib; see
coast (n.)). A kind of large apple with prominent ribs, i.e. one having a shape more like a green
pepper than a plain, round apple. Also applied derisively to the head. Common 14c.-17c. but limited
to fruit-growers afterward.


costermonger (n.)

1510s, itinerant apple-seller from coster (see costard) + monger. Sense extended from apple-seller
to any salesman who plied his wares from a street-cart. Contemptuous use is from Shakespeare (2
Henry IV), but reason is unclear.


costive (adj.)

c.1400, from Middle French costiv&eacute;, from Latin constipatus, past participle of constipare
(see constipation).


costly (adj.)

late 14c., from cost + -ly (1). Earlier formation with the same sense were costful (mid-13c.),
costious (mid-14c.).


costume (n.)

1715, style of dress, an art term, from French costume (17c.), from Italian costume fashion, habit,
from Latin consuetudinem (nominative consuetudo) custom, habit, usage. Essentially the same word as
custom but arriving by a different etymology. From customary clothes of the particular period in
which the scene is laid, meaning broadened by 1818 to any defined mode of dress. Costume jewelry is
first attested 1933.


costume (v.)

1823, from costume (n.). Related: Costumed; costuming.


cosy (adj.)

chiefly British form of cozy.


cot (n.1)

small bed, 1630s, from Hindi khat couch, hammock, from Sanskrit khatva, probably from a Dravidian
source (compare Tamil kattil bedstead).


cot (n.2)

hut, cottage; see cote.


cotangent (n.)

from co. tangent, abbreviation of complement + tangent (n.).


cote (n.)

Old English cote, fem. of cot (plural cotu) small house, bedchamber, den (see cottage). Applied to
buildings for animals from early 15c.


coterie (n.)

1738, from French coterie circle of acquaintances, originally in Middle French an organization of
peasants holding land from a feudal lord (14c.), from cotier tenant of a cote (see cottage).


coterminous (adj.)

1630s, malformed in English from co- + terminous (see terminal). Latin purists prefer conterminous.


cotillion (n.)

type of dance, 1766, from French cotillion (15c.), originally petticoat, a double diminutive of Old
French cote skirt (see coat (n.)); its application to a kind of dance arose in France and is
considered obscure by some linguists, but there are lively turns in the dance that flash the
petticoats.    Meaning formal ball is 1898, American English, short for cotillion ball. French uses
-on (from Latin -onem) to reinforce Latin nouns felt to need more emphatic power (as in poisson from
Latin piscis). It also uses -on to form diminutives, often strengthened by the insertion of -ill-,
as in the case of this word.


cotquean (n.)

1540s, obsolete, housewife of a cot, from cot (see cottage) + quean; hence a vulgar beldam, scold
[OED]; also used contemptuously (by Shakespeare, etc.) of men seen as overly interested in
housework.


cottage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French cote hut, cottage + Anglo-French suffix -age (probably denoting the
entire property attached to a cote). Old French cot is probably from Old Norse kot hut, cognate of
Old English cot, cote cottage, hut, from Proto-Germanic *kutan (cognates: Middle Dutch cot, Dutch
kot).    Meaning small country residence (without suggestion of poverty or tenancy) is from 1765.
Modern French cottage is a 19c. reborrowing from English. Cottage industry is attested from 1921.
Cottage cheese is attested from 1831, American English, earliest in reference to Philadelphia:
There was a plate of rye-bread, and a plate of wheat, and a basket of crackers; another plate with
half a dozen paltry cakes that looked as if they had been bought under the old Court House; some
morsels of dried beef on two little tea-cup plates: and a small glass dish of that preparation of
curds, which in vulgar language is called smear-case, but whose nom de guerre is cottage-cheese, at
least that was the appellation given it by our hostess. [Miss Leslie, Country Lodgings, Godey's
Lady's Book, July 1831]


cotter (n.)

1640s, perhaps a shortened form of cotterel, a dialectal word for cotter pin or bolt, bracket to
hang a pot over a fire (1560s), itself of uncertain origin.


cotton (n.)

late 13c., from Old French coton (12c.), ultimately (via Proven&ccedil;al, Italian, or Old Spanish)
from Arabic qutn, a word perhaps of Egyptian origin. Philip Miller of the Chelsea Physic Garden sent
the first cotton seeds to American colony of Georgia in 1732. Also ultimately from the Arabic word,
Dutch katoen, German Kattun, Proven&ccedil;al coton, Italian cotone, Spanish algodon, Portuguese
algod&atilde;o. Cotton gin is recorded from 1794 (see gin (n.2)).


cotton (v.)

to get on with someone (usually with to), 1560s, perhaps from Welsh cytuno consent, agree. But
perhaps also a metaphor from cloth finishing and thus from cotton (n.). Related: Cottoned;
cottoning.


cotton-picking (adj.)

as a deprecatory term first recorded in a Bugs Bunny cartoon, but a similar noun meaning
contemptible person dates to around 1919, perhaps with racist overtones that have faded over the
years. Before mechanization, cotton picking was the most difficult labor on a cotton plantation.
I drove out to a number of the farms near Denison and found many very young white children working
all day in the hot sun picking and dragging sacks of cotton. In one field the labor corps consisted
of one woman and six children, one of them 5 years, one 6 years, one 7 years, one 9 years, and two
about 11. The father was plowing. The 5 and 6 year olds worked all day as did the rest. The 7-year-
old said he picked 50 pounds a day and the 9 year old 75 pounds. (A good picker averages several
hundred a day.) School begins late on account of the cotton picking, but the children nearly all
prefer school to the picking. Picking hours are long, hot, and deadly monotonous. While the very
young children seem to enjoy it, very soon their distaste for it grows into all-absorbing hatred for
all work. [Field Notes of Lewis W. Hine, Child-Labor Conditions in Texas, report to U.S.
Congressional Commission on Industrial Relations, 1916]


Cottonian

library in the British Museum, named for antiquarian Sir Robert Bruce Cotton (1570-1631). He donated
some book to the state and his grandson donated the rest. It was badly damaged in a fire in 1731.
The surname represents Old English cotum, plural of cot cottage.


cotyledon (n.)

from 1540s, in various sense, from Latin cotyledon pennywort, navelwort, from Greek kotyledon cup-
shaped cavity, from kotyle hollow thing, small vessel, also the name of a small liquid measure
(nearly a half-pint); of uncertain origin. Botanical sense is 1776, from Linnaeus (1751).


couch (v.)

c.1300, to overlay with gold, inlay, from Old French couchier to lay down, place; go to bed, put to
bed, from Latin collocare to lay, place, station, arrange, from com- together (see com-) + locare to
place (see locate). Meaning to put into words is from 1520s. Related: Couched; couching. Heraldic
couchant (lying down with the head up) is late 15c., from the French present participle.


couch (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French couche (12c.) a bed, lair, from coucher to lie down, from Latin collocare
(see couch (v.)). Traditionally, a couch has the head end only raised, and only half a back; a sofa
has both ends raised and a full back; a settee is like a sofa but may be without arms; an ottoman
has neither back nor arms, nor has a divan, the distinctive feature of which is that it goes against
a wall. Couch potato first recorded 1979.


couch-grass (n.)

1570s; the first element is a corruption of Old English cwice (see quick).


cougar (n.)

1774, from French couguar, Buffon's adaption (influenced by jaguar) of a word the Portuguese picked
up in Brazil as &ccedil;u&ccedil;uarana, perhaps from Tupi susuarana, from suasu deer + rana false.
Another proposed source is Guarani gua&ccedil;u ara. Evidently the cedillas dropped off the word
before Buffon got it. Slang sense of older woman (35-plus) who seeks younger males as sex partners
is attested by 2002; said in some sources to have originated in Canada, probably from some reference
to predatory feline nature.


cough (v.)

early 14c., coughen, probably in Old English, but not recorded, from Proto-Germanic *kokh- (with the
rough kh of German or of Scottish loch; cognates: Middle Dutch kochen, Middle High German kuchen).
Onomatopoeic. Related: Coughed; coughing. As a noun from c.1300.


could (v.)

Old English cu&eth;e, past tense of cunnan to be able (see can (v.1)); ending changed 14c. to
standard English -d(e). The excrescent -l- was added 15c.-16c. on model of would, should, where it
is historical.


couldn&#039;t

by 1670s, contraction of could + not.


coulee (n.)

deep ravine, seasonally flooded, 1804, a North American word, originally in areas explored by French
trappers, from French coul&eacute;e flow (17c.), from fem. past participle of couler to flow, from
Latin colare to filter, strain (see colander).


coulomb (n.)

1881, named for French chemist Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (1736-1806), who devised a method of
measuring electrical quantity. It is the quantity of electricity conveyed in 1 second by a current
of 1 ampere. The name is a French form of Columbus.


coulrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of clowns, by 2001 (said in Web sites to date from 1990s or even 1980s), a popular term,
not from psychology, possibly facetious, though the phenomenon is real enough; said to be built from
Greek kolon limb, with some supposed sense of stilt-walker, hence clown + -phobia.    Ancient Greek
words for clown were skl&ecirc;ro-paikt&ecirc;s, from paizein to play (like a child); or
deikeliktas; other classical words used for theatrical clowns were related to rustic, peasant
(compare Latin fossor clown, literally laborer, digger, related to fossil).    The whole creation
looks suspiciously like the sort of thing idle pseudo-intellectuals invent on the Internet and which
every smarty-pants takes up thereafter; perhaps it is a mangling of Modern Greek klooun clown, which
is the English word borrowed into Greek.


coulter (n.)

Old English culter, from Latin culter a knife, iron blade in a plowshare, from PIE root *(s)kel- to
cut (see scale (n.1)). As a surname (13c.), probably from Coulter in Lancashire.


Coumadin (n.)

by 1953, name for human anti-coagulant use of the rat poison warfarin sodium, abstracted from the
chemical name, 3-(&#945;-acetonylbenzyl)-4-hydroxycoumarin; earlier known as Dicoumarol, it attained
publicity when it was used in 1955 to treat U.S. President Dwight Eisenhower after a heart attack.
The coumarin element (1830) is from French coumarine, from coumarou, the native name in Guyana of
the tonquin bean, one source of the substance.


council (n.)

early 12c., from Anglo-French cuncile, from Old North French concilie (Old French concile, 12c.)
assembly; council meeting; body of counsellors, from Latin concilium group of people, meeting, from
com- together (see com-) + calare to call (see claim (v.)). Tendency to confuse it in form and
meaning with counsel has been consistent since 16c.


councillor (n.)

late 14c., alteration of counsellor by assimilation to council.


councilor (n.)

see councillor.


counsel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French counseil (10c.) advice, counsel; deliberation, thought, from Latin
consilium plan, opinion (see consultation). As a synonym for lawyer, first attested late 14c.


counsel (v.)

late 13c., from Old French conseiller to advise, counsel, from Latin consiliari, from consilium
plan, opinion (see counsel (n.)). Related: Counseled. Counseling giving professional advice on
social or psychological problems dates from 1940.


counsellor (n.)

early 13c., from Old French conseillier (Modern French conseiller), from Latin consilator, agent
noun from  consiliare, from consilium (see counsel (v.)). Meaning one who gives professional legal
advice is from 1530s. Psychological sense (marriage counsellor, etc., is from 1940).


counselor (n.)

see counsellor.


count (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French conter add up, but also tell a story, from Latin computare (see compute).
Related: Counted; counting. Modern French differentiates compter to count and conter to tell, but
they are cognates.


count (n.)

title of nobility, c.1300, from Anglo-French counte (Old French conte), from Latin comitem
(nominative comes) companion, attendant, the Roman term for a provincial governor, from com- with
(see com-) + stem of ire to go (see ion). The term was used in Anglo-French to render Old English
eorl, but the word was never truly naturalized and mainly was used with reference to foreign titles.


countdown (n.)

1953, American English, in early use especially of launches of rockets or missiles, from count (v.)
+ down.


countenance (v.)

late 15c., to behave or act, from countenance (n.). Sense of to favor, patronize is from 1560s, from
notion of to look upon with sanction or smiles. Related: Countenanced; countenancing.


countenance (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French contenance demeanor, bearing, conduct, from Latin continentia restraint,
abstemiousness, moderation, literally way one contains oneself, from continentem, present participle
of continere (see contain). Meaning evolving Middle English from appearance to facial expression
betraying a state of mind, to face itself (late 14c.).


counter (n.)

mid-14c., table where a money lender does business, from Old French contouer, comptoir (14c.)
counting room, table of a bank, from Medieval Latin computatorium place of accounts, from Latin
computatus, past participle of computare (see compute). Generalized 19c. from banks to shops, then
extended to display cases for goods. Phrase under the counter is from 1926.


counter (v.)

go against, late 14c., from Old French countre facing opposite (see counter-). Related: Countered;
countering. As an adverb, from mid-15c.; as an adjective, from 1590s.


Counter Reformation

1840, from counter- + Reformation.


counter-

word-forming element meaning against; in return; corresponding, from Anglo-French countre-, French
contre-, from Latin contra opposite, contrary to, against, in return, also used as a prefix (see
contra-).


counteract (v.)

1670s, from counter- + act (v.). Related: Counteracted; counteracting.


counterargument (n.)

1862, from counter- + argument.


counterattack (n.)

also counter-attack, 1882, from counter- + attack (n.); as two words from early 19c. The verb is
recorded from 1916.


counterbalance (v.)

1570s, from counter- + balance (v.), in reference to scales. Figurative use dates from 1630s. As a
noun, from c.1600.


counterclockwise (adj., adv.)

1870, also counter-clockwise; from counter- + clockwise.


counterculture (n.)

also counter-culture, counter culture, 1968, from counter- + culture (q.v.). Popularized by, and
perhaps coined in, the book The Making of a Counter Culture by Theodore Roszak. As an adjective by
1972.


counterfactual (adj.)

1946, from counter- + factual.


counterfeit (v.)

late 13c., from Old French contrefait imitated (Modern French contrefait), past participle of
contrefaire imitate, from contre- against (see contra-) + faire to make, to do (from Latin facere;
see factitious). Medieval Latin contrafactio meant setting in opposition or contrast. Related:
Counterfeited; counterfeiting. The noun and adjective are from late 14c.


counterinsurgency (n.)

1962, from counter- + insurgency.


counterintelligence (n.)

also counter-intelligence, 1940, from counter- + intelligence.


counterintuitive (adj.)

also counter-intuitive, 1955, from counter- + intuitive.


countermand (v.)

early 15c., from Old French contremander reverse an order or command (13c.), from contre- against
(see contra-) + mander, from Latin mandare to order (see mandate (n.)). Related: Countermanded;
countermanding.


countermeasure (n.)

1923, from counter- + measure (n.).


counteroffer (n.)

1788, from counter- + offer (n.).


counterpane (n.)

outer covering of a bed, c.1600, alteration of earlier counterpoynte (mid-15c.; see counterpoint) on
model of Middle French pan, Latin pannus cloth (see pane).


counterpart (n.)

mid-15c., originally countre part duplicate of a legal document, from Middle French contrepartie,
from contre facing, opposite (see contra-) + partie copy of a person or thing, originally fem. past
participle of partir to divide (see party (n.)).


counterpoint (n.)

early 15c., of stitching, from Old French cuilte contrepointe quilt stitched through and through,
altered from coute pointe, from Medieval Latin culcita puncta quilted mattress, from Latin culcita
cushion + puncta, fem. past participle of pungere to prick, stab (see pungent).    Of music, mid-
15c., from Old French contrepoint, from Medieval Latin cantus contrapunctus, from contrapunctum,
from Latin contra + puncta, with reference to the indication of musical notes by pricking with a
pointed pen over or under the original melody on a manuscript.


counterpoise (n.)

early 15c., from Old French contrepois (Modern French contrepoids), from contre- against (see
contra-) + peis, from Latin pensum weight, noun use of neuter past participle of pendere to weigh
(see pendant).


counterproductive (adj.)

also counter-productive, counter productive, 1920, American English, from counter- + productive.


counterrevolution (n.)

also counter-revolution, 1791, from counter- + revolution. First recorded in U.S. with reference to
American Revolution.


countersign (n.)

1590s, from Middle French contresigne, from contre- against (see contra-) + signe sign (see sign
(n.)).


countertop (n.)

1878, from counter (n.) + top (n.1).


countervail (v.)

late 14c., to be worth as much as, also to prevail against, from Anglo-French countrevaloir, Old
French contrevaloir to be effective against, be comparable to, from Latin phrase contra valere to be
worth against (see contra- and valiant). Related: Countervailing.


countess (n.)

mid-12c., adopted in Anglo-French for the wife of an earl, from Medieval Latin cometissa, fem. of
Latin comes count (see count (n.)).


countless (adj.)

numberless, uncountable, 1580s, from count (v.) + -less.


countrified (adj.)

1650s, from country + past participle form of -fy.


country (n.)

mid-13c., district, native land, from Old French contree, from Vulgar Latin *(terra) contrata (land)
lying opposite, or (land) spread before one, from Latin contra opposite, against (see contra-).
Sense narrowed 1520s to rural areas, as opposed to cities. Replaced Old English land. As an
adjective from late 14c. First record of country-and-western music style is from 1942. Country club
first recorded 1886. Country mile a long way is from 1915, American English.


countryman (n.)

late 13c., from country + man (n.).


countryside (n.)

mid-15c., literally one side of a country (a valley, a mountain range, etc.), from country + side
(n.); hence, any tract of land having a natural unity (1727).


county (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French counte, from Late Latin comitatus jurisdiction of a count, from Latin
comes (see count (n.)); replaced Old English scir shire.


coup (n.)

c.1400, from Old French coup, colp a blow, strike (12c.), from Medieval Latin colpus, from Vulgar
Latin colapus, from Latin colaphus a cuff, box on the ear, from Greek kolaphos a blow, slap. Meaning
a sudden decisive act is 1852, short for coup d'etat. In Modern French the word is a workhorse,
describing everything from a pat on the back to a whipping, and is used as well of thunder, gusts of
wind, gunshots, and chess moves.


coup d&#039;etat (n.)

1640s, from French coup d'&eacute;tate, literally stroke of the state (see coup). Technically any
sudden, decisive political act but popularly restricted to the overthrow of a government.


coup de foudre (n.)

1779, from French coup de foudre, literally stroke of lightning, also love at first sight (see
coup).


coup de grace (n.)

1690s, from French coup de gr&acirc;ce, literally stroke of grace; the merciful death-blow that ends
another's suffering (see coup).


coupe (n.)

1834, from French coupe (18c.), noun use of past participle of couper to cut (in half); see coup.
Modern use is from early 19c. carrosse coupe cut-off carriage, a shorter version of the berlin,
minus the back seat. First applied to closed two-door automobiles 1908.


couple (v.)

c.1200, from Old French copler, from cople (see couple (n.)). Related: Coupled; coupling.


couple (n.)

late 13c., from Old French cople married couple, lovers (12c., Modern French couple), from Latin
copula tie, connection, from PIE *ko-ap-, from *ko(m)- together + *ap- to take, reach. Meaning
broadened mid-14c. to any two things.


couplet (n.)

1570s, in poetry, from French couplet (mid-14c.), a diminutive of couple (see couple (n.)). In
music, from 1876.


coupon (n.)

1822, certificate of interest due on a bond (which could be cut from the bond and presented for
payment), from French coupon, literally piece cut off, from couper to cut, from coup a blow (see
coup). Meaning widened to discount ticket 1860s by British travel agent Thomas Cook. The specific
advertising sense is from 1906.    COUPON. A financial term, which, together with the practice, is
borrowed from France. In the United States, the certificates of State stocks drawing interest are
accompanied by coupons, which are small tickets attached to the certificates. At each term when the
interest falls due, one of these coupons is cut off (whence the name); and this being presented to
the State treasurer or to a bank designated by him, entitles the holder to receive the interest.
[Bartlett]


courage (n.)

c.1300, from Old French corage (12c., Modern French courage) heart, innermost feelings; temper, from
Vulgar Latin *coraticum (source of Italian coraggio, Spanish coraje), from Latin cor heart (see
heart) which remains a common metaphor for inner strength.    In Middle English, used broadly for
what is in one's mind or thoughts, hence bravery, but also wrath, pride, confidence, lustiness, or
any sort of inclination. Replaced Old English ellen, which also meant zeal, strength.


courageous (adj.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French corageous, Old French corageus (12c., Modern French courageux), from
corage (see courage). Related: Courageously; courageousness.


courant (n.)

newspaper (now only in names of newspapers), from French courant, literally running, present
participle of courir to run (see current (adj.)).


courier (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French courrier, from Old French coreor, ultimately an agent noun from Latin
currere to run (see current (adj.)).


course (n.)

late 13c., onward movement, from Old French cors (12c.) course; run, running; flow of a river, from
Latin cursus a running race or course, from curs- past participle stem of currere to run (see
current (adj.)).    Most extended senses (meals, etc.) are present in 14c. Academic meaning planned
series of study is c.1600 (in French from 14c.). Phrase of course is attested from 1540s; literally
of the ordinary course; earlier in same sense was bi cours (c.1300).


course (v.)

16c., from course (n.). Related: Coursed; coursing.


courser (n.)

large, powerful horse, c.1300, from Old French corsier fast horse, charger, literally fast-running,
from Vulgar Latin *cursarius, from Latin cursus (see course (n.)).


court (n.)

late 12c., from Old French cort (11c., Modern French cour) king's court, princely residence, from
Latin cortem, accusative of cors (earlier cohors) enclosed yard, and by extension (and perhaps by
association with curia sovereign's assembly), those assembled in the yard; company, cohort, from
com- together (see com-) + stem hort- related to hortus garden, plot of ground (see yard (n.1)).
Sporting sense is from 1510s, originally of tennis. Legal meaning is from late 13c. (early
assemblies for justice were overseen by the sovereign personally).


court (v.)

woo, offer homage, as one does at court, 1570s; see court (n.). Related: Courted; courting.


court martial (n.)

also court-martial, 1650s (plural courts martial), originally martial court (1570s), from court +
martial. As a verb, from 1859.


courteous (adj.)

mid-14c., earlier curteis (c.1300), from Old French curteis (Modern French courtois) having courtly
bearing or manners, from curt court (see court (n.)) + -eis, from Latin -ensis.    Rare before
c.1500. In feudal society, also denoting a man of good education (hence the name Curtis). Medieval
courts were associated with good behavior and also beauty; compare German h&uuml;bsch beautiful,
from Middle High German h&uuml;besch beautiful, originally courteous, well-bred, from Old Franconian
hofesch, from hof court. Related: Courteously (mid-14c., kurteis-liche).


courtesan (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French courtisane, from Italian cortigiana prostitute, literally woman of
the court, fem. of cortigiano one attached to a court, from corte court, from Latin cortem (see
court (n.)).


courtesy

early 13c., curteisie, from Old French curteisie (Modern French courtoisie), from curteis courteous
(see courteous). A specialized sense of curteisie is the source of English curtsy.


courthouse (n.)

late 15c., from court (n.) + house (n.). In Virginia and the Upper South, it also can mean county
seat.


courtier (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French *corteour, from Old French cortoiier to be at court, live at court
(see court (n.)).


courtly (adj.)

mid-15c., having manners befitting a court, from court (n.) + -ly (1). Meaning pertaining to the
court is from late 15c. Courtly love highly conventionalized medieval chivalric love (amour
courtois) is attested from 1896.


courtroom (n.)

1670s, from court (n.) + room (n.).


courtship (n.)

1570s, behavior of a courtier, from court (n.) + -ship. Meaning  paying court to a woman with
intention of marriage is from 1590s.


courturier (n.)

1899, male dressmaker or fashion designer, from French couture sewing, dressmaking (see couture).
Couturi&egrave;re dressmaker is from 1818.


courtyard (n.)

1550s, from court (n.) + yard (n.1).


couscous (n.)

c.1600, from French couscous (16c.), ultimately from Arabic kuskus, from kaskasa to pound, he
pounded.


cousin (n.)

mid-12c., from Old French cosin (12c., Modern French cousin) nephew, kinsman, cousin, from Latin
consobrinus cousin, originally mother's sister's son, from com- together (see com-) + sobrinus
(earlier *sosrinos) cousin on mother's side, from soror (genitive sororis) sister.    Italian
cugino, Danish kusine, Polish kuzyn also are from French. German vetter is from Old High German
fetiro uncle, perhaps on the notion of child of uncle. Words for cousin tend to drift to nephew on
the notion of father's nephew.    Many IE languages (including Irish, Sanskrit, Slavic, and some of
the Germanic tongues) have or had separate words for some or all of the eight possible cousin
relationships, such as Latin, which along with consobrinus had consobrina mother's sister's
daughter, patruelis father's brother's son, atruelis mother's brother's son, amitinus father's
sister's son, etc. Old English distinguished f&aelig;deran sunu father's brother's son, modrigan
sunu mother's sister's son, etc.    Used familiarly as a term of address since early 15c.,
especially in Cornwall. Phrase kissing cousin is Southern U.S. expression, 1940s, apparently
denoting those close enough to be kissed in salutation; Kentish cousin (1796) is an old British term
for distant relative.


couth (adj.)

Old English cu&eth;e known, past participle of cunnan (see can (v.1)), from Proto-Germanic *kunthaz
(cognates: Old Frisian kuth known, Old Saxon cuth, Old High German kund, German kund, Gothic
kun&thorn;s known).    Died out as such 16c. with the emergence of could, but the old word was
reborn 1896, with a new sense of cultured, refined, as a back-formation from uncouth (q.v.). The Old
English word forms the first element in the man's proper name Cuthbert, literally famous-bright.


couture (n.)

1908, from French couture, literally dressmaking, sewing, from Old French costure (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *consutura, from past participle of Latin consuere to sew together, from con- together
(see com-) + suere to sew (see sew). Used as a collective term for women's fashion designers.


covalent (adj.)

1929, from covalence (1919), from co- + valence.


covariance

1878, from covariant (1853), from co- + variant.


cove (n.1)

early 14c., den, cave, from Old English cofa small chamber, cell, from Proto-Germanic *kubon
(compare Old High German kubisi tent, hut, German Koben pigsty, Old Norse kofi hut, shed). Extension
of meaning to small bay is 1580s, apparently via Scottish dialectal meaning small hollow place in
coastal rocks (a survival of an Old English secondary sense).


cove (n.2)

fellow, chap, slang from at least 1560s, said to be from Romany (Gypsy) cova that man.


coven (n.)

a gathering of witches, 1660s, earlier (c.1500) a variant of covent, cuvent early forms of convent.
Association with witches arose in Scotland, but not popularized until Sir Walter Scott used it in
this sense in Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft (1830).Efter that tym ther vold meit bot somtymes
a Coven, somtymes mor, somtymes les; bot a Grand Meitting vold be about the end of ilk Quarter. Ther
is threttein persones in ilk Coeven; and ilk on of vs has an Sprit to wait wpon ws, quhan ve pleas
to call wpon him. I remember not all the Spritis names; bot thair is on called Swein, quhilk waitis
wpon the said Margret Wilson in Aulderne; he is still clothed in grass-grein .... [Criminal Trials
in Scotland, III, appendix, p.606, confession of Issobell Gowdie in Lochloy in 1662]


covenant (n.)

c.1300, from Old French covenant agreement, originally present participle of covenir agree, meet,
from Latin convenire come together (see convene). Applied in Scripture to God's arrangements with
man as a translation of Latin testamentum, Greek diatheke, both rendering Hebrew berith (though
testament also is used for the same word in different places).


covenant (v.)

c.1300, from covenant (n.). Related: Covenanted; covenanting. Covenanter (1638) was used especially
in reference to Scottish Presbyterians who signed the Solemn League and Covenant (1643) for the
defense and furtherance of their cause.


covent (n.)

early form of convent (n.) in use to 17c.


Coventry

city in Warwickshire, Old English Couentre (1043) Cofa's tree, from Old English masc. personal name
Cofa (genitive Cofan) + tree (n.). Probably a boundary marker or public assembly place.


cover (v.)

mid-12c., from Old French covrir (12c., Modern French couvrir) to cover, protect, conceal,
dissemble, from Late Latin coperire, from Latin cooperire to cover over, overwhelm, bury, from com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + operire to close, cover (see weir). Related: Covered; covering.
Military sense is from 1680s; newspaper sense first recorded 1893; use in football dates from 1907.
Betting sense is 1857. OF horses, as a euphemism for copulate it dates from 1530s. Covered wagon
attested from 1745.


cover (n.)

early 13c., in compounds, from cover (v.). Meaning recording of a song already recorded by another
is 1966. Cover girl is U.S. slang from 1915, shortening of magazine-cover girl.


cover-up (n.)

also coverup, means or act of concealing some event or activity, 1922, from verbal phrase, from
cover (v.) + up (adv.).


coverage (n.)

mid-15c., charge for a booth at a fair, from cover + -age. Reintroduced 1912, American English, in
insurance.


coverlet (n.)

c.1300, perhaps a diminutive of cover (n.), but early form coverlite suggests an unrecorded Old
French or folk-etymology *covre-lit, from covrir to cover + lit bed (see litter (n.)).


covert (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French covert hidden, obscure, underhanded, literally covered, past participle of
covrir to cover (see cover). Related: Covertly.


coverture (n.)

early 13c., earliest reference is to bedcovers, from Old French coverture (12c.) blanket; roof;
concealment, from Latin *coopertura, from past participle stem of cooperire to cover (see cover
(v.)). Most modern senses had evolved by mid-15c.


covet (v.)

mid-13c., from Old French coveitier covet, desire, lust after (12c., Modern French convoiter,
influenced by con- words), probably ultimately from Latin cupiditas passionate desire, eagerness,
ambition, from cupidus very desirous, from cupere long for, desire (see cupidity). Related: Coveted;
coveting.


covetous (adj.)

mid-13c., from Old French coveitos (12c., Modern French convoiteux) desirous, covetous, from Vulgar
Latin *cupiditosus, from Latin cupiditas (see covet). Related: Covetously; covetousness.


covey (n.)

mid-14c., brood of partridges, from Middle French cov&eacute;e brood (Modern French couv&eacute;e),
from Gallo-Roman *cubata, literally hatchling, from past participle stem of Latin cubare to sit,
incubate, hatch (see incubation).


cow (n.)

Old English cu cow, from Proto-Germanic *kwon (cognates: Old Frisian ku, Middle Dutch coe, Dutch
koe, Old High German kuo, German Kuh, Old Norse kyr, Danish, Swedish ko), earlier *kwom, from PIE
*gwous (cognates Sanskrit gaus, Greek bous, Latin bov-, Old Irish bo, Latvian guovs, Armenian gaus
cow, Slovak hovado ox), perhaps ultimately imitative of lowing (compare Sumerian gu, Chinese ngu,
ngo ox). In Germanic and Celtic, of females only; in most other languages, of either gender. Other
cow words sometimes are from roots meaning horn, horned, such as Lithuanian karve, Old Church
Slavonic krava.


cow (v.)

intimidate, c.1600, probably from Old Norse kuga oppress, of unknown origin, but perhaps having
something to do with cow (n.) on the notion of easily herded. Related: Cowed; cowing.


cowabunga (interj.)

1954, American English, from exclamation of surprise and anger by Chief Thunderthud in The Howdy
Doody Show, 1950s children's TV show; used by surfers 1960s as a shout of triumph, and spread
worldwide 1990 by use in the TV cartoon Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.


coward (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French coart coward (no longer the usual word in French, which has now in this
sense poltron, from Italian, and l&acirc;che), from coe tail, from Latin coda, popular dialect
variant of cauda tail, of uncertain origin + -ard, an agent noun suffix denoting one that carries on
some action or possesses some quality, with derogatory connotation (see -ard).    The word probably
reflects an animal metaphoric sense still found in expressions like turning tail and tail between
legs. Coart was the name of the hare in Old French versions of Reynard the Fox. Italian codardo,
Spanish cobarde are from French.    The identification of coward &amp; bully has gone so far in the
popular consciousness that persons &amp; acts in which no trace of fear is to be found are often
called coward(ly) merely because advantage has been taken of superior strength or position ....
[Fowler]    As a surname (attested from 1255) it represents Old English cuhyrde cow-herd. Farmer has
coward's castle a pulpit, Because a clergyman may deliver himself therefrom without fear of
contradiction or argument.


cowardice (n.)

c.1300, from Old French coardise (13c.), from coard, coart (see coward) + noun suffix -ise.
Cowardice, as distinguished from panic, is almost always simply a lack of ability to suspend the
functioning of the imagination. [Ernest Hemingway, Men at War, 1942]


cowardly (adj.)

1550s, from coward + -ly (1). The adverb (late 14c.) is much older than the adjective:    Yit had I
levir do what I may Than here to dye thus cowerdelye [Le Morte d'Arthur, c.1450]    An Old English
word for cowardly was earg, which also meant slothful. Related: Cowardliness.


cowbell (n.)

1650s, American English, from cow (n.1) + bell (n.).


cowboy (n.)

1725, boy who tends to cows, from cow (n.) + boy. Sense in Western U.S. is from 1849; in figurative
use by 1942 for brash and reckless young man (as an adjective meaning reckless, from 1920s). Cowhand
is first attested 1852 in American English (see hand (n.)). Cowpoke (said to be 1881, not in popular
use until 1940s) was said to be originally restricted to the cowboys who prodded cattle onto
railroad cars with long poles.


cower (v.)

c.1300, probably from Middle Low German *kuren lie in wait (Modern German kauern), or similar
Scandinavian words meaning to squat and to doze (such as Old Norse kura, Danish, Norwegian kure,
Swedish kura). Thus unrelated to coward. Related: Cowered; cowering.


cowl (n.)

Old English cule, from earlier cugele, from Late Latin cuculla monk's cowl, variant of Latin
cucullus hood, cowl, of uncertain origin. Cowling is 1917 in the aircraft sense.


cowlick (n.)

1590s, from cow (n.) + lick (n.). Because it looks like a cow licked your head.


coworker (n.)

also co-worker, 1640s, from co- + worker (n.).


Cowper&#039;s gland (n.)

1738, so called because discovered by anatomist William Cowper (1666-1709); see Cooper.


cowrie (n.)

small shell, used as money in parts of Asia, 1660s, from Hindi and Urdu kauri, from Mahrati kavadi,
from Sanskrit kaparda, perhaps related to Tamil kotu shell.


cowslip (n.)

Old English cu-slyppe, apparently from cu cow (see cow (n.)) + slyppe slop, slobber, dung (see slop
(n.1)).


Cox

surname, from early 16c., earlier Cocks (c.1300), in many cases from cock (n.1), which apparently
was used as a personal name in Old English, also as a familiar term for a boy, later used of
apprentices, servants, etc. Perhaps in some cases for the sign of an inn. In some cases perhaps from
cook (n.), or Welsh coch red.


coxcomb (n.)

1570s, from cokkes comb (1560s, see cockscomb). Johnson has coxcomical (adj.) foppish, conceited,
but discourages it as a low word unworthy of use.


coxswain (n.)

early 14c., officer in charge of a ship's boat and its crew, from cock ship's boat (from Old French
coque canoe) + swain boy, from Old Norse sveinn boy, servant (see swain).


coy (adj.)

early 14c., quiet, modest, demure, from Old French coi, earlier quei quiet, still, placid, gentle,
ultimately from Latin quietus resting, at rest (see quiet (n.)). Meaning shy emerged late 14c.
Meaning unwilling to commit is 1961. Related: Coyly; coyness.


coyote (n.)

1759, American English, from Mexican Spanish coyote, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) coyotl.


coz (n.)

1550s, familiar abbreviation of cousin.


coze (v.)

to chat, 1828, of uncertain origin; perhaps from French causer to talk, from Latin causari to plead,
dispute, discuss a question, from causa (see cause (n.)).


cozen (v.)

1560s, of uncertain origin; perhaps from French cousiner cheat on pretext of being a cousin; or from
Middle English cosyn fraud, trickery (mid-15c.), which is perhaps related to Old French co&ccedil;on
dealer, merchant, trader, from Latin cocionem horse dealer. Related: Cozened; cozening; cozenage.


cozy (adj.)

1709, colsie, Scottish dialect, perhaps of Scandinavian origin (compare Norwegian kose seg be cozy).
In Britain, usually cosy. Related: Cozily; coziness.


cpr

by 1979, abbreviation of cardiopulmonary resuscitation.


cpu

by 1970, abbreviation of central processing unit.


crab (n.1)

crustacean, Old English crabba, from a general Germanic root (compare Dutch krab, Old High German
krebiz, German Krabbe, Old Norse krabbi crab), related to Low German krabben, Dutch krabelen to
scratch, claw, from PIE root *gerbh- to scratch, carve (see carve). The constellation name is
attested in English from c.1000; the Crab Nebula (1840), however, is in Taurus, the result of the
supernova of 1054, and is so called for its shape. French crabe (13c.) is from Germanic, probably
Old Norse.


crab (n.2)

fruit of the wild apple tree, c.1300, crabbe, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish
krabb&auml;pple), of obscure origin. The combination of bad-tempered, combative and sour in the two
nouns crab naturally yielded a verb meaning of to vex, irritate (c.1400), later to complain
irritably, find fault (c.1500). The noun meaning sour person is from 1570s.


crabbed (adj.)

late 14c., peevish, angry, ill-tempered, from crab (n.1), from the crab's combative disposition;
mid-15c. as resembling a crab in reference to crookedness. Of taste bitter, harsh, late 14c., from
crab (n.2).


crabby (adj.)

1520s, in now-obsolete sense crooked, gnarled, rough, from extended sense of crab (n.1) + -y (2).
Meaning disagreeable, sour, peevish is attested from 1776, American English. Both senses were found
earlier in crabbed.


crabgrass (n.)

c.1600, from crab (n.1) + grass. Originally a marine grass of salt marshes; modern meaning is from
1743. Perhaps partly for its crooked form.


crack (v.)

Old English cracian make a sharp noise, from Proto-Germanic *krakojan (cognates: Middle Dutch
craken, Dutch kraken, German krachen), probably imitative. Related: Cracked; cracking. From early
14c. as to utter, say, speak, talk, especially speak loudly or boastingly (late 14c.). To crack a
smile is from 1835, American English; to crack the whip in the figurative sense is from 1886.


crack (n.)

a split, an opening, mid-15c., earlier a splitting sound; a fart; the sound of a trumpet (late
14c.), probably from crack (v.). Meaning rock cocaine is first attested 1985. The superstition that
it is bad luck to step on sidewalk cracks has been traced to c.1890. Meaning try, attempt first
attested 1830, nautical, probably a hunting metaphor, from slang sense of fire a gun.    At their
head, apart from the rest, was a black bull, who appeared to be their leader; he came roaring along,
his tail straight an end, and at times tossing up the earth with his horns. I never felt such a
desire to have a crack at any thing in all my life. He drew nigh the place where I was standing; I
raised my beautiful Betsey to my shoulder, took deliberate aim, blazed away, and he roared, and
suddenly stopped. [A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett, Written by Himself, Philadelphia,
1834]    Adjectival meaning top-notch, superior (as in a crack shot) is slang from 1793, perhaps
from earlier verbal sense of do any thing with quickness or smartness (Johnson). Grose (1796) has
THE CRACK, or ALL THE CRACK. The fashionable theme, the go.


crackdown (n.)

also crack down; 1935, from the verbal phrase (1915), from crack (v.) + down (adv.); probably from
the sense of to shoot at (1913).    These scab contractors probably think that they have us whipped,
but they are badly mistaken. With the reorganization of the Building Trades Council, which is
progressing nicely, we will be in a position to cope with them and when we do crack down on them
they will have to come across or get out. [Journal of Electrical Workers and Operators, September
1915]


cracked (adj.)

mid-15c., past participle adjective from crack (v). Meaning mentally unsound is 17c. (compare crack-
brain crazy fellow). The equivalent Greek word was used in this sense by Aristophanes.


cracker (n.1)

mid-15c., hard wafer, but the specific application to a thin, crisp biscuit is 1739; agent noun from
crack (v.). Cracker-barrel (adj.) emblematic of down-home ways and views is from 1877.


cracker (n.2)

Southern U.S. derogatory term for poor, white trash (1766), probably an agent noun from crack (v.)
in the sense to boast (as in not what it's cracked up to be). Compare Latin crepare to rattle,
crack, creak, with a secondary figurative sense of boast of, prattle, make ado about.I should
explain to your Lordship what is meant by crackers; a name they have got from being great boasters;
they are a lawless set of rascalls on the frontiers of Virginia, Maryland, the Carolinas and
Georgia, who often change their places of abode. [1766, G. Cochrane]  But DARE compares corn-cracker
poor white farmer (1835, U.S. Midwest colloquial). Especially of Georgians by 1808, though often
extended to residents of northern Florida. Another name in mid-19c. use was sand-hiller poor white
in Georgia or South Carolina.    Not very essentially different is the condition of a class of
people living in the pine-barrens nearest the coast [of South Carolina], as described to me by a
rice-planter. They seldom have any meat, he said, except they steal hogs, which belong to the
planters, or their negroes, and their chief diet is rice and milk. They are small, gaunt, and
cadaverous, and their skin is just the color of the sand-hills they live on. They are quite
incapable of applying themselves steadily to any labor, and their habits are very much like those of
the old Indians. [Frederick Law Olmsted, A Journey in the Seaboard Slave States, 1856]


cracker-jack (n.)

also crackerjack, something excellent, 1893, U.S. colloquialism, apparently a fanciful construction,
earliest use in reference to racing horses. The caramel-coated popcorn-and-peanuts confection was
said to have been introduced at the World's Columbian Exposition (1893). Supposedly a salesman gave
it the name when he tasted some and said, That's a cracker-jack, using the then-popular expression.
The name was trademarked 1896. The Prize in Every Box was introduced 1912.    Your brother Bob is
traveling, isn't he?    Yep. He's with one of the big racing teams. I tell you, he's a cracker-jack!
Wins a bushel of diamonds and gold cups every week.  [Life, Aug. 1, 1895]


crackhead (n.)

slang, crack cocaine addict, by 1986, from crack (n.) in the drug slang sense + head (n.). In
earlier slang, crack-headed meant crazy (1796), from the literal sense of crack.


cracking (adj.)

excellent, colloquial from 1830s, from present participle of crack (v.).


crackle (v.)

mid-15c., crackelen, frequentative of cracken to crack (see crack (v.)). Related: Crackled;
crackling. The noun is recorded from 1833.


crackpot (n.)

mentally unbalanced person, 1898, probably from crack (v.) + pot (n.1) in a slang sense of head.
Compare crack-brain crazy fellow (late 16c.). Earlier it was used in a slang sense a small-time big-
shot (1883), and by medical doctors in reference to a metallic chinking sometimes heard when
percussion is made over a cavity which communicates with a bronchus.


cradle (n.)

baby's bed, c.1200, cradel, from Old English cradol little bed, cot, from Proto-Germanic *kradulas
basket (cognates: Old High German kratto, krezzo basket, German Kr&auml;tze basket carried on the
back). From late 14c. as device for holding or hoisting. Cat's cradle is so called from 1768.
Cradle-snatching amorous pursuit of younger person is from 1906.    It's like cradle-snatching to
want to marry a girl of sixteen, and you ought to be ashamed of yourself, for you can't be much more
than twenty one yourself. [Edith Van Dyne (L. Frank Baum), Aunt Jane's Nieces Abroad, 1906]


cradle (v.)

c.1500, from cradle (n.). Related: Cradled; cradling.


craft (n.)

Old English cr&aelig;ft (West Saxon, Northumbrian), -creft (Kentish), originally power, physical
strength, might, from Proto-Germanic *krab-/*kraf- (cognates: Old Frisian kreft, Old High German
chraft, German Kraft strength, skill; Old Norse kraptr strength, virtue). Sense expanded in Old
English to include skill, dexterity; art, science, talent (via a notion of mental power), which led
by late Old English to the meaning trade, handicraft, calling, also something built or made. The
word still was used for might, power in Middle English.    Use for small boat is first recorded
1670s, probably from a phrase similar to vessels of small craft and referring either to the trade
they did or the seamanship they required, or perhaps it preserves the word in its original sense of
power.


craft (v.)

Old English cr&aelig;ftan to exercise a craft, build, from the same source as craft (n.). Meaning to
make skilfully is from early 15c., obsolete from 16c., but revived c.1950s, largely in U.S.
advertising and commercial senses. Related: Crafted; crafting.


craftsman (n.)

mid-14c., craftes man, originally a member of a craft guild, from genitive of craft (n.) + man
(n.1). Written as one word from late 14c. Old English had cr&aelig;ftiga in this sense. Related:
Craftsmanship.


crafty (adj.)

mid-12c., crafti, from Old English cr&aelig;ftig strong, powerful, later skillful, ingenious,
degenerating by c.1200 to cunning, sly (but through 15c. also skillfully done or made; intelligent,
learned; artful, scientific) from craft (n.) + -y (2). Related: Craftily; craftiness.


crag (n.)

early 14c.; as a place-name element attested from c.1200, probably from a Celtic source akin to Old
Irish crec rock, and carrac cliff, Welsh craig rock, stone, Manx creg, Breton krag.


craggy (adj.)

mid-15c.; see crag + -y (2). Related: Cragginess.


cram (v.)

Old English crammian press something into something else, from Proto-Germanic *kram-/*krem-
(cognates: Old High German krimman to press, pinch, Old Norse kremja to squeeze, pinch), from PIE
root *ger- to gather (see gregarious). Meaning study intensely for an exam originally was British
student slang first recorded 1803. Related: Crammed; cramming.


cramp (n.1)

muscle contraction, late 14c., from Old French crampe, from a Frankish or other Germanic word
(compare Old High German krapmhe cramp, spasm, related to kramph bent, crooked), from a Proto-
Germanic root forming many words for bent, crooked, including, via French, crampon. Writer's cramp
is first attested 1842 as the name of a physical affliction of the hand, in reference to
translations of German medical papers (Stromeyer); also known as scrivener's palsy.


cramp (n.2)

metal bar bent at both ends, early 15c., from Middle Dutch crampe or Middle Low German krampe, both
from the same Proto-Germanic root that yielded cramp (n.1). Metaphoric sense of something that
confines or hinders first recorded 1719.


cramp (v.1)

to contract (of muscles), early 15c., from cramp (n.1). Related: Cramped; cramping.


cramp (v.2)

to bend or twist, early 14c., from cramp (n.2) and Old French crampir. Later compress forcibly
(1550s), and, figuratively, to restrict (1620s). Related: Cramped; cramping.


crampon (n.)

metal bar bent at the ends for fastening, c.1300, from Old French crampoun, from Germanic (see cramp
(n.1); also compare cramp (n.2)).


cranberry (n.)

1640s, American English adaptation of Low German kraanbere, from kraan crane (see crane (n.)) +
Middle Low German bere berry (see berry). Perhaps so called from a resemblance between the plants'
stamens and the beaks of cranes.    Upon the Rocks and in the Moss, grew a Shrub whose fruit was
very sweet, full of red juice like Currans, perhaps 'tis the same with the New England Cranberry, or
Bear-Berry, (call'd so from the Bears devouring it very greedily;) with which we make Tarts. [An
Account of Several Late Voyages &amp; Discoveries, London, 1694]    German and Dutch settlers in the
New World apparently recognized the similarity between the European berries (Vaccinium oxycoccos)
and the larger North American variety (V. macrocarpum) and transferred the name. In England, they
were marshwort or fenberries, but the North American berries, and the name, were brought over late
17c. The native Algonquian name for the plant is represented by West Abenaki popokwa.


crane (n.)

Old English cran large wading bird, common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon krano, Old High German
krano, German Kranich, and, with unexplained change of consonant, Old Norse trani), from PIE *gere-
(cognates: Greek geranos, Latin grus, Welsh garan, Lithuanian garnys heron, stork), perhaps echoic
of its cry. Metaphoric use for machine with a long arm is first attested late 13c. (a sense also in
equivalent words in German and Greek).


crane (v.)

to stretch (the neck), 1799, from crane (n.). Related: Craned; craning.


cranial (adj.)

1779, from Modern Latin cranium, from Greek kranion skull (see cranium) + -al (1).


cranio-

word-forming element meaning of the brain, from Latinized comb. form of Greek kranion skull (see
cranium).


craniotomy (n.)

1817, from cranio- + -tomy.


cranium (n.)

early 15c., craneum, from Medieval Latin cranium skull, from Greek kranion skull, upper part of the
head, related to kara (poetic kras) head, from PIE root *ker- (1) horn, head (see horn (n.)).
Strictly, the bones which enclose the brain.


crank (n.)

handle for turning a revolving axis, Old English *cranc, implied in crancst&aelig;f a weaver's
instrument, crencestre female weaver, spinster, from Proto-Germanic base *krank-, and related to
crincan to bend, yield (see crinkle, cringe). English retains the literal sense of the ancient root,
while German and Dutch krank sick, formerly weak, small, is from a figurative use. The 1825
supplement to Jamieson's Scottish dictionary has crank infirm, weak, etc.    The sense of an
eccentric person, especially one who is irrationally fixated, is first recorded 1833, said to be
from the crank of a barrel organ, which makes it play the same tune over and over; but more likely a
back-formation from cranky (q.v.). Meaning methamphetamine attested by 1989.


crank (v.)

1590s, to zig-zag, from crank (n.). Meaning to turn a crank is first attested 1908, with reference
to automobile engines. Related: Cranked; cranking.


crankshaft (n.)

1803, from crank (v.) + shaft (n.). The basic form of the mechanism appears to date from Roman
times.


cranky (adj.)

cross-tempered, irritable, 1807, from crank (n.) + -y (2). The evolution would be from earlier
senses of crank, such as a twist or fanciful turn of speech (1590s); inaccessible hole or crevice
(1560s). Grose's 1787 Provincial Glossary has Cranky. Ailing sickly from the dutch crank, sick, and
identifies it as a Northern word. Jamieson's Scottish dictionary (1825) has crank in a secondary
sense of hard, difficult, as in crank word, a word hard to be understood; crank job, a work attended
with difficulty, or requiring ingenuity in the execution. Related: Crankily; crankiness.   Ben. Dang
it, don't you spare him--A cross grain'd cranky toad as ever crawl'd. (etc.) [Richard Cumberland,
Lovers Resolutions, Act I, 1813]


cranny (n.)

mid-15c., possibly from a diminutive of Middle French cran notch, fissure (14c.), from crener to
notch, split, from Medieval Latin crenare, possibly from Latin cernere to separate, sift (see
crisis). But OED casts doubt on this derivation.


crap (v.)

defecate, 1846, from one of a cluster of words generally applied to things cast off or discarded
(such as weeds growing among corn (early 15c.), residue from renderings (late 15c.), underworld
slang for money (18c.), and in Shropshire, dregs of beer or ale), all probably from Middle English
crappe grain that was trodden underfoot in a barn, chaff (mid-15c.), from Middle French crape
siftings, from Old French crappe, from Medieval Latin crappa, crapinum chaff.  Related: Crapped;
crapping.    Despite folk etymology insistence, not from Thomas Crapper (1837-1910) who was,
however, a busy plumber and may have had some minor role in the development of modern toilets. The
name Crapper is a northern form of Cropper (attested from 1221), an occupational surname, obviously,
but the exact reference is unclear. Crap (v.) as a variant of crop (v.) was noted early 19c, as a
peculiarity of speech in Scotland and the U.S. Southwest (Arkansas, etc.).    Draw out yere sword,
thou vile South'ron!  Red wat wi' blude o' my kin!  That sword it crapped the bonniest flower  E'er
lifted its head to the sun!   [Allan Cunningham (1784-1842), The Young Maxwell]


crap (n.)

act of defecation, 1898; see crap (v.). Sense of rubbish, nonsense also first recorded 1898.


crape (n.)

1630s, Englished spelling of crepe (q.v.).


crappie (n.)

type of freshwater fish, 1856, American English, of unknown origin; perhaps from Canadian French
dialectal crapp&eacute;.


crappy (adj.)

1846, from crap (n.) + -y (2). Related: Crappily; crappiness.


craps (n.)

1843, American English, unrelated to the term for excrement, instead it is from Louisiana French
craps the game of hazard, from an 18c. continental French corruption of English crabs, which was
18c. slang for a throw of two or three (the lowest throw), which perhaps is from crab (n.2), the
sense in crab apple. The 1843 citation (in an anti-gambling publication, An Exposure of the Arts and
Miseries of Gambling) calls it a game lately introduced into New Orleans.


crapulent (adj.)

1650s, from Latin crapulentus very drunk, from crapula excessive drinking (see crapulous). Related:
Crapulence.


crapulous (adj.)

1530s, sick from too much drinking, from Latin crapula, from Greek kraipale hangover, drunken
headache, nausea from debauching. The Romans used it for drunkenness itself. English has used it in
both senses. Related: Crapulously; crapulousness.


crash (v.)

late 14c., crasschen break in pieces; probably imitative. Meaning break into a party, etc. is 1922.
Slang meaning to sleep dates from 1943; especially from 1965. Computing sense is from 1973. Related:
Crashed; crashing.


crash (n.)

1570s, from crash (v.); sense of financial collapse is from 1817, collision is from 1910; references
to falling of airplanes are from World War I.


crass (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French crasse (16c.), from Latin crassus solid, thick, fat; dense. The literal
sense always has been rare in English; meaning grossly stupid is recorded from 1650s, from French.
Middle English had cras (adj.) slow, sluggish, tardy (mid-15c.), also crassitude thickness. Related:
Crassly; crassness.


crate (n.)

large box, 1680s, earlier hurdle, grillwork (late 14c.), from Latin cratis wickerwork, lattice,
kitchen-rack, or from Dutch krat basket; both perhaps from a common PIE root *kert- to turn, entwine
(see hurdle (n.)).


crate (v.)

to put in a crate, 1871, from crate (n.). Related: Crated; crating.


crater (n.)

1610s, from Latin crater, from Greek krater bowl for mixing wine with water, from kera- to mix, from
PIE root *kere- to mix, confuse; cook (see rare (adj.2)). Used in Latin for bowl-shaped mouth of a
volcano. Applied to features of the Moon since 1831 (they originally were thought to be volcanic).
As a verb, from 1830 in poetry, 1872 in science. Related: Cratered; cratering.


cravat (n.)

1650s, from French cravate (17c.), from Cravate Croatian, from German Krabate, from Serbo-Croatian
Hrvat a Croat (see Croat). Cravats came into fashion 1650s in imitation of linen scarves worn by
Croatian mercenaries in the French army in the Thirty Years War.


crave (v.)

Old English crafian ask, implore, demand by right, from North Germanic *krabojan (cognates: Old
Norse krefja to demand, Danish kr&aelig;ve, Swedish kr&auml;va); perhaps related to craft in its
base sense of power. Current sense to long for is c.1400, probably through intermediate meaning to
ask very earnestly (c.1300). Related: Craved; craving.


craven (adj.)

early 13c., cravant, perhaps from Old French crevante defeated, past participle of cravanter to
strike down, to fall down, from Latin crepare to crack, creak. Sense affected by crave and moved
from defeated to cowardly (c.1400) perhaps via intermediary sense of confess oneself defeated.
Related: Cravenly; cravenness.


cravings (n.)

urgent desires, 17c., from craving, verbal noun from crave.


craw (n.)

Old English *cr&aelig;g throat, from Proto-Germanic *krag- throat (cognates: Middle Dutch craghe
neck, throat, Old High German chrago, German Kragen collar, neck), of obscure origin.


crawfish (n.)

1620s, variant of crayfish. Not originally an American form. Also in 19c. American English as a
verb, to back out, in reference to the creature's movements.


crawl (v.)

c.1200, creulen, from a Scandinavian source, perhaps Old Norse krafla to claw (one's way), Danish
kravle, from the same root as crab (n.1). If there was an Old English *craflian, it has not been
recorded. Related: Crawled; crawling.


crawl (n.)

1818, from crawl (v.); in the swimming sense from 1903, the stroke developed by Frederick Cavill,
well-known English swimmer who emigrated to Australia and modified the standard stroke of the day
after observing South Seas islanders. So called because the swimmer's motion in the water resembles
crawling.


crayfish (n.)

small, freshwater lobster, early 14c., crevis, from Old French crevice crayfish (13c., Modern French
&eacute;crevisse), probably from Frankish *krebitja or a similar Germanic word that is a diminutive
form of the root of crab (n.1); compare Old High German krebiz crab, shellfish, German Krebs. Modern
spelling is 16c., under influence of fish (n.).


crayon (n.)

1640s, from French crayon pencil (16c.), originally chalk pencil, from craie chalk, from Latin creta
chalk, pipe-clay, of unknown origin. Not now considered to mean Cretan earth, as once was believed.


craze (v.)

late 14c., crasen, craisen to shatter, crush, break to pieces, probably Germanic and perhaps
ultimately from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse *krasa shatter), but entering English via
an Old French crasir (compare Modern French &eacute;craser). Original sense preserved in crazy quilt
pattern and in reference to cracking in pottery glazing (1815). Mental sense (by 1620s) perhaps
comes via transferred sense of be diseased or deformed (mid-15c.), or it might be an image. Related:
Crazed; crazing.    ... there is little assurance in reconciled enemies: whose affections (for the
most part) are like unto Glasse; which being once cracked, can neuer be made otherwise then crazed
and vnsound. [John Hayward, The Life and Raigne of King Henrie the IIII, 1599]


craze (n.)

late 15c., break down in health, from craze (v.) in its Middle English sense; this led to a noun
sense of mental breakdown, and by 1813 to the extension to mania, fad, or, as The Century Dictionary
(1902) defines it, An unreasoning or capricious liking or affectation of liking, more or less sudden
and temporary, and usually shared by a number of persons, especially in society, for something
particular, uncommon, peculiar, or curious ....


craziness (n.)

c.1600, infirmity, from crazy + -ness. Meaning state of being flawed or damaged is from 1660s; that
of mental unsoundness is from 1755.


crazy (adj.)

1570s, diseased, sickly, from craze + -y (2). Meaning full of cracks or flaws is from 1580s; that of
of unsound mind, or behaving as so is from 1610s. Jazz slang sense cool, exciting attested by 1927.
To drive (someone) crazy is attested by 1873. Phrase crazy like a fox recorded from 1935. Crazy
Horse, Teton Lakhota (Siouan) war leader (d.1877) translates tha&#353;uka witko, literally his horse
is crazy.


creak (v.)

early 14c., utter a harsh cry, of imitative origin. Used of the sound made by a rusty gate hinge,
etc., from 1580s. Related: Creaked; creaking. As a noun, from c.1600.


creaky (adj.)

1834, from creak + -y (2). Related: Creakily; creakiness.


cream (n.)

early 14c., creyme, from Old French cresme (13c., Modern French cr&egrave;me) chrism, holy oil,
blend of Late Latin chrisma ointment (from Greek khrisma unguent; see chrism) and Late Latin cramum
cream, which is perhaps from Gaulish. Replaced Old English ream. Re-borrowed 19c. from French as
creme. Figurative sense of most excellent element or part is from 1580s. Cream-cheese is from 1580s.


cream (v.)

mid-15c., to foam, from cream (n.). Meaning to beat, thrash, wreck is 1929, U.S. colloquial.
Related: Creamed; creaming.


creamer (n.)

1858, dish for skimming cream, agent noun from cream (v.). As a pitcher for cream, from 1877.


creamery (n.)

1808, from French cr&eacute;merie, from cr&egrave;me (see cream (n.)).


creampuff (n.)

also cream puff, by 1859 as a kind of light confection, from cream (n.) + puff (n.). In figurative
sense of weakling, sissy, it is recorded from 1935.    I remember my first campaign. My opponent
called me a cream puff. That's what he said. Well, I rushed out and got the baker's union to endorse
me. [Sen. Claiborne Pell, D-R.I., 1987]    As a salesman's word, something that is a tremendous
bargain, it is from 1940s.


creamy (adj.)

mid-15c., from cream (n.) + -y (2). Related: Creamily; creaminess.


crease (n.)

1660s, altered from creaste a ridge, perhaps a variant of crest (n.), via meaning a fold in a length
of cloth (mid-15c.) which produced a crest. In sports, first in cricket (1779), where it was
originally cut into the ground. As a verb, from 1580s. Related: Creased; creasing.


create (v.)

late 14c., from Latin creatus, past participle of creare to make, bring forth, produce, beget,
related to crescere arise, grow (see crescent). Related: Created; creating.


creatine (n.)

1834, from French creatine, from Greek kreas flesh, meat (see raw) + chemical suffix -ine (2).
Organic base discovered by French physicist Michel-Eug&egrave;ne Chevreul (1786-1889) in the juice
of flesh and named by him.


creatinine (n.)

by 1847, from creatine + chemical suffix -ine (2).


creation (n.)

late 14c., action of creating, a created thing, from Old French creacion (14c., Modern French
cr&eacute;ation) creation, coming into being, from Latin creationem (nominative creatio) a creating,
a producing, in classical use an electing, appointment, choice, noun of action from past participle
stem of creare (see create). Meaning that which God has created, the world and all in it is from
1610s. The native word in the Biblical sense was Old English frum-sceaft. Of fashion costumes,
desserts, etc., from 1870s, from French. Creation science is attested by 1970.


creationism (n.)

1847, originally a Christian theological position that God immediately created a soul for each
person born; from creation + -ism. As a name for the religious reaction to Darwin, opposed to
evolution, it is attested from 1880.  James Ussher (1581-1656), Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of All
Ireland, and Vice-Chancellor of Trinity College in Dublin was highly regarded in his day as a
churchman and as a scholar. Of his many works, his treatise on chronology has proved the most
durable. Based on an intricate correlation of Middle Eastern and Mediterranean histories and Holy
writ, it was incorporated into an authorized version of the Bible printed in 1701, and thus came to
be regarded with almost as much unquestioning reverence as the Bible itself. Having established the
first day of creation as Sunday 23 October 4004 B.C. ... Ussher calculated the dates of other
biblical events, concluding, for example, that Adam and Eve were driven from Paradise on Monday 10
November 4004 BC, and that the ark touched down on Mt Ararat on 5 May 1491 BC on a Wednesday.
[Craig, G.Y., and E.J. Jones, A Geological Miscellany, Princeton University Press, 1982.]


creative (adj.)

1670s, having the quality of creating, from create + -ive. Of literature, imaginative, from 1816,
first attested in Wordsworth. Creative writing is attested from 1907. Related: Creatively.


creativity (n.)

1859, from creative + -ity. An earlier word was creativeness (1800).


creator (n.)

c.1300, Supreme Being, from Anglo-French creatour, Old French creator (12c., academic and
liturgical, alongside popular creere, Modern French cr&eacute;ateur), from Latin creator creator,
author, founder, from creatus (see create). Translated in Old English as scieppend (from verb
scieppan; see shape (v.)). Not generally capitalized until KJV. General meaning one who creates is
from 1570s.


creature (n.)

late 13c., anything created, also living being, from Old French creature (Modern French
cr&eacute;ature), from Late Latin creatura thing created, from creatus, past participle of Latin
creare create (see create). Meaning anything that ministers to man's comforts (1610s), after I Tim.
iv:4, led to jocular use for whiskey (1630s).


creche (n.)

Christmas manger scene, 1792, from French cr&egrave;che, from Old French cresche (13c.) crib,
manger, stall, ultimately from a Germanic source; compare Old High German kripja, Old English cribb
(see crib). Also a public nursery for infants where they are cared for while their mothers are at
work (1854).


cred (n.)

slang shortening of credibility, by 1992.


credence (n.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin credentia belief, from Latin credentum (nominative credens), past
participle of credere believe, trust (see credo).


credential (n.)

that which entitles to credit, 1756, probably a back-formation from credentials. Earlier in English
as an adjective, confirming, corroborating (late 15c.). As a verb, provide with credentials, by 1828
(implied in dredentialed).


credentials (n.)

letters entitling the bearer to certain credit or confidence, 1670s, from Medieval Latin
credentialis, from credentia (see credence). Probably immediately as a shortening of letters
credential (1520s, with French word order); earlier was letter of credence (mid-14c.).


credenza (n.)

1883, an Italian sideboard, from Italian credenza, literally belief, credit, from Medieval Latin
credentia (see credence).    The same evolution that produced this sense in Italian also worked on
the English word credence, which in Middle English also meant act or process of testing the nature
or character of food before serving it as a precaution against poison, a former practice in some
royal or noble households. Because of that, in medieval times it also meant a side-table or side-
board on which the food was placed to be tasted before serving; hence, in later use, a cupboard or
cabinet for the display of plate, etc. These senses fell away in English, and the modern furniture
piece, which begins to be mentioned in domestic interiors from c.1920, took its name from Italian,
perhaps as a more elegant word than homely sideboard.


credibility (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin credibilitas, from Latin credibilis (see credible). Credibility gap is
1966, American English, in reference to official statements about the Vietnam War.


credible (adj.)

believable, late 14c., from Latin credibilis worthy to be believed, from credere (see credo).
Related: Credibly.


credit (n.)

1520s, from Middle French cr&eacute;dit (15c.) belief, trust, from Italian credito, from Latin
creditum a loan, thing entrusted to another, from past participle of credere to trust, entrust,
believe (see credo). The commercial sense was the original one in English (creditor is mid-15c.).
Meaning honor, acknowledgment of merit, is from c.1600. Academic sense of point for completing a
course of study is 1904. Movie/broadcasting sense is 1914. Credit rating is from 1958; credit union
is 1881, American English.


credit (v.)

1540s, from credit (n.). Related: Credited; crediting.


credit card

1952 in the modern sense; the phrase was used late 19c. to mean traveler's check.


creditable (adj.)

1520s, from credit (v.) + -able. Related: Creditably; creditability.


creditor (n.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French creditour, Old French creditour (early 14c.), from Latin creditor
truster, lender, from creditus, past participle of credere (see credo).


credo (n.)

late 12c., from Latin, literally I believe, first word of the Apostles' and Nicene Creeds, first
person singular present indicative of credere to believe, perhaps from PIE compound *kerd-dhe- to
believe, literally to put one's heart (cognates: Old Irish cretim, Irish creidim, Welsh credu I
believe, Sanskrit &#347;rad-dh&#257;- faith). The nativized form is creed. General sense of formula
or statement of belief is from 1580s.


credulity (n.)

early 15c., from Old French credulit&eacute; (12c.), from Latin credulitatem (nominative credulitas)
easiness of belief, rash confidence, noun of quality from credulus (see credulous).


credulous (adj.)

1570s, from Latin credulus that easily believes, trustful, from credere to believe (see credo).
Related: Credulously; credulousness.


Cree

1744, from phonetic rendering of Canadian French Cris, short for Christinaux, from Ojibwa
(Algonquian) *kiristino, originally referring to a group in the Hudson Bay region.


creed (n.)

Old English creda article or statement of Christian belief, from Latin credo I believe (see credo).
Broadening 17c. to mean any statement of belief.


creek (n.)

mid-15c., creke narrow inlet in a coastline, altered from kryk (early 13c.; in place names from
12c.), probably from Old Norse kriki corner, nook, perhaps influenced by Anglo-French crique, itself
from a Scandinavian source via Norman. Perhaps ultimately related to crook and with an original
notion of full of bends and turns (compare dialectal Swedish krik corner, bend; creek, cove).
Extended to inlet or short arm of a river by 1570s, which probably led to use for small stream,
brook in American English (1620s). Also used there and in Canada, Australia, New Zealand for branch
of a main river, possibly from explorers moving up main rivers and seeing and noting mouths of
tributaries without knowing they often were extensive rivers of their own. Slang phrase up the creek
in trouble, often especially pregnant, first recorded 1941, perhaps originally armed forces slang
for lost while on patrol.


Creek

Indian tribe or confederation, 1725, named for creek, the geographical feature, and abbreviated from
Ochese Creek Indians, from the place in Georgia where English first encountered them. Native name is
Muskogee, a word of uncertain origin.


creel (n.)

early 14c., originally Scottish, of unknown origin. Perhaps related to Middle French crille
latticework.


creep (v.)

Old English creopan to creep (class II strong verb; past tense creap, past participle cropen), from
Proto-Germanic *kreupan (cognates: Old Frisian kriapa, Middle Dutch crupen, Old Norse krjupa to
creep), perhaps from a PIE root *g(e)r- crooked [Watkins]. Related: Crept; creeping.


creep (n.)

a creeping motion, 1818, from creep (v.). Meaning despicable person is 1935, American English slang,
perhaps from earlier sense of sneak thief (1914). Creeper a gilded rascal is recorded from c.1600,
and the word also was used of certain classes of thieves, especially those who robbed customers in
brothels. The creeps a feeling of dread or revulsion first attested 1849, in Dickens.


creeper (n.)

Old English creopera one who creeps, agent noun from creep (v.). Also see creep (n.). Meaning lice
is from 1570s; of certain birds from 1660s; of certain plants from 1620s.


creepy (adj.)

1794, characterized by creeping, from creep + -y (2). Meaning having a creeping feeling in the flesh
is from 1831; that of producing such a feeling, the main modern sense, is from 1858. Creepy-crawly
is from 1858.


cremate (v.)

1874, a back-formation from cremation. Related: Cremated; cremating.


cremation (n.)

1620s, from Latin cremationem (nominative crematio), noun of action from past participle stem of
cremare to burn, consume by fire (also used of the dead), from PIE *krem-, extended form of root
*ker- heat, fire (see carbon).


crematoria (n.)

plural of Modern Latin crematorium (see crematorium).


crematorium (n.)

1880, from Latin cremator-, stem of cremare (see cremation) + -orium (see -ory).


crematory (n.)

1876, the nativized form of crematorium. From 1884 as an adjective.


creme (n.)

1845, from French cr&egrave;me (see cream (n.)). For cr&egrave;me br&#251;l&eacute;e, see brulee.


creme de la creme (n.)

elite, finest flower of society, 1848, from French cr&egrave;me de la cr&egrave;me, literally the
cream of the cream (see cream (n.)).


crenel (n.)

open space on an embattlement, early 14c., from Old French crenel (12c.), apparently a diminutive of
cren notch (see cranny).


crenelate (v.)

early 14c., from French cr&eacute;neler, from cr&eacute;nel&eacute; (12c.); see crenel. Sometimes
also crenellate; the double -l- seems to be from a presumed Latin *crenella as a diminutive of
crena. Related: Crenelated (1823), also crenellated; crenellation (1849). Earlier formes of the past
participle adjective included carneled.


crenelated (adj.)

1823, past participle adjective from crenelate.


creole (n.)

c.1600, from French cr&eacute;ole (17c.), from Spanish criollo person native to a locality, from
Portuguese crioulo, diminutive of cria person (especially a servant) raised in one's house, from
criar to raise or bring up, from Latin creare to produce, create (see create).    The exact sense
varies with local use. Originally with no connotation of color or race; Fowler (1926) writes: Creole
does not imply mixture of race, but denotes a person either of European or (now rarely) of negro
descent born and naturalized in certain West Indian and American countries. In U.S. use, applied to
descendants of French and Spanish settlers in Louisiana from at least 1792. Of languages, from 1879.
As an adjective, from 1748.


creosote (n.)

1835, from German Kreosot, coined 1832 by its discoverer, German-born natural philosopher Carl
Ludwig, Baron Reichenbach (1788-1869), from Greek kreo-, comb. form of kreas flesh (see raw) + soter
preserver, from soizein save, preserve. So called because it was used as an antiseptic.


crepe (n.)

1797, from French cr&ecirc;pe, from Old French crespe (14c.), from Latin crispa, fem. of crispus
curled, wrinkled (see crisp (adj.)). Meaning small, thin pancake is from 1877. Crepe paper is first
attested 1895.


crepitation (n.)

1650s, noun of action from Latin crepitare to crackle, frequentative of crepare to crack, creak (see
raven). In medical use from 1834.


crepitus (n.)

c.1810, from Latin crepitus a rattling, creaking; another word for crepitation, which is from the
same root.


crept

past tense and past participle of creep (v.).


crepuscular (adj.)

figurative use from 1660s; literal use from 1755, from Latin crepusculum twilight, dusk, from creper
dusky, of unknown origin. Especially of evening twilight.


crepuscule (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cr&eacute;puscule (13c.), from Latin crepusculum.


crescendo (n.)

1776 as a musical term, from Italian crescendo increasing, from Latin crescendo, ablative of gerund
of crescere to increase (see crescent). Figurative use is from 1785. As a verb, from 1900.


crescent (n.)

late 14c., crescent-shaped ornament, from Anglo-French cressaunt, from Old French creissant crescent
of the moon (12c., Modern French croissant), from Latin crescentum (nominative crescens), present
participle of crescere come forth, spring up, grow, thrive, swell, increase in numbers or strength,
from PIE root *ker- (3) to grow (cognates: Latin Ceres, goddess of agriculture, creare to bring
forth, create, produce; Greek kouros boy, kore girl; Armenian serem bring forth, serim be born).
Applied in Latin to the waxing moon, luna crescens, but subsequently in Latin mistaken to refer to
the shape, not the stage. The original Latin sense is preserved in crescendo. A badge or emblem of
the Turkish sultans (probably chosen for its suggestion of increase); figurative sense of Muslim
political power is from 1580s, but modern writers often falsely associate it with the Saracens of
the Crusades or the Moors of Spain. Horns of the waxing moon are on the viewer's left side; those of
the waning moon are on his right.


cress (n.)

Old English cresse, originally c&aelig;rse, from Proto-Germanic *krasjon- (cognates: Middle Low
German kerse, karse; Middle Dutch kersse; Old High German kresso, German Kresse), from PIE root
*gras- to devour (see gastric). It underwent a metathesis similar to that of grass. French cresson,
Italian crescione are Germanic loan-words.


crest (n.)

early 14c., from Old French creste tuft, comb (Modern French cr&ecirc;te), from Latin crista tuft,
plume, perhaps related to word for hair (such as crinis), but it also was used for crest of a cock
or a helmet. Replaced Old English hris.


crest (v.)

late 14c., provide with a crest, from Old French crester, from creste (see crest (n.)). Meaning to
come over the top of is from 1832. Related: Crested; cresting.


crestfallen (adj.)

1580s, past participle adjective, but the verb crestfall is recorded only from 1610s, in reference
to diseased horses, and is rare. It's possible that the image behind this use of the word is not
cocks, as often is asserted, but horses.


cretaceous (adj.)

1670s, chalky, from Latin cretaceus chalk-like, from creta chalk. As a geological period (with a
capital C-), it was first used 1832. The extensive chalk beds of southeastern England were laid down
during the Cretaceous.


Cretan (n.)

Old English Cretense (plural), from Latin Cretanus (singular); see Crete. They were proverbial in
ancient times as liars; compare Greek kretismos lying, literally Cretan behavior.


Crete

traditionally said to be from Krus, name of a mythological ancestor; probably an ethnic name of some
sort.


cretin (n.)

1779, from French cr&eacute;tin (18c.), from Alpine dialect crestin, a dwarfed and deformed idiot of
a type formerly found in families in the Alpine lands, a condition caused by a congenital deficiency
of thyroid hormones, from Vulgar Latin *christianus a Christian, a generic term for anyone, but
often with a sense of poor fellow. Related: Cretinism (1801).


cretonne (n.)

1870, from French cretonne (1723), supposedly from Creton, village in Normandy where it originally
was made.


crevasse (n.)

1823, of glaciers; 1814, of riverbanks (in that case from Louisiana French), from French crevasse,
from Old French crevace crevice (see crevice). Essentially the same word as crevice, but re-adopted
in senses for which the meaning that had taken hold in crevice was felt to be too small.


crevice (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French crevace (12c., Modern French crevasse) gap, rift, crack (also, vulgarly,
the female pudenda), from Vulgar Latin *crepacia, from Latin crepare to crack, creak (see raven);
meaning shifted from the sound of breaking to the resulting fissure.


crew (n.)

mid-15c., group of soldiers, from Middle French crue (Old French creue) an increase, recruit,
military reinforcement, from fem. past participle of creistre grow, from Latin crescere arise, grow
(see crescent). Meaning people acting or working together is first attested 1560s. Gang of men on a
warship is from 1690s. Crew-cut first attested 1938, so called because the style  originally was
adopted by boat crews at Harvard and Yale.


crewel (n.)

embroidery, 1590s, of unknown origin. Earliest usage is late 15c., as a name for a kind of thin,
worsted yarn originally used in crewel work.


crib (n.)

Old English cribbe manger, fodder bin in cowsheds and fields, from a West Germanic root (cognates:
Old Saxon kribbia manger; Old Frisian and Middle Dutch kribbe; Old High German krippa, German Krippe
crib, manger) probably related to German krebe basket. Meaning child's bed with barred sides is
1640s; probably from frequent use in reference to the manger where infant Jesus was laid. Thieves'
slang for dwelling house dates to at least 1812, but late 20c.  use probably is independent. The Old
High German version passed to French and became creche.


crib (v.)

steal, 17c. from crib (n.) in a secondary sense a basket; this probably also is the source of
student slang meaning plagiarize (1778). Related: Cribbed; cribbing.


cribbage (n.)

the card game, 1620s, probably from crib set of cards thrown from each player's hand, of uncertain
origin, though this word is later than the game name.


crick (n.)

early 15c., of uncertain origin; OED says probably onomatop&#339;ic.


cricket (n.1)

the insect, early 14c., from Old French criquet (12c.) a cricket, from criquer to creak, rattle,
crackle, of echoic origin.


cricket (n.2)

the game, 1590s, apparently from Old French criquet goal post, stick, perhaps from Middle
Dutch/Middle Flemish cricke stick, staff, perhaps from the same root as crutch. Sense of fair play
is first recorded 1851, on notion of cricket as it should be played.


cried

past tense and past participle of cry (v.).


crier (n.)

early 13c. as a surname; as an officer of the courts, late 13c., agent noun from cry (v.); town
crier sense is late 14c.


crikey

exclamation, 1838, probably one of the many substitutions for Christ.


crime (n.)

mid-13c., sinfulness, from Old French crimne (12c., Modern French crime), from Latin crimen
(genitive criminis) charge, indictment, accusation; crime, fault, offense, perhaps from cernere to
decide, to sift (see crisis). But Klein (citing Brugmann) rejects this and suggests *cri-men, which
originally would have been cry of distress (Tucker also suggests a root in cry words and refers to
English plaint, plaintiff, etc.). Meaning offense punishable by law is from late 14c. The Latin word
is glossed in Old English by facen, also deceit, fraud, treachery. Crime wave first attested 1893,
American English.


criminal (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French criminel (11c.), from Latin criminalis pertaining to crime, from
crimen (genitive criminis); see crime. Preserves the Latin -n-. Criminal law (or criminal justice)
distinguished from civil in English at least since late 15c.


criminal (n.)

1620s, from criminal (adj.).


criminality (n.)

1610s, from French criminalit&eacute;, from Medieval Latin criminalitas, from Latin criminalis (see
criminal).


criminology (n.)

1890, from Latin stem of criminal + -ology. Criminologist is recorded from 1857.


criminy (interj.)

also crimine, 1680s; it looks like Italian crimine crime but likely is simply another euphemism for
Christ as a swear-word.


crimp (v.)

1630s; Old English had gecrympan to crimp, curl, but the modern word probably is from Middle Dutch
or Low German crimpen/krimpen to shrink, crimp. Related: Crimped; crimping.


crimp (n.)

1863, from crimp (v.). Originally natural curl in wool fiber. To put a crimp in (something) is 1896,
U.S. slang.


crimson (v.)

c.1600, from crimson (n.). Related: Crimsoned; crimsoning.


crimson (n.)

early 15c., deep red color, from Old Spanish cremesin of or belonging to the kermes (the shield-
louse insects from which a deep red dye was obtained), from Medieval Latin cremesinus (see kermes).
For similar transfer of the dye word to generic use for red, compare Old Church Slavonic
&#269;ruminu, Russian &#269;ermnyj red, from the same source.


crine (v.)

c.1500, to shrink, shrivel, from Scottish English, from Gaelic crion to whither.


cringe (v.)

early 13c., from causative of Old English cringan give way, fall (in battle), become bent, from
Proto-Germanic *krank- bend, curl up (cognates: Old Norse kringr, Dutch kring, German Kring circle,
ring). Related: Cringed; cringing. As a noun from 1590s.


crinkle (v.)

late 14c., from frequentative of Old English crincan, variant of cringan to bend, yield (see
cringe). Related: Crinkled; crinkling. As a noun from 1590s.


crinoid (adj.)

1836, Latinized from Greek krinoeides lily-like, from krinon lily (a foreign word of unknown origin)
+ -oeides like (see -oid).


crinoline (n.)

1830, from French crinoline hair cloth (19c.), from Italian crinolino, from crino horsehair (from
Latin crinis hair) + lino flax, thread, from Latin linum (see linen). So called from the warp and
woof fibers of the original mixture.


Crip (n.)

member of a major U.S. street gang, founded in South Central Los Angeles 1971, the name supposedly
originally was cribs, partly a reference to the youth of most of the original members, and when they
began carrying pimp canes it was altered to Crip, which has been attested in U.S. slang as a
shortening of cripple (n.) since 1918.


cripple (n.)

Old English crypel, related to cryppan to crook, bend, from Proto-Germanic *krupilaz (cognates: Old
Frisian kreppel, Middle Dutch cropel, German kr&uuml;ppel, Old Norse kryppill). Possibly also
related to Old English creopan to creep (creopere, literally creeper, was another Old English word
for crippled person).


cripple (v.)

mid-13c., to move slowly, from cripple (n.). Meaning make a cripple of, lame is from early 14c.
Related: Crippled; crippling.


crisis (n.)

early 15c., from Latinized form of Greek krisis turning point in a disease (used as such by
Hippocrates and Galen), literally judgment, result of a trial, selection, from krinein to separate,
decide, judge, from PIE root *krei- to sieve, discriminate, distinguish (cognates: Greek krinesthai
to explain; Old English hriddel sieve; Latin cribrum sieve, crimen judgment, crime, cernere (past
participle cretus) to sift, separate; Old Irish criathar, Old Welsh cruitr sieve; Middle Irish crich
border, boundary). Transferred non-medical sense is 1620s in English. A German term for mid-life
crisis is Torschlusspanik, literally shut-door-panic, fear of being on the wrong side of a closing
gate.


crisp (adj.)

Old English crisp curly, from Latin crispus curled, wrinkled, having curly hair, from PIE root
*(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.)). It began to mean brittle 1520s, for obscure reasons,
perhaps based on what happens to flat things when they are cooked. Figurative sense of neat, brisk
is from 1814; perhaps a separate word. As a noun, from late 14c. Potato crisps (the British version
of U.S. potato chips) is from 1929.


crisp (v.)

late 14c., to curl, from crisp (adj.). Meaning to become brittle is from 1805. Related: Crisped;
crisping.


crispin (n.)

1640s, shoemaker, in literary use only, from Ss. Crispin and Crispinian (martyred at Soissons, c.285
C.E.), patrons of shoemakers. French hagiographers make the brothers noble Romans who, while they
preached in Gaul, worked as shoemakers to avoid living on the alms of the faithful. The name is
Crispinus, a Roman cognomen, from Latin crispus curly (probably with reference to hair; see crisp).


crispy (adj.)

late 14c., curly, from crisp (adj.) + -y (2). Meaning brittle is recorded from 1610s.


crisscross (v.)

1818, from Middle English crist(s)-crosse Christ's cross (late 15c.), earlier cros-kryst (late
14c.), referring to the mark of a cross formerly written before the alphabet in hornbooks. The mark
itself stood for the phrase Christ-cross me speed ('May Christ's cross give me success'), a formula
said before reciting the alphabet [Barnhart]. Used today without awareness of origin. As an
adjective, 1846; as a noun, 1848.


Cristina

fem. proper name, the native form of Latin Christiana, fem. of Christianus (see Christian). In the
Middle Ages, the masculine form of the name (Cristian) was less popular in England than the
feminine, though Christian was common in Brittany. Surnames Christie, Chrystal, etc. represent
common Northern and Scottish pet forms of the names.


crit

shortening of criticism, from 1908; shortening of critical from 1957 (originally among nuclear
physicists).


criteria (n.)

1620s, plural of criterion (q.v.).


criterion (n.)

1660s, from Latinized form of Greek kriterion means for judging, standard, from krites judge, from
PIE root *krei- (see crisis). Used in English as a Greek word from 1610s.


critic (n.)

1580s, one who passes judgment, from Middle French critique (14c.), from Latin criticus a judge,
literary critic, from Greek kritikos able to make judgments, from krinein to separate, decide (see
crisis). Meaning one who judges merits of books, plays, etc. is from c.1600. The English word always
had overtones of censurer, faultfinder.     To understand how the artist felt, however, is not
criticism; criticism is an investigation of what the work is good for. ... Criticism ... is a
serious and public function; it shows the race assimilating the individual, dividing the immortal
from the mortal part of a soul. [George Santayana, The Life of Reason, 1906]   <hr />   A perfect
judge will read each work of wit   With the same spirit that its author writ;  [Pope, An Essay on
Criticism, 1709]


critical (adj.)

1580s, censorious, from critic + -al (1). Meaning pertaining to criticism is from 1741; medical
sense is from c.1600; meaning of the nature of a crisis is from 1640s; that of crucial is from 1841,
from the decisive sense in Latin criticus. Related: Criticality (1756; in the nuclear sense, 1950);
critically (1650s, accurately; 1815, in a critical situation). In nuclear science, critical mass is
attested from 1940.


criticise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of criticize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Criticised;
criticising.


criticism (n.)

c.1600, action of criticizing, from critic + -ism. Meaning art of estimating literary worth is from
1670s.


criticize (v.)

1640s, to pass judgment on something (usually unfavorable), from critic + -ize. Meaning to discuss
critically is from 1660s; that of to censure is from 1704. Related: Criticized; criticizing.


critique (n.)

1702, restored French spelling of 17c. critick art of criticism (see critic), ultimately from Greek
kritike tekhne the critical art.


critter (n.)

1815, dialectal or humorous pronunciation of creature.


Cro Magnon

1869, from the name of a hill in Dordogne department of France, where in a cave prehistoric human
remains were found in 1868.


croak (v.)

early 14c., crouken, imitative or related to Old English cracian (see crack (v.)). Slang meaning to
die is first recorded 1812, from sound of death rattle. Related: Croaked; croaking.


croak (n.)

1560s, from croak (v.).


croaker (n.)

prophet of evil, 1630s, agent noun from croak (v.); a reference to the raven (compare Middle English
crake a raven, early 14c., from Old Norse kraka crow, of imitative origin).


Croat (n.)

from Serbo-Croatian Hrvat a Croat, from Old Church Slavonic Churvatinu Croat, literally mountaineer,
highlander, from churva mountain (compare Russian khrebet mountain chain).


Croatia

from Modern Latin Croatia, from Croatian Hrvatska, probably related to Russian khrebet mountain
chain (see Croat).


crochet (n.)

1840, from French crochet (12c.), diminutive of croc hook, from Old Norse krokr hook (see crook). So
called for the hooked needle used.


crochet (v.)

1858, from crochet (n.). Related: Crocheted; crocheting.


crock (n.)

Old English crocc, crocca pot, vessel, from Proto-Germanic *krogu pitcher, pot (cognates: Old
Frisian krocha pot, Old Saxon kruka, Middle Dutch cruke, Dutch kruik, Old High German kruog pitcher,
German Krug, Old Norse krukka pot). Perhaps from the same source as Middle Irish crocan pot, Greek
krossos pitcher, Old Church Slavonic krugla cup. Used as an image of worthless rubbish since 19c.,
perhaps from the use of crockery as chamberpots.


crockery (n.)

earthen vessels collectively, 1719 (in crockery-ware); see crock + -ery.


crocket (n.)

c.1300, curl of hair, from Anglo-French crocket, from northern French form of French crochet (see
crochet). Meaning ornamental device on a Gothic pediment is from late 14c.


crocodile (n.)

1560s, restored spelling of Middle English cokedrille, kokedrille (c.1300), from Medieval Latin
cocodrillus, from Latin crocodilus, from Greek krokodilos, word applied by Herodotus to the
crocodile of the Nile, apparently due to its basking habits, from kroke pebbles + drilos worm. The
crocodile tears story was in English from at least c.1400.


crocus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin crocus, from Greek krokos saffron, crocus, probably of Semitic origin (compare
Arabic kurkum), ultimately from Sanskrit kunkumam, unless the Sanskrit word is from the Semitic one.
The autumnal crocus (Crocus sativa) was a common source of yellow dye in Roman times, and was
perhaps grown in England, where the word existed as Old English croh, but this form of the word was
forgotten by the time the plant was re-introduced in Western Europe by the Crusaders.


Croesus

from Latinized form of Greek Kroisis, 6c. B.C.E. king of Lydia in Asia Minor, famously wealthy;
hence rich man or in other allusions to riches, from late 14c.


croft (n.)

Old English croft enclosed field, small field, of unknown etymology. Crofter is 1799, originally
Scottish.


Crohn&#039;s disease

1935, for U.S. pathologist B.B. Crohn (1884-1983), one of the team that wrote the article describing
it in 1932.


croissant (n.)

1899, see crescent.


cromlech (n.)

c.1600, from Welsh, from crom, fem. of crwm crooked, bent, concave + llech (flat) stone. Applied in
Wales and Cornwall to what in Brittany is a dolmen; a cromlech there is a circle of standing stones.


crone (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French carogne, from Old North French carogne, term of abuse for a
cantankerous or withered woman, literally carrion, from Vulgar Latin *caronia (see carrion).


Cronus

from Greek Kronos, youngest of the first generation of Titans, and their leader; of uncertain
origin, but probably not related to Khronos, personification of time.


crony (n.)

1660s, Cambridge student slang, probably from Greek khronios long-lasting, from khronos time (see
chrono-), and with a sense of old friend, or contemporary.


cronyism (n.)

1840, friendship, from crony + -ism. Meaning appointment of friends to important positions,
regardless of ability is originally American English, from c.1950.


crook (n.)

early 13c., hook-shaped instrument or weapon, from Old Norse krokr hook, corner, cognate with Old
High German kracho hooked tool, of obscure origin but perhaps related to a widespread group of
Germanic kr- words meaning bent, hooked. Meaning swindler is American English, 1879, from crooked in
figurative sense of dishonest (1708). Crook dishonest trick was in Middle English.


croon (v.)

c.1400, originally Scottish, from Middle Dutch kronen to lament, mourn, perhaps imitative.
Originally to bellow like a bull as well as to utter a low, murmuring sound (mid-15c.). Popularized
by Robert Burns. Sense evolved to lament, then to sing softly and sadly. Related: Crooned; crooning.


crooner (n.)

type of popular singer, 1930, agent noun from croon.


crop (n.)

Old English cropp bird's craw, also head or top of a sprout or herb. The common notion is
protuberance. Cognate with Old High German kropf, Old Norse kroppr. Meaning harvest product is
c.1300, probably through the verbal meaning cut off the top of a plant (c.1200).


crop (v.)

cut off the top of a plant, c.1200, from crop (n.). The general meaning of to cut off is mid-15c.
Related: Cropped; cropping. Women's fashion crop top is attested from 1984.


croquet (n.)

1858, from Northern French dialect croquet hockey stick, from Old North French shepherd's crook,
from Old French croc (12c.), from Old Norse krokr hook (see crook). Game originated in Brittany,
popularized in Ireland c.1830, England c.1850, where it was very popular until 1872.


croquette (n.)

1706, from French croquette (17c.), from croquer to crunch (imitative) + diminutive suffix -ette.


cross (n.)

Old English cros (mid-10c.), from Old Irish cros, probably via Scandinavian, from Latin crux
(accusative crucem, genitive crucis) stake, cross on which criminals were impaled or hanged, hence,
figuratively, torture, trouble, misery; originally a tall, round pole; possibly of Phoenician
origin. Replaced Old English rood. Also from Latin crux are Italian croce, French croix, Spanish and
Portuguese cruz, Dutch kruis, German Kreuz.


cross (adj.)

ill-tempered, 1630s, probably from 16c. sense of contrary, athwart, especially with reference to
winds and sailing ships, from cross (n.). Cross-purposes contradictory intentions is from 1660s.


cross (v.)

c.1200, make the sign of a cross, from cross (n.). Sense of to go across is from c.1400; that of to
cancel by drawing lines over is from mid-15c. Related: Crossed; crossing.


cross-country (adj.)

also cross country, crosscountry; 1767, of roads, from cross (v.) + country, or short for across-
country. Of flights, from 1909.


cross-dressing (n.)

also crossdressing, cross dressing, 1911, from cross (adj.) + dressing; a translation of German
Transvestismus (see transvestite).


cross-examination (n.)

also cross examination; 1827, an examination of a witness by the other side, to 'check' the effects
of previous questioning, from cross (adj.) + examination. Related: Cross-examine (1660s).


cross-eye

also crosseye, 1770 (implied in cross-eyed), from cross (adj.) + eye.


cross-fire (n.)

also crossfire, 1860, from cross (adj.) + fire (n.).


cross-over (n.)

also crossover, 1795, as a noun, a term in textiles, from cross (v.) + over (adv.). From 1884 in
railroading; from 1912 in biology. As a general adjective from 1893; specifically of musicians and
genres from 1971.


cross-patch (n.)

peevish person, usually female, c.1700, from cross (adj.) + patch (n.1) piece.


cross-pollination (n.)

also cross pollination, 1882, from cross (adj.) + pollination.


cross-reference (n.)

also crossreference, cross reference, 1834, from cross (adj.) + reference (n.). As a verb by 1902.


cross-section (n.)

also cross section, 1748, originally in engineering sketches, from cross (adj.) + section (n.).
Figurative sense of representative sample is from 1903.


cross-stitch (n.)

1710, from cross (adj.) + stitch (v.). As a verb from 1794.


crossbow (n.)

mid-15c., from cross (n.) + bow (n.1).


crossroad (n.)

1719, from cross (adj.) + road.


crossroads (n.)

1795, in figurative sense of a turning point, a moment of decision; from crossroad. In U.S., used
for a crossroads and little more; small, dull town by 1845.


crossword (n.)

1925, short for crossword puzzle (q.v.).


crossword puzzle

January 1914, from cross (adj.) + word + puzzle. The first one ran in the New York World newspaper
Dec. 21, 1913, but was called word-cross.


crotch (n.)

1530s, original meaning pitchfork, from Old North French croche shepherd's crook, variant of croc
hook (see crochet); meaning region where the body forks is 1590s.


crotchet (n.)

late 14c., crocket, later small hook (early 15c.), from Old French crochet (pronounced crotchet)
hook (see crochet). As a surgical instrument, from 1750. Figurative use in musical notation is from
mid-15c., from the shape of the notes. Meaning whimsical fancy is from 1570s; perhaps from the same
mechanical image in crank; but other authorities link this sense to the musical notation one.


crotchety (adj.)

1825, from crotchet whim or fancy + -y (2). But the sense evolution is obscure.


crouch (v.)

late 14c., probably from Old French crochir become bent, crooked, from croche hook (see crochet).
Related: Crouched; crouching. As a noun, from 1590s.


croup (n.)

coughing illness, 1765, from obsolete verb croup to cry hoarsely, croak (1510s), probably echoic.
This was the local name of the disease in southeastern Scotland, given wide currency by Dr. Francis
Home (1719-1813) of Edinburgh in his 1765 article on it. Related: Croupy.


croupier (n.)

one who clears the winnings from the table in gambling, 1731, from French croupier (17c.),
originally one who rides behind another, on the croup or rump of a horse (a word of Germanic
origin); hence extended to any one who backs up another; a second.


crouton (n.)

1806, from French cro&#251;ton small piece of toasted bread, from cro&#251;te crust, from Old French
crouste (13c.), from Latin crusta (see crust (n.)).


crow (n.)

Old English crawe, imitative of bird's cry. Phrase eat crow is perhaps based on the notion that the
bird is edible when boiled but hardly agreeable; first attested 1851, American English, but said to
date to War of 1812 (Walter Etecroue turns up 1361 in the Calendar of Letter Books of the City of
London). Crow's foot wrinkle around the corner of the eye is late 14c. Phrase as the crow flies
first recorded 1800.


Crow

Indian tribe of the American Midwest, the name is a rough translation of their own name, Apsaruke.


crow (v.)

Old English crawian make a loud noise like a crow  (see crow (n.)); sense of exult in triumph is
1520s, perhaps in part because the English crow is a carrion-eater. Related: Crowed; crowing.


crowbar (n.)

1748, with bar (n.1), earlier simply crow (c.1400); so called from its beak or from resemblance to a
crow's foot; or possibly it is from crows, from Old French cros, plural of croc hook.


crowd (v.)

Old English crudan to press, crush. Cognate with Middle Dutch cruden to press, push, Middle High
German kroten to press, oppress, Norwegian kryda to crowd. Related: Crowded; crowding.


crowd (n.)

1560s, from crowd (v.). The earlier word was press (n.).


crown (v.)

late 12c., from Old French coroner, from corone (see crown (n.)). Related: Crowned; crowning. The
latter in its sense of that makes complete is from 1650s.


crown (n.)

early 12c., royal crown, from Anglo-French coroune, Old French corone (13c., Modern French
couronne), from Latin corona crown, originally wreath, garland, related to Greek korone anything
curved, kind of crown. Old English used corona, directly from Latin.    Extended to coins bearing
the imprint of a crown (early 15c.), especially the British silver 5-shilling piece. Also monetary
units in Iceland, Sweden (krona), Norway, Denmark (krone), and formerly in German Empire and
Austria-Hungary (krone). Meaning top of the skull is from c.1300. Crown-prince is 1791, a
translation of German kronprinz.


crozier (n.)

late 13c., from Old French crocier, from Medieval Latin crociarius bearer of a cross, from crocia
cross; also from Old French croisier one who bears or has to do with a cross (see cross (n.)). The
two words merged in Middle English. Technically, the bearer of a bishop's pastoral staff;
erroneously applied to the staff itself since 1733.


cru (n.)

from French cru vineyard, literally growth (16c.), from Old French crois (12c.; Modern French
cro&icirc;t), from croiss-, stem of croistre growth, augment, increase, ultimately from Latin
crescere come forth, spring up, grow, thrive (see crescent).


crucial (adj.)

1706, cross-shaped, from French crucial, a medical term for ligaments of the knee (which cross each
other), from Latin crux (genitive crucis) cross (see cross (n.)). The meaning decisive, critical
(1830) is extended from a logical term, Instantias Crucis, adopted by Francis Bacon (1620); the
notion is of cross fingerboard signposts at forking roads, thus a requirement to choose.


cruciate (adj.)

cross-shaped, from Modern Latin cruciatus, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) cross (see cross (n.)).
Obsolete meaning tormented is 1530s, from Latin cruciat-, past participle stem of cruciare cause
pain or anguish to, literally crucify, from crux.


crucible (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin crucibulum melting pot for metals, originally night lamp. First
element might be Middle High German kruse earthen pot. Or perhaps it is from Latin crux on some
fancied resemblance to a cross. Used of any severe test or trial since 1640s.


cruciferous (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin crucifer cross-bearing, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) stake, cross (see
cross (n.)). Originally in literal senses; botanical use (in reference to a symmetrical arrangement
of four petals) is from 1851.


crucifix (n.)

early 13c., from Old French crucefix (12c., Modern French crucifix), from Latin cruci fixus (one)
fixed to the cross (see crucify).


crucifixion (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin crucifixionem (nominative crucifixio), noun of action from past
participle stem of crucifigere kill by crucifixion; fasten to a cross (see crucify).


cruciform (adj.)

1660s, from Modern Latin cruciformis, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) stake, cross (see cross
(n.)) + forma form (see form (n.)).


crucify (v.)

c.1300, from Old French crucifer (12c., Modern French crucifier), from Vulgar Latin *crucificare,
from Late Latin crucifigere to fasten to a cross, from cruci, dative of Latin crux cross (see cross
(n.)) + figere fasten (see fix (v.)). An ancient mode of capital punishment considered especially
ignominious by the Romans. Figurative sense of to torment is 1620s. Related: Crucified; crucifying.


cruciverbalist (n.)

maker of crossword puzzles, by 1990, coined in English from Latin cruci-, comb. form of crux cross
(see cross (n.)) + verbum word (see verb).


crud (n.)

nonsense, rubbish, 1940, U.S. slang; originally 1920s army and college student slang for venereal
disease. Said to be a metathesis variant of curd, which actually makes it an unconscious return to
the original Middle English form of that word (see curd). As G.I. name for disease of any and every
sort it is attested from 1945.


crude (adj.)

late 14c., in a raw state, from Latin crudus rough; not cooked, raw, bloody, from PIE *krue-do-,
from PIE *kreue- (1) raw flesh (see raw). Meaning lacking grace is first attested 1640s. Related:
Crudely; crudeness. Crude oil is from 1865.


crudites (n.)

1960, from French crudit&eacute;s, literally raw things (see crudity).


crudity (n.)

early 14c., from Middle French crudit&eacute; (14c.) and directly from Latin cruditatem (nominative
cruditas), from crudus (see crude).


cruel (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French cruel (12c.), earlier crudel, from Latin crudelis rude, unfeeling;
cruel, hard-hearted, related to crudus rough, raw, bloody (see crude). Related: Cruelly.


cruelty (n.)

early 13c., from Old French crualt&eacute; (12c., Modern French cruaut&eacute;), from Latin
crudelitatem (nominative crudelitas) cruelty, from crudelis (see cruel).


cruet (n.)

small glass bottle for vinegar, oil, etc., c.1300, Anglo-French diminutive of Old French crue an
earthen pot, from Frankish *kruka or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German kruog);
related to crock.


cruise (v.)

1650s, from Dutch kruisen to cross, sail to and fro, from kruis cross, from Latin crux. Compare the
sense evolution in cognate cross (v.). Related: Cruised; cruising. As a noun from 1706.


cruiser (n.)

1670s, agent noun from cruise (v.), or, probably, borrowed from similar words in neighboring
languages (such as Dutch kruiser, French croiseur), originally a warship built to cruise and protect
commerce or chase hostile ships (but in 18c. often applied to privateers); meaning one who cruises
for sex partners is from 1903, in later use mostly of homosexuals; as a boxing weight class, from
1920; meaning police patrol car is 1929, American English.


cruller (n.)

1805, American English, apparently from Dutch kruller, from krullen to curl, from Middle Dutch
crullen, related to curl.


crumb (n.)

Old English cruma crumb, fragment, from a West Germanic root of obscure origin (compare Middle Dutch
crume, Dutch kruim, German krume). The -b- appeared mid-15c., in part by analogy with words like
dumb, in part perhaps reinforced by crumble. Slang meaning lousy person is 1918, from crumb, U.S.
slang for body-louse (1863), so called from resemblance.


crumble (v.)

late 15c., kremelen, from Old English *crymelan, presumed frequentative of gecrymman to break into
crumbs, from cruma (see crumb). The -b- is 16c., probably on analogy of French-derived words like
humble, where it belongs, or by influence of crumb. Related: Crumbled; crumbling.


crumby (adj.)

1731, full of crumbs, from crumb + -y (2). Overlapping somewhat with crummy, but generally
restricted to the more literal senses.


crummy (adj.)

1560s, easily crumbled; 1570s, like bread, from crumb + -y (2). The second sense probably accounts
for 18c. (and later in dialects) use, of a woman, attractively plump, full-figured, buxom. Slang
meaning shoddy, filthy, inferior, poorly made in use by 1859, probably is from the first sense, but
influenced by crumb in its slang sense of louse.


crumpet (n.)

1690s, perhaps from crompid cake wafer, literally curled-up cake (1382; Wyclif's rendering of Hebrew
raqiq in Ex. 29:23), from crompid, past participle of crumpen curl up. Alternative etymology is from
Celtic (compare Breton krampoez thin, flat cake). Slang meaning woman regarded as a sex object is
first recorded 1936.


crumple (v.)

c.1300, crumplen, frequentative of crumpen to curl up (from Old English crump bent, crooked).
Related: Crumpled; crumpling.


crunch (v.)

1814, from craunch (1630s), probably of imitative origin. Related: Crunched; crunching. The noun is
1836, from the verb; the sense of critical moment was popularized 1939 by Winston Churchill, who had
used it in his 1938 biography of Marlborough.


crunchy (adj.)

1892, from crunch + -y (2). Student slang sense of annoyingly intense about health or environmental
issues is by 1990, short for crunchy granola (considered as natural and wholesome); not entirely
pejorative at first. Related: Crunchiness.


crunk (n.)

by 1999, style of popular music developed in U.S. South in 1990s; often said to be a contraction of
crazy drunk. It was used early in a sense of cool, good.


crusade (n.)

1706, respelling of croisade (1570s), from Middle French croisade (16c.), Spanish cruzada, both from
Medieval Latin cruciata, past participle of cruciare to mark with a cross, from Latin crux (genitive
crucis) cross. Other Middle English forms were croiserie, creiserie. Figurative sense of campaign
against a public evil is from 1786.


crusade (v.)

1732, from crusade (n.). Related: Crusaded; crusading.


crusader (n.)

1743, from crusade + -er (1). Earlier was croisader, from French croisadeur.


cruse (n.)

small vessel for liquids, early 15c., perhaps related to Old Norse krus pot, tankard, from a general
Germanic root of unknown origin. Compare Middle Dutch cruese, Dutch kroes cup, pot, mug, Middle Low
German krus, Danish krus mug, jug, German Krause jug, mug.


crush (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French cruissir (Modern French &eacute;craser), variant of croissir to gnash
(teeth), crash, break, perhaps from Frankish *krostjan to gnash (cognates: Gothic kriustan, Old
Swedish krysta to gnash). Figurative sense of to humiliate, demoralize is c.1600. Related: Crushed;
crushing. Italian crosciare, Catalan cruxir, Spanish crujirare to crack are Germanic loan-words.


crush (n.)

1590s, act of crushing, from crush (v.). Meaning thick crowd is from 1806. Sense of person one is
infatuated with is first recorded 1884; to have a crush on is from 1913.


crust (v.)

late 14c.; see crust (n.). Related: Crusted; crusting.


crust (n.)

early 14c., hard outer part of bread, from Old French crouste (13c., Modern French cro&#251;te) and
directly from Latin crusta rind, crust, shell, bark, from PIE *krus-to- that which has been
hardened, from root *kreus- to begin to freeze, form a crust (cognates: Sanskrit krud- make hard,
thicken; Avestan xruzdra- hard; Greek krystallos ice, crystal, kryos icy cold, frost; Lettish
kruwesis frozen mud; Old High German hrosa ice, crust; Old English hruse earth; Old Norse hro&eth;r
scurf). Meaning outer shell of the earth is from 1550s.


Crustacea (n.)

1814, Modern Latin neuter plural of crustaceus (animalia), literally having a crust or shell, from
Latin crusta crust, rind, bark, hard shell (see crust (n.)). Taken as a zoological classification by
Lamarck, 1801; Cuvier (1798) had les insectes crustac&eacute;es.


crustacean (n.)

1835, from Crustacea the class name. As an adjective, 1858 (earlier was crustaceous, 1640s).


crustation (n.)

mid-17c., noun of action from crust (v.).


crusty (adj.)

c.1400, from crust (n.) + -y (2). Figurative use, of persons, short-tempered, is from 1560s.


crutch (n.)

Old English crycce crutch, staff, from Proto-Germanic *krukjo (cognates: Old Saxon krukka, Middle
Dutch crucke, Old High German krucka, German Kr&ouml;cke crutch, related to Old Norse krokr hook;
see crook). Figurative sense is first recorded c.1600. As a verb, from 1640s. Italian gruccia
crutch, crocco hook are Germanic loan-words.


crux (n.)

1814, cross, from Latin crux cross (see cross (n.)). Figurative use for a central difficulty, is
older, from 1718; perhaps from Latin crux interpretum a point in a text that is impossible to
interpret, in which the literal sense is something like crossroads of interpreters. Extended sense
of central point is from 1888.


cry (v.)

early 13c., beg, implore, from Old French crier, from Vulgar Latin *critare, from Latin quiritare to
wail, shriek (source of Italian gridare, Old Spanish cridar, Spanish and Portuguese gritar), of
uncertain origin; perhaps a variant of quirritare to squeal like a pig, from *quis, echoic of
squealing, despite ancient folk etymology that traces it to call for the help of the Quirites, the
Roman constabulary. The meaning was extended 13c. to weep, which it largely replaced by 16c.
Related: Cried; crying.    Most languages, in common with English, use the general word for cry out,
shout, wail to also mean weep, shed tears to express pain or grief. Romance and Slavic, however, use
words for this whose ultimate meaning is beat (the breast), compare French pleurer, Spanish llorar,
both from Latin plorare cry aloud, but probably originally plodere beat, clap the hands. Also
Italian piangere (cognate with French plaindre lament, pity) from Latin plangere, originally beat,
but especially of the breast, as a sign of grief. U.S. colloquial for crying out loud is 1924,
probably another euphemism for for Christ's sake.


cry (n.)

late 13c., from cry (v.).


crybaby (n.)

1851, American English, from cry + baby (n.).


cryo-

word-forming element meaning very cold, freezing, from Latinized form of Greek kryo-, comb. form of
kryos icy cold, related to kryeros chilling (see crust (n.)).


cryogenic (adj.)

1902, from cryogen freezing mixture (1875), from cryo- freezing + -genic having to do with
production (see genus). Related: Cryogenics (1958).


crypt (n.)

early 15c., grotto, cavern, from Latin crypta vault, cavern, from Greek krypte (short for krypte
kamara hidden vault), fem. of kryptos hidden, verbal adjective from kryptein to hide, from PIE
*krau- to conceal, hide (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kryjo, kryti to hide). Meaning underground
burial vault or chapel in a church first attested 1789.


cryptic (adj.)

1630s, hidden, occult, mystical, from Late Latin crypticus, from Greek kryptikos fit for concealing,
from kryptos hidden (see crypt). Meaning mysterious, enigmatic is recorded from 1920. Related:
Cryptically.


crypto-

before vowels crypt-, word-forming element meaning secret or hidden, used in forming English words
since at least 1760, from Latinized form of Greek kryptos hidden, concealed, secret (see crypt; the
Greek comb. form was krypho-). Crypto-fascist is attested from 1937; crypto-communist from 1946.


cryptogram (n.)

1880, from crypto- + gram word, letter. A modern word coined in English; though the elements are
Greek, the ancient Greeks would find it barbarous.


cryptography (n.)

1650s, from French cryptographie or directly from Modern Latin cryptographia, from Greek kryptos
hidden (see crypt) + -graphy. Related: Cryptograph; cryptographer.


cryptology (n.)

1640s, from crypto- + -ology.


cryselephantine (adj.)

1827, from Greek khryselephantinos of gold and ivory, applied to statues overlaid with gold and
ivory, such as Athene Parthenos and Olympian Zeus.


crystal (n.)

Old English cristal clear ice, clear mineral, from Old French cristal (12c., Modern French crystal),
from Latin crystallus crystal, ice, from Greek krystallos, from kryos frost, from PIE root *kru(s)-
hard, hard outer surface (see crust). Spelling adopted the Latin form 15c.-17c. The mineral has been
so-called since Old English; it was regarded by the ancients as a sort of fossilized ice. As a
shortened form of crystal-glass it dates from 1590s. As an adjective, from late 14c.


crystalline (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French cristalin like crystal (Modern French crystallin), from Latin
crystallinus, from Greek krystallinos of crystal, from krystallos (see crystal).


crystallisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of crystallization; for spelling, see -ize.


crystallization (n.)

1660s, noun of action from crystallize + -ation. Figurative use is attested from 1842.


crystallize (v.)

1590s, from crystal + -ize. Figurative use is from 1660s. Related: Crystallized; crystallizing.


crystallized (adj.)

c.1600, past participle adjective from crystallize. Of fruit, etc., from 1875.


cub (n.)

1520s, cubbe young fox, of unknown origin; perhaps from Old Irish cuib whelp, or from Old Norse
kobbi seal. Extended to the young of bears, lions, etc., after 1590s. The native word was whelp. Cub
Scout is from 1922.


Cuba

said to be from Taino (Arawakan) Cubanacan, the name of the people who occupied the island. Related:
Cuban (1829), Cuban heel (1908); Cuban Missile Crisis (October 16-28, 1962).


cubby (n.)

1868, short for cubbyhole.


cubbyhole (n.)

1825, the first element possibly from a diminutive of cub stall, pen, cattle shed, coop, hutch
(1540s), a dialect word with apparent cognates in Low German (such as East Frisian kubbing, Dutch
kub). Or related to cuddy small room, cupboard (1793), originally small cabin in a boat (1650s),
from Dutch kajuit, from French cahute. Or perhaps simply a children's made-up word.


cube (n.)

1550s, from Middle French cube (13c.) and directly from Latin cubus, from Greek kybos a cube, a six-
sided die, vertebra, perhaps from PIE root *keu(b)- to bend, turn. Mathematical sense is from 1550s
in English (it also was in the ancient Greek word: the Greeks threw with three dice; the highest
possible roll was three sixes).


cube (v.)

1580s in the mathematical sense; 1947 with meaning cut in cubes, from cube (n.). The Greek verbal
derivatives from the noun all referred to dice-throwing and gambling. Related: Cubed; cubing.


cubic (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French cubique (14c.), from Latin cubicus, from Greek kybikos, from kybos cube
(see cube (n.)). Related: Cubical.


cubicle (n.)

mid-15c., bedroom, from Latin cubiculum bedroom, from cubare to lie down, originally bend oneself,
from PIE root *keu(b)- to bend, turn. With Latin -clom, suffix denoting place. Obsolete from 16c.
but revived 19c. for dormitory sleeping compartment, sense of any partitioned space (such as a
library carrel or, later, office work station) is first recorded 1926.


cubism (n.)

1911, from French cubisme, from cube (see cube (n.)), said to have been coined by French art critic
Louis Vauxcelles at the 1908 Salon des Ind&eacute;pendants in reference to a work by Georges Braque.
Related: Cubist.


cubit (n.)

ancient unit of measure based on the forearm from elbow to fingertip, usually from 18 to 22 inches,
early 14c., from Latin cubitum the elbow, from PIE *keu(b)- to bend. Such a measure, known by a word
meaning forearm or the like, was known to many peoples (Greek pekhys, Hebrew ammah, English ell).


cuboid (adj.)

cube-like, 1829, a modern coinage; see cube (n.) + -oid.


cucking stool (n.)

early 13c., from cuck to void excrement, from Old Norse kuka feces (the chair was sometimes in the
form of a close-stool). Also known as trebucket and castigatory, it was used on disorderly women and
fraudulent tradesmen, either in the form of public exposure to ridicule or for ducking in a pond.


cuckold (n.)

mid-13c., kukewald, from Old French cucuault, from cocu (see cuckoo) + pejorative suffix -ault, of
Germanic origin. So called from the female bird's alleged habit of changing mates, or her authentic
habit of leaving eggs in another bird's nest.    In Modern French the identity is more obvious:
Coucou for the bird and cocu for the betrayed husband. German Hahnrei (13c.), from Low German, is of
obscure origin. The second element seems to be connected to words for ardent, and suggests perhaps
sexually aggressive hen, with transferal to humans, but Kluge suggests rather a connection to words
for capon and castrated. Related: Cuckoldry.


cuckold (v.)

1580s, from cuckold (n.). Related: Cuckolded; cuckolding.


cuckoo (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French cocu cuckoo, also cuckold, echoic of the male bird's mating cry (compare
Greek kokkyx, Latin cuculus, Middle Irish cuach, Sanskrit kokilas). Slang sense of crazy (adj.) is
American English, 1918, but noun meaning stupid person is first recorded 1580s, perhaps from the
bird's unvarying, oft-repeated call. The Old English name was geac, cognate with Old Norse gaukr,
source of Scottish and northern English gowk. The Germanic words presumably originally were echoic,
too, but had drifted in form. Cuckoo clock is from 1789.


cucumber (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cocombre (13c., Modern French concombre), from Latin cucumerem
(nominative cucumis), perhaps from a pre-Italic Mediterranean language. The Latin word also is the
source of Italian cocomero, Spanish cohombro, Portuguese cogombro. Replaced Old English
eor&thorn;&aelig;ppla (plural), literally earth-apples.   Cowcumber was common form 17c.-18c., and
that pronunciation lingered into 19c. Planted as a garden vegetable by 1609 by Jamestown colonists.
Phrase cool as a cucumber (c.1732) embodies ancient folk knowledge confirmed by science in 1970:
inside of a field cucumber on a warm day is 20 degrees cooler than the air temperature.


cud (n.)

Old English cudu cud, earlier cwudu, common Germanic (compare Old Norse kva&eth;a resin, Old High
German quiti glue, German Kitt putty); perhaps from PIE root *gwet- resin, gum.


cuddle (v.)

early 16c. (implied in cudlyng), perhaps a variant of obsolete cull, coll to embrace (see collar
(n.)); or perhaps from Middle English *couthelen, from couth known, hence comfortable with. It has a
spotty early history and seems to have been a nursery word at first. Related: Cuddled; cuddling.


cuddly (adj.)

1863, from cuddle + -y (2).


cudgel (n.)

Old English cycgel club with rounded head; perhaps from PIE root *geu- to curve, bend.


cudgel (v.)

to beat with a cudgel, 1590s, from cudgel (n.). Related: Cudgeled; cudgeling.


cue (v.)

1928, from cue (n.1). Related: Cued, cueing.


cue (n.1)

stage direction, 1550s, from Q, which was used 16c., 17c. in stage plays to indicate actors'
entrances, probably as an abbreviation of Latin quando when (see quandary) or a similar Latin
adverb. Shakespeare has it as both Q and cue.


cue (n.2)

billiard stick, 1749, variant of queue (n.). Cue ball first recorded 1881.


cuff (v.1)

to put a cuff on, 1690s, from cuff (n.). Related: Cuffed; cuffing.


cuff (n.)

bottom of a sleeve, mid-14c., cuffe hand covering, mitten, glove, perhaps somehow from Medieval
Latin cuffia head covering, of uncertain origin. Sense of band around the sleeve is first attested
1520s; sense of hem of trousers is 1911. Off the cuff extemporaneously is 1938 American English
colloquial, suggesting an actor or speaker reading from notes jotted on his shirt sleeves rather
than learned lines. Cuff links is from 1897.


cuff (v.2)

hit, 1520s, of unknown origin, perhaps from Swedish kuffa to thrust, push. Related: Cuffed; cuffing.
As a noun from 1560s.


cui bono

a Latin phrase from Cicero. It means to whom for a benefit, or who profits by it? not to what good
purpose? as is often erroneously claimed. From cui to? for whom?, an old form preserved here in the
dative form of the interrogative pronoun quis who? (see who) + bono good (see bene-).


cuirass (n.)

armor for the chest and back, mid-15c., from Middle French cuirasse (15c.), from Late Latin coriacea
vestis garment of leather, from Latin corium leather, hide (see corium). Cognate with Italian
corazza, Spanish coraza, Portuguese coura&ccedil;a.


cuisine (n.)

1786, from French cuisine style of cooking, originally kitchen, cooking, cooked food (12c.), from
Late Latin cocina, earlier coquina kitchen, from Latin coquere to cook (see cook (n.)).


cul-de-sac (n.)

1738, as an anatomical term, from French cul-de-sac, literally bottom of a sack, from Latin culus
bottom, backside, fundament. For second element, see sack (n.1). Application to streets and alleys
is from 1800.


culdee (n.)

mid-12c., from Old Irish c&#233;le de anchorite, from cele associate, companion, sometimes servant
(compare ceilidh) + de of God. Perhaps an attempt to translate Servus Dei or some other Latin term
for religious hermit.


culinary (adj.)

1630s, of the kitchen, from Latin culinarius pertaining to the kitchen, from culina kitchen, food
(see kiln). Meaning of cookery is from 1650s.


cull (v.)

c.1200, originally put through a strainer, from Old French coillir (12c., Modern French cueillir)
collect, gather, pluck, select, from Latin colligere gather together, collect, originally choose,
select (see collect). Related: Culled; culling. As a noun, from 1610s.


cull (n.)

dupe, saphead, rogues' slang from late 16c., perhaps a shortening of cullion base fellow, originally
testicle (from French couillon, from Old French coillon testicle; worthless fellow, dolt, from Latin
coleus, literally strainer bag; see cojones), though another theory traces it to Romany (Gypsy)
chulai man. Also sometimes cully, though some authorities assert cully was the canting term for dupe
and cull was generic man, fellow, without implication of gullibility. Compare also gullible.


cullen

in some uses it represents an Englishing of Cologne, the city in Germany. As a surname it can be
this or from Cullen, Banffshire.


culminate (v.)

1640s, from Late Latin culminatus past participle of culminare to top, to crown, from Latin culmen
(genitive culminis) top, peak, summit, roof, gable, also used figuratively, contraction of columen
(see column). Related: Culminated; culminating.


culmination (n.)

1630s, from French culmination, noun of action from past participle stem of Late Latin culminare
(see culminate). Originally a term in astronomy/astrology; figurative use is from 1650s.


culottes (n.)

a divided skirt, 1911, from French culotte breeches (16c.), a diminutive of cul bottom, backside,
backside, anus, from Latin culus bottom, fundament. Earlier, in the singular cullote, it was used to
mean knee-breeches (1842). Por le cul bieu By God's arse was an Old French oath.


culpability (n.)

1670s, from Late Latin culpabilitas guilt, culpability, from Latin culpabilis (see culpable).


culpable (adj.)

late 13c., coupable, from Old French coupable (12c., Modern French coupable), from Latin culpabilis
worthy of blame, from culpare to blame, from culpa crime, fault, blame, guilt, error. English (and
for a time French) restored the first Latin -l- in later Middle Ages.


culprit (n.)

1670s, from Anglo-French cul prit, contraction of Culpable: prest (d'averrer nostre bille) guilty,
ready (to prove our case), words used by prosecutor in opening a trial. It seems the abbreviation
cul. prit was mistaken in English for an address to the defendant.


cult (n.)

1610s, worship, also a particular form of worship, from French culte (17c.), from Latin cultus care,
labor; cultivation, culture; worship, reverence, originally tended, cultivated, past participle of
colere to till (see colony). Rare after 17c.; revived mid-19c. with reference to ancient or
primitive rituals. Meaning devotion to a person or thing is from 1829.   <b>Cult</b>. An organized
group of people, religious or not, with whom you disagree. [Rawson]


cultivar (n.)

1923, from culti(vated) var(iety), coined by U.S. horticulturalist Liberty Hyde Bailey (1858-1954)
in Gentes Herbarum.


cultivate (v.)

early 17c., from Medieval Latin cultivatus, past participle of cultivare to cultivate, from Late
Latin cultivus tilled, from Latin cultus (see cult). Figurative sense of improve by training or
education is from 1680s. Related: Cultivable; cultivated; cultivating.


cultivation (n.)

c.1700, of knowledge, etc., a figurative use, from French cultivation (16c.), noun of action from
cultiver, from Latin cultivare to till (see cultivate). Meaning raising of a plant or crop is from
1719; literal sense of tilling of the land is from 1725.


cultivator (n.)

1660s, noun of action (in Latin form) from cultivate. As the name of an agricultural tool, from
1759.


cultural (adj.)

1868, in reference to the raising of plants or animals, from Latin cultura tillage (see culture) +
-al (1). In reference to the cultivation of the mind, from 1875; hence, relating to civilization or
a civilization. A fertile starter-word among anthropologists and sociologists, for example cultural
diffusion, in use by 1912; cultural diversity by 1935; cultural imperialism by 1937; cultural
pluralism by 1932; cultural relativism by 1948.


Cultural Revolution

1966, from Chinese, translation of Wuchan Jieji Wenhua Da Geming Proletarian Cultural Great
Revolution.


culturalization (n.)

by 1929; see cultural + -ization.


culturally (adv.)

1889, from cultural + -ly (2).


culture (n.)

mid-15c., the tilling of land, from Middle French culture and directly from Latin cultura a
cultivating, agriculture, figuratively care, culture, an honoring, from past participle stem of
colere tend, guard, cultivate, till (see colony). The figurative sense of cultivation through
education is first attested c.1500. Meaning the intellectual side of civilization is from 1805; that
of collective customs and achievements of a people is from 1867.    For without culture or holiness,
which are always the gift of a very few, a man may renounce wealth or any other external thing, but
he cannot renounce hatred, envy, jealousy, revenge. Culture is the sanctity of the intellect.
[William Butler Yeats]    Slang culture vulture is from 1947. Culture shock first recorded 1940.


cultured (adj.)

1743 in the literal sense of cultivated, of land, etc., past participle adjective from culture;
meaning developed under controlled natural conditions is from 1906, originally of pearls. Meaning
improved by exposure to intellectual culture is from 1777.


culvert (n.)

1773, origin unknown, perhaps, as Weekley suggests, the name of a long-forgotten engineer or bridge-
builder.


cum

verb and noun, by 1973, apparently a variant of the sexual sense of come that originated in
pornographic writing, perhaps first in the noun sense. This experience sexual orgasm slang meaning
of come (perhaps originally come off) is attested from 1650, in Walking In A Meadowe Greene, in a
folio of loose songs collected by Bishop Percy.    They lay soe close together, they made me much to
wonder;  I knew not which was wether, until I saw her under.  Then off he came, and blusht for shame
soe soon that he had endit;  Yet still she lies, and to him cryes, one more and none can mend it.
As a noun meaning semen or other product of orgasm it is on record from the 1920s. The sexual cum
seems to have no connection with Latin cum, the preposition meaning with, together with, which is
occasionally used in English in local names of combined parishes or benifices (such as Chorlton-cum-
Hardy), in popular Latin phrases (such as cum laude), or as a combining word to indicate a dual
nature or function (such as slumber party-cum-bloodbath).


cum laude

1872, originally at Harvard, from Medieval Latin, literally with praise, from Latin cum with +
laude, ablative of laus (genitive laudis) praise (see laud). Probably from earlier use (in Latin) at
Heidelberg and other German universities.


Cumaean (adj.)

1731, from Latin Cumae (Greek Kyme), ancient city on the Italian coast near Naples, founded by
Greeks 8c. B.C.E.; especially famous for the Sybil there, mentioned by Virgil.


cumber (v.)

c.1300, to overthrow, destroy; to be overwhelmed; to harass, apparently from French, but Old French
combrer to seize hold of, lay hands on, grab, snatch, take by force, rape, has not quite the same
sense. Perhaps a shortened formation from a verb akin to Middle English acombren obstructing
progress, from Old French encombrer, from combre obstruction, barrier, from Vulgar Latin *comboros
that which is carried together, perhaps from a Gaulish word.    The likely roots are PIE *kom (see
com-) + *bher- (1) to bear (see infer). Weakened sense of to hamper, to obstruct or weigh down is
late 14c. Related: Cumbered; cumbering.


Cumberland

Old English Cumbra land (945) region of the Cymry (see Cymric).


cumbersome (adj.)

late 14c., from cumber (v.) + -some (1). Meaning unwieldy, hard to carry is from 1590s. Related:
Cumbersomely; cumbersomeness.


cumbrous (adj.)

late 14c., cumbersome, troublesome, clumsy, unwieldy, from cumber + -ous.


cumin (n.)

Old English cymen, from Latin cuminum, from Greek kyminon, cognate with Hebrew kammon, Arabic
kammun.


cummerbund (n.)

1610s, from Hindi kamarband loin band, from Persian kamar waist + band something that ties, from
Avestan banda- bond, fetter, from PIE root *bhendh- to bind (see bend (v.)).


cummin (n.)

alternative spelling of cumin.


cumulate (v.)

1530s, from Latin cumulatus heaped, increased, augmented, past participle of cumulare to heap, from
cumulus mound, heap (see cumulus). Related: Cumulated; cumulating.


cumulation (n.)

1610s, noun of action from cumulate.


cumulative (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin cumulatus, past participle of cumulare to heap, from cumulus heap (see cumulus) +
-ive.


cumulonimbus (n.)

1887, from cumulo-, comb. form of cumulus, + nimbus.


cumulus (n.)

1650s, a heap, from Latin cumulus a heap, pile, mass, surplus, from PIE *ku-m-olo-, suffixed
shortened form of root *keue- to swell (compare Sanskrit svayati swells up, is strong, Greek kyein
to swell, Lithuanian &#353;aunas firm, solid, fit, capable). Meteorological use for rounded mass of
clouds first attested 1803.


cun (v.)

to learn to know, inquire into, from Old English cunnian to learn to know, ultimately from the same
ancient root as can (v.1). Surviving into 17c. and perhaps later in dialects.


cuneiform (adj.)

1670s, wedge shaped, from French cun&eacute;iforme (16c.), from Latin cuneus a wedge, wedge-shaped
thing, of unknown origin, + French -forme (see form (n.)). Applied to characters in ancient Middle
Eastern inscriptions made with wedge-shaped writing tools; first used in this sense by German
physician and traveller Engelbert K&auml;mpfer (1681-1716); in English from 1818. As a noun from
1862.


cunnilingus (n.)

1887, from Latin cunnus vulva (see cunt) + lingere to lick (see lick (v.)). The Latin properly would
mean one who licks a vulva, but it is used in English in reference to the action, not the actor. The
verb ought to be *cunnilingue.Cunnilingus was a very familiar manifestation in classical times; ...
it tends to be especially prevalent at all periods of high civilization. [Havelock Ellis, 1905]


cunning (adj.)

early 14c., learned, skillful, present participle of cunnen to know (see can (v.1)). Sense of
skillfully deceitful is probably late 14c. As a noun from c.1300. Related: Cunningly.


cunt (n.)

female intercrural foramen, or, as some 18c. writers refer to it, the monosyllable, Middle English
cunte female genitalia, by early 14c. (in Hendyng's Proverbs -- &#658;eve &#254;i cunte to
cunni[n]g, And crave affetir wedding), akin to Old Norse kunta, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, and
Middle Low German kunte, from Proto-Germanic *kunton, of uncertain origin. Some suggest a link with
Latin cuneus wedge, others to PIE root *geu- hollow place, still others to PIE *gwen-, root of queen
and Greek gyne woman.    The form is similar to Latin cunnus female pudenda (also, vulgarly, a
woman), which is likewise of disputed origin, perhaps literally gash, slit, from PIE *sker- (1) to
cut, or literally sheath, from PIE *kut-no-, from root *(s)keu- to conceal, hide.   Hec vulva: a
cunt. Hic cunnus: idem est. [from Londesborough Illustrated Nominale, c.1500, in Anglo-Saxon and Old
English Vocabularies, eds. Wright and W&#252;lcker, vol. 1, 1884]    First known reference in
English apparently is in a compound, Oxford street name Gropecuntlane cited from c.1230 (and
attested through late 14c.) in Place-Names of Oxfordshire (Gelling &amp; Stenton, 1953), presumably
a haunt of prostitutes. Used in medical writing c.1400, but avoided in public speech since 15c.;
considered obscene since 17c.    in Middle English also conte, counte, and sometimes queinte,
queynte (for this, see q). Chaucer used quaint and queynte in Canterbury Tales (late 14c.), and
Andrew Marvell might be punning on quaint in To His Coy Mistress (1650).    What eyleth yow to
grucche thus and grone? Is it for ye wolde haue my queynte allone? [Wife of Bath's Tale]    Under
MONOSYLLABLE Farmer lists 552 synonyms from English slang and literature before launching into
another 5 pages of them in French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. [A sampling: Botany
Bay, chum, coffee-shop, cookie, End of the Sentimental Journey, fancy bit, Fumbler's Hall,
funniment, goatmilker, heaven, hell, Itching Jenny, jelly-bag, Low Countries, nature's tufted
treasure, parenthesis, penwiper, prick-skinner, seminary, tickle-toby, undeniable, wonderful lamp,
and aphrodisaical tennis court. Dutch cognate de kont means a bottom, an arse, but Dutch also has
attractive poetic slang ways of expressing this part, such as liefdesgrot, literally cave of love,
and vleesroos rose of flesh.     Alternative form cunny is attested from c.1720 but is certainly
much earlier and forced a change in the pronunciation of coney (q.v.), but it was good for a pun
while coney was still the common word for rabbit: A pox upon your Christian cockatrices! They cry,
like poulterers' wives, 'No money, no coney.'  [Philip Massinger: The Virgin-Martyr, Act I, Scene 1,
1622]


cup (n.)

Old English cuppe, from Late Latin cuppa cup (source of Italian coppa, Spanish copa, Old French
coupe cup), from Latin cupa tub, cask, tun, barrel, from PIE *keup- a hollow (cognates: Sanskrit
kupah hollow, pit, cave, Greek kype a kind of ship, Old Church Slavonic kupu, Lithuanian kaupas).
The Late Latin word was borrowed throughout Germanic: Old Frisian kopp cup, head, Middle Low German
kopp cup, Middle Dutch coppe, Dutch kopje cup, head. German cognate Kopf now means exclusively head
(compare French t&ecirc;te, from Latin testa potsherd). Meaning part of a bra that holds a breast is
from 1938. [One's] cup of tea what interests one (1932), earlier used of persons (1908), the sense
being what is invigorating.


cup (v.)

late 14c., to draw blood by cupping, from cup (n.). Meaning to form a cup is from 1830. Related:
Cupped; cupping.


cupboard (n.)

late 14c., a board or table to place cups and like objects, from cup (n.) + board (n.1). As a type
of closed cabinet for food, etc., from early 16c.


cupcake (n.)

1828, American English, from cup (n.) + cake (n.), probably from the cups they are baked in, but
possibly from the small measures of ingredients used to make them. Meaning attractive young woman is
recorded from 1930s, American English.


cupful (n.)

mid-12c., from cup (n.) + -ful.


Cupid

Roman god of passionate love, late 14c., from Latin Cupido, personification of cupido desire, love,
from cupere to desire (see cupidity). Identified with Greek Eros. Cupid's bow  as a shape,
especially of lips, is from 1858.


cupidity (n.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French cupidite, Middle French cupidit&eacute;, from Latin cupiditatem
(nominative cupiditas) passionate desire, lust; ambition, from cupidus eager, passionate, from
cupere to desire (perhaps cognate with Sanskrit kupyati bubbles up, becomes agitated, Old Church
Slavonic kypeti to boil, Lithuanian kupeti to boil over). Despite the primarily erotic sense of the
Latin word, in English cupidity originally, and still especially, means desire for wealth.


cupola (n.)

1540s, from Italian cupola, from Late Latin cupula a little tub, diminutive of Latin cupa cask,
barrel (see cup (n.)).


cuppa (n.)

colloquial shortening of cup of (coffee, etc.), recorded from 1925; as a stand-alone (almost always
with implied tea) it dates from 1934.


cupreous (adj.)

1660s, from Late Latin cupreus of copper, from cuprum, alternative form of cyprum copper (see copper
(n.1)). Related: Cupric (1799).


cur (n.)

early 13c., curre, earlier kurdogge used of both vicious dogs and cowardly dogs, probably from Old
Norse kurra or Middle Low German korren both echoic, both meaning to growl. Compare Swedish
dialectal kurre, Middle Dutch corre house dog.


curable (adj.)

late 14c., from cure (v.) + -able; or from Old French curable (13c.) and directly from Late Latin
curabilis, from Latin curare.


Curacao

West Indian island, Cura&ccedil;ao, discovered 1499 by Alonso de Hojeda, who called it Isla de los
Gigantes in reference to the stature of the natives. The modern name probably is a Europeanized
version of some lost native word. The liqueur is made from the dried peel of the Cura&ccedil;ao
orange.


curare (n.)

1777, from Portuguese or Spanish curare, a corruption of the name in the Carib language of the
Macusi Indians of Guyana, wurali or wurari, which had a sort of click sound at the beginning, and is
said to mean he to whom it comes falls.


curate (n.)

late 14c., spiritual guide, from Medieval Latin curatus one responsible for the care (of souls),
from Latin curatus, past participle of curare to take care of (see cure (v.)). Church of England
sense of paid deputy priest of a parish first recorded 1550s.


curation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French curacion treatment of illness, from Latin curationem (nominative
curatio), a taking care, attention, management, especially   medical attention, noun of action from
past participle stem of curare to cure (see cure (v.)).


curative (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French curatif (15c.) curative, healing, from Latin curat-, past participle
stem of curare to cure (see cure (v.)). As a noun, attested from 1857.


curator (n.)

mid-14c., from Latin curator overseer, manager, guardian, agent noun from curatus, past participle
of curare (see cure (v.)). Originally of those put in charge of minors, lunatics, etc.; meaning
officer in charge of a museum, library, etc. is from 1660s.


curb (n.)

late 15c., strap passing under the jaw of a horse (used to restrain the animal), from Old French
courbe (12c.) curb on a horse, from Latin curvus, from curvare to bend (see curve (v.)). Meaning
enclosed framework is from 1510s, probably originally with a notion of curved; extended to margins
of garden beds 1731; to margin of stone between a sidewalk and road 1791 (sometimes spelled kerb).
Figurative sense of a check, a restraint is from 1610s.


curb (v.)

1520s, of horses, to lead to a curb, from curb (n.). Figurative use from 1580s. Related: Curbed;
curbing.


curbstone (n.)

1791, from curb (n.) + stone (n.).


curcumin (n.)

coloring matter, 1850, from Curcuma, genus name for plants of the ginger family, from which the
chemical was drawn, Medieval Latin, from Arabic kurkum saffron, tumeric. Compare crocus.


curd (n.)

c.1500, metathesis of crud (late 14c.), originally any coagulated substance, probably from Old
English crudan to press, drive, from PIE root *greut- to press, coagulate, perhaps via ancestor of
Gaelic gruth (because cognates are unknown in other Germanic or Romance languages).


curdle (v.)

1630s (earlier crudle, 1580s), to thicken, cause to congeal, frequentative of curd (v.) to make into
curd (late 14c.; see curd). Of blood, in figurative sense to inspire horror from c.1600. Related:
Curdled (1590); curdling (c.1700, almost always with reference to blood, in the figurative sense).


cure (n.1)

c.1300, care, heed, from Latin cura care, concern, trouble, with many figurative extensions, such as
study; administration; a mistress, and also means of healing, remedy, from Old Latin coira-, from
PIE root *kois- be concerned. Meaning medical care is late 14c.


cure (n.2)

parish priest, from French cur&eacute; (13c.), from Medieval Latin curatus (see curate).


cure (v.)

late 14c., from Old French curer, from Latin curare take care of, hence, in medical language, treat
medically, cure (see cure (n.)). In reference to fish, pork, etc., first recorded 1743. Related:
Cured; curing.    Most words for cure, heal in European languages originally applied to the person
being treated but now can be used with reference to the disease, too. Relatively few show an ancient
connection to words for physician; typically they are connected instead to words for make whole or
tend to or even conjurer. French gu&eacute;rir (with Italian guarir, Old Spanish guarir) is from a
Germanic verb stem also found in in Gothic warjan, Old English wearian ward off, prevent, defend
(see warrant (n.)).


cure-all (n.)

panacea, 1870, from cure (v.) + all. As a name of various plants, it is attested from 1793.


Curetes

from Latin Curetes, from Greek Kouretes, plural of Koures, literally youthful, related to koros
youth, child.


curettage (n.)

1897; see curette (q.v.) + -age.


curette (n.)

surgical instrument, 1753, from French curette (15c.), from curer to clear, cleanse (from Latin
curare; see cure (v.)) + -ette.


curfew (n.)

early 14c., evening signal, ringing of a bell at a fixed hour, from Anglo-French coeverfu (late
13c.), from Old French cuevrefeu, literally cover fire (Modern French couvre-few), from cuevre,
imperative of covrir to cover (see cover (v.)) + feu fire (see focus (n.)). The medieval practice of
ringing a bell at fixed time in the evening as an order to bank the hearths and prepare for sleep.
The original purpose was to prevent conflagrations from untended fires. The modern extended sense of
periodic restriction of movement had evolved by 1800s.


curfuffle (n.)

1813 (carfuffle), first used by Scottish writers, from a dialect word of Scotland based on fuffle to
throw into disorder; first element probably as in kersplash, etc. (see ker-).


curia (n.)

c.1600, one of the ten divisions of each of the three ancient Roman tribes; also the Senate-house of
Rome, from Latin curia court, perhaps from *co-wiria community of men. Transferred to the Papal
court (1840).


curie (n.)

unit of radioactivity, 1910, named for Pierre Curie (1859-1906) or his wife, Marie (1867-1934),
discoverers of radium.


curio (n.)

piece of bric-a-brac from the Far East, 1851, shortened form of curiosity (n.).


curiosity (n.)

late 14c., careful attention to detail, also desire to know or learn (originally usually in a bad
sense), from Old French curiosete curiosity, avidity, choosiness (Modern French curiosit&eacute;),
from Latin curiositatem (nominative curiositas) desire of knowledge, inquisitiveness, from curiosus
(see curious). Neutral or good sense is from early 17c. Meaning an object of interest is from 1640s.


curious (adj.)

mid-14c., eager to know (often in a bad sense), from Old French curios solicitous, anxious,
inquisitive; odd, strange (Modern French curieux) and directly from Latin curiosus careful,
diligent; inquiring eagerly, meddlesome, akin to cura care (see cure (n.)). The objective sense of
exciting curiosity is 1715 in English. In booksellers' catalogues, the word means erotic,
pornographic. Curiouser and curiouser is from Alice in Wonderland (1865).


curium (n.)

1946, named by U.S. chemist Glenn T. Seaborg, who helped discover it in 1944, for the Curies (see
Curie).


curl (v.)

mid-15c., metathesis of crulle (c.1300), probably from an unrecorded Old English word or from Middle
Dutch krul curly, from Proto-Germanic *krusl- (cognates: East Frisian krull lock of hair, Middle
High German krol, Norwegian krull, Danish kr&oslash;lle curl). The noun is recorded from c.1600.


curler (n.)

1748, agent noun from curl (v.). Related: Curlers.


curlew (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French courlieu (13c., Modern French courlis), said to be imitative of the bird's
cry but apparently assimilated with corliu runner, messenger, from corre to run (see current
(adj.)). The bird is a good runner.


curlicue (n.)

1843, American English, from curly + cue, perhaps from French queue tail or letter Q in its looping
script form. Earlier in this sense was curlie-wurlie (1772).


curling (n.)

game played with stones on ice, 1610s, from present participle of curl (v.). The name appears to
describe the motion given to the stone [OED]. A description of a similar game is attested from
Flanders c.1600.


curly (adj.)

1770s, from curl + -y (2); earliest use is of hair. Related: Curliness.


curmudgeon (n.)

1570s, of unknown origin; the suggestion, based on a misreading of a garbled note from Johnson, that
it is from French coeur mechant evil heart is not taken seriously; the first syllable may be cur
dog. Liberman says the word must have been borrowed from Gaelic (and references muigean disagreeable
person), with variant spelling of intensive prefix ker-. Related: Curmudgeonly.


currant (n.)

c.1500, from raysyn of Curans (mid-14c.) raisins of Corinth, with the -s- mistaken for a plural
inflection. From Anglo-French reisin de Corauntz. The small, seedless raisins were exported from
southern Greece. Then in 1570s the word was applied to an unrelated Northern European berry (genus
Ribes), recently introduced in England, on its resemblance to the raisins.


currency (n.)

1650s, condition of flowing, from Latin currens, present participle of currere to run (see current
(adj.)); the sense of a flow or course extended 1699 (by John Locke) to circulation of money.


current (adj.)

c.1300, running, flowing, from Old French corant running, lively, eager, swift, present participle
of corre to run, from Latin currere to run, move quickly (of persons or things), from PIE *kers- to
run (cognates: Greek -khouros running, Lithuanian karsiu go quickly, Old Norse horskr swift, Old
Irish and Middle Welsh carr cart, wagon, Breton karr chariot, Welsh carrog torrent). Meaning
prevalent, generally accepted is from 1560s.


current (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French corant (Modern French courant), from Old French corant (see current
(adj.)). Applied 1747 to the flow of electrical force.


currently (adv.)

at the present time, 1570s, from current (adj.) + -ly (2).


curricular (adj.)

1798, pertaining to driving carriages; from Latin curriculum (see curriculum) + -ar.


curriculum (n.)

1824, from Modern Latin transferred use of classical Latin curriculum a running, course, career
(also a fast chariot, racing car), from currere (see current (adj.)). Used in English as a Latin
word since 1630s at Scottish universities.


curriculum vitae (n.)

brief account of one's life and work, 1902, from Latin curriculum vitae, literally course of one's
life (see curriculum). Abbreviated c.v..


currier (n.)

late 14c., one who dresses and colors leather, from Old French corier, from Latin coriarius tanner,
currier, from corium hide, leather, skin (see corium).


curry (v.)

late 13c., to rub down a horse, from Anglo-French curreier to curry-comb a horse, from Old French
correier put in order, prepare, curry, from con-, intensive prefix (see com-), + reier arrange, from
a Germanic source (see ready). Related: Curried; currying.


curry (n.)

the spice, 1680s, from Tamil kari sauce, relish for rice.


curry favor (v.)

early 16c., altered by folk etymology from curry favel (c.1400) from Old French correier fauvel to
be false, hypocritical, literally to curry the chestnut horse, which in medieval French allegories
was a symbol of cunning and deceit. See curry (v.). Old French fauvel is from a Germanic source and
ultimately related to fallow (adj.); the sense here is entangled with that of similar-sounding Old
French favele lying, deception, from Latin fabella, diminutive of fabula (see fable (n.)).


curse (n.)

late Old English curs a prayer that evil or harm befall one, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old
French curuz anger, or Latin cursus course. Connection with cross is unlikely. No similar word
exists in Germanic, Romance, or Celtic. Curses as a histrionic exclamation is from 1885. The curse
menstruation is from 1930. Curse of Scotland, the 9 of diamonds in cards, is attested from 1791, but
the origin is obscure.


curse (v.)

Old English cursian, from the source of curse (n.). Meaning to swear profanely is from early 13c.
Related: Cursed; cursing.


cursive (adj.)

1784, from French cursif (18c.), from Medieval Latin cursivus running, from Latin cursus a running,
from past participle of currere to run (see current (adj.)). The notion is of written with a running
hand (without raising the pen), originally as opposed to the older uncial hand.


cursor (n.)

computer sense is 1967 extension of name for the sliding part of a slide rule or other instrument
(1590s), earlier a running messenger (c.1300), from Latin cursor runner, also errand-boy, from
curs-, past participle stem of currere to run (see current (adj.)).


cursory (adj.)

c.1600, from Middle French cursoire rapid, from Late Latin cursorius hasty, of a race or running,
from Latin curs-, past participle stem of currere to run (see current (adj.)).


curt (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin curtus (cut) short, shortened, incomplete, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut
(see short (adj.)). Sense of rude is first recorded 1831. The Latin word was adopted early into most
Germanic languages (compare Icelandic korta, German kurz, etc.) and drove out the native words based
on Proto-Germanic *skurt-, but English retains short.


curtail (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French courtault made short, from court short (Old French cort, from Latin
curtus; see curt) + -ault pejorative suffix of Germanic origin. Originally curtal; used of horses
with docked tails, which probably influenced the spelling in general use; curtal is retained in
poetics to describe a shortened stanza or poem. Related: Curtailed; curtailing.


curtain (n.)

c.1300, from Old French cortine curtain, tapestry, drape, blanket, from Late Latin cortina curtain,
but in classical Latin round vessel, cauldron, from Latin cortem (older cohortem) enclosure,
courtyard (see cohort). The confusion apparently begins in using cortina as a loan-translation for
Greek aulaia (curtain) in the Vulgate (to render Hebrew yeriah in Exodus xxvi:1, etc.) because the
Greek word was connected to aule court, perhaps because the door of a Greek house that led out to
the courtyard was a hung cloth. The figurative sense in curtain call is from 1884. Curtains the end
is 1912, originally from stage plays.


curtilage (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French curtilage, from Old French cortil little court, walled garden, yard,
from Medieval Latin cortile court, yard, from Latin cortis (see court (n.)).


curtsey

alternative spelling of curtsy.


curtsy (n.)

1540s, expression of respect, a variant of courtesy (q.v.). Specific meaning a bending the knee and
lowering the body as a gesture of respect is from 1570s. Originally not exclusively feminine.


curtsy (v.)

1550s, from curtsy (n.). Related: Curtsied; curtsying.


curvaceous (adj.)

1936, U.S. colloquial, from curve + facetious use of -aceous, Modern Latin botanical suffix meaning
of a certain kind. First recorded reference is to Mae West.


curvature (n.)

1660s, from Latin curvatura a bending, from curvatus, past participle of curvare to bend (see curve
(v.)). In non-Euclidian geometry, from 1873.


curve (v.)

early 15c. (implied in curved), from Latin curvus crooked, curved, bent, and curvare to bend, both
from PIE root *(s)ker- (2) to turn, bend (see ring (n.)).


curve (n.)

1690s, curved line, from curve (v.). With reference to the female figure (usually plural, curves),
from 1862; as a type of baseball pitch, from 1879.


curvilinear (adj.)

1710, from curvi-, comb. form of Latin curvus (see curve (v.)) + linearis, from linea line (see line
(n.)). Earlier was curvilineal (1650s).


curvy (adj.)

1902, from curve (n.) + -y (2). Related: Curviness.


cushion (n.)

c.1300, from Old French coissin seat cushion (12c., Modern French coussin), probably a variant of
Vulgar Latin *coxinum, from Latin coxa hip, thigh, or from Latin culcita mattress. Someone has
counted more than 400 spellings of the plural of this word in Middle English wills and inventories.
Also from the French word are Italian cuscino, Spanish cojin.


cushion (v.)

1730s, from cushion (n.). In the figurative sense, from 1863. Related: Cushioned; cushioning.


cushy (adj.)

easy, 1915, Anglo-Indian slang, from Hindi khush pleasant, healthy, happy + -y (2).


cusp (n.)

1580s, from Latin cuspis point, spear, pointed end, head, of unknown origin. Astrological use is
earliest.


cuspid (n.)

1743, from Latin cuspis (genitive cuspidus) point, pointed end (see cusp). Of teeth, from 1878.
Related: Cuspidate (adj.), attested from 1690s.


cuspidor (n.)

1779, a colonial word, from Portuguese cuspidor spittoon, from cuspir to spit, from Latin conspuere
spit on, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + spuere to spit (see spew (v.)).


cuss (n.)

1775, American English dialectal, troublesome person or animal, an alteration of curse (n.), or else
a shortening of the slang sense of customer.


cuss (v.)

to say bad words, 1815, alteration of curse (v.). Related: Cussed; cussing. To cuss out attested by
1881.


custard (n.)

mid-14c., meat or fruit pie, crustade, from Middle French croustade (Modern French coutarde), from
Old Proven&ccedil;al croustado fruit tart, literally something covered with crust, from crosta
crust, from Latin crusta (see crust (n.)). Modern meaning is c.1600. Spelling change perhaps by
influence of mustard.


custodial (adj.)

1772, from custody (Latin custodia) + -al (1).


custodian (n.)

1781, from custody (Latin custodia) + -an.  As janitor, by 1944, American English, short for
custodian-janitor (by 1899).


custody (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin custodia guarding, watching, keeping, from custos (genitive custodis) guardian,
keeper, protector, from PIE *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see hide (n.1)).


custom (n.)

c.1200, habitual practice, from Old French costume custom, habit, practice; clothes, dress (12c.,
Modern French coutume), from Vulgar Latin *consuetumen, from Latin consuetudinem (nominative
consuetudo) habit, usage, way, practice, tradition, familiarity, from consuetus, past participle of
consuescere accustom, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + suescere become used to, accustom
oneself, related to sui, genitive of suus oneself, from PIE *swe- oneself (see idiom). Replaced Old
English &thorn;eaw. Sense of a regular toll or tax on goods is early 14c. The native word here is
toll.


custom (adj.)

made to measure or order, c.1830, from custom (n.).


customary (adj.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin custumarius, from Latin consuetudinarius, from consuetitudinem (see
custom (n.)). Related: Customarily.


customer (n.)

late 14c., customs official; later buyer (early 15c.), from Anglo-French custumer, from Medieval
Latin custumarius, from Latin consuetudinarius (see custom (n.)). More generalized meaning a person
with whom one has dealings emerged 1540s; that of a person to deal with (usually wth an adjective,
tough, etc.) is by 1580s. In Shakespeare, the word also can mean prostitute.


customise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of customize (q.v.); for spelling, see -ize.


customize (v.)

1934, to make (something) to a customer's specifications, American English, from custom (adj.) +
-ize. Related: Customizable; customization; customized; customizing.


cut (v.)

late 13c., possibly Scandinavian, from North Germanic *kut- (cognates: Swedish dialectal kuta to
cut, kuta knife, Old Norse kuti knife), or from Old French couteau knife. Replaced Old English
ceorfan (see carve (v.)), sni&thorn;an, and scieran (see shear). Meaning to be absent without excuse
is British university slang from 1794. To cut a pack of cards is from 1590s. Related: Cutting.


cut (n.)

1520s, gash, incision, from cut (v.); meaning piece cut off is from 1590s; sense of a wounding
sarcasm is from 1560s.


cutaneous (adj.)

1570s, from Medieval Latin cutaneus, from Latin cutis the skin (see cuticle).


cute (adj.)

1731, clever, shortening of acute; informal sense of pretty is 1834, American English student slang.
Related: Cuteness.


cutesy (adj.)

artificially or annoyingly cute, by 1968, from cute (adj.).


cutey (n.)

alternative spelling of cutie.


cuticle (n.)

1610s, from Latin cuticula, diminutive of cutis skin, from PIE *ku-ti-, from root *(s)keu- to cover,
conceal (cognates: Lithuanian kiautas husk, Old English hyd skin, hide; see hide (n.1)). Specialized
sense of skin at the base of the nail is from 1907. Related: Cuticular.


cutie (n.)

cute person, originally especially attractive young woman, 1917, from diminutive of cute.


cutlass (n.)

1590s, from Middle French coutelas (16c.), probably from Italian coltellaccio large knife (with
augmentative suffix -accio), from coltello knife, from Latin cultellus small knife, diminutive of
culter knife, plowshare, from PIE *kel-tro-, from root *(s)kel- to cut (see scale (n.1)).


cutler (n.)

c.1400, from Old French coutelier (12c., Modern French coutelier) knife-maker, from Latin
cultellarius, from cultellus knife (see cutlass).


cutlery (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French coutelerie (13c., Modern French coutellerie) cutting utensils, also knife-
making, from coutel knife, from Latin cultellus (see cutlass).


cutlet (n.)

1706, from French c&ocirc;telette, from Old French costelette little rib (14c.), a double diminutive
of coste rib, side, from Latin costa (see coast (n.)); influenced by English cut.


cutoff (n.)

1640s, act of cutting off, also portion cut off, from verbal phrase cut off (late 14c.). Of rivers,
from 1773; of roads, from 1806; of clothing (adj.), from 1840.


cutout (n.)

1851, from verbal phrase, from cut (v.) + out (adv.).


cutpurse (n.)

one who steals by the method of cutting purses, a common practice when men wore their purses at
their girdles [Johnson], mid-14c., from cut (v.) + purse (n.). The word continued after the method
switched to picking pockets.


cutter (n.)

late 12c., one who cuts in any sense, agent noun from cut (v.). As a type of small, single-masted
vessel, from 1762, earlier boat belonging to a ship of war (1745), perhaps so called from the notion
of cutting through the water.


cutthroat (n.)

also cut-throat, 1530s, from cut (v.) + throat (n.). As an adjective from 1560s. Of card games from
1823.


cutting edge

also cutting-edge, 1825 in the literal sense (often at first with reference to plows); figurative
sense is from 1964.


cuttlefish (n.)

Old English cudele the cuttlefish; first element perhaps related to Middle Low German k&uuml;del
container, pocket; Old Norse koddi cushion, testicle; and Old English codd (see cod).


cuz

17c. as an abbreviation of cousin; 1889 as an attempt to represent the lazy pronunciation of
because.


Cuzco

city in Peru, former capital of the Inca Empire, from Quechua (Inca), literally navel, in a
figurative meaning center (of the world, as the navel is the center of the body).  Other places
known as navel of the world include Delphi, Jerusalem, Rome, Easter Island, and Mount Kailash in
Tibet.


cv (n.)

abbreviation of curriculum vitae.


cwm (n.)

1853, from Welsh cwm coomb (see coomb).


cyan (n.)

1889, short for cyan blue (1879), from Greek kyanos dark blue, dark blue enamel, lapis lazuli,
probably a non-Indo-European word, but perhaps akin to, or from, Hittite *kuwanna(n)- copper blue.


cyanide (n.)

a salt of hydrocyanic acid, 1826, coined from cyan-, comb. form for carbon and nitrogen compounds,
from Greek kyanos dark blue (see cyan) + chemical ending -ide, on analogy of chloride. So called
because it first had been obtained by heating the dye pigment powder known as Prussian blue (see
Prussian).


cyanosis (n.)

blue disease, the blue jaundice of the ancients, 1820, Medical Latin, from Greek kyanosis, from
kyanos dark blue color (see cyan) + -osis.


cyanotic (adj.)

1833, from comb. form of root of cyanosis + -ic.


cyber

as an element in word formation, ultimately from cybernetics (q.v.). It enjoyed explosive use with
the rise of the Internet early 1990s. One researcher (Nagel) counted 104 words formed from it by
1994. Cyberpunk (by 1986) and cyberspace were among the earliest.    Cyber is such a perfect prefix.
Because nobody has any idea what it means, it can be grafted onto any old word to make it seem new,
cool -- and therefore strange, spooky. [New York magazine, Dec. 23, 1996]    As a stand-alone, it is
attested by 1998 as short for cybersex (which is attested by 1995).


cybercafe (n.)

1994, from cyber + cafe.


cybernetic (adj.)

1951, back-formation from cybernetics. Greek kybernetikos meant good at steering.


cybernetics (n.)

coined 1948 by U.S. mathematician Norbert Wiener (1894-1964) from Greek kybernetes steersman
(metaphorically guide, governor) + -ics; perhaps based on 1830s French cybern&eacute;tique the art
of governing.  The future offers very little hope for those who expect that our new mechanical
slaves will offer us a world in which we may rest from thinking. Help us they may, but at the cost
of supreme demands upon our honesty and our intelligence. [Norbert Weiner, God and Golem, Inc.,
1964]


cyberspace (n.)

1982, often as two words at first, coined by science fiction writer William Gibson (best known for
Neuromancer) and used by him in a short story published in 1982, from cyber- (see cybernetics) +
space (n.).


cyborg (n.)

1960, a blend of the first elements of cybernetic and organism.


cycad (n.)

1845, Modern Latin, from Greek kykas, a word found in Theophrastus, but now thought to be a scribal
error for koikas palm trees, accusative plural of koix, a word from an unknown non-Greek language.


cyclamen (n.)

1550s, from Medieval Latin cyclamen, from Latin cyclaminos, from Greek kyklaminos, from kyklos
circle (see cycle (n.)). So called in reference to the bulbous shape of the root.


cycle (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin cyclus, from Greek kyklos circle, wheel, any circular body, circular
motion, cycle of events, from PIE kw(e)-kwl-o-, suffixed, reduplicated form of root *kwel- (1), also
*kwele-, to roll, to move around, wheel (cognates: Sanskrit cakram circle, wheel, carati he moves,
wanders; Avestan caraiti applies himself, c'axra chariot, wagon; Greek polos a round axis (PIE *kw-
becomes Greek p- before some vowels), polein move around; Latin colere to frequent, dwell in, to
cultivate, move around, cultus tended, cultivated, hence also polished, colonus husbandman, tenant
farmer, settler, colonist; Lithuanian kelias a road, a way; Old Norse hvel, Old English hweol wheel;
Old Church Slavonic kolo, Old Russian kolo, Polish ko&#322;o, Russian koleso a wheel).


cycle (v.)

1842, revolve in cycles, from cycle (n.). Meaning to ride a bicycle is from 1883. Related: Cycled;
cycling.


cyclic (adj.)

1794, from French cyclique (16c.), from Latin cyclicus, from Greek kyklikos moving in a circle, from
kyklos (see cycle (n.)).


cyclical (adj.)

1817, from cyclic + -al (1).


cyclist (n.)

bicyclist, 1882; see bicycle + -ist. Saxonists preferred wheelman.


cyclo-

before a vowel, cycl-, word-forming element meaning circle, ring, rotation, from Latinized form of
Greek kyklo-, comb. form of kyklos circle, wheel, ring (see cycle (n.)).


cyclone (n.)

1848, coined by British East India Company official Henry Piddington to describe the devastating
storm of December 1789 in Coringa, India; irregularly formed from Greek kyklon moving in a circle,
whirling around, present participle of kykloun move in a circle, whirl, from kyklos circle (see
cycle (n.)). Applied to tornados from 1856.


cyclonic (adj.)

1860, from cyclone + -ic.


cyclopean (adj.)

1640s, from Latin cyclopeus, from Greek kyklopeios, from kyklopes (see cyclops).


cyclops (n.)

(plural cyclopes), 1510s, from Latin, from Greek kyklops, literally round-eyed, from stem of kyklos
(see cycle (n.)) + -ops (see eye (n.)). One of a race of one-eyed giants who forged thunderbolts for
Zeus, built the walls of Mycenae, etc.


cyclorama (n.)

picture of a landscape on the interior surface of a cylindrical space, 1840, from cyclo- + -rama
spectacle.


cyclotron (n.)

1935, from cyclo- + ending from electron.


cygnet (n.)

c.1400, also signet before 17c., from Anglo-French, diminutive of Old French cigne, cisne swan
(12c., Modern French cygne), from Latin cygnus, from Greek kyknos, perhaps from PIE *keuk- to be
white.


cylinder (n.)

1560s, from Middle French cylindre (14c.), from Latin cylindrus roller, cylinder, from Greek
kylindros a cylinder, roller, roll, from kylindein to roll, of unknown origin.


cylindrical (adj.)

1640s, probably from cylindric (but this is attested only from 1680s), from Greek kylindrikos, from
kylindros (see cylinder) + -al (1).


cymbal (n.)

from Old English cimbal and from Old French cymbale (13c.), both from Latin cymbalum, from Greek
kymbalon a cymbal, from kymbe bowl, drinking cup.


Cymric (adj.)

1839, from Welsh Cymru Wales, Cymry the Welsh, plural of Cymro, probably from ancient combrox
compatriot, from British Celtic *kom-brogos, from collective prefix *kom- (see com-) + *brogos
district, from PIE *merg- boundary, border (see mark (n.1)). Compare Allobroges, name of a warlike
people in Gallia Narbonensis, literally those from another land.


cynic (n.)

mid-16c., in reference to the ancient philosophy, from Greek kynikos a follower of Antisthenes,
literally dog-like, from kyon (genitive kynos) dog (see canine). Supposedly from the sneering
sarcasm of the philosophers, but more likely from Kynosarge Gray Dog, name of the gymnasium outside
ancient Athens (for the use of those who were not pure Athenians) where the founder, Antisthenes (a
pupil of Socrates), taught. Diogenes was the most famous. Popular association even in ancient times
was dog-like (Lucian has kyniskos a little cynic, literally puppy). Meaning sneering sarcastic
person is from 1590s.


cynical (adj.)

1580s, resembling Cynic philosophers, from cynic + -al (1). By late 17c. the meaning had shaded into
the general one of critical, disparaging the motives of others, captious, sneering, peevish.
Related: Cynically.


cynicism (n.)

1670s, philosophy of the Cynics, from cynic + -ism. Meaning cynical character is from 1847. For
nuances of usage of cynicism, see humor.


cynosure (n.)

1590s, from Middle French cynosure (16c.), from Latin Cynosura, literally dog's tail, the
constellation (now Ursa Minor) containing the North Star, the focus of navigation, from Greek
kynosoura, literally dog's tail, from kyon (genitive kynos; see canine) + oura tail (see arse).


Cynthia

fem. proper name, also the Moon, from Latin Cynthia dea the Cynthian goddess, epithet of
Artemis/Diana, said to have been born on Mt. Cynthus on Delos.


cypress (n.)

type of evergreen tree (sacred to Pluto), late 12c., from Old French cipres (12c., Modern French
cypr&egrave;s), from Late Latin cypressus, from Latin cupressus, from Greek kyparissos, probably
from an unknown pre-Greek Mediterranean language. Perhaps related to Hebrew gopher, name of the tree
whose wood was used to make the ark (Gen. vi:14).


Cyprian (adj.)

1620s, of Cyprus, from Latin Cyprianus, from Cyprius, from Greek Kyprios (see Cyprus). The island
was famous in ancient times as the birthplace of Aphrodite and for erotic worship rituals offered to
her there; hence Cyprian meant licentious, lewd, the earliest attested sense in English (1590s) and
was applied 18c.-19c. to prostitutes.


Cyprus

eatern Mediterranean island, from Greek Kypros land of cypress trees (see cypress).


Cyrene

ancient Greek colony in Libya; the name is of unknown origin. Cyrenaic referred to the philosophy
(practical hedonism) of Aristippus of Cyrene (c.435-c.356 B.C.E.).


Cyrillic

1842, in reference to the Slavic alphabet, from St. Cyril, 9c. apostle of the Slavs, who supposedly
invented it. The alphabet replaced earlier Glagolitic. The name Cyril is Late Latin Cyrillus, from
Greek Kyrillos, literally lordly, masterful, related to kyrios lord, master (see church).


Cyrus

Latinized form of Greek Kyros, from Old Persian Kurush, a name of unknown etymology. In Hebrew,
Koresh, and in that form taken c.1990 by Wayne Howell of Texas, U.S., when he became head of the
Branch Davidian church there.


cyst (n.)

1713, from Modern Latin cystis (in English as a Latin word from 1540s), from Greek kystis bladder,
pouch.


cystic (adj.)

1630s, pertaining to the gall bladder, from French cystique (16c.), from Modern Latin cysticus, from
Greek kystis bladder, pouch. Meaning pertaining to a cyst is from 1713. Cystic fibrosis coined in
1938.


cystitis (n.)

c.1780, from cyst + -itis.


cystocele (n.)

1811, from French cystoc&egrave;le, from Greek kystis bladder, pouch + kele tumor.


cystoscopy (n.)

1910, from Greek kystis bladder, pouch + -oscopy (see -scope).


cyto-

before a vowel, cyt-, word-forming element, Latinized comb. form of Greek kytos a hollow,
receptacle, basket (from PIE *ku-ti-, from root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal; see hide (n.1)); used in
modern science since c.1859 for cell, perhaps especially from the sense (in Aristophanes) of a cell
of a hive of wasps or bees.


cytology (n.)

1857, from cyto- + -logy. Related: Cytologist (1884).


cytoplasm (n.)

1874, from cyto- + -plasm.


cytosine (n.)

1894, from German cytosin (1894), from cyto- cell + -ose + chemical suffix -ine (2). The name
cytosine (due to Kossel and Neumann) is misleading. Cytosine is not, like adenosine and guanosine, a
nucleoside but the sugar-free base. [Flood]


cytotoxic (adj.)

1902, from cyto- + toxic. Related: Cytotoxicity.


czar (n.)

1550s, from Russian tsar, from Old Slavic tsesari, from Gothic kaisar, from Greek kaisar, from Latin
Caesar. First adopted by Russian emperor Ivan IV, 1547.    The spelling with cz- is against the
usage of all Slavonic languages; the word was so spelt by Herberstein, Rerum Moscovit. Commentarii,
1549, the chief early source of knowledge as to Russia in Western Europe, whence it passed into the
Western Languages generally; in some of these it is now old-fashioned; the usual Ger. form is now
zar; French adopted tsar during the 19th c. This also became frequent in English towards the end of
that century, having been adopted by the Times newspaper as the most suitable English spelling.
[OED]    The Germanic form of the word also is the source of Finnish keisari, Estonian keisar. The
transferred sense of person with dictatorial powers is first recorded 1866, American English,
initially in reference to President Andrew Johnson. The fem. czarina is 1717, from Italian czarina,
from Ger. Zarin, fem. of Zar czar. The Russian fem. form is tsaritsa. His son is tsarevitch, his
daughter is tsarevna.


Czech

said to be from the name of an ancestral chief, but perhaps from a source akin to Czech &#269;eta
army.


Czechoslovakia (n.)

Central European nation from 1919-1992, from Czecho-, Latinized comb. form of Czech + Slovakia (see
Slovak).


