-derm

word-forming element meaning skin, from Greek derma skin, hide, leather (see derma).


-dom

abstract suffix of state, from Old English dom statute, judgment (see doom (n.)). Already active as
a suffix in Old English (as in freodom, wisdom); from stem *do- do + *-moz abstract suffix. Cognate
with German -tum, Old High German tuom.


D

fourth letter of the Roman alphabet, from Greek delta, from Phoenician and Hebrew daleth, pausal
form of deleth door, so called from its shape. The sign for 500 in Roman numerals. 3-D for three-
dimensional is attested from 1953.


D-day (n.)

1918, date set for the beginning of a military operation, with D as an abbreviation of day; compare
H-hour, also from the same military order of Sept. 7, 1918:The First Army will attack at H-Hour on
D-Day with the object of forcing the evacuation of the St. Mihiel salient. [Field Order No. 8, First
Army, A.E.F.]They designate the day and hour of the operation when the day and hour have not yet
been determined, or where secrecy is essential [U.S. Army Center of Military History Web site]. Now
almost exclusively of June 6, 1944.


D.A.

American English initialism (acronym) for district attorney from 1934; for duck's ass haircut (or,
as OED would have it, duck's arse), from 1951. The haircut so called for the shape of it at the back
of the head.


d.c.

abbreviation of direct current, attested from 1898.


D.C.

abbreviation of District of Columbia, apparently not widely used before 1820, but eventually it
became necessary to distinguish the place from the many other Washingtons in America. The city and
the district were named in 1791 (at first known as Territory of Columbia; the territory was
organized as a district in 1801), but the towns within it (Washington, Georgetown, Alexandria)
remained separate municipalities and at one time all took D.C. The district was effectively
organized as a unitary municipality in 1871.


D.D.

abbreviation of Latin Divinitatis Doctor Doctor of Divinity.


D.D.T.

also DDT, 1943, from dichlorodiphenyltrichlorethane; first made in U.S. by Geigey &amp; Co.


D.T.

1858, abbreviation of delirium tremens.


dab (v.)

c.1300, dabben to strike, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative. Modern sense of strike with a
slight, quick pressure developed by mid-16c., influenced by French dauber (see daub). Related:
Dabbed; dabbing. As a noun from c.1300, heavy blow with a weapon. Dab hand is British slang, 1828,
from dab expert (1690s), said to be school slang, of unknown origin, perhaps from dab in the strike
lightly sense.


dabble (v.)

1550s, probably a frequentative of dab. Original meaning was wet by splashing; modern figurative
sense of do superficially first recorded 1620s. Related: Dabbled; dabbling. An Ellen Dablewife is in
the Lancashire Inquests from 1336.


dace (n.)

small, freshwater fish, early 15c., from Old French darz, nominative or plural of dart dart (see
dart (n.)). So called for its movements. But another theory traces it to a Medieval Latin darsus,
said to be of Gaulish origin.


dacha (n.)

from Russian dacha, originally gift, from Slavic *datja, from PIE *do- to give (see donation).


Dachau

town in Bavaria, Germany, from Old High German daha clay + ouwa island, describing its situation on
high ground by the Amper River. Infamous as the site of a Nazi concentration camp nearby, opened in
1933 as a detention site for political prisoners and surrendered to the U.S. Army April 29, 1945.
Not a death camp per se, but as it was one of the places where inmates from other camps were sent as
the Reich collapsed at the end of the war, and as it was one of the few large camps overrun by
British or American forces, it has come to symbolize Nazi atrocities in many minds in the West.
Arbeit Macht Frei was spelled out in metal on the gate (as it was on other concentration camps, such
as Gross-Rosen, Sachsenhausen, Theresienstadt).


dachshund (n.)

1881, from German Dachshund (15c.), from Dachs (Old High German dahs, 11c.) badger (perhaps
literally builder; see texture) + Hund dog (see hound (n.)). Probably so called because the dogs
were used in badger hunts, their long, thin bodies bred to burrow into setts. French taisson,
Spanish texon, tejon, Italian tasso are Germanic loan words.


Dacron (n.)

1951, proprietary name (reg. U.S. Patent Office) by E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co.; an invented
word, on the model of nylon, etc.


dactyl (n.)

metrical foot, late 14c., from Greek dactylos, literally finger (also toe), of unknown origin; the
metrical use (a long syllable followed by two short ones) is by analogy with the three joints of a
finger.


dactylic (adj.)

1580s, from Latin dactylicus, from Greek daktylikos pertaining to a dactyl, from daktylos (see
dactyl).


dad (n.)

recorded from c.1500, but probably much older, from child's speech, nearly universal and probably
prehistoric (compare Welsh tad, Irish daid, Czech, Latin, Greek tata, Lithuanian tete, Sanskrit
tatah, all of the same meaning).


dada

1920, from French dada hobbyhorse, child's nonsense word, selected 1916 by Romanian poet Tristan
Tzara (1896-1963), leader of the movement, for its resemblance to meaningless babble.Freedom: DADA
DADA DADA, the howl of clashing colors, the intertwining of all contradictions, grotesqueries,
trivialities: LIFE. [T. Tzara, Dada Manifesto, 1918]  Related: Dadaist; Dadaism.


daddy (n.)

c.1500, colloquial diminutive of dad, with -y (3). Daddylonglegs is from 1814; daddy-o is first
recorded 1949, from bop talk.


dado (n.)

1660s, of pedestals, from Italian dado die, cube, from Latin datum (see die (n.)). Of wood panelling
in a room, from 1787.


DAE

initialism (acronym) for A Dictionary of American English on Historical Principles, published in
four volumes between 1936 and 1944, edited by Sir William A. Craigie and James R. Hulbert.


daedal (adj.)

1580s, skillful, cunning, from Latin daedalus, from Greek daidalos skillful, cunningly wrought. Also
an anglicized form of the name Daedalus from Greek mythology (1610s).


Daedalus

father of Icarus in Greek mythology, builder of the Cretan labyrinth, from Greek Daidalos, literally
the cunning worker, from daidallein to work artfully.


daemon (n.)

alternative spelling (in specialized senses) of demon (q.v.). Related: Daemonic.


daffodil (n.)

1540s, variant of Middle English affodill asphodel (c.1400), from Medieval Latin affodillus, from
Latin asphodelus, from Greek asphodelos, of unknown origin. The initial d- is perhaps from merging
of the article in Dutch de affodil, the Netherlands being a source for bulbs. First reference to the
flower we know by this name (Narcissus pseudo-Narcissus) is from 1590s.


daffy (adj.)

1884, perhaps from daft (adj.), or from obsolete daffe halfwit (compare 15c. daffish), of unknown
origin. With -y (2). Related: Daffily; daffiness.


daft (adj.)

Old English ged&aelig;fte gentle, becoming, from Proto-Germanic *gadaftjaz (cognates: Old English
daeftan to put in order, arrange, gedafen suitable; Gothic gadaban to be fit), from PIE *dhabh- to
fit together. Sense progression from mild (c.1200) to dull (c.1300) to foolish (mid-15c.) to crazy
(1530s) probably was influenced by analogy with daffe halfwit.


dag (n.)

thin rain, drizzle, wet fog, late 17c., from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse d&ouml;gg,
plural daggir dew, from Proto-Germanic *daowo- (source of Old English deaw; see dew).


dagga (n.)

marijuana, 1660s, from Afrikaans, from Hottentot dachab cannabis sativa smoked as a narcotic.


dagger (n.)

late 14c., apparently from Old French dague dagger, from Old Proven&ccedil;al dague or Italian daga,
of uncertain origin; perhaps Celtic, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *daca Dacian knife, from the Roman
province in modern Romania. The ending is possibly the faintly pejorative -ard suffix. Attested
earlier (1279) as a surname (Dagard, presumably one who carried a dagger). Also compare dogwood.
Middle Dutch dagge, Danish daggert, German Degen also are from French.


dago (n.)

1823, from Spanish Diego James. Originally used of Spanish or Portuguese sailors on English or
American ships; by 1900 it had broadened to include non-sailors and shifted to mean chiefly Italian.
James the Greater is the patron saint of Spain, and Diego as generic for a Spaniard is attested from
1610s.


Dagon (n.)

god of the Philistines, from Hebrew Dagon, from dag fish.


daguerreotype (n.)

1839, from French daguerreotype, coined from name of inventor, Louis Daguerre (1789-1851) + -type
(see type (n.)).


dahlia (n.)

1804, named 1791 by Spanish botanist Antonio Jos&eacute; Cavanilles for Anders Dahl (1751-1789),
Swedish botanist and pupil of Linnaeus, who discovered it in Mexico in 1788. The likelihood that a
true blue variety of the flower never could be cultivated was first proposed by French-Swiss
botanist Augustin Pyramus de Candolle, and noted in English by 1835; hence blue dahlia, figurative
expression for something impossible or unattainable (1866).


daily (adj.)

Old English d&aelig;glic (see day). Cognate with German t&auml;glich. This form is known from
compounds: twad&aelig;glic happening once in two days, &thorn;reod&aelig;glic happening once in
three days; the more usual Old English word was d&aelig;ghwamlic, also d&aelig;gehwelc.


daimon (n.)

transliteration of Greek daimon lesser god, guiding spirit, tutelary deity, 1852; see demon.
Employed to avoid the post-classical associations of that word.


daimyo

also daimio, former title of the chief nobles of Japan, 1839, from Japanese, literally big name,
from Chinese dai great + mio, myo name.


daintily (adv.)

c.1300, sumptuously; late 14c., elegantly, from dainty (adj.) + -ly (2).


dainty (n.)

c.1300, excellence, elegance; a luxury, from Old French deintie (12c.) price, value, also delicacy,
pleasure, from Latin dignitatem (nominative dignitas) greatness, rank, worthiness, worth, beauty,
from dignus worthy (see dignity).


dainty (adj.)

c.1300, deinte, delightful, pleasing, from dainty (n.). Meaning evolved in Middle English to choice,
excellent (late 14c.) to delicately pretty. Related: Daintiness.


daiquiri (n.)

type of alcoholic drink, 1920 (first recorded in F. Scott Fitzgerald), from Daiquiri, name of a
district or village in eastern Cuba.


dairy (n.)

late 13c., building for making butter and cheese; dairy farm, formed with Anglo-French -erie affixed
to Middle English daie (in daie maid dairymaid), from Old English d&aelig;ge kneader of bread,
housekeeper, female servant (see dey (n.1)). The purely native word was dey-house.


dais (n.)

mid-13c., from Anglo-French deis, Old French dais table, platform, from Latin discus disk-shaped
object, also, by medieval times, table, from Greek diskos quoit, disk, dish (see disk (n.)). Died
out in English c.1600, preserved in Scotland, revived 19c. by antiquarians.


daisy (n.)

Old English d&aelig;gesege, from d&aelig;ges eage day's eye, because the petals open at dawn and
close at dusk. (See day (n.) + eye (n.)). In Medieval Latin it was solis oculus sun's eye. As a
female proper name said to have been originally a pet form of Margaret (q.v.).   Daisy-cutter first
attested 1791, originally of horses that trot with low steps; later of cricket (1889) and baseball
hits that skim along the ground. Daisy-chain in the group sex sense is attested from 1941. Pushing
up daisies dead is attested from 1918, but variants with the same meaning go back to 1842.


Dakota

1809, name of a group of native peoples from the Plains states speaking a Siouan language, from
Dakota dakhota friendly (the name often is translated as allies). Recorded by Lewis and Clark (1804)
as Dar co tar; in western dialects of the Teton subgroup, Lakota, Lakhota; in Assiniboine dialect,
Nakota, Nakhota.


dal (n.)

1690s, from Hindi dal split pulse, from Sanskrit dala, from dal to split.


Dalai Lama

literally the Ocean Lama, from Mongolian dalai ocean + lama.


dale (n.)

Old English d&aelig;l dale, valley, gorge, from Proto-Germanic *dalan valley (cognates: Old Saxon,
Dutch, Gothic dal, Old Norse dalr, Old High German tal, German Tal valley), from PIE *dhel- a hollow
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic dolu pit, Russian dol valley). Preserved by Norse influence in north
of England.


daliance (n.)

mid-14c., confab, chat, from dally + -ance. Probably formed in Anglo-French, but not attested there.
Meaning amorous play, flirtation is from late 14c.; that of idle or frivolous activity is from
1540s.


Dallas

city in Texas, U.S., settled 1841, named 1846 for George M. Dallas (1792-1864), U.S. vice president
under Polk (1845-49); the family name (13c.) is from the barony of Dallas (Moray) or means dweller
at the house in the dale.


dally (v.)

c.1300, to talk, converse, possibly from Anglo-French dalier to amuse oneself, of uncertain origin.
Sense of waste time emerged by late 14c. Related: Dallied; dallying.


Dalmatia

region along the eastern Adriatic coast in what is now Croatia, of uncertain origin. Perhaps from a
derivative of PIE *dhal- to bloom, in a sense of young animal, in reference to the mountain
pastures.


Dalmatian

1810, spotted dog, presumably named for Dalmatia, but dog breeders argue over whether there is a
Croatian ancestry for the breed, which seems to be represented in Egyptian bas-reliefs and Hellenic
friezes. Popular in early 1800s as a carriage dog, to trot alongside carriages and guard them in
owner's absence. Even fire departments nowadays tend to spell it *Dalmation.


Dalton

in reference to a system of school education designed by Helen Parkhurst, 1920, from Dalton,
Massachusetts, U.S., where it was first adopted. For Daltonism see color blindness.


dam (n.1)

water barrier, early 14c., probably from Old Norse dammr or Middle Dutch dam, both from Proto-
Germanic *dammaz (cognates: Old Frisian damm, German Damm), of unknown origin.


dam (n.2)

animal mother, c.1300, variant of dame (q.v.), also originally used, like that word, for lady,
mother; but meanings diverged into separate spellings by 16c.


dam (v.)

late 15c., from dam (n.1). Related: Dammed; damming.


damage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French damage (12c., Modern French dommage) loss caused by injury, from dam
damage, from Latin damnum loss, hurt, damage (see damn).


damage (v.)

early 14c., from Old French damagier, from damage (see damage (n.)). Related: Damaged; damaging.


Damascus

ancient city in Syria, famous in medieval times for silk and steel, mid-13c., from Latin Damascus,
from Greek Damaskos, from Semitic (compare Hebrew Dammeseq, Arabic Dimashq), from a pre-Semitic name
of unknown origin. Related: Damascene, from Latin Damascenus of Damascus.


damask (n.)

late 14c., Damaske cloth from Damascus, the Syrian city.


dame (n.)

early 13c., from Old French dame lady, mistress, wife, from Late Latin domna, from Latin domina
lady, mistress of the house, from Latin domus house (see domestic). Legal title for the wife of a
knight or baronet. Slang sense of woman first attested 1902 in American English.


dammit (interj.)

representation of the exclamation damn it! as it usually is sounded, attested from 1908.


damn (v.)

late 13c., to condemn, from Old French damner damn, condemn; convict, blame; injure, derivative of
Latin damnare to adjudge guilty; to doom; to condemn, blame, reject, from noun damnum damage, hurt,
harm; loss, injury; a fine, penalty, possibly from an ancient religious term from PIE *dap- to
apportion in exchange [see Watkins]. The Latin word evolved a legal meaning of pronounce judgment
upon. Theological sense is first recorded early 14c.; the optative expletive use likely is as old.
Damn and its derivatives generally were avoided in print from 18c. to c.1930s (the famous line in
the film version of Gone with the Wind was a breakthrough and required much effort by the studio).
The noun is recorded from 1610s; to be not worth a damn is from 1817. The adjective is 1775, short
for damned; Damn Yankee, characteristic Southern U.S. term for Northerner, is attested from 1812.
Related: Damning.


damnable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French damnable or directly from Late Latin damnabilis, from Latin damnare (see
damn). Related: Damnably.


damnation (n.)

c.1300, condemnation to Hell by God, also fact of being condemned by judicial sentence, from Old
French damnation, from Latin damnationem (nominative damnatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of damnare (see damn). As an imprecation, attested from c.1600.    Damnation follows death in
other men,  But your damn'd Poet lives and writes agen.  [Pope, letter to Henry Cromwell, 1707 or
1708]


damnedest (adj.)

also damndest, originally damnedst, 1830, superlative of damned (see damn).


Damocles

courtier of Dionysius I, tyrant of Syracuse; his name in Greek means literally fame of the people,
from demos, damos people (see demotic) + -kles fame, a common ending in Greek proper names (as in
Sophocles, Pericles), from PIE *klew-es, from root *kleu- to hear (see listen). To teach Damocles
how a tyrant lives, Dionysius seated him at a banquet with a sword suspended above his head by a
single hair.


damp (n.)

early 14c., a noxious vapor, perhaps in Old English but there is no record of it. If not, probably
from Middle Low German damp; ultimately in either case from Proto-Germanic *dampaz (cognates: Old
High German damph, German Dampf vapor; Old Norse dampi dust). Sense of moisture, humidity is first
certainly attested 1706.


damp (adj.)

1580s, dazed, from damp (n.). Meaning slightly wet is from 1706. Related: Dampness.


damp (v.)

late 14c., to suffocate, from damp (n.). Figurative meaning to deaden (the spirits, etc.) attested
by 1540s. Meaning to moisten is recorded from 1670s. Related: Damped; damping.


dampen (v.)

1630s, to dull or deaden (of force, enthusiasm, ardor, etc.), from damp (adj.) + -en (1). Meaning to
moisten is recorded from 1827. Related: Dampened; dampening.


dampener (n.)

1857, agent noun from dampen.


damper (n.)

of a piano, 1783; of a chimney, 1788; agent noun from damp (v.). Either or both led to various
figurative senses.


damsel (n.)

late 12c., from Old French dameisele woman of noble birth (Modern French demoiselle young lady),
modified (by association with dame) from earlier donsele, from Gallo-Roman *domnicella, diminutive
of Latin domina lady (see dame). Archaic until revived by romantic poets, along with 16c.-17c.
variant form damozel.


dan

title of address to members of religious orders, c.1300, from Old French dan (Modern French dom),
from Latin dominus lord (source of Portuguese don, Spanish don, Italian donno; see don (n.)).


Dan (1)

familiar form of masc. proper name Daniel.


Dan (2)

name of one of the 12 tribes of ancient Israel or its territory, named for its founder; literally he
who judges, related to Hebrew din to judge. In the Old Testament, it occupied the northernmost part
of Israel, hence its use proverbially for utmost extremity, as in in from Dan to Beersheba (the
southernmost region), 1738.


Dana

fem. proper name; in U.S. little used before c.1925, then in top 100 for girls born from 1963 to
1984.


Danaid (n.)

in Greek mythology, one of the 50 daughters of Danaus, king of Argos, from Greek Danaides (plural).
On command of their father, all (except Hypermnestra) killed their husbands and consequently were
condemned to draw water perpetually in bottomless buckets.


dance (v.)

c.1300, from Old French dancier (12c., Modern French danser), of unknown origin, perhaps from Low
Frankish *dintjan and akin to Old Frisian dintje tremble, quiver. A word of uncertain origin but
which, through French influence in arts and society, has become the primary word for this activity
from Spain to Russia (Italian danzare, Spanish danzar, Rumanian dansa, Swedish dansa, German
tanzen).    In part the loanword from French is used mainly with reference to fashionable dancing
while the older native word persists in use with reference to folk-dancing, as definitively Russ.
pljasat' vs. tancovat' [Buck].    Replaced Old English sealtian, itself a borrowing from Latin
saltare to dance, frequentative of salire to leap (see salient (adj.); dance words frequently are
derived from words meaning jump, leap). Related: Danced; dancing.    It is strange, and will, I am
sure, appear to my readers almost incredible, that as far as I have ever read, there is no reference
that can be identified as containing a clear allusion to dancing in any of our really ancient MS.
books. [Eugene O'Curry, On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish, vol. 2, p.406, 1873]


dance (n.)

c.1300, from dance (v.).


dancer (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from dance. (Dancere as a surname is attested from early 12c.). Related:
Danseuse female dancer, from French fem. of danseur.


dandelion (n.)

early 15c., earlier dent-de-lioun (late 14c.), from Middle French dent de lion, literally lion's
tooth (from its toothed leaves), translation of Medieval Latin dens leonis. Other folk names, like
tell-time refer to the custom of telling the time by blowing the white seed (the number of puffs
required to blow them all off supposedly being the number of the hour), or to the plant's more
authentic diuretic qualities, preserved in Middle English piss-a-bed and French pissenlit.


dander (n.)

1831, American English, temper, of unknown origin; perhaps originally from figurative use of West
Indies dander, dunder fermentation of sugar, from Spanish redundar to overflow, from Latin redundare
(see redundant).


dandle (v.)

1520s, of unknown origin. Perhaps somehow felt to be imitative. Compare Italian dondolare to dandle,
swing, and French dandiner, from Old French dandin small bell, imitative of its sound. Related:
Dandled; dandling.


dandruff (n.)

1540s, first element obscure, second element is Northumbrian or East Anglian dialectal huff, hurf
scab, from Old Norse hrufa, from Proto-Germanic *hreufaz, source of Old English hreofla leper.


dandy (n.)

c.1780, of uncertain origin; it first appeared in a Scottish border ballad:I've heard my granny
crackO' sixty twa years backWhen there were sic a stock of Dandies Oetc. In that region, Dandy is
diminutive of Andrew (as it was in Middle English generally). The word was in vogue in London
c.1813-1819. His female counterpart was a dandizette (1821) with French-type ending. The adjective
dandy first recorded 1792; very popular c.1880-1900. Related: Dandified; dandify.


Dane (n.)

native of Denmark, from Danish Daner (replacing Old English Dene (plural)); used in Old English of
Northmen generally. Perhaps ultimately from a source related to Old High German tanar sand bank, in
reference to their homeland; or from Proto-Germanic *den- low ground, for the same reason.
Applied 1774 to a breed of large dogs. Danegeld not known by that name in Old English, or until
1086, long after the end of the Viking depredations. Supposedly originally a tax to pay for
protection from the Northmen (either to outfit defensive armies or to buy peace). Danelaw (c.1050)
was the Danish law in force over that large part of England under Viking rule after c.878; the
application to the land itself is modern (1837).


dang (interj.)

1781 (in Sophia Lee's comedy A Chapter of Accidents, which was acted first in 1780), euphemism for
damn.


danger (n.)

mid-13c., power of a lord or master, jurisdiction, from Anglo-French daunger, Old French dangier
power, power to harm, mastery, authority, control (12c., Modern French danger), alteration (due to
assoc. with damnum) of dongier, from Vulgar Latin *dominarium power of a lord, from Latin dominus
lord, master (see domain).    Modern sense of risk, peril (from being in the control of someone or
something else) evolved first in French and was in English late 14c. Replaced Old English pleoh; in
early Middle English this sense is found in peril.


dangerous (adj.)

early 13c., difficult, arrogant, severe (the opposite of affable), from Anglo-French dangerous, Old
French dangeros (12c., Modern French dangereux), from danger (see danger).    In Chaucer, it means
hard to please, reluctant to give; sense of full of danger, risky is from late 15c. Other words used
in this sense included dangersome (1560s), dangerful (1540s). Related: Dangerously.


dangle (v.)

1590s, probably from Scandinavian (compare Danish dangle, Swedish dangla to swing about, Norwegian
dangla), perhaps via North Frisian dangeln. Related: Dangled; dangling.


Daniel

proper name, Hebrew, literally God is my judge; related to Dan, literally he who judges, the tribe
descended from Jacob's son of that name in Old Testament. Consistently in the top 15 names for boys
born in the U.S. from 1972 through 2008.


Danielle

fem. proper name, from Daniel. In U.S., little used before c.1940, and in top 20 for girls born from
1984-1994.


Danish

Old English Denisc people of Denmark (see Dane); danish pastry is 1934; shortened form danish is
from 1963.


dank (adj.)

c.1400, earlier as a verb (early 14c.), now obsolete, meaning to moisten, used of mists, dews, etc.
Perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish dank moist place, d&auml;nka to moisten) or German
(compare Middle High German damph, Dutch damp vapor). Now largely superseded by damp (adj.).
Related: Dankness.


Danny

familiar form of proper name Daniel.


Dante

masc. proper name, most modern uses outside Italy ultimately are in reference to Dante Alighieri
(c.1265-1321), the great poet; the name is a shortening of Latin Durante, from durare harden, endure
(see endure).


Danube

major river of Europe (German Donau, Hungarian Duna, Russian Dunaj), from Latin Danuvius, from
Celtic *danu(w)-yo-, from PIE *danu- river (compare Don, Dnieper, Dniester).


Daoism (n.)

alternative Romanization of Taoism (q.v.).


dap (n.)

fist-bump greeting, with various theories as to origin and name meaning. In U.S. popular black
culture by 1972 and controversial during the Vietnam War when used by U.S. soldiers, as it often was
regarded by whites as a ritual act of black solidarity. Probably imitative (dap was used in 19c. for
the bounce of a ball or the skip of a stone on water). Dap, meanwhile, is listed in the DAS as black
slang c.1950 for aware, up to date, also stylish, well-dressed, in the latter case at least a
shortening of dapper.


Daphne

fem. proper name, from Greek daphne laurel, bay tree; in mythology the name of a nymph, daughter of
the river Peneus, metamorphosed into a laurel by Gaia to save her from being ravished as she was
pursued by Apollo.


dapper (adj.)

mid-15c., elegant, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German dapper bold, strong, sturdy, later quick,
nimble, from Proto-Germanic *dapraz, perhaps with ironical shift of meaning (cognates: Old High
German tapfar heavy, German tapfer brave), from PIE root *dheb- dense, firm, compressed.


dapple (v.)

early 15c. (implied in past participle adjective dappled), perhaps from a Scandinavian source akin
to Old Norse depill spot, Norwegian dape puddle. Perhaps a back-formation from, or merger with,
Middle English adjective dapple-gray apple-gray (late 14c.), based on resemblance to the markings on
an apple (compare Old Norse apalgrar dapple-gray), or, as it was used of gray horses with round
blotches, perhaps via resemblance to apples themselves.


dar

Arabic word, literally house, used in place names, such as Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, literally House
of Peace.


Darby and Joan

1735, characteristic name of an old, happily married couple.


dare (v.)

from first and third person singular of Old English durran to brave danger, dare; venture, presume,
from Proto-Germanic *ders- (cognates: Old Norse dearr, Old High German giturran, Gothic gadaursan),
from PIE *dhers- to dare, be courageous (cognates: Sanskrit dadharsha to be bold; Old Persian
dar&#353;- to dare; Greek thrasys bold; Old Church Slavonic druzate to be bold, dare; Lithuanian
dristi to dare, drasus courageous).    An Old English irregular preterite-present verb: darr,
dearst, dear were first, second and third person singular present indicative; mostly regularized
16c., though past tense dorste survived as durst, but is now dying, persisting mainly in northern
English dialect. Meaning to challenge or defy (someone) is first recorded 1570s.


dare (n.)

1590s, from dare (v.).


daredevil (n.)

1794, recklessly daring person, from dare (v.) + devil (n.). The devil might refer to the person, or
the sense might be one who dares the devil (compare scarecrow, pickpocket, cutthroat). As an
adjective, from 1832.


Darfur

region in Sudan, named for its people, from Arabic dar, literally house + Fur, ethnic name of the
indigenous African population.


daring (n.)

late 14c., verbal noun from dare (v.).


Darius

name of three Persian rulers, notably Darius the Great, Persian emperor 521-485 B.C.E., from Greek
Darius, from Old Persian Darayavaus, probably literally he who holds firm the good, from PIE root
*dher- (2) to hold firmly, support (see firm (adj.)).


Darjeeling

town in northeastern India, from Tibetan dojeling diamond island, in reference to Vajrayana
(literally vehicle of the diamond) Buddhism. The island being the high ground of the place's site.
As a type of tea, from 1882.


dark (adj.)

Old English deorc dark, obscure, gloomy; sad, cheerless; sinister, wicked, from Proto-Germanic
*derkaz (cognates: Old High German tarchanjan to hide, conceal). Absence of light especially at
night is the original meaning. Application to colors is 16c. Theater slang for closed is from 1916.


dark (n.)

early 13c., from dark (adj.). Figurative in the dark ignorant first recorded 1670s.


dark ages

1739, any benighted time in history, period of ignorance; specific focus on the centuries from the
fall of Rome to the revival of secular literature is from 1830s.


dark horse (n.)

in politics, 1842, an image from horse racing, in which dark is used in its figurative sense of
unknown.    Moonraker is called a dark horse; that is neither his sire nor dam is known. [Pierce
Egan's Book of Sports, London, 1832]


darken (v.)

c. 1300, to make dark; late 14c., to become dark, from dark (adj.) + -en (1). The more usual verb in
Middle English was simply dark, as it is in Chaucer and Shakespeare, and darken did not predominate
until 17c. The Anglo-Saxons also had a verb sweorcan meaning to grow dark. To darken someone's door
(usually with a negative) is attested from 1729.


darkling

in the dark, mid-15c., from dark (n.) + now-obsolete adverbial ending -ling.    But having nothing
to do with the participial -ing it does not mean growing dark &amp;c.; from the mistaken notion that
it is a participle spring both the misuse of the word itself and the spurious verb darkle. [Fowler]


darkly (adv.)

Old English deorclice darkly, horribly, foully; see dark + -ly (2).


darkness (n.)

Old English deorcnysse, from dark + -ness. Figurative use is recorded from mid-14c. The 10c. Anglo-
Saxon treatise on astronomy uses &#254;eostrum for darkness.


darky (n.)

black person (now offensive), 1775, from dark (adj.) + -y (3). Related: Darkies.


darling

Old English deorling darling, favorite minion, double diminutive of deor dear (see dear (adj.)). The
vowel shift from -e- to -a- (16c.) is usual for -er- followed by a consonant. It is better to be An
olde mans derlyng, than a yong mans werlyng (1562).


darn (v.)

to mend c.1600, perhaps from Middle French darner mend, from darne piece, from Breton darn piece,
fragment, part. Alternative etymology is from obsolete dern (see dern). Related: Darned; darning.


darn (interj.)

tame curse word, 1781, American English euphemism for damn, said to have originated in New England
when swearing was a punishable offense; if so, its spread was probably influenced by 'tarnal, short
for Eternal, as in By the Eternal (God), favorite exclamation of Andrew Jackson, among others (see
tarnation). Related: darned (past participle adjective, 1806); darndest (superlative, 1844).


darnel (n.)

weed growing in grainfields, c.1300, from northern dialectal French darnelle; according to one
theory, the the second element is Old French neelle (Modern French nielle) cockle, from Vulgar Latin
nigella black-seeded, from fem. of Latin nigellus blackish.    But perhaps rather the word is
related to Middle Dutch verdaernt, verdarnt stunned, dumbfounded, angry, Walloon darne, derne
stunned, dazed, drunk, the plant so called from its well-known inebriating property. Long noted for
its poisonous properties (actually caused by fungus growing on the plant); The French word for it is
ivraie, from Latin ebriacus intoxicated, and the botanical name, Lolium temulentum, is from Latin
temulent drunken, though this sometimes is said to be from the heavy seed heads lolling over under
their own weight.    In some parts of continental Europe it appears the seeds of darnel have the
reputation of causing intoxication in men, beasts, and birds, the effects being sometimes so violent
as to produce convulsions. In Scotland the name of Sleepies, is applied to darnel, from the seeds
causing narcotic effects. [Gouverneur Emerson, The American Farmer's Encyclopedia, New York, 1860.
It also mentions that Haller speaks of them as communicating these properties to beer.]


dart (n.)

early 14c., from Old French dart throwing spear, arrow, from Proto-Germanic *darothuz cognates: Old
English daro&eth;, Old High German tart, Old Norse darra&thorn;r dart). Italian and Spanish dardo
are said to be from Germanic by way of Old Proven&ccedil;al.


dart (v.)

late 14c., to pierce with a dart, from dart (n.). Meaning to move like a dart is attested from
1610s. Related: Darted; darter; darting.


Darwin

surname attested from 12c., from Old English deorwine, literally dear friend, probably used as a
given name and also the source of the masc. proper name Derwin.


Darwinism (n.)

1864, from Charles Darwin (1809-1882), whose major works were The Origin of Species (1859) and The
Descent of Man (1871), + -ism.


dash (v.)

c.1300, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish daska, Danish daske to beat, strike),
somehow imitative. The oldest sense is that in dash to pieces and dashed hopes. Intransitive meaning
move quickly appeared c.1300, that of to write hurriedly is 1726.  Related: Dashed; dashing.


dash (n.)

late 14c., from dash (v.). Sporting sense is from 1881, originally race run in one heat.


dashboard (n.)

1846, from dash (v.) + board (n.1); board in front of a carriage to stop mud from being splashed
(dashed) into the vehicle by the horse's hoofs. Of motor vehicles, from 1904.


dashiki (n.)

1969, of West African origin.


dashing (adj.)

1801, given to cutting a dash (1786), which was a colloquial expression for acting brilliantly, from
dash (n.) in the sense of showy appearance, which is attested from 1715. The sense of splashing is
recorded from mid-15c.


dastard (n.)

mid-15c., one who is lazy or dull; an English formation on a French model, probably from *dast,
dazed, past participle of dasen to daze (see daze (v.)) + deprecatory suffix -ard. Meaning one who
shirks from danger is late 15c.


dastardly (adj.)

1560s, showing despicable cowardice, originally dull, from Middle English dastard + -ly (1).


dat

representing the pronunciation of that in West Indian, Irish, or U.S. black speech, from 1680s.


data (n.)

1640s, plural of datum, from Latin datum (thing) given, neuter past participle of dare to give (see
date (n.1)). Meaning transmittable and storable computer information first recorded 1946. Data
processing is from 1954.


data base (n.)

also database, attested from 1962, from data + base (n.).


date (n.1)

time, early 14c., from Old French date (13c.) date, day; time, from Medieval Latin data, noun use of
fem. singular of Latin datus given, past participle of dare to give, grant, offer, from PIE root
*do- to give (cognates: Sanskrit dadati gives, danam offering, present; Old Persian dadatuv let him
give, Old Church Slavonic dati give, dani tribute; Latin donum gift; Greek didomi, didonai, to give,
offer, doron gift; Lithuanian duonis gift, Old Irish dan gift, endowment, talent, Welsh dawn gift).
The Roman convention of closing every article of correspondence by writing given and the day and
month -- meaning perhaps given to messenger -- led to data becoming a term for the time (and place)
stated. (a Roman letter would include something along the lines of datum Romae pridie Kalendas Maias
-- given at Rome on the last day of April.


date (n.3)

liaison, 1885, gradually evolving from date (n.1) in its general sense of appointment; romantic
sense by 1890s. Meaning person one has a date with is from 1925.


date (n.2)

the fruit, late 13c., from Old French date, from Old Proven&ccedil;al datil, from Latin dactylus,
from Greek daktylos date, originally finger, toe; so called because of fancied resemblance between
oblong fruit of the date palm and human digits. Possibly from a Semitic source (compare Hebrew
deqel, Aramaic diqla, Arabic daqal date palm) and assimilated to the Greek word for finger.


date (v.2)

have a romantic liaison; 1902, from date (n.3). Related: Dated; dating.


date (v.1)

to mark (a document) with the date, late 14c., from date (n.1). Meaning to assign to or indicate a
date (of an event) is from c.1400. Meaning to mark as old-fashioned is from 1895. Related: Dated;
dating.


date rape (n.)

by 1973, from date (n.3) + rape (n.1).


dated (adj.)

old-fashioned, 1900, past participle adjective from date (v.1).


dateline (n.)

1880, imaginary line down the Pacific Ocean on which the calendar day begins and ends, from date
(n.1) + line (n.). Meaning line of text that tells the date and place of origin of a newspaper,
article, telegram, etc. is from 1888.


dative (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin dativus pertaining to giving, from datus given (see date (n.1)); in grammatical
use from Greek dotike (ptosis) dative (case), from dotikos of giving nature, from dotos given, from
PIE root *do- to give, from the same PIE root as the Latin word. In law, that may be disposed of at
pleasure, from 1530s. Typically the case of the indirect object, but sometimes also denoting motion
toward. In old Germanic languages, the fourth case, catch-all for Indo-European dative, ablative,
locative, and other cases.


datum (n.)

proper Latin singular of data (q.v.).


daub (v.)

late 14c. (Dauber as a surname is recorded from mid-13c.), from Old French dauber to whitewash,
plaster (13c.), perhaps from Latin dealbare, from de- thoroughly + albare to whiten, from albus
white (see alb). Painting sense is from 1620s. Related: Daubed; daubing. As a noun, from mid-15c.


daughter (n.)

Old English dohtor, from Proto-Germanic *dochter, earlier *dhukter (cognates: Old Saxon dohtar, Old
Norse dottir, Old Frisian and Dutch dochter, German Tochter, Gothic dauhtar), from PIE *dhugheter
(cognates: Sanskrit duhitar-, Avestan dugeda-, Armenian dustr, Old Church Slavonic du&#353;ti,
Lithuanian dukte, Greek thygater). The common Indo-European word, lost in Celtic and Latin (Latin
filia daughter is fem. of filius son). The modern spelling evolved 16c. in southern England.
Daughter-in-law is attested from late 14c.


daunt (v.)

c.1300, to vanquish, from Old French danter, variant of donter (12c., Modern French dompter) be
afraid of, fear, doubt; control, restrain, from Latin domitare, frequentative of domare to tame (see
tame (v.)). Sense of to intimidate is from late 15c. Related: Daunted; daunting.


dauntless (adj.)

1590s, from daunt + -less. Related: Dauntlessly.


dauphin (n.)

eldest son of the king of France (title in use from 1349-1830), early 15c., from Middle French
dauphin, literally dolphin (see dolphin).    Originally the title attached to the Dauphin of
Viennois, whose province (in the French Alps north of Provence) came to be known as Dauphin&eacute;.
Three dolphins were on the coat of arms of the lords of Viennois, first worn by Guido IV (d.1142).
It is said originally to have been a personal name among the lords of Viennois. Humbert III, the
last lord of Dauphin&eacute;, ceded the province to Philip of Valois in 1349, on condition that the
title be perpetuated by the eldest son of the king of France. The French fem. form is dauphine.


davenport (n.)

large upholstered couch, 1897, apparently named for the manufacturer. Earlier (1853) a kind of small
ornamental writing table. The proper name is attested from 12c., from a place in Cheshire (Old
English Devennport).


David

masc. proper name, in Old Testament second king of Israel and Judah and author of psalms, from
Hebrew Dawidh, literally darling, beloved friend. The name was common in England and Scotland by
12c., but much earlier in Wales. A nickname form was Dawe, hence surnames Dawson, Dawkins. A top 10
list name for boys born in the U.S. from 1934 to 1992.


Davis Cup

donated 1900 as a national tennis championship trophy by U.S. statesman Dwight Filley Davis
(1879-1945) while still an undergraduate at Harvard.


davit (n.)

also david, crane-like structure used to lower things off a ship, etc., late 15c., apparently a use
of the masc. proper name David on the pattern of applying common Christian names to useful devices
(compare jack, jenny, jimmy).


Davy Jones

the spirit of the sea, 1751, first mentioned in Smollett's The Adventures of Peregrin Pickle
(chapter 15) as an ominous and terrifying fiend who presides over all the evil spirits of the deep,
and is often seen in various shapes, perching among the rigging on the eve of hurricanes, shipwrecks
and other disasters. Davy Jones's Locker bottom of the sea, is 1803, from nautical slang, of unknown
origin; second element may be from biblical Jonah, regarded as unlucky by sailors.


daw (n.)

early 15c., from Proto-Germanic *dakhwo (cognates: Old High German taha, German Dohle), perhaps
imitative of bird's cry. Medieval Latin tacula, Italian taccola are said to be Germanic loan words.


dawdle (v.)

1650s, perhaps a variant of daddle to walk unsteadily. Perhaps influenced by daw, because the bird
was regarded as sluggish and silly. Not in general use until c.1775. Related: Dawdled; dawdling.


dawg (n.)

colloquial for dog, attested from 1898.


dawn (v.)

c.1200, dauen, to dawn, grow light, shortened or back-formed from dauinge, dauing period between
darkness and sunrise, (c.1200), from Old English dagung, from dagian to become day, from root of
d&aelig;g day (see day). Probably influenced by a Scandinavian word (compare Danish dagning, Old
Norse dagan a dawning; compare also German tagen to dawn). Related: Dawned; dawning.


dawn (n.)

1590s, from dawn (v.).


day (n.)

Old English d&aelig;g day, also lifetime, from Proto-Germanic *dagaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Middle
Dutch, Dutch dag, Old Frisian dei, Old High German tag, German Tag, Old Norse dagr, Gothic dags),
from PIE *dhegh-.    Not considered to be related to Latin dies (see diurnal), but rather to
Sanskrit dah to burn, Lithuanian dagas hot season, Old Prussian dagis summer. Meaning originally, in
English, the daylight hours; expanded to mean the 24-hour period in late Anglo-Saxon times. The day
formerly began at sunset, hence Old English Wodnesniht was what we would call Tuesday night. Names
of the weekdays were not regularly capitalized in English until 17c. Day off first recorded 1883;
day-tripper first recorded 1897. The days in nowadays, etc. is a relic of the Old English and Middle
English use of the adverbial genitive.


day care (n.)

also daycare, day-care, 1964, from day + care (n.).


Day-Glo

1951, proprietary name (Dane &amp; Co. of London) for a brand of fluorescent paint.


daybreak (n.)

1520s, from day + break (n.).


daydream (n.)

1680s, from day + dream (n.). As a verb, attested from 1820. Related: Daydreamer; daydreaming.


daylight (n.)

c.1300 (as two words from mid-12c., daies liht), from day + light (n.); its figurative sense of
clearly visible open space between two things (1820) has been used in references to boats in a race,
U.S. football running backs avoiding opposing tackles, a rider and a saddle, and the rim of a glass
and the surface of the liquor. The (living) daylights that you beat out of someone were originally
slang for the eyes (1752), extended figuratively to the vital senses.


daylong (adj.)

Old English d&aelig;glang; see day + long (adj.).


daytime (n.)

1530s, from day + time (n.).


daze (v.)

early 14c., dasen, perhaps from Old Norse *dasa (compare dasask to become weary, with reflexive
suffix -sk). Or perhaps from Middle Dutch dasen act silly. Perhaps originally to make weary with
cold, which is the sense of Icelandic dasask (from the Old Norse word). Related: Dazed.


daze (n.)

a dazed condition, 1825, from daze (v.).


dazzle (v.)

late 15c., frequentative of Middle English dasen (see daze (v.)). Originally intransitive; the
transitive sense is from 1530s. Related: Dazzled; dazzling.


de

Latin adverb and preposition of separation in space, meaning down from, off, away from, and
figuratively concerning, by reason of, according to; from PIE demonstrative stem *de- (see to).


de facto

Latin, literally in fact, in reality, thus, existing, but not necessarily legally ordained; from
facto, ablative of factum deed, act (see fact).


de jure

Latin, literally of law, thus legitimate, lawful, by right of law, required by law. Jure is ablative
of ius (see just (adj.)).


de minimis

Latin, literally of little things, thus, so minor as to not be worth regarding.


de novo

Latin, literally anew, afresh.


de profundis

the 130th Psalm, so called for its opening words, Latin, literally out of the depths.


de rigueur

1849, French, literally of strictness, thus according to obligation of convention. See rigor.


de-

active word-forming element in English and in many words inherited from French and Latin, from Latin
de down, down from, from, off; concerning (see de), also used as a prefix in Latin usually meaning
down, off, away, from among, down from, but also down to the bottom, totally hence completely
(intensive or completive), which is its sense in many English words. As a Latin prefix it also had
the function of undoing or reversing a verb's action, and hence it came to be used as a pure
privative -- not, do the opposite of, undo -- which is its primary function as a living prefix in
English, as in defrost (1895), defuse (1943), etc. Compare also dis-.


de-emphasize (v.)

also deemphasize, 1938, from de- + emphasize. Related: De-emphasized; de-emphasizing.


de-escalate (v.)

also deescalate, 1964, from de- + escalate. Related: De-escalated; de-escalating; de-escalation.


deacon (n.)

Old English deacon, diacon, from Late Latin diaconus, from Greek diakonos servant of the church,
religious official, literally servant, from dia- thoroughly + PIE *kon-o-, from root *ken- (1) to
set oneself in motion.


deactivate (v.)

1904, from de- + activate. Related: Deactivated; deactivating; deactivation.


dead (adj.)

Old English dead dead, also torpid, dull; of water, still, standing, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon dod, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Old Frisian dad, Middle Dutch doot,
Dutch dood, Old High German tot, German tot, Old Norse dau&eth;r, Gothic dau&thorn;s dead), from PIE
*dhou-toz-, from root *dheu- (3) to die (see die (v.)).    Meaning insensible is first attested
early 13c. Of places, inactive, dull, from 1580s. Used from 16c. in adjectival sense of utter,
absolute, quite (as in dead drunk, first attested 1590s; dead heat, 1796). As an adverb, from late
14c. Dead on is 1889, from marksmanship. Dead duck is from 1844. Dead letter is from 1703, used of
laws lacking force as well as uncollected mail. Phrase in the dead of the night first recorded
1540s. Dead soldier emptied liquor bottle is from 1913 in that form; the image is older.  For but
ich haue bote of mi bale I am ded as dorenail (c.1350).


dead end (n.)

closed end of a passage, 1886, from dead (adj.) + end (n.). Figurative use is attested from 1922. As
an adjective, from 1928; as a verb, from 1921. Related: Deadender (by 1996).


dead man&#039;s hand (n.)

in poker, pair of aces and pair of eights, supposedly what Wild Bill Hickock held when Jack McCall
shot him in 1876.


dead reckoning

might be from nautical abbreviation ded. (deduced) in log books, but it also fits dead (adj.) in the
sense of unrelieved, absolute.


Dead Sea

mid-13c., from dead (adj.) + sea; its water is 26 percent salt (as opposed to 3 or 4 percent in most
oceans) and supports practically no life. In the Bible it was the Salt Sea (Hebrew yam hammelah),
also Sea of the Plain and East Sea. In Arabic it is al-bahr al-mayyit Dead Sea. The ancient Greeks
knew it as he Thalassa asphaltites the Asphaltite Sea. Latin Mare Mortum, Greek he nekra thalassa
(both The Dead Sea) referred to the sea at the northern boundaries of Europe, the Arctic Ocean.


deadbeat (n.)

worthless sponging idler, 1863, American English slang, perhaps originally Civil War slang, from
dead (adj.) + beat. Earlier used colloquially as an adjectival expression to mean completely beaten
(1821), and perhaps the base notion is of worn out, good for nothing. It is noted in a British
source from 1861 as a term for a pensioner.    In England dead beat means worn out, used up. ... But
here, dead beat is used, as a substantive, to mean a scoundrel, a shiftless, swindling vagabond. We
hear it said that such a man is a beat or a dead beat. The phrase thus used is not even good slang.
It is neither humorous nor descriptive. There is not in it even a perversion of the sense of the
words of which it is composed. Its origin is quite beyond conjecture. [Americanisms, in The Galaxy,
January 1878]    It also was used of a kind of regulating mechanism in pendulum clocks.


deaden (v.)

1660s deprive of or diminish (some quality), from dead (adj.) + -en (1). Earlier the verb was simply
dead. Related: Deadened; deadening.


Deadhead (n.)

by 1974 in sense of devotee of the rock music band the Grateful Dead; earlier (with lower-case) one
who rides for free on the railroads (1866), and non-paying spectator (1841).


deadline (n.)

time limit, 1920, American English newspaper jargon, from dead (adj.) + line (n.). Perhaps
influenced by earlier use (1864) to mean the do-not-cross line in Civil War prisons, which figured
in the Wirz trial.And he, the said Wirz, still wickedly pursuing his evil purpose, did establish and
cause to be designated within the prison enclosure containing said prisoners a dead line, being a
line around the inner face of the stockade or wall enclosing said prison and about twenty feet
distant from and within said stockade; and so established said dead line, which was in many places
an imaginary line, in many other places marked by insecure and shifting strips of [boards nailed]
upon the tops of small and insecure stakes or posts, he, the said Wirz, instructed the prison guard
stationed around the top of said stockade to fire upon and kill any of the prisoners aforesaid who
might touch, fall upon, pass over or under [or] across the said dead line .... [Trial of Henry Wirz,
Report of the Secretary of War, Oct. 31, 1865]


deadlock (n.)

complete standstill, from dead (adj.), in its emphatic use, + lock (n.). First attested 1779 in
Sheridan's play The Critic.


deadly (adj.)

Old English deadlic mortal, subject to death, also causing death; see dead + -ly (1). Meaning having
the capacity to kill is from late 14c. (Old English words for this included dea&eth;b&aelig;rlic,
dea&eth;berende).


deadpan

1928, from dead (adj.) + pan (n.) in slang sense of face.


deadweight (n.)

1650s, weight of an inert body, from dead (adj.) + weight (n.).


deadwood (n.)

1887 in figurative sense of useless person or thing, originally American English, from dead (adj.) +
wood (n.). Dead wood in a forest is useful as firewood; perhaps the reference here is to the dried
up parts of plants grown for commercial production of flowers or fruit.


deaf (adj.)

Old English deaf deaf, also empty, barren, specialized from Proto-Germanic *daubaz (cognates: Old
Saxon dof, Old Norse daufr, Old Frisian daf, Dutch doof deaf, German taub, Gothic daufs deaf,
insensate), from PIE dheubh-, which was used to form words meaning confusion, stupefaction,
dizziness (cognates: Greek typhlos blind, typhein to make smoke; Old English dumb unable to speak;
Old High German tumb).    The word was pronounced to rhyme with reef until 18c. Deaf-mute is from
1837, after French sourd-muet. Deaf-mutes were sought after in 18c.-19c. Britain as fortune-tellers.
Deaf as an adder (Old English) is from Psalms lviii:5.


deafen (v.)

1590s, to make deaf, from deaf + -en (1). The earlier verb was simply deaf (mid-15c.). For to become
deaf, to grow deaf, Old English had adeafian (intransitive), which survived into Middle English as
deave but then took on a transitive sense from mid-14c. and sank from use except in dialects (where
it mostly has transitive and figurative senses), leaving English without an intransitive verb here.


deafening (adj.)

very loud, 1590s, from present participle of deafen (q.v.). Deafening silence is attested by 1830.


deafness (n.)

late 14c., from deaf + -ness.


deal (n.1)

from Old English d&aelig;l part, share, quantity, amount, from Proto-Germanic *dailaz (cognates: Old
Norse deild, Old Frisian del, Dutch deel, Old High German and German teil, Gothic dails part,
share), from PIE *dail- to divide (cognates: Old Church Slavonic delu part, Lithuanian dalis).
Business sense of transaction, bargain is 1837, originally slang. Meaning an amount is from 1560s.
New Deal is from F.D. Roosevelt speech of July 1932. Big deal is 1928; ironic use first recorded
1951 in Catcher in the Rye. Deal breaker is attested by 1975.


deal (n.2)

plank or board of pine, c.1400, from Low German (compare Middle Low German dele), from Proto-
Germanic *theljon, from PIE root *tel- ground, floor. An Old English derivative was &thorn;elu hewn
wood, board, flooring.


deal (v.)

Old English d&aelig;lan to divide, distribute, separate, share, bestow, dispense, from the source of
deal (n.). Meaning to distribute cards before a game is from 1520s. To deal with handle is attested
from mid-15c. Related: Dealt; dealing.


dealer (n.)

Old English d&aelig;lere divider, distributor; agent, negotiator, agent noun from deal (v.). Meaning
player who passes out the cards in a game is from c.1600; meaning one who deals in merchandise is
from 1610s. Illegal drug sense is recorded by 1920.


dealership (n.)

1916, from dealer + -ship.


dealt

past tense and past participle of deal (v.).


deamination (n.)

1912, from de- + amine + -ation.


dean (n.)

early 14c., from Old French deien (12c., Modern French doyen), from Late Latin decanus head of a
group of 10 monks in a monastery, from earlier secular meaning commander of 10 soldiers (which was
extended to civil administrators in the late empire), from Greek dekanos, from deka ten (see ten).
Replaced Old English teo&eth;ingealdor. College sense is from 1570s (in Latin from late 13c.).


dear (adj.)

Old English deore precious, valuable, costly, loved, beloved, from Proto-Germanic *deurjaz
(cognates: Old Saxon diuri, Old Norse dyrr, Old Frisian diore, Middle Dutch dure, Dutch duur, Old
High German tiuri, German teuer), ultimate origin unknown. Used interjectorily since 1690s. As a
polite introductory word to letters, it is attested from mid-15c. As a noun, from late 14c., perhaps
short for dear one, etc.


dearborn (n.)

light four-wheeled wagon, 1821, American English, supposedly from the name of the inventor, by
tradition said to be Gen. Henry Dearborn (1751-1829).


dearly (adv.)

Old English deorlice (see dear).


dearth (n.)

mid-13c., derthe scarcity (originally used of famines, when food was costly because scarce; extended
to other situations of scarcity from early 14c.), abstract noun formed from root of Old English
deore precious, costly (see dear) + abstract noun suffix -th (2). Common Germanic formation, though
not always with the same sense (cognates: Old Saxon diurtha splendor, glory, love, Middle Dutch
dierte, Dutch duurte, Old High German tiurida glory).


deary (n.)

also dearie, diminutive of dear with a notion of dear one.


deasil (adj.)

rightwise, turned toward the right; motion according to the apparent course of the sun, 1771, from
Gaelic deiseil, deiseal (adjective and adverb) toward the south, taken in sense of toward the right,
from deas right, right-hand; south, cognate with Irish deas, Old Irish dess, des, Welsh dehau, and
ultimately with Latin dexter (see dexterity). The second element of the Gaelic word is not explained
(one old guess, in the Century Dictionary (1902), is a proposed *iul direction, guidance).


death (n.)

Old English dea&eth; death, dying, cause of death, in plura, ghosts, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon doth, Old Frisian dath, Dutch dood, Old High German tod, German Tod, Old Norse
dau&eth;i, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Gothic dau&thorn;as death), from verbal stem *dheu-
(3) to die (see die (v.)) + *-thuz suffix indicating act, process, condition.    I would not that
death should take me asleep. I would not have him meerly seise me, and onely declare me to be dead,
but win me, and overcome me. When I must shipwrack, I would do it in a sea, where mine impotencie
might have some excuse; not in a sullen weedy lake, where I could not have so much as exercise for
my swimming. [John Donne, letter to Sir Henry Goodere, Sept. 1608]   Death's-head, a symbol of
mortality, is from 1590s. Death row first recorded 1940s. Death knell is attested from 1814; death
penalty from 1875; death rate from 1859. Slang be death on be very good at is from 1839. Death wish
first recorded 1896. The death-watch beetle (1660s) inhabits houses, makes a ticking noise like a
watch, and was superstitiously supposed to portend death.    FEW ears have escaped the noise of the
death-watch, that is, the little clickling sound heard often in many rooms, somewhat resembling that
of a watch; and this is conceived to be of an evil omen or prediction of some person's death:
wherein notwithstanding there is nothing of rational presage or just cause of terror unto melancholy
and meticulous heads. For this noise is made by a little sheathwinged grey insect, found often in
wainscot benches and wood-work in the summer. [Browne, Vulgar Errors]


death camp (n.)

1944, in reference to the Nazis, probably translating German Todeslager; they also were known as
extermination camps (German Vernichtungslager); historians usually count six of them: Auschwitz-
Birkenau, Che&#322;mno, Be&#322;&#380;ec, Majdanek, Sobib&oacute;r, Treblinka.


deathbed (n.)

Old English, the grave, from death (n.) + bed (n.). Meaning bed on which someone dies is from
c.1300.


deathless (adj.)

1580s, from death + -less. Related: Deathlessly; deathlessness.


deathly (adj.)

Old English dea&thorn;lic mortal (see death). Meaning deadly is from late 12c.; that of death-like
is from 1560s.


deb (n.)

slang shortening of debutante, by 1920.


debacle (n.)

disaster, 1848, from French d&eacute;b&acirc;cle downfall, collapse, disaster (17c.), a figurative
use, literally breaking up (of ice on a river), extended to the violent flood that follows when the
river ice melts in spring; from d&eacute;b&acirc;cler to free, from Middle French desbacler to
unbar, from des- off + bacler to bar, from Vulgar Latin *bacculare, from Latin baculum stick (see
bacillus). Sense of disaster was present in French before English borrowed the word.


debar (v.)

early 15c., to shut out, exclude, from French d&eacute;barrer, from Old French desbarer (12c.,
which, however, meant only to unbar, unbolt, the meaning turned around in French as the de- was felt
in a different sense), from des- (see dis-) + barrer to bar (see bar (n.1)). Related: Debarment;
debarred.


debark (v.)

1650s, from French d&eacute;barquer (16c.), from de- (Old French des-; see dis-) + barque bark (see
bark (n.2)).


debase (v.)

1560s, from de- down + base (adj.) low, on analogy of abase (or, alternatively, from obsolete verb
base to abuse).


debatable (adj.)

1530s (late 15c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French debatable (Modern French d&eacute;battable), from
debatre (see debate (v.)). Earliest references were to lands claimed by two nations; general sense
is from 1580s.


debate (v.)

late 14c., to quarrel, dispute, also discuss, deliberate upon the pros and cons of, from Old French
debatre (13c., Modern French d&eacute;battre), originally to fight, from de- down, completely (see
de-) + batre to beat (see battery). Related: Debated; debating.


debate (n.)

early 14c., a quarrel, dispute, disagreement, from Old French debat; see debate (v.). Sense of a
formal dispute, a debating contest is perhaps from early 15c.


debauch (v.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;baucher entice from work or duty, from Old French desbaucher to
lead astray, supposedly literally to trim (wood) to make a beam (from bauch beam, from Frankish balk
or some other Germanic source akin to English balk (n.)). A sense of shaving something away,
perhaps, but the root is also said to be a word meaning workshop, which gets toward the notion of to
lure someone off the job; either way the sense evolution is unclear.


debauchee (n.)

1660s, from French d&eacute;bauch&eacute; debauched (person), noun use of past participle of
debaucher (see debauch).  <b>Debauchee</b>, n. One who has so earnestly pursued pleasure that he has
had the misfortune to overtake it. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


debauchery (n.)

1640s, from debauch + -ery. With a variety of spellings in 17c., such as debaush-, deboich-,
debosh-.


debenture (n.)

written acknowledgment of a debt, early 15c., from Latin debentur there are due (said to have been
the first word in formal certificates of indebtedness), passive present third person plural of
debere to owe (see debt).


debilitate (v.)

1530s, from Latin debilitatus, past participle of debilitare to weaken, from debilis weak (see
debility). Related: Debilitated; debilitating.


debilitation (n.)

early 15c., from French d&eacute;bilitation (13c.), from Latin debilitationem (nominative debilitas)
a laming, crippling, weakening, noun of action from past participle stem of debilitare to weaken
(see debilitate).


debility (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French debilite (Modern French d&eacute;bilit&eacute;) or directly from
Latin debilitatem (nominative debilitas) a laming, crippling, weakening, from debilis lame,
disabled, crippled, figuratively weak, helpless, from de- from, away (see de-) + -bilis strength,
from PIE root *bel- (see Bolshevik).


debit (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French debet or directly from Latin debitum thing owed, that which is owing,
neuter past participle of debere to owe (see debt). As a verb from 1680s. Debit card is attested
from 1975.


debonair (adj.)

c.1200, mild, gentle, kind courteous, from Old French debonaire, from de bon' aire of good race,
originally used of hawks, hence, thoroughbred (opposite of French demalaire). Used in Middle English
to mean docile, courteous, it became obsolete and was revived with an altered sense of pleasant,
affable (1680s).


Deborah

fem. proper name, prophetess and judge in the Old Testament, Hebrew, literally bee (thus the name is
the same as Melissa).


deboshed (adj.)

1590s, anglicized spelling of French pronunciation of debauched dissolute (see debauch). Obsolete in
England after mid-17c., retained in Scotland, and given a revival of sorts by Scott (1826), so that
it turns up in 19c. literary works.


debridement (n.)

removal of damaged tissue from a wound, 1839, from French d&eacute;bridement, literally an
unbridling, from d&eacute;- (see de-) + bride bridle, from a Germanic source akin to Middle High
German bridel (see bridle). Related: debride, debriding.


debrief (v.)

obtain information (from someone) at the end of a mission, 1945, from de- + brief (v.). Related:
Debriefed; debriefing.


debris (n.)

1708, from French d&eacute;bris remains, waste, rubbish (16c.), from obsolete debriser break down,
crush, from Old French de- (see de-) + briser to break, from Late Latin brisare, possibly of Gaulish
origin (compare Old Irish brissim I break).


debt (n.)

late 13c., dette, from Old French dete, from Latin debitum thing owed, neuter past participle of
debere to owe, originally, keep something away from someone, from de- away (see de-) + habere to
have (see habit (n.)). Restored spelling after c.1400.


debtor (n.)

early 13c., dettur, dettour, from Old French detour, from Latin debitor a debter, from past
participle stem of debere; see debt. The -b- was restored in later French, and in English
c.1560-c.1660. The KJV has detter three times, debter three times, debtor twice and debtour once.


debug (v.)

1945, of machine systems, from de- + bug (n.) glitch, defect in a machine. Meaning to remove a
concealed microphone is from 1964. Related: Debugged; debugging.


debunk (v.)

1923,  from de- + bunk (n.2); first used by U.S. novelist William Woodward (1874-1950), the notion
being to take the bunk out of things.  Related: Debunked; debunking.


debut (n.)

1751, from French d&eacute;but first appearance, a figurative use from d&eacute;buter make the first
stroke at billiards, also to lead off at bowls (a game akin to bowling), 16c., from but mark, goal,
from Old French but end (see butt (n.3)). The verb is first attested 1830.   D&eacute;but can only
be pronounced as French, and should not be used by anyone who shrinks from the necessary effort.
[Fowler]


debutant (n.)

1824, male performer or speaker making his first public appearance, from French, noun use of present
participle of d&eacute;buter to make the first strike (in billiards, etc.), from debut (see debut).


debutante (n.)

1801, female stage actress making her first public performance, from fem. of French debutant (q.v.).
In reference to a young woman making her first appearance in society, from 1817.


deca-

before a vowel, dec-, word-forming element meaning ten, from Latinized comb. form of Greek deka ten
(see ten). In the metric system, multiplied by ten; while deci- means divided by ten.


decade (n.)

mid-15c., ten parts (of anything; originally in reference to the books of Livy), from Middle French
d&eacute;cade (14c.), from Late Latin decadem (nominative decas), from Greek dekas (genitive
dekados) group of ten, from deka ten (see ten). Meaning period of ten years is 1590s in English.


decadence (n.)

1540s, from Middle French d&eacute;cadence (early 15c.), from Medieval Latin decadentia decay, from
decadentem (nominative decadens) decaying, present participle of decadere to decay, from Latin de-
apart, down (see de-) + cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). Used of periods in art since 1852, on
French model.


decadent (adj.)

in a state of decline or decay (from a former condition of excellence), 1837, from French
d&eacute;cadent, back-formation from d&eacute;cadence (see decadence). In reference to literary
(later, other artistic) schools that believed, or affected to believe, they lived in an age of
artistic decadence, 1885 in French, 1888 in English. Usually in a bad sense:    Bread, supposedly
the staff of life, has become one of our most decadent foods -- doughy, gummy, and without the
aroma, flavor, texture, taste and appearance that is typical of good bread. [College and University
Business 1960]    Beckoning sense of desirable and satisfying to self-indulgence begins c.1970 in
commercial publications in reference to desserts.


decaffeinate (v.)

1909 (implied in decaffeinated), from de- + caffeine + -ate (2).


decagon (n.)

early 17c., from Modern Latin decagonum, from Greek dekagonon, from deka ten (see ten) + gonia
corner, angle (see knee (n.)).


decal (n.)

by 1909, shortening of decalcomania, from French d&eacute;calcomanie, from d&eacute;calquer (18c.)
transferring of a tracing from specially prepared paper to glass, porcelain, etc. (in vogue in
France 1840s, England 1862-64), from de- off + calquer to press, from Italian calcare, from Latin
calcare to tread on, press.    Time was when there were only printers employed in making the sheets
that were stuck on the ware, giving the old-time term of plain print. This form of decoration was
succeeded a few years ago by the decalcomania or decal. This decal is an imported sheet,
lithographed, and the little sprigs, flowers and scenes are cut out and stuck on the ware. [Brick,
the Leading Clay Journal, April 1909]


Decalogue (n.)

Ten Commandments, late 14c., from Middle French decalogue, from Latin decalogus, from Greek, from
the phrase hoi deka logoi used to translate Ten Commandments in Septuagint.


Decameron (n.)

c.1600, from Italian Decamerone, name of Boccaccio's 14c. collection of 100 tales supposedly told
over 10 days, from Greek deka ten (see ten) + hemera day (see ephemera).


decamp (v.)

1670s, from French d&eacute;camper (17c.), earlier descamper, from des- (see dis-) + camper (see
camp (n.)). Non-military use is from 1751. Related: Decamped; decamping.


decant (v.)

1630s, pour off the clear liquid from a solution by gently tipping the vessel, originally an
alchemical term, from French d&eacute;canter, perhaps from Medieval Latin decanthare to pour from
the edge of a vessel, from de- + Medieval Latin canthus corner, lip of a jug, from Latin cantus,
canthus iron rim around a carriage wheel. Related: Decanted; decanting.


decanter (n.)

vessel for decanting liquors, 1715, agent noun from decant.


decapitate (v.)

1610s, from French d&eacute;capiter (14c.), from Late Latin decapitatus past participle of
decapitare, from Latin de- off (see de-) + caput (genitive capitis) head (see capitulum). Related:
Decapitated; decapitating.


decapitation (n.)

1640s, from French d&eacute;capitation, from Medieval Latin decapitationem (nominative decapitatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of Late Latin decapitare (see decapitate).


decapod (n.)

1835 as a type of crustacean having 10 legs, from French d&eacute;capode (1806), from Modern Latin
Decapoda (animalia), from Greek dekapoda, neuter plural of dekapous ten-footed (see ten + foot
(n.)). From 1888 as a type of locomotive.


decathlon (n.)

1912, from deca ten (see ten) + Greek athlon contest, prize, of uncertain origin. A modern Olympic
event consisting of 10 challenges.


decay (v.)

late 15c., to decrease, from Anglo-French decair, Old North French decair (Old French decheoir,
12c., Modern French d&eacute;choir) to fall, set (of the sun), weaken, decline, decay, from Vulgar
Latin *decadere to fall off, from de- (see de-) + Latin cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). Meaning
decline, deteriorate is c.1500; that of to decompose, rot is from 1570s. Related: Decayed; decaying.


decay (n.)

mid-15c., deterioration, decline in value, from decay (v.). Meaning gradual decrease in
radioactivity is from 1897.


decease (n.)

death, early 14c., from Old French deces (12c., Modern French d&eacute;c&egrave;s) decease, death,
from Latin decessus death (euphemism for mors), also a retirement, a departure, from decess-, past
participle stem of decedere die, depart, withdraw, literally to go down, from de- away (see de-) +
cedere go (see cede). Still used with a tinge of euphemism.


decease (v.)

to die, early 15c., from decease (n.). Related: Deceased; deceasing


deceased (adj.)

late 15c., past participle adjective from decease (v.). As a verbal noun meaning dead person, those
who are dead, from early 17c.


decedent (n.)

1730, dead person, mostly as a term in law, from Latin decedentem, present participle of decedere to
die, to depart (see decease (n.)).


deceit (n.)

c.1300, from Old French deceite, fem. past participle of deceveir (see deceive).   Deceit is a
shorter and more energetic word for deceitfulness, indicating the quality; it is also, but more
rarely, used to express the act or manner of deceiving. The reverse is true of deception, which is
properly the act or course by which one deceives, and not properly the quality; it may express the
state of being deceived. Fraud is an act or series of acts of deceit by which one attempts to
benefit himself at the expense of others. It is generally a breaking of the law; the others are not.
[entry for deceit in The Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia, 1902]


deceitful (adj.)

mid-15c., from deceit + -ful. Related: Deceitfully; deceitfulness.


deceive (v.)

c.1300, from Old French decevoir (12c., Modern French d&eacute;cevoir) to deceive, from Latin
decipere to ensnare, take in, beguile, cheat, from de- from or pejorative + capere to take (see
capable). Related: Deceived; deceiver; deceiving.


decelerate (v.)

1899, back-formation from deceleration. Related: Decelerated; decelerating.


deceleration (n.)

1894, originally in railroading, coined from de- do the opposite of (see de-) + (ac)celeration.
Verily deceleration is a word which could only be coined by the Great Western. [Engineering, Feb. 2,
1894]


December (n.)

c.1000, from Old French decembre, from Latin December, from decem ten (see ten); tenth month of the
old Roman calendar, which began with March.    The -ber in four Latin month names is probably from
-bris, an adjectival suffix. Tucker thinks that the first five months were named for their positions
in the agricultural cycle, and after the gathering in of the crops, the months were merely numbered.
If the word contains an element related to mensis, we must assume a *decemo-membris (from
*-mensris). October must then be by analogy from a false division Sep-tem-ber &amp;c.; Perhaps,
however, from *de-cem(o)-mr-is, i.e. forming the tenth part or division, from *mer- ..., while
October = *octuo-mr-is. [T.G. Tucker, Etymological Dictionary of Latin]


decency (n.)

1560s, appropriateness, from Latin decentia comeliness, decency, from decentem becoming, fitting
(see decent). Meaning modesty (i.e. appropriateness to standards of society) is from 1630s.


decennial (adj.)

1680s, from Latin decennium, from decennis of 10 years, from decem ten (see ten) + annus year (see
annual). For vowel change, see biennial.


decent (adj.)

1530s, proper to one's station or rank, also tasteful, from Middle French d&eacute;cent, or directly
from Latin decentem (nominative decens) becoming, seemly, fitting, proper, present participle of
decere to be fitting or suitable, from PIE *deke-, from root *dek- to take, accept, to receive,
greet, be suitable (cognates: Greek dokein to appear, seem, think, dekhesthai to accept; Sanskrit
da&#347;asyati shows honor, is gracious, dacati makes offerings, bestows; Latin docere to teach,
decus grace, ornament). Meaning kind, pleasant is from 1902. Are you decent? (1949) was originally
backstage theater jargon for are you dressed.


decentralization (n.)

1839, from de- + centralization.


decentralize (v.)

1840 (implied in decentralized), probably a back-formation from decentralization. Related:
Decentralizing.


deception (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;ception (13c., decepcion) or directly from Late Latin
deceptionem (nominative deceptio) a deceiving, from Latin decept-, past participle stem of decipere
(see deceive).


deceptive (adj.)

1610s, from French deceptif (late 14c.), from Medieval Latin deceptivus, from decept-, past
participle stem of Latin decipere (see deceive). Earlier in this sense was deceptious (c.1600), from
French deceptieux, from Medieval Latin deceptiosus, from deceptionem. Related: Deceptively;
deceptiveness.


decession (n.)

c.1600, from Latin decessionem, noun of action from past participle stem of decedere to go down,
depart (see decease (n.)).


deci-

in the metric system, word-forming element denoting weights of one-tenth of the standard unit of
measure, 1801, from French deci-, taken arbitrarily from Latin decimus tenth, from decem ten (see
ten).


decibel (n.)

1928, from deci- + bel (n.).    Progress in science and industry is constantly demanding new terms
and one of the latest of these is the word decibel, coined by telephone engineers to describe the
efficiency of telephone circuits. It is a substitute for the phrase transmission unit. The actual
unit decided upon was first called bel, after the inventor of the telephone. The bel, however, is
larger than is needed in practice, and, therefore, a unit one-tenth as large was adopted by
engineers and named the decibel. [Popular Mechanics, May 1929]


decide (v.)

late 14c., to settle a dispute, from Old French decider, from Latin decidere to decide, determine,
literally to cut off, from de- off (see de-) + caedere to cut (see -cide). For Latin vowel change,
see acquisition. Sense is of resolving difficulties at a stroke. Meaning to make up one's mind is
attested from 1830. Related: Decided; deciding.


decided (adj.)

resolute, 1790, past participle adjective from decide. A decided victory is one whose reality is not
in doubt; a decisive one goes far toward settling some issue. Related: Decidedly.


deciduous (adj.)

1680s, from Latin deciduus that which falls off, from decidere to fall off, from de- down (see de-)
+ cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). Originally with reference to leaves, petals, teeth, etc.;
specific sense of trees whose leaves fall off (opposed to evergreen) is from 1778.


decile (adj.)

1670s in astrology; 1882 in statistics; from French d&eacute;cile or Medieval Latin *decilis, from
Latin decem ten (see ten) on the model of quintilis, sextilis.


decimal (adj.)

c.1600, from Medeival Latin decimalis of tithes or tenths, from Latin decimus tenth, from decem ten
(see ten). Applied to Arabic notation before modern sense of decimal fractions emerged. As a noun
from 1640s.


decimate (v.)

c.1600, in reference to the practice of punishing mutinous military units by capital execution of
one in every 10, by lot; from Latin decimatus, past participle of decimare (see decimation). Killing
one in ten, chosen by lots, from a rebellious city or a mutinous army was a common punishment in
classical times. The word has been used (incorrectly, to the irritation of pedants) since 1660s for
destroy a large portion of. Related: Decimated; decimating.


decimation (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin decimationem (nominative decimatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin decimare the removal or destruction of one-tenth, from decem ten (see ten). Earliest
sense in English was of a tithe; punishment sense is from 1580s; transferred sense of much
destruction, severe loss recorded from 1680s.


decimeter (n.)

1809, from deci- + meter (n.2).


decipher (v.)

1520s, from de- + cipher. Perhaps in part a loan-translation from Middle French d&eacute;chiffrer.
Related: Deciphered; deciphering.


decision (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;cision (14c.), from Latin decisionem (nominative decisio) a
decision, settlement, agreement, noun of action from past participle stem of decidere (see decide).
Decision making (adjective, also decision-making) is recorded from 1953.


decisive (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin decisivus, from Latin decis-, past participle stem of decidere (see
decide). Related: Decisively; decisiveness.


deck (n.)

covering over part of a ship, mid-15c., perhaps a shortening of Middle Low German verdeck (or a
related North Sea Germanic word), a nautical word, from ver- fore + decken to cover, put under roof,
from Proto-Germanic *thackjam (related to thatch, q.v.).    Sense extended early in English from
covering to platform of a ship. Pack of cards is 1590s, perhaps because they were stacked like decks
of a ship. Deck chair (1884) so called because they were used on ocean liners. Tape deck (1949) is
in reference to the flat surface of old reel-to-reel tape recorders.


deck (v.2)

knock down, c.1953, probably from deck (n.) on the notion of laying someone out on the deck.
Related: Decked; decking.


deck (v.1)

adorn (as in deck the halls), early 15c., from Middle Dutch dekken to cover, from the same Germanic
root as deck (n.). Meaning to cover is from 1510s in English. Replaced Old English &thorn;eccan.
Related: Decked; decking.


deckhand (n.)

1844, American English, from deck (n.) + hand (n.).


deckle (n.)

1810, in paper-making, from German deckel lid, little cover, diminutive of decke cover (see deck
(n.)).


declaim (v.)

late 14c., from Middle French d&eacute;clamer and directly from Latin declamare to practice public
speaking, to bluster, from de- intensive prefix + clamare to cry, shout (see claim (v.)). At first
in English spelled declame, but altered under influence of claim. Related: Declaimed; declaiming.


declamation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin declamationem (nominative declamatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of declamare (see declaim).


declamatory (adj.)

1580s, from Latin declamatorius pertaining to the practice of speaking, from declamatus, past
participle of declamare (see declaim).


declarant (n.)

1680s, from French d&eacute;clarant, from Latin declarantem (nominative declarans), present
participle of declarare (see declare).


declaration (n.)

mid-14c., action of stating, from Old French declaration, from Latin declarationem (nominative
declaratio), noun of action from past participle stem of declarare (see declare). Meaning
proclamation, public statement is from 1650s. Declaration of independence is recorded from 1776 (the
one by the British American colonies seems to be the first so called; though the phrase is not in
the document itself, it was titled that from the first in the press).


declarative (adj.)

mid-15c., from French d&eacute;claratif and directly from Late Latin declarativus, from past
participle stem of Latin declarare (see declare).


declaratory (adj.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin declaratorius, from Latin declarator, from declarare (see declare).


declare (v.)

early 14c., from Old French declarer explain, elucidate, or directly from Latin declarare make
clear, reveal, disclose, announce, from de- intensive prefix (see de-) + clarare clarify, from
clarus clear (see clear (adj.)). Related: Declared; declaring.


declasse (adj.)

1887, from French d&eacute;class&eacute;, past participle of d&eacute;classer to cause to lose
class, from de-, privative prefix (see de-) + classer to class (see class).


declassify (v.)

1865, originally a term in logic; with reference to state secrets, 1946; from de- + classify.
Related: Declassification; declassified; declassifying.


declension (n.)

mid-15c., ultimately from Latin declinationem (nominative declinatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of declinare (see decline (v.)); perhaps via French; the form is irregular, and its
history obscure [OED].


declination (n.)

late 14c. as a term in astronomy, from Old French declinacion (Modern French d&eacute;clinaison),
from Latin declinationem (nominative declinatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
declinare (see decline (v.)). It took on various other senses 15c.-17c., most now obsolete.


decline (v.)

late 14c., to turn aside, deviate, from Old French decliner to sink, decline, degenerate, turn
aside, from Latin declinare to lower, avoid, deviate, to bend from, inflect, from de- from (see de-)
+ clinare to bend, from PIE *klei-n-, suffixed form of *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)). Sense has
been altered since c.1400 by interpretation of de- as downward. Meaning not to consent, politely
refuse, is from 1630s. Related: Declined; declining.


decline (n.)

early 14c., deterioration, degeneration, from Old French declin (see decline (v.)).


declivity (n.)

1610s, from French d&eacute;clivit&eacute;, from Latin declivitatem (nominative declivitas) a slope,
declivity, from declivis a sloping downward, from de- down (see de-) + clivus a slope, from PIE
*klei-wo-, suffixed form of *klei to lean (see lean (v.)).


decoct (v.)

early 15c., from Latin decoctus, past participle of decoquere (see decoction). Related: Decocted;
decocting.


decoction (n.)

late 14c., from French d&eacute;coction (13c.) or directly from Latin decoctionem (nominative
decoctio) a boiling down, noun of action from past participle stem of decoquere to boil down, from
de- down (see de-) + coquere to cook (see cook (n.)).


decode (v.)

1896, from de- + code. Related: Decoded; decoding.


decolletage (n.)

1894 (from 1883 as a French word in English), from French d&eacute;colletage, from
d&eacute;collet&eacute; low-necked (see decollete).


decollete (adj.)

1831, from French d&eacute;collet&eacute;, past participle of d&eacute;colleter to bare the neck and
shoulders, from de- (see de-) + collet collar of a dress, diminutive of col (Latin collum) neck (see
collar (n.)). Not to be confused with decollate (v.), which means to behead.


decolonization (n.)

1853 in political sense, American English, from de- + colonization. Earlier as a medical term.


decommission (v.)

1922, originally with reference to warships, from de- + commission (v.). Related: Decommissioned;
decommissioning.


decompensate (v.)

1912, probably a back-formation from decompensation. Related: Decompensated; decompensating.


decompensation (n.)

1900, from de- + compensation.


decompose (v.)

1750s, to separate into components, from de- opposite of + compose. Sense of putrefy is first
recorded 1777. Related: Decomposed; decomposing.


decomposer (n.)

1833, a decomposing agent, agent noun from decompose.


decomposition (n.)

1762, from de- + composition. An earlier word in the same form meant further compounding of already
composite things (1650s).


decompress (v.)

1905, from de- + compress (v.). Related: Decompressed; decompressing.


decompression (n.)

1905, from de- + compression.


decongestant (n.)

1950, from de- + congestant (see congest).


deconstruct (v.)

1973, back-formation from deconstruction. Related: Deconstructed; deconstructing.


deconstruction (n.)

1973, as a strategy of critical analysis, in translations from French of the works of philosopher
Jacques Derrida (1930-2004). The word was used in English in a literal sense from 1865 of building
and architecture, and in late 1860s sometimes as an ironic variant of Reconstruction in the U.S.
political sense.


decontaminate (v.)

1936, from de- + contaminate. Originally in reference to poison gas. Related: Decontaminated;
decontaminating.


decor (n.)

1897, from French d&eacute;cor (18c.), back-formation from d&eacute;corer to decorate (14c.), from
Latin decorare (see decorate). It thus duplicates Latin decor beauty, elegance, charm, grace,
ornament. Originally a theater term in English; general use is since 1926.


decorate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin decoratus, past participle of decorare to decorate, adorn, embellish,
beautify, from decus (genitive decoris) an ornament, from PIE root *dek- to receive, be suitable
(see decent). Related: Decorated; decorating.


decoration (n.)

early 15c., action of decorating, beautification, from Late Latin decorationem (nominative
decoratio), noun of action from past participle stem of decorare (see decorate). Meaning that which
decorates is from 1670s. As a badge or medal worn as a mark of honor, it is attested from 1816
(often in plural, decorations).


decorative (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French decoratif, from decorat-, past participle stem of Latin decorare (see
decorate).


decorator (n.)

1755, agent noun in Latin form from decorate.


decorous (adj.)

1660s, from Latin decorus becoming, seemly, fitting, proper, from decus (genitive decoris) ornament
(see decorate). Related: Decorously; decorousness.


decorticate (v.)

1610s, from Latin decorticatus, past participle of decorticare to strip of bark, from de- (see de-)
+ stem of cortex bark of a tree (see cortex). Related: Decortication.


decorum (n.)

1560s, from Latin decorum that which is seemly, noun use of neuter of adjective decorus fit, proper,
from decor (see decor).


decoupage (n.)

1960, from French d&eacute;coupage, literally the act of cutting out, from decouper to cut out
(12c., Old French decoper), from de- out (see de-) + couper to cut (see chop (v.1)).


decouple (v.)

c.1600, from French d&eacute;coupler to uncouple, from de- (see de-) + coupler (Old French copler;
see couple (v.)). Related: Decoupled; decoupling.


decoy (n.)

1610s, perhaps from Dutch kooi cage, used of a pond surrounded by nets, into which wildfowl were
lured for capture, from West Germanic *kaiwa, from Latin cavea cage. The first element is possibly
the Dutch definite article de, mistaken in English as part of the word. But decoy, of unknown
origin, was the name of a card game popular c.1550-1650, and this may have influenced the form of
the word.


decoy (v.)

1650s, from decoy (n.). Related: Decoyed; decoying.


decrease (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French decreiss-, present participle stem of decreistre, Old French
descroistre (12c., Modern French d&eacute;cro&icirc;tre), from Latin decrescere to grow less,
diminish, from de- away from (see de-) + crescere to grow (see crescent). Related: Decreased;
decreasing.


decrease (n.)

late 14c., detriment, harm; early 15c. as a becoming less or smaller, from Anglo-French decres; see
decrease (v.).


decree (n.)

early 14c., from Old French decre, variant of decret (12c., Modern French d&eacute;cret), from Latin
decretum, neuter of decretus, past participle of decernere to decree, decide, pronounce a decision,
from de- (see de-) + cernere to separate (see crisis).


decree (v.)

late 14c., from decree (n.). Related: Decreed; decreeing.


decrement (n.)

1620s, from Latin decrementum diminution, from stem of decrescere (see decrease).


decrepit (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;cr&eacute;pit (15c.), from Latin decrepitus very old, infirm,
from de- down (see de-) + *crepitus, past participle of crepare to crack, break (see raven).


decrepitude (n.)

c.1600, from French d&eacute;cr&eacute;pitude (14c.), from Latin decrepitus (see decrepit).


decrescendo (n.)

1806, from Italian decrescendo, from Latin decrescere (see decrease (v.)).


decriminalization (n.)

1945, from de- + criminal + -ization. Especially in reference to narcotics since c.1968.


decriminalize (v.)

1963, to reform a criminal, back-formation from decriminalization. Meaning to make legal something
that formerly had been illegal was in use by 1970 (there are isolated instances back to 1867).
Related: Decriminalized; decriminalizing.


decry (v.)

1610s, from French decrier (14c.; Old French descrier cry out, announce), from de- down, out (see
de-) + crier to cry, from Latin quiritare (see cry (v.)). In English, the sense has been colored by
the presumption that de- in this word means down.


decrypt (v.)

to solve a cryptogram, 1936, from de- + cryptogram. Related: Decrypted; decrypting.


decubitus (n.)

1866, Modern Latin, from Latin decumbere to lie down, from de- (see de-) + cumbere (see succumb).


decuple (adj.)

1610s, from French d&eacute;cuple (late 15c.), from Latin decuplus tenfold, from decem- ten (see
ten) + -plus (see plus).


decussate (v.)

1650s, from Latin decussatus, past participle of decussare to divide crosswise, to cross in the form
of an 'X,' from decussis the figure 'ten' (in Roman numerals, represented by X) from decem ten (see
ten). As an adjective, from 1825.


dedicate (v.)

early 15c. (of churches), from Latin dedicatus, past participle of dedicare consecrate, proclaim,
affirm, set apart, from de- away (see de-) + dicare proclaim, from stem of dicere to speak, to say
(see diction). Dedicated devoted to one's aims or vocation is first attested 1944.


dedication (n.)

late 14c., action of dedicating, from Old French dedicacion (14c., Modern French d&eacute;dication)
consecration of a church or chapel, or directly from Latin dedicationem, noun of action from
dedicare (see dedicate). Meaning the giving of oneself to some purpose is c.1600; as an inscription
in a book, etc., from 1590s.


deduce (v.)

early 15c., from Latin deducere lead down, derive (in Medieval Latin, infer logically), from de-
down (see de-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Originally literal; sense of draw a conclusion from
something already known is first recorded 1520s, from Medieval Latin. Related: Deduced; deducing.


deduct (v.)

early 15c., from Latin deductus, past participle of deducere lead down, bring away; see deduce, with
which it formerly was interchangeable. Technically, deduct refers to taking away portions or
amounts; subtract to taking away numbers. Related: Deducted; deducting.


deductible (adj.)

1610s, that may be deduced, also that may be deducted; from Latin deducere (see deduce) + -ible. As
a noun, deductible thing, by 1927.


deduction (n.)

early 15c., action of deducting, from Middle French d&eacute;duction or directly from Latin
deductionem (nominative deductio), noun of action from past participle stem of deducere (see
deduce). Meaning that which is deducted is from 1540s. As a term in logic, from Late Latin use of
deductio as a loan-translation of Greek apagoge.


deductive (adj.)

1640s, from Latin deductivus, from deduct-, past participle stem of deducere to deduce (see deduce).
Related: Deductively.


deed (n.)

Old English d&aelig;d a doing, act, action, transaction, event, from Proto-Germanic *d&aelig;dis
(cognates: Old Saxon dad, Old Norse da&eth;, Old Frisian dede, Middle Dutch daet, Dutch daad, Old
High German tat, German Tat deed, Gothic gade&thorn;s a putting, placing), from PIE *dhetis
(cognates: Lithuanian detis load, burden, Greek thesis a placing, setting), from *dhe- place, put
(see do). Sense of written legal document is early 14c. As a verb, 1806, American English Related:
Deeded; deeding.


Deely-bobber (n.)

headband with springs carrying ornaments, 1982 trademark name held by Ace Novelty Company. Earlier
it had been a patent name for a type of building blocks, manufactured 1969-1973.


deem (v.)

Old English deman to judge, condemn, think, compute, from root of dom (see doom (n.)). Originally to
pronounce judgment as well as to form an opinion. The two judges of the Isle of Man were called
deemsters in 17c., a title formerly common throughout England and Scotland and preserved in the
surname Dempster.


deemed

past tense of deem (q.v.).


deep (adj.)

Old English deop profound, awful, mysterious; serious, solemn; deepness, depth, deope (adv.), from
Proto-Germanic *deupaz (cognates: Old Saxon diop, Old Frisian diap, Dutch diep, Old High German
tiof, German tief, Old Norse djupr, Danish dyb, Swedish djup, Gothic diups deep), from PIE *dheub-
deep, hollow (cognates: Lithuanian dubus deep, hollow, Old Church Slavonic duno bottom, foundation,
Welsh dwfn deep, Old Irish domun world, via sense development from bottom to foundation to earth to
world).    Figurative senses were in Old English; extended 16c. to color, sound. Deep pocket wealth
is from 1951. To go off the deep end lose control of oneself is slang first recorded 1921, probably
in reference to the deep end of a swimming pool, where a person on the surface can no longer touch
bottom. When 3-D films seemed destined to be the next wave and the biggest thing to hit cinema since
talkies, they were known as deepies (1953).


deep (n.)

Old English deop deep water, especially the sea, from the source of deep (adj.).


deep six (n.)

place where something is discarded, by 1921 (in phrase give (something) the deep six), originally in
motorboating slang, perhaps from earlier underworld noun sense of the grave (1929), which is perhaps
a reference to the usual grave depth of six feet. But the phrase (in common with mark twain) also
figured in the sailing jargon of sounding, for a measure of six fathoms:    As the water deepened
under her keel the boyish voice rang out from the chains: By the mark five--and a quarter less six--
by the deep six--and a half seven--by the deep eight--and a quarter eight. [Learning the Road to
Sea, in Outing magazine, Feb. 1918]     In general use by 1940s. As a verb from 1953.


deep-freeze (n.)

registered trademark (U.S. Patent Office, 1941) of a type of refrigerator; used generically for cold
storage since 1949.


deep-seated (adj.)

1741, having its seat far below the surface; see seat (v.). Figurative use is from 1847.


deepen (v.)

c.1600, from deep (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Deepened; deepening. The earlier verb had been simply
deep, from Old English diepan.


deeply (adv.)

Old English deoplice (see deep (adj.)), used in both literal and figurative senses.


deer (n.)

Old English deor animal, beast, from Proto-Germanic *deuzam, the general Germanic word for animal
(as opposed to man), but often restricted to wild animal (cognates: Old Frisian diar, Dutch dier,
Old Norse dyr, Old High German tior, German Tier animal, Gothic dius wild animal, also see
reindeer), from PIE *dheusom creature that breathes, from root *dheu- (1) cloud, breath (cognates:
Lithuanian dusti gasp, dvesti gasp, perish; Old Church Slavonic dychati breathe).    For prehistoric
sense development, compare Latin animal from anima breath). Sense specialization to a specific
animal began in Old English (usual Old English for what we now call a deer was heorot; see hart),
common by 15c., now complete. Probably via hunting, deer being the favorite animal of the chase
(compare Sanskrit mrga- wild animal, used especially for deer). Deer-lick is first attested 1778, in
an American context.


deerskin (n.)

late 14c., from deer + skin (n.).


def (adj.)

excellent, first recorded 1979 in Black English, perhaps a shortened form of definite, or from a
Jamaican variant of death.


deface (v.)

mid-14c., to obliterate, from Old French desfacier mutilate, destroy, disfigure, from des- away from
(see dis-) + Vulgar Latin *facia (see face (n.)). Weaker sense of to mar, make ugly is late 14c. in
English. Related: Defaced; defacing.


defacement (n.)

1560s, from deface + -ment.


defalcate (v.)

1530s, to lop off, from Medieval Latin defalcatus, past participle of defalcare (see defalcation).
Modern scientific use dates from 1808.


defalcation (n.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin defalcationem (nominative defalcatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of defalcare, from de- + Latin falx, falcem sickle, scythe, pruning hook.


defamation (n.)

c.1300, from Old French diffamacion, Medieval Latin deffamation, from Latin diffamationem
(nominative diffamatio), noun of action from past participle stem of diffamare (see defame).


defamatory (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French diffamatoire, Medieval Latin diffamatorius tending to defame, from
diffamat-, past participle stem of diffamare (see defame).


defame (v.)

c.1300, from Old French defamer (13c., Modern French diffamer), from Medieval Latin defamare, from
Latin diffamare to spread abroad by ill report, make a scandal of, from dis- suggestive of ruination
+ fama a report, rumor (see fame (n.)). Related: Defamed; defaming.


default (n.)

early 13c., offense, crime, sin, later (late 13c.) failure, failure to act, from Old French defaute
(12c.) fault, defect, failure, culpability, lack, privation, from Vulgar Latin *defallita a
deficiency or failure, past participle of *defallere, from Latin de- away (see de-) + fallere to
deceive, to cheat; to put wrong, to lead astray, cause to be mistaken; to escape notice of, be
concealed from (see fail (v.)). The financial sense is first recorded 1858; the computing sense is
from 1966.


default (v.)

late 14c., be lacking, be missing, also become weak, from default (n.). Related: Defaulted;
defaulting.


defeasance (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French defesaunce, Old French desfaisance undoing, destruction, from desfaire
(Modern French d&eacute;faire) to undo, destroy (see defeat (v.)). Related:  Defease; defeasible.


defeat (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French defeter, from Old French desfait, past participle of desfaire to undo,
from Vulgar Latin *diffacere undo, destroy, from Latin dis- un-, not (see dis-) + facere to do,
perform (see factitious). Original sense was of bring ruination, cause destruction. Military sense
of conquer is c.1600. Related: Defeated; defeating.


defeat (n.)

1590s, from defeat (v.).


defeatism (n.)

1918; see defeatist.


defeatist

1918, adjective and noun, in reference to pacifists and political opposition in Britain, from French
d&eacute;faitiste, which was used there in reference to the Russians who sought to end their war
with Germany; see defeat (n.) + -ist. Their opposition, in the original Russian context, were called
defensists.


defecate (v.)

1570s, to purify, from Latin defaecatus, past participle of defaecare cleanse from dregs, purify,
from the phrase de faece from dregs (plural faeces; see feces). Excretory sense first recorded 1830
(defecation), American English, from French. Related: Defecated; defecating.


defecation (n.)

1620s, from Late Latin defecationem (nominative deficatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of Latin defecare (see defecate). An Old English word for bowel movement was arse-gang literally
arse-going.


defect (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French defect and directly from Latin defectus failure, revolt, falling
away, noun use of past participle of deficere to fail, desert (see deficient).


defect (v.)

1570s, from Latin defectus, past participle of deficere to fail, desert (see defect (n.)). Related:
Defected; defecting.


defection (n.)

1540s, action of failing; 1550s, action of deserting a party, leader, etc. from Latin defectionem
(nominative defectio) desertion, revolt, failure, noun of action from past participle stem of
deficere (see deficient). Originally used often of faith.


defective (adj.)

mid-14c., from Middle French d&eacute;fectif (14c.) and directly from Late Latin defectivus, from
defect-, past participle stem of deficere (see deficient). A euphemism for mentally ill from 1898 to
c.1935. Related: Defectively; defectiveness.


defector (n.)

1660s, agent noun in Latin form from defect, or else from Latin defector revolter, agent noun from
deficere (see deficient).


defence

see defense.


defend (v.)

mid-13c., from Old French defendre (12c.) defend, resist, and directly from Latin defendere ward
off, protect, guard, allege in defense, from de- from, away (see de-) + -fendere to strike, push,
from PIE root *gwhen- to strike, kill (see bane). In the Mercian hymns, Latin defendet is glossed by
Old English gescilde&eth;. Related: Defended; defending.


defendant (n.)

c.1400, in the legal sense, from French d&eacute;fendant, present participle of d&eacute;fendre (see
defend). Earliest use in English was as a present participle adjective meaning defending (c.1300).


defender (n.)

c.1300 (early 13c. as a surname), via Anglo-French, from Old French defendeor, agent noun from
defendre (see defend). The Latin word in this sense was defensor.


defenestration (n.)

1620, the action of throwing out of a window, from Latin fenestra window (see fenestration). A word
invented for one incident: the Defenestration of Prague, May 21, 1618, when two Catholic deputies to
the Bohemian national assembly and a secretary were tossed out the window (into a moat) of the
castle of Hradshin by Protestant radicals. It marked the start of the Thirty Years War. Some
linguists link fenestra with Greek verb phainein to show; others see in it an Etruscan borrowing,
based on the suffix -(s)tra, as in Latin loan-words aplustre the carved stern of a ship with its
ornaments, genista the plant broom, lanista trainer of gladiators. Related: Defenestrate (1915);
defenestrated (1620).


defense (n.)

c.1300, forbidding, prohibition, also action of guarding or protecting, from Old French defense,
from Latin defensus, past participle of defendere ward off, protect (see defend). But it also
arrived (without the final -e) from Old French defens, from Latin defensum thing protected or
forbidden, neuter past participle of defendere.   Defens was assimilated into defense, but not
before it inspired the alternative spelling defence, via the same tendency that produced hence
(hennis), pence (penies), dunce (Duns). First used 1935 as a euphemism for national military
resources. Defense mechanism in psychology is from 1913.


defenseless (adj.)

also defenceless, 1520s, from defense + -less. Related: Defenselessly.


defensible (adj.)

late 13c., from Old French defensable, from Late Latin defensibilem, from Latin defens-, past
participle stem of defendere (see defend).


defensive

c.1400 (adj. and noun), from French d&eacute;fensif (14c.), from Medieval Latin defensivus, from
defens-, past participle stem of Latin defendere (see defend). Of persons, alert to reject
criticism, from 1919. Related: Defensively; defensiveness.


defer (v.1)

to delay, late 14c., differren, deferren, from Old French differer (14c.), from Latin differre carry
apart, scatter, disperse; also be different, differ; also defer, put off, postpone, (see differ).
Etymologically identical with differ; the spelling and pronunciation differentiated from 15c.,
perhaps partly by association of this word with delay.


defer (v.2)

yield, mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;f&eacute;rer (14c.) to yield, comply, from Latin
deferre carry away, transfer, grant, from de- down, away (see de-) + ferre carry (see infer). Main
modern sense is from meaning refer (a matter) to someone, which also was in Latin.


deference (n.)

1640s, from French d&eacute;f&eacute;rence (16c.), from d&eacute;f&eacute;rer (see defer (v.2)).


deferent (adj.)

1620s, from French d&eacute;f&eacute;rent (16c.), from Latin deferentem (nominative deferens),
present participle of deferre to carry down or away (see defer (v.2)). Earlier in Middle English as
a word in astronomy (early 15c.).


deferential (adj.)

1822, from deferent + -ial; as a word in anatomy, from 1877. Related: Deferentially.


deferment (n.)

1610s, from defer (v.1) + -ment. As a word for conditional exemption from a military draft it dates
to 1918, American English.


deferral (n.)

1895, from defer (v.1) + -al (2).


deferred (adj.)

delayed, 1660s, past participle adjective from defer (v.1).


defiance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French desfiance challenge, declaration of war, from desfiant, present participle
of desfier (see defy).


defiant (adj.)

1837, from French d&eacute;fiant, present participle of d&eacute;fier (see defy). Related:
Defiantly.


defibrillation (n.)

1940, in reference to heartbeat, from de- + fibrillation a beating in an abnormal way, from Modern
Latin fibrilla, diminutive of fibra fiber, in reference to the muscle strands of the heart that
contract irregularly in this condition.


defibrillator (n.)

1956, agent noun from defibrillation.


deficiency (n.)

1630s, from deficience (mid-15c.) + -cy; or from Late Latin deficientia, from deficientem (see
deficient).


deficient (adj.)

1580s, from Latin deficientem (nominative deficiens), present participle of deficere to desert,
revolt, fail, from de- down, away (see de-) + facere to do, perform (see factitious).


deficit (n.)

1782, from French d&eacute;ficit (late 17c.), from Latin deficit it is wanting, an introductory word
in clauses of inventory, third person singular present indicative of deficere to be deficient (see
deficient).


defilade (n.)

1828, from defile (n.) + -ade.


defile (v.)

c.1400, to desecrate, profane; mid-15c., to make foul or dirty, alteration of earlier defoulen, from
Old French defouler trample down, violate, also ill-treat, dishonor, from de- down (see de-) + foler
to tread, from Latin fullo person who cleans and thickens cloth by stamping on it  (see foil (v.)).
The alteration (or re-formation) in English is from influence of Middle English filen (v.) to render
foul; make unclean or impure, literal and figurative, from Old English fylen (trans.), related to
Old English fulian (intrans.) to become foul, rot, from the source of foul (adj.). Compare befoul,
which also had a parallel form befilen. Related: Defiled; defiling.


defile (n.)

narrow passage, 1640s, especially in a military sense, a narrow passage down which troops can march
only in single file, from French d&eacute;fil&eacute;, noun use of past participle of d&eacute;filer
march by files (17c.), from de- off (see de-) + file row, from Latin filum thread (see file (v.)).
The verb in this sense is 1705, from French d&eacute;filer.


defilement (n.)

1570s, from defile (v.) + -ment.


define (v.)

late 14c., to specify; to end, from Old French defenir, definir to finish, conclude, come to an end;
bring to an end; define, determine with precision, and directly from Latin definire to limit,
determine, explain, from de- completely (see de-) + finire to bound, limit, from finis boundary, end
(see finish (v.)). Related: Defined; defining.


definite (adj.)

1550s, from Latin definitus defined, bounded, limited, past participle of definire (see define).
Definite means defined, clear, precise, unmistakable; definitive means having the character of
finality.


definitely (adv.)

1580s, from definite + -ly (2). As a colloquial emphatic word, attested by 1931.


definition (n.)

late 14c., decision, setting of boundaries, from Old French definicion, from Latin definitionem
(nominative definitio), noun of action from past participle stem of definire (see define).    In
logic, meaning act of stating what something means is from 1640s; meaning a statement of the
essential nature of something is from late 14c.; the special focus on words developed after c.1550.
Meaning degree of distinctness of the details in a picture is from 1889.


definitive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French definitif (12c.), from Latin definitivus explanatory, definitive, from
past participle stem of definire (see define). Related: Definitively.


deflagration (n.)

c.1600, from Latin deflagrationem (nominative deflagratio) a burning up, conflagration, noun of
action from past participle stem of deflagrare, from de- (see de-) + flagrare (see flagrant).


deflate (v.)

1891, in reference to balloons, coinage based on inflate. Latin deflare meant to blow away, but in
the modern word the prefix is taken in the sense of down. Related: Deflated; deflating.


deflation (n.)

1891, release of air, from deflate + -ion. In reference to currency or economic situations, from
1920.


deflect (v.)

1550s, from Latin deflectere to bend (something) aside or downward, from de- away (see de-) +
flectere to bend (see flexible). Originally transitive, the intransitive sense is first recorded
1640s. Related: Deflected; deflecting.


deflection (n.)

also (and with more etymological propriety) deflexion, c.1600, from Latin deflexionem, noun of
action from past participle stem of deflectere (see deflect). Both forms were present 17c., but the
spelling with -c- has come to predominate.


defloration (n.)

late 14c., culling of the finest passages from books, from Old French desfloracion (14c.), from
Latin deflorationem plucking of flowers, also taking of (a woman's) virginity, noun of action from
past participle stem of deflorare (see deflower). Compare also anthology. Also used in Middle
English with reference to virginity from c.1400.


deflower (v.)

late 14c., deprive (a maiden) of her virginity, also excerpt the best parts of (a book), from Old
French desflorer (13c., Modern French d&eacute;florer) to deflower (a garden); to take the virginity
of, from Late Latin deflorare, from de- (see de-) + flos flower (see flora). Notion is to strip of
flowers, hence to ravish, which is the oldest sense in English.The French Indians are said not to
have deflowered any of our young women they captivated. [James Adair, The Life of an Indian Trader,
London, 1775]


defogger (n.)

1966, from agent noun from de- + fog (v.).


defoliant (adj.)

1943, from defoliate + -ant.


defoliate (v.)

1793, perhaps a back-formation from defoliation. Earlier in this sense was defoil (c.1600). Related:
Defoliated; defoliating.


defoliation (n.)

1650s, noun of action from past participle stem of Late Latin defoliare shed leaves, from de- (see
de-) + folium leaf (see folio).


deforest (v.)

1880 in modern sense, from de- + forest. Related: Deforested; deforesting. Disforest in the sense to
clear of trees is from 1660s. Disafforest is attested in this sense from 1842; originally it meant
reduce from the legal status of a forest (1590s).


deforestation (n.)

1884, from deforest + -ation. Earlier was deforesting (1530s) which was a legal term for the change
in definition of a parcel of land from forest to something else.


deform (v.)

c.1400, to disfigure, from Old French deformer (13c.), from Latin deformare put out of shape,
disfigure, from de- (see de-) + formare (see form (v.)). Related: Deformed; deforming.


deformation (n.)

mid-15c., transformation, from Old French deformation and directly from Latin deformationem
(nominative deformatio), noun of action from past participle stem of deformare (see deform).


deformity (n.)

early 15c., diformyte, from Old French deformit&eacute; deformity, disfigurement, from Latin
deformitatem (nominative deformitas) ugliness, from deformis misformed, misshapen, from deformare
(see deform).


defragment (v.)

1992, in computer sense, from de- + fragment. Related: Defragmented; defragmenting.


defraud (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French defrauder, from Latin defraudare to defraud, cheat, from de- thoroughly
(see de-) + fraudare (see fraud). Related: Defrauded; defrauding.


defray (v.)

1540s, from Middle French defraier (15c.), from de- out (see de-) + fraier spend, from Old French
frais costs, damages caused by breakage, from Latin fractum, neuter past participle of frangere to
break (see fraction). Alternative etymology traces second element to Old High German fridu peace,
via Vulgar Latin *fredum fine, cost.


defrock (v.)

1580s, from French d&eacute;froquer (15c.), from de- (see de-) + froque frock (see frock). Related:
Defrocked.


defrost (v.)

1895, from de- + frost. Related: Defrosted; defrosting.


deft (adj.)

Old English ged&aelig;fte mild, gentle, differentiated in Middle English into daft (q.v.) and this
word, via sense of apt, skillful, adept. Cognate with Gothic gadaban to be fit, Old Norse dafna to
grow strong, Dutch deftig important, relevant.


deftly (adv.)

mid-15c., from deft + -ly (2).


defunct (adj.)

1590s, from Old French defunct (14c., Modern French defunt) or directly from Latin defunctus dead,
literally off-duty, from past participle of defungi to discharge, finish, from de- off, completely
(see de-) + fungi perform or discharge duty, from PIE root *bheug- (2) to enjoy (see brook (v.)).


defuse (v.)

1943, from de- + fuse. Related: Defused; defusing.


defy (v.)

c.1300, to renounce one's allegiance; mid-14c., to challenge, defy, from Old French defier, desfier
to challenge, defy, provoke; renounce (a belief), repudiate (a vow, etc.), from Vulgar Latin
*disfidare renounce one's faith, from Latin dis- away (see dis-) + fidus faithful (see faith).


degauss (v.)

de-magnetize, originally especially of ships as a defense against magnetic mines, 1940, from German
scientist Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855), a pioneer in the study of magnetics.


degeneracy (n.)

1660s, from degenerate + -cy.


degenerate (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin degeneratus, past participle of degenerare to be inferior to one's ancestors,
to become unlike one's race or kind, fall from ancestral quality, used of physical as well as moral
qualities, from phrase de genere, from de + genus (genitive generis) birth, descent (see genus). The
noun is from 1550s.


degenerate (v.)

1540s, from Latin degeneratus, past participle of degenerare fall from ancestral quality (see
degenerate (adj.)). Figurative sense of to fall off, decline was in Latin. Related: Degenerated;
degenerating.


degeneration (n.)

c.1600, from French d&eacute;g&eacute;neration (15c.) or directly from Late Latin degenerationem
(nominative degeneratio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin degenerare (see
degenerate (adj.)).


degenerative (adj.)

1846; see degenerate + -ive.


deglutition (n.)

from French d&eacute;glutition (16c.), from Latin deglutitionem, noun of action from past participle
stem of deglutare, from de- (see de-) + glutire to swallow, from PIE *gwele- (3) to swallow (see
glut (v.)).


degradation (n.)

1530s, from French d&eacute;gradation (14c., Old French degradacion), from Medieval Latin
degradationem (nominative degradatio), noun of action from past participle stem of degradare (see
degrade).


degrade (v.)

late 14c., from Old French degrader (12c.) degrade, deprive (of office, rank, etc.), from des- down
(see dis-) + Latin gradus step (see grade (n.)). Related: Degraded; degrading.


degree (n.)

early 13c., from Old French degr&eacute; (12c.) a step (of a stair), pace, degree (of relationship),
academic degree; rank, status, position, said to be from Vulgar Latin *degradus a step, from Late
Latin degredare, from Latin de- down (see de-) + gradus step (see grade (n.)).    Most modern senses
date from Middle English, from notion of a hierarchy of steps. Meaning a grade of crime is 1670s;
that of a unit of temperature is from 1727. The division of the circle into 360 degrees was known in
Babylon and Egypt. It is perhaps from the daily motion of the sun through the zodiac in the course
of a year.


degression (n.)

late 15c., from Latin degressionem (nominative degressio) a going down, noun of action from past
participle stem of degredi to go down, march down, descend, from de- down (see de-) + gradus step
(see grade (n.)).


degustation (n.)

1650s, from Latin degustationem (nominative degustatio) a tasting, noun of action from past
participle stem of degustare to take a taste from, sample, from de- (see de-) + gustare to taste
(see gusto).


dehiscence (n.)

1828, from Modern Latin dehiscentia, from dehiscentem (nominative dehiscens), present participle of
dehiscere to gape, open, split down (of the earth, etc.), from de- (see de-) + hiscere, inchoative
of hiare to yawn (see yawn (v.)).


dehumanize (v.)

1818, from de- + humanize. Related: Dehumanized; dehumanizing.


dehumidifier (n.)

1921, agent noun from de- + humidify.


dehydrate (v.)

1854, from de- + hydrate (v.). A chemical term at first, given a broader extension 1880s. Related:
Dehydration (1834).


deicide (n.)

1610s, the killing of a god; 1650s, one who kills a god, from Latin deus god (see Zeus) + -cida (see
-cide).


deictic (adj.)

1828, from Latinized form of Greek deiktikos able to show, from deiktos shown, verbal adjective from
deiknynai to show (see diction).


deific (adj.)

late 15c., from French d&eacute;ifique (late 14c.), from Late Latin deificus god-making, sacred, in
Medieval Latin divine, from deus god (see Zeus) + -ficus making (see factitious).


deification (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin deificationem (nominative deificatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of deificare (see deify).


deify (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French deifier (13c.), from Late Latin deificare, from deificus making godlike,
from Latin deus god (see Zeus) + -ficare, from facere to make, do (see factitious). Related:
Deified; deifying.


deign (v.)

c.1300, from Old French deignier (Modern French daigner), from Latin dignari to deem worthy or fit
(source of Italian degnare, Spanish de&ntilde;ar), from dignus worthy (see dignity). Sense of take
or accept graciously led to that of condescend (1580s). Related: Deigned; deigning.


deinstitutionalization (n.)

1967 (disinstitutionalization is attested from 1955), from de- + institutionalization.


deipnosophist (n.)

gourmand, 1650s, from Greek deipnosophistes one learned in the mysteries of the kitchen, from
deipnon chief meal, dinner (of unknown origin) + sophistes master of a craft (see sophist). the word
has come down thanks to Deipnosophistai, 3c. work on gastronomy by Athenaeus.


deism (n.)

1680s (deist is from 1620s), from French d&eacute;isme, from Latin deus god (see Zeus). Until
c.1700, opposed to atheism; later as the opposite of theism (q.v.).


deist (n.)

1620s, from French d&eacute;iste, from Latin deus (see Zeus). Related: Deistic (1795). Also see
deism.


deity (n.)

c.1300, divine nature; late 14c., a god, from Old French deit&eacute;, from Late Latin deitatem
(nominative deitas) divine nature, coined by Augustine from Latin deus god, from PIE *deiwos (see
Zeus).


deixis (n.)

1949, from Greek deixis reference. Related: Deictic.


deja vu

1903, from French d&#233;j&#224; vu, literally already seen. The phenomenon also is known as
promnesia. Similar phenomena are d&eacute;j&agrave; entendu already heard (of music, etc.), 1965;
and d&eacute;j&agrave; lu already read.


deject (v.)

early 15c., to throw or cast down, from Old French dejeter (12c.), from Latin deiectus a throwing
down, felling, fall, past participle of deicere to cast down, destroy; drive out; kill, slay,
defeat, from de- down + -icere, comb. form of iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Originally literal;
the sense of depress in spirit is c.1500.


dejected (adj.)

depressed at heart, 1580s, past participle adjective from deject. Related: Dejectedly (1610s).


dejection (n.)

early 15c., from Old French dejection abjection, depravity; casting down and directly from Latin
dejectionem (nominative dejectio), noun of action from past participle stem of dejicere to cast down
(see deject).


deke (n.)

1960, ice hockey slang for a quick feinting move, short for decoy. The verb is attested from 1961.


delamination (n.)

1877, from de- + lamination.


Delaware

U.S. state, river, Indian tribe, named for the bay, which was named for Baron (commonly Lord) De la
Warr (Thomas West, 1577-1618), first English colonial governor of Virginia. The family name is
attested from 1201, from Delaware in Brasted, Kent, probably ultimately from de la werre of the war
(a warrior), from Old French werre/guerre war.


delay (v.)

c.1300, from Old French delaiier, from de- away, from (see de-) + laier leave, let, probably a
variant of Old French laissier, from Latin laxare slacken, undo (see lax). Related: Delayed;
delaying.


delay (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French delaie, from delaiier (see delay (v.)).


dele

typographer's direction to blot out a letter, from Latin dele, imperative singular of delere (see
delete).


delectable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French delectable, from Latin delectabilis delightful, from delectare (see
delight (n.)). Related: Delectably.


delectation (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French delectation enjoyment (12c.), from Latin delectationem (nominative
delectatio), noun of action from past participle stem of delectare (see delight (n.)).


delegate (n.)

late 15c., from Old French delegat or directly from Latin delegatus, past participle of delegare to
send as a representative, from de- from, away (see de-) + legare send with a commission (see
legate).


delegate (v.)

1520s (early 15c. as a past participle adjective), from delegate (n.). Related: Delegated;
delegating.


delegation (n.)

1610s, action of delegating (earlier in this sense was delegacie, mid-15c.); perhaps a native
formation, perhaps from French d&eacute;l&eacute;gation, or directly from Latin delegationem
(nominative delegatio) assignment, delegation, noun of action from past participle stem of delegare
(see delegate). Meaning persons sent by commission is from 1818; meaning a state's elected
representatives, taken collectively, is U.S. political usage from 1820s.


delete (v.)

late 15c., destroy, eradicate, from Latin deletus, past participle of delere destroy, blot out,
efface, from delevi, originally perfective tense of delinere to daub, erase by smudging (as of the
wax on a writing table), from de- from, away (see de-) + linere to smear, wipe (see lime (n.1)). In
English, specifically of written matter, from c.1600. Related: Deleted; deleting.


deleterious (adj.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin deleterius, from Greek deleterios noxious, from deleter destroyer, from
deleisthai to hurt, injure. Related: Deleteriously; deleteriousness.


deletion (n.)

1580s, from Latin deletionem (nominative deletio), noun of action from past participle stem of
delere (see delete).


delf (n.)

late Old English d&aelig;lf trench, ditch, quarry, from gedelf digging, a digging, from delfan to
dig (see delve).


Delft

town in Holland,named from its chief canal, from Dutch delf, literally ditch, canal; which is
related to Old English d&aelig;lf and modern delve. As a short form of delftware, attested from
1714.


delftware (n.)

1714, from Delft, town in Holland where the glazed earthenware was made, + ware.


Delhi

city in India, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to Hindi dehli threshold, with reference to the
watershed boundary between the Ganges and Indus, which is nearby.


deli (n.)

1954, short for delicatessen.


Delian (adj.)

1620s, of Delos, tiny island in the Aegean, birthplace of Apollo and Artemis. Delian problem find
the length of the side of a cube having double the volume of a given cube, was set by the oracle at
Delos when it answered (430 B.C.E.) that the plague in Athens would end when Apollo's (cube-shaped)
altar was doubled. The Latin fem. form of the word became the proper name Delia.


deliberate (adj.)

early 15c., done with careful consideration, from Latin deliberatus resolved upon, determined, past
participle of deliberare (see deliberation). Meaning slow, consciously unhurried is attested by
1590s. Related: Deliberately.


deliberate (v.)

1540s, from Latin deliberatus, past participle of deliberare (see deliberation). Related:
Deliberated; deliberating.


deliberation (n.)

late 14c., Old French deliberation, from Latin deliberationem (nominative deliberatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of deliberare weigh, consider well, from de- entirely (see de-) +
-liberare, altered (perhaps by influence of liberare liberate) from librare to balance, weigh, from
libra scale.


deliberative (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French d&eacute;lib&eacute;ratif or directly from Latin deliberativus pertaining
to deliberation, from past participle stem of deliberare (see deliberation). Related:
Deliberatively; deliberativeness.


delibrate (v.)

1620s, to pull off the bark of a tree, from Latin delibrare to peel, from de- (see de-) + liber bark
(see library).


delicacies (n.)

things dainty and gratifying to the palate, mid-15c., from plural of delicacy.


delicacy (n.)

late 14c., delightfulness; fastidiousness; quality of being addicted to sensuous pleasure, from
delicate + -cy. Meaning fineness, softness, tender loveliness is from 1580s; that of weakness of
constitution is from 1630s. Meaning fine food, a dainty viand is from early 15c.


delicate (adj.)

late 14c., self-indulgent, loving ease; delightful; sensitive, easily hurt; feeble, from Latin
delicatus alluring, delightful, dainty, also addicted to pleasure, luxurious, effeminate; of
uncertain origin; related by folk etymology (and perhaps genuinely) to deliciae a pet, and delicere
to allure, entice (see delicious). Meaning easily broken is recorded from 1560s.


delicately (adv.)

mid-14c., luxuriously, from delicate + -ly (2). Meaning softly, gently is early 15c.


delicatessen (n.)

1889, American English, from German delikatessen, plural of delikatesse a delicacy, fine food, from
French d&eacute;licatesse (1560s), from d&eacute;licat fine, from Latin delicatus (see delicate).


delicious (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in deliciously), from Old French delicios (Modern French d&eacute;licieux), from
Late Latin deliciosus delicious, delicate, from Latin delicia (plural deliciae) a delight,
allurement, charm, from delicere to allure, entice, from de- away (see de-) + lacere lure, deceive
(related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace). As a name of a type of apple, attested from 1903, first
grown by Jesse Hiatt of Iowa, U.S.A. Colloquial shortening delish is attested from 1920.


deliciousness (n.)

mid-15c., from delicious + -ness.


delict

1520s, from Latin delictum fault, offense, crime, neuter singular of past participle of delinquere
(see delinquent). Phrase in flagrant delict translates Latin in flagrante delicto.


deligate (v.)

1840, from Latin deligatus bound fast, from deligare to bind fast, from de- (see de-) + ligare to
bind (see ligament).


deligation (n.)

1660s, noun of action from Latin deligare (see deligate).


delight (n.)

c.1200, delit, from Old French delit pleasure, delight, sexual desire, from delitier please greatly,
charm, from Latin delectare to allure, delight, charm, please, frequentative of delicere entice (see
delicious). Spelled delite until 16c. when it changed under influence of light, flight, etc.


delight (v.)

c.1200, deliten, from Old French delitier (see delight (n.)). Related: Delighted; delighting.


delightful (adj.)

c.1400, from delight (n.) + -ful. Related: Delightfully.


Delilah

temptress, treacherous lover, 1590s, from the name of the woman who seduced and betrayed Samson in
Judges, from Hebrew Delilah, literally delicate, languishing, amorous, from Semitic root d-l-l to
hang down, to languish.


delimit (v.)

1852, from French d&eacute;limiter (18c.), from Latin delimitare to mark out as a boundary, from de-
(see de-) + limitare, from limitem, limes boundary, limit (see limit (n.)). Related: Delimited;
delimiting.


delimitation (n.)

1836, from French d&eacute;limitation (18c.), noun of action from d&eacute;limiter (see delimit).


delimiter (n.)

1960, in computing, agent noun from delimit.


delineate (v.)

1550s, from Latin delineatus, past participle of delineare to sketch out, from de- completely (see
de-) + lineare draw lines, from linea line (see line (n.)). Related: Delineated; delineating.


delineation (n.)

1560s, native formation from delineate, or else from Latin delineationem (nominative delineatio)
sketch, description, noun of action from past participle stem of delineare (see delineate).


delinquency (n.)

1630s, from Latin delinquentia fault, crime, delinquency, from delinquentem (see delinquent).


delinquent (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;linquant, from present participle of d&eacute;linquer (15c.),
and directly from Latin delinquentum (nominative delinquens), present participle of delinquere to
fail; be wanting, fall short; offend, from de- completely (see de-) + linquere to leave (see
relinquish). As an adjective, from c.1600.


deliquesce (v.)

1756, in chemistry, from Latin deliquescere to melt away, from de- (see de-) + liquescere to melt,
from liquere to be liquid (see liquid (adj.)). General use dates from 1858.


deliquescent (adj.)

1791, in chemistry, from Latin deliquescentem (nominative deliquescens), present participle of
deliquescere (see deliquesce). General use dates from 1866. Related: Deliquescence.


delirious (adj.)

1703, from stem of delirium + -ous. Figurative use attested from 1791. Related: Deliriously.


delirium (n.)

1590s, from Latin delirium madness, from deliriare be crazy, rave, literally go off the furrow, a
plowing metaphor, from phrase de lire, from de off, away (see de-) + lira furrow, earth thrown up
between two furrows, from PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow (see learn).


delirium tremens (n.)

1813, medical Latin, literally trembling delirium, introduced 1813 by British physician Thomas
Sutton, for that form of delirium which is rendered worse by bleeding, but improved by opium. By
Rayer and subsequent writers it has been almost exclusively applied to delirium resulting from the
abuse of alcohol [Sydenham Society Lexicon of Medicine]. As synonyms, Farmer lists barrel-fever,
gallon distemper, blue Johnnies, bottle ache, pink spiders, quart-mania snakes in the boots,
triangles, uglies, etc.


deliver (v.)

c.1200, save, rescue, set free, liberate, from Old French delivrer to set free; remove; save,
preserve; hand over (goods), also used of childbirth, from Late Latin deliberare, from de- away (see
de-) + Latin liberare to free (see liberal (adj.)).    Childbirth sense in English, to bring (a
woman) to childbirth, is from c.1300. Sense of hand over, give, give up, yield is c.1300. in
English, which brings it in opposition to its root. Meaning project, throw is 1590s. Related:
Delivered; delivering.


deliverable (adj.)

1755, from deliver + -able.


deliverance (n.)

c.1300, action of setting free in physical or spiritual senses, from Old French deliverance (12c.),
from d&eacute;livrer (see deliver). Formerly also with senses now restricted to delivery.


delivery (n.)

early 15c., action of handing over to another, from Anglo-French delivr&eacute;e, noun use of fem.
past participle of Old French d&eacute;livrer (see deliver). Childbirth sense is attested from
1570s. Of speech, from 1580s. Of a blow, throw of a ball, etc., from 1702.


dell (n.1)

Old English dell dell, hollow, dale (perhaps lost and then borrowed in Middle English from cognate
Middle Dutch/Middle Low German delle), from Proto-Germanic *daljo (cognates: German Delle dent,
depression, Gothic ib-dalja slope of a mountain); related to dale (q.v.).


dell (n.2)

rogue's cant 16c.-17c. for a young girl of the vagrant class, of uncertain origin.    A Dell is a
yonge wenche, able for generation, and not yet knowen or broken by the vpright man. ... [W]hen they
have beene lyen with all by the vpright man then they be Doxes, and no Dells. [Thomas Harman, A
Caveat or Warning for Common Cursitors, 1567]


Della Crusca

1796, from Italian Accademia della Crusca, literally Academy of the Chaff, the name of an Academy
established at Florence in 1582, mainly with the object of sifting and purifying the Italian
language; whence its name, and its emblem, a sieve [OED].


Della Robbia

1787, from name of a family of 15c. Florentine painters and sculptors; used of wares made by Luca
Della Robbia (1400-1482), or those like them.


delouse (v.)

1918, from de- + louse. First used in reference to World War I armies. Related: Deloused; delousing.


Delphi

oracle town on slopes of Mount Parnassus, from Greek delphis dolphin (see dolphin). Supposedly
Apollo assumed this form to found the shrine.


Delphic (adj.)

1590s, from Latin Delphicus, from Greek Delphikos, from Delphi (see Delphi).


delt (n.)

short for deltoid (q.v.).


delta (n.)

c.1200, Greek letter shaped like a triangle, equivalent to our D, the name from Phoenician daleth
tent door. Herodotus used it of the mouth of the Nile, and it was so used in English from 1550s;
applied to other river mouths from 1790.


deltoid (adj.)

1741, in deltoid muscle, so called for its shape, from Greek deltoeides triangular, literally shaped
like the letter delta; see delta + -oid.


delude (v.)

c.1400, from Latin deludere to play false; to mock, deceive, from de- down, to one's detriment (see
de-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Related: Deluded; deluding.


deluge (n.)

late 14c., from Old French deluge (12c.), earlier deluve, from Latin diluvium flood, inundation,
from diluere wash away, from dis- away (see dis-) + -luere, comb. form of lavere to wash (see lave).


deluge (v.)

1590s; see deluge (n.). Related: Deluged; deluging.


delusion (n.)

act of misleading someone, early 15c.; as a form of mental derangement, 1550s, from Latin delusionem
(nominative delusio) a deceiving, noun of action from past participle stem of deludere (see delude).
Technically, delusion is a belief that, though false, has been surrendered to and accepted by the
whole mind as a truth; illusion is an impression that, though false, is entertained provisionally on
the recommendation of the senses or the imagination, but awaits full acceptance and may not
influence action. Delusions of grandeur, the exact phrase, is recorded from 1840, though the two
words were in close association for some time before that.


delusional (adj.)

1871, from delusion + -al (1).


delusive (adj.)

c.1600; see delusion + -ive.


deluxe (adj.)

1819, from French de luxe, literally of luxury, from Latin luxus excess, abundance (see luxury).


delve (v.)

Old English delfan to dig (class III strong verb; past tense dealf, past participle dolfen), common
West Germanic verb (cognates: Old Saxon delban, Dutch delven, Middle High German telben to dig),
from PIE root *dhelbh- (cognates: Lithuanian delba crowbar, Russian dolbit', Czech dlabati, Polish
d&#322;uba&#263; to chisel; Russian dolot&oacute;, Czech dlato, Polish d&#322;uto chisel). Weak
inflections emerged 14c.-16c. Related: Delved; delving.


dem

representing pronunciation of them in Jamaican speech, from 1868. As a minced form of damn, attested
from late 14c.


demagnetize (v.)

1839; see de- + magnetize.  Related: Demagnetized; demagnetizing.


demagogic (adj.)

1831; see demagogue + -ic. Greek had demagogikos fit for or like a demagogue.


demagogue (n.)

1640s, from Greek demagogos popular leader, also leader of the mob, from demos people (see demotic)
+ agogos leader, from agein to lead (see act (n.)). Often a term of disparagement since the time of
its first use, in Athens, 5c. B.C.E. Form perhaps influenced by French demagogue (mid-14c.).


demagogue (v.)

by 1964, American English, from demagogue (n.). Related: Demagogued; demagoguing.


demagoguery (n.)

1855; see demagogue + -ery. Demagogy in the same sense is from 1650s, from Greek demagogia
leadership of the people.


demand (v.)

late 14c., ask, make inquiry, from Old French demander (12c.) to request; to demand, from Latin
demandare entrust, charge with a commission (in Vulgar Latin, to ask, request, demand), from de-
completely (see de-) + mandare to order (see mandate). Meaning to ask for as a right is early 15c.,
from Anglo-French legal use. Related: Demanded; demanding.


demand (n.)

late 13c., a question, from Old French demande (see demand (v.)). Meaning a request, claim is from
c.1300. In the political economy sense (correlating to supply) it is attested from 1776 in Adam
Smith.


demanding (adj.)

early 15c., asking, questioning, present participle adjective from demand (v.). Meaning insistent is
by late 19c. Related: Demandingly.


demarcate (v.)

1816, back-formation from demarcation. Related: Demarcated; demarcating.


demarcation (n.)

c.1752, from Spanish linea de demarcacion or Portuguese linha de demarca&ccedil;ao, name of the line
laid down by Pope Alexander VI, May 4, 1493, dividing the New World between Spain and Portugal on a
line 100 leagues west of the Cape Verde Islands. Applied from 1801 to other lines dividing regions.
From Spanish de- (see de-) + marcar to mark the boundaries of, from a Germanic source (see mark
(n.1)).


demarche (n.)

1650s, walk, step, from French d&eacute;marche (15c.) literally gait, walk, bearing, from
d&eacute;marcher (12c.) to march, from de- (see de-) + marcher (see march (v.)). Meaning a
diplomatic step attested from 1670s. A word never quite anglicized.


demark (v.)

1650s, abstracted from demarcation and altered by influence of mark (v.).


dematerialize (v.)

1884; see de- + materialize.  Related: Dematerialized; dematerializing.


demean (v.)

lower in dignity, c.1600, perhaps from de- down + mean (adj.) and modeled on debase.
Indistinguishable in some uses from obsolete demean (see demeanor) which influenced it and may be
its true source. Related: Demeaned; demeaning.


demeaning (adj.)

1829, present participle adjective from demean (v.). Related: Demeaningly.


demeanor (n.)

late 15c., from obsolete Middle English demean handle, manage, conduct, later behave in a certain
way (early 14c.), from Old French demener (11c.) to guide, conduct; to live, dwell, from de-
completely (see de-) + mener to lead, direct, from Latin minare to threaten, in Late Latin to drive
(a herd of animals); see menace. Sense in English evolved from notion of conduct, manage (oneself).
Spelling changed by influence of nouns in -or, -our.


demeanour

chiefly British English spelling of demeanor; for suffix, see -or.


dement (v.)

to drive mad, 1540s, probably from Middle French d&eacute;menter, from Late Latin dementare to drive
out of one's mind, from stem of Latin demens out of one's senses, insane, raving, foolish;
distracting, wild, reckless (a less technical term than insanitas), from phrase de mente, from de +
mente, ablative of mens mind (see mind (n.)).


demented (adj.)

1640s, from obsolete dement drive mad.


dementia (n.)

1806, from Latin dementia madness, insanity, literally a being out of one's mind, from dement-, stem
of demens mad, raving (see dement) + abstract noun suffix -ia. It existed earlier in an anglicized
form, demency (1520s), from French d&eacute;mence. Dementia praecox is a Modern Latin form recorded
from 1899 in English, 1891 in German, from French d&eacute;mence pr&eacute;coce (1857). See
precocious.


demerit (n.)

late 14c., from Old French desmerite blame, demerit (Modern French d&eacute;m&eacute;rite), from
des- not, opposite (see dis-) + merite merit (see merit (n.)). Latin demereri meant to merit,
deserve, from de- in its completive sense. But Medieval Latin demeritum meant fault. Both senses
existed in the Middle French form of the word. Meaning penalty point in school is attested from
1862.


Demerol

trademark name, by 1942; originally a morphine substitute.


demesne (n.)

c.1300, demeyne (modern spelling by late 15c.), from Anglo-French demesne, demeine, Old French
demaine land held for a lord's own use, from Latin dominicus belonging to a master, from dominus
lord. Re-spelled by Anglo-French legal scribes under influence of Old French mesnie household (and
the concept of a demesne as land attached to a mansion) and their fondness for inserting -s- before
-n-. Essentially the same word as domain.


Demeter

goddess of agriculture, mother of Persephone, from Greek Demeter; the second element generally given
as mater (see mother); the first element possibly from da, Doric form of Greek ge earth (see Gaia),
but Liddell &amp; Scott find this improbable. The Latin masc. proper name Demetrius means son of
Demeter.


demi-

word-forming element meaning half, half-sized, partial, early 15c., from Old French demi half
(12c.), from Late Latin dimedius, from Latin dimidius half, one-half, which contains the elements
dis- apart (see dis-) + medius middle (see medial).


demi-monde (n.)

1855, also demimonde, from French demi-monde so-so society, literally half-world, from demi- half +
monde, from Latin mundus world (see mundane).    Popularized by use as title of a comedy by
Alexandre Dumas fils (1824-1895). Dumas' Demi-Monde is the link between good and bad society ... the
world of compromised women, a social limbo, the inmates of which ... are perpetually struggling to
emerge into the paradise of honest and respectable ladies [Fraser's Magazine, 1855]. Not properly
used of courtesans. Compare 18th-century English demi-rep (1749, the second element short for
reputation), defined as a woman that intrigues with every man she likes, under the name and
appearance of virtue ... in short, whom every body knows to be what no body calls her [Fielding].


demigod (n.)

1520s, from demi- + god, rendering Latin semideus. The child of sexual intercourse between a deity
and a mortal, a man raised to divine rank, or a minor god.


demijohn (n.)

1769, partial translation and word-play from French damejeanne (late 17c.) Lady Jane, term used for
large globular wicker-wrapped bottle, perhaps because its shape suggested a stout woman in the
costume of the period. A general Mediterranean word, with forms found in Spanish, Portuguese,
Italian, and Arabic.


demilitarize (v.)

1883, in reference to the Austrian military frontier in the Balkans; see de- + military + -ize.
Demilitarized zone attested by 1921 (the Versailles Treaty uses neutralized zone).


demise (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French demise, fem. past participle of d&eacute;mettre dismiss, put away, from
des- away (from Latin dis-) + Middle French mettre put, from Latin mittere let go, send (see
mission). Originally transfer of estate by will, meaning extended 1754 to death because that's when
this happens.


demisemiquaver (n.)

1706; see demi- + semi- + quaver (n.).


demission (n.)

1570s, from French d&eacute;mission, from Latin demissionem a sending away, noun of action from past
participle stem of demittere (see demit).


demit (v.)

1610s (figurative), 1640s (literal), from Latin demittere to send down, from de- (see de-) + mittere
to send (see mission).


demitasse (n.)

also demi-tasse, 1842, from French, literally half-cup, from demi- + tasse, an Old French borrowing
from Arabic tassah, from Persian tasht cup, saucer (compare Italian tazza, Spanish taza cup).


demiurge (n.)

1670s, from Latinized form of Greek demiourgos, literally public or skilled worker (from demos
common people; see demotic + ergos work; see organ).    The title of a magistrate in some
Peloponnesian city-states and the Ach&aelig;an League; taken in Platonic philosophy as a name for
the maker of the world. In the Gnostic system, conceived as a being subordinate to the Supreme
Being, and sometimes as the author of evil [OED].


demo (n.)

short for demonstration (tape, disc, etc.). Music recording given out for promotional purposes,
1963. The word was used earlier to mean a public political demonstration (1936).


demob (v.)

1920, short for demobilize. Originally in reference to World War I troops returning to civilian
life. Related: Demobbed.


demobilization (n.)

1866; see demobilize + -ation.


demobilize (v.)

1882; see de- (privative) + mobilize. Related: Demobilized; demobilizing.


democracy (n.)

1570s, from Middle French d&eacute;mocratie (14c.), from Medieval Latin democratia (13c.), from
Greek demokratia popular government, from demos common people, originally district (see demotic), +
kratos rule, strength (see -cracy).    Democracy implies that the man must take the responsibility
for choosing his rulers and representatives, and for the maintenance of his own 'rights' against the
possible and probable encroachments of the government which he has sanctioned to act for him in
public matters. [Ezra Pound, ABC of Economics, 1933]


democrat (n.)

1790, adherent of democracy, with reference to France, from French d&eacute;mocrate (18c., opposed
to aristocrate), back-formation from d&eacute;mocratie (see democracy); revived in U.S. as a
political party affiliation 1798, with a capital D. As a shortening of this, Demo (1793) is older
than Dem (c.1840).


democratic (adj.)

c.1600, from French d&eacute;mocratique, from Medieval Latin democraticus, from Greek demokratikos
of or for democracy; favoring democracy, from demokratia (see democracy). Earlier was democratian
(1570s).    As a political faction name, from 1790 in reference to France. U.S. political usage
(with a capital D) attested from c.1800. The party originally was the Anti-Federal party, then the
Democratic-Republican (Democratic for short). It formed among those opposed to extensive powers for
the U.S. federal government. The name of the party was not formally shortened to Democratic until
1829. Democratic socialism is attested from 1849.


democratization (n.)

1865; see democratize + -ation.


democratize (v.)

1798 (transitive), 1840 (intransitive), from French d&eacute;mocratiser, from d&eacute;mocratie (see
democracy). Greek demokratizein meant to be on the democratic side.


demographic (adj.)

1891, from demography + -ic. As a noun, by 1998, short for demographic group or category. Related:
Demographical; demographically.


demographics (n.)

1967, the science of divining from demographic statistics; see demography + -ics. Originally in
reference to TV audiences and advertisers.


demography (n.)

1880, from Greek demos people (see demotic) + -graphy.


demoiselle (n.)

1510s, from French demoiselle (Old French dameiselle); see damsel.


demolish (v.)

1560s, from Middle French demoliss-, present participle stem of d&eacute;molir to destroy, tear down
(late 14c.), from Latin demoliri tear down, from de- down (see de-) + moliri build, construct, from
moles (genitive molis) massive structure (see mole (n.3)). Related: Demolished; demolishing.


demolition (n.)

1540s, from Old French demolition (14c.) demolition; defeat, rout, from Latin demolitionem
(nominative demolitio), noun of action from past participle stem of demoliri (see demolish). Mencken
noted demolition engineer for house-wrecker by 1936. Demolition derby is recorded from 1956,
American English, defined by OED as a contest in which old cars are battered into one another, the
last one running being declared the winner.


demon (n.)

c.1200, from Latin daemon spirit, from Greek daimon deity, divine power; lesser god; guiding spirit,
tutelary deity (sometimes including souls of the dead); one's genius, lot, or fortune; from PIE
*dai-mon- divider, provider (of fortunes or destinies), from root *da- to divide (see tide (n.)).
Used (with daimonion) in Christian Greek translations and Vulgate for god of the heathen and unclean
spirit. Jewish authors earlier had employed the Greek word in this sense, using it to render shedim
lords, idols in the Septuagint, and Matt. viii:31 has daimones, translated as deofol in Old English,
feend or deuil in Middle English. Another Old English word for this was hellcniht, literally hell-
knight.    The original mythological sense is sometimes written daemon for purposes of distinction.
The Demon of Socrates was a daimonion, a divine principle or inward oracle. His accusers, and later
the Church Fathers, however, represented this otherwise. The Demon Star (1895) is Algol.


demoness (n.)

1630s; see demon + -ess.


demonetization (n.)

1852, from French d&eacute;mon&eacute;tisation, from d&eacute;monetiser (see demonetize).


demonetize (v.)

1852, from French d&eacute;monitiser, from de- (see de-) + monetiser (see monetize).


demoniac (adj.)

c.1400, possessed, insane, earlier (late 14c.) as a noun, one who is possessed, from Late Latin
daemoniacus, from Greek daimoniakos possessed by a demon, from diamon (see demon).


demonic (adj.)

1660s, from Latin daemonicus, from daemon (see demon). Demonical is from late 15c.


demonize (v.)

1821, to make into a demon (literally or figuratively), from Medieval Latin daemonizare, from Latin
daemon (see demon). Greek daimonizesthai meant to be possessed by a demon. Related: Demonized;
demonizing.


demonology (n.)

1590s; see demon + -ology.


demonstrable (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin demonstrabilis, from demonstrare (see demonstration). Related: Demonstrably.


demonstrate (v.)

1550s, to point out, from Latin demonstratus, past participle of demonstrare (see demonstration).
Meaning to point out by argument or deduction is from 1570s. Related: Demonstrated; demonstrating.


demonstration (n.)

late 14c., proof that something is true, from Old French demonstration or directly from Latin
demonstrationem (nominative demonstratio), noun of action from past participle stem of demonstrare
to point out, indicate, demonstrate, figuratively, to prove, establish, from de- entirely (see de-)
+ monstrare to point out, show, from monstrum divine omen, wonder (see monster). Meaning public show
of feeling, usually with a mass meeting and a procession, is from 1839. Related: Demonstrational.


demonstrative (adj.)

late 14c., characterized by logic, based on logic, from Old French d&eacute;monstratif (14c.), from
Latin demonstrativus pointing out, demonstrating, from past participle stem of demonstrare (see
demonstration). Grammatical sense, pointing out the thing referred to, is mid-15c. Meaning given to
outward expressions of feelings is from 1819. Demonstrative pronoun is late 16c.


demonstrator (n.)

1610s, one who points out, agent noun in Latin form from demonstrate. From 1680s as one who uses
exhibits as a method of teaching; 1870 as one who participates in public demonstrations.


demoralize (v.)

c.1793, to corrupt the morals of, from French d&eacute;moraliser, from de- remove (see de-) + moral
(adj.) (see moral). Said to be a coinage of the French Revolution. Sense of lower the morale of
(especially of armies) is first recorded 1848. Related: Demoralized; demoralizing.


demote (v.)

1881, American English coinage from de- + stem of promote. Said to have been Midwestern in origin.
Regarding an antithesis to 'promote,' the word universally in use in Cambridge, in Harvard College,
is drop. The same word is in use in the leading schools here (Boston). I hope I may be counted every
time against such barbarisms as 'demote' and 'retromote.' [Edward Everett Hale, 1892, letter to the
publishers of Funk &amp; Wagnalls' Standard Dictionary]    Related: Demoted; demoting.


demotic (adj.)

1822, from Greek demotikos of or for the common people, in common use, from demos common people,
originally district, from PIE *da-mo- division, from root *da- to divide (see tide). In contrast to
hieratic. Originally of the simpler of two forms of ancient Egyptian writing; broader sense is from
1831; used of Greek since 1927.


demotion (n.)

1901, agent noun from demote (v.).


demotivate (v.)

1976; see de- + motivate. Related: Demotivated; demotivating.


Dempsey

surname, from Irish &Oacute; Diomasaigh descendant of Diomasach, literally proud.


demulcent (adj.)

1732, from Latin demulcentem (nominative demulcens), present participle of demulcere to stroke down,
soothingly pet, from de- (see de-) + mulcere to soothe.


demur (v.)

c.1200, to linger, tarry, delay, from Old French demorer delay, retard, from Latin demorari to
linger, loiter, tarry, from de- (see de-) + morari to delay, from mora a pause, delay (see
moratorium). Main modern sense of raise objections is first attested 1630s. Related: Demurred;
demurring.


demure (adj.)

late 14c. (early 14c. as a surname), from Old French meur mature, fully grown, ripe, hence discreet,
from Latin maturus mature (see mature (v.)) [OED]. The de- in this word is of uncertain meaning. Or
possibly from Anglo-French demur&eacute; (Old French demor&eacute;), past participle of demorer
stay, and influenced by meur [Barnhart]. Or from Old French de (bon) murs of good manners, from murs
(Modern French moeurs) [Klein].


demurrage (n.)

1640s, from Old French demorage, from demorer (see demur).


demurrer (n.)

legal pleading, 1530s, from Anglo-French demurrer, Old French demorer to delay, retard (see demur).


demystify (v.)

1963; see de- + mystify. Related: Demystified; demystifying.


den (n.)

Old English denn wild animal's lair, from Proto-Germanic *danjan (cognates: Middle Low German denne
lowland, wooded vale, den, Old English denu valley, Old Frisian dene down, Old High German tenni,
German tenne threshing floor, from PIE *dan- low ground). Sense of small room is 1771, originally
colloquial.


denarius (n.)

ancient Roman silver coin, 1570s, from Latin denarius, noun use of adjective meaning containing ten,
and short for denarius nummus the coin containing ten (aces), from deni- by tens, from decem ten
(see ten).


denationalize (v.)

1807, to deprive of nationality, from French d&eacute;nationaliser (said in contemporary English
publications to have been coined by Napoleon Buonaparte; denapoleonize was coined shortly
thereafter); see de- + nationalize. Meaning to transfer from national to private ownership recorded
from 1921. Related: Denationalized; denationalization.


denaturation (n.)

1845, earlier in French and German; see denature + -ation.


denature (v.)

1878, in modern sense, from French d&eacute;naturer (Old French desnaturer change the nature of;
make unnatural); see de- + nature. Earlier to make unnatural (1680s). Related: Denatured.


dendrite (n.)

mid-18c., from Greek dendrites of or pertaining to a tree, from dendron tree (see dendro-). The
mineral so called for its markings.


dendritic (adj.)

1816; see dendrite + -ic.


dendro-

word-forming element meaning tree, from Greek dendro-, comb. form of dendron tree, sometimes
especially fruit tree (as opposed to hyle timber), from PIE *der-drew-, from root *deru- to be firm,
solid, steadfast, specifically used for wood, tree (see tree (n.)).


dendrochronology (n.)

dating by tree rings, 1928; see dendro- + chronology.


dendrology (n.)

1708, from dendro- + -ology.


dene (n.2)

bare, sandy tract by the sea, late 13c., of uncertain origin, perhaps connected to dune, but the
sense difference is difficult.


dene (n.1)

small valley, from Old English denu valley (see den).


Deneb

bright star in the tail of the constellation Cygnus the Swan, 1741, from Arabic Al Dhanab al Dajajah
the Hen's Tail.


Denebola

second-brightest star in Leo, from Latinized corruption of Arabic dhanab al-(asad) tail of the lion.
In 18c., often simply Deneb.


dengue (n.)

1828, from West Indian Spanish dengue, from an African source, perhaps Swahili dinga seizure, cramp,
form influenced by Spanish dengue prudery (perhaps because sufferers walk stiffly and erect due to
painful joints). The disease is African, introduced to the West Indies 1827.


denial (n.)

1520s; see deny + -al (2). Replaced earlier denyance (mid-15c.). Meaning unconscious suppression of
painful or embarrassing feelings first attested 1914 in A.A. Brill's translation of Freud's
Psychopathology of Everyday Life; phrase in denial popularized 1980s.


denier (n.)

French coin, early 15c., from Old French dener, a small coin of slight value, roughly equivalent to
the English penny, in use in France from the time of Charlemagne to early modern times, from Latin
denarium, from denarius, name of a Roman coin (source also of Spanish dinero; see denarius).


denigrate (v.)

1520s, from Latin denigratus, past participle of denigrare to blacken, defame, from de- completely
(see de-) + nigr-, stem of niger black (see Negro). of unknown origin. Apparently disused in 18th c.
and revived in 19th c. [OED]. Related: Denigrated; denigrating.


denigration (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin denigrationem (nominative denigratio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin denigrare (see denigrate).


denim (n.)

1690s, from French serge de N&icirc;mes serge from N&icirc;mes, town in southern France. Application
to coarse cotton cloth is first recorded 1850 in American English. Denims pants made of denim
recorded from 1868. The place name is Roman Nemausus, said to be ultimately from Gaulish nemo
sanctuary.


Denise

fem. form of masc. proper name Dennis. Little used in U.S. before 1920s; was at its most popular
(top 50) for girls born between 1951 and 1973.


denitrification (n.)

1883; see de- + nitrification. Related: Denitrate; denitrify.


denizen (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French deinzein, from deinz within, inside, from Late Latin deintus, from de-
from + intus within (see ento-). Historically, an alien admitted to certain rights of citizenship; a
naturalized citizen.


Denmark

from Dane, the people's name, + Danish mark border (see mark (n.1)).


Dennis

masc. proper name, from French Denis, ultimately from Latin Dionysius, name of an important 6c.
Church father, from Greek Dionysos, god of wine and revelry.


denominate (v.)

1550s, from Latin denominatus, past participle of denominare to name (see denomination). Related:
Denominated; denominating.


denomination (n.)

late 14c., a naming, act of giving a name to, from Old French denominacion nominating, naming, from
Latin denominationem (nominative denominatio) a calling by anything other than the proper name,
metonymy, from denominare to name, from de- completely (see de-) + nominare to name (see nominate).
Meaning a class is from mid-15c. Monetary sense is 1650s; meaning religious sect is 1716.


denominational (adj.)

1838; see denomination + -al (1).


denominative (adj.)

early 15c., in name only, from Late Latin denominativus, from Latin denominatus (see denominate).


denominator (n.)

1540s, in mathematics, from Medieval Latin denominator, agent noun from past participle stem of
denominare (see denomination).


denotate (v.)

1590s, from past participle stem of Latin denotare (see denote). Related: Denotated; denotating.


denotation (n.)

1530s, indication, from Late Latin denotationem (nominative denotatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of denotare (see denote). As a term in logic, from 1843 (contrasted with
connotation).


denotative (adj.)

1610s, from Latin denotat-, past participle stem of denotare (see denote) + -ive.


denote (v.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;noter (14c.), from Latin denotare denote, mark out, from de-
completely (see de-) + notare to mark (see note (v.)). Related: Denoted; denoting.


denouement (n.)

1752, from French d&eacute;nouement an untying (of plot), from d&eacute;nouer untie (Old French
desnouer) from des- un-, out (see dis-) + nouer to tie, knot, from Latin nodus a knot, from PIE
*ned- to bind, tie (see net (n.)).


denounce (v.)

early 14c., announce, from Old French denoncier (12c., Modern French d&eacute;noncer), from Latin
denuntiare to announce, proclaim; denounce, menace; command, order, from de- down + nuntiare
proclaim, announce, from nuntius messenger (see nuncio). Negative sense in English via meaning to
declare or proclaim something as cursed, excommunicated, forgiven, removed from office. Related:
Denounced; denouncing.


dense (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French dense and directly from Latin densus thick, crowded; cloudy, perhaps
from PIE root *dens- dense, thick (cognates: Greek dasus hairy, shaggy). Sense of stupid is first
recorded 1822.


density (n.)

c.1600, from French densit&eacute; (16c.), from Old French dempsit&eacute; (13c.), from Latin
densitas thickness, from densus thick, dense (see dense).


dent (n.)

early 14c., a strike or blow, dialectal variant of Middle English dint (q.v.); sense of indentation
first recorded 1560s, apparently influenced by indent.


dent (v.)

late 14c., from dent (n.). Related: Dented; denting.


dental (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French dental of teeth or Medieval Latin dentalis, from Latin dens (genitive
dentis) tooth, from PIE root *dent- (see tooth).


dentifrice (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French dentifrice (15c.), from Latin dentifricium powder for rubbing the
teeth, from dens (genitive dentis) tooth (see tooth) + fricare to rub (see friction).


dentin (n.)

also dentine, the hard substance in teeth, 1836, from comb. form of Latin dens (genitive dentis)
tooth (see tooth) + chemical suffix -in (2).


dentist (n.)

1759, from French dentiste, from dent tooth, from Latin dens (see tooth) + -ist.  Dentist figures it
now in our newspapers, and may do well enough for a French puffer, but we fancy Rutter is content
with being called a tooth-drawer [Edinburgh Chronicle, Sept. 15, 1759].   Tooth-drawer is attested
from late 14c.


dentistry (n.)

1838; see dentist + -ry.


dentition (n.)

1610s, teething, the cutting of teeth, from Latin dentitionem (nominative dentitio) teething, noun
of action from past participle stem of dentire to cut the teeth, from dentem (nominative dens) tooth
(see tooth). Meaning arrangement of teeth is from 1849.


denture (n.)

1874, from French denture set of teeth, from Latin dens (genitive dentis, tooth; see tooth) + -ure
(see -ure). In Middle English, the word meant an indenture; a zigzag course (c.1400). Related:
Dentures.


denudation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;nudation, from Latin denudationem (nominative denudatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of denudare (see denude). Figurative use is from 1590s. In
geology, from 1811.


denude (v.)

early 15c. (implied in denuded), from Middle French d&eacute;nuder, from Latin denudare to lay bare,
strip; uncover, expose, from de- away (see de-) + nudare to strip, from nudus naked, bare (see
naked). Related: Denuding.


denunciate (v.)

1590s, from Latin   denunciatus, past participle of denuntiare (see denounce). The same word as
denounce, but directly from Latin. Not widely used except in its noun form, denunciation.


denunciation (n.)

early 15c., act of declaring or stating something, from Latin denuntiationem (nominative
denuntiatio), noun of action from past participle stem of denuntiare (see denounce). Meaning a
charge is mid-15c.


Denver

city in Colorado, U.S., founded 1858 as Auraria (golden), renamed 1859 for Gen. James W. Denver
(1817-1892), governor of the territory. The family name is from the place of that name in Norfolk,
literally ford or passage used by the Danes, from Old English Dena (genitive plural) + f&aelig;r.
The Denver boot or shoe as the name for a wheel clamp for illegally parked vehicles, supposedly was
invented 1953 by Frank Marugg, pattern-maker and violinist with the Denver Symphony Orchestra. He
was a friend of politicians and police department officials, and the city sheriff's department came
to him for help in making a device to immobilize vehicles whose owners didn't pay parking tickets.


deny (v.)

early 14c., from Old French denoiir deny, repudiate, withhold, from Latin denegare to deny, reject,
refuse (source of Italian dinegarre, Spanish denegar), from de- away (see de-) + negare refuse, say
'no,'  from Old Latin nec not, from Italic base *nek- not, from PIE root *ne- no, not (see un-).
Related: Denied; denying.


Deo volente

1767, Latin, literally God willing.


deodand (n.)

1520s, from Anglo-French deodande (late 13c.), from Medieval Latin deodandum, from Deo dandum a
thing to be given to God, from dative of deus god (see Zeus) + neuter gerundive of dare to give (see
date (n.1)). In English law, a personal chattel which, having been the immediate cause of the death
of a person, was forfeited to the Crown to be applied to pious uses. Abolished 1846.


deodorant (n.)

1848, originally of substances to quell the odor of manure, formed in English as if from de- + Latin
odorem smell (see odor (n.)). In reference to a substance to be used on the human body, from 1860.
An earlier version, a perfumed powder, was called empasm (1650s), from Greek *empasma to sprinkle
on.


deodorize (v.)

1858; see de- + odor + -ize. Related: Deodorized; deodorizing.


deontology (n.)

science of moral duty, 1826, from Greek deont-, comb. form of deon that which is binding, duty,
neuter present participle of dei is binding; + -ology. Said to have been coined by Bentham. Related:
Deontological.


deoxidize (v.)

1794; see de- + oxidize. Related: Deoxidized; deoxidizing.


deoxy-

also desoxy-, word-forming element used to make chemical names for compounds which contain less
oxygen than other compounds, from de- + first two syllables of oxygen


deoxyribonucleic acid (n.)

1931; see deoxyribose.


deoxyribose (n.)

1931, from deoxy- (because the 2' hydroxyl (-OH) in the sugar is in this case reduced to a hydrogen
(H) by loss of an oxygen) + ribose.


depart (v.)

mid-13c., part from each other, from Old French departir (10c.) to divide, distribute; separate
(oneself), depart; die, from Late Latin departire divide (transitive), from de- from (see de-) +
partire to part, divide, from pars (genitive partis) a part (see part (n.)).    As a euphemism for
to die (to depart this life; compare Old French departir de cest siecle) it is attested from c.1500,
as is the departed for the dead, singly or collectively. Transitive lingers in some English usages;
the wedding service was till death us depart until 1662. Related: Departed; departing.


department (n.)

mid-15c., a going away, act of leaving, from Old French departement (12c.) division, sharing out;
divorce, parting, from Late Latin departire (see depart). French department meant group of people
(as well as departure), from which English borrowed the sense of separate division, separate
business assigned to someone in a larger organization (c.1735). Meaning separate division of a
government is from 1769. As an administrative district in France, from 1792.


department store (n.)

1878; a store that sells a variety of items, organized by department.    The Department Store is the
outgrowth of the cheap counter business originated by Butler Brothers in Boston about ten years ago.
The little Five Cent Counter then became a cornerstone from which the largest of all the world's
branches of merchandising was to be reared. It was the Cheap Counter which proved to the progressive
merchant his ability to sell all lines of wares under one roof. It was the Five Cent Counter
epidemic of '77 and '78 which rushed like a mighty whirlwind from the Atlantic to the Pacific and
all along its path transformed old time one line storekeepers into the wide-awake merchant princes
of the present day. It was this same epidemic which made possible the world famed Department Stores
of Houghton, of Boston; Macy, of New York; Wanamaker, of Philadelphia; and Lehman, of Chicago.
[American Storekeeper, 1885]


departmental (adj.)

1791, pertaining to a French department, from French d&eacute;partmental, from d&eacute;partement
(see department). Meaning of departmental systems generally from 1832.


departure (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French deporteure departure, figuratively, death, from departir (see depart) +
-ure (see -ure).


depeche (n.)

a dispatch, from French d&eacute;p&ecirc;che (15c.), from d&eacute;p&ecirc;cher to dispatch, from
Old French despeechier, from des- (see des-) + stem of empeechier to hinder (see impeach). Not
directly related to dispatch.


depend (v.)

early 15c., to be attached to as a condition or cause, a figurative use, from Middle French
dependre, literally to hang from, hang down, from Latin dependere to hang from, hang down; be
dependent on, be derived, from de- from, down (see de-) + pendere to hang, be suspended (see
pendant). Related: Depended; depending.


dependable (adj.)

1735; se depend + -able. Related: Dependability; dependably.


dependance (n.)

c.1400, early variant of dependence, rare since c.1800; see -ance.


dependancy (n.)

early variant of dependency, rare since c.1800; see -ance.


dependant (adj.)

also dependent, late 14c.; of persons, from 1580s, from French d&eacute;pendant (adjective and
noun), properly present participle of d&eacute;pendre to hang down, also to depend, from Latin
dependentem (see depend).    As a noun, from early 15c., originally action growing out of another
action.  As with its relative dependence, the Latin-influenced variant (in this case dependent) co-
existed through 18c., but with this word the French spelling has proven more durable in English,
possibly because it has been found convenient to keep both, one (dependant) for the noun, the other
(dependent) for the adjective.


dependants (n.)

1580s, see dependant.


dependence (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;pendance, from dependre (see depend). Originally also
dependance (the earlier form), depending whether the writer had French or Latin foremost in mind;
the Latin form gradually predominated and after c.1800 dependance is rare. As an adjective from
c.1600.


dependencies (n.)

territories subordinate to another nation, 1680s; see dependency.


dependency

1590s (adj.), 1610s (n.); see dependent + -cy. Originally also dependancy, on the French model, but
the Latinate form gradually pushed this into disuse; see -ance. Meaning territory subordinate to
another nation is recorded from 1680s.


dependent

15c., variant spelling of dependant, now mostly restricted to adjectival use; see -ance. Dependent
variable in mathematics is recorded from 1852.


depersonalization (n.)

1907; see de- + personalization. Related: Depersonalize; depersonalized.


dephlogisticate (v.)

1775; see de- + phlogiston. Related: Dephlogisticated; dephlogisticating.


depict (v.)

early 15c., from Latin depictus, past participle of depingere to portray, paint, sketch; describe,
imagine, from de- down (see de-) + pingere to paint (see paint (v.)). Related: Depicted; depicting.


depiction (n.)

1680s, from French depiction, from Late Latin depictionem (nominative depictio) painting,
description, noun of action from Latin depictus (see depict).


depilation (n.)

early 15c., from Modern Latin depilationem, noun of action from past participle stem of depilare
(see depilatory).


depilatory (adj.)

c.1600, from French d&eacute;pilatorie (adj.), from Latin depilatus having one's hair plucked, from
de- completely (see de-) + pilatus, past participle of pilare deprive of hair, from pilus hair (see
pile (n.3)). Earlier in same sense was Depilative. As a noun from c.1600, from French
d&eacute;pilatorie (n.).


deplane (v.)

1923; see de- + plane (n.2).


deplete (v.)

1807, back-formation from depletion. Related: Depleted; depleting.


depletion (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin depletionem (nominative depletio) blood-letting, noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin deplere to empty, literally to un-fill, from de- off, away (see de-) +
plere to fill (see pleio-).


deplorable (adj.)

1610s; see deplore + -able. Perhaps from French d&eacute;plorable or directly from Late Latin
deplorabilis. Johnson (mid-18c.) noted the weakened colloquial use of the word for very bad.
Related: Deplorably.


deplore (v.)

1550s, to give up as hopeless, from French d&eacute;plorer (13c.), from Latin deplorare deplore,
bewail, lament, give up for lost, from de- entirely (see de-) + plorare weep, cry out. Meaning to
regret deeply is from 1560s. Related: Deplored; deploring.


deploy (v.)

1786 as a military word, from French d&eacute;ployer unroll, unfold, from Old French desploiier
unfold, from Latin displicare unfold, scatter, from dis- (see dis-) + plicare to fold see ply
(v.1)). In its AFr. form regularly adopted in ME as desplay [OED]. Related: Deployed; deploying.


deployment (n.)

1796, from French d&eacute;ploiement, from d&eacute;ployer (see deploy).


depolarization (n.)

1815; see de- + polarization. Related: Depolarize; depolarized.


depoliticize (v.)

1928, from de- + politicize. Related: Depoliticized; depoliticizing.


deponent (adj.)

1520s, originally grammatical (of verbs passive in form but active in sense), from Latin deponentem
putting down or aside, present participle of deponere (see deposit (v.)). Noun meaning one who makes
a deposition is from 1540s.


depopulate (v.)

1540s; see de- + populate. Perhaps from Latin depopulatus, past participle of depopulari to lay
waste, ravage. Related: Depopulated; depopulating. Earlier in same sense was dispeplen (early 15c.).


depopulation (n.)

early 15c.; see de- + population.


deport (v.1)

late 15c., to behave, from Old French deporter behave, deport (oneself) (12c.), also with a wide
range of meanings in Old French, such as be patient; take one's (sexual) pleasure with; amuse,
entertain; remain, delay, tarry; cheer, console, treat kindly; put aside, cast off, send away, from
de- from, off (see de-) + porter to carry, from Latin portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Related:
Deported; deporting.


deport (v.2)

banish, 1640s, from French d&eacute;porter, from Latin deportare carry off, transport, banish,
exile, from de- in its sense of off, away (see de-) + portare to carry (but associated by folk
etymology with portus harbor); see port (n.1). Related: Deported; deporting.


deportation (n.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;portation, from Latin deporationem (nominative deportatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of deportare (see deport (v.2)).


deportee (n.)

1895; see deport (v.2) + -ee.


deportment (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French d&eacute;portement, from d&eacute;porter to behave, from Old French
deporter (see deport (v.1)).


depose (v.)

c.1300, from Old French deposer (12c.), from de- down (see de-) + poser put, place (see pose (v.1)).
Related: Deposed; deposing.


deposit (v.)

1620s, from Latin depositus, past participle of deponere lay aside, put down, deposit, also used of
births and bets, from de- away (see de-) + ponere to put (see position). Related: Deposited;
depositing.


deposit (n.)

1620s, from Latin depositum, from deponere (see deposit (v.)). Geological sense is from 1781;
monetary sense is from 1737.


deposition (n.)

late 14c., dethronement, putting down from dignity or authority, from Old French deposicion (12c.),
from Latin depositionem (nominative depositio), noun of action from past participle stem of deponere
(see deposit (v.)).    Meaning statements made in court under oath is from early 15c. Meaning action
of depositing is from 1590s. Properly, deposition belongs to deposit, but deposit and depose have
become totally confused and English deposition partakes of senses belonging to both.


depositor (n.)

1560s, agent noun in Latin form from deposit (v.).


depository (n.)

place where things are deposited, 1750, from Medieval Latin depositorium, from deposit-, past
participle stem of Latin deponere (see deposit (v.)) + -orium (see -ory).


depot (n.)

1795, warehouse, from French d&eacute;p&ocirc;t a deposit, place of deposit, from Old French depost
a deposit or pledge, from Latin depositum a deposit, noun use of neuter past participle of deponere
lay aside (see deposit (v.)). Military sense is from 1798; meaning railway station is first recorded
1842, American English.


deprave (v.)

late 14c., corrupt, lead astray, pervert, from Old French depraver (14c.) or directly from Latin
depravare distort, disfigure; figuratively to pervert, seduce, corrupt, from de- completely (see
de-) + pravus crooked. Related: Depraved; depraving.


depravity (n.)

1640s; see deprave + -ity. Earlier in same sense was pravity.


deprecate (v.)

1620s, to pray against or for deliverance from, from Latin deprecatus, past participle of deprecari
to pray (something) away (see deprecation). Meaning to express disapproval is from 1640s. Related:
Deprecated, deprecating.


deprecation (n.)

c.1500, prayer to avert evil, from Middle French depr&eacute;cation, from Latin deprecationem
(nominative deprecatio), from past participle stem of deprecari plead in excuse, avert by prayer,
literally to pray (something) away, from de- away (see de-) + precari pray (see pray). Sense of
disapproval is first attested 1610s.


deprecative (adj.)

mid-15c., praying for deliverance, from Middle French d&eacute;pr&eacute;catif (13c.), from Late
Latin deprecativus, from past participle stem of Latin deprecari (see deprecation). Related:
Deprecatively.


deprecatory (adj.)

1580s, from Late Latin deprecatorius, from deprecat-, past participle stem of deprecari (see
deprecation).


depreciate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin depretiatus, past participle of depretiare to lower the price of, undervalue,
from de- down (see de-) + pretium price (see price (n.)). Related: Depreciated; depreciating;
depreciatory.


depreciation (n.)

1767, a lowering of value (originally of currency), noun of action from depreciate. Meaning loss of
value of a durable good by age or wear is from 1900.


depredate (v.)

1620s, from Latin depredatus, past participle of depraedare to pillage, ravage (see depredation).


depredation (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;pr&eacute;dation, from Late Latin depraedationem (nominative
depraedatio) a plundering, from past participle stem of Latin depraedari to pillage, from de-
thoroughly (see de-) + praedari to plunder, literally to make prey of, from praeda prey (see prey
(n.)).


depress (v.)

early 14c., put down by force, from Old French depresser, from Late Latin depressare, frequentative
of Latin deprimere press down, from de- down (see de-) + premere to press (see press (v.1)). Meaning
push down physically is from early 15c.; that of deject, make gloomy is from 1620s; economic sense
of lower in value is from 1878. Related: Depressed; depressing.


depressant (n.)

sedative, 1876 as a noun, 1887 as an adjective; see depress + -ant.


depression (n.)

late 14c. as a term in astronomy, from Old French depression (14c.) or directly from Latin
depressionem (nominative depressio), noun of action from past participle stem of deprimere to press
down, depress (see depress).    Attested from 1650s in the literal sense; meaning dejection,
depression of spirits is from early 15c. (as a clinical term in psychology, from 1905);
meteorological sense is from 1881 (in reference to barometric pressure); meaning a lowering or
reduction in economic activity was in use by 1826; given a specific application (with capital D-) by
1934 to the one that began worldwide in 1929. For melancholy, depression an Old English word was
grevoushede.


depressive (adj.)

1610s, from Latin depress-, past participle stem of deprimere (see depress) + -ive. In psychology,
from 1905.


deprivation (n.)

mid-15c., removal from office or position, from Medieval Latin deprivationem (nominative
deprivatio), noun of action from past participle stem of deprivare (see deprive).


deprive (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French depriver, from Medieval Latin deprivare, from Latin de- entirely (see de-)
+ privare release from (see private). Replaced Old English bed&aelig;lan. Related: Deprived;
depriving.


deprived (adj.)

1550s, dispossessed, past participle adjective from deprive. As a euphemism for the condition of
children who lack a stable home life, by 1945.


deprogram (v.)

release from cult brainwashing, 1973, from de- + program (v.). Related: Deprogrammed; deprogramming.


dept.

abbreviation of department, attested from 1869.


depth (n.)

late 14c., apparently formed in Middle English on model of length, breadth; from Old English deop
deep (see deep) + -th (2). Replaced older deopnes deepness. Though the English word is relatively
recent, the formation is in Proto-Germanic, *deupitho-, and corresponds to Old Saxon diupitha, Dutch
diepte, Old Norse dyp&eth;, Gothic diupi&thorn;a.


deputation (n.)

late 14c., noun of action from depute (v.).


depute (v.)

mid-14c., to appoint, assign, from Middle French deputer, from Late Latin deputare destine, allot
(see deputy). Related: Deputed; deputing.


deputize (v.)

1730s; see deputy + -ize. Related: Deputized; deputizing.


deputy (n.)

c.1400, one given the full power of an officer without holding the office, from Anglo-French
deput&eacute;, noun use of past participle of Middle French d&eacute;puter appoint, assign (14c.),
from Late Latin deputare to destine, allot, in classical Latin to esteem, consider, consider as,
literally to cut off, prune, from de- away (see de-) + putare to think, count, consider, literally
to cut, prune (see pave).


deracinate (n.)

1590s, to pluck up by the roots, from French d&eacute;raciner, from Old French desraciner uproot,
dig out, pull up by the roots, from des- (see dis-) + racine root, from Late Latin radicina,
diminutive of Latin radix (see radish). Related: Deracinated.


derail (v.)

1850, in both transitive and intransitive senses, from French d&eacute;railler to go off the rails,
from de- (see de-) + railler (see rail (n.1)). In general use first in U.S. Related: Derailed;
derailing.


derailleur (n.)

type of bicycle gear mechanism, 1930, from French d&eacute;railleur (1927), from d&eacute;railler to
go off the rails (see derail).


derailment (n.)

1850, from French d&eacute;raillement, from d&eacute;railler to go off the rails (see derail).


derange (v.)

1776, throw into confusion, from French d&eacute;ranger, from Old French desrengier disarrange,
throw into disorder, from des- do the opposite of (see dis-) + Old French rengier (Modern French
ranger) to put into line, from reng line, row, from a Germanic source (see rank (n.)). Mental sense
first recorded c.1790.


deranged (adj.)

c.1790, insane; of things, out of order, from 1796; past participle adjective from derange (v.).


derangement (n.)

1737, disturbance of regular order, from French d&eacute;rangement (17c.), from d&eacute;ranger (see
derange). Of mental order, from 1800.


derby (n.)

type of hat, manufactured in U.S. 1850, name appears 1870, perhaps from annual Derby horse race in
England, where this type of hat was worn. Race was begun 1780 by the 12th Earl of Derby; the name
was used for any major horse race after 1875. Derby the English shire is Old English Deorby deer
village, from deor deer + by habitation, homestead, from a Scandinavian source (see bylaw).


derecho (n.)

from American Spanish derecho, from Old Spanish diestro, from Latin directus (see direct (v.)).


deregulate (v.)

1963, back-formation from deregulation. Related: Deregulated; deregulating.


derelict (adj.)

1640s, from Latin derelictus solitary, deserted, past participle of dereliquere to abandon, forsake,
desert, from de- entirely + relinquere leave behind (see relinquish). Originally especially of
vessels abandoned at sea or stranded on shore. As a noun, from 1660s.


dereliction (n.)

1590s, abandonment (formerly with a wider range than in modern use, such as of the sea withdrawing
from the land), from Latin derelictionem (nominative derelictio), noun of action from past
participle stem of derelinquere (see derelict). Meaning failure in duty is from c.1830.


deride (v.)

1520s, from Middle French derider, from Latin deridere to ridicule, laugh to scorn (see derision).
Related: Derided; deriding.


derision (n.)

c.1400, from Old French derision derision, mockery (13c.), from Latin derisionem (nominative
derisio), noun of action from past participle stem of deridere ridicule, from de- down (see de-) +
ridere to laugh.


derisive (adj.)

1620s, characterized by derision, from Latin deris-, past participle stem of deridere (see derision)
+ -ive. Meaning ridiculous is from 1896. Related: Derisively.


derisory (adj.)

1610s, from Latin derisorius, from derisor derider, agent noun from deridere (see deride).


derivate (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin derivatus, past participle of derivare (see derive). From 1650s as a noun.


derivation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;rivation (14c.), from Latin derivationem (nominative
derivatio) a leading off, turning away, noun of action from past participle stem of derivare (see
derive). Grammatical sense is older; general meaning origination, descent is from c.1600.


derivative

early 15c. (adj.); mid-15c. (n.), from Middle French d&eacute;rivatif (15c.), from Late Latin
derivat-, past participle stem of Latin derivare (see derive). Mathematical sense is from 1670s.


derive (v.)

late 14c., from Old French deriver to flow, pour out; derive, originate, from Latin derivare to lead
or draw off (a stream of water) from its source (in Late Latin also to derive), from phrase de rivo
(de from + rivus stream; see rivulet). Etymological sense is 1550s. Related: Derived; deriving.


derm (n.)

1835, from Greek derma skin, hide, leather (see derma).


derma (n.)

skin beneath the epidermis, 1706, from Modern Latin derma, from Greek derma (genitive dermatos)
skin, from PIE root *der- (2) to split, peel, flay (see tear (v.1)).


dermabrasion (n.)

1954; see derma + abrasion.


dermal (adj.)

1803; see derm + -al (1). A native formation, the Greek adjective would be dermatikos, yielding
*dermatic.


dermatitis (n.)

1851; see dermato- + -itis.


dermato-

before vowels, dermat-, word-forming element meaning of or pertaining to skin, from Greek dermato-
(shortened form dermo-), from derma skin (see derma).


dermatologist (n.)

1833; see dermatology + -ist.


dermatology (n.)

1819, from dermato- + -logy. Related: Dermatological.


dermis (n.)

1830, perhaps from Latinized form of Greek derma skin (see derma); or perhaps a back-formation from
epidermis.


dern (adj.)

secret, hidden (obsolete), from Old English derne concealed, secret, dark, from West Germanic
*darnjaz (cognates: Old Saxon derni, Old Frisian dern concealed, dark, Old High German tarni secret,
concealed, veiled).    As a verb, to conceal, from Old English diernan to hide. Compare Old High
German tarnjan to conceal, hide; German Tarnkappe, Tarnhelm magical cap or helmet which turns the
wearer invisible or allows him to assume any form. Related to dark (adj.). French ternir to tarnish,
to dull apparently is a Germanic loan-word.


derogate (v.)

early 15c., impair (authority); disparage (reputation), from Latin derogatus, past participle of
derogare diminish (see derogatory).


derogation (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French d&eacute;rogacion (14c.), from Latin derogationem (nominative derogatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of derogare (see derogatory).


derogative (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French derogatif, from Latin *derogativus, from past participle stem of
derogare (see derogatory).


derogatory (adj.)

c.1500, from Late Latin derogatorius, from Latin derogatus, past participle of derogare to take
away, detract from, diminish, also repeal partly, restrict, modify, from de- away (see de-) + rogare
ask, question, propose (see rogation).


derrick (n.)

c.1600, originally hangman, then a gallows, then hoist, crane (1727), from surname of a hangman at
Tyburn gallows, London, c.1606-1608, often referred to in contemporary theater. The name represents
a late borrowing from the Low Countries (compare Dutch Diederik) of Old High German Theodric.


derriere (n.)

1774, from French derri&egrave;re back part, rear, originally an adverb, behind, behind the back
(12c.), from Late Latin deretro, from Latin de from (see de-) + retro back (see retro-).


derring-do (n.)

originally (late 14c.) dorrying don, literally daring to do, from durring daring, present participle
of Middle English durren to dare (see dare (v.)) + don, infinitive of do (v.). Misspelled derrynge
do 1500s and mistaken for a noun by Spenser, who took it to mean manhood and chevalrie; picked up
from him and passed on to Romantic poets as a pseudo-archaism by Sir Walter Scott.


derringer (n.)

1850, for Henry Deringer (1786-1868), U.S. gunsmith who invented it in the 1840s; prevailing
misspelled form is how his name appeared on the many counterfeits and imitations. A small pistol
with a large bore, very effective at short range [OED].


dervish (n.)

1580s, from Turkish dervish, from Persian darvesh, darvish beggar, poor, hence religious mendicant;
equivalent of Arabic faqir (see fakir). The whirling dervishes are just one order among many.
Originally dervis; modern spelling is from mid-19c.


Des Moines

city in Iowa, U.S., named for French Rivi&egrave;re des Moines, the river that flows past it, which
traditionally is derived from French des moines of the monks, in reference to missionaries, but this
probably is a fur trappers' folk-etymologizing of a name of the native people who lived there.
The place appears in a 1673 text as Moinguena, and historians believe this represents Miami-Illinois
mooyiinkweena, literally shitface, from mooy excrement + iinkwee face; a name given by the Peoria
Indians (whose name has itself become a sort of insult) to their western neighbors. It is not
unusual for Indian peoples to have hostile or derogatory names for others, but this seems an extreme
case.


des-

the usual form of Latin dis- in Old Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Proven&ccedil;al, French.


desalination (n.)

1943, from de- + salination. As a verb, desalt is recorded from 1909.


descant (n.)

late 14c., from Old North French descant (Old French deschant), from Medieval Latin discantus
refrain, part-song, from Latin dis- asunder, apart (see dis-) + cantus song (see chant). Spelling
was partly Latinized 16c. Originally counterpoint.


descant (v.)

mid-15c.; see descant (n.). Sense of to comment at length is first attested 1640s.


descend (v.)

c.1300, from Old French descendre (10c.) descend, dismount; fall into; originate in, from Latin
descendere come down, descend, sink, from de- down (see de-) + scandere to climb, from PIE root
*skand- jump (see scan (v.)). Sense of originate is late 14c. in English. Related: Descended;
descending.


descendant

mid-15c. (adj.), c.1600 (n.), from French descendant (13c.), present participle of descendre (see
descend). Despite a tendency to use descendent for the adjective and descendant for the noun,
descendant seems to be prevailing in all uses and appears 5 times more often than its rival in books
printed since 1900. Compare dependant.


descendent

see descendant.


descender (n.)

in typography, part of a letter that extends below the body, 1802, agent noun from descend.


descension (n.)

early 15c., from Old French descension, from Latin descensionem (nominative descensio) a going down,
descending, noun of action from descensus, past participle of descendere (see descend).


descent (n.)

c.1300, from Old French descente descent, descendance, lineage, formed from descendre (see descend)
on analogy of French nouns such as attente from attendre to expect, vente sale from vendre to sell,
pente slope from pendre to hang (the etymological English word from Latin would be *descence).
Figurative use is from late 14c. Meaning action of descending, also a downward slope is from 1590s.
Meaning act of descending from an ancestor is from mid-14c. Evolutionary sense is from 1859 in
Darwin, though there are uses which suggest essentially the same thing going back to 1630s.


deschooling (n.)

1970, coined by Austrian-born U.S. anarchist philosopher Ivan Illich (1926-2002) for the transfer of
education to non-institutional systems; see de- + schooling.


describe (v.)

early 13c., descriven, from Old French descrivre, descrire (13c.), from Latin describere to write
down, copy; sketch, represent (see description). Reconstructed with Latin spelling 16c. Related:
Describable; described, describes, describing.


description (n.)

late 14c., from Old French description (12c.) and directly from Latin descriptionem (nominative
descriptio) representation, description, copy, noun of action from past participle stem of
describere write down, transcribe, copy, sketch, from de- down (see de-) + scribere write (see
script (n.)).


descriptive (adj.)

1751, from Late Latin descriptivus, from descript-, past participle stem of describere (see
description). Related: Descriptively; descriptiveness.


descry (v.1)

to see, discern, c.1300, probably from Old French descrier publish (Modern French d&eacute;crier),
from Latin describere (see describe).


descry (v.2)

to proclaim, mid-14c., from Old French descrier, from des- (see dis-) + crier, from Latin quiritare
(see cry (v.)).


desecrate (v.)

1670s, formed from de- do the opposite of (see de-) + stem of consecrate. Old French had dessacrer
to profane, and there is a similar formation in Italian; but Latin desecrare meant to make holy,
with de- in this case having a completive sense. Related: Desecrated; desecrating.


desecration (n.)

1717, noun of action from desecrate (v.).


desegregate (v.)

1948, back-formation from desegregation. Related: Desegregated; desegregating.


desegregation (n.)

1935, American English, from de- do the opposite of + segregation in the racial sense.


desensitize (v.)

1904; see de- do the opposite of + sensitize. Originally of photography development; psychological
sense is first recorded 1935. Related: Desensitized; desensitizing.


desert (v.)

to leave one's duty, late 14c., from Old French deserter (12c.) leave, literally undo or sever
connection, from Late Latin desertare, frequentative of Latin deserere to abandon, to leave,
forsake, give up, leave in the lurch, from de- undo (see de-) + serere join together, put in a row
(see series). Military sense is first recorded 1640s. Related: Deserted; deserting.


desert (n.1)

wasteland, early 13c., from Old French desert (12c.) desert, wilderness, wasteland; destruction,
ruin, from Late Latin desertum (source of Italian diserto, Old Proven&ccedil;al dezert, Spanish
desierto), literally thing abandoned (used in Vulgate to translate wilderness), noun use of neuter
past participle of Latin deserere forsake (see desert (v.)).    Sense of waterless, treeless region
was in Middle English and gradually became the main meaning. Commonly spelled desart in 18c., which
is not etymological but at least avoids confusion with the other two senses of the word. Classical
Latin indicated this idea with deserta, plural of desertus.


desert (n.2)

suitable reward or punishment (now usually plural and with just), c.1300, from Old French deserte,
noun use of past participle of deservir be worthy to have, ultimately from Latin deservire serve
well (see deserve).


deserter (n.)

1630s, agent noun from desert (v.).


desertification (n.)

1973, from desert (n.1) + -fication. In French, d&eacute;sertisation is attested from 1968.


desertion (n.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;sertion (early 15c.), from Late Latin desertionem (nominative
desertio) a forsaking, abandoning, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin deserere (see
desert (v.)).


deserve (v.)

early 13c., from Old French deservir (Modern French desservir) deserve, be worthy of, earn, merit,
from Latin deservire serve well, from de- completely (see de-) + servire to serve (see serve). From
be entitled to because of good service (a sense found in Late Latin), meaning generalized c.1300 to
be worthy of. Related: Deserved; deserving.


desiccate (v.)

1570s (past participle adjective desicatt is attested from early 15c.), from Latin desiccatus, past
participle of desiccare to make very dry (see desiccation). Related: Desiccated; desiccating.


desiccated (adj.)

1670s, past participle adjective from desiccate.


desiccation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French desiccation or directly from Late Latin desiccationem (nominative
desiccatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin desiccare to make very dry, from de-
thoroughly (see de-) + siccare to dry (see siccative).


desiderata (n.)

plural of desideratum (1650s), from Latin, literally something for which desire is felt, from past
participle stem of desiderare to long for (see desire).


desideratum (n.)

something lacking, see desiderata.


design (v.)

1540s, from Latin designare mark out, devise, choose, designate, appoint, from de- out (see de-) +
signare to mark, from signum a mark, sign (see sign (n.)). Originally in English with the meaning
now attached to designate; many modern uses of design are metaphoric extensions. Related: Designed;
designing.


design (n.)

1580s, from Middle French desseign purpose, project, design, from Italian disegno, from disegnare to
mark out, from Latin designare to mark out (see design (v.)).


designate (adj.)

1640s, from Latin designatus, past participle of designare (see design (v.)).


designate (v.)

 As a verb, from 1791, from designate (adj.) or else a back-formation from designation. Related:
Designated; designating.


designated (adj.)

past participle adjective from designate. Designated hitter introduced in American League baseball
in 1973, soon giving wide figurative extension to designated, such as designated driver, by 1985.


designation (n.)

late 14c., action of pointing out, from Old French designacion or directly from Latin designationem
(nominative designatio) a marking out, specification, noun of action from past participle stem of
designare (see design (v.)). Meaning descriptive name is from 1824.


designer (n.)

1640s, one who schemes; agent noun from design (v.). Meaning one who makes an artistic design or a
construction plan is from 1660s. In fashion, as an adjective, bearing the label of a famous clothing
designer (thus presumed to be expensive or prestigious), from 1966. Designer drug attested from
1983.


designing (adj.)

scheming, 1670s, present participle adjective from design (v.).


desirable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French desirable (12c.), from dasirer (see desire (v.)). Related: Desirably;
desirability.


desire (v.)

early 13c., from Old French desirrer (12c.) wish, desire, long for, from Latin desiderare long for,
wish for; demand, expect, original sense perhaps await what the stars will bring, from the phrase de
sidere from the stars, from sidus (genitive sideris) heavenly body, star, constellation (but see
consider). Related: Desired; desiring.


desire (n.)

c.1300, from Old French desir, from desirer (see desire (v.)); sense of lust is first recorded mid-
14c.


desirous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French desirous, Old French desirros (11c., Modern French d&eacute;sireux), from
Vulgar Latin *desiderosus, from stem of Latin desiderare (see desire (v.)).


desist (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;sister (mid-14c.), from Latin desistere to stand aside, leave
off, cease, from de- off (see de-) + sistere stop, come to a stand (see assist). Related: Desisted;
desisting.


desk (n.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin desca table to write on (mid-13c.), from Latin discus quoit, platter,
dish, from Greek diskos (see disk (n.)). The Medieval Latin is perhaps via Italian desco. Used
figuratively of office or clerical work since 1797; desk job is first attested 1965.


desktop (n.)

1929, from desk + top. As an adjective meaning suitable for use on a desktop, it is recorded from
1958 (in reference to computers). As a shortening of desktop computer, recorded from 1983. Desktop
publishing recorded from 1984.


desmo-

before vowels desm-, word-forming element used in scientific compounds, from Greek desmos bond,
fastening, chain, from PIE root *de- to bind.


desolate (adj.)

mid-14c., without companions, also uninhabited, from Latin desolatus, past participle of desolare
leave alone, desert, from de- completely (see de-) + solare make lonely, from solus alone (see sole
(adj.)). Sense of joyless is 15c.


desolate (v.)

late 14c., from desolate (adj.). Related: Desolated; desolating.


desolation (n.)

late 14c., action of laying waste, also sorrow, grief, from Old French desolacion (12c.) desolation,
devastation, hopelessness, despair, from Church Latin desolationem (nominative desolatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of desolare (see desolate (adj.)). Meaning condition of being
ruined or wasted is from early 15c.


despair (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French despeir, Old French despoir, from desperer (see despair (v.)). Replaced
native wanhope.


despair (v.)

early 14c., from stem of Old French desperer be dismayed, lose hope, despair, from Latin desperare
to despair, to lose all hope, from de- without (see de-) + sperare to hope, from spes hope (see
sperate). Related: Despaired; despairing; despairingly.


despatch

18c. variant of dispatch (q.v.), apparently the result of an error in the printing of Johnson's
dictionary.


desperado (n.)

c.1600, a person in despair, mock-Spanish version of desperate (n.) reckless criminal (1560s),  from
Latin desperatus (see desperation). There was an adjective desperado in Old Spanish, meaning out of
hope, desperate, but apparently it never was used as a noun and it probably has nothing to do with
the English word. Meaning a desperate or reckless man is recorded from 1640s.


desperate (adj.)

early 15c., despairing, hopeless, from Latin desperatus given up, despaired of, past participle of
desperare (see despair (v.)). Sense of driven to recklessness is from late 15c.; weakened sense of
having a great desire for is from 1950s. Related: Desperately.


desperation (n.)

mid-14c., from Middle French d&eacute;speration or directly from Latin desperationem (nominative
desperatio) despair, hopelessness, noun of action from past participle stem of desperare lose hope
(see despair (v.)).


despicable (adj.)

1550s, from Late Latin despicabilis, from Latin despicari despise, disdain, look down on, from de-
down (see de-) + spicare, variant of specere to look (see scope (n.1)).


despise (v.)

c.1300, from Old French despis-, present participle stem of despire to despise, from Latin despicere
look down on, scorn, from de- down (see de-) + spicere/specere look at (see scope (n.1)). Related:
Despised; despising.


despite

c.1300, originally a noun, from Old French despit (12c., Modern French d&eacute;pit), from Latin
despectus a looking down on, scorn, contempt, from past participle of despicere (see despise).
The preposition (early 15c.) is short for in despite of (late 13c.), a loan-translation of Old
French en despit de in contempt of. Almost became despight during 16c. spelling reform.


despoil (v.)

c.1300, from Old French despoillier (12c., Modern French d&eacute;pouiller) to strip, rob, deprive
of, steal, borrow, from Latin despoliare to rob, despoil, plunder, from de- entirely (see de-) +
spoliare to strip of clothing, rob, from spolium armor, booty (see spoil (v.)). Related: Despoiled;
despoiling.


despoliation (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin despoliationem (nominative despoliatio), noun of action from Latin
despoliatus, past participle of despoliare (see despoil).


despondence (n.)

1670s, from Latin despondere to give up, lose, lose heart, resign, to promise in marriage
(especially in phrase animam despondere, literally give up one's soul), from the sense of a promise
to give something away, from de- away (see de-) + spondere to promise (see spondee). A condition
more severe than despair.


despondency (n.)

1650s; see despondence + -cy.


despondent (adj.)

1690s, from Latin despondentem (nominative despondens), present participle of despondere (see
despondence). Related: Despondently (1670s).


despot (n.)

1560s, absolute ruler, from Old French despot (14c.), from Medieval Latin despota, from Greek
despotes master of a household, lord, absolute ruler, from PIE *dems-pota- house-master; for first
element see domestic (adj.); second element cognate with Latin potis, potens (see potent).
Faintly pejorative in Greek, progressively more so as used in various languages for Roman emperors,
Christian rulers of Ottoman provinces, and Louis XVI during the French Revolution. The female
equivalent was despoina lady, queen, mistress, source of the proper name Despina.


despotic (adj.)

1640s, from French despotique (14c.), from Greek despotikos, from despotes (see despot). Related:
Despotical; despotically.


despotism (n.)

mid-18c., from French despotisme; see despot + -ism.    All education is despotism. [William Godwin,
Enquirer, 1797]


dessert (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French dessert (mid-16c.) last course, literally removal of what has been
served, from desservir clear the table, literally un-serve, from des- remove, undo (see dis-) + Old
French servir to serve (see serve (v.)).


destabilize (v.)

1934 in a physical sense; earlier (1924) with reference to political systems, governments, nations,
etc.; see de- + stabilize. Related: Destabilized; destabilizing.


destin (v.)

obsolete form of destine (q.v.).


destination (n.)

1590s, act of appointing, from Latin destinationem (nominative destinatio) purpose, design, from
past participle stem of destinare determine, appoint, choose, make firm or fast, from de-
completely, formally (see de-) + -stinare (related to stare to stand) from PIE *ste-no-, from root
*sta- to stand (see stet). Modern sense (1787) is from place of destination, where one is destined
to go.


destine (v.)

c.1300, from Old French destiner (12c.), from Latin destinare make fast or firm, establish (see
destination). Originally in English of the actions of deities, fate, etc. Of human choices or
actions, from early 16c. Related: Destined.


destiny (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French destin&eacute;e (12c.) purpose, intent, fate, destiny; that which is
destined, noun use of fem. past participle of destiner, from Latin destinare make firm, establish
(see destination). The sense is of that which has been firmly established, as by fate.


destitute (adj.)

late 14c., abandoned, forsaken, from Latin destitutus abandoned, past participle of destituere
forsake, from de- away + statuere put, place, causative of stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to
stand (see stet). Originally literal; sense of lacking resources, impoverished is 1530s.


destitution (n.)

early 15c., from Old French destitution and directly from Latin destitutionem (nominative
destitutio) a forsaking, deserting, from destitutus, past participle of destituere (see destitute).


destrier (n.)

war horse, c.1300, from Old French destrier (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *dextrarius led by the right
hand, from Latin dextra, fem. of dexter (see dexterity).


destroy (v.)

early 13c., from Old French destruire (12c., Modern French d&eacute;truire) destroy, ravage, lay
waste, from Vulgar Latin *destrugere (source of Italian distruggere), refashioned (influenced by
destructus), from Latin destruere tear down, demolish, literally un-build, from de- un-, down (see
de-) + struere to pile, build (see structure (n.)). Related: Destroyed; destroying.


destroyer (n.)

late 14c., someone or something that destroys, agent noun from Old French destruire (see destroy).
As a type of warship, 1893, originally torpedo-boat destroyer; the class name perhaps from the
proper name given to one such ship in the U.S. Navy in 1882.


destruct (v.)

to destroy, 1958, probably a back-formation from destruction in the jargon of U.S. aerospace and
defense workers to refer to deliberate destruction of a missile in flight by a friendly agent;
popularized 1966 in form self-destruct in the voice-over at the beginning of popular TV spy drama
Mission Impossible. OED records an isolated use of destruct from 17c., in this case probably from
Latin destruct-, past participle stem of destruere.


destructible (adj.)

1755, from Late Latin destructibilis, from Latin destructus, past participle of destruere (see
destroy).


destruction (n.)

early 14c., from Old French destruction (12c.) and directly from Latin destructionem (nominative
destructio) a pulling down, destruction, from past participle stem of destruere tear down (see
destroy).


destructive (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French destructif (14c.), from Late Latin destructivus, from destruct-, past
participle stem of Latin destruere (see destroy).


desuetude (n.)

1620s, from Middle French d&eacute;su&eacute;tude (16c.), from Latin desuetudo disuse, from
desuetus, past participle of desuescere become unaccustomed to, from de- away, from (see de-) +
suescere become used to (see mansuetude).


desultory (adj.)

1580s, skipping about, from Latin desultorius hasty, casual, superficial, adjective form of desultor
(n.) a rider in the circus who jumps from one horse to another while they are in gallop, from
desul-, stem of desilire jump down, from de- down (see de-) + salire to jump, leap (see salient
(adj.)). Sense of irregular, without aim or method is c.1740. Related: Desultorily; desultoriness.


detach (v.)

1680s, from French d&eacute;tacher to detach, untie, from Old French destachier, from des- apart +
attachier attach (see attach). Related: Detached; detaching.


detachable (adj.)

1818; see detach + -able.


detachment (n.)

1660s, action of detaching, from French d&eacute;tachement (17c.), from d&eacute;tacher (see
detach). Meaning portion of a military force is from 1670s; that of aloofness from objects or
circumstances is from 1798.


detail (n.)

c.1600, from French d&eacute;tail, from Old French detail small piece or quantity, literally a
cutting in pieces, from detaillier cut in pieces, from de- entirely (see de-) + taillier to cut in
pieces (see tailor).  Modern sense is from French en d&eacute;tail piece by piece, item by item (as
opposed to en gros), a commercial term used where we would today use retail. Military sense is 1708,
from notion of distribution in detail of the daily orders first given in general, including
assignment of specific duties.


detail (v.)

1630s, from French d&eacute;tailler cut up in pieces; narrate in particulars, from Old French
detaillier, from detail (see detail (n.)). Related: Detailed; detailing.


detain (v.)

early 15c., deteynen, from Old French detenir to hold off, keep back (12c.), from Latin detinere
hold off, keep back, from de- from, away (see de-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Modern spelling is
17c., from influence of contain, retain, etc. Related: Detained; detaining.


detainee (n.)

1928, from detain + -ee.


detainer (n.)

one who detains, 1530s, agent noun from detain. As a legal term, a detaining in one's possession,
from 1610s, from Anglo-French detener, from Old French detenir (noun use of infinitive).


detect (v.)

early 15c., from Latin detectus, past participle of detegere uncover, expose, figuratively discover,
reveal, disclose, from de- un-, off (see de-) + tegere to cover (see stegosaurus). Related:
Detected; detecting.


detection (n.)

early 15c., exposure, accusation, from Latin detectionem (nominative detectio) an uncovering, noun
of action from past participle stem of detegere (see detect).


detective (n.)

1850, short for detective police, from detective (adj.), 1843; see detect + -ive.


detector (n.)

1540s, from Latin detector uncoverer, revealer, agent noun from detectus, past participle of
detegere (see detect).


detente (n.)

1908 as a political term, a borrowing of French d&eacute;tente loosening, slackening (used in the
Middle Ages for the catch of a crossbow), from Vulgar Latin detendita, fem. past participle of Latin
detendere loosen, release, from de- from, away (see de-) + tendere stretch (see tenet). The
reference is to a relaxing in a political situation. The French word was earlier borrowed as detent
(1680s) catch which regulates the strike in a clock.


detention (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;tention (13c.), from Late Latin detentionem (nominative
detentio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin detinere (see detain). Sense of
confinement used by 1570s (in reference to Mary Queen of Scots). In reference to school punishment,
recorded from 1882.


deter (v.)

1570s, from Latin deterrere to frighten from, discourage from, from de- away (see de-) + terrere
frighten (see terrible). Deterrent is from 1829.


deterge (v.)

1620s, from French d&eacute;terger (16c.), from Latin detergere (see detergent).


detergent (adj.)

1610s, from Latin detergentem (nominative detergens), present participle of detergere to wipe away,
cleanse, from de- off, away (see de-) + tergere to rub, polish, wipe. Originally a medical term,
application to chemical cleansing product is from 1938.


detergent (n.)

detergent substance, 1670s, from detergent (adj.).


deteriorate (v.)

1640s (as a past participle adjective, 1570s), from Late Latin deterioratus, past participle of
deteriorare get worse, make worse, from Latin deterior worse, lower, inferior, meaner, contrastive
of *deter bad, lower, from PIE *de-tero-, from demonstrative stem *de- (see de). Originally
transitive in English; intransitive sense is from 1758. Related: Deteriorated; deteriorating.


deterioration (n.)

1650s, possibly a native formation, or else from French d&eacute;t&eacute;rioration (15c.), noun of
action from d&eacute;t&eacute;riorer, from Late Latin deteriorare (see deteriorate).


determinant

c.1600 (adj.); 1680s (n.), from Latin determinantem (nominative determinans), present participle of
determinare (see determine).


determinate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin determinatus, past participle of determinare (see determine).


determination (n.)

mid-14c., decision, sentence, from Old French d&eacute;terminacion (14c.) determination, settlement,
definition, from Latin determinationem (nominative determinatio) conclusion, boundary, noun of
action from past participle stem of determinare (see determine).    As a bringing to an end
(especilly of a suit at law), late 15c. As fixed direction toward a goal, from 1650s, originally in
physics or anatomy; metaphoric sense fixation of will is from 1680s; that of quality of being
resolute is from 1822.


determinative (adj.)

1650s, from French d&eacute;terminatif (15c.), from Latin determinat-, past participle stem of
determinare (see determine). As a noun from 1832.


determine (v.)

mid-14c., to come to an end, also to settle, decide (late 14c.), from Old French determiner (12c.)
or directly from Latin determinare to enclose, bound, set limits to, from de- off (see de-) +
terminare to mark the end or boundary, from terminus end, limit (see terminus). Sense of coming to a
firm decision (to do something) is from mid-15c. Related: Determined; determining; determiner.


determined (adj.)

1560s, decided, past participle adjective from determine. Meaning limited is from c.1600; that of
characterized by resolution is from c.1600, of actions; 1772, of persons.


determinism (n.)

1846, in theology (lack of free will); 1876 in general sense of doctrine that everything  happens by
a necessary causation, from French d&eacute;terminisme, from German Determinismus, perhaps a back-
formation from Praedeterminismus (see determine).


deterministic (adj.)

1874, from determinist (see determinism) + -ic.


deterrence (n.)

1861; see deterrent + -ence.


deterrent

1829, noun and adjective, in Bentham, from Latin deterrentem, present participle of deterrere (see
deter). In reference to nuclear weapons, from 1954.


detest (v.)

early 15c., to curse, to call God to witness and abhor, from Middle French d&eacute;tester, from
Latin detestari to curse, execrate, abominate, express abhorrence for, literally denounce with one's
testimony, from de- from, down (see de-) + testari be a witness, from testis witness (see
testament). Related: Detested; detesting.


detestable (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;testable (14c.), from Latin detestabilis execrable,
abominable, from detestari (see detest). Related: Detestably.


detestation (n.)

mid-15c., from French d&eacute;testation (14c.), from Latin detestationem (nominative detestatio)
execration, detestation, from past participle stem of detestari (see detest).


dethrone (v.)

c.1600; see de- (privative) + throne. Related: Dethroned; dethroning.


detonate (v.)

1729, a back-formation from detonation, or else from Latin detonatus, past participle of detonare.
Related: Detonated; detonating.


detonation (n.)

1670s, explosion accompanied by loud sound, from French d&eacute;tonation, from Medieval Latin
detonationem (nominative detonatio), from Latin detonare to thunder down, to release one's thunder,
roar out, from de- down (see de-) + tonare to thunder (see thunder (n.)). Sense of act of causing to
explode (mid-18c.) developed in French.


detonator (n.)

1822, agent noun in Latin form from detonate. For suffix, see -er (1).


detour (n.)

1738, from French d&eacute;tour, from Old French destor side road, byway; evasion, excuse, from
destorner turn aside, from des- aside + tourner to turn (see turn (v.)).


detour (v.)

1836 (intransitive); 1905 (transitive), from detour (n.). Related: Detoured; detouring.


detox

1972 (v.), 1975 (n.), colloquial abbreviation of detoxify, detoxification.


detoxicate (v.)

1867; see de- + toxic + -ate (2). Specifically of drug and alcohol addictions since 1970.


detoxification (n.)

1905, of substances, 1971 of persons who drink to excess; see detoxify + -ation.


detoxify (v.)

1905; see de- + toxic + -fy. Earlier in the same sense was detoxicate (1867).


detract (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;tracter, from Latin detractus, past participle of detrahere
to take down, pull down, disparage (see detraction). Related: Detracted; detracting.


detraction (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French detraccion detraction, disparagement, denigration, from Latin detractionem
(nominative detractio) a drawing off, from past participle stem of detrahere take down, pull down,
disparage, from de- down (see de-) + trahere to pull (see tract (n.1)). The fem. form detractress is
attested from 1716.


detractor (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French detractour, Old French detractor detractor, backbiter, from Latin
detractor, agent noun from detrahere (see detraction).


detriment (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;triment or directly from Latin detrimentum a rubbing off; a
loss, damage, defeat, from past participle stem of detere to wear away, figuratively to weaken,
impair, from de- away (see de-) + terere to rub, wear (see throw (v.)).


detrimental (adj.)

1650s; see detriment + -al (1). Related: Detrimentally.


detritus (n.)

1795, process of erosion, from Latin detritus a wearing away, from detri-, stem of detere wear away
(see detriment). Geological sense of matter produced by erosion is 1802, probably from French
detritus; incorrect, in any case.


Detroit

city in Michigan, U.S., from French d&eacute;troit, literally straits, from Old French destreit
(12c.), from Latin districtum, neuter of districtus. French fort built there 1701. By 1918 the city
name was synonymous with U.S. automobile manufacturing.


deuce (n.)

late 15c., the 2 in dice or cards, also a roll of 2 in dice (1510s), from Middle French deus (Modern
French deux), from Latin duos (nominative duo) two (see two).    Became a mild oath by 1710, about
50 years after it was first attested in the sense of bad luck, the devil, etc., perhaps because two
was the lowest score, and probably by similarity to Latin deus and related words meaning god. Low
German had der daus! in same sense 16c., which perhaps influenced the English form. Deuce coupe is
1940s hot-rodder slang for souped up two-door car, especially a 1932 Ford. Related: Deuced;
deucedly.


deus (n.)

God, a god, see Zeus; c.1300 as a French interjection; never nativized, but appearing in adopted
Latin expressions such as deus absconditus hidden god.


deus ex machina (n.)

1690s, from Modern Latin translation of Greek theos ek mekhanes, literally the god from the machina,
the device by which gods were suspended over the stage in Greek theater (see machine). The fem. is
dea ex machina.


deuterium (n.)

1933, coined by U.S. chemist Harold C. Urey, with Modern Latin ending + Greek deuterion, neuter of
deuterios having second place, from deuteros second, from duo (see two). So called because it is
twice the mass of hydrogen.


Deuteronomy (n.)

5th book of the Pentateuch, late 14c., from Late Latin Deuteronomium, from Greek Deuteronomion,
literally second law, from deuteros second + nomos law (see numismatics). A mistranslation of Hebrew
mishneh hattorah hazzoth a copy of this law [Deut. xvii:18]. The book is a repetition, with
comments, of the Decalogue and most of the laws of Exodus. The title was translated literally into
Old English as &aelig;fter&aelig;, literally after-law.


Deutsch

the German word for German; see Dutch.


deva (n.)

god, good spirit in Hindu religion, from Sanskrit deva a god, originally a shining one, from *div-
to shine, thus cognate with Greek dios divine and Zeus, and Latin deus god (Old Latin deivos); see
Zeus.    Fem. form devi is used for goddess, also (with capital D-) for the mother goddess in
Hinduism. Hence, also, devadasi temple dancing girl, literally female servant of a god, from dasi
slave girl. Also Devanagari, the formal alphabet of Sanskrit writings, perhaps originally divine
city script, from nagara city.


devaluation (n.)

1898; see de- + valuation. Specific application to currency is from 1914.


devalue (v.)

1918, a back-formation from devaluation. Related: Devalued; devaluing.


devastate (v.)

1630s, perhaps a back-formation from devastation. Apparently not common until 19c.; earlier verb
form devast is attested from 1530s, from Middle French devaster. Related: devastated; devastating.


devastating (adj.)

1630s, present participle adjective from devastate. Trivial use by 1889.


devastation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;vastation, from Late Latin devastationem (nominative
devastatio), from past participle stem of Latin devastare lay waste completely, from de- completely
(see de-) + vastare lay waste, from vastus empty, desolate (see waste (v.)).


develop (v.)

1650s, unroll, unfold, from French d&eacute;velopper, replacing English disvelop (1590s, from Middle
French desveloper), both from Old French desveloper unwrap, unfurl, unveil; reveal the meaning of,
explain, from des- undo + veloper wrap up, of uncertain origin, possibly Celtic or Germanic. Modern
figurative use is 18c. The photographic sense is from 1845; the real estate sense is from 1890.


developer (n.)

1833, one who develops, agent noun from develop. Photography use attested from 1869; meaning
speculative builder is from 1938.


development (n.)

1756, an unfolding; see develop + -ment. Of property, with the sense bringing out the latent
possibilities, from 1885 (Pickering's glossary of Americanisms, 1816, has betterments The
improvements made on new lands, by cultivation, and the erection of buildings, &amp;c.;). Meaning
state of economic advancement is from 1902. Meaning advancement through progressive stages is 1836.


developmental (adj.)

1830, from development + -al (1). Developmentalist (1862) was a word for follower of the theory of
evolution.


deviance (n.)

1944; see deviant + -ance. A sociologists' word, perhaps coined because statisticians and
astronomers already had claimed deviation.


deviant (adj.)

c.1400, from Late Latin deviantem (nominative devians), present participle of deviare turn aside,
from Latin phrase de via, from de off (see de-) + via way (see via). The noun meaning one that
deviates is from late 15c.; in the sexual sense, from 1952; also deviate (n.), recorded since 1912.


deviate (v.)

1630s, from Late Latin deviatus, past participle of deviare to turn out of the way (see deviant).
Related: Deviated; deviating. The noun meaning sexual pervert is attested from 1912.


deviation (n.)

1640s, noun of action from deviate (v.). Statistical sense is from 1858. Related: Deviational.


device (n.)

late 13c., from Old French devis division, separation, disposition, wish, desire; coat of arms,
emblem; last will, from deviser to divide, distribute (see devise). Sense of method by which
something is divided arose in French and led to modern meaning.


devil (n.)

Old English deofol evil spirit, a devil, the devil, false god, diabolical person, from Late Latin
diabolus (also the source of Italian diavolo, French diable, Spanish diablo; German Teufel is Old
High German tiufal, from Latin via Gothic diabaulus).    The Late Latin word is from Ecclesiastical
Greek diabolos, in Jewish and Christian use, Devil, Satan (scriptural loan-translation of Hebrew
satan), in general use accuser, slanderer, from diaballein to slander, attack, literally throw
across, from dia- across, through + ballein to throw (see ballistics). Jerome re-introduced Satan in
Latin bibles, and English translators have used both in different measures.    In Vulgate, as in
Greek, diabolus and d&aelig;mon (see demon) were distinct, but they have merged in English and other
Germanic languages.    Playful use for clever rogue is from c.1600. Meaning sand spout, dust storm
is from 1835. In U.S. place names, the word often represents a native word such as Algonquian
manito, more properly spirit, god. Phrase a devil way (c.1300) was originally Hell-ward, to Hell,
but by late 14c. as an expression of irritation.   Devil's books playing cards is from 1729, but the
cited quote says they've been called that time out of mind (the four of clubs is the devil's
bedposts); devil's coach-horse is from 1840, the large rove-beetle, which is defiant when disturbed.
Talk of the Devil, and he's presently at your elbow [1660s].


devil&#039;s advocate (n.)

1760, translating Latin advocatus diaboli, one whose job it is to urge against the canonization of a
candidate for sainthood. [F]ar from being the whitewasher of the wicked, the [devil's advocate] is
the blackener of the good. [Fowler]


devil-may-care (adj.)

1837 (but suggested in other forms by 1793).


devilish (adj.)

mid-15c.; see devil + -ish. Related: Devilishly; devilishness.


devilled (adj.)

grilled with hot condiments, 1800; see devil.


devilment (n.)

1771; see devil + -ment.


devilry (n.)

late 14c., from devil + -ry; deviltry (1788) is a corrupt formation from it.


devious (adj.)

1590s, out of the way, from Latin devius out of the way, remote, off the main road, from de via (see
deviate). Originally in the Latin literal sense; figurative sense of deceitful is first recorded
1630s. Related: Deviously; deviousness. Figurative senses of the Latin word were retired,
sequestered, wandering in the byways, foolish, inconsistent.


devirginate (v.)

late 15c.; see de- + virgin + -ate (2). Related: Devirginated.


devise (v.)

early 13c., to form, fashion; c.1300, to plan, contrive, from Old French deviser dispose in
portions, arrange, plan, contrive (in modern French, to chat, gossip), from Vulgar Latin *divisare,
frequentative of Latin dividere to divide (see divide). Modern sense is from to arrange a division
(especially via a will), a meaning present in the Old French word. Related: Devised; devising.


devoid (adj.)

c.1400, shortening of devoided, past participle of obsolete verb devoiden to remove, void, vacate
(c.1300), from Old French desvuidier (12c., Modern French d&eacute;vider) to empty out, flush game
from, unwind, let loose (an arrow), from des- out, away + voider to empty, from voide empty (see
void (adj.)).


devolution (n.)

1540s; see de- + evolution. Used in various legal and figurative senses; in biology, as the opposite
of evolution, it is attested from 1882.


devolve (v.)

early 15c., to roll down, from Latin devolvere to roll down, from de- (see de-) + volvere to roll
(see volvox). Figurative sense of to cause to pass down is from 1520s. Related: Devolved; devolving.
Also in same sense was devolute (1530s), from Latin devolutus, past participle of devolvere.


Devon

county name, Old English Defena(scir), late 9c., (territory of the) Dumnonii, a Celtic name. As a
type of cattle, from 1834.


Devonian (adj.)

1837, as a geological era, from the English county of Devon, where the Old Red Sandstone formations
of that age are prominent, + -ian.


devote (v.)

1580s, from Latin devotus, past participle of devovere (see devotion). Second and third meanings in
Johnson's Dictionary (1755) are to addict, to give up to ill and to curse, to execrate; to doom to
destruction. Related: Devoted; devoting.


devoted (adj.)

1590s, set apart by a vow, past participle adjective from devote (v.). Meaning characterized by
devotion is from c.1600. Related: Devotedly.


devotee (n.)

1640s, from devote, with a French suffix, perhaps on model of assignee. Earlier in this sense was
devote (1620s).


devotion (n.)

early 13c., from Old French devocion devotion, piety, from Latin devotionem (nominative devotio),
noun of action from past participle stem of devovere dedicate by a vow, sacrifice oneself, promise
solemnly, from de- down, away (see de-) + vovere to vow, from votum vow (see vow (n.)).    In
ancient Latin, act of consecrating by a vow, also loyalty, fealty, allegiance; in Church Latin,
devotion to God, piety. This was the original sense in English; the etymological sense, including
secular situations, returned 16c. via Italian and French.


devotional (adj.)

1640s; see devotion + -al (1). The noun meaning devotional composition is recorded from 1650s.


devour (v.)

early 14c., from Old French devorer (12c.) devour, swallow up, engulf, from Latin devorare swallow
down, accept eagerly, from de- down (see de-) + vorare to swallow (see voracity). Related: Devoured;
devouring.


devout (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French devot pious, devoted, assiduous, from Latin devotus given up by vow,
devoted, past participle of devovere dedicate by vow (see devotion).


dew (n.)

Old English deaw, from Proto-Germanic *dawwaz (cognates: Old Saxon dau, Old Frisian daw, Middle
Dutch dau, Old High German tau, German Tau, Old Norse d&ouml;gg dew), from PIE root *dheu- (2) to
flow (cognates: Sanskrit dhavate flows, runs).


dew claw (n.)

also dew-claw, 1570s, from claw, but the signification of the first element is obscure (see dewlap).


dewdrop (n.)

early 14c. (as two words); see dew + drop (n.).


Dewey Decimal system

proposed 1876 by Melvil Dewey (1851-1931) while acting librarian of Amherst College. He also
crusaded for simplified spelling and the metric system.


dewlap (n.)

mid-14c., dewe lappe, from lappe loose piece (Old English l&aelig;ppa), first element of unknown
origin or meaning. Originally of cattle.


dewpoint (n.)

1833; see dew + point (n.).


dewy (adj.)

Old English deawig (see dew + -y (2)).


Dexedrine (n.)

1942, trademark (Smith, Kline and French Laboratories) for dexamphetamine sulphate, probably from
dextro- + chemical ending from Benzedrine, etc.


Dexter

masc. proper name, from Latin dexter on the right hand (see dexterity). Compare also Benjamin.


dexterity (n.)

1520s, from Middle French dexterit&eacute; (16c.), from Latin dexteritatem (nominative dexteritas)
readiness, skillfulness, prosperity, from dexter skillful, also right (hand) (source of Old French
destre, Spanish diestro, etc.), from PIE root *deks- on the right hand, hence south to one facing
east (cognates: Sanskrit daksinah on the right hand, southern, skillful; Avestan dashina- on the
right hand; Greek dexios on the right hand, also fortunate, clever; Old Irish dess on the right
hand, southern; Welsh deheu; Gaulish Dexsiva, name of a goddess of fortune; Gothic taihswa;
Lithuanian desinas; Old Church Slavonic desnu, Russian desnoj). The Latin form is with the
comparative suffix -ter, thus meaning etymologically the better direction. Middle English dester
meant right hand, and in heraldry dexter means on the right side.


dexterous (adj.)

c.1600, convenient, suitable, formed in English from Latin dexter (see dexterity) + -ous. Meaning
skillful, clever is from 1620s.


dextro-

word-forming element meaning toward or on the right-hand side, from comb. form of Latin dexter (see
dexterity).


dextrose (n.)

1867, shortened from dextro-glucose, from dextro- right + -ose (2), chemical suffix indicating a
sugar. So called because this form of glucose polarizes light to the right in spectroscopy.


dextrous (adj.)

1620s, alternative spelling of dexterous; this version is more conformable to Latin but less common
in English.


dey (n.1)

Old English d&aelig;ge female servant, housekeeper, maid, from Proto-Germanic *daigjon (cognates:
Old Norse deigja maid, female servant, Swedish deja dairymaid), from PIE *dheigh- to form, build
(see dough). Now obsolete (though OED says, Still in living use in parts of Scotland), it forms the
first element of dairy and the second of lady.    The ground sense seems to be kneader, maker of
bread; advancing by Old Norse deigja and Middle English daie to mean female servant, woman employed
in a house or on a farm. D&aelig;ge as servant is the second element in many surnames ending in -day
(such as Faraday, and perhaps Doubleday servant of the Twin, etc.).


dey (n.2)

1650s, title of a military commander in Muslim north Africa, from Turkish dai maternal uncle, a
friendly title used of older men, especially by the Janissaries of Algiers of their commanding
officers. There were also deys in Tunis and Tripoli.


dharma (n.)

1796, in secular sense, caste custom, right behavior; in Buddhism and Hinduism, moral law, from
Sanskrit, law, right, justice, related to dharayati holds, and cognate with Latin firmus, all from
PIE root *dher- (2) to hold firmly, support (see firm (adj.)).


dhoti

1620s, from Hindi dhoti.


dhow (n.)

1799, original language unknown, single-masted native vessel used on Arabian Sea, later widely
applied to all Arab vessels. Klein suggests a relation to Persian dav running.


di- (1)

word-forming element meaning two, double, twice, from Greek di-, from dis twice, related to duo (see
two).


di- (2)

word-forming element meaning apart, asunder, form of dis- before certain voiced consonants.


di- (3)

word-forming element meaning through; thoroughly, form of dia- before vowels.


dia-

before vowels, di-, word-forming element meaning through, thoroughly, entirely, from Greek dia-,
from dia through, throughout, probably from the root of duo two (see two) with a base sense of
twice.


diabetes (n.)

1560s, from medical Latin diabetes, from late Greek diabetes excessive discharge of urine (so named
by Aretaeus the Cappadocian, physician of Alexandria, 2c.), literally a passer-through, siphon, from
diabainein to pass through, from dia- through (see dia-) + bainein to go (see come).    An old
common native name for it was pissing evil. In classical Greek, diabainein meant to stand or walk
with the legs apart, and diabetes meant a drafting compass, from the position of the legs.


diabetic (adj.)

1799; see diabetes + -ic. From 1840 as a noun.


diabolic (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French diabolique (13c.), from Late Latin diabolicus, from Ecclesiastical Greek
diabolikos devilish, from diabolos (see devil (n.)).


diabolical (adj.)

c.1500, pertaining to the devil, from diabolic + -al (1). Meaning befitting the devil is from 1540s.
Related: Diabolically.


diabolism (n.)

c.1600s, from Ecclesiastical Greek diabolos devil (see devil (n.)) + -ism.


diachronic (adj.)

1857, from Greek dia throughout (see dia-) + khronos time (see chrono-). Use in linguistics dates
from 1927.


diacritic (adj.)

1690s, of sounds, from Greek diakritikos that separates or distinguishes, from diakrinein to
separate one from another, from dia- (see dia-) + krinein to separate, decide, judge (see crisis).
As a noun, from 1866. Related: Diacritical.


diadem (n.)

late 13c., from Old French diademe and directly from Latin diadema cloth band worn around the head
as a sign of royalty, from Greek diadema, from diadein to bind across, from dia- across (see dia-) +
dein to bind, related to desmos band, from PIE *de- to bind. Used of the headband worn by Persian
kings and adopted by Alexander the Great and his successors.


diagnose (v.)

1861, back-formation from diagnosis. Related: Diagnosed; diagnosing.


diagnoses (n.)

plural of diagnosis.


diagnosis (n.)

1680s, medical Latin application of Greek diagnosis a discerning, distinguishing, from stem of
diagignoskein discern, distinguish, literally to know thoroughly, from dia- apart (see dia-) +
gignoskein to learn (see gnostic).


diagnostic

1620s (adjective and noun), from Greek diagnostikos able to distinguish, from diagnostos, verbal
adjective from diagignoskein (see diagnosis). Related: Diagnostics.


diagonal (adj.)

1540s (implied in diagonally), from Middle French diagonal, from Latin diagonalis, from diagonus
slanting line, from Greek diagonios from angle to angle, from dia- across (see dia-) + gonia angle,
related to gony knee (see knee (n.)). As a noun, from 1570s.


diagram (n.)

1610s, from French diagramme, from Latin diagramma, from Greek diagramma geometric figure, that
which is marked out by lines, from diagraphein mark out by lines, delineate, from dia- across, out
(see dia-) + graphein write, mark, draw (see -graphy). The verb is 1840, from the noun.


dial (n.)

early 15c., sundial, earlier dial of a compass (mid-14c.), apparently from Medieval Latin dialis
daily, from Latin dies day (see diurnal).    The word perhaps was abstracted from a phrase such as
Medieval Latin rota dialis daily wheel, and evolved to mean any round plate over which something
rotates. Telephone sense is from 1879, which led to dial tone (1921), the signal to begin dialing,
which term soon might be the sole relic of the rotary phone.


dial (v.)

1650s, to work with aid of a dial or compass, from dial (n.). Telephone sense is from 1923. Related:
Dialed; dialing.


dialect (n.)

1570s, form of speech of a region or group, from Middle French dialecte, from Latin dialectus local
language, way of speaking, conversation, from Greek dialektos talk, conversation, speech; also the
language of a country, dialect, from dialegesthai converse with each other, from dia- across,
between (see dia-) + legein speak (see lecture (n.)).


dialectal (adj.)

1831, from dialect + -al (1).


dialectic (n.)

1580s, earlier dialatik (late 14c.), from Old French dialectique (12c.), from Latin dialectica, from
Greek dialektike (techne) (art of) philosophical discussion or discourse, fem. of dialektikos of
conversation, discourse, from dialektos discourse, conversation (see dialect). Originally synonymous
with logic; in modern philosophy refined by Kant, then by Hegel, who made it mean process of
resolving or merging contradictions in character. Related: Dialectics.


dialectical (adj.)

argumentative, 1540s; see dialectic + -al (1).


dialog

see dialogue.


dialogue (n.)

early 13c., literary work consisting of a conversation between two or more persons, from Old French
dialoge, from Latin dialogus, from Greek dialogos conversation, dialogue, related to dialogesthai
converse, from dia- across (see dia-) + legein speak (see lecture (n.)).    Sense broadened to a
conversation c.1400. Mistaken belief that it can only mean conversation between two persons is from
confusion of dia- and di- (1); the error goes back to at least 1532, when trialogue was coined
needlessly for a conversation between three persons. A word that has been used for conversation
between two persons is the hybrid duologue (1864).


dialysis (n.)

1580s, from Latin, from Greek dialysis dissolution, separation (of the disbanding of troops, a
divorce, etc.), from dialyein dissolve, separate, from dia- apart + lyein loosen (see lose). Used
originally in logic and grammar; chemistry sense is first recorded 1861, medicine 1914. Related:
Dialytic.


diamante (adj.)

1904, from French diamant&eacute;, past participle of diamanter to set with diamonds, from Old
French diamant (see diamond).


diameter (n.)

late 14c., from Old French diametre, from Latin diametrus, from Greek diametros (gramme) diagonal of
a circle, from dia- across, through (see dia-) + metron a measure (see meter (n.2)).


diametric (adj.)

1802, probably shortened from diametrical (1550s); see diameter + -ical.


diametrically (adv.)

1630s, completely (opposed, contrary, etc.); see diametric. Mostly in figurative use; the two points
that mark the ends of a line of diameter across a circle are opposite one another.


diamond (n.)

early 14c., from Old French diamant, from Medieval Latin diamantem (nominative diamas), from Vulgar
Latin *adiamantem (altered by influence of the many Greek words in dia-), from Latin adamantem
(nominative adamans) the hardest metal, later, diamond (see adamant). Playing card suit is from
1590s; Sense in baseball is American English, 1875.


Diana

c.1200, ancient Italian goddess of the moon, patroness of virginity and hunting, later identified
with Greek Artemis, and through her with eastern goddesses such as Diana of Ephesus. The name is
earlier Diviana, from *diw-yo-, from PIE root *dyeu- to shine (see Zeus).


dianetics (n.)

1950, coined by U.S. writer Latin Ron Hubbard (1911-1986), an alteration of dianoetic (1670s) of or
pertaining to thought, from Greek dianoetikos of or for thinking; intellectual, from dianoetos,
verbal adjective from dianoe-esthai to think, from dia- through (see dia-) + noe-ein to think,
suppose.


Dianthus (n.)

1849, from Modern Latin (Linnaeus), literally flower of Zeus, from Greek Dios, genitive of Zeus Zeus
(see Zeus) + anthos flower (see anther).


diaper (n.)

mid-14c., fabric with a repeated pattern of figures, from Old French diaspre ornamental cloth;
flowered, patterned silk cloth, perhaps via Medieval Latin diasprum from Medieval Greek diaspros
thoroughly white, or perhaps white interspersed with other colors, from dia- (see dia-) + aspros
white.   Aspros originally meant rough, and was applied to the raised parts of coins (among other
things), and thus was used in Byzantine Greek to mean silver coin, from which the bright, shiny
qualities made it an adjective for whiteness. Modern sense of underpants for babies is continuous
since 1837, but such usage has been traced back to 1590s.


diaper (v.)

late 14c., to put a small, repeated pattern on, from Old French diaprer, variant of diasprer, from
diaspre (see diaper (n.)). Meaning to put a diaper on (a baby) is attested by 1951. Related:
Diapered; diapering.


diaphanous (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin diaphanus, from Greek diaphanes transparent, from dia- through (see dia-)
+ phainesthai, middle voice form (subject acting on itself) of phainein to show (see phantasm).


diaphragm (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin diaphragma, from Greek diaphragma partition, barrier, muscle which
divides the thorax from the abdomen, from diaphrassein to barricade, from dia- across (see dia-) +
phrassein to fence or hedge in. The native word is midriff. Meaning contraceptive cap is from 1933.


diarist (n.)

1818; see diary + -ist.


diarize (v.)

1842; see diary + -ize. Related: Diarized; diarizing.


diarrhea (n.)

late 14c., from Old French diarrie, from Late Latin diarrhoea, from Greek diarrhoia diarrhea (coined
by Hippocrates), literally a flowing through, from diarrhein to flow through, from dia- through (see
dia-) + rhein to flow (see rheum). Respelled 16c. from diarria on Latin model.


diarrhoea

variant spelling of diarrhea (q.v.); see also oe.


diary (n.)

1580s, from Latin diarium daily allowance, later a journal, neuter of diarius daily, from dies day
(see diurnal); also see -ary. Earliest sense was a daily record of events; sense of the book in
which such are written is said to be first attested in Ben Jonson's Volpone (1605).


diaspora (n.)

1876, from Greek diaspora dispersion, from diaspeirein to scatter about, disperse, from dia- about,
across (see dia-) + speirein to scatter (see sprout). The Greek word was used in Septuagint in Deut.
xxviii:25. A Hebrew word for it is galuth exile. Related: Diasporic.


diastase (n.)

enzyme or group of enzymes found in a seed and capable of converting starch into sugar, coined 1833
by Payen and Persoz from Greek diastasis a setting apart, from dia- across (see dia-) + stasis a
standing (see stasis).


diastole (n.)

1570s, from medical Latin diastole, from Greek diastole drawing asunder, dilation, from diastellein,
from dia- through, thoroughly, entirely (see dia-) + stellein to set in order, arrange, array,
equip, make ready, from PIE *stel-yo-, suffixed form of root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives
referring to a standing object or place (see stall (n.1)).


diatessaron (n.)

late 14c. as a term in music meaning interval of a fourth; 1803 in reference to harmonizings of the
gospels, especially that of Tatian (2c.), from Greek dia tessaron, from dia composed of (literally
through; see dia-) + tessaron four, related to tessares (see four).


diatom (n.)

1845, coined from Greek diatomos cut in two, from diatemnein to cut through, from dia- through (see
dia-) + temnein to cut (see tome). So called because they typically appear to have been cut in half.
Related: Diatomic.


diatonic (adj.)

c.1600, from French diatonique, from Latin diatonicus, from Greek diatonikos, from diatonos
extending; pertaining to the diatonic scale, from dia- (see dia-) + teinein to stretch (see tenet).


diatribe (n.)

1640s (in Latin form in English from 1580s), discourse, critical dissertation, from French diatribe
(15c.), from Latin diatriba learned discussion, from Greek diatribe employment, study, in Plato,
discourse, literally a wearing away (of time), from dia- away (see dia-) + tribein to wear, rub,
from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist (see throw (v.)). Sense of invective is 1804,
apparently from French.


Diazepam (n.)

1961, from (benzo)diazep(ine) + -am, apparently an arbitrary suffix. The element diazo- denotes two
nitrogen atoms combined with one hydrocarbon radical.


dib

see dibs.


dibble (n.)

tool to make a hole in the soil (as to plant seeds), mid-15c., probably from Middle English dibben
(perhaps akin to dip) + instrumental suffix -le. The verb is from 1580s. Related: Dibbled; dibbling.


dibs

children's word to express a claim on something, 1932, originally U.S., apparently a contraction of
dibstone a knucklebone or jack in a children's game (1690s), of unknown origin.


dice (n.)

early 14c., des, dys, plural of dy (see die (n.)), altered 14c. to dyse, dyce, and 15c. to dice. As
in pence, the plural s retains its original breath sound, probably because these words were not felt
as ordinary plurals, but as collective words [OED]. Sometimes used as singular 1400-1700.


dice (v.)

to cut into cubes, late 14c., from dice (n.). Meaning to play at dice is from early 15c. Related:
Diced; dicing.


dicey (adj.)

risky, uncertain (as the roll of dice), 1940s, aviators' jargon, from dice (n.) + -y (2). Related:
Diciness.


dichotomy (n.)

c.1600, from Greek dichotomia a cutting in half, from dicha in two, asunder (related to dis twice) +
temnein to cut (see tome).


dick (n.)

fellow, lad, man, 1550s, rhyming nickname for Rick, short for Richard, one of the commonest English
names, it has long been a synonym for fellow, and so most of the slang senses are probably very old,
but naturally hard to find in the surviving records. The meaning penis is attested from 1891 in
Farmer's slang dictionary (possibly British army slang). Meaning detective is recorded from 1908,
perhaps as a shortened variant of detective.


Dick Whittington

The story is an old one, told under other names throughout Europe, of a poor boy who sends a cat he
had bought for a penny as his stake in a trading voyage; the captain sells it on his behalf for a
fortune to a foreign king whose palace is overrun by rats. The hero devotes part of his windfall to
charity, which may be why the legend attached in England since 16c. to Sir Richard Whittington
(d.1423), three times Lord Mayor of London, who died childless and devoted large sums in his will to
churches, almshouses, and St. Bartholomew's Hospital.


dickens

exclamation, 1590s, apparently a substitute for devil; probably altered from Dickon, nickname for
Richard and source of the surnames Dickens and Dickenson, but exact derivation and meaning are
unknown.


dicker (v.)

haggle, bargain in a petty way, 1802, American English, perhaps from dicker (n.) a unit or package
of tens, especially hides (attested from late 13c.), perhaps from Latin decuria parcel of ten
(supposedly a unit of barter on the Roman frontier; compare German Decher set of ten things), from
decem ten (see ten) on model of centuria from centum.


dickhead (n.)

stupid, contemptible person, by 1969, from dick in the penis sense + head.


dicky (n.)

detached shirt front, 1811; a small bird, 1851; diminutive of dick, but the applications are obscure
in both cases.


Dictaphone (n.)

trademarked by the Columbia Graphophone Company in 1907; from dictation + -phone. A separate company
from 1923.


dictate (v.)

1590s, to practice dictation, say aloud for another to write down, from Latin dictatus, past
participle of dictare say often, prescribe, frequentative of dicere tell, say (see diction). Sense
of to command is 1620s. Related: Dictated; dictates; dictating.


dictate (n.)

1590s, from Latin dictatum something dictated, noun use of neuter past participle of dictare (see
dictate (v.)).


dictation (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin dictationem (nominative dictatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of dictare (see dictate (v.)).


dictator (n.)

late 14c., from Latin dictator, agent noun from dictare (see dictate (v.)). Transferred sense of one
who has absolute power or authority in any sphere is from c.1600. In Latin use, a dictator was a
judge in the Roman republic temporarily invested with absolute power.


dictatorial (adj.)

1701; see dictator + -ial. Related: Dictatorially.


dictatorship (n.)

1580s, from dictator + -ship.


diction (n.)

1540s, a word; 1580s, expression of ideas in words, from Late Latin dictionem (nominative dictio) a
saying, expression, word, noun of action from dic-, past participle stem of Latin dicere speak,
tell, say (source of French dire to say), related to dicare proclaim, dedicate, from PIE root *deik-
to point out (cognates: Sanskrit dic- point out, show, Greek deiknynai to prove, Latin digitus
finger, Old High German zeigon, German zeigen to show, Old English teon to accuse, t&aelig;can to
teach).


dictionary (n.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin dictionarium collection of words and phrases, from Latin dictionarius of
words, from dictio word (see diction). Probably first English use in title of a book was in Sir
Thomas Elyot's Latin Dictionary (1538) though Latin Dictionarius was so used from early 13c. Grose's
1788 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue has RICHARD SNARY. A dictionary.


Dictograph

patented 1907 in U.S. by K.M. Turner and W. Donnan, from dictation + -graph instrument for
recording; something written.


dictum (n.)

1660s, from Latin dictum thing said (a saying, bon-mot, prophecy, etc.), an order, command, neuter
of dictus, past participle of dicere say (see diction). In legal use, a judge's expression of
opinion which is not the formal resolution of a case.


did (v.)

Old English dyde, past tense of do (v.). The only remainder in Germanic of the old linguistic
pattern of forming a past tense by reduplication of the stem of the present tense. Far back in
Germanic the equivalent of did was used as a suffix to make the past tenses of other verbs, hence
the English -ed suffix (Old English -de).


didactic (adj.)

1650s, from French didactique, from Greek didaktikos apt at teaching, from didaktos taught, past
participle of didaskein teach, from PIE root *dens- wisdom, to teach, learn. Related: Didactically;
didacticism.


diddle (v.)

to cheat, swindle, 1806, from dialectal duddle, diddle to totter (1630s). Meaning waste time is
recorded from 1825. Meaning to have sex with is from 1879; that of to masturbate (especially of
women) is from 1950s. More or less unrelated meanings that have gathered  around a suggestive sound.
Related: Diddled; diddling.


didgeridoo (n.)

1924, Australian, of imitative origin.


didn&#039;t

by 1775, contraction of did not.


dido (n.)

prank, caper, 1807, American English slang, perhaps from the name of the Carthaginian queen in the
Aeneid. Usually in phrase to cut didoes.


didst

archaic 2nd person singular past indicative of do (q.v.).


die (v.)

mid-12c., possibly from Old Danish d&oslash;ja or Old Norse deyja to die, pass away, both from
Proto-Germanic *dawjan (cognates: Old Frisian deja to kill, Old Saxon doian, Old High German touwen,
Gothic diwans mortal), from PIE root *dheu- (3) to pass away, die, become senseless (cognates: Old
Irish dith end, death, Old Church Slavonic daviti, Russian davit' to choke, suffer).    It has been
speculated that Old English had *diegan, from the same source, but it is not in any of the surviving
texts and the preferred words were steorfan (see starve), sweltan (see swelter), wesan dead, also
for&eth;gan and other euphemisms.    Languages usually don't borrow words from abroad for central
life experiences, but die words are an exception, because they are often hidden or changed
euphemistically out of superstitious dread. A Dutch euphemism translates as to give the pipe to
Maarten. Regularly spelled dege through 15c., and still pronounced dee by some in Lancashire and
Scotland. Used figuratively (of sounds, etc.) from 1580s. Related: Died; dies.


die (n.)

early 14c. (as a plural, late 14c. as a singular), from Old French de die, dice, of uncertain
origin. Common Romanic (cognates: Spanish, Portuguese, Italian dado, Proven&ccedil;al dat, Catalan
dau), perhaps from Latin datum given, past participle of dare (see date (n.1)), which, in addition
to give, had a secondary sense of to play (as a chess piece); or else from what is given (by chance
or Fortune). Sense of stamping block or tool first recorded 1690s.


diehard

also die-hard, 1844 (n.), in reference to the 57th Regiment of Foot in the British Army; as an
adjective, attested from 1871; from die (v.) + hard (adv.). As a brand name of an automobile
battery, DieHard, introduced by Sears in 1967.


dieresis (n.)

also diaeresis, 1610s, sign marking the division of a diphthong into two simple sounds, from Late
Latin diaeresis, from Greek diairesis division, noun of action from diairein to divide, separate,
from dia- apart (see dia-) + hairein to take (see heresy). In classical prosody, the slight break in
the forward motion of a line that is felt when the end of a foot coincides with the end of a word
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry].


Dies Irae

literally day of wrath, first words of Latin hymn of Last Judgment, attributed to Thomas of Celano
(c.1250). See diurnal + ire.


diesel (adj.)

1894, named for Rudolf Diesel (1858-1913), German mechanical engineer who designed this type of
engine.


diet (n.1)

regular food, early 13c., from Old French diete (13c.) diet, pittance, fare, from Medieval Latin
dieta parliamentary assembly, also a day's work, diet, daily food allowance, from Latin diaeta
prescribed way of life, from Greek diaita, originally way of life, regimen, dwelling, related to
diaitasthai lead one's life, and from diaitan, originally separate, select (food and drink),
frequentative of *diainysthai take apart, from dia- apart + ainysthai take, from PIE root *ai- to
give, allot. Often with a sense of restriction since 14c.; hence put (someone) on a diet (mid-15c.).


diet (n.2)

assembly, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin dieta, variant of diaeta daily office (of the Church), daily
duty, assembly, meeting of counselors, from Greek diaita (see diet (n.1)), but associated with Latin
dies day (see diurnal).


diet (v.)

late 14c., to regulate one's diet for the sake of health, from Old French dieter, from diete (see
diet (n.1)); meaning to regulate oneself as to food (especially against fatness) is from 1650s.
Related: Dieted; dieting. An obsolete word for this is banting. The adjective in this sense (Diet
Coke, etc.) is from 1963, originally American English.


dietary (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin dietarius, from Latin diaetarius, from diaeta (see diet (n.1)).


dietetic (adj.)

1570s, from Latin diaeteticus, from Greek diaitetikos of or pertaining to diet, from diaita (see
diet (1)). As a noun from 1759.


dietetics (n.)

1540s, see dietetic + -ics.


dietician (n.)

1845, from diet (n.1) on model of physician. Earlier was dietist (c.1600).


dietitian (n.)

see dietician.


differ (v.)

late 14c., from Old French differer (14c.) and directly from Latin differre to set apart, differ,
from dis- away from (see dis-) + ferre carry (see infer).    Two senses that were present in Latin
have gone separate ways in English since c.1500 with defer (transitive) and differ (intransitive).
Related: Differed; differing.


difference (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French difference (12c.) difference, distinction; argument, dispute, from Latin
differentia diversity, difference, from differentem (nominative differens), present participle of
differre to set apart (see differ). Sense of a quarrel first attested late 14c. Colloquial phrase
what's the diff? first recorded 1896.


different (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French different (14c.), from Latin differentem (nominative differens)
differing, different, present participle of differre to set apart (see differ). Colloquial sense of
special attested by 1912. Related: Differently.


differential (adj.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin differentialis, from Latin differentia (see difference). Related:
Differentially.


differentiate (v.)

1816, from Medieval Latin differentiatus, past participle of differentiare, from Latin differentia
(see difference).    Originally a mathematical term; transitive and non-technical sense of
discriminate between is from 1876. Earlier, difference had been used as a verb in this sense.
Related: Differentiated; differentiating; differentiation.


difficult (adj.)

c.1400, apparently a back-formation from difficulty. French has difficile, Latin difficilis. Of
persons, hard to please, from 1580s.


difficulty (n.)

late 14c., from Old French difficult&eacute;, from Latin difficultatem (nominative difficultas)
difficulty, distress, poverty, from difficilis hard, from dis- not, away from (see dis-) + facilis
easy (see facile).


diffidence (n.)

c.1400, from Latin diffidentia mistrust, distrust, want of confidence, from diffidere to mistrust,
lack confidence, from dis- away (see dis-) + fidere to trust (see faith). Modern sense is of
distrusting oneself (1650s). The original sense was the opposite of confidence.


diffident (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin diffidentem (nominative diffidens), present participle of diffidere (see
diffidence). Related: Diffidently.


diffract (v.)

1803, perhaps a back-formation from diffraction. Related: Diffracted; diffracting.


diffraction (n.)

1670s, from French diffraction (17c.) or directly from Modern Latin diffractionem (nominative
diffractio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin diffringere break in pieces, from
dis- apart (see dis-) + frangere to break (see fraction).


diffuse (v.)

1520s (transitive), 1650s (intransitive), from Latin diffusus, past participle of diffundere to pour
out or away (see diffusion). Related: Diffused; diffusing.


diffuse (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin diffusus (see diffuse (v.)).


diffusion (n.)

late 14c., from Latin diffusionem (nominative diffusio) a pouring forth, noun of action from past
participle stem of diffundere scatter, pour out, from dis- apart, in every direction (see dis-) +
fundere pour (see found (v.2)).


dig (v.)

early 14c. (diggen), of uncertain origin, perhaps related to dike and ditch, either via Old French
diguer (ultimately from a Germanic source), or directly from an unrecorded Old English word. Native
words were deolfan (see delve), grafan (see grave (v.)).    Slang sense of understand first recorded
1934 in Black English, probably based on the notion of excavate. A slightly varied sense of
appreciate emerged 1939. Strong past participle dug appeared 16c., but is not etymological. Related:
Digging.


dig (n.)

late 17c. as a tool for digging, from dig (v.). Meaning archaeological expedition is from 1896.
Meaning thrust or poke (as with an elbow) is from 1819; figurative sense of this is from 1840.


digamist (n.)

person who has married a second time, 1650s, from di- (1) + -gamy + -ist.


digest (n.)

collection of writing, late 14c., from Latin digesta, from neuter plural of digestus, literally
digested thing, noun use of past participle of digerere to separate, divide, arrange, from dis-
apart (see dis-) + gerere to carry (see gest).


digest (v.)

assimilate food in bowels, late 14c., from Latin digestus (see digest (n.)). Related: Digested;
digesting.


digestible (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French digestible, from Latin digestibilis, from past participle stem of
digerere (see digest (n.)).


digestion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French digestion (13c.), from Latin digestionem (nominative digestio), noun of
action from past participle stem of digerere (see digest (n.)).


digestive (n.)

late 14c., from Old French digestif (14c.), from Late Latin digestivus pertaining to digestion, from
past participle stem of Latin digerere (see digest (n.)). From 1530s as an adjective. The noun in
the French form digestif is attested from 1908.


digger (n.)

mid-15c., one who digs, agent noun from dig (v.). The communistic movement in England so called from
1649.


dight (v.)

to adorn (archaic or poetic), Old English dihtan dictate, appoint, ordain; guide; compose, an early
borrowing from Latin dictare to dictate (see dictate (v.)).    The Latin word borrowed even earlier
into continental Germanic became Old High German dihton to write compose, German dichten to write
poetry. In Middle English, dight exploded to a vast array of meanings (including to rule, to handle,
to abuse, to have sex with, to kill, to clothe, to make ready, to repair) till it was one of the
most-used verbs in the language, but all senses have faded now into obscurity, dialect, or poetic
use.


digit (n.)

late 14c., numeral below 10, from Latin digitus finger or toe (also with secondary meanings dealing
in counting and numerals), related to dicere tell, say, point out (see diction). Numerical sense is
because numerals under 10 were counted on fingers. The finger or toe sense in English is attested
from 1640s.


digital (adj.)

1650s, pertaining to fingers, from Latin digitalis, from digitus (see digit). Meaning using
numerical digits is from 1938, especially of computers after c.1945; in reference to recording or
broadcasting, from 1960. Related: Digitize.


digitalis (n.)

1660s, Modern Latin translation of German fingerhut, the German name of foxglove, literally thimble.
Named by Fuchs (1542), and so called for its shape. The medicine (originally extracted from the
plant) is so called from 1799.


dignified (adj.)

past participle adjective from dignify; 1660s in sense ranking as a dignitary; 1812 in sense having
a dignified manner.


dignify (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French dignifier, from Medieval Latin dignificare make worthy, from Latin
dignus (see dignity) + -ficare, from facere to make, do (see factitious). Related: Dignification;
dignified; dignifying.


dignitary (n.)

1670s; see dignity + -ary. Related: Dignitaries (plural).


dignity (n.)

early 13c., from Old French dignite dignity, privilege, honor, from Latin dignitatem (nominative
dignitas) worthiness, from dignus worth (n.), worthy, proper, fitting from PIE *dek-no-, from root
*dek- to take, accept (see decent).


digraph (n.)

1788, in linguistics, from Greek di- twice (see di- (1)) + -graph something written, from Greek
graphe writing, from graphein to write, express by written characters, earlier to draw, represent by
lines drawn (see -graphy). In mathematics, from 1955, a contraction of directed graph.


digress (v.)

1520s, from Latin digressus, past participle of digredi to go aside, depart (see digression), or
perhaps a back-formation from digression. Related: Digressed; digressing.


digression (n.)

late 14c., from Latin digressionem (nominative digressio) a going away, departing, noun of action
from past participle stem of digredi to deviate, from dis- apart, aside (see dis-) + gradi to step,
go (see grade (n.)).


digs (n.)

lodgings, slang attested from 1893, from dig.


dike (n.)

Old English dic trench, ditch; an earthwork with a trench; moat, from Proto-Germanic *dik-
(cognates: Old Norse diki ditch, fishpond, Old Frisian dik mound, dam, Middle Dutch dijc mound, dam,
pool, Dutch dijk dam, German Deich embankment), from PIE root *dheigw- to pierce, fasten (cognates:
Sanskrit dehi- wall, Old Persian dida wall, stronghold, fortress, Persian diz).    At first an
excavation, later (late 15c.) applied to the resulting earth mound; a sense development paralleled
by cognate forms in many other languages. This is the northern variant of the word that in the south
of England yielded ditch (n.).


diktat (n.)

1933, from German Diktat dictate.


dilapidate (v.)

1560s, to bring a building to ruin, from Latin dilapidatus, past participle of dilapidare to
squander, waste, originally to throw stones, scatter like stones; see dilapidation. Perhaps the
English word is a back-formation from dilapidation.


dilapidated (adj.)

in ruins, broken down, 1806, past participle adjective from dilapidate.


dilapidation (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin dilapidationem (nominative dilapidatio) a squandering, noun of action
from past participle stem of Latin dilapidare throw away, squander, waste, literally pelt with
stones (thus ruin, destroy) or else scatter like stones, from dis- asunder (see dis-) + lapidare
throw stones at, from lapis (genitive lapidis) stone. Taken in Eng. in a more literal sense than was
usual in Latin [OED].


dilatation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French dilatation, from Late Latin dilatationem (nominative dilatatio) a widening,
from past participle stem of Latin dilatare (see dilate).


dilate (v.)

late 14c., from Old French dilater, from Late Latin dilatare make wider, enlarge, from dis- apart
(see dis-) + latus wide (see latitude). Related: Dilated; dilating.


dilation (n.)

1590s, formed from dilate on the mistaken assumption that the -ate in that word was the Latin verbal
suffix (it is instead part of the stem); the proper form, dilatation, is older (c.1400).


dilatory (adj.)

late 15c., from Late Latin dilatorius, from dilator procrastinator, from dilatus, serving as past
participle of differe delay (see defer).


dildo (n.)

1590s, perhaps a corruption of Italian deletto delight, from Latin dilectio, noun of action from
diligere to esteem highly, to love (see diligence). Or (less likely) of English diddle. Curse Eunuke
dilldo, senceless counterfet [Choise of Valentines or the Merie Ballad of Nash his Dildo, T. Nashe,
c.1593]


dilemma (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin dilemma, from Greek dilemma double proposition, a technical term in rhetoric,
from di- two + lemma premise, anything received or taken, from root of lambanein to take (see
analemma). It should be used only of situations where someone is forced to choose between two
alternatives, both unfavorable to him. But even logicians disagree on whether certain situations are
dilemmas or mere syllogisms.


dilettante (n.)

1733, borrowing of Italian dilettante lover of music or painting, from dilettare to delight, from
Latin delectare (see delight (n.)). Originally without negative connotation, devoted amateur, the
pejorative sense emerged late 18c. by contrast with professional.


diligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligence attention, care; haste, speed, from Latin diligentia
attentiveness, carefulness, from diligentem (nominative diligens) attentive, assiduous, careful,
originally present participle of diligere single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; aspire to,
be content with, appreciate, originally to pick out, select, from dis- apart (see dis-) + legere
choose, gather (see lecture (n.)).    Sense evolved from love through attentiveness to carefulness
to steady effort. From the secondary French sense comes the old useage of diligence for public stage
coach (1742; dilly for short), from a French shortening of carrosse de diligence.


diligent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligent (14c.), from Latin diligentem attentive, assiduous (see
diligence). Related: Diligently.


dill (n.)

Old English dile dill, anise, a Proto-Germanic word of unknown origin (cognates: Old Saxon dilli,
Middle Dutch and Dutch dille, Swedish dill, German Dill).


dilly (n.)

delightful or excellent person or thing (often used ironically), 1935, American English, from an
earlier adjective (1909), perhaps from the first syllable of delightful or delicious, or related to
the nursery word for duck. Dilly was also slang for a stagecoach (1818), from French carrosse de
diligence (see diligence).


dilly-dally (v.)

1741, probably a reduplication of dally. Related: Dilly-dallying.


dilute (v.)

1550s, from Latin dilutus, past participle of diluere dissolve, wash away, dilute, from dis- apart +
-luere, comb. form of lavere to wash (see lave). Related: Diluted; diluting. As an adjective from
c.1600.


dilution (n.)

1640s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin diluere (see dilute).


diluvial (adj.)

pertaining to a flood (or The Flood), 1650s, from Late Latin diluvialis, from Latin diluvium flood,
inundation (see deluge (n.)). Related: Diluvian.


dim (adj.)

Old English dimm dark, gloomy, obscure, from Proto-Germanic *dimbaz (cognates: Old Norse dimmr, Old
Frisian dim, Old High German timber dark, black, somber). Not known outside Germanic. Slang sense of
stupid is from 1892. Related: Dimly; dimness.


dim (v.)

c.1200, perhaps in Old English, from dim (adj.). Related: Dimmed; dimming.


dim sum (n.)

1948, from Cantonese dim sam (Chinese dianxin) appetizer, said to mean literally touch the heart.


dime (n.)

chosen 1786 as name for U.S. 10 cent coin, from dime a tenth, tithe (late 14c.), from Old French
disme (Modern French d&icirc;me) a tenth part, from Latin decima (pars) tenth (part), from decem ten
(see ten).    The verb meaning to inform (on someone) is 1960s, from the then-cost of a pay phone
call. A dime a dozen almost worthless first recorded 1930. Phrase stop on a dime attested by 1954 (a
dime being the physically smallest unit of U.S. currency).


dimension (n.)

late 14c., measurement, size, from Latin dimensionem (nominative dimensio) a measuring, noun of
action from past participle stem of dimetri to measure out, from dis- (see dis-) + metiri to measure
(see measure). Meaning any component of a situation is from 1929. Related: Dimensional; dimensions.


diminish (v.)

early 15c., from merger of two obsolete verbs, diminue and minish. Diminue is from Old French
diminuer make small, from Latin diminuere break into small pieces, variant of deminuere lessen,
diminish, from de- completely + minuere make small (see minus).   Minish is from Old French
menuisier, from Latin minuere. Related: Diminished; diminishes; diminishing.


diminuendo

1775, from Italian diminuendo lessening, diminishing, present participle of diminuire, from Latin
deminuere (see diminish).


diminution (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French diminuciun, Old French diminucion, from Latin diminutionem (nominative
diminutio), earlier deminutionem, noun of action from past participle stem of deminuere (see
diminish).


diminutive

late 14c. (noun and adjective), from Old French diminutif (14c.), from Latin diminutivus, earlier
deminutivus, from past participle stem of deminuere (see diminish).


dimity (n.)

mid-15c., from Italian dimiti, plural of dimito, a name for a kind of strong cotton cloth, from
Medieval Latin dimitum, from Greek dimitos of double thread, from di- (see di- (1)) + mitos warp
thread, thread (see mitre).


dimmer (n.)

1822, agent noun from dim (v.). Of mechanisms for reducing the brightness of electric lights, from
1905.


dimorphous (adj.)

1832, from Greek dimorphos of two forms, from di- (see di- (1)) + morphe form, shape (see Morpheus).


dimple (n.)

c.1400, perhaps existing in Old English as a word meaning pothole, perhaps ultimately from Proto-
Germanic *dumpilaz, which has yielded words in other languages meaning small pit, little pool (such
as German T&uuml;mpel pool, Middle Low German d&uuml;mpelen, Dutch dompelen to plunge). Related:
Dimples.


dimple (v.)

1570s (implied in dimpled), from dimple (n.).


dimwit (n.)

also dim-wit, U.S. college slang by 1922, from dim (adj.) + wit (n.). Related: dimwitted.


din (n.)

Old English dyne (n.), dynian (v.), from Proto-Germanic *duniz (cognates: Old Norse dynr, Danish
don, Middle Low German don noise), from PIE root *dwen- to make noise (cognates: Sanskrit dhuni
roaring, a torrent).


Dinah

fem. proper name, in the Old Testament, Jacob's daughter by Leah, from Hebrew Dinah, literally
judgment, from din to judge.


dinar (n.)

Middle Eastern unit of currency, 1630s, from Arabic dinar, from late Greek denarion, from Latin
denarius (see denarius).


Dinaric (adj.)

from Dinara, ancient name of a mountain in Dalmatia.


dine (v.)

late 13c., from Old French disner (Modern French d&icirc;ner) to dine, eat, have a meal, originally
take the first meal of the day, from stem of Gallo-Roman *desjunare to break one's fast, from Vulgar
Latin *disjejunare, from dis- undo (see dis-) + Late Latin jejunare to fast, from Latin iejunus
fasting, hungry (see jejune).


diner (n.)

one who dines, 1815, agent noun from dine. Meaning railway car for eating is 1890, American English;
of restaurants built to resemble dining cars (or in some cases actual converted dining cars) from
1935. The Diner's Club credit card system dates from 1952.


dinette (n.)

1930, from dine + diminutive (or false French) suffix -ette.


ding (v.)

1819, to sound as metal when struck, possibly abstracted from ding-dong, of imitative origin. The
meaning to deal heavy blows is c.1300, probably from Old Norse dengja to hammer, perhaps also
imitative. Meaning dent is 1960s. Related: Dinged; dinging.


ding dong

imitative of the sound of a bell, c.1560.


ding-a-ling (n.)

one who is crazy, 1935, from notion of hearing bells in the head (see ding (v.)).


dingbat (n.)

1838, American English, some kind of alcoholic drink, of unknown origin. One of that class of words
(such as dingus, doohickey, gadget, gizmo, thingumabob) which are conjured up to supply names for
items whose proper names are unknown or not recollected. Used at various periods for money, a
professional tramp, a muffin, a typographical ornament, male genitalia, a Chinese, an Italian, a
woman who is neither your sister nor your mother, and a foolish person in authority. Popularized in
sense of foolish person by U.S. TV show All in the Family (1971-79), though this usage dates from
1905.


dinger (n.)

something superlative, 1809, American English, agent noun from ding (v.).


dinghy (n.)

1810, from Hindi dingi small boat, perhaps from Sanskrit drona-m wooden trough, related to dru-s
wood, tree (see tree (n.)). The spelling with -h- is to indicate a hard -g-.


dingle (n.)

deep dell or hollow, usually wooded, mid-13c., of unknown origin; a dialectal word until it entered
literary use 17c.


dingleberry (n.)

by 1973, perhaps with suggestions of dangle and berry. Attested from late 19c. through 1930s as a
humorous-sounding surname in comedic writing.


dingo (n.)

1789, Native Australian name, from Dharruk (language formerly spoken in the area of Sydney) /din-go/
tame dog, though the English used it to describe wild Australian dogs. Bushmen continue to call the
animal by the Dharruk term /warrigal/ wild dog.


dingus (n.)

any unspecified or unspecifiable object; something one does not know the name of or does not wish to
name, 1876, U.S. slang, from Dutch dinges, literally thing (see thing).


dingy (adj.)

1736, Kentish dialect, dirty, of uncertain origin, but perhaps related to dung. The noun dinge
(1816) is a back-formation.


dining (n.)

c.1400, verbal noun from dine (v.). Dining room is attested from c.1600.


dink (n.)

derogatory for Vietnamese, 1969, U.S. military slang, of uncertain origin.


DINK

acronym for double income, no kids, popular from 1987.


dinkum (n.)

1888, hard work, Australian slang, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to Lincolnshire dialect.
Meaning honest, genuine is attested from 1894.


dinky (adj.)

1788 neat, trim, dainty, small, from Scottish dialectal dink finely dressed, trim (c.1500), of
unknown origin. Modern sense is 1850s.


dinner (n.)

c.1300, from Old French disner (11c.), originally breakfast, later lunch, noun use of infinitive
disner (see dine). Always used in English for the main meal of the day; shift from midday to evening
began with the fashionable classes. Childish reduplication din-din is attested from 1905.


dinosaur (n.)

1841, coined in Modern Latin by Sir Richard Owen, from comb. form of Greek deinos terrible (see
dire) + sauros lizard (see -saurus). Figurative sense of person or institution not adapting to
change is from 1952.


dint (n.)

Old English dynt blow dealt in fighting (especially by a sword), from Proto-Germanic *duntiz
(cognates: Old Norse dyntr blow, kick). Phrase by dint of ... by force of, by means of, is early
14c.


diocesan (adj.)

mid-15c., from French dioc&eacute;sain (15c.), from diocese (see diocese).


diocese (n.)

early 14c., from Old French diocese (13c., Modern French dioc&egrave;se), from Late Latin diocesis a
governor's jurisdiction, later, a bishop's jurisdiction, from Greek dioikesis government,
administration; province, originally economy, housekeeping, from dioikein control, govern,
administer, manage a house, from dia- thoroughly (see dia-) + oikos house (see villa).


diode (n.)

1886, from Greek di- twice + hodos way (see cede).


Diomedes

Greek hero in the Trojan War, literally advised by Zeus, from Dios, genitive of Zeus (see Zeus) +
medos counsel, plan, device, cunning (see Medea).


Dion

masc. proper name, short for Dionysius (see Dennis).


Dionysian (adj.)

of or pertaining to Dionysos, Greek god of wine and revelry, identified with Roman Bacchus. His name
is of unknown origin. Or in reference to historical men named Dionysius such as the tyrants of
Syracuse and especially Dionysius Exiguus (see A.D.), such as Dionysian period of 532 Julian years,
when the moon phases recur on the same days of the week.


diorama (n.)

1823 as a type of picture-viewing device, from French diorama (1822), from Greek di- through (see
dia-) + orama that which is seen, a sight (see panorama). Meaning small-scale replica of a scene,
etc. is from 1902.


Dioscuri (n.)

from Greek Dioskouroi, literally Zeus' boys, from Dios, genitive of Zeus (see Zeus) + kouroi, plural
of kouros boy, son (see crescent).


dioxin (n.)

1919, from dioxy- + chemical suffix -in (2). All the compounds in the group are characterized by two
oxygen atoms.


dip (v.)

Old English dyppan immerse, baptize by immersion, from Proto-Germanic *duppjan (cognates: Old Norse
deypa to dip, Danish d&oslash;be to baptize, Old Frisian depa, Dutch dopen, German taufen, Gothic
daupjan to baptize), related to Old English diepan immerse, dip, and perhaps ultimately to deep. As
a noun, from 1590s. Sense of downward slope is 1708. Meaning sweet sauce for pudding, etc. first
recorded 1825.


dip (n.)

stupid person, eccentric person, 1920s slang, perhaps a back-formation from dippy. Dipshit is an
emphatic form of dip (2); dipstick may be a euphemism or may reflect putative dipstick 'penis'
[DAS].


diphtheria (n.)

from French diphth&eacute;rie, coined 1857 by physician Pierre Bretonneau (1778-1862) from Greek
diphthera prepared hide, leather, of unknown origin; the disease so called for the tough membrane
that forms in the throat. Bretonneau's earlier name for it was diphth&eacute;rite, anglicized as
diphtheritis (1826). Formerly known in England as the Boulogne sore throat, because it spread from
France.


diphthong (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French diphthongue, from Late Latin diphthongus, from Greek diphthongos
having two sounds, from di- double (see di- (1)) + phthongos sound, voice, related to phthengesthai
utter, speak loudly.


diplodocus (n.)

1884, coined in Modern Latin in 1878 by U.S. paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh (1831-1899) from
Greek diploos double (see diploid) + dokos a beam. So called for the peculiar structure of the tail
bones.


diploid (adj.)

1908, from Greek diploos double, twofold, (from di- two + root *pel- to fold; see ply (v.)) + eidos
form (see -oid).


diploma (n.)

1640s, state paper, official document, from Latin diploma, from Greek diploma license, chart,
originally paper folded double, from diploun to double, fold over, from diploos double (see diploid)
+ -oma. Specific academic sense is 1680s in English.


diplomacy (n.)

1796, from French diplomatie, formed from diplomate diplomat (on model of aristocratie from
aristocrate), from Latin adjective diplomaticos, from diploma (genitive diplomatis) official
document conferring a privilege (see diploma; for sense evolution, see diplomatic).    It is obvious
to any one who has been in charge of the interests of his country abroad that the day secrecy is
abolished negotiations of any kind will become impossible. [Jules Cambon, The Diplomatist (transl.
Christopher Rede Turner), 1931]


diplomat (n.)

1813, from French diplomate, a back-formation from diplomatique (see diplomatic) on model of
aristocrate from aristocratique.


diplomatic (adj.)

1711, pertaining to documents, texts, charters, from Medieval Latin diplomaticus, from diplomat-,
stem of diploma (see diploma).    Meaning pertaining to international relations is recorded from
1787, apparently a sense evolved in 18c. from the use of diplomaticus in Modern Latin titles of
collections of international treaties, etc., in which the word referred to the texts but came to be
felt as meaning pertaining to international relations. In the general sense of tactful and adroit,
it dates from 1826. Related: Diplomatically.


dipper (n.)

late 14c., as a type of diving bird, agent noun from dip (v.). As a ladle or long-handled utensil
for drawing liquid, from 1783, chiefly American English. As the popular U.S. name for the asterism
known in Britain as The Plough or Charles' Wain, attested by 1833.


dippy (adj.)

mad, insane, crazy, 1903, perhaps from dip + -y (2), but the exact signification is unclear. Another
theory connects it with dipsomania.


dipsomania (n.)

1843, morbid craving for alcohol, coined in medical Latin from Greek dipsa thirst (of unknown
origin) + mania.


dipsomaniac (n.)

drunkard, 1858, from dipsomania; slang shortening dipso is from 1880.


diptych (n.)

1620s, from Latin diptycha (plural), from late Greek diptykha, neuter plural of diptykhos double-
folded, doubled, from dis- two + ptykhe fold.


dire (adj.)

1560s, from Latin dirus fearful, awful, boding ill, of unknown origin; perhaps from Oscan and
Umbrian and perhaps cognate with Greek deinos, from PIE root *dwei-.


direct (v.)

late 14c., to write (to someone), to address, from Latin directus straight, past participle of
dirigere set straight, from dis- apart (see dis-) + regere to guide (see regal). Compare dress;
address.    Meaning to govern, regulate is from c.1500; to order, ordain is from 1650s. Sense of to
write the destination on the outside of a letter is from 16c. Of plays, films, etc., from 1913.
Related: Directed; directing.


direct (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin directus straight, past participle of dirigere set straight (see direct (v.)).


direction (n.)

c.1400, orderly arrangement; c.1500 as action of directing, from Latin directionem (nominative
directio), noun of action from past participle stem of dirigere (see direct (v.)). Meaning course
pursued by a moving object is from 1660s. Related: Directional.


directions (n.)

instructions on how to get somewhere, 1590s, plural of direction (q.v.).


directive (adj.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin directivus, from past participle stem of Latin dirigere (see direct
(v.)). From 1640s as a noun.


directly (adv.)

1510s, in a straight line, from direct (adj.) + -ly (2). Figurative use is slightly earlier
(c.1500). Meaning at once, immediately in time (c.1600) is from earlier sense of without
intermediate steps (1520s).


director (n.)

late 15c., a guide, from Anglo-French directour, French directeur, agent noun from Latin dirigere
(see direct (v.)). Corporate sense is from 1630s; theatrical sense from 1911.


directorate (n.)

1837, from director + -ate (1).


directory (n.)

1540s, guide, book of rules, from Medieval Latin directorium, noun use of neuter of Latin
directorius, from directus (see direct (v.)). Meaning alphabetical listing of inhabitants of a
region is from 1732; listing of telephone numbers is from 1908. As an adjective, from mid-15c.


dirge (n.)

early 13c., dirige (current contracted form is from c.1400), from Latin dirige direct! imperative of
dirigere to direct, probably from antiphon Dirige, Domine, Deus meus, in conspectu tuo viam meam,
Direct, O Lord, my God, my way in thy sight, from Psalm v:9, which opened the Matins service in the
Office of the Dead. Transferred sense of any funeral song is from c.1500.


dirigible (n.)

airship, 1885, from French dirigeable, literally capable of being directed or guided, from Latin
dirigere (see direct (v.)). The word existed as an adjective in English from 1580s, with the literal
sense.


dirk (n.)

c.1600, perhaps from Dirk, the proper name, which was used in Scandinavian for a picklock. But the
earliest spellings were dork, durk (Johnson, 1755, seems to be responsible for the modern spelling),
and the earliest association is with Highlanders, however there seems to be no such word in Gaelic,
where the proper name is biodag. Another candidate is German dolch dagger.


dirndl (n.)

1937, from German dialectal diminutive of dirne girl (in dirndlkleid peasant dress), from a
diminutive of Middle High German dierne maid, from Old High German thiorna, which is related to Old
English &thorn;egn (see thane).


dirt (n.)

15c. metathesis of Middle English drit, drytt mud, dirt, dung (c.1300), from Old Norse drit, cognate
with Old English dritan to void excrement, from Proto-Germanic *dritan (cognates: Dutch drijten, Old
High German trizan).    Used abusively of persons from c.1300. Meaning gossip first attested 1926
(in Hemingway); dirt bike is 1960s. Dirt-cheap is from 1821. Dirt road attested by 1852.


dirty (adj.)

c.1500, from dirt + -y (2). Earlier dritty (late 14c.). Meaning smutty, morally unclean is from
1590s. Of colors, from 1690s. Dirty linen personal or familial secrets is first recorded 1860s.
Dirty work in the figurative sense is from 1764; dirty trick is from 1670s. The dirty look someone
gives you is from 1928; dirty old man superannuated lecher is from 1932. Related: dirtiness.


dirty (v.)

1590s, from dirty (adj.). Related: Dirtied; dirtying.


dis (v.)

also diss, slang, by 1980, shortening of disrespect or dismiss, originally in U.S. Black English,
popularized by hip hop. Related: Dissed; dissing. Earlier it was short for disconnected in the
telephone sense and used figuratively in slang to mean weak in the head (1925).


Dis

Roman underworld god, from Latin Dis, contracted from dives rich, which is related to divus divine,
god, hence favored by god. Compare Pluto and Old Church Slavonic bogatu rich, from bogu god.


dis-

(assimilated as dif- before -f-, to di- before most voiced consonants), word-forming element meaning
1. lack of, not (as in dishonest); 2. do the opposite of (as in disallow); 3. apart, away (as in
discard), from Old French des- or directly from Latin dis- apart, in a different direction, between,
figuratively not, un-, also exceedingly, utterly, from PIE *dis- apart, asunder (cognates: Old
English te-, Old Saxon ti-, Old High German ze-, German zer-).    The PIE root is a secondary form
of *dwis- and thus is related to Latin bis twice (originally *dvis) and to duo, on notion of two
ways, in twain.    In classical Latin, dis- paralelled de- and had much the same meaning, but in
Late Latin dis- came to be the favored form and this passed into Old French as des-, the form used
for new compound words formed in Old French, where it increasingly had a privative sense (not).
In English, many of these words eventually were altered back to dis-, while in French many have been
altered back to de-. The usual confusion prevails.


disability (n.)

1570s, want of ability; see dis- + ability. Related: Disabilities.


disable (v.)

mid-15c., from dis- do the opposite of + ablen (v.) to make fit (see able). Related: Disabled;
disabling. Earlier in the same sense was unable (v.) make unfit, render unsuitable (c.1400).


disabled (adj.)

incapacitated, 1630s, past participle adjective from disable. Earlier it meant legally disqualified
(mid-15c.).


disabuse (v.)

1610s, from dis- + abuse (v.). Related: Disabused; disabusing.


disaccord (v.)

late 14c.; see dis- + accord (v.). Related: Disaccorded; disaccording; disaccordance.


disaccustom (v.)

late 15c., from Old French desacostumer render unfamiliar (Modern French d&eacute;saccoutumer), from
des- (see dis-) + acostumer (see accustom). Related: Disaccustomed.


disadvantage (n.)

late 14c., disavauntage, from Old French desavantage (13c.), from des- (see dis-) + avantage (see
advantage).


disadvantage (v.)

1530s, from disadvantage (n.). Related: Disadvantaged; disadvantaging.


disadvantaged (adj.)

1610s, past participle adjective from disadvantage (v.). Of races or classes deprived of
opportunities for advancement, from 1902, a word popularized by sociologists. As a noun, shorthand
for disadvantaged persons, it is attested by 1939.


disadvantageous (adj.)

c.1600; see disadvantage (n.) + -ous. Related: Disadvantageously.


disaffect (v.)

1610s, from dis- + affect (v.1). Related: Disaffected; disaffecting.


disaffected (adj.)

estranged, hostile, usually in reference to authority, 1630s, past participle adjective from
disaffect. Related: Disaffectedly; disaffectedness.


disaffection (n.)

c.1600; see dis- + affection.


disagree (v.)

late 15c., refuse to assent, from Old French desagreer (12c.), from des- (see dis-) + agreer (see
agree). Related: Disagreed; disagreeing.


disagreeable (adj.)

c.1400, not in agreement, from Old French desagreable (13c.), from des- (see dis-) + agreable (see
agreeable). Meaning not in accord with one's taste is from 1690s. Related: Disagreeably;
disagreeableness. Slightly earlier in same sense was unagreeable (late 14c.).


disagreement (n.)

late 15c.; see dis- + agreement.


disallow (v.)

late 14c., to refuse to praise, from Old French desalouer to blame, from des- (see dis-) + alouer
(see allow); meaning to reject is from 1550s. Related: Disallowed; disallowing; disallowance.


disallowable (adj.)

mid-15c., from disallow + -able.


disambiguate (v.)

1963, back-formation from disambiguation. Related: Disambiguated; disambiguating.


disambiguation (n.)

1827; see dis- + ambiguous + -ation.


disappear (v.)

early 15c., disaperen, from dis- do the opposite of + appear. Earlier was disparish (early 15c.),
from French disparaiss-, stem of dispara&icirc;tre. Related: Disappeared; disappearing; disappears.
Slang disappearing act is originally of magic shows; in figurative sense of getting away first
attested 1913.


disappearance (n.)

1712; see disappear + -ance.


disappoint (v.)

early 15c., dispossess of appointed office, from Middle French desappointer (14c.) undo the
appointment, remove from office, from des- (see dis-) + appointer appoint (see appoint).    Modern
sense of to frustrate expectations (late 15c.) is from secondary meaning of fail to keep an
appointment. Related: Disappointed; disappointing.


disappointed (adj.)

1550s, past participle adjective from disappoint. Related: Disappointedly.


disappointment (n.)

1610s, fact of disappointing; see disappoint + -ment. Meaning state or feeling of being disappointed
is from 1756. Meaning a thing that disappoints is from 1756.


disapprobation (n.)

1640s; see dis- + approbation.


disapproval (n.)

1660s; see disapprove + -al (2).


disapprove (v.)

late 15c., disprove; as the reverse of approve it is first attested 1640s. See dis- + approve.
Related: Disapproved; disapproving.


disarm (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desarmer (11c.), from des- (see dis-) + armer to arm (see arm (v.)). The
figurative sense is slightly earlier in English than the literal. Related: Disarmed; disarming.


disarmament (n.)

1795; see dis- + armament.


disarray (v.)

late 14c.; see dis- lack of + array. Perhaps formed on the analogy of Old French desareer.


disarray (n.)

early 15c., disorder, confusion; see disarray (v.).


disarticulate (adj.)

early 15c.; see dis- + articulate (adj.).


disassemble (v.)

1610s, to disperse; see dis- + assemble. Meaning to take apart is from 1922. Related: Disassembled;
disassembling; disassembly.


disassociate (v.)

c.1600, from dis- + associate (v.). Related: Disassociated; disassociating; disassociation.


disaster (n.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;sastre (1560s), from Italian disastro ill-starred, from dis-,
here merely pejorative (see dis-) + astro star, planet, from Latin astrum, from Greek astron (see
star (n.)). The sense is astrological, of a calamity blamed on an unfavorable position of a planet.


disastrous (adj.)

1580s, ill-starred, from French d&eacute;sastreux (16c.), from d&eacute;sastre (see disaster) or
from Italian desastroso. Meaning calamitous is from c.1600. Related: Disastrously.


disavow (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desavouer (13c.), from des- opposite of (see dis-) + avouer (see avow).
Related: Disavowed; disavowing.


disavowal (n.)

1748; see disavow + -al (2).


disband (v.)

1590s, from Middle French desbander (Modern French d&eacute;bander), in military sense, from des-
(see dis-) + band (v.). Related: Disbanded; disbanding.


disbar (v.)

deprive of the privileges of a barrister, 1630s; see dis- opposite of + bar in the legal sense.
Related: Disbarred; disbarring; disbarment.


disbelief (n.)

1670s; see dis- + belief. A Latin-Germanic hybrid.


disbelieve (v.)

1640s; see dis- + believe. Related: Disbelieved; disbelieving; disbeliever.


disburse (v.)

1520s, disbourse, from Old French desbourser (13c.) extract (money) from a purse, spend (money),
from des- (see dis-) + bourse purse (see bursar). Related: Disbursed; disbursing.


disbursement (n.)

1590s; see disburse + -ment.


disc (n.)

Latinate spelling preferred in British English for most uses of disk (q.v.). American English tends
to use it in the musical recording sense; originally of phonograph records, recently of compact
discs. Hence, discophile enthusiast for gramophone recordings (1940).


discalceate (adj.)

unshod, barefoot, 1650s, from Latin discalceatus, from dis- (see dis-) + calceatus, past participle
of calceare to furnish with shoes, from calceus shoe.


discard (v.)

1590s, literally to throw a card away, from dis- away + card (n.). Figurative use (in a non-gaming
sense) is first recorded 1580s. In the card-playing sense, decard is attested by 1550s. Related:
Discarded; discarding. As a noun, from 1742.


discern (v.)

late 14c., from Old French discerner (13c.) distinguish (between), separate (by sifting), and
directly from Latin discernere to separate, set apart, divide, distribute; distinguish, perceive,
from dis- off, away (see dis-) + cernere distinguish, separate, sift (see crisis). Related:
Discerned; discerning.


discernible (adj.)

also discernable, 1560s, from French discernable, from discerner (see discern). Form with -a- was
more common at first; spelling changed to -i- 17c. to conform to Latin discernibilis.


discerning

action of perceiving, late 14c., verbal noun from discern. As a present participle adjective,
attested from c.1600.


discernment (n.)

1580s; see discern + -ment.


discharge (v.)

early 14c., to exempt, exonerate, release, from Old French deschargier (12c., Modern French
d&eacute;charger) to unload, discharge, from Late Latin discarricare, from dis- do the opposite of
(see dis-) + carricare load (see charge (v.)).    Meaning to unload, to free from is late 14c. Of
weapons, from 1550s. The electrical sense is first attested 1748. Meaning to fulfill, to perform
one's duties is from c.1400. Related: Discharged; discharging.


discharge (n.)

late 14c., relief from misfortune, see discharge (v.). Meaning release from work or duty is from
early 15c.


dischargeable (adj.)

mid-15c., from discharge (v.) + -able.


disciple (n.)

Old English discipul (fem. discipula), Biblical borrowing from Latin discipulus pupil, student,
follower, said to be from discere to learn [OED, Watkins], from a reduplicated form of PIE root
*dek- to take, accept (see decent).    But according to Barnhart and Klein, from a lost compound
*discipere to grasp intellectually, analyze thoroughly, from dis- apart (see dis-) + capere to take,
take hold of (see capable). Compare Latin capulus handle from capere. Sometimes glossed in Old
English by &thorn;egn (see thane).


discipleship (n.)

1540s, from disciple + -ship.


disciplinable (adj.)

mid-15c., from discipline + -able.


disciplinarian (n.)

one who enforces order, 1630s, see discipline; earlier used of Puritans who wanted to establish the
Presbyterian discipline in England (1580s). Meaning advocate of greater discipline is from 1746.


disciplinary (adj.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin disciplinarius, from Latin disciplina (see discipline (n.)).


discipline (n.)

early 13c., penitential chastisement; punishment, from Old French descepline (11c.) discipline,
physical punishment; teaching; suffering; martyrdom, and directly from Latin disciplina instruction
given, teaching, learning, knowledge, also object of instruction, knowledge, science, military
discipline, from discipulus (see disciple (n.)).    Sense of treatment that corrects or punishes is
from notion of order necessary for instruction. The Latin word is glossed in Old English by
&thorn;eodscipe.  Meaning branch of instruction or education is first recorded late 14c. Meaning
military training is from late 15c.; that of orderly conduct as a result of training is from c.1500.


discipline (v.)

c.1300; see discipline (n.). Related: Disciplined; disciplines; disciplining.


disclaim (v.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French disclaimer, Old French desclamer disclaim, disavow, from des- (see dis-) +
clamer to call, cry out, claim (see claim (v.)). Related: Disclaimed; disclaiming.


disclaimer (n.)

denial of a claim, mid-15c., from Anglo-French disclaimer disavowal, denial; see disclaim.
Infinitive used as a noun in Old French. Compare waiver, etc.


disclose (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desclos open, exposed, plain, explicit, past participle of desclore
(Modern French d&eacute;clore) open, break open, unlock, reveal, from des- (see dis-) + clore to
close (see close (v.)). Related: Disclosed; disclosing.


disclosure (n.)

1590s; see disclose + -ure. Formed in English, perhaps on model of closure.


disco (n.)

1964, American English shortening of discotheque; sense extended by 1972 to the kind of music played
there.


discobolus (n.)

discus thrower, from Latin, from Greek discobolos, from diskos quoit, discus (see disk (n.)) +
-bolos thrower, related to ballein to throw (see ballistics).


discography (n.)

1933; see disc + -graphy.


discolor (v.)

late 14c., from Old French descolorer, from des- (see dis-) + colorer to color, from Latin colorare
(see coloration). Related: Discolored; discoloring.


discoloration (n.)

1640s, noun of action from discolorate (early 15c.), from past participle stem of Medieval Latin
discolorare (see discolor) + -ation.


discolour (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of discolor (q.v.); for ending see -or. Related: Discoloured;
discolouring; discolouration.


discombobulate (v.)

1834, American English, fanciful coinage of a type popular then (originally discombobricate).
Related: discombobulating; discombobulation.


discombobulated (adj.)

1834 (as discombobracated); see discombobulate.


discomfit (v.)

c.1200, as an adjective, from Old French desconfit vanquished, defeated, past participle of
desconfire to defeat, destroy, from des- not (see dis-) + confire make, prepare, accomplish, from
Latin conficere (see confection).    Used as a verb in English from c.1300. Weaker sense of
disconcert is first recorded 1520s in English, probably by confusion with discomfort. Related:
Discomfited; discomfiting.


discomfiture (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French desconfiture rout, defeat (12c.; Modern French d&eacute;confiture), from
desconfit (see discomfit).


discomfort (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French desconfort (12c.), from desconforter (v.), from des- (see dis-) +
conforter (see comfort (v.)).


discomfort (v.)

c.1300, to deprive of courage, from Old French desconforter; see discomfort (n.). Related:
Discomforted; discomforting.


disconcert (v.)

1680s, from Middle French disconcerter (Modern French d&eacute;concerter) confused, from dis- do the
opposite of (see dis-) + concerter (see concert). Related: Disconcerted; disconcerting;
disconcertingly.


disconnect (v.)

1770; see dis- + connect. Perhaps a back-formation from disconnection. Related: Disconnected;
disconnecting.


disconnection (n.)

1735, disconnexion; see dis- not + connection. Spelling disconnection attested from 1769.


disconsolate (adj.)

c.1400, from Medieval Latin disconsolatus comfortless, from Latin dis- away (see dis-) + consolatus,
past participle of consolari (see console (v.)). Related: Disconsolately.


discontent (v.)

late 15c., from dis- not + content (v.). Related: Discontented; discontentedly; discontentment;
discontentedness.


discontent (adj.)

mid-15c., from dis- + content (adj.).


discontent (n.)

state or condition of discontent, 1580s, from dis- + content (n.). Winter of our discontent is from
Richard III.


discontinuance (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French, from Old French discontinuer (see discontinue).


discontinue (v.)

late 14c., from Old French discontinuer (14c.), from Medieval Latin discontinuare, from dis- not
(see dis-) + Latin continuare to continue (see continue). Related: Discontinued; discontinuity;
discontinuous; discontinuation.


discord (n.)

early 13c., descorde, unfriendly feeling, ill will; also dissention, strife, from Old French
descorde (12c.) disagreement, from Latin discordia, from discors (genitive discordis) disagreeing,
disagreement, from dis- apart (see dis-) + cor (genitive cordis) heart (see heart). Musical sense is
late 14c.


discord (v.)

c.1300, from Old French discorder (13c.), from Latin discordare (see discord (n.)).


discordance (n.)

mid-14c.; see discord (v.) + -ance.


discordant (adj.)

late 14c., discordaunt, from Old French descordant, present participle of descorder (see discord
(n.)). Related: Discordantly.


discotheque (n.)

1954 as a French word in English; nativized by 1965, from French discoth&egrave;que nightclub with
recorded music for dancing, also record library, borrowed 1932 from Italian discoteca record
collection, record library, coined 1927 from disco phonograph record + -teca collection, probably on
model of biblioteca library.


discount (n.)

1620s, abatement, alteration of 16c. French descompte, from Medieval Latin discomputus (source of
Italian disconto), from discomputare (see discount (v.)). Meaning deduction for early payment is
from 1680s; meaning reduction in the price of goods attested by 1837.


discount (v.)

1620s, reckon as an abatement or deduction, from Old French desconter (13c., Modern French
d&eacute;compter), from Medieval Latin discomputare, from dis- (see dis-) + computare to count (see
count (v.)). Hence, to abate, deduct (1650s), and figurative sense to leave out of account,
disregard (1702).  Related: Discounted; discounting.


discountenance (v.)

put to shame, 1570s, from Middle French descontenancer (16c.) to abash, from des- (see dis-) +
contenancer (see countenance).


discourage (v.)

mid-15c., discoragen, from Middle French descourager, from Old French descoragier, from des- away
(see dis-) + corage (see courage). Related: Discouraged; discouragement; discouraging.


discourse (n.)

late 14c., process of understanding, reasoning, thought, from French discours, from Latin discursus
a running about, in Late Latin conversation, from past participle stem of discurrere run about, from
dis- apart (see dis-) + currere to run (see current (adj.)). Sense of formal speech or writing is
first recorded 1580s.


discourse (v.)

1540s, from discourse (n.). Related: Discoursed; discoursing.


discourteous (adj.)

1560s; see dis- + courteous. Related: Discourteously.


discourtesy (n.)

1550s; see dis- opposite of + courtesy.


discover (v.)

c.1300, divulge, reveal, disclose, from Old French descovrir uncover, unroof, unveil, reveal,
betray, from Late Latin discooperire, from Latin dis- opposite of (see dis-) + cooperire to cover up
(see cover). At first with a sense of betrayal or malicious exposure (discoverer originally meant
informant); the meaning to obtain knowledge or sight of what was not known is from 1550s. Related:
Discovered; discovering.


discovery (n.)

1550s, fact of discovering; see discover + -y (1). Earlier in this sense was discovering (mid-14c.).
Meaning that which is discovered is from 1630s.


discredit (v.)

1550s, from dis- opposite of + credit (v.). Related: Discredited; discrediting; discreditable;
discreditably.


discreet (adj.)

mid-14c., morally discerning, prudent, circumspect, from Old French discret discreet, sensible,
intelligent, wise, from Latin discretus separated, distinct, in Medieval Latin discerning, careful,
past participle of discernere distinguish (see discern). Meaning separate, distinct in English is
late 14c.    Spellings discrete and nativized discreet co-existed until after c.1600, when discreet
became the common word for careful, prudent, and discrete was maintained in philosophy, medicine,
music and other disciplines that remembered Latin and made effort to obey it. Related: Discreetly.


discrepancy (n.)

mid-15c. (discrepance), from Latin discrepantia discordance, discrepancy, from discrepantem
(nominative discrepans), present participle of discrepare sound differently, differ, from dis-
apart, off (see dis-) + crepare to rattle, crack (see raven). Related: Discrepancies.


discrete (adj.)

late 14c., see discreet. Related: Discretely.


discretion (n.)

c.1300, dyscrecyun, moral discernment, from Old French discrecion or directly from Late Latin
discretionem (nominative discretio) discernment, power to make distinctions, in classical Latin
separation, distinction, noun of state from past participle stem of discernere to separate,
distinguish (see discern). Phrase at (one's) discretion attested from 1570s, from sense of power to
decide or judge (late 14c.); the age of discretion (late 14c.) in English law was 14.


discretionary (adj.)

1680s (implied in discretionarily); see discretion + -ary.


discriminate (v.)

1620s, from Latin discriminatus, past participle of discriminare to divide, separate, from discrimen
(genitive discriminis) interval, distinction, difference, derived noun from discernere (see
discern). The adverse (usually racial) sense is first recorded 1866, American English. Positive
sense remains in discriminating. Related: Discriminated. Also used 17c. and after as an adjective
meaning distinct.


discriminating (adj.)

possessing discernment, 1792, present participle adjective from discriminate (v.).


discrimination (n.)

1640s, the making of distinctions, from Late Latin discriminationem (nominative discriminatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of discriminare (see discriminate). Especially in a prejudicial
way, based on race, 1866, American English. Meaning discernment is from 1814.  It especially annoys
me when racists are accused of 'discrimination.' The ability to discriminate is a precious facility;
by judging all members of one 'race' to be the same, the racist precisely shows himself incapable of
discrimination. [Christopher Hitchens]


discriminatory (adj.)

1828; see discriminate + -ory.


discursive (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French discursif, from Medieval Latin discursivus, from Latin discursus a running
about (see discourse). Related: Discursively.


discus (n.)

1650s, from Latin discus discus, disk, from Greek diskos disk, quoit, platter (see disk (n.)).


discuss (v.)

mid-14c., to examine, investigate, from Latin discuss-, past participle stem of discutere to dash to
pieces, agitate, in Late Latin and Vulgar Latin also to discuss, investigate (see discussion).
Meaning examine by argument, debate is from mid-15c. Related: Discussed; discussing.


discussion (n.)

mid-14c., examination, investigation, judicial trial, from Old French discussion discussion,
examination, investigation, legal trial, from Late Latin discussionem (nominative discussio)
examination, discussion, in classical Latin, a shaking, from discussus, past participle of discutere
strike asunder, break up, from dis- apart (see dis-) + quatere to shake (see quash). Meaning a
talking over, debating in English first recorded mid-15c. Sense evolution in Latin appears to have
been from smash apart to scatter, disperse, then in post-classical times (via the mental process
involved) to investigate, examine, then to debate.


disdain (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desdeignier disdain, scorn, refuse, repudiate, from des- do the opposite
of (see dis-) + deignier treat as worthy (see deign). Related: Disdained; disdaining.


disdain (n.)

mid-14c., desdegne scorn, contempt, earlier dedeyne offended dignity (c.1300), from Old French
desdeigne, from desdeignier (see disdain (v.)). Sometimes in early Modern English shortened to
sdain, sdainful. Related: disdainful; disdainfully.


disease (n.)

early 14c., discomfort, inconvenience, from Old French desaise lack, want; discomfort, distress;
trouble, misfortune; disease, sickness, from des- without, away (see dis-) + aise ease (see ease).
Sense of sickness, illness in English first recorded late 14c.; the word still sometimes was used in
its literal sense early 17c.


diseased (adj.)

late 15c., past participle adjective from Middle English verb disesen to make uneasy; inflict pain
(mid-14c.), later to have an illness or infection (late 14c.); to infect with a disease (late 15c.),
from disease (n.).


disembark (v.)

1580s, from Middle French desembarquer, from des- (see dis-) + embarquer (see embark). Related:
Disembarkation; disembarked; disembarking.


disembodied (adj.)

1742, past participle adjective from disembody (1714), from dis- not + embody. Related:
Disembodiment.


disembowel (v.)

c.1600, from dis- + embowel. Earlier form was disbowel (mid-15c.); embowel, with the same meaning,
is attested from 1520s. Related: Disemboweled; disembowelment.


disempower (v.)

1813; see dis- + empower. Related: Disempowered; disempowerment.


disenchant (v.)

1580s, from Middle French desenchanter (13c.), from des- (see dis-) + enchanter to enchant (see
enchant). Related: Disenchanted; disenchanting; disenchantment. Carlyle coined disenchantress
(1831).


disenfranchise (v.)

deprive of civil or electoral privileges, 1640s, from dis- + enfranchise. Earlier form was
disfranchise (mid-15c.). Related: Disenfranchised; disenfranchisement.


disengage (v.)

c.1600 in figurative sense; 1660s in literal sense of detach, from dis- do the opposite of + engage
(q.v.). Related: Disengaged; disengaging.


disengagement (n.)

1640s; see disengage + -ment.


disentangle (v.)

1590s; see dis- + entangle. Related: Disentangled; disentangling.


disfavor (n.)

1530s; see dis- the opposite of + favor (n.). As a verb, from 1560s. Related: Disfavored;
disfavoring.


disfavour

chiefly British English spelling of disfavor (q.v.); for ending, see -or. Related: Disfavoured;
disfavouring.


disfigure (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desfigurer disfigure, alter, disguise, destroy, from Medieval Latin
diffigurare, from Latin dis- (see dis-) + figura figure, from figurare to figure (see figure (n.)).
Related: Disfigured; disfiguring.


disfigurement (n.)

1630s, from disfigure + -ment.


disfunction (n.)

1927, variant of dysfunction (q.v.).


disfunctional (adj.)

1951, variant of dysfunctional.


disgorge (v.)

late 15c., from Old French desgorgier to disgorge, pour out, from des- (see dis-) + gorge throat
(see gorge). Related: Disgorged; disgorging; disgorgement.


disgrace (v.)

1550s, disfigure, from Middle French disgracier (16c.), from Italian disgraziare, from disgrazia
misfortune, deformity, from dis- opposite of (see dis-) + grazia grace (see grace). Meaning bring
shame upon is from 1590s. Related: Disgraced; disgracing. The noun is 1580s, from Middle French
disgrace (16c.).


disgraceful (adj.)

1590s, graceless, opposite of graceful; see dis- + graceful. Meaning full of disgrace (1590s) is
from disgrace + -ful. Related: Disgracefully.


disgruntle (v.)

1680s, from dis- entirely, very + obsolete gruntle to grumble (Middle English gruntelen, early
15c.), frequentative of grunt (v.).


disgruntled (adj.)

past participle adjective from disgruntle.


disguise (v.)

c.1300, from Old French desguiser (11c.) disguise, change one's appearance, from des- away, off (see
dis-) + guise style, appearance (see guise). Originally primarily to put out of one's usual manner
(of dress, etc.). Oldest sense preserved in phrase disguised with liquor (1560s).It is most absurdly
said, in popular language, of any man, that he is disguised in liquor; for, on the contrary, most
men are disguised by sobriety. [Thomas de Quincy, Confessions of an English Opium-Eater, 1856]
Related: Disguised; disguising.


disguise (n.)

c.1400, strange style of dress (especially one meant to deceive), from disguise (v.).


disgust (n.)

1590s, from Middle French desgoust strong dislike, repugnance, literally distaste (16c., Modern
French d&eacute;go&#251;t), from desgouster have a distaste for, from des- opposite of (see dis-) +
gouster taste, from Latin gustare to taste (see gusto).


disgust (v.)

c.1600, from Middle French desgouster have a distaste for (see disgust (n.)). Sense has strengthened
over time, and subject and object have been reversed; the older use looks like this: It is not very
palatable, which makes some disgust it (1660s). The reverse sense of to excite nausea is attested
from 1640s. Related: Disgusted; disgusting.


dish (n.)

Old English disc plate, bowl, platter, from Latin discus dish, platter, quoit, from Greek diskos
disk, platter (see disk (n.)). A common West Germanic borrowing; Old High German borrowed the word
as tisc plate, but German tisch now means table, in common with other later Romanic forms (such as
Italian desco, French dais). Meaning particular variety of food served is first recorded mid-15c.
Meaning what one likes is c.1900; that of attractive woman is 1920s. Meaning concave reflector or
antenna attested from 1948.


dish (v.)

to serve food, late 14c., from dish (n.). Meaning to disparage, denigrate first recorded 1940s;
probably from the same notion in figurative dish it out administer punishment (1934). Related:
Dished; dishing.


dishabille (n.)

1670s, from French d&eacute;shabill&eacute; (17c.), noun use of past participle of
d&eacute;shabiller to undress (oneself), from des- (see dis-) + habiller to dress, originally
prepare, arrange (see habit).


disharmony (n.)

c.1600; see dis- + harmony.


dishcloth (n.)

also dish-cloth, 1828, from dish (n.) + cloth. It relegated earlier dish-clout (1520s) to dialect.


dishearten (v.)

1590s (first recorded in Henry V), from dis- the opposite of + hearten. Related: Disheartened;
disheartening.


dishevel (v.)

originally an adjective, bare-headed, late 14c., variant (with muted final -e) of dishevely, from
Old French deschevele bare-headed, with shaven head, past participle adjective from descheveler to
disarrange the hair, from des- apart (see dis-) + chevel hair, from Latin capillus hair (see
capillary). Of the hair, dissheveled, mid-15c. OED says use as a verb is chiefly a back-formation
from disheveled.


disheveled (adj.)

also dishevelled, early 15c., without dressed hair, parallel form of dishevel (adj.); see dishevel.
General sense of with disordered dress is from c.1600.


dishonest (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French deshoneste (13c., Modern French d&eacute;shonn&ecirc;te) dishonorable,
horrible, indecent, perhaps from a Medieval Latin or Gallo-Roman compound of Latin dis- not (see
dis-) + honestus honorable (see honest). The Latin formation was dehonestus. Related: Dishonestly.


dishonesty (n.)

late 14c., disgrace, shame, want of honor, from Old French deshonest&eacute; (13c.) dishonor,
impropriety, from des- (see dis-) + Latin honestatem honorableness (see honesty). Meaning want of
honesty is recorded from 1590s.


dishonor (v.)

mid-13c., from Old French deshonorer (12c.), from Late Latin dishonorare (reformed from classical
Latin dehonestare), from dis- opposite of (see dis-) + honorare (see honor). Related: Dishonored;
dishonoring.


dishonor (n.)

c.1300, from Old French deshonor (12c.); see dishonor (v.).


dishonorable (adj.)

1530s; see dis- + honorable. Related: Dishonorably.


dishonour

chiefly British English spelling of dishonor; also see  -or. Related: Dishonoured; dishonouring;
dishonourable; dishonourably.


dishpan (n.)

pan in which dishes are washed, 1872, from dish (n.) + pan (n.). Dishpan hands attested from 1944.


dishwasher (n.)

also dish-washer, mid-15c. of persons; 1867 of machines; from dish (n.) + washer.


dishwater (n.)

also dish-water, water where dishes have been washed, late 15c., from dish (n.) + water (n.1). Used
figuratively of weak broth, coffee, etc., from 1719.


dishy (adj.)

very attractive, 1961, from dish (n.) in the attractive or desirable person or thing sense + -y (2).


disillusion (v.)

to free or be freed from illusion, 1855, from a noun meaning act of freeing from illusion (1814);
see dis- + illusion. Related: Disillusioned; disillusioning.


disillusionment (n.)

1856, from disillusion + -ment.


disincentive (n.)

1946; see dis- + incentive (n.).


disinclination (n.)

1640s; see dis- + inclination.


disincline (v.)

1640s, from dis- + incline (v.). Related: Disinclined; disinclining.


disinfect (v.)

1590s, perhaps from French d&eacute;sinfecter (16c.), or formed in English from dis- + infect.
Related: Disinfected; disinfecting.


disinfectant (n.)

1837, from French d&eacute;sinfectant (1816), noun use of present participle of d&eacute;sinfecter
(see disinfect). From 1875 as an adjective.


disinformation (n.)

1955, from Russian dezinformatsiya (1949), which is said to be from French; see dis- + information.


disingenuous (adj.)

lacking in candor, 1650s, from dis- opposite of + ingenuous. Related: Disingenuously;
disingenuousness.


disinherit (v.)

mid-15c., from dis- not + inherit. Related: Disinherited; disinheriting. Replaced earlier desherit
(c.1300), from Old French desheriter.


disinhibition (n.)

1927; see dis- + inhibition. From the start it was noted as being, often, inhibition of an
inhibition.


disintegrate (v.)

1796, from dis- do the opposite of + integrate (v.). Related: Disintegrated; disintegrating.


disintegration (n.)

1796, noun of action from disintegrate.


disinter (v.)

1610s, from French d&eacute;senterrer (15c.), from d&eacute;s- (see dis-) + enterrer to inter (see
inter). Related: Disinterred.


disinterested (adj.)

1610s, unconcerned, the sense we now would ascribe to uninterested, with the sense of impartial
going to disinteressed (c.1600). See dis- + interest. Modern sense of disinterested is first
attested 1650s. As things now stand, disinterested means free from personal bias, while uninterested
means caring nothing for the matter in question. Related: Disinterestedly; disinterestedness.


disinvestment (n.)

1938, first recorded in writings of J.M. Keynes, from dis- + investment. The verb disinvest in this
sense is a back-formation attested from 1961. Related: Disinvested; disinvesting.


disinvite (v.)

1570s; see dis- + invite. Related: Disinvited; disinviting.


disjecta membra (n.)

scattered remains (especially literary), from Horace's Latin phrase disjecti membra poetae limbs of
a dismembered poet.


disjointed (adj.)

1640s, past participle adjective from disjoint (mid-15c.), from Old French desjoindre, from Latin
disiungere, from dis- (see dis-) + iungere (see jugular).


disjunction (n.)

c.1400, disjunccioun, from Old French disjunction (13c.) or directly from Latin disjunctionem
separation, noun of action from past participle stem of disjungere (see disjointed).


disjuncture (n.)

c.1400, surgical, dislocation, from Latin; see dis- + juncture. Figurative use from 1680s.


disk (n.)

American English preferred spelling, 1660s, round flat surface, from Latin discus quoit, discus,
disk, from Greek diskos disk, quoit, platter, related to dikein throw, from PIE *dik-skos-, from
root *deik- to show, pronounce solemnly; also in derivatives referring to the directing of words or
objects [Watkins]; see diction.    Sense of phonograph disk is 1888; computing sense is from 1947.
Disk jockey first recorded 1941; dee-jay is from 1955; DJ is 1961; video version veejay is 1982.
Disk-drive is from 1952.


diskette (n.)

floppy disk, 1973, from disk with diminutive suffix -ette.


dislike (v.)

1540s (implied in disliking), hybrid which ousted native mislike as the opposite of like (v.).
Related: Disliked; disliking. English in 16c. also had the excellent dislove hate, cease to love,
but it did not survive.


dislocate (v.)

c.1600, from earlier adjective or past participle dislocate out of joint (c.1400), from Medieval
Latin dislocatus, past participle of dislocare put out of place, from Latin dis- away (see dis-) +
locare to place (see locate). Related: Dislocated; dislocating.


dislocation (n.)

c.1400, originally of bones, from Old French dislocacion (14c.), or directly from Medieval Latin
dislocationem (nominative dislocatio), noun of action from past participle stem of dislocare (see
dislocate). General sense is from c.1600.


dislodge (v.)

c.1400, from Old French deslogier to leave or cause to leave a lodging place; expel, drive away,
from des- do the opposite of (see dis-) + logier (see lodge (v.)). Related: Dislodged; dislodging.


disloyal (adj.)

early 15c. (implied in disloyally), from Old French desloial, desleal (Modern French d&eacute;loyal)
treacherous, false, deceitful, from des- (see dis-) + loial (see loyal).


disloyalty (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French desloyaulte, from Old French desloiaute, desleaut&eacute; disloyalty,
faithlessness, marital infidelity, from desloial (see disloyal). Especially of allegiance to a state
or sovereign since c.1600.


dismal (adj.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French dismal (mid-13c.), from Old French (li) dis mals (the) bad days, from
Medieval Latin dies mali evil or unlucky days (also called dies &AElig;gyptiaci), from Latin dies
days (see diurnal) + mali, plural of malus bad (see mal-).    Through the Middle Ages, calendars
marked two days of each month as unlucky, supposedly based on the ancient calculations of Egyptian
astrologers (Jan. 1, 25; Feb. 4, 26; March 1, 28; April 10, 20; May 3, 25; June 10, 16; July 13, 22;
Aug. 1, 30; Sept. 3, 21; Oct. 3, 22; Nov. 5, 28; Dec. 7, 22). Modern sense of gloomy, dreary first
recorded in English 1590s, in reference to sounds. Related: Dismally.


dismantle (v.)

1570s, from Middle French desmanteler to tear down the walls of a fortress, literally strip of a
cloak, from des- off, away (see dis-) + manteler to cloak (see mantle). Related: Dismantled;
dismantling.


dismast (v.)

1747, from dis- + mast (n.1). Related: Dismasted; dismasting.


dismay (v.)

late 13c., dismaien, from Old French *desmaier (attested only in past participle dismaye), from
Latin de- intensive prefix + Old French esmaier to trouble, disturb, from Vulgar Latin *exmagare
divest of power or ability (source of Italian smagare to weaken, dismay, discourage), from ex- (see
ex-) + Germanic stem *mag- power, ability (cognates: Old High German magen to be powerful or able;
see may (v.)). Spanish desmayer to be dispirited is a loan word from Old French. Related: Dismayed;
dismaying.


dismay (n.)

c.1300, from dismay (v.).


dismember (v.)

c.1300, from Old French desmembrer (11c.), from Medieval Latin dismembrare tear limb from limb;
castrate, from Latin de- take away + membrum limb (see member). Related: Dismembered; dismembering.


dismemberment (n.)

1751, from dismember + -ment. Earlier formation was dismembration (1590s).


dismiss (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dimissus, past participle of dimittere send away, send different ways; break
up, discharge; renounce, abandon, from dis- apart, away (see dis-) + mittere send, let go (see
mission). Prefix altered by analogy with many dis- verbs. Dismit, in the same sense, is attested
from late 14c. Related: Dismissed; dismissing.


dismissal (n.)

1806, formed on model of refusal, etc., from dismiss + -al (2); replacing earlier dismission
(1540s).


dismissive (adj.)

1640s, characterized by or appropriate to dismissal; from dismiss + -ive. Meaning contemptuous,
rejecting is recorded by 1922. Related: Dismissively.


dismount (v.)

1540s, from dis- + mount (v.). Related: Dismounted; dismounting.


Disney

surname attested from mid-12c. (William de Ysini), from Isigny in the Calvados region of Normandy.
Disneyesque, in reference to Walt Disney's cartooning style, is attested from 1939 (in W.H. Auden).


Disneyland (n.)

in figurative sense of land of make-believe first recorded 1956, from U.S. entertainment park
(opened in 1955) created by cartoonist Walter E. Disney (1901-1966).


disobedience (n.)

c.1400, from Old French desobedience, from Vulgar Latin *disobedientia (replacing Latin
inobedientia) from Latin dis- (see dis-) + obedientia (see obedience). The English word replaced
earlier desobeissance in this sense, and inobedience (c.1200).


disobedient (adj.)

early 15c., dysobedyent, from Old French desobedient, from Vulgar Latin *disobedientem (replacing
Latin inobedientem) from Latin dis- (see dis-) + obedientem (see obedient). Related: Disobediently.
Earlier in the same sense was disobeissant (late 14c.), from Old French desobeissant, and inobedient
(early 14c.).


disobey (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desobeir (13c.) disobey; refuse service or homage, from Vulgar Latin
*disoboedire, reformed with dis- from Late Latin inobedire, a back-formation from inobediens not
obeying, from Latin in- not + present participle of obedire (see obey). Related: Disobeyed;
disobeying.


disoblige (v.)

c.1600, to free from obligation; 1630s, to refuse to oblige, from French d&eacute;sobliger (c.1300),
from des- (see dis-) + Latin obligare (see oblige). Related: Disobliged; disobliging.


disorder (v.)

late 15c., from dis- not (see dis-) + the verb order (v.). Replaced earlier disordeine (mid-14c.),
from Old French desordainer, from Medieval Latin disordinare throw into disorder, from Latin
ordinare to order, regulate (see ordain). Related: Disordered; disordering.


disorder (n.)

1520s, from disorder (v.).


disorderly (adj.)

1580s, opposed to moral order, also opposed to legal authority; see dis- + orderly (adj.). The
meaning untidy is attested from 1630s; the older senses are those in disorderly house, disorderly
conduct, etc.


disorganize (v.)

1793, from French d&eacute;sorganiser, from d&eacute;s- not (see dis-) + organiser organize (see
organize). This word and related forms were introduced in English in reference to the French
Revolution. Related: Disorganized; disorganizing; disorganization.


disorient (v.)

1650s, from French d&eacute;sorienter to cause to lose one's bearings, literally to turn from the
east, from d&eacute;s- (see dis-) + orienter (see orient (v.)). Related: Disoriented; disorienting.


disorientation (n.)

1860; see dis- + orientation.


disown (v.)

1620s; see dis- + own (v.). Related: Disowned; disowning.


disparage (v.)

early 14c., degrade socially, from Old French desparagier (Modern French d&eacute;parager) reduce in
rank, degrade, devalue, depreciate, originally to marry unequally, and thus by extension the
disgrace or dishonor involved in this, from des- away (see dis-) + parage rank, lineage (see peer
(n.)). Sense of belittle first recorded 1530s. Related: Disparaged; disparaging; disparagingly.


disparagement (n.)

late 15c., from Old French desparagement, from desparagier (see disparage).


disparate (adj.)

c.1600, unlike in kind, from Latin disparatus, past participle of disparare divide, separate, from
dis- apart (see dis-) + parare get ready, prepare (see pare); meaning influenced by Latin dispar
unequal, unlike. Related: Disparately; disparateness.


disparity (n.)

1550s, from Middle French disparit&eacute; (16c.), from Late Latin disparitatem (nominative
disparitas) inequality, from dis- not (see dis-) + paritas parity (see parity). Related:
Disparities.


dispassionate (adj.)

1590s, from dis- the opposite of (see dis-) + passionate. Related: Dispassionately.


dispatch (v.)

1510s, to send off in a hurry, from a word in Spanish (despachar expedite, hasten) or Italian
(dispacciare to dispatch). For first element, see dis-. The exact source of the second element has
been proposed as Vulgar Latin *pactare to fasten, fix or *pactiare, or as Latin -pedicare to entrap
(from Latin pedica shackle; see impeach); and the Spanish and Italian words seem to be related to
(perhaps opposites of) Old Proven&ccedil;al empachar impede. See OED for full discussion. Meaning to
get rid of by killing is attested from 1520s. Related: Dispatched; dispatching. As a noun, from
1540s, originally dismissal; sense of a message sent speedily is first attested 1580s.


dispatcher (n.)

mid-16c., agent noun from dispatch (v.).


dispel (v.)

c.1400, dispelen, from Latin dispellere drive apart, from dis- away (see dis-) + pellere to drive,
push (see pulse (n.1)). Since the meaning is to drive away in different directions it should not
have as an object a single, indivisible thing (you can dispel suspicion, but not an accusation).
Related: Dispelled; dispelling.


dispensable (adj.)

1530s, subject to dispensation, from Medieval Latin dispensabilis, from dispensare (see dispense).
Meaning that can be done without is from 1640s. Related: Dispensability.


dispensary (n.)

place for weighing out medicines, 1690s, from Medieval Latin dispensarius one who dispenses, from
Latin dispensare (see dispense).


dispensation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French despensacion (12c., Modern French dispensation), or directly from Latin
dispensationem (nominative dispensatio) management, charge, noun of action from past participle stem
of dispensare (see dispense). Theological sense is from the use of the word to translate Greek
oikonomoia office, method of administration.


dispense (v.)

early 14c., from Old French dispenser give out (13c.), from Latin dispensare disburse, administer,
distribute (by weight), frequentative of dispendere pay out, from dis- out (see dis-) + pendere to
pay, weigh (see pendant).    In Medieval Latin, dispendere was used in the ecclesiastical sense of
grant license to do what is forbidden or omit what is required (a power of popes, bishops, etc.),
and thus acquired a sense of grant remission from punishment or exemption from law, hence to do away
with (1570s), do without (c.1600). Older sense is preserved in dispensary. Related: Dispensed;
dispensing.


dispenser (n.)

c.1400, one who administers (a household, etc.), c.1200 in surnames, from Anglo-French dispensour,
Old French despenseor, from Latin dispensatorem, agent noun from dispensare (see dispense). Meaning
a container that dispenses in fixed measure is from 1918.


dispersal (n.)

1821; see disperse + -al (2).


disperse (v.)

late 14c., from Latin dispersus, past participle of dispergere to scatter, from dis- apart, in every
direction (see dis-) + spargere to scatter (see sparse). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by
tostregdan. Related: Dispersed; dispersing.


dispersion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French dispersion (13c.), from Latin dispersionem (nominative dispersio) a
scattering, noun of action from past participle stem of dispergere (see disperse).


dispirit (v.)

1640s; see dis- + spirit (n.). Related: Dispirited; dispiriting.


displace (v.)

1550s, from Middle French desplacer (15c.), from des- (see dis-) + placer to place. Related:
Displaced; displacing. Displaced person refugee is from 1944.


displacement (n.)

1610s, removal from office; see displace + -ment. Physics sense is from c.1810.


display (v.)

late 13c., unfurl (a banner, etc.), from Old French desploiir (Modern French d&eacute;ployer)
unfold, unfasten, spread out (of knots, sealed letters, etc.), from Latin displicare to scatter,
from dis- un-, apart (see dis-) + plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)).    Properly of sails or flags
(and unconnected to play); meaning reveal, exhibit is late 14c. Related: Displayed; displaying.


display (n.)

1580s, description, from display (v.). Meaning exhibition is from 1680s.


displease (v.)

early 14c., from Old French desplais-, present tense stem of desplaisir to displease (13c.), from
Latin displicere displease, from dis- not (see dis-) + placere to please (see please). Related:
Displeased; displeasing.


displeasure (n.)

early 15c., from Old French desplaisir, infinitive used as a noun (see displease). Earlier in same
sense was displesaunce (late 14c.).


disport (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French disporter divert, amuse, from Old French desporter to seek amusement,
literally carry away (the mind from serious matters), from des- away (see dis-) + porter to carry,
from Latin portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Compare disporter a minstrel or jester (early 15c.).


disposable (adj.)

1640s, that may be done without; see dispose + -able. Meaning designed to be discarded after one use
is from 1943, originally of diapers, soon of everything; replaced throw-away (1928) in this sense.
First recorded use of disposable income (preserving the older sense) is from 1948.


disposal (n.)

1620s, power to make use of; see dispose + -al (2); of waste material, from c.1960, originally in
medical use.


dispose (v.)

late 14c., from Old French disposer (13c.) arrange, order, control, regulate (influenced in form by
poser to place), from Latin disponere put in order, arrange, distribute, from dis- apart (see dis-)
+ ponere to put, place (see position). Related: Disposed; disposing.


disposed (adj.)

mid-14c., inclined, in the mood, past participle adjective from dispose. Meaning in a certain
condition is late 14c.; arranged is 15c.


disposition (n.)

late 14c., ordering, management, also tendency of mind, from Old French disposicion (12c.)
arrangement, order; mood, state of mind, from Latin dispositionem (nominative dispositio)
arrangement, management, noun of action from past participle stem of disponere to put in order,
arrange (see dispose). References to temperament (late 14c. in English) are from astrological use of
the word for position of a planet as a determining influence.


dispossess (v.)

late 15c., from Old French despossesser to dispossess, from des- (see dis-) + possesser (see
possess). Related: Dispossessed; dispossessing.


dispossession (n.)

1570s, noun of action from dispossess.


disproof (n.)

1530s; see dis- + proof.


disproportion (n.)

1550s; see dis- + proportion.


disproportionate (adj.)

1550s, from dis- not + proportionate. Improportionate in same sense is from late 14c. Related:
Disproportionately.


disprove (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desprover refute, contradict, from des- (see dis-) + prover (see prove).
Related: Disproved; disproving.


disputant (n.)

1610s, from Latin disputantem (nominative disputans), present participle of disputare (see dispute).


disputation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French desputasion and directly from Latin disputationem (nominative
disputatio), noun of action from past participle stem of disputare (see dispute).


dispute (v.)

c.1300, from Old French desputer (12c.) dispute, fight over, contend for, discuss, from Latin
disputare weigh, examine, discuss, argue, explain, from dis- separately (see dis-) + putare to
count, consider, originally to prune (see pave).    Used in Vulgate in sense of to argue, contend
with words. Related: Disputable; disputed; disputing. The noun is not certainly recorded before
1590s (disputacioun in that sense is from late 14c.).


disqualification (n.)

1710s, agent noun from disqualify.


disqualify (v.)

1718 (implied in disqualified), from dis- + qualify. Related: Disqualifying.


disquiet (v.)

1520s, from dis- + quiet. Related: Disquieted; disquieting. As a noun, from 1570s.


disquietude (n.)

1709; from disquiet on model of quietude.


disquisition (n.)

c.1600, subject for investigation, also systematic search, from Latin disquisitionem (nominative
disquisitio) an inquiry, investigation, noun of action from past participle stem of disquirere
inquire, from dis- apart (see dis-) + quaerere seek, ask (see query (v.)). Sense of long speech
first recorded 1640s.


disregard (v.)

1640s, from dis- + regard. Related: Disregarded; disregarding. As a noun, from 1660s.


disremember (v.)

1815, American English colloquialism, from dis- + remember.


disrepair (n.)

1798, from dis- + repair (n.).


disreputable (adj.)

1710 (implied in disreputableness); see dis- + reputable. Related: Disreputably.


disrepute (n.)

1650s, from dis- + repute (n.).


disrespect

1610s (v.), 1630s (n.), from dis- + respect. Related: Disrespected; disrespecting.


disrespectful (adj.)

1670s; see dis- + respectful. Related: Disrespectfully.


disrobe (v.)

1580s in intransitive sense of to undress (oneself); see dis- + robe. Related: Disrobed; disrobing.
Transitive sense is from 1580s.


disrupt (v.)

1650s, but rare before c.1820, from Latin disruptus, past participle of disrumpere (see disruption).
Or perhaps a back-formation from disruption. Related: Disrupted; disrupting.


disruption (n.)

early 15c., from Latin disruptionem (nominative disruptio) a breaking asunder, noun of action from
past participle stem of disrumpere break apart, split, shatter, break to pieces, from dis- apart
(see dis-) + rumpere to break (see rupture (n.)).


disruptive (adj.)

1862 (in electricity sense from 1842); see disrupt + -ive. Related: Disruptively; disruptiveness.


dissatisfaction (n.)

1630s; see dis- + satisfaction.


dissatisfy (v.)

1660s; see dis- + satisfy. Related: Dissatisfied; dissatisfying.


dissect (v.)

c.1600, from Latin dissectus, past participle of dissecare to cut to pieces (see dissection). Or
perhaps a back-formation from dissection. Related: Dissected; dissecting.


dissection (n.)

1580s, from Middle French dissection, from Medieval Latin dissectionem (nominative dissectio), noun
of action from past participle stem of Latin dissecare cut in pieces, from dis- apart (see dis-) +
secare to cut (see section).


dissemble (v.)

early 15c. (implied in dissemblable), apparently a variant of Middle English dissimule (influenced
by Middle French dessembler or English resemble), late 14c., from Old French dissimuler, from Latin
dissimulare (see dissimulation). Related: Dissembled; dissembling.


dissembler (n.)

1520s, agent noun from dissemble.


disseminate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin disseminatus, past participle of disseminare to spread abroad, disseminate, from
dis- in every direction (see dis-) + seminare to plant, propagate, from semen (genitive seminis)
seed (see semen). Related: Disseminated; disseminates; disseminating. Middle English had dissemen to
scatter (early 15c.).


dissemination (n.)

1640s, from Latin disseminationem (nominative disseminatio) a scattering of seed, a sowing, noun of
action from past participle stem of disseminare (see disseminate). Or perhaps a native noun
formation from disseminate.


dissension (n.)

early 14c., from Old French dissension (12c.) and directly from Latin dissensionem (nominative
dissensio) disagreement, difference of opinion, discord, strife, noun of action from past participle
stem of dissentire disagree (see dissent).


dissent (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dissentire differ in sentiments, disagree, be at odds, contradict, quarrel,
from dis- differently (see dis-) + sentire to feel, think (see sense (n.)). Related: Dissented;
dissenting. The noun is 1580s, from the verb.  Has there ever been a society which has died of
dissent? Several have died of conformity in our lifetime. [Jacob Bronowski Science and Human Values,
1956]


dissenter (n.)

1630s, in 17c. especially of religions (with a capital D- from 1670s); agent noun from dissent.


dissertation (n.)

1610s, discussion, debate, from Latin dissertationem (nominative dissertatio) discourse, noun of
action from past participle stem of dissertare debate, argue, examine, harangue, frequentative of
disserere discuss, examine, from dis- apart (see dis-) + serere to arrange words (see series). Sense
of formal, written treatise is 1650s.


disservice (n.)

1590s; see dis- + service. Perhaps formed on analogy of French desservice (16c.).


dissever (v.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French deseverer, Old French dessevrer (10c.), from des- (see dis-) + sevrer
(see sever). Related: Dissevered; dissevering; disseverance; disseveration.


dissidence (n.)

1650s, from Latin dissidentia diversity, contrariety, from dissidens, present participle of
dissidere (see dissident).


dissident (adj.)

1530s, from Latin dissidentem (nominative dissidens), present participle of dissidere to be remote;
disagree, be removed from, literally to sit apart, from dis- apart (see dis-) + sedere to sit (see
sedentary).


dissident (n.)

1766, in reference to Protestants, from dissident (adj.). In the political sense first used 1940,
coinciding with the rise of 20c. totalitarian systems, especially with reference to the Soviet
Union.


dissimilar (adj.)

1620s, from dis- + similar; perhaps on analogy of French dissimilaire. Related: Dissimilarity.


dissimilate (v.)

make different, 1821, from dis- + Latin similis on model of assimilate. Related: Dissimilated;
dissimilating; dissimilation (1806).


dissimilation (n.)

1874, noun of action from dissimilate.


dissimilitude (n.)

early 15c., from Latin dissimilitudo, from dissimilis, from dis- not (see dis-) + similis like (see
similar).


dissimulate (v.)

1530s, from Latin dissimulatus, past participle of dissimulare to disguise, hide, conceal, keep
secret, from dis- (see dis-) + simulare (see simulate). Related: Dissimulated; dissimulating.


dissimulation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French dissimulation (12c.), from Latin dissimulationem (nominative
dissimulatio) a disguising, concealment, noun of action from past participle stem of dissimulare
make unlike, conceal, disguise, from dis- completely + simulare pretend, assume, simulate (see
simulation).


dissipate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dissipatus, past participle of dissipare to spread abroad, scatter, disperse;
squander, disintegrate, from dis- apart (see dis-) + supare to throw, scatter, from PIE *swep- to
throw, sling, cast (cognates: Lithuanian supu to swing, rock, Old Church Slavonic supo to strew).
Related: Dissipated; dissipates; dissipating.


dissipation (n.)

early 15c., act of scattering, from Latin dissipationem (nominative dissipatio), noun of action from
past participle stem of dissipare (see dissipate). Meaning intemperate mode of living is from 1784.


dissociate (v.)

1610s (implied in dissociated), from Latin dissociatus, past participle of dissociare to separate
from companionship, disunite, set at variance, from dis- apart (see dis-) + sociare to join, from
socius companion (see social (adj.)). Attested from 1540s as a past participle adjective meaning
separated.


dissociation (n.)

1610s, from French dissociation, from Latin dissociationem (nominative dissociatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of dissociare (see dissociate).


dissolute (adj.)

late 14c., loose, negligent, morally or religiously lax, from Latin dissolutus loose, disconnected,
past participle of dissolvere loosen up (see dissolve). A figurative use of the classical Latin
word. Related: Dissolutely; dissoluteness.


dissolution (n.)

late 14c., separation into parts, also frivolity, moral laxness, dissolute living, from Old French
dissolution (12c.) and directly from Latin dissolutionem (nominative dissolutio) a dissolving,
destroying, interruption, dissolution, noun of action from past participle stem of dissolvere (see
dissolve).


dissolve (v.)

late 14c. (transitive and intransitive) to break up (of material substances), from Latin dissolvere
to loosen up, break apart, from dis- apart (see dis-) + solvere to loose, loosen (see solve).
Meaning to disband (an assembly) is early 15c. Related: Dissolved; dissolving.


dissonance (n.)

early 15c., disagreement, from Middle French dissonance and directly from Late Latin dissonantia,
from Latin dissonantem (see dissonant). Figurative use dates from 1875.


dissonant (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French dissonant and directly from Latin dissonantem (nominative dissonans),
present participle of dissonare differ in sound, from dis- apart (see dis-) + sonare to sound (see
sonata).


dissuade (v.)

1510s, from Middle French dissuader and directly from Latin dissuadere to advise against, oppose by
argument, from dis- off, against (see dis-) + suadere to urge (see suasion). Related: Dissuaded;
dissuading.


dissuasion (n.)

early 15c., from Latin dissuasionem (nominative dissuasio) an advice to the contrary, noun of action
from past participle stem of dissuadere (see dissuade).


distaff (n.)

Old English dist&aelig;f stick that holds flax for spinning, from dis- bunch of flax (cognates:
Middle Low German dise, Low German diesse a bunch of flax on a distaff; see bedizen) + st&aelig;f
stick, staff (see staff).     A synonym in English for the female sex, female authority in the
family, since at least the late 1400s, probably because in the Middle Ages spinning was typically
done by women. St. Distaff's Day was Jan. 7, when women resumed their spinning and other ordinary
employments after the holidays [OED].


distal (adj.)

1808, formed from distant + -al (1) on model of central, dorsal, ventral, etc.


distance (n.)

late 13c., quarrel, estrangement, discord, strife, from Old French destance (13c.), from Latin
distantia a standing apart, from distantem (nominative distans) standing apart, separate, distant,
present participle of distare stand apart, from dis- apart, off (see dis-) + stare to stand (see
stet).    Meaning remoteness, space between things or places is late 14c. The figurative sense of
aloofness is the same as in stand-offish. Phrase go the distance (1930s) seems to be originally from
the prize ring, where the word meant scheduled length of a bout.


distance (v.)

1570s (transitive); 1640s (intransitive), from distance (n.). Related: Distanced; distancing.


distant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French distant (14c.), from Latin distantem (nominative distans), present
participle of distare to stand apart, be remote (see distance (n.)). Related: Distantly.


distaste (n.)

1590s, from dis- + taste.


distasteful (adj.)

c.1600, from distaste + -ful. Related: Distastefully; distastefulness.


distelfink (n.)

Pennsylvania Dutch ornamental bird design, from German Distelfink goldfinch, literally thistle-
finch, from Old High German distilvinko, from distil thistle (see thistle) + Old High German finco
finch, from PIE *(s)ping- sparrow, finch (see finch). The bird so called because it feeds on thistle
seeds. Compare Old French chardonel goldfinch, from chardon thistle.


distemper (v.)

mid-14c., to disturb, from Old French destemprer, from Medieval Latin distemperare vex, make ill,
literally upset the proper balance (of bodily humors), from dis- un-, not (see dis-) + Latin
temperare mingle in the proper proportion (see temper (v.)). Related: Distempered.


distemper (n.)

1550s, from distemper (v.); in reference to a disease of dogs, from 1747.


distend (v.)

c.1400, from Latin distendere to swell or stretch out, extend, from dis- apart (see dis-) + tendere
to stretch (see tenet). Related: Distended; distending.


distention (n.)

also distension, early 15c., from Middle French distension and directly from Latin distensionem
(nominative distensio, distentio), noun of action from past participle stem of distendere (see
distend).


distill (v.)

also distil, late 14c., from Old French distiller (14c.), from Latin distillare trickle down in
minute drops, from dis- apart (see dis-) + stillare to drip, drop, from stilla drop. Related:
Distilled; distilling.


distillate (n.)

product of distillation, 1864; see distill + -ate (1).


distillation (n.)

late 14c., process of distilling, from Late Latin distillationem (nominative distillatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of distillare (see distill). Meaning product of distilling is from
1590s.


distiller (n.)

1570s, agent noun from distill.


distillery (n.)

1670s, act of distilling; see distill + -ery. Meaning place for distilling is from 1759.


distinct (adj.)

late 14c., originally past participle of distincten (c.1300) to distinguish, from Old French
distincter, from Latin distinctus, past participle of distinguere (see distinguish). Related:
Distinctness.


distinction (n.)

c.1200, one of the parts into which something is divided; mid-14c. as action of distinguishing, from
Old French distinction and directly from Latin distinctionem (nominative distinctio) separation,
distinction, discrimination, noun of action from past participle stem of distinguere (see
distinguish). Meaning distinctive nature or character is late 14c. Meaning excellence or eminence
(what distinguishes from others) is first recorded 1690s.


distinctive (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French distinctif and directly from Medieval Latin distinctivus, from Latin
distinct-, past participle of distinguere (see distinguish). Meaning markedly individual is from
1580s. Related: Distinctively; distinctiveness.


distinctly (adv.)

late 14c., from distinct + -ly (2).   <b>[D]istinctly</b>, in the sense really quite, is the badge
of the superior person indulgently recognizing unexpected merit in something that we are to
understand is not quite worthy of his notice. [Fowler]


distingue (adj.)

having an air of distinction, 1813 (in Byron), from French distingu&eacute;, literally
distinguished, past participle of distinguer (see distinguish).    The girls I knew had sad and
sullen gray faces   With distingu&eacute; traces   That used to be there -- You could see where
they'd been washed away   By too many through the day   Twelve o'clock tales.  [Lush Life, Billy
Strayhorn, age 17]


distinguish (v.)

1560s, from Middle French distinguiss-, stem of distinguer, or directly from Latin distinguere to
separate between, separate by pricking, from dis- apart (see dis-) + -stinguere to prick (see
extinguish, and compare Latin instinguere to incite, impel).    The suffix -ish is due to the
influence of many verbs in which it is the equivalent of Old French -iss-, ultimately from Latin
inchoative suffix -iscere (this is also the case in extinguish, admonish, and astonish). Related:
Distinguishing. The earlier form of the verb was distinguen (mid-14c.).


distinguishable (adj.)

1590s; see distinguish + -able. Related: Distinguishably.


distinguished (adj.)

c.1600, separate, past participle adjective from distinguish. Sense of famous, celebrated, recorded
from 1714; meaning having an air of distinction is from 1748.


distort (v.)

1580s, from Latin distortus, past participle of distorquere to twist different ways, distort, from
dis- completely + torquere to twist (see torque (n.)). Related: Distorted; distorting.


distortion (n.)

1580s, action of distorting, from Latin distortionem (nominative distortio), noun of action from
past participle stem of distorquere (see distort). Figurative use (of words, etc.) from 1640s.


distract (v.)

mid-14c., to draw asunder or apart, to turn aside (literal and figurative), from Latin distractus,
past participle of distrahere draw in different directions, from dis- away (see dis-) + trahere to
draw (see tract (n.1)).    Sense of to throw into a state of mind in which one knows not how to act
is from 1580s. Related: Distracted; distracting; distractedly; distractedness.


distraction (n.)

mid-15c., the drawing away of the mind, from Latin distractionem (nominative distractio) a pulling
apart, separating, noun of action from past participle stem of distrahere (see distract). Meaning
mental disturbance (in driven to distraction, etc.) is c.1600. Meaning a thing or fact that
distracts is from 1610s.


distraught (adj.)

late 14c., alteration (Englishing) of earlier distract (perhaps by association with other past
participle forms in -ght, such as caught, bought, brought), mid-14c., past participle of distracten
derange the intellect of, drive mad (see distract).


distress (n.)

late 13c., circumstance that causes anxiety or hardship, from Old French destresse, from Vulgar
Latin *districtia restraint, affliction, narrowness, distress, from Latin districtus, past
participle of distringere draw apart, hinder, also, in Medieval Latin compel, coerce, from dis-
apart (see dis-) + stringere draw tight, press together (see strain (v.)). Meaning anguish,
suffering; grief is from c.1300.


distress (v.)

late 14c., from Old French destresser, from Vulgar Latin *districtiare (see distress (n.)). Related:
Distressed; distressing.


distressed (adj.)

past participle adjective from distress. In reference to furniture, by 1940.


distressful (adj.)

1590s, from distress + -ful. Related: Distressfully; distressfulness.


distribute (v.)

early 15c., to deal out or apportion, from Latin distributus, past participle of distribuere to
divide, distribute (see distribution). Related: Distributable; distributed; distributing.


distribution (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French distribution (13c.) and directly from Latin distributionem (nominative
distributio) a division, distribution, noun of action from past participle stem of distribuere deal
out in portions, from dis- individually + tribuere assign, allot (see tribute).


distributive (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French distributif, from Late Latin distributivus, from Latin distribut-, past
participle stem of distribuere (see distribution). Related: Distributively.


distributor (n.)

1520s, distributer (Latinized form is from 1570s), agent noun from Latin distribuere (see
distribution). As a part in an internal combustion engine, from 1905.


district (n.)

1610s, territory under the jurisdiction of a lord or officer, from French district (16c.), from
Medieval Latin districtus restraining of offenders, jurisdiction, then under the feudal system area
of jurisdiction, noun use of past participle of Latin distringere hinder, detain (see distress).
Used vaguely of any tract of land from 1712. District attorney attested by 1789, American English.


distrust

early 15c. (v.); 1510s (n.), from dis- + trust. The etymologically correct form is mistrust, in
which both elements are Teutonic [Klein]. Related: Distrusted; distrusting; distrustful;
distrustfully; distrustfulness.


disturb (v.)

c.1300, to stop or hinder, from Old French destorber (Old North French distourber) and directly from
Latin disturbare throw into disorder, from dis- completely (see dis-) + turbare to disorder,
disturb, from turba turmoil (see turbid).    Meaning to frighten is late 13c.; that of to stir up,
agitate is c.1300. Related: Disturbed; disturbing; disturbingly. Middle English also had distourbler
(n.) one who disturbs or incites (late 14c.).


disturbance (n.)

late 13c., mental distress, from Old French destorbance (12c., Old North French distorbance), from
destourber, from Latin disturbare (see disturb). Meaning public disturbance is c.1300; that of
destruction of peace or unity is late 14c.


disturbed (adj.)

past participle adjective from disturb. Meaning emotionally or mentally unstable is from 1904.


disunion (n.)

late 15c., from dis- + union.


disunite (v.)

1560s (implied in disunited); see dis- + unite. Related: Disuniting.


disuse (n.)

c.1400, see dis- + use (n.).


disuse (v.)

c.1400, misuse, pervert; mid-15c., become unaccustomed, from or on analogy of Old French desuser,
from des- not (see dis-) + user use (see use (v.)). Related: Disused.


ditch (n.)

Old English dic ditch, dike, a variant of dike (q.v.). Last ditch (1715) refers to the last line of
military defenses.


ditch (v.)

late 14c., surround with a ditch; dig a ditch; from ditch (n.). Meaning to throw into a ditch is
from 1816, hence sense of abandon, discard, first recorded 1899 in American English. Of aircraft, by
1941. Related: Ditched; ditching.


ditheism (n.)

belief in the existence of two gods, 1670s, from di- (1) + theism.


dither (v.)

1640s, to quake, tremble, phonetic variant of Middle English didderen (late 14c.), of uncertain
origin. The sense of vacillate, be anxious is from 1819. Related: Dithered; dithering.


dithyramb (n.)

c.1600, from Latin dithyrambus, from Greek dithyrambos, of unknown origin, perhaps a pre-Hellenic
loan-word. A wild choric hymn, originally in honor of Dionysus or Bacchus. Related: Dithyrambic.


ditto

1620s, Tuscan dialectal ditto (in) the said (month or year), literary Italian detto, past participle
of dire to say, from Latin dicere (see diction).    Originally used in Italian to avoid repetition
of month names in a series of dates; generalized meaning of same as above first recorded in English
1670s. Dittohead, self-description of followers of U.S. radio personality Rush Limbaugh, attested by
1995. dittoship is from 1869.


ditty (n.)

short song, c.1300, from Old French ditie composition, poem, treatise, from Latin dictatum thing
dictated, neuter past participle of dictare dictate (see dictate (v.)).


ditty bag (n.)

1850s nautical slang, perhaps from British naval phrase commodity bag.


ditzy (adj.)

also ditsy, stupid, scatterbrained (especially of women), by 1973, U.S. slang, of unknown origin;
one guess is that it is related to earlier U.S. black slang dicty (1926) conceited, snobbish, also
of unknown origin, but the sense is very difficult. The noun ditz (1982) appears to be a back-
formation.


diuresis (n.)

medical Latin, from Greek diourein to urinate (see diuretic) + -esis.


diuretic

c.1400 (adjective and noun), from Old French diuretique, from Late Latin diureticus, from Greek
diouretikos prompting urine, from diourein urinate, from dia through (see dia-) + ourein urinate,
from ouron (see urine).


diurnal (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin diurnalis daily, from Latin dies day + -urnus, an adjectival suffix
denoting time (compare hibernus wintery). Dies day is from PIE root *dyeu- to shine (cognates:
Sanskrit diva by day, Welsh diw, Breton deiz day; Armenian tiw; Lithuanian diena; Old Church
Slavonic dini, Polish dzie&#324;, Russian den), literally to shine (compare Greek delos clear; Latin
deus, Sanskrit deva god, literally shining one; Avestan dava- spirit, demon; Lithuanian devas, Old
Norse tivar gods; Old English Tig, genitive Tiwes, see Tuesday).


diva (n.)

distinguished woman singer, prima donna, 1883, from Italian diva goddess, fine lady, from Latin diva
goddess, fem. of divus divine (one); see divine (adj.).


divagate (v.)

1590s, from Latin divagatus, past participle of divagari to wander about, from di(s)- apart (see
dis-) + vagari to wander, ramble (see vague). Related: Divagated; divagating.


divagation (n.)

1550s, noun of action from Latin divagatus, past participle of divagari (see divagate).


divan (n.)

1580s, Oriental council of state, from Turkish divan, from Arabic diwan, from Persian devan bundle
of written sheets, small book, collection of poems (as in the Divan i-Hafiz), related to debir
writer.    Sense evolved through book of accounts, to office of accounts, custom house, council
chamber, then to long, cushioned seat, such as are found along the walls in Middle Eastern council
chambers (see couch). The sofa/couch sense was taken into English 1702; the book of poems sense in
1823.


dive (v.)

mid-13c., from Old English dufan to dive, duck, sink (intransitive, class II strong verb; past tense
deaf, past participle dofen) and dyfan to dip, submerge (weak, transitive), from Proto-Germanic verb
*dubijan, from PIE *dheub- deep, hollow (see deep (adj.)). Past tense dove is a later formation,
perhaps on analogy of drive/drove. Related: Diving. Dive bomber attested by 1939.


dive (n.)

c.1700, from dive (v.). Sense of disreputable bar is first recorded American English 1871, perhaps
because they were usually in basements, and going into one was both a literal and figurative diving.


diver (n.)

c.1500, agent noun from dive (v.).


diverge (v.)

1660s, from Modern Latin divergere go in different directions, from dis- apart (see dis-) + vergere
to bend, turn (see verge (v.)). Originally a term in optics; the figurative sense is 19c. Related:
Diverged; diverging.


divergence (n.)

1650s, from Modern Latin divergentia, from divergens (see diverge). Related: Divergency.


divergent (adj.)

1690s, from Modern Latin divergentem (nominative divergens), present participle of divergere (see
diverge). Related: Divergently.


divers (adj.)

mid-13c., not alike (sense now in diverse); late 13c., separate, distinct; various, from Old French
divers (11c.) different, various, singular, odd, exceptional, wretched, treacherous, perverse, from
Latin diversus turned different ways, in Late Latin various, past participle of divertere (see
divert).    Sense of several, numerous is recorded from c.1300, referring originally and in form to
the variety of objects; but, as variety implies number, becoming an indefinite numeral word
expressing multiplicity [OED], a sense that emerged by c.1400.


diverse (adj.)

c.1300, spelling variant of divers (q.v.), perhaps by analogy with converse, traverse, etc. In some
cases directly from Latin diversus, and since c.1700 restricted to the meaning different in
character or quality. Related: Diversely.


diversification (n.)

c.1600, noun of action from Medieval Latin diversificare (see diversify). Economic sense is from
1939.


diversify (v.)

late 15c., from Old French diversifier (13c.) to make diverse, from Medieval Latin diversificare,
from Latin diversus (see diverse). Economic sense is from 1939. Related: Diversified; diversifying.


diversion (n.)

early 15c., diverse condition; c.1600 act of diverting, from Middle French diversion, from Late
Latin diversionem (nominative diversio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin divertere
(see divert).    Sense of amusement, entertainment is first recorded 1640s. Hence, divertimento
(1823), from the Italian form; originally a musical composition designed primarily for
entertainment.


diversity (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being diverse, mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversit&eacute;
(12c.) difference, diversity, unique feature, oddness: also wickedness, perversity, from Latin
diversitatem (nominative diversitas) contrariety, contradiction, disagreement; also, as a secondary
sense, difference, diversity, from diversus turned different ways (in Late Latin various), past
participle of divertere (see divert).    Negative meaning, being contrary to what is agreeable or
right; perversity, evil existed in English from late 15c. but was obsolete from 17c. Diversity as a
virtue in a nation is an idea from the rise of modern democracies in the 1790s, where it kept one
faction from arrogating all power (but this was not quite the modern sense, as ethnicity, gender,
sexual identity, etc. were not the qualities in mind):    The dissimilarity in the ingredients which
will compose the national government, and still more in the manner in which they will be brought
into action in its various branches, must form a powerful obstacle to a concert of views in any
partial scheme of elections. There is sufficient diversity in the state of property, in the genius,
manners, and habits of the people of the different parts of the Union, to occasion a material
diversity of disposition in their representatives towards the different ranks and conditions in
society. [Federalist #60, Feb. 26, 1788 (Hamilton)]    Specific focus (in a positive sense) on race,
gender, etc. is from 1992.


divert (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French divertir (14c.), from Latin divertere to turn in different
directions, blended with devertere turn aside, from dis- aside and de- from + vertere to turn (see
versus). Related: Diverted; diverting.


diverticulum (n.)

blind tube (anatomical), 1819, Modern Latin, from Latin deverticulum a bypath, from devertere to
turn aside (see divert).


Dives

traditional name for a rich man, late 14c., from Latin dives rich (man); see Dis. Used in Luke xvi
in Vulgate and commonly mistaken as the proper name of the man in the parable. Related to divus
divine, and originally meaning favored by the gods (see divine (adj.)).


divest (v.)

1560s, devest (modern spelling is c.1600), from Middle French devester strip of possessions, from
Old French desvestir, from des- away (see dis-) + vestir to clothe (see vest (v.)).    The
figurative sense of strip of possessions is earliest in English; reflexive sense of to strip oneself
of is from c.1600. Economic sense (implied in divestment) is from 1955. Related: Divested;
divesting.


divestiture (n.)

c.1600, from divest on analogy of investiture. Economics sense is from 1961.


divide (v.)

early 14c., from Latin dividere to force apart, cleave, distribute, from dis- apart (see dis-) +
-videre to separate, from PIE root *weidh- to separate (see widow; also see with).    Mathematical
sense is from early 15c. Divide and rule (c.1600) translates Latin divide et impera, a maxim of
Machiavelli. Related: Divided; dividing.


divide (n.)

1640s, act of dividing, from divide (v.). Meaning watershed, separation between river valleys is
first recorded 1807, American English.


dividend (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French dividende a number divided by another, from Latin dividendum thing to
be divided, neuter gerundive of dividere (see divide). Mathematical sense is from 1540s. Meaning
portion of interest on a loan, stock, etc. is from 1620s. Related: Dividends.


divider (n.)

1520s, agent noun from divide (v.). Meaning partition or screen, especially in a room, is from 1959.


divination (n.)

late 14c., from Old French divination (13c.), from Latin divinationem (nominative divinatio) the
power of foreseeing, prediction, noun of action from past participle stem of divinare, literally to
be inspired by a god (see divine (adj.)).


divine (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French devin (12c.), from Latin divinus of a god, from divus a god, related to deus
god, deity (see Zeus). Weakened sense of excellent had evolved by late 15c.


divine (v.)

to conjure, to guess, originally to make out by supernatural insight, mid-14c., from Old French
deviner, from Vulgar Latin *devinare, dissimilated from *divinare, from Latin divinus (see divine
(adj.)), which also meant soothsayer. Related: Divined; diviner; divining. Divining rod (or wand)
attested from 1650s.


divine (n.)

c.1300, soothsayer, from Old French devin, from Latin divinus (adj.); see divine (adj.). Meaning
ecclesiastic, theologian is from late 14c.


divinely (adv.)

1580s, from divine (adj.) + -ly (2).


divinity (n.)

c.1300, science of divine things; late 14c., quality of being divine, also a divine being, from Old
French devinit&eacute; (12c.), from Latin divinitatem (nominative divinitas), from divinus (see
divine (adj.)).


divisible (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French divisibile, from Late Latin divisibilis, from divis-, past participle
stem of Latin dividere (see divide (v.)).


division (n.)

late 14c., from Old French division, from Latin divisionem (nominative divisio), from divid-, stem
of dividere (see divide). Military sense is first recorded 1590s. Mathematical sense is from early
15c. The mathematical division sign supposedly was invented by British mathematician John Pell
(1611-1685) who taught at Cambridge and Amsterdam.


divisive (adj.)

c.1600, having a quality of dividing, from Latin divis-, past participle stem of dividere (see
divide (v.)) + -ive. Meaning producing discord is from 1640s. Related: Divisively; divisiveness.


divisor (n.)

early 15c., Latin agent noun from dividere (see divide (v.)).


divorce (n.)

late 14c., from Old French divorce (14c.), from Latin divortium separation, dissolution of marriage,
from divertere to separate, leave one's husband, turn aside (see divert). Not distinguished in
English from legal separation until mid-19c.


divorce (v.)

late 14c., from Old French divorcer, from divorce (see divorce (n.)). Related: Divorced; divorcing.


divorcee (n.)

divorced woman, 1813, from French divorc&eacute;e, noun use of fem. past participle of divorcer (see
divorce (v.)). The male equivalent in French is divorc&eacute;.


divot (n.)

1530s, from Scottish, literally piece of turf or sod used for roofing material, etc., of unknown
origin. The golfing sense is from 1886.


divulge (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin divulgare publish, make common, from dis- apart (see dis-) + vulgare make
common property, from vulgus common people (see vulgar). Related: Divulged; divulging.


divvy (v.)

1872, American English, originally a noun, a slang shortening of dividend; the verb was in use by
1877 and is primary now (the noun is not in Webster's New World Dictionary), leading some (such as
Webster's) to think the word is a slang alteration of divide. Related: Divvying. In early 20c.
British slang the same word was a shortening of divine (adj.).


Dixie (n.)

1859, first attested in the song of that name, which was popularized, if not written, by Ohio-born
U.S. minstrel musician and songwriter Dan Emmett (1815-1904); perhaps a reference to the Mason-Dixon
Line, but there are other well-publicized theories dating back to the Civil War. Popularized
nationwide in minstrel shows. Dixieland style of jazz developed in New Orleans c.1910, so called
from 1919.


Dixiecrat (n.)

in U.S. politics, 1948, from Dixie + ending from Democrat.


dizziness (n.)

Old English dysignesse; see dizzy + -ness.


dizzy (adj.)

Old English dysig foolish, stupid, from Proto-Germanic *dusijaz (cognates: Low German d&uuml;sig
dizzy, Dutch duizelen to be dizzy, Old High German dusig foolish, German Tor fool, Old English
dw&aelig;s, Dutch dwaas foolish), perhaps from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, vapor, smoke; to rise in a cloud
(and related notions of defective perception or wits).    Meaning having a whirling sensation is
from mid-14c.; that of giddy is from c.1500 and seems to merge the two earlier meanings. Used of the
foolish virgins in early translations of Matthew xxv; used especially of blondes since 1870s.
Related: Dizzily.


dizzy (v.)

Old English dysigan, from source of dizzy (adj.). Related: Dizzied; dizzying.


DNA (n.)

1944, abbreviation of deoxyribonucleic acid (1931).


do (v.)

Middle English do, first person singular of Old English don make, act, perform, cause; to put, to
place, from West Germanic *don (cognates: Old Saxon duan, Old Frisian dua, Dutch doen, Old High
German tuon, German tun), from PIE root *dhe- to put, place, do, make (see factitious).    Use as an
auxiliary began in Middle English. Periphrastic form in negative sentences (They did not think)
replaced the Old English negative particles (Hie ne wendon). Slang meaning to do the sex act with or
to is from 1913. Expression do or die is attested from 1620s.  Compare does, did, done.


do (n.)

first (and last) note of the diatonic scale, by 1754, from do, used as a substitution for ut (see
gamut) for sonority's sake, first in Italy and Germany. U.S. slang do-re-mi money is from 1920s,
probably a pun on dough in its slang sense of cash.


do-gooder (n.)

a person who seeks to correct social ills in an idealistic, but usually impractical or superficial,
way, 1650s (as do-good), in Zootomia, or Observations on the Present Manners of the English: Briefly
Anatomizing the Living by the Dead. With An Usefull Detection of the Mountebanks of Both Sexes,
written by Richard Whitlock, a medical doctor. Probably used even then with a taint of impractical
idealism. Modern pejorative use seems to have begun on the socialist left, mocking those who were
unwilling to take a hard line. OED has this citation, from The Nation in 1923:    There is nothing
the matter with the United States except ... the parlor socialists, up-lifters, and do-goods.    The
form do-gooder appears in American English from 1927, presumably because do-good was no longer felt
as sufficiently noun-like. A slightly older word for this was goo-goo.


do-it-yourself

as a modifier, attested by 1941. The expression is much older.


do-rag (n.)

by 1973 (said to date to 1960s in DAS), Black English, from hairdo + rag (n.).


do-si-do

1929, from French dos-&agrave;-dos back to back (see dossier).


DOA

also d.o.a., 1929, police slang abbreviation of dead on arrival.


doable (adj.)

mid-15c., from do (v.) + -able.


dobbie (n.)

household sprite, 1811, from playful use of the proper name represented in dobbin (q.v.). In Sussex,
such apparitions were called Master Dobbs.


dobbin (n.)

farm horse, 1596 (in Merchant of Venice), probably from diminutive form of Dob (early 13c.), common
Middle English familiar form of masc. proper name Robin or Robert; personal name applied to a horse.


Dobermann pinscher (n.)

1917, for Ludwig Dobermann, 19c. German dog-breeder in Thuringia. Pinscher fox terrier seems to be a
19c. borrowing from English pinch (see Kluge).   Der Kutscher aus gutem Hause verschafft sich, wie
er kann und wenn er kann, einen ganz kleinen englischen Pinscher, der den Pferden sehr gut gut folgt
und die gro&szlig;en D&auml;nen von ehedem ersetzt hat, aus J.J. Rousseau's Zeit, der von dem
d&auml;nischen Hunde umgerannt wurde, wie ihr wi&szlig;t. [Paris, oder, Das Buch der Hundert und
Ein, Volume 6, Theodor Hell (pseud.), Potsdam, 1833]


dobro (n.)

1952, American English, contracted from the name of its Slovakia-born inventors, the Dopera Brothers
(John, Rudy, Emil). The word also happens to mean good thing in Slovak. Patent filed 1947, claims
use from 1929.


doc (n.)

familiar form of doctor, first recorded c.1850.


docent (adj.)

1630s, from Latin docentem (nominative docens), present participle of docere to teach (see doctor).
As a noun, from 1880.


Docetism (n.)

1846, heresy of the Docetae, who held that the body of Jesus was a phantom, from Greek Doketai, name
of the sect, literally believers, from dokein to seem, have the appearance of, think, related to
doxa (see decent).


docile (adj.)

late 15c., easily taught, from Italian or French docile, from Latin docilis easily taught, from
docere teach (see doctor). Sense of obedient, submissive first recorded 1774.


docility (n.)

1550s, from French docilit&eacute; (15c.), from Latin docilitatem (nominative docilitas), from
docilis (see docile).


docimacy (n.)

judicial inquiry into the character of aspirants for office or citizenship, especially in ancient
Athens, 1801, from Greek dokimasia assay, proving, examination, from stem of dokimazein to test,
prove, from dokimos proven, genuine, literally accepted, related to dekhesthai to take, accept,
cognate with Latin decere to be seemly or fitting (see decent).


dock (n.1)

ship's berth, late 15c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German docke, perhaps ultimately (via Late
Latin *ductia aqueduct) from Latin ducere to lead (see duke (n.)); or possibly from a Scandinavian
word for low ground (compare Norwegian dokk hollow, low ground). Original sense perhaps furrow a
grounded vessel makes in a mud bank. As a verb from 1510s. Related: Docked; docking.


dock (n.2)

where accused stands in court, 1580s, originally rogue's slang, from Flemish dok pen or cage for
animals, origin unknown.


dock (v.)

cut an animal's tail, late 14c., from dok (n.) fleshy part of an animal's tail (mid-14c.), related
to Old English -docca muscle, from Proto-Germanic *dokko something round, bundle (cognates: Old
Norse dokka bundle, girl, Danish dukke doll, German Docke small column, bundle, doll, smart girl).
Meaning to reduce (someone's) pay for some infraction is first recorded 1822. Related: Docked;
docking.


dock (n.3)

name for various tall, coarse weeds, Old English docce, from Proto-Germanic *dokkon (cognates:
Middle Dutch docke-, German Docken-, Old Danish dokka), akin to Middle High German tocke bundle,
tuft, and ultimately to the noun source of dock (v.).


docket (n.)

mid-15c., a summary or abstract, of unknown origin, perhaps a diminutive form related to dock (v.).
An early form was doggette. Meaning list of lawsuits to be tried is from 1709.


docksider (n.)

1969 as person who frequents docks, 1974 as the name of a type of shoe, a cheaper version of the
topsider; from dock (n.1) + side (n.).


doctor (n.)

c.1300, Church father, from Old French doctour, from Medieval Latin doctor religious teacher,
adviser, scholar, in classical Latin teacher, agent noun from docere to show, teach, cause to know,
originally make to appear right, causative of decere be seemly, fitting (see decent).    Meaning
holder of highest degree in university is first found late 14c.; as is that of medical professional
(replacing native leech (n.2)), though this was not common till late 16c. The transitional stage is
exemplified in Chaucer's Doctor of phesike (Latin physica came to be used extensively in Medieval
Latin for medicina). Similar usage of the equivalent of doctor is colloquial in most European
languages: Italian dottore, French docteur, German doktor, Lithuanian daktaras, though these are
typically not the main word in those languages for a medical healer. For similar evolution, see
Sanskrit vaidya- medical doctor, literally one versed in science. German Arzt, Dutch arts are from
Late Latin archiater, from Greek arkhiatros chief healer, hence court physician. French
m&eacute;decin is a back-formation from m&eacute;dicine, replacing Old French miege, from Latin
medicus.


doctor (v.)

1590s, to confer a degree on, from doctor (n.). Meaning to treat medically is from 1712; sense of
alter, disguise, falsify is from 1774. Related: Doctored; doctoring.


Doctor Martens

type of heavy walking boots, 1977 (use claimed from 1965), trademark name taken out by Herbert Funck
and Klaus Martens of West Germany.


doctorate (n.)

degree of a doctor, 1670s; see doctor (n.) + -ate (1).


doctrinaire (n.)

1820, from French doctrinaire impractical person, originally adherent of doctrines (14c.), from
Latin doctrina (see doctrine).    At first used in the context of French politics, contemptuously
applied by rival factions to those who tried to reconcile liberty with royal authority after 1815.
Hence, anyone who applies doctrine without making allowance for practical considerations (1831). As
an adjective, from 1834.


doctrinal (adj.)

pertaining to doctrines, 1560s, from Late Latin doctrinalis, from doctrina (see doctrine). Attested
from mid-15c. as the title of a text book (from Middle French doctrinal).


doctrine (n.)

late 14c., from Old French doctrine (12c.) teaching, doctrine, and directly from Latin doctrina
teaching, body of teachings, learning, from doctor teacher (see doctor (n.)).


document (n.)

early 15c., teaching, instruction, from Old French document (13c.) lesson, written evidence, from
Latin documentum example, proof, lesson, in Medieval Latin official written instrument, from docere
to show, teach (see doctor (n.)). Meaning something written that provides proof or evidence is from
early 18c. Related: Documents.


document (v.)

1640s, to teach; see document (n.). Meaning to support by documentary evidence is from 1711.
Related: Documented; documenting.


documentary (adj.)

c.1810, pertaining to documents, from document + -ary. Meaning factual, meant to provide a record of
something is from 1926, from French film documentarie (1924). The noun (short for documentary film)
is attested from 1935. Docudrama is a 1961 coinage.


documentation (n.)

1754, admonition, from Medieval Latin documentationem (nominative documentio) admonition (see
document). Meaning furnishing with documents or papers is from 1884, probably from document. Meaning
collection of informational papers is from 1927.


dodder (v.)

1610s, perhaps from Middle English daderen to quake, tremble (late 15c.), apparently frequentative
of dialectal dade, on a form similar to totter, patter. Related: Doddered; doddering.


dodecahedron (n.)

1560s, from Greek dodeka twelve (short for duodeka, from duo two + deka ten; compare dozen) + hedra
seat, base, chair, face of a geometric solid, from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


dodge (n.)

person's way of making a living, 1842, slang, from dodge (v.).


dodge (v.)

to move to and fro (especially in an effort to avoid something), 1560s, origin and sense evolution
obscure, perhaps akin to Scottish dodd to jog. Common from early 18c. in figurative sense of to
swindle, to play shifting tricks. Related: Dodged; dodging.


dodger (n.)

1560s, one who dodges, in the literal or figurative (especially underworld) senses of dodge. The
U.S. word meaning corn cake is recorded from 1831, perhaps a different word (compare Northern
English dialectal dodge lump, large piece, 1560s).


Dodgers

U.S. baseball club, originally based in Brooklyn, N.Y., so called from 1900, from trolley dodgers,
Manhattanites' nickname for Brooklyn residents, in reference to the streetcar lines that criss-
crossed the borough.


dodgy (adj.)

1861, from dodge + -y (2). Related: Dodginess.


dodo (n.)

1620s, from Portuguese doudo fool, simpleton, an insult applied by Portuguese sailors to the awkward
bird (Didus ineptus) they found on Mauritius island. The last record of a living one is from 1681.
Applied in English to stupid persons since 1886.


doe (n.)

Old English da a female deer, of unknown origin, perhaps a Celtic loan-word (compare Cornish da
fallow deer, Old Irish dam ox, Welsh dafad sheep).


doer (n.)

c.1300, agent noun from do.


does

third person singular present of do (v.), originally a Northumbrian variant in Old English that
displaced doth, doeth 16c.-17c.


doesn&#039;t

1690s, contraction of does not.


doff (v.)

mid-14c., contraction of do off, preserving the original sense of do as put. At the time of
Johnson's Dictionary [1755] the word was obsolete, and rarely used except by rustics, but it was
saved from extinction (along with don) by Sir Walter Scott. Related: Doffed; doffing.


dog (n.)

Old English docga, a late, rare word used of a powerful breed of canine. It forced out Old English
hund (the general Germanic and Indo-European word; see canine) by 16c. and subsequently was picked
up in many continental languages (French dogue (16c.), Danish dogge), but the origin remains one of
the great mysteries of English etymology.    Many expressions -- a dog's life (c.1600), go to the
dogs (1610s), etc. -- reflect earlier hard use of the animals as hunting accessories, not pampered
pets. In ancient times, the dog was the worst throw in dice (attested in Greek, Latin, and Sanskrit,
where the word for the lucky player was literally the dog-killer), which plausibly explains the
Greek word for danger, kindynas, which appears to be play the dog.    Slang meaning ugly woman is
from 1930s; that of sexually aggressive man is from 1950s. Adjectival phrase dog-eat-dog attested by
1850s. Dog tag is from 1918. To dog-ear a book is from 1650s; dog-eared in extended sense of worn,
unkempt is from 1894. Notwithstanding, as a dog hath a day, so may I perchance have time to declare
it in deeds. [Princess Elizabeth, 1550]  Phrase put on the dog get dressed up (1934) may look back
to the stiff stand-up shirt collars that in the 1890s were the height of male fashion (and were
known as dog-collars at least from 1883), with reference to collars worn by dogs. The common Spanish
word for dog, perro, also is a mystery word of unknown origin, perhaps from Iberian. A group of
Slavic dog words (Old Church Slavonic pisu, Polish pies, Serbo-Croatian pas) likewise are of unknown
origin.


dog (v.)

to track like a dog, 1510s, see dog (n.). Related: Dogged; dogging.


dog days (n.)

1530s, from Latin dies caniculares, from Greek; so called because they occur around the time of the
heliacal rising of Sirius, the Dog Star (kyon seirios). Noted as the hottest and most unwholesome
time of the year; usually July 3 to Aug. 11, but variously calculated, depending on latitude and on
whether the greater Dog-star (Sirius) or the lesser one (Procyon) is reckoned.    The heliacal
rising of Sirius has shifted down the calendar with the precession of the equinoxes; in ancient
Egypt c.3000 B.C.E. it coincided with the summer solstice, which also was the new year and the
beginning of the inundation of the Nile. The dog association apparently began here (the star's
hieroglyph was a dog), but the reasons for it are obscure.


dog leg (n.)

something bent like a dog's hind leg, 1703. Originally of a type of staircase.


doge (n.)

chief magistrate of Venice or Genoa, 1540s, from Venetian dialect doge, from Latin ducem, accusative
of dux leader (see duke (n.)).


dogfight (n.)

aerial combat, World War I air forces slang, from earlier meaning riotous brawl (1880s); from dog
(n.) + fight (n.). The literal sense of a fight among or between dogs is from 1650s.


dogfish (n.)

a name for various types of small shark, late 15c., dokefyche, from dog (n.) + fish (n.). Said to be
so called because they hunt in packs. This was the image of sharks in classical antiquity as well.
But in the Mediterranean, among the Greeks and Romans of antiquity, closer contact with sharks had
left an impression of vicious dogs of the sea. Thus, Pliny's canis marinus. The metaphor of the dog
spread to the North to dominate the European image of the shark, from the Italian pescecane and
French chien de mer to the German Meerhund and Hundfisch and English sea dog and dogfish. [Tom
Jones, The Xoc, the Sharke and the Sea Dogs, in Fifth Palenque Round Table, 1983, edited by Virginia
M. Field, 1985.]


dogged (adj.)

having the qualities of a dog (mostly in a negative sense), c.1300, from dog (n.). Meaning
persistent is from 1779. Hence doggedly (late 14c.), cruelly, maliciously; later with a dog's
persistence (1773). Related: Doggedness.


dogger (n.)

two-masted fishing boat, used in North Sea fishery, mid-14c., of unknown origin. It likely is the
source of the name Dogger Bank (1660s) for the great banks of shoals in the North Sea.


doggerel

late 14c. (adj.); 1630s (n.), Any rhyming verse in which the meter is forced into metronomic
regularity by the stressing of normally unstressed syllables and in which rhyme is forced or banal
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry]. probably from dog (n.) + pejorative suffix -rel and applied
to bad poetry perhaps with a suggestion of puppyish clumsiness, or being fit only for dogs. Attested
as a surname from mid-13c., but the sense is not evident.


doggone (adj.)

1851, American English, a fantastic perversion of god-damned [Weekley]. But Mencken favors the
theory that it is a blend form of dog on it; in fact it is still often used with it following. It is
thus a brother to the old English phrase, 'a pox upon it,' but is considerably more decorous.


doggy (n.)

also doggie, 1825, from dog (n.) + -y (3). Doggy-bag attested from 1965. As an adj. doggy is
attested from late 14c., from -y (2). The word has been used in various formations since at least
late 19c. to describe the sex act when one partner is on all fours.


doghouse (n.)

1610s, from dog (n.) + house (n.). Originally a kennel; the backyard type, for a single animal, is
late 19c. Figurative sense of disgrace is from 1932.


dogie (n.)

motherless calf in a herd, 1887, cowboy slang, of uncertain origin.


dogma (n.)

c.1600 (in plural dogmata), from Latin dogma philosophical tenet, from Greek dogma (genitive
dogmatos) opinion, tenet, literally that which one thinks is true, from dokein to seem good, think
(see decent). Treated in 17c.-18c. as a Greek word in English.


dogmatic (adj.)

1670s, from Late Latin dogmaticus, from Greek dogmatikos pertaining to doctrines, from dogma (see
dogma). Related: Dogmatical (c.1600).


dogmatism (n.)

c.1600, but not in common use until 19c., from French dogmatisme (16c.), from Medieval Latin
dogmatismus, from Latin dogma (see dogma).


dogs (n.)

feet, 1913, from rhyming slang dog's meat.


dogwood (n.)

shrubs and small trees of the genus Cornus, 1610s, earlier dog-tree (1540s); the first element
sometimes said to have been perhaps dag -- compare dagger, dag (v.) to pierce or stab (1630s,
perhaps 15c.) -- the trees have hard, white wood that was used in making skewers; another name for
it was skewer-wood. But another guess is that the tree was given the name in reference to its fruit,
which was called dogberry from 1550s, and dog had implications of cheap, inferior (i.e. fit for a
dog).


doily (n.)

1714, short for doily-napkin (1711), from doily thin, woolen fabric; supposedly from Doiley, surname
of a 17c.-early 18c. dry-goods dealer on London's Strand. Doily earlier meant genteel, affordable
woolens (1670s), evidently from the same source. The surname is d'Ouilly, from one of several places
called Ouilly in Normandy.


doing (n.)

early 13c., verbal noun from do (v.). From c.1600-1800 it also was a euphemism for copulation.


dojo (n.)

hall in which judo is practiced, 1942, from Japanese.


dol (n.)

unit of intensity of pain, 1947, from Latin dolor pain.


Dolby

sound reproduction system, 1966, named for its inventor, U.S. engineer Ray M. Dolby (b.1933).


dolce far niente

1814, from Italian, literally sweet doing nothing. The Latin roots are dulcis sweet (see dulcet),
facere to make, do (see factitious), and nec entem, literally not a being.    This phrase, frequent
enough in English literature, does not seem to occur in any Italian author of note. Howells says
that he found it current among Neapolitan lazzaroni, but it is not included in any collection of
Italian proverbial sayings. [Walsh]


dolce vita (n.)

life of pleasure, 1960, Italian, from title of Fellini's film.


doldrums (n.)

1811, from dulled, past participle of dullen, from Old English dol foolish, dull, ending perhaps
patterned on tantrum.


dole (n.)

Old English dal state of being divided; sharing, giving out, shortened from gedal portion, related
to d&aelig;l deal, from Proto-Germanic *dailiz (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon del, Middle
Dutch deil, Dutch deel, Old High German teil, German Teil). On the dole is 1920s.


dole (v.)

hand out charity, mid-15c., from dole (n.). <related:>Doled; doling.</related:>


doleful (adj.)

late 13c., with -ful, from Middle English dole grief (early 13c.), from Old French doel (Modern
French deuil), from Late Latin dolus grief, from Latin dolere suffer, grieve. Related: Dolefully.


doll (n.)

1550s, endearing name for a female pet or a mistress; originally a familiar form of fem. proper name
Dorothy (q.v.). The -l- for -r- substitution in nicknames is common in English: compare Hal for
Harold, Moll for Mary, Sally for Sarah, etc. Attested from 1640s as colloquial for slattern; sense
of child's toy baby is c.1700. Transferred back to living beings 1778 in sense of pretty, silly
woman.


doll (v.)

1867, to pet, indulge, from doll (n.). Usually with up. Meaning to dress up is from 1906, American
English. Related: Dolled; dolling.


dollar (n.)

1550s, from Low German daler, from German taler (1530s, later thaler), abbreviation of
Joachimstaler, literally (gulden) of Joachimstal, coin minted 1519 from silver from mine opened 1516
near Joachimstal, town in Erzgebirge Mountains in northwest Bohemia. German Tal is cognate with
English dale.    The thaler was a large silver coin of varying value in the German states (and a
unit of the German monetary union of 1857-73 equal to three marks); it also served as a currency
unit in Denmark and Sweden. English colonists in America used the word in reference to Spanish
pieces of eight. Continental Congress July 6, 1785, adopted dollar when it set up U.S. currency, on
suggestion of Gouverneur Morris and Thomas Jefferson, because the term was widely known but not
British. But none were circulated until 1794.    When William M. Evarts was Secretary of State he
accompanied Lord Coleridge on an excursion to Mount Vernon. Coleridge remarked that he had heard it
said that Washington, standing on the lawn, could throw a dollar clear across the Potomac. Mr.
Evarts explained that a dollar would go further in those days than now. [Walsh]    Phrase dollars to
doughnuts attested from 1890; dollar diplomacy is from 1910. The dollar sign ($) is said to derive
from the image of the Pillars of Hercules, stamped with a scroll, on the Spanish piece of eight.
However, according to the <b>Bureau of Engraving and Printing</b> of the U.S. Department of the
Treasury:    [T]he most widely accepted explanation is that the symbol is the result of evolution,
independently in different places, of the Mexican or Spanish P's for pesos, or piastres, or pieces
of eight. The theory, derived from a study of old manuscripts, is that the S gradually came to be
written over the P, developing a close equivalent of the $ mark. It was widely used before the
adoption of the United States dollar in 1785.


dollhouse (n.)

1855, from doll (n.) + house (n.). Doll's house first recorded 1783.


dollop (n.)

1570s, from East Anglian dialectal dallop patch, tuft or clump of grass, of uncertain origin. Modern
sense of a lump or glob is 1812. As a verb, from 1825.


dolly (n.)

c.1600, Dolly, a fem. nickname (see doll); 1790 as child's doll; applied from 1792 to any
contrivance fancied to resemble a dolly in some sense, especially a small platform on rollers
(1901). Doesn't look like one to me, either, but that's what they say.


dolmen (n.)

1859, from French dolmin applied 1796 by French general and antiquarian Th&eacute;ophile Malo Corret
de La Tour d'Auvergne (1743-1800), perhaps from Cornish tolmen enormous stone slab set up on
supporting points, such that a man may walk under it, literally hole of stone, from Celtic men
stone.    Some suggest the first element may be Breton taol table, a loan-word from Latin tabula
board, plank, but the Breton form of this compound would be taolvean. There is reason to think that
this [tolmen] is the word inexactly reproduced by Latour d'Auvergne as dolmin, and misapplied by him
and succeeding French archaeologists to the cromlech [OED]. See cromlech, which is properly an
upright flat stone, often arranged as one of a circle.


dolomite (n.)

1794, named for French geologist D&eacute;odat De Gratet De Dolomieu (1750-1801) who described the
rock in his study of the Alps (1791).


Dolores

fem. proper name, from Spanish Maria de los Dolores, literally Mary of the Sorrows, from plural of
dolor, from Latin dolor pain, sorrow.


dolorous (adj.)

c.1400, causing pain, from Old French doloros (12c., Modern French douloureux) painful, sorrowful,
wretched, from Late Latin dolorosus painful, sorrowful, from Latin dolor pain, grief. Sense of
causing grief is from mid-15c.; that of full of sorrow is from 1510s. Related: Dolorously;
dolorousness.


dolphin (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French daulphin, from Medieval Latin dolfinus, from Latin delphinus dolphin, from
Greek delphis (genitive delphinos) dolphin, related to delphys womb, perhaps via notion of the
animal bearing live young, or from its shape, from PIE *gwelbh-. Popularly applied to the dorado
from late 16c.


dolt (n.)

1540s, perhaps a variant of dold dull, foolish, influenced by dulte, dolte, past participle forms of
Middle English dullen to dull, make or become dazed or stupid (see dull (adj.)). Related: Doltish;
doltishly; doltishness.


Dom Perignon

trademark name, 1954 (in use from 1936), from monk of that name (1638-1715), blind cellarmaster of
the monastery of Hautvilliers near Epernay, France, who was said to have discovered the advantage of
corked bottles in fermentation. Dom was a title of authority, from Latin dominus lord, master (see
domain).


domain (n.)

early 15c., in Scottish, from Middle French domaine domain, estate, from Old French demaine lord's
estate, from Latin dominium property, dominion, from dominus lord, master, owner, from domus house
(see domestic). Form influenced in Old French by Medieval Latin domanium domain, estate. Internet
domain name attested by 1985.


dome (n.)

round, vaulted roof, 1650s, from French dome (16c.), from Proven&ccedil;al doma, from Greek doma
house, housetop (especially a style of roof from the east), related to domos house (see domestic).
In the Middle Ages, German dom and Italian duomo were used for cathedral (on the notion of God's
house), so English began to use this word in the sense cupola, an architectural feature
characteristic of Italian cathedrals. Used in U.S. also with reference to round summits of
mountains.


Domesday book

1178, popular name of Great Inquisition or Survey (1086), William the Conqueror's inventory of his
new domain, from Middle English domes, genitive of dom day of judgment (see doom). The booke ... to
be called Domesday, bicause (as Mathew Parise saith) it spared no man, but iudged all men
indifferently. [William Lambarde, A Perambulation of Kent, 1570]


domestic (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French domestique (14c.) and directly from Latin domesticus belonging to the
household, from domus house, from PIE *dom-o- house, from root *dem- house, household (cognates:
Sanskrit damah house; Avestan demana- house; Greek domos house, despotes master, lord; Latin dominus
master of a household; Old Church Slavonic domu, Russian dom house; Lithuanian dimstis enclosed
court, property; Old Norse topt homestead).    It represents the usual Indo-European word for house
(Italian, Spanish casa are from Latin casa cottage, hut; Germanic *hus is of obscure origin). The
noun meaning household servant is 1530s (a sense also found in Old French domestique). Domestics,
originally articles of home manufacture, is attested from 1620s. Related: Domestically. Domestic
violence is attested from 19c. as revolution and insurrection; 1977 as spouse abuse, violence in the
home.


domesticate (v.)

1630s, of animals; 1741, of persons, to cause to be attached to home and family; from Medieval Latin
domesticatus, past participle of domesticare to tame, literally to dwell in a house, from domesticus
(see domestic). Related: Domesticated; domesticating.


domestication (n.)

1774; see domestic + -ation.


domesticity (n.)

1721; see domestic + -ity.


domicile (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French domicile (14c.), from Latin domicilium, perhaps from domus house (see
domestic) + colere to dwell (see colony). As a verb, it is first attested 1809. Related: Domiciled;
domiciliary.


dominance (n.)

1819; see dominant + -ance. Related: Dominancy.


dominant (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French dominant (13c.), from Latin dominantem (nominative dominans), present
participle of dominari (see domination). Music sense is from 1819. Sexual bondage sense by c.1960.
The noun is first recorded 1819, earliest in the musical sense.


dominate (v.)

1610s, from Latin dominatus, past participle of dominari to rule, dominate, to govern, from dominus
(see domain). Related: Dominated; dominating. Or perhaps a back-formation from domination.


domination (n.)

late 14c., rule, control, from Old French dominacion (12c.) domination, rule, power, from Latin
dominationem (nominative dominatio), noun of action from past participle stem of dominari to rule,
have dominion over, from dominus lord, master, literally master of the house, from domus home (see
domestic) + -nus, suffix denoting ownership or relation. Sexual sense by 1961.


dominatrix (n.)

dominant female entity, attested since 1560s, though not in quite the usual modern sense (Rome ...
dominatrix of nations [1561]). See domination + -trix. Modern BDSM sense attested by 1976.


domineer (v.)

1580s, from Dutch domineren to rule (16c.), from Middle French dominer, from Latin dominari to rule,
'lord' it over (see domination). Shakespeare's usage is not the earliest in English. Related:
Domineering.


Dominic

masc. proper name, from Latin dominicus pertaining to a lord (see demesne).


Dominican (1)

Black friar, 1630s, from Latin form of the name of Domingo de Guzman (Santo Domingo), founder of the
order of preaching friars. His name, like Italian form Dominic, is from Latin dominicus pertaining
to a lord.


Dominican (2)

native or inhabitant of the Dominican Republic, 1853, from the Caribbean island of Dominica, home of
the nation, so named 1493, from Latin (dies) dominica Sunday, the day of the week on which the
island was discovered.


dominion (n.)

early 15c., from Old French dominion dominion, rule, power, from Medieval Latin dominionem
(nominative dominio), corresponding to Latin dominium property, ownership, from dominus (see
domination).    British sovereign colonies often were called dominions, hence the Dominion of
Canada, the formal title after the 1867 union, and Old Dominion, the popular name for the U.S. state
of Virginia, first recorded 1778.


domino (n.)

1801, from French domino (1771), perhaps (on comparison of the black tiles of the game) from the
meaning hood with a cloak worn by canons or priests (1690s), from Latin dominus lord, master (see
domain), but the connection is not clear. Klein thinks it might be directly from dominus, because he
who has first disposed his pieces becomes 'the master.'  Metaphoric use in geopolitics is from April
1954, first used by U.S. President Eisenhower in a New York Times piece, in reference to what
happens when you set up a row of dominos and knock the first one down.


domino theory

in geo-politics, by 1963; see domino. Eisenhower's original phrase was domino principle (1954).


dominoes (n.)

the usual form when referring to the game played with dominoes, c.1800; see domino.


don (n.)

1520s, from Spanish or Portuguese don, title of respect, from Latin dominus lord, master. The
university sense is c.1660, originally student slang; underworld sense is 1952, from Italian don,
from Late Latin domnus, from Latin dominus (see domain). The fem. form is Dona (Spanish/Portuguese),
Donna (Italian).


don (v.)

early 14c. contraction of do on (see doff). After 1650 retained in popular use only in north.
dialect; as a literary archaism it has become very frequent in 19th c. [OED]. Related: Donned;
donning.


don juan (n.)

philanderer, from the legendary dissolute Spanish nobleman whose rakish exploits formed the stuff of
popular tales in Spain from early 17c., dramatized by Gabriel Tellez in Convivado de Piedra. Adapted
into French and Italian before 1700; Used attributively in English for ladies' man, womanizer from
the time of Byron's popular poem about him (1819).


don&#039;t

contraction of do not, recorded from 1630s.


Donald

surname, from 13c. Scottish Dofnald, Dufenald, probably from Gaelic Domhnall, Old Irish Domnall
(pronounced Dovnall), from Proto-Celtic *Dubno-valos world-mighty, ruler of the world, from *walos
ruler + PIE *dheub- (see deep (adj.)).


donate (v.)

1819, back-formation from donation. Related: Donated; donating.


donation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French donacion (13c.), from Latin donationem (nominative donatio) a
presenting, giving, noun of action from past participle stem of donare give as a gift, from donum
gift, from PIE *donum gift (cognates: Sanskrit danam offering, present, Old Church Slavonic dani
tribute, Lithuanian duonis gift, Old Irish dan gift, endowment, talent, Welsh dawn gift), from root
*do- to give (see date (n.1)).


Donatist (n.)

mid-15c., adherent of a Christian sect in 4c. North Africa, from Medieval Latin Donatista, from
Donatus name of two of the principal men in it. The schism had more to do with episcopal succession
in Carthage than with doctrine. The name is literally bestowed, given.


donative (adj.)

1550s, from Latin donativus, from donare (see donation). As a noun, from early 15c.


done

past participle of do (v.); from Old English past participle gedon (a vestige of the prefix is in
ado). U.S. Southern use of done in phrases like he done gone to the store is attested from 1827,
according to OED: a perfective auxiliary or with adverbial force in the sense 'already; completely.'
Meaning finished is early 15c. Slang done for doomed is from 1842.


donee (n.)

1520s; see donor + -ee.


Donegal

county in northern Ireland, from Irish Dun na nGall fort of the foreigners (in this case, the
Danes); also see Galloway.


dong (n.)

penis, 1891, of unknown origin.


donkey (n.)

1785, originally slang, perhaps a diminutive from dun dull gray-brown, the form perhaps influenced
by monkey. Or possibly from a familiar form of Duncan (compare dobbin). The older English word was
ass (n.1).


Donna

fem. proper name, from Italian, literally lady, from Latin domina (see dame).


donnish (adj.)

1835, from don (n.) in the university sense + -ish. Related: Donnishness.


donnybrook (n.)

1852, from Donnybrook Fair, proverbial for carousing and brawling, held in County Dublin until 1855.


donor (n.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French donour, Old French doneur (Modern French donneur), from Latin donatorem
(nominative donator) giver, donor, agent noun from past participle stem of donare give as a gift
(see donation). Of blood, from 1910; of organs or tissues, from 1918.


Donovan

from Irish Donndubhan dark brown.


donut (n.)

see doughnut. It turns up as an alternate spelling in U.S. as early as 1870 (Josh Billings), common
from c.1920 in names of bakeries. Halliwell (Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words, 1847) has
donnut a pancake made of dough instead of batter, which Bartlett (1848) writes is no doubt the same
word as the American one.


doo-wop

1958, from the nonsense harmony phrases sung under the vocal lead (this one attested from mid-
1950s).


doodad (n.)

unnamed thing, 1905, chiefly U.S., a made-up word (compare doohickey).


doodah (n.)

excitement, 1915, from refrain of the minstrel song Camptown Races.


doodle (v.)

scrawl aimlessly, 1935, from dialectal doodle, dudle fritter away time, trifle, or associated with
dawdle. It was a noun meaning simple fellow from 1620s.    LONGFELLOW: That's a name we made up back
home for people who make foolish designs on paper when they're thinking. It's called doodling.
Almost everybody's a doodler. Did you ever see a scratch pad in a telephone booth? People draw the
most idiotic pictures when they're thinking. Dr. Von Holler, here, could probably think up a long
name for it, because he doodles all the time. [Mr. Deeds Goes to Town, screenplay by Robert Riskin,
1936; based on Opera Hat, serialized in American Magazine beginning May 1935, by Clarence Aldington
Kelland]    Related: Doodled; Doodling.    Doodle Sack. A bagpipe. Dutch. -- Also the private parts
of a woman. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


doodle-bug (n.)

type of beetle or larvae, c.1866, Southern U.S. dialect; see doodle + bug (n.). The same word was
applied 1944 in R.A.F. slang to German V-model flying bombs.


doofus (n.)

student slang, dolt, idiot, nerd, by 1960s. Dictionary of American Slang says probably related to
doo-doo and goofus.


doohickey (n.)

also doohicky, a name for something one doesn't know the name of, 1914, American English, arbitrary
formation.


doolally (adj.)

insane, eccentric, British slang, by 1917 in the armed services and in full doolally tap (with Urdu
word for fever), from Deolali, near Bombay, India, which was a military camp (established 1861) with
a large barracks and a chief staging point for British troops on their way to or from India; the
reference is to men whose enlistments had expired who waited there impatiently for transport home.


doom (n.)

Old English dom law, judgment, condemnation, from Proto-Germanic *domaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old
Frisian dom, Old Norse domr, Old High German tuom, Gothic doms judgment, decree), from PIE root
*dhe- (cognates: Sanskrit dhaman- law, Greek themis law, Lithuanian dome attention), literally to
set, put (see factitious). A book of laws in Old English was a dombec. Modern sense of fate, ruin,
destruction is c.1600, from the finality of the Christian Judgment Day.


doom (v.)

late 14c., from doom (n.). Related: Doomed; dooming.


Doomsday (n.)

Old English domes d&aelig;g, from domes, genitive of dom (see doom (n.)) + d&aelig;g day (see day
(n.)).    In medieval England it was expected when the world's age reached 6,000 years from
creation, which was thought to have been in 5200 B.C. Bede, c.720, complained of being pestered by
rustici asking him how many years till the sixth millennium ended. There is no evidence for a
general panic in the year 1000 C.E. Doomsday machine bomb powerful enough to wipe out human life on
earth is from 1960.


door (n.)

Middle English merger of Old English dor (neuter; plural doru) large door, gate, and Old English
duru (fem., plural dura) door, gate, wicket; both from Proto-Germanic *dur- (cognates: Old Saxon
duru, Old Norse dyrr, Danish d&oslash;r, Old Frisian dure, Old High German turi, German T&uuml;r).
The Germanic words are from PIE *dhwer- a doorway, a door, a gate (cognates: Greek thyra, Latin
foris, Gaulish doro mouth, Gothic dauro gate, Sanskrit dv&aacute;rah door, gate, Old Persian duvara-
door, Old Prussian dwaris gate, Russian dver' a door).    The base form is frequently in dual or
plural, leading to speculation that houses of the original Indo-Europeans had doors with two
swinging halves. Middle English had both dure and dor; form dore predominated by 16c., but was
supplanted by door.A door is what a dog is perpetually on the wrong side of. [Ogden Nash]


doorbell (n.)

c.1815, from door + bell (n.).


doorknob (n.)

1847, American English, from door + knob.


doormat (n.)

1660s, from door + mat. Figurative use from 1861.


doorstep (n.)

1810, from door + step (n.).


doorway (n.)

1799, from door + way (n.).


dooryard (n.)

c.1764, American English, from door + yard (n.1).


doozy

also doozie, 1903 (adj.), 1916 (n.), perhaps an alteration of daisy, or from popular Italian actress
Eleonora Duse (1859-1924). In either case, reinforced by Duesenberg, the expensive, classy make of
automobile from the 1920s-30s.


dopamine

1959, from DOPA, the amino acid (from first letter of elements of dioxyphenylalanine), + -amine.


dope (n.)

1807, American English, sauce, gravy, thick liquid, from Dutch doop thick dipping sauce, from doopen
to dip (see dip (v.)). Extension to drug is 1889, from practice of smoking semi-liquid opium
preparation. Meaning foolish, stupid person is older (1851) and may have a sense of thick-headed.
Sense of inside information (1901) may come from knowing before the race which horse had been
drugged to influence performance. Dope-fiend is attested from 1896.


dope (v.)

1889, from dope (n.). Related: Doped; doping.


dopey (adj.)

1896, from dope (n.) + -y (2).


doppelganger (n.)

1830, from German Doppelg&auml;nger, literally double-goer, originally with a ghostly sense. See
double + gang (n.). Sometimes half-anglicized as doubleganger.


Doppler

1871, in reference to Christian Doppler (1803-1853), Austrian scientist, who in 1842 explained the
effect of relative motion on waves (originally to explain color changes in binary stars); proved by
musicians performing on a moving train. Doppler shift is the change of frequency resulting from the
Doppler effect.


Dora

fem. proper name, short for Dorothy, Dorothea.


Dorcas

fem. proper name, from Greek dorkas gazelle, deer. Dorcas Society ladies' meeting to make clothes
for the poor (1832) is from Acts ix:36-41.


Dorchester

Old English Dorcanceaster, earlier Dornwaraceaster, from Latin Durnovaria, from Romano-British
*duro- walled town.


dord (n.)

1934, a ghost word printed in Webster's New International Dictionary and defined as a noun used by
physicists and chemists, meaning density. In sorting out and separating abbreviations from words in
preparing the dictionary's second edition, a card marked D or d meaning density somehow migrated
from the abbreviations stack to the words stack. The D or d entry ended up being typeset as a word,
dord, and defined as a synonym for density. The mistake was discovered in 1939.


Dorian (adj.)

c.1600, in reference to the mode of ancient Greek music, literally of Doris, from Greek Doris,
district in central Greece, traditionally named for Doros, legendary ancestor of the Dorians, whose
name is probably related to doron gift (see date (n.1)).


Doric (adj.)

1560s, see Dorian; in reference to the architectural order, 1610s. The Doric dialect in ancient
Greek theater was broad and rustic, hence it has been applied in English to northern and Scots
dialects (1837).


dork (n.)

stupid person, 1967, originally U.S. student slang, perhaps from earlier meaning penis (1964),
itself probably an alteration of dick. Related: Dorky; dorkiness.


dorm (n.)

1900, colloquial shortening of dormitory.


dormancy (n.)

1723; see dormant + -cy. Middle English had dormitation sleep, sleeping (mid-15c.)


dormant (adj.)

late 14c., fixed in place, from Old French dormant (12c.), present participle of dormir to sleep,
from Latin dormire to sleep, from PIE root *drem- to sleep (cognates: Old Church Slavonic dremati to
sleep, doze, Greek edrathon I slept, Sanskrit drati sleeps). Meaning in a resting situation (in
heraldry) is from c.1500. Meaning sleeping' is from 1620s.


dormer (n.)

1590s, originally window of a sleeping room, from Middle French dormeor sleeping room, from dormir
to sleep (see dormant).


dormitory (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin dormitorium sleeping place, from dormire to sleep (see dormant). Old English
had sl&aelig;pern dormitory, with ending as in barn.


dormouse (n.)

early 15c., possibly from Anglo-French *dormouse tending to be dormant (from stem of dormir to
sleep, see dormer), with the second element mistaken for mouse; or perhaps it is from a Middle
English dialectal compound of mouse and Middle French dormir. The rodent is inactive in winter.
French dormeuse, fem. of dormeur sleeper is attested only from 17c.


Dorothy

fem. proper name, from French Doroth&eacute;e, from Latin Dorothea, from Greek, literally gift of
God, from doron gift (see date (n.1)) + fem. of theos god (see theo-). With the elements reversed,
it becomes Theodora. The accessory called a Dorothy bag is so called from 1907.


dorsal (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French dorsal (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin dorsalis, corresponding to
Latin dorsualis of the back, from dorsum back, of uncertain origin.


dory (n.1)

small, flat-bottomed boat, 1709, American English, perhaps from a West Indian or Central American
Indian language.


dory (n.2)

type of edible fish, mid-15c., from Old French doree, originally the fem. past participle of dorer
to gild, from Latin deauratus, from de- + aurare to gild, from aurum (see aureate). So called in
reference to its colorings.


dosage (n.)

1867; see dose + -age, perhaps on model of French dosage (1812).


dose (n.)

early 15c., the giving of medicine (in a specified amount or at a stated time), from Middle French
dose (15c.) or directly from Late Latin dosis, from Greek dosis a portion prescribed, literally a
giving, used by Galen and other Greek physicians to mean an amount of medicine, from stem of didonai
to give (see date (n.1)). Slang meaning venereal disease is from 1914.


dose (v.)

1650s, from dose (n.). Related: Dosed; dosing.


dossier (n.)

1880, from French dossier bundle of papers, from dos back (12c.), from Vulgar Latin dossum, variant
of Latin dorsum back (see dorsal). Supposedly so called because the bundle bore a label on the back,
or possibly from resemblance of the bulge in a mass of bundled papers to the curve of a back. Old
French dossiere meant back-strap, ridge strap (of a horse's harness).


dot (n.)

Old English dott speck, head of a boil, perhaps related to Norwegian dot lump, small knot, Dutch dot
knot, small bunch, wisp, Old High German tutta nipple; ultimate origin unclear.    Known from a
single source c.1000; the word reappeared with modern meaning mark c.1530; not common until 18c.
Morse telegraph sense is from 1838. On the dot punctual is 1909, in reference to a clock dial face.
Dot-matrix first attested 1975.


dot (v.)

1740, from dot (n.). Related: Dotted; dotting.


dotage (n.)

the state of one who dotes, c.1300; see dote + -age. Originally of all sorts of mental impairment,
not just that resulting from old age. First recorded late 14c. for senility.


dotard (n.)

imbecile, late 14c., from dote + -ard.


dote (v.)

c.1200, to be feeble-minded from age, from Middle Low German doten be foolish, of unknown origin.
Meaning to be infatuated is from late 15c. Related: Doted; dotes; doting.


doth

see does.


dotty (adj.)

1812, full of dots, from dot (n.) + -y (2). Meaning silly is from c.1400, in dotypolle dotty poll
(i.e. dotty head), in which case the first element is from dote (v.).


Douai

or Douay, name of town in northern France, used elliptically in reference to the English translation
of the Bible begun there late 16c., sanctioned by Roman Catholic Church. [Also called Rheims-Douai
translation because it was published in Rheims in 1582]. It uses more Latinate words than the KJV.


double (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French doble (10c.) double, two-fold; two-faced, deceitful, from Latin duplus
twofold, twich as much from duo two (see two) + -plus more (see -plus). Double standard attested by
1951. Military double time (1833) originally was 130 steps per minute.


double (v.)

late 13c., make double, from Old French dobler, from Latin duplare, from duplus (see double (adj.)).
Meaning to work as, in addition to one's regular job is c.1920, circus slang, from performers who
also played in the band. Related: Doubled; doubling. To double up bodily is from 1814.    A blow on
the stomach doubles up the boxer, and occasions that gasping and crowing which sufficiently indicate
the cause of the injury .... [Donald Walker, Defensive Exercises, 1840]


double (n.)

mid-14c., amount twice as great, also duplicate copy, from double (adj.).


double agent (n.)

1935, from double (adj.) + agent (n.).


double date (v.)

1931, from double (adj.) + date (v.2).


Double Dutch

gibberish, 1864 (High Dutch for incomprehensible language is recorded from 1789); from double (adj.)
+ Dutch.


double entendre

also double-entendre, 1670s, from French (where it was rare and is now obsolete), literally a
twofold meaning, from entendre (now entente) to hear, to understand, to mean. The proper Modern
French phrase would be double entente, but the phrase has become established in English in its old
form.


double talk (n.)

1938, from double (adj.) + talk (n.). Old English had a similar formation in twispr&aelig;c double
speech, deceit, detraction.


double-check (v.)

1958, from double (adj.) + check (v.). Related: Double-checked; double-checking.


double-cross (n.)

1834, from double (adj.) + cross (n.) in the sense of pre-arranged swindle or fix. Originally to win
a race after promising to lose it. As a verb from 1903, American English. Related: Double-crossed;
double-crossing.


double-decker (n.)

1835 of ships, 1867 of street vehicles; from double (adj.) + deck (n.).


double-header (n.)

1869, American English, originally a kind of fireworks or a railway train pulled by two engines; see
double (adj.) + head (n.). Baseball sense is c.1890.


double-park (v.)

1931, from double (adj.) + park (v.). Related: Double-parked; double-parking.


double-take (n.)

1922, from double (adj.) + take (n.).


double-team (v.)

attack two-on-one, 1860; see double (adj.) + team (v.). Related: Double-teamed; double-teaming.


doublespeak (n.)

1957, from double (adj.) + speak, coined on model of doublethink in Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four
(the language in that book was Newspeak).


doublet (n.)

early 14c. as a type of men's garment, from Old French doublet (12c.), from diminutive of duble (see
double (adj.)). From 1550s as one of two things that are alike.


doublethink (n.)

1948, coined by Orwell in Nineteen Eighty-Four, from double (adj.) + think.


doubloon (n.)

1620s, from French doublon (16c.) and directly from Spanish doblon a gold coin, augmentative of
doble double (coin so called because it was worth twice as much as the Spanish gold pistole), from
Latin duplus double (see double (adj.)). Also see -oon.


doubly (adv.)

late 14c., from double (adj.) + -ly (2).


doubt (v.)

early 13c., to dread, fear, from Old French doter doubt, be doubtful; be afraid, from Latin dubitare
to doubt, question, hesitate, waver in opinion (related to dubius uncertain; see dubious),
originally to have to choose between two things.    The sense of fear developed in Old French and
was passed on to English. Meaning to be uncertain is attested in English from c.1300. The -b- was
restored 14c. by scribes in imitation of Latin. Replaced Old English tweogan (noun twynung), from
tweon two, on notion of of two minds or the choice of two implied in Latin dubitare (compare German
Zweifel doubt, from zwei two).


doubt (n.)

early 13c., from Old French dote (11c.) fear, dread; doubt, from doter (see doubt (v.)).


doubtful (adj.)

late 14c., from doubt (n.) + -ful. Related: Doubtfully; doubtfulness.


doubtless

mid-14c. (adv.), mid-15c. (adj.), from doubt (n.) + -less. Related: Doubtlessly.


douche (n.)

1766, jet of water, from French douche (16c.), from Italian doccia shower, from docciare to spray,
from Latin ductionem a leading, from ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Meaning vaginal cleansing is
from 1833. The verb is first attested 1838. Related: Douched; douching.


douchebag (n.)

also douche-bag, douche bag, 1893, from douche + bag (n.). American English slang sense of
contemptible person attested by 1967.


dough (n.)

Old English dag dough, from Proto-Germanic *daigaz something kneaded (cognates: Old Norse deig,
Swedish deg, Middle Dutch deech, Dutch deeg, Old High German teic, German Teig, Gothic daigs dough),
from PIE *dheigh- to build, to form, to knead (cognates: Sanskrit dehah body, literally that which
is formed, dih- to besmear; Greek teikhos wall; Latin fingere to form, fashion, figura a shape,
form, figure; Gothic deigan to smear; Old Irish digen firm, solid, originally kneaded into a compact
mass). Meaning money is from 1851.


doughboy (n.)

U.S. soldier, 1864, American English, said to have been in oral use from 1854, or from the Mexican-
American War (1847), it is perhaps from resemblance of big buttons on old uniforms to a sort of
biscuit of that name (1680s), but there are various other conjectures.


doughface (n.)

contemptuous nickname in U.S. politics for Northern Democrats who worked in the interest of the
South before the Civil War; it was taken to mean man who allows himself to be moulded. The source is
an 1820 speech by John Randolph of Roanoke, in the wake of the Missouri Compromise.    Randolph,
mocking the northerners intimidated by the South, referred to a children's game in which the players
daubed their faces with dough and then looked in a mirror and scared themselves. [Daniel Walker
Howe, What Hath God Wrought, 2007]   Mask of dough is recorded from 1809, and the same image
Randolph used is attested in another context by 1833.


doughnut (n.)

1809, American English, from dough + nut (n.), probably on the notion of being a small round lump
(the holes came later, first mentioned c.1861). First recorded by Washington Irving, who described
them as balls of sweetened dough, fried in hog's fat, and called doughnuts, or olykoeks. Earlier
name for it was dough-boy (1680s). Bartlett (1848) meanwhile lists doughnuts and crullers among the
types of olycokes, a word he derives from Dutch olikoek, literally oil-cake, to indicate a cake
fried in lard.    The ladies of Augusta, Maine, set in operation and carried out a novel idea,
namely, the distribution of over fifty bushels of doughnuts to the Third volunteer regiment of that
State. A procession of ladies, headed by music, passed between double lines of troops, who presented
arms, and were afterwards drawn up in hollow square to receive from tender and gracious hands the
welcome doughnation. [Frazar Kirkland, Anecdotes of the Rebellion, 1866]     Meaning a driving in
tight circles is U.S. slang, 1981. Compare also donut.


doughty (adj.)

Old English dohtig competent, good, valiant, from dyhtig strong, related to dugan to be fit, be
able, be strong, and influenced by its past participle, dohte.    All from Proto-Germanic *duhtiz-
(cognates: Middle High German t&uuml;htec, German t&uuml;chtig, Middle Dutch duchtich), from PIE
*dheugh- to be fit, be of use, proper (cognates: German Tugend virtue, Greek teukhein to make ready,
Irish dual becoming, fit, Russian du&#382;ij strong, robust). Rare after 17c.; in deliberately
archaic or mock-heroic use since c.1800. If it had survived, its modern form would be dighty.


Douglas

family name (late 12c.), later masc. personal name, from Gaelic Dubh glas the dark water, name of a
place in Lanarkshire. As a given name, in the top 40 for boys born in U.S. from 1942 to 1971.
Douglas fir named for David Douglas (1798-1834), Scottish botanist who first recorded it in Pacific
Northwest, 1825. Douglas scheme, Douglas plan, Douglassite, etc. refer to social credit economic
model put forth by British engineer Maj. Clifford Hugh Douglas (1879-1952).


doula (n.)

by 1980, from Greek doulos (fem. doule) slave.


dour (adj.)

mid-14c., severe, from Scottish and northern England dialect, probably from Latin durus hard (see
endure); sense of gloomy, sullen is late 15c.


douse (v.)

1550s, to strike, punch, which is perhaps from Middle Dutch dossen beat forcefully or a similar Low
German word.    Meaning to strike a sail in haste is recorded from 1620s; that of to extinguish (a
light) is from 1785; perhaps influenced by dout (1520s), an obsolete contraction of do out (compare
doff, don). OED regards the meaning to plunge into water, to throw water over (c.1600) as a separate
word, of unknown origin, though admitting there may be a connection of some sort. Related: Doused;
dousing.


dove (n.)

probably from Old English dufe- (found only in compounds), from Proto-Germanic *dubon (cognates: Old
Saxon duba, Old Norse dufa, Swedish duva, Middle Dutch duve, Dutch duif, Old High German tuba,
German Taube, Gothic -dubo), perhaps related to words for dive, in reference to its flight.
Originally applied to all pigeons, now mostly restricted to the turtle dove. A symbol of gentleness
from early Christian times, also of the Holy Spirit (as in Gen. viii:8-12), and of peace and
deliverance from anxiety; political meaning person who advocates peace attested by 1917, from the
Christian dove of peace.


dove (v.)

past tense of dive (q.v.).


dovecote (n.)

early 15c., from dove (n.) + cote.


Dover

port in Kent, Old English Dofras (c.700), from Latin Dubris (4c.), from British Celtic *Dubras the
waters. Named for the stream that flows nearby.


dovetail

late 16c. (n.), 1650s (v.), from dove (n.) + tail. So called from resemblance of shape in the tenon
or mortise of the joints to that of the birdâ&euro;&trade;s tailfeather display. Related:
Dovetailed.


Dow Jones

short for Dow Jones Industrial Average, first published 1884 by Charles Henry Dow (1851-1902) and
Edward D. Jones (1856-1920), later publishers of The Wall Street Journal.


dowager (n.)

1520s, from Middle French douagere widow with a dower literally pertaining to a dower, from douage
dower, from douer endow, from Latin dotare, from dos (genitive dotis) dowry (see dowry).


dowdy

1580s (n.), an aukward, ill-dressed, inelegant woman [Johnson]; 1670s (adj.), perhaps a diminutive
of doue poorly dressed woman (early 14c.), of uncertain origin. The modern use of dowd (n.) is most
likely a back-formation from dowdy. If plaine or homely, wee saie she is a doudie or a slut [Barnabe
Riche, Riche his Farewell to Militarie profession, 1581].You don't have to be dowdy to be a
Christian. [Tammy Faye Bakker, Newsweek, June 8, 1987]  Related: Dowdily; dowdiness.


dowel (n.)

mid-14c., dule rim or section of a wheel, perhaps akin to Middle Low German dovel plug, tap (of a
cask). Modern meaning is first attested 1794.


dower (n.)

late 13c., from Old French doaire dower, dowry, gift (see dowry).


down (adv.)

late Old English shortened form of Old English ofdune downwards, from dune from the hill, dative of
dun hill (see down (n.2)). A sense development peculiar to English.    Used as a preposition since
c.1500. Sense of depressed mentally is attested from c.1600. Slang sense of aware, wide awake is
attested from 1812. Computer crash sense is from 1965. As a preposition from late 14c.; as an
adjective from 1560s. Down-and-out is from 1889, American English, from situation of a beaten
prizefighter. Down home (adj.) is 1931, American English; down the hatch as a toast is from 1931;
down to the wire is 1901, from horse-racing. Down time is from 1952. Down under Australia and New
Zealand attested from 1886; Down East Maine is from 1825.


down (n.1)

soft feathers, late 14c., from Old Norse dunn, perhaps ultimately from PIE root *dheu- (1) to fly
about (like dust), to rise in a cloud.


down (n.2)

Old English dun down, moor; height, hill, mountain, from Proto-Germanic *dunaz- (cognates: Middle
Dutch dunen sandy hill, Dutch duin), probably a pre-insular loan-word from Celtic [Cambridge
Dictionary of English Place-Names], in other words, borrowed at a very early period, before the
Anglo-Saxon migration, from PIE root *dheue- to close, finish, come full circle. Meaning elevated
rolling grassland is from c.1300.    The non-English Germanic words tend to mean dune, sand bank
(see dune), while the Celtic cognates tend to mean hill, citadel (compare Old Irish dun hill, hill
fort; Welsh din fortress, hill fort; and second element in place names London, Verdun, etc.). German
D&uuml;ne, French dune, Italian, Spanish duna are said to be loan-words from Dutch.


down (v.)

1560s, from down (adv.). Related: Downed; downing.


Down&#039;s Syndrome

1961, from J.L.H. Down (1828-1896), English physician; chosen as a less racist name for the
condition than earlier mongolism.


down-hearted (adj.)

also downhearted, 1774 (downheartedly is attested from 1650s), a figurative image from down (adv.) +
hearted.


down-to-earth (adj.)

also down to earth, as an adjectival phrase, attested from 1932.


downbeat

1876 (n.), in reference to downward stroke of a conductor's baton; 1952 (adj.) in figurative sense
of pessimistic, but that is probably via associations of the word down (adv.), because the beat
itself is no more pessimistic than the upbeat is optimistic.


downcast (adj.)

c.1600, from past participle of obsolete verb downcast (c.1300), from down (adv.) + cast (v.).
Literal at first; figurative sense is 1630s.


downer (n.)

1966 in sense of barbiturate; 1970 in sense of depressing person; agent noun from down (v.).


downfall (n.)

ruin, fall from high condition, c.1300, from down (adv.) + fall (v.).


downgrade (v.)

1930, from down (adv.) + grade (v.). Related: Downgraded; downgrading. As a noun, a downward slope,
from 1858.


downhill

1590s (n.); 1650s (adv.), 1727 (adj.), from down (adv.) + hill. Meaning â&euro;&oelig;a downhill
skiing raceâ&euro;? is from 1960.


Downing Street

short street in London, named for British diplomat Sir George Downing (c.1624-1684). It contains the
residence of the prime minister (at Number 10), hence its metonymic use for the British government,
attested from 1781.


download

1977 (n.), 1980 (v.), from down (adv.) + load (v.). Related: Downloaded; downloading.


downplay (v.)

de-emphasize, 1968, from down (adv.) + play (v.). Related: Downplayed; downplaying.


downpour (n.)

1811, from verbal phrase, down (adv.) + pour (v.).


downright (adv.)

c.1200, straight down, from down (adv.) + right (adj.1). Meaning thoroughly attested from c.1300.
Old English had dunrihte downwards, and inverted form right-down is attested 17c.


downscale (v.)

1945, American English, from down (adv.) + scale (v.). From 1966 as an adjective.


downside (n.)

1680s, underside, from down (adv.) + side. Meaning drawback, negative aspect is attested by 1995.


downsize (v.)

1986 in reference to companies shedding jobs; earlier (1975) in reference to U.S. automakers
building smaller cars and trucks (supposedly a coinage at General Motors), from down (adv.) + size
(v.). Related: Downsized; downsizing.


downspout (n.)

1896, from down (adv.) + spout (n.).


downstairs (adv., adj.)

1590s, from down (adv.) + stairs (see stair).


downstream (adv., adj.)

1706, from down (prep.) + stream (n.).


downtime (n.)

1952, from down (adv.) + time (n.).


downtown (n.)

1835, from down (adv.) + town. The notion is of suburbs built on heights around a city.


downtrodden (adj.)

1560s, stepped on, from down (adv.) + trodden. Figurative use, oppressed, is from 1590s.


downturn (n.)

1926 in the economic sense, from down (adv.) + turn (n.).


downward (adv.)

c.1200, from down (adv.) + -ward. Old English had aduneweard in this sense. Downwards, with
adverbial genitive, had a parallel in Old English ofduneweardes.


downy (adj.)

1570s, from down (n.1) + -y (2).


dowry (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French dowarie, Old French doaire (late 13c.) dower, dowry, gift, from
Medieval Latin dotarium, from Latin dotare to endow, portion, from dos (genitive dotis) marriage
portion, from PIE *do-ti (cognates: Sanskrit dadati, Greek didonai, Old Church Slavonic dati,
Lithuanian duoti, Armenian tam, all meaning to give), from root *do- to give (see date (n.1)).


dowse (v.)

1690s, a south England dialect word, of uncertain origin, said to have been introduced to Devon by
German miners in Elizabethan times. Related: Dowsed; dowsing.


doxology (n.)

hymn of praise, 1640s, from Medieval Latin doxologia, from Ecclesiastical Greek doxologia praise,
glory, from doxologos praising, glorifying, from doxa glory, praise (from dokein to seem good; see
decent) + logos a speaking (see lecture (n.)).


doxy (n.)

rogue's girlfriend, 1520s, slang, of unknown origin (see dell (n.2)). Liberman says it is probably
from Low German dokke doll, with the deterioration of meaning from 'sweetheart' and 'wench' to
'whore.'


doyen

early 15c., from Middle French doyen commander of ten, from Old French deien (see dean).


doyenne

1905, from fem. of French doyen (see doyen). As a type of pear, from 1731.


doze (v.)

1640s, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse dusa to doze, Danish d&oslash;se to
make dull, Swedish dialectal dusa to sleep); related to Old English dysig foolish (see dizzy). May
have existed in dialect earlier than attested date. Related: Dozed; dozing. As a noun, from 1731.


dozen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French dozaine a dozen, from doze (12c.) twelve, from Latin duodecim twelve, from
duo two + decem ten (see ten).    The Old French fem. suffix -aine is characteristically added to
cardinals to form collectives in a precise sense (exactly 12, not about 12). The dozens invective
contest (1928) originated in slave culture, the custom probably African, the word probably from
bulldoze (q.v.) in its original sense of a whipping, a thrashing.


dozy (adj.)

drowsy, 1690s, from doze + -y (2).


Dr. Pepper

soft drink, patented 1906 by the Dr. Pepper Co., Dallas, Texas, named for U.S. physician Dr. Charles
Pepper.


drab (n.)

1680s, color of natural, undyed cloth, from Middle French drap (see drape (n.)). Figurative sense is
c.1880. Apparently not related to earlier word meaning a dirty, untidy woman (1510s), a prostitute
(1520s), which seems to be connected with Irish drabog, Gaelic drabag dirty woman, and perhaps with
Low German drabbe dirt. Ultimately perhaps from PIE *dher- (1) to make muddy. Meaning small, petty
debt (the sense in dribs and drabs) is 1828, of uncertain connection to the other senses.


drachma (n.)

1570s, from Greek drakhme, an Attic coin and weight, probably originally a handful (see dram).
Earlier as dragme (late 14c.), from Old French dragme, from Medieval Latin dragma.


Draco (n.)

northern constellation representing a dragon, from Latin draco dragon (see dragon). Identified as
such since ancient times.


draconian (adj.)

1876 (earlier Draconic, implied from 1640s), from Draco, Greek statesman who laid down a code of
laws for Athens 621 B.C.E. that mandated death as punishment for minor crimes. His name seems to
mean literally sharp-sighted (see dragon).


Dracula (n.)

the vampire, from in Bram Stoker's novel (1897). It was a surname of Prince Vlad II of Wallachia
(d.1476), and means in Romanian son of Dracul, literally the dragon, from the name and emblem taken
by Vlad's father, also named Vlad, c.1431 when he joined the Order of the Dragon, founded 1418 by
Sigismund the Glorious of Hungary to defend the Christian religion from the Turks and crush heretics
and schismatics.


draft (n.)

c.1500, spelling variant of draught (q.v.) to reflect change in pronunciation. Among the senses that
have gone with this form of the word in American English, the meaning rough copy of a writing
(something drawn) is attested from 14c.; that of preliminary sketch from which a final copy is made
is from 1520s; that of flow of a current of air is from c.1770. Of beer from the 1830s, in reference
to the method of drawing it from the cask. Sense in bank draft is from 1745. The meaning a drawing
off a group for special duty is from 1703, in U.S. especially of military service; the verb in this
sense first recorded 1714. Related: Drafted; drafting.


draftee (n.)

1864, in a military context, American English, from draft + -ee.


draftsman (n.)

1660s, variant of draughtsman; also see draft.


drafty (adj.)

1580s, from draft + -y (2). Related: Draftiness.


drag (v.)

mid-15c., from Old Norse draga, or a dialectal variant of Old English dragan to draw, both
ultimately from Proto-Germanic *dragan to draw, pull, from PIE root *dhragh- to draw, drag on the
ground (cognates: Sanskrit dhrajati pulls, slides in, Russian drogi wagon; but not considered to be
directly the source of Latin trahere).    Meaning to take a puff (of a cigarette, etc.) is from
1914. Related: Dragged; dragging. Drag-out violent fight is from c.1859. To drag (one's) feet (1946,
in figurative sense) supposedly is from logging, from a lazy way to use a two-man saw.


drag (n.)

c.1300, dragnet, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish dragg grapnel) or from Old
English dr&aelig;ge dragnet, related to dragan to draw (see drag (v.)).    Sense of annoying, boring
person or thing is 1813, perhaps from the notion of something that must be dragged as an impediment.
Sense of women's clothing worn by a man is said to be 1870 theater slang, from the sensation of long
skirts trailing on the floor (another guess is Yiddish trogn to wear, from German tragen); drag
queen is from 1941.   Drag racing (1947), is said to be from thieves' slang drag automobile (1935),
perhaps ultimately from slang sense of wagon, buggy (1755), because a horse would drag it. By 1851
this was transferred to street, as in the phrase main drag (which some propose as the source of the
racing sense).    In addition to the time trials there are a number of drag races between two or
more cars. They are run, not for record, but to satisfy the desire of most Americans to see who can
get from here to there in the fastest time. [Popular Mechanics, January 1947]


draggle (v.)

1510s, frequentative of drag (v.). This led to draggle-tail sloppy woman, woman whose skirts are wet
and draggled (1590s). Related: Draggled.


dragnet (n.)

Old English dr&aelig;gnet, a net to drag the bottom of a body of water in fishing; see drag (v.) +
net (n.). Figurative use is from 1640s; police sense attested by 1894.


dragoman (n.)

early 14c., from Old French drugemen, from late Greek dragoumanos, from Arabic targuman interpreter,
from targama interpret. Treated in English as a compound, with plural -men.


dragon (n.)

early 13c., from Old French dragon, from Latin draconem (nominative draco) huge serpent, dragon,
from Greek drakon (genitive drakontos) serpent, giant seafish, apparently from drak-, strong aorist
stem of derkesthai to see clearly, from PIE *derk- to see. Perhaps the literal sense is the one with
the (deadly) glance.    The young are dragonets (14c.). Obsolete drake dragon is an older borrowing
of the same word. Used in the Bible to translate Hebrew tannin a great sea-monster, and tan, a
desert mammal now believed to be the jackal.


dragonfly (n.)

1620s, from dragon + fly (n.).


dragoon (n.)

1620s, from French dragon carbine, musket, because the guns the soldiers carried breathed fire like
a dragon (see dragon). Also see -oon.


dragoon (v.)

1680s, literally to force by the agency of dragoons (which were used by the French kings to
persecute Protestants), from dragoon (n.). Related: Dragooned; dragooning.


dragster (n.)

1954, from drag (n.) in the racing sense + -ster, perhaps abstracted from roadster.


drain (n.)

1550s, from drain (v.).


drain (v.)

Old English dreahnian to drain, strain out, from Proto-Germanic *dreug-, source of drought, dry,
giving the English word originally a sense of make dry. Figurative meaning of exhaust is attested
from 1650s. The word is not found in surviving texts between late Old English and the 1500s.
Related: Drained; draining.


drainage (n.)

1650s, from drain + -age.


drake (n.1)

male duck, c.1300, unrecorded in Old English but may have existed then, from West Germanic *drako
(cognates: Low German drake, second element of Old High German anutrehho, dialectal German Drache).


drake (n.2)

archaic for dragon, from Old English draca dragon, sea monster, huge serpent, from Proto-Germanic
*drako (cognates: Middle Dutch and Old Frisian drake, Dutch draak, Old High German trahho, German
drache), an early borrowing from Latin draco (see dragon).


dram (n.)

mid-15c., small weight of apothecary's measure, a phonetic spelling, from Anglo-Latin dragma, Old
French drame, from Late Latin dragma, from Latin drachma drachma, from Greek drakhma measure of
weight, also, silver coin, literally handful (of six obols, the least valuable coins in ancient
Athens), akin to drassesthai to grasp. The fluid dram is one-eighth of a fluid ounce, hence a small
drink of liquor (1713); Hence dram shop (1725), where liquor was sold by the shot.


drama (n.)

1510s, from Late Latin drama play, drama, from Greek drama (genitive dramatos) play, action, deed,
from dran to do, act, perform (especially some great deed, whether good or bad), from PIE *dere- to
work. Drama queen attested by 1992.


Dramamine

proprietary name of an anti-nausea drug, 1949. Said to have been originally developed as an anti-
allergy drug at Johns Hopkins.


dramatic (adj.)

1580s, from Late Latin dramaticus, from Greek dramatikos pertaining to plays, from drama (genitive
dramatos; see drama). Meaning full of action and striking display, fit for a drama is from 1725.
Dramatic irony is recorded from 1907. Related: Dramatical; dramatically.


dramatis personae

Latin for persons of a drama.


dramatist (n.)

1670s, see drama (Greek stem dramat-) + -ist.


dramatization (n.)

1796, from dramatize + -ation.


dramatize (v.)

1780s, to adopt for the stage, see drama (Greek stem dramat-) + -ize. Meaning to act out is from
1823. Related: Dramatized; dramatizing.


dramaturge (n.)

dramatist, 1870, from French dramaturge, from Greek dramatourgos a dramatist, from drama (genitive
dramatos) + ergos worker (see organ).


dramaturgy (n.)

composition and production of plays, 1801, from French dramaturgie, from Greek dramatourgia, from
drama (genitive dramatos) + ergos worker (see organ).


Drambuie (n.)

1893, proprietary name of a whiskey liqueur manufactured in Scotland.


drang nach Osten (n.)

1906, former German imperial policy of eastward expansion; literally pressure to the east.


drank

Old English dranc, singular past tense of drink. It also became past participle 17c.-19c., probably
to avoid the pejorative associations of drunk.


drape (v.)

c.1400, to ornament with cloth hangings; mid-15c., to weave into cloth, from Old French draper to
weave, make cloth (13c.), from drap cloth, piece of cloth, sheet, bandage, from Late Latin drapus,
perhaps of Gaulish origin (compare Old Irish drapih mantle, garment). Meaning to cover with drapery
is from 1847. Meaning to cause to hang or stretch out loosely or carelessly is from 1943. Related:
Draped; draping.


drape (n.)

1660s, from drape (v.). Jive talk slang for suit of clothes is attested from 1945.


draper (n.)

mid-14c. (mid-12c. as a surname), one who weaves and/or sells cloth, from Anglo-French draper, Old
French drapier (13c.) draper, clothes-seller, clothes-maker, agent noun from drap (see drape (v.)).


drapery (n.)

early 14c., cloth, textiles, from Old French draperie (12c.) weaving, cloth-making, clothes shop,
from drap (see drape (n.)). From late 14c. as place where cloth is made; cloth market. Meaning stuff
with which something is draped is 1680s.


drapes (n.)

curtains, 1895, see drape (n.).


drastic (adj.)

1690s, originally medical, forceful, vigorous, especially in effect on bowels, from Greek drastikos
effective, efficacious; active, violent, from drasteon (thing) to be done, from dran to do, act,
perform. Sense of extreme, severe is first recorded 1808. Related: Drastically.


drat

1815, disguised form of exclamation God rot (something or someone).


draught (n.)

c.1200, from Old English *dreaht, *dr&aelig;ht, related to dragan to draw, drag (see drag (v.)).
Oldest sense besides that of pulling is of drinking. It retains the functions that did not branch
off with draft (q.v.).


draughts (n.)

British name for the tabletop game that in U.S. is checkers, c.1400, from draught, perhaps because
the pieces are dragged over the board in moves. Earlier it is recorded as jeu de dames (late 14c.).


draughtsman (n.)

1660s, from genitive of draught + man (n.).


draughty (adj.)

1846, from draught + -y (2).


Dravidian (adj.)

1856, pertaining to the race in southern India or the languages spoken by them, from Sanskrit
Dravidah, name of a region in southern India, + -ian.


draw (v.)

c.1200, spelling alteration of Old English dragan to drag, to draw, protract (class VI strong verb;
past tense drog, past participle dragen), from Proto-Germanic *dragan to draw, pull (cognates: Old
Norse draga to draw, Old Saxon dragan, Old Frisian draga, Middle Dutch draghen, Old High German
tragen, German tragen to carry, bear), from PIE root *dhragh- (see drag (v.)).    Sense of make a
line or figure (by drawing a pencil across paper) is c.1200. Meaning pull out a weapon is c.1200. To
draw a criminal (drag him from a horse to place of execution) is from early 14c. To draw a blank
come up with nothing (1825) is an image from lotteries. As a noun, from 1660s; colloquial sense of
anything that can draw a crowd is from 1881 (the verb in this sense is 1580s).


draw (n.)

game or contest that ends without a winner, attested first in drawn match (1610s), of uncertain
origin; some speculate it is from withdraw. Draw-game is from 1825. As a verb, to leave undecided,
from 1837.


drawback (n.)

hindrance, disadvantage,1720, from draw (v.) + back (adv.). The notion is of something that holds
back success or activity.


drawbridge (n.)

14c., from draw (v.) + bridge (n.).


drawdown (n.)

of troops, by 1991, in reference to the end of the Cold War; from draw (v.) + down (adv.). Earlier
of wells (c.1900).


drawer (n.)

mid-14c., agent noun from draw (v.). Attested from 1570s in sense of a box that can be drawn out of
a cabinet.


drawers (n.)

1560s, garments that are pulled (or drawn) on; see draw (v.).


drawing (n.)

c.1300, a pulling, in various senses, verbal noun from draw (v.). The picture-making sense is from
1520s; of the picture itself from 1660s. Drawing board is from 1725; used in figurative expression
from mid-20c.


drawing room

1640s, short for withdrawing room (see withdraw), into which ladies would go after dinner.


drawl (v.)

1590s, perhaps from Middle Dutch dralen, East Frisian draulen to linger, delay, apparently an
intensive of the root of draw (v.). Or else a native formation along the same lines. Related:
Drawled; drawling. As a noun from 1760.


drawn

c.1200, from Old English dragen, past participle of draw (v.).


dray (n.)

mid-14c., Middle English noun derivative of Old English dragan to draw, originally meaning a cart
without wheels that has to be dragged (compare Old Norse draga timber dragged behind a horse); see
drag (v.).


drayage (n.)

1791, conveyance by dray, from dray + -age. Later also in reference to the fee for such.


drayman (n.)

1580s, from dray + man (n.).


dread (v.)

late 12c., a shortening of Old English adr&aelig;dan, contraction of ondr&aelig;dan counsel or
advise against, also to dread, fear, be afraid, from on- against + r&aelig;dan to advise (see read
(v.)). Cognate of Old Saxon andradon, Old High German intraten. Related: Dreaded; dreading. As a
noun from 12c.


dreadful (adj.)

early 13c., full of dread, from dread (n.) + -ful. Meaning causing dread is from mid-13c.; weakened
sense of very bad is from c.1700. Related: Dreadfully.


dreadlocks (n.)

1960, from dread + locks (see lock (n.2)). The style supposedly based on that of East African
warriors. So called from the dread they presumably aroused in beholders, but Rastafarian dread
(1974) also has a sense of fear of the Lord, expressed in part as alienation from contemporary
society.


Dreadnought (n.)

battleship, literally fearing nothing, from dread (v.) + nought (n.). Mentioned as the name of a
ship in the Royal Navy c.1596, but modern sense is from the name of the first of a new class of
British battleships mainly armed with big guns of one caliber, launched Feb. 18, 1906.


dreads (n.)

see dreadlocks.


dream (n.)

mid-13c. in the sense sequence of sensations passing through a sleeping person's mind (also as a
verb), probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish dr&oslash;m, Swedish dr&ouml;m, Old Saxon drom
merriment, noise, Old Frisian dram dream, Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German traum dream,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *draugmas deception, illusion, phantasm (cognates: Old Saxon bidriogan,
Old High German triogan, German tr&uuml;gen to deceive, delude, Old Norse draugr ghost, apparition).
Possible cognates outside Germanic are Sanskrit druh- seek to harm, injure, Avestan druz- lie,
deceive.    But Old English dream meant only joy, mirth, noisy merriment, also music. And much study
has failed to prove that Old English dream is the root of the modern word for sleeping vision,
despite being identical in spelling. Either the meaning of the word changed dramatically or vision
was an unrecorded secondary Old English meaning of dream, or there are two separate words here. OED
offers this theory: It seems as if the presence of dream 'joy, mirth, music,' had caused dream
'dream' to be avoided, at least in literature, and swefn, lit. 'sleep,' to be substituted ....
Words for sleeping vision in Old English were m&aelig;ting and swefn. Old English swefn originally
meant sleep, as did a great many Indo-European dream nouns, such as Lithuanian sapnas, Old Church
Slavonic sunu, and the Romanic words (French songe, Spanish sue&#241;o, Italian sogno all from Latin
somnium (from PIE *swep-no-; cognate with Greek hypnos; see somnolence; Old English swefn is from
the same root). Dream in the sense of ideal or aspiration is from 1931, from earlier sense of
something of dream-like beauty or charm (1888).


dream (v.)

c.1200 in the current sense, from dream (n.). Old English verb dremen meant rejoice; play music.
Related: Dreamed; dreaming.


dreamboat (n.)

romantically desirable person, 1947, from dream (n.) + boat (n.). When My Dream Boat Comes Home was
the title of a 1936 song credited to Guy Lombardo.


dreamer (n.)

c.1300, one who dreams, agent noun from dream (v.). Meaning idler, daydreamer emerged by 1530s. Old
English dreamere meant musician.


dreamland (n.)

1834, from dream (n.) + land (n.).


dreamless (adj.)

c.1600, from dream (n.) + -less. Old English dreamleas meant joyless. Related: Dreamlessly;
dreamlessness.


dreamscape (n.)

1959, from dream + second element abstracted from landscape, etc. First attested in a Sylvia Plath
poem.


dreamt

alternative past tense and past participle of dream (v.).


dreamy (adj.)

1560s, full of dreams, from dream + -y (2). Meaning perfect, ideal, attested from 1941, American
English teen slang. Compare dreamboat romantically desirable person; dream girl (1903).


drear (adj.)

1620s, poetic shortening of dreary.


dreariness (n.)

Old English dreorinysse; see dreary + -ness.


dreary (adj.)

Old English dreorig sad, sorrowful, originally cruel, bloody, blood-stained, from dreor gore, blood,
from (ge)dreosan (past participle droren) fall, decline, fail, from Proto-Germanic *dreuzas
(cognates: Old Norse dreyrigr gory, bloody, and more remotely, German traurig sad, sorrowful), from
PIE root *dhreu- to fall, flow, drip, droop (see drip (v.)).    The word has lost its original sense
of dripping blood. Sense of dismal, gloomy first recorded 1667 in Paradise Lost, but Old English had
a related verb drysmian become gloomy.


dreck (n.)

filth, trash, 1922, from Yiddish drek (German dreck), from Middle High German drec, from Proto-
Germanic *threkka (cognates: Old English &thorn;reax rubbish, Old Frisian threkk), perhaps connected
to Greek skatos dung, Latin stercus excrement, from PIE root *(s)ker- to cut (see shear (v.)).


dredge (n.)

late 15c., in Scottish dreg-boat boat for dredging, perhaps ultimately from root of drag (possibly
via Middle Dutch dregghe drag-net). The verb is attested from c.1500 in Scottish. Related: Dredged;
dredging.


dredger (n.)

c.1500, agent noun from dredge (v.).


dree (v.)

Old English dreogan to work, suffer, endure; see drudge. Cognate of Old Norse drygjado carry out,
accomplish, Gothic driugan serve as a soldier.


dreg (n.)

see dregs.


dregs (n.)

c.1300 (implied in surname Dryngedregges), from Old Norse dregg sediment, from Proto-Germanic *drag-
(cognates: Old High German trestir, German Trester grapeskins, husks), from PIE *dher- (1) to make
muddy. Replaced Old English cognate dr&aelig;st, d&aelig;rst dregs, lees. Figurative use is from
1530s.


drek

see dreck.


drench (v.)

c.1200, to submerge, drown, from Old English drencan give drink to, ply with drink, make drunk;
soak, saturate; submerge, drown, causative of drincan to drink (see drink), from Proto-Germanic
*drankijan (cognates: Old Norse drekkja, Swedish dr&auml;nka, Dutch drenken, German tr&auml;nken,
Gothic dragkjan to give to drink). Sense of to wet thoroughly by throwing liquid over is from
c.1550. Related: Drenched; drenching.


dress (v.)

early 14c., make straight; direct, guide, control, prepare for cooking, from Old French dresser,
drecier raise (oneself), address, prepare, lift, raise, hoist, set up, arrange, set (a table), serve
(food), straighten, put right, direct, from Vulgar Latin *directiare, from Latin directus direct,
straight (see direct (v.)).    Sense of decorate, adorn is late 14c., as is that of put on clothing.
Original sense survives in military meaning align columns of troops. Dress up attire elaborately is
from 1670s; dressing down wearing clothes less formal than expected is from 1960. To dress (someone)
down (1769) is ironical. Related: Dressed; dressing.


dress (n.)

c.1600, originally any clothing, especially that appropriate to rank or to some ceremony; sense of
woman's garment is first recorded 1630s, with overtones of made not merely to clothe but to adorn.
Dress rehearsal first recorded 1828.


dressage (n.)

1936, from French dressage, from dresser to train, drill (see dress (v.)). Middle English had dress
(v.) in the sense of to train or break in a horse or other animal (c.1400), but it died out.


dresser (n.)

c.1300, person who prepares or furnishes, agent noun from dress (v.). Meaning table, sideboard, is
late 14c., from Old French dresseur, dre&ccedil;oir table to prepare food, from dresser prepare,
dress. Meaning chest, dressing bureau is from 1895.


dressing (n.)

mid-14c., verbal noun from dress (v.). Sense in cookery is from c.1500. Meaning bandage is first
recorded 1713. Dressing gown attested from 1777; dressing room from 1670s.


dressy (adj.)

1760s, from dress (v.) + -y (2).  For as her natural face decays, her skill improves in making the
artificial one. Well, nothing diverts me more than one of those fine, old, dressy things, who thinks
to conceal her age by everywhere exposing her person; sticking herself up in the front of a side-
box; trailing through a minuet at Almack's; and then, in the public gardens looking, for all the
world, like one of the painted ruins of the place. [Goldsmith, The Good Natured Man, 1768].


drew

Old English dreow, past tense of draw (v.).


drib (n.)

drop, c.1730, Scottish, perhaps from dribble.


dribble (v.)

1580s, frequentative of obsolete verb drib (1520s), variant of drip (v.). Sports sense first used of
soccer (1863), basketball sense is by 1892 (implied in dribbling). Related: Dribbled; dribbling. As
a noun from 1670s.


driblet (n.)

1590s, diminutive of drib (n.).


drier (n.)

see dry (v.).


drift (n.)

c.1300, literally a being driven (of snow, etc.); not recorded in Old English; either a suffixed
form of drive (v.) (compare thrift/thrive) or borrowed from Old Norse drift snow drift, or Middle
Dutch drift pasturage, drove, flock, both from Proto-Germanic *driftiz (cognates: Danish and Swedish
drift, German Trift), from PIE root *dhreibh- to drive, push (see drive (v.)). Sense of what one is
getting at is from 1520s. Meaning controlled slide of a sports car attested by 1955.


drift (v.)

late 16c., from drift (n.). Figurative sense of be passive and listless is from 1822. Related:
Drifted; drifting.


drifter (n.)

1864, as a mining term; 1883, boat fishing with drift-nets; agent noun from drift (v.). Meaning
vagrant is from 1908.


driftwood (n.)

1630s, from drift (v.) + wood (n.).


drill (n.1)

tool for making holes, 1610s, from Dutch dril, drille a hole, instrument for boring holes, from
drillen to bore (a hole), turn around, whirl (see drill (v.)).


drill (n.2)

small furrow, 1727; also machine for sowing seeds (1731), from obsolete drill rill, trickling stream
(1640s), of unknown origin; perhaps connected to drill (n.1).


drill (n.4)

West African baboon species, 1640s, perhaps from a native word (compare mandrill).


drill (n.3)

kind of coarse, twilled cloth, 1743, from French drill, from German drillich heavy, coarse cotton or
linen fabric, from Old High German adjective drilich threefold, from Latin trilix (genitive
trilicis) triply twilled (see trellis). So called in reference to the method of weaving it.


drill (v.)

c.1600 (implied in drilling), from Dutch drillen to bore (a hole), turn around, whirl, from Proto-
Germanic *thr- (cognates: Middle High German drillen to turn, round off, bore, Old Engish
&thorn;yrel hole), from PIE *tere- (1) to turn, rub (see throw (v.)). Sense of to instruct in
military exercise is 1620s (also in Dutch drillen and in the Danish and German cognates), probably
from the notion of troops turning in maneuvers. Extended noun sense of the agreed-upon procedure is
from 1940. Related: Drilled.


drink (v.)

Old English drincan to drink, also to swallow up, engulf (class III strong verb; past tense dranc,
past participle druncen), from Proto-Germanic *drenkan (cognates: Old Saxon drinkan, Old Frisian
drinka, Dutch drinken, Old High German trinkan, German trinken, Old Norse drekka, Gothic drigkan to
drink), of uncertain origin or connections, perhaps from a root meaning to draw.    Most Indo-
European words for this trace to PIE *po(i)- (source of Greek pino, Latin biber, Irish ibim, Old
Church Slavonic piti, Russian pit'; see imbibe).    The noun meaning beverage, alcoholic beverage
was in late Old English.  The noun, AS. drinc, would normally have given southern drinch (cf.
drench), but has been influenced by the verb. [Weekley]    To drink like a fish is first recorded
1747.


drinker (n.)

Old English drincere, agent noun from drink (v.). Specifically of consumers of alcoholic beverages
from c.1200.


drinking (n.)

c.1200, drinkinge, verbal noun from drink (v.). Drinking problem alcoholism is from 1957; earlier
was drinking habit (1899).


drip (n.)

mid-15c., from drip (v.). The slang meaning stupid, feeble, or dull person is first recorded 1932,
perhaps from earlier American English slang sense nonsense (1919).


drip (v.)

c.1300, perhaps from Middle Danish drippe, from Proto-Germanic *drup- (cognates: Dutch druipen,
German triefen), from PIE root *dhreu-. Related to droop and drop. Old English had cognate drypan to
let drop, dropian fall in drops, and dreopan to drop. Related: Dripped; dripping.


drippy (adj.)

1817, from drip + -y (2). Meaning sloppily sentimental is 1944, from the slang sense.


drive (n.)

1690s, act of driving, from drive (v.). Meaning excursion by vehicle is from 1785. Golfing sense of
forcible blow is from 1836. Meaning organized effort to raise money is 1889, American English. Sense
of dynamism is from 1908. In the computing sense, first attested 1963.


drive (v.)

Old English drifan to drive, force, hunt, pursue; rush against (class I strong verb; past tense
draf, past participle drifen), from Proto-Germanic *driban (cognates: Old Frisian driva, Old Saxon
driban, Dutch drijven, Old High German triban, German treiben, Old Norse drifa, Gothic dreiban to
drive), from PIE root *dhreibh- to drive, push. Original sense of pushing from behind, altered in
Modern English by application to automobiles. Related: Driving.  MILLER: The more you drive, the
less intelligent you are. [Repo Man, 1984]


drive-by (adj.)

as a modifier, by 1989 (originally of shootings), from drive (v.) + by.


drive-in (adj.)

in reference to of restaurants, banks, etc., 1929; from drive (v.) + in. Of movie theaters by 1933
(the year the first one opened, in Camden, N.J.).


drive-through (adj.)

1949 (in an advertisement for the Beer Vault Drive-Thru in Ann Arbor, Michigan), from drive (v.) +
through.


drivel (n.)

early 14c., drevel saliva, slaver, from drivel (v.). Meaning idiotic speech or writing is from 1852.


drivel (v.)

Old English dreflian to dribble or run at the nose, slobber, from Proto-Germanic *drab-, from PIE
*dher- (1) to make muddy, darken. Meaning to speak nonsense is mid-14c. Related: Driveling,
drivelling.


driven (adj.)

motivated, by 1972, past participle adjective from drive (v.).


driver (n.)

one who drives in various senses, c.1400; agent noun from drive (v.). Slavery sense is attested by
1796. Driver's seat is attested by 1867; figurative use by 1954.


driveway (n.)

1884 in sense private road from a public road to a private house, from drive (v.) + way (n.).


drizzle (v.)

1540s, perhaps an alteration of drysning a falling of dew (c.1400), from Old English -drysnian,
related to dreosan to fall, from PIE root *dhreu- (see drip (v.)). Or perhaps a frequentative of
Middle English dresen to fall, from Old English dreosan. Related: Drizzled; drizzling. As a noun,
from 1550s.


droid (n.)

1977, short for android.


droit du seigneur (n.)

1784, alleged medieval custom whereby the feudal lord had the right to have sex with the bride of
his vassal on their wedding night before she went to her husband, from French, literally the lord's
right. There is little evidence that it actually existed; it seems to have been invented in
imagination 16c. or 17c. The Latin form was jus primae noctis, law of the first night. For French
droit, see right (adj.2).


droll (adj.)

1620s, from French dr&ocirc;le odd, comical, funny (1580s), in Middle French a noun meaning a merry
fellow, possibly from Middle Dutch drol fat little fellow, goblin, or Middle High German trolle
clown, ultimately from Old Norse troll giant, troll (see troll (n.)). Related: Drolly; drollish.


drollery (n.)

1590s, from French dr&ocirc;lerie (16c.), from dr&ocirc;le (see droll).


dromedary (n.)

late 13c., from Old French dromedaire, from Late Latin dromedarius kind of camel, from Latin dromas
(genitive dromados), from Greek dromas kamelos running camel, from dromos a race course, from PIE
*drem-, from possible base *der- to run, walk, step (cognates: Sanskrit dramati runs, goes, Greek
dromas running, Middle High German tremen to rock, shake, sway). One-humped Arabian camels were bred
and trained for riding. An early variant was drumbledairy (1560s).


drone (n.)

Old English dran, dr&aelig;n male honeybee, from Proto-Germanic *dran- (cognates: Middle Dutch
drane; Old High German treno; German Drohne, which is from Middle Low German drone), probably
imitative; given a figurative sense of idler, lazy worker (male bees make no honey) 1520s. Meaning
pilotless aircraft is from 1946.    Drones, as the radio-controlled craft are called, have many
potentialities, civilian and military. Some day huge mother ships may guide fleets of long-distance,
cargo-carrying airplanes across continents and oceans. Long-range drones armed with atomic bombs
could be flown by accompanying mother ships to their targets and in for perfect hits. [Popular
Science, November, 1946]    Meaning deep, continuous humming sound is early 16c., apparently
imitative (compare threnody). The verb in the sound sense is early 16c.; it often is the
characteristic sound of airplane engines. Related: Droned; droning.


droog (n.)

gang member, young ruffian, a transliteration of the Russian word for friend, introduced by English
novelist Anthony Burgess in A Clockwork Orange (1962). The Russian word comes from Old Church
Slavonic drugu companion, friend, other (source of Bohemian drug companion, Serbo-Croatian drugi
other), which belongs to a group of related Indo-European words (such as Lithuanian draugas friend,
traveling companion; Gothic driugan do military service, ga-drauhts soldier; Old Norse drott, Old
English dryht, Old High German truht multitude, people, army) apparently with an original sense of
companion.


drool (v.)

1802, apparently a dialectal variant or contraction of drivel. Related: Drooled; drooling. The noun
is from 1860s.


droop (v.)

early 13c., from Old Norse drupa to drop, sink, hang (the head), from Proto-Germanic *drup-, from
PIE *dhreu-, related to Old English dropian to drop (see drip). Related: Drooped; drooping. As a
noun, from 1640s.


droopy (adj.)

dejected, sad, gloomy, early 13c., drupie, perhaps from droop, perhaps from Old Norse drupr drooping
spirits, faintness.


drop (n.)

Old English dropa a drop of liquid, from Proto-Germanic *drupon (cognates: Old Saxon dropo, Old
Norse dropi, Dutch drop, Old High German tropfo, German Tropfen (n.)), from PIE *dhreu-.    Meaning
an act of dropping is from 1630s; of immaterial things (prices, temperatures, etc.) from mid-19c.
Meaning lozenge, hard candy is 1723. Meaning secret place where things can be left illicitly and
picked up later is from 1931.   Drop in the bucket (late 14c.) is from Isa. ix:15 [KJV]. At the drop
of a hat suddenly is from 1854; drop-in casual visit is 1819; drop-kick is 1857. To get the drop on
someone originally was Old West gunslinger slang (1869).


drop (v.)

Old English dropian to fall in drops (see drop (n.)). Meaning to fall vertically is late 14c.
Transitive sense allow to fall is mid-14c. Related: Dropped; dropping. Exclamation drop dead is from
1934; as an adjective meaning stunning, excellent it is first recorded 1970.


droplet (n.)

c.1600, from drop (n.) + diminutive suffix -let.


dropout (n.)

one who 'drops out' of something, 1930, from drop (v.) + out (adv.). As a phrase, drop out withdraw
is recorded from 1550s.


dropper (n.)

1700, distiller, agent noun from drop (v.). Meaning small tube from which liquid may be made to fall
in drops is from 1889.


dropsical (adj.)

1680s; see dropsy + -ical.


dropsy (n.)

late 13c., a shortening of Middle English ydropsy, from Old French idropsie, from Latin hydropsis,
from Greek hydrops (genitive hydropos) dropsy, from hydor water (see water (n.1)).


drosophila (n.)

scientific name of a fruit fly, 1829, from Modern Latin (Fall&eacute;n, 1823), from Greek drosos dew
+ philos loving see -phile).


dross (n.)

dirt, dregs, Old English dros the scum thrown off from metals in smelting, from Proto-Germanic
*drohs- (cognates: Middle Dutch droes, Dutch droesem, Middle Low German dros, Old High German
truosana, German Drusen dregs, husks), from PIE dher- (1) to make muddy. Meaning refuse, rubbish is
mid-15c.


drought (n.)

Old English druga&eth;, drugo&eth; drought, dryness, desert, from Proto-Germanic *drugothaz, from
Germanic root *dreug- dry (cf high/height) with *-itho, Germanic suffix for forming abstract nouns
(see -th (2)). Drouth was a Middle English variant continued in Scottish and northern English
dialect and in poetry.


drove (n.)

Old English draf beasts driven in a body, road along which cattle are driven, originally act of
driving, from drifan to drive (see drive (v.)).


drove

Old English draf, past tense and obsolete past participle of drive (v.).


drover (n.)

early 15c. (late 13c. as a surname), agent noun from drove (n.).


droves (n.)

see drove.


drown (v.)

c.1300, transitive  and intransitive, perhaps from an unrecorded derivative word of Old English
druncnian (Middle English druncnen) be swallowed up by water (originally of ships as well as living
things), probably from the base of drincan to drink.    Modern form is from northern England
dialect, probably influenced by Old Norse drukna be drowned. Related: Drowned; drowning.


drowse (v.)

1570s, probably a back-formation from drowsy. Old English had a similar word, but there is a
600-year gap. Related: Drowsed; drowsing.


drowsy (adj.)

1520s, probably ultimately from Old English drusan, drusian sink, also become languid, slow, or
inactive (related to dreosan to fall), from Proto-Germanic *drus- (see dreary). But there is no
record of it in Middle English. Related: Drowsily; drowsiness.


drub (v.)

1630s (in an Oriental travel narrative), probably from Arabic darb a beating, from daraba he beat up
(see discussion in OED). Related: Drubbed; Drubbing.


drudge (n.)

late 15c., one employed in mean, servile, or distasteful work, missing in Old English and Middle
English, unless it is represented by Middle English druggen do menial or monotonous work; druggunge,
mid-13c., which are perhaps from Old English dreogan to work, suffer, endure (see endure). The verb
is from 1540s. Related: Drudged; drudging. The surname is from 13c., probably from Old French dragie
a mixture of grains sown together, thus, a grower of this crop.


drudgery (n.)

1540s, from drudge + -ery.


drug (n.)

late 14c. (early 14c. in Anglo-French), medicine, chemical ingredients, from Old French droge
supply, stock, provision (14c.), of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German
droge-vate dry barrels, or droge waere, literally dry wares, but specifically drugs and spices, with
first element mistaken as word for the contents (see dry goods), or because medicines mostly
consisted of dried herbs.    Compare Latin species, in Late Latin wares, then specialized to spices
(French &eacute;pice, English spice). The same source produced Italian and Spanish droga, Swedish
drog.    Application to narcotics and opiates is late 19c., though association with poisons is
1500s. Druggie first recorded 1968. To be a drug on or in the market (mid-17c.) is of doubtful
connection and may be a different word, perhaps a play on drag, which was sometimes drug
c.1240-1800.


drug (v.)

c.1600, from drug (n.). Related: drugged; drugging.


drug store (n.)

also drug-store, 1810, American English, from drug (n.) + store (n.). Drug-store cowboy is 1925,
American English slang, originally one who dressed like a Westerner but obviously wasn't.


druggist (n.)

1610s, from French droguiste, from droge (see drug (n.)). Earlier drugger (1590s).


drugs (n.)

narcotics, opiates, etc., 1883, from drug (n.).


Druid (n.)

1560s, from French druide, from Latin druidae (plural), from Gaulish Druides, from Celtic compound
*dru-wid-, probably representing Old Celtic *derwos true/PIE *dru- tree (especially oak; see tree
(n.)) + *wid- to know (see vision). Hence, literally, perhaps, they who know the oak (perhaps in
allusion to divination from mistletoe). Anglo-Saxon, too, used identical words to mean tree and
truth (treow).    The English form comes via Latin, not immediately from Celtic. The Old Irish form
was drui (dative and accusative druid; plural druad); Modern Irish and Gaelic draoi, genitive druadh
magician, sorcerer. Not to be confused with United Ancient Order of Druids, secret benefit society
founded in London 1781.


Druidess (n.)

1755, from Druid + -ess. Formerly, Druid had been used indifferently of both sexes.


Druidic (adj.)

1773, from Druid + -ic. Related: Druidical.


drum (n.)

1540s, probably from Middle Dutch tromme drum, common Germanic (compare German Trommel, Danish
tromme, Swedish trumma), probably of imitative origin. Not common before 1570s. Slightly older, and
more common at first, was drumslade, apparently from Dutch or Low German trommelslag. Machinery
sense attested from 1740, from similarity of shape.


drum (v.)

1570s, from drum (n.). To drum (up) business, etc., is American English 1839, from the old way of
drawing a crowd.


drumlin (n.)

1833, diminutive of drum (1725) ridge or long, narrow hill, often separating two parallel valleys,
from Gaelic and Irish druim back, ridge.


drummer (n.)

1570s, agent noun from drum (v.).


Drummond light (n.)

torch that burns calcium oxide (lime) and gives off intense white light, 1854, named for Scottish
engineer Capt. Thomas Drummond, R.E., (1797-1840), who invented it c.1825.


drumstick (n.)

1580s, from drum (n.) + stick (n.); applied to the lower joint of cooked fowl 1764.


drunk (adj.)

past participle of drink, used as an adjective from mid-14c. in sense intoxicated. In various
expressions, such as drunk as a lord (1891); Chaucer has dronke ... as a Mous (c.1386); and, from
1709, as Drunk as a Wheelbarrow. Medieval folklore distinguished four successive stages of
drunkenness, based on the animals they made men resemble: sheep, lion, ape, sow. Drunk driver first
recorded 1948. Drunk-tank jail cell for drunkards attested by 1912, American English. The noun
meaning drunken person is from 1852; earlier this would have been a drunkard.


drunkard (n.)

1520s, droncarde, but probably older (attested from late 13c. as a surname, Druncard), from Middle
English dronken, participial adjective from drunk (q.v.), + -ard.


drunken (adj.)

full form of the past participle of drunk. Meaning inebriated was in Old English druncena;
adjectival meaning habitually intoxicated is from 1540s. Related: Drunkenly.


drunkenness (n.)

Old English druncennysse; see drunken + -ness.


drupe (n.)

1753, from Modern Latin drupa stone-fruit, from Latin drupa (oliva) wrinkled olive, from Greek
dryppa, short for drypepes tree-ripened, from drys tree + pepon ripe (see pumpkin).


Druse

member of a Muslim sect centered in Lebanon, 1786, from Arabic duruz, plural of darazi, from name of
the sect founder, Ismail ad-Darazi (11c.), literally Ismail the Tailor.


Drusilla

fem. proper name, Latin fem. diminutive of Drusus, frequent surname in Livian gens, earlier Drausus,
perhaps a Celtic word meaning literally strong (compare Old Celtic *dru- oak, also strong; see
Druid).


druthers (n.)

1895, from jocular formation based on I'd ruther, American English dialectal form of I'd rather
(used by Bret Harte as drathers, 1875).


dry (adj.)

Old English dryge, from Proto-Germanic *draugiz (cognates: Middle Low German dr&ouml;ge, Middle
Dutch druge, Dutch droog, Old High German trucchon, German trocken, Old Norse draugr), from Germanic
root *dreug- dry.    Meaning barren is mid-14c. Of humor or jests, early 15c. (implied in dryly); as
uninteresting, tedious from 1620s. Of places prohibiting alcoholic drink, 1870 (but dry feast, one
at which no liquor is served, is from late 15c.; colloquial dry (n.) prohibitionist is 1888,
American English). Dry goods (1708) were those measured out in dry, not liquid, measure. Dry land
(that not under the sea) is from early 13c. Dry run is from 1940s.


dry (v.)

Old English drygan, related to dry (adj.). Related: Dried; drying. Of the two agent noun spellings,
drier is the older (1520s), while dryer (1874) was first used of machines. Dry out in the drug
addiction sense is from 1967. Dry up stop talking is 1853.


dryad (n.)

1550s, from Latin dryas, from Greek dryas (plural dryades) wood nymph, from drus (genitive dryos)
oak, from PIE *deru- tree, wood, oak (see tree (n.)).


dryer (n.)

agent noun from dry (v.).


du jour (adj.)

from French plat du jour dish of the day, early 20c. on restaurant menus, abstracted as an all-
purpose modifier 1989.


dual (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin dualis, from duo two (see two). Related: Dually.


dualism (n.)

1755 as a term in philosophy, from French dualisme (1754); also used in theological senses; see dual
+ -ism.


dualistic (adj.)

1801, from stem of dualism + -istic.


duality (n.)

late 14c., from Old French dualit&eacute; (14c.), from Late Latin dualitas, from Latin dualis (see
dual).


dub (v.1)

give a name to, originally make a knight, from late Old English dubbian knight by striking with a
sword (11c.), a late word, perhaps borrowed from Old French aduber equip with arms, adorn (11c.) of
uncertain origin, but there are phonetic difficulties. Meaning provided with a name is from 1590s.
Related: Dubbed; dubbing.


dub (v.2)

add or alter sound on film, 1929, shortening of double; so called because it involves re-recording
voices onto a soundtrack. The type of re-mixed reggae music was so called from 1974, probably for
the same reason. Related: Dubbed; dubbing.


Dubai

Gulf coast emirate, of uncertain origin.


dubiety (n.)

c.1750, from Late Latin dubietas doubt, uncertainty, from dubius (see dubious).


dubious (adj.)

1540s, from Latin dubiosus doubtful, from dubium doubt, neuter of dubius vacillating, moving two
ways, fluctuating; figuratively wavering in opinion, doubting, doubtful, from duo two (see two),
with a sense of of two minds, undecided between two things. Old English also used tweo two to mean
doubt. Compare doubt (v.). Related: Dubiously; dubiousness.


dubitation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French dubitation (13c.), from Latin dubitationem (nominative dubitatio)
uncertainty, doubt, noun of state from past participle stem of dubitare to waver in opinion, be
uncertain, doubt, question (related to dubius uncertain; see dubious).


Dublin

capital of Ireland, literally black pool, from Irish dubh black + linn pool. In reference to the
dark waters of the River Liffey.


Dubonnet (n.)

sweet French aperitif, 1913, trademark name, from the name of a family of French wine merchants.


ducal (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French ducal (15c.), from Late Latin ducalis, from Latin dux (genitive
ducis); see duke (n.).


ducat (n.)

late 14c., from Old French ducat (late 14c.), from Italian ducato (12c.), from Medieval Latin
ducatus coin, originally duchy, from dux (genitive ducis) duke (see duke (n.)).    So called for the
name or effigy of Roger II of Sicily, Duke of Apulia, which first issued the coins (c.1140).
Byzantine emperor Constantine X had the Greek form doux struck on his coins during his reign
(1059-1067). Over the years it was a unit of currency of varying value in Holland, Russia, Austria,
Sweden, Venice, etc. Remained popular in slang for money or ticket from its prominence in The
Merchant of Venice.


Duce (n.)

1923, title assumed by Benito Mussolini (1883-1945); Italian, literally leader, from Latin ducem
(see duke (n.)).


duchess (n.)

c.1300, from Old French duchesse, from Late Latin or Medieval Latin ducissa, fem. of dux (see duke
(n.)). Often spelled dutchess until early 19c. (as in Dutchess County, New York, U.S.).


duchy (n.)

mid-14c., territory ruled by a duke or duchess, from Old French duch&eacute; (12c.), from Medieval
Latin ducatus, from Latin dux (see duke (n.)).


duck (n.1)

waterfowl, Old English duce (found only in genitive ducan) a duck, literally a ducker, presumed to
be from Old English *ducan to duck, dive (see duck (v.)). Replaced Old English ened as the name for
the bird, this being from PIE *aneti-, the root of the duck noun in most Indo-European languages.
In the domestic state the females greatly exceed in number, hence duck serves at once as the name of
the female and of the race, drake being a specific term of sex. [OED]    As a term of endearment,
attested from 1580s. duck-walk is 1930s; duck soup anything easily done is by 1899. Duck's ass
haircut is from 1951. Ducks-and-drakes, skipping flat stones on water, is from 1580s; the figurative
sense of throwing something away recklessly is c.1600.


duck (n.2)

strong, untwilled linen (later cotton) fabric, used for sails and sailors' clothing, 1630s, from
Dutch doeck linen cloth (Middle Dutch doec), related to German Tuch piece of cloth, Danish dug, Old
Frisian dok, Old High German tuoh, all of unknown origin.


duck (v.)

to plunge into (transitive), c.1300; to suddenly go under water (intransitive), mid-14c., from
presumed Old English *ducan to duck, found only in derivative duce (n.) duck (but there are cognate
words in other Germanic languages, such as Old High German tuhhan to dip, German tauchen to dive,
Old Frisian duka, Middle Dutch duken to dip, dive, Dutch duiken), from Proto-Germanic *dukjan.
Sense of bend, stoop quickly is first recorded in English 1520s. Related: Ducked; ducking. The noun
is attested from 1550s in the sense of quick stoop; meaning a plunge, dip is from 1843.


duckling (n.)

mid-15c., dookelynge, from duck (n.) + -ling. The ugly duckling is from Hans Christian Andersen's
tale (1843 in Danish, by 1846 in English).


ducky (adj.)

excellent, slang from 1897 (often ironical),perhaps from duckie as a term of endearment (early
19c.). Probably not related to much earlier slang noun meaning a woman's breast [...whose pritty
duckys I trust shortly to kysse, Henry VIII, c.1536 letter to Anne Boleyn, who, contrary to rumor,
did not have three of them].


duct (n.)

1640s, course, direction, from Latin ductus a leading, past participle of ducere to lead (see duke
(n.)). Anatomical sense is from 1660s. Meaning conduit, channel is 1713; that of air tube in a
structure is from 1884.


duct tape

by 1943; see duct (here in the electrical wiring sense) + tape.


ductile (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French ductile or directly from Latin ductilis that may be led or drawn, from
past participle of ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Related: Ductility.


dud (n.)

c.1825, person in ragged clothing, from duds (q.v.). Sense extended by 1897 to counterfeit thing,
and 1908 to useless, inefficient person or thing. This led naturally in World War I to shell which
fails to explode, and thence to expensive failure.


dude (n.)

1883, fastidious man, New York City slang of unknown origin; recent research suggests it is a
shortening of Yankee Doodle, based on the song's notion of foppish, over-fastidious male (compare
macaroni). The vogue word of 1883, originally used in reference to the devotees of the aesthetic
craze, later applied to city slickers, especially Easterners vacationing in the West (as in dude
ranch, first recorded 1921).    Now, tenderfoot is not to be construed as the Western equivalent of
that much evolved and more abused specimen of mankind, familiarly styled dude. For even the Montana
cowboy recognizes the latter. Not that he has ever seen the true prototype of a class that was
erstwhile so numerous among us. But he is convinced that a person caught in the act of wearing a
white linen collar, and who looks as though he might have recently shaved or washed his face, must
be a dude, true and proper. [Random Notes and Observations of a Trip through the Great Northwest,
The Medical Record, Oct. 20, 1883]    Application to any male is recorded by 1966, U.S., originally
in Black English.


dudette (n.)

by 1991, from dude in the surfer/teen slang sense + fem. ending -ette. Earlier (in the Old West
sense) were dudine (1883), dudess (1885).


dudgeon (n.)

1570s, duggin, of unknown origin. One suggestion is Italian aduggiare to overshadow, giving it the
same sense development as umbrage. No clear connection to earlier dudgeon (late 14c.), a kind of
wood used for knife handles, which is perhaps from a French word.


duds (n.)

c.1300, dudde cloak, mantle, later in plural, ragged clothing (1560s), of uncertain origin.


due (adj.)

early 14c., customary, regular; mid-14c., owing, payable, from Old French deu, past participle of
devoir to owe, from Latin debere to owe (see debt).    In reference to points of the compass (as in
due east) it is attested from c.1600, originally nautical, from notion of fitting, rightful. As an
adverb from 1590s; as a noun from early 15c. Prepositional phrase due to (much maligned by
grammarians) is from 1897.


duel (n.)

1590s (from late 13c. in Latin form), from Medieval Latin duellum combat between two persons, by
association with Latin duo two, but originally from Latin duellum war, an Old Latin form of bellum
(see bellicose). Retained in poetic and archaic language and apparently given a special meaning in
Medieval or Late Latin of one-on-one combat on fancied connection with duo two.


duel (v.)

1640s, see duel (n.). Related: Dueled; dueling; duelling.


duelist (n.)

1590s, from duel + -ist.


duenna (n.)

1660s, chief lady in waiting upon the queen of Spain, also an elderly woman in charge of girls from
a Spanish family, from Spanish due&ntilde;a married lady, mistress (fem. of due&ntilde;o master),
from Latin domina (see dame). Sense extended in English to any elderly woman chaperon of a younger
woman (1708).


dues (n.)

fee for membership, 1660s, from plural of due (n.). To pay (one's) dues in the figurative sense is
from 1943. Giue them their due though they were diuels [1589].


duet (n.)

1740, from French duet, from Italian duetto short musical composition for two voices, diminutive of
duo two (see two). As a verb, from 1822. The Italian form of the noun was used in English from
c.1724.


duff (n.)

buttocks, rump, 1830s, of unknown origin.


duffel

see duffle.


duffer (n.)

inept person; old man, especially bad golfer, 1842, perhaps from Scottish duffar dull or stupid
person, from dowf stupid, literally deaf, from Old Norse daufr, with pejorative suffix -art. Or
perhaps from 18c. thieves' slang duff (v.) to dress or manipulate an old thing and make it look new.


duffle (n.)

1670s, from Dutch duffel, from Duffel, town in Brabant where the cloth was originally sold. Duffel
bag is American English, first recorded 1917 in a letter of e e cummings.


dufus (n.)

see doofus.


dug (n.)

animal nipple, or, contemptuously, the human female breast, 1520s, origin obscure, related to
Swedish dagga, Danish d&aelig;gge to suckle.


dug (v.)

past tense and past participle of dig (v.).


Dugan

from Irish Dubhagan, diminutive of dubh black.


dugong (n.)

1800, from Malay duyung, which is dugung in the Philippines.


dugout (n.)

also dug-out, canoe, 1722, American English, from dug, past participle of dig (v.) + out (adv.).
Baseball sense is first recorded 1914, from c.1855 meaning of rough shelter.


duke (n.)

early 12c., sovereign prince, from Old French duc (12c.) and directly from Latin dux (genitive
ducis) leader, commander, in Late Latin governor of a province, from ducere to lead, from PIE *deuk-
to lead (cognates: Old English togian to pull, drag, Old High German ziohan to pull, Old English
togian to draw, drag, Middle Welsh dygaf I draw).    Applied in English to nobleman of the highest
rank probably first mid-14c., ousting native earl. Also used to translate various European titles
(such as Russian knyaz).


dukes (n.)

hands, 1874, now mainly in put up your dukes (phrase from 1859), probably not connected to duke
(n.). Chapman [Dictionary of American Slang] suggests Romany dook the hand as read in palmistry,
one's fate; but Partridge [Slang To-day and Yesterday] gives it a plausible, if elaborate, etymology
as a contraction of Duke of Yorks, rhyming slang for forks, a Cockney term for fingers, thus hands.


dulcet (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French doucet, diminutive of doux sweet, earlier dulz, from Latin dulcis, from
PIE *dlk-wi-, suffixed form of root *dlk-u- sweet (compare glucose).


dulcimer (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French doulce mer, variant of doulcemele, perhaps from doulz de mer, said to
represent Latin dulce sweet + melos song, from Greek melos melody.


Dulcinea

sweetheart, 1748, from the name of Don Quixote's mistress in Cervantes' romance, the name a Spanish
fem. derivative of Latin dulce sweet.


dull (adj.)

c.1200, stupid; early 13c., blunt, not sharp; rare before mid-14c., apparently from Old English dol
dull-witted, foolish, or an unrecorded parallel word, or from Middle Low German dul slow-witted,
both from Proto-Germanic *dulaz (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon dol foolish, Old High German
tol, German toll mad, wild, Gothic dwals foolish), from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, vapor, smoke (and
related notions of defective perception or wits). Of color from early 15c.; of pain or other
sensations from 1725. Sense of boring first recorded 1580s.    dull. (8) Not exhilarating; not
delightful; as to make dictionaries is dull work. [Johnson]   Dullsville, slang for town where
nothing happens, attested from 1960.


dull (v.)

c.1200, to grow weary, tire; of pointed or edged things from c.1400; of the senses from 1550s; from
dull (adj.). Related: Dulled; dulling.


dullard (n.)

mid-15c. (but early 13c. as a surname), from dull (adj.) + -ard.


Duluth

city in Minnesota, U.S., named for French pioneer explorer Daniel Greysolen, sieur du Luth
(1649-1710), the Robin Hood of Canada, the leader of the coureurs de bois, who passed through in
1678 on a mission into the wilderness.


duly (adj.)

late 14c., duweliche rightly, properly, from dewe due (see due) + -liche (see -ly (2)).


duma (n.)

Russian national assembly, 1870 (in reference to city councils; the national one was set up in
1905), literally thought, from a Germanic source (compare Gothic doms judgment, English doom, deem).


dumb (adj.)

Old English dumb silent, unable to speak, from PIE *dheubh- confusion, stupefaction, dizziness, from
root *dheu- (1) dust, mist, vapor, smoke, and related notions of defective perception or wits.
The Old English, Old Saxon (dumb), Gothic (dumbs), and Old Norse (dumbr) forms of the word meant
only mute, speechless; in Old High German (thumb) it meant both this and stupid, and in Modern
German this latter became the only sense. Meaning foolish, ignorant was occasionally in Middle
English, but modern use (1823) comes from influence of German dumm. Related: dumber; dumbest.
Applied to silent contrivances, hence dumbwaiter. As a verb, in late Old English, to become mute;
c.1600, to make mute. To dumb (something) down is from 1933.


dumbass (n.)

by 1959, from dumb stupid + ass (n.2).


dumbbell (n.)

weighted bar used for exercise, 1711, originally an apparatus like that used to ring a church bell,
but without the bell (hence dumb); used for exercise but sometimes also to practice ringing changes.
Figurative sense of blockhead, stupid person attested by 1918, American English college slang.


dumbfound (v.)

1650s, from dumb (adj.) + ending from confound.


dumbfounded (adj.)

past participle adjective from dumbfound.


dumbledore (n.)

1787, noted as a dialect word in Hampshire, Cornwall, etc. for a bumblebee.


dumbstruck (adj.)

1823, from dumb + past participle of strike (v.).


dumbwaiter (n.)

1749, an article of furniture, from dumb (adj.) + waiter (apparently because it serves as a waiter
but is silent). As a movable platform for passing dishes, etc., up and down from one room
(especially a basement kitchen) to another, from 1847.


dumdum bullet

1897, named for Dum-Dum arsenal in Bengal, where the British made them to use against fanatical
charges by tribesmen. Outlawed by international declaration, 1899. The place name is literally hill,
mound, battery, cognate with Persian damdama.


dummkopf (n.)

1809 (dom cop), from German dummkopf, literally dumb head; see dumb (adj.) + cup (n.).


dummy (n.)

1590s, mute person, from dumb (adj.) + -y (3). Extended by 1845 to figure representing a person.
Used in card games (originally whist) since 1736. Meaning dolt, blockhead is from 1796.


dump (v.)

early 14c., throw down or fall with force, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish dumpe,
Norwegian dumpa to fall suddenly). The sense of unload en masse is first recorded in American
English 1784. That of discard, abandon is from 1919. Related: Dumped; dumping. Dump truck is from
1930.


dump (n.)

place where refuse is dumped, 1865, originally of mining operations, from dump (v.). Meaning any
shabby place is from 1899. Meaning act of defecating is from 1942.


dumpling (n.)

c.1600, Norfolk dialect, of uncertain origin, perhaps from some Low German word or from noun dump
lump (late 18c.). Related: Dumplings.


dumps (n.)

low spirits, 1520s, plural of dumpe a fit of musing, possibly from Dutch domp haze, mist, from
Middle Dutch damp vapor (see damp (n.)).


Dumpster (n.)

1930s, from Dempster-Dumpster trash-hauling mechanism, patented by Dempster Brothers and probably
named from dump (v.) with the surname in mind.


dumpy (adj.)

short and stout, 1750, apparently from some noun dump (compare dumpling), but the connection is
unclear.


dun (v.)

to insist on payment of debt, 1620s, perhaps related to dunnen to sound, resound, make a din
(c.1200, dialectal variant of din), or shortened from dunkirk (c.1600) privateer, a private vessel
licensed to attack enemy ships during wartime, from Dunkirk, French port from which they sailed. The
oldest theory traces it to a Joe Dun, supposedly a London bailiff famous for catching defaulters.
Related: Dunned; dunning. As a noun from 1620s.


dun (adj.)

Old English dunn dingy brown, dark-colored, perhaps from Celtic (compare Old Irish donn dark; Gaelic
donn brown, dark; Welsh dwnn brownish), from PIE *donnos, *dusnos dark.


Duncan

from Gaelic donn brown, dark (see dun (adj.)) + ceann head.


dunce (n.)

dullard, 1570s, from earlier Duns disciple follower of John Duns Scotus (c.1265-1308), Scottish
scholar of philosophy and theology supposed to have been born at Duns in Berwickshire. By 16c.,
humanist reaction against medieval theology singled him out as the type of the hairsplitting
scholastic. It became a general term of reproach applied to more conservative philosophical
opponents by 1520s, later extended to any dull-witted student.


dunderhead (n.)

1620s, from head (n.); the first element is obscure; perhaps from Middle Dutch doner, donder to
thunder (compare blunderbuss).


dundrearies (n.)

1867, long, flowing whiskers, like those worn by actor E.A. Sothern (1826-1881) while playing Lord
Dundreary, witless, indolent chief character in English dramatist Tom Taylor's play Our American
Cousin (1858).


dune (n.)

1790, from French, Middle Dutch or Middle Low German dune, all perhaps from Gaulish *dunom (thus
related to down (n.2)). The French dune sand hill (13c.) is held by Diez to be an Old French
borrowing from Dutch duin or some other Germanic source. Italian and Spanish duna are from French.
Dune buggy attested by 1965.


dung (n.)

Old English dung manure, fertilizer, common Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon dung
manure; Old High German tunga manuring, tung underground room covered with manure; German Dung; Old
Norse dyngja heap of manure, women's apartment; Swedish dynga dung, muck; Danish dynge heap, mass,
pile), perhaps from a PIE *dhengh- covering (cognates: Lithuanian dengti to cover, Old Irish dingim
I press).    The word recalls the ancient Germanic custom (reported by Tacitus) of covering
underground shelters with manure to keep in warmth in winter. The meaning animal excrement, whether
used as fertilizer or not, is from late 13c.The whole body of journeymen tailors is divided into two
classes, denominated Flints and Dungs: the former work by the day and receive all equal wages; the
latter work generally by the piece [1824]. Dung beetle attested by 1630s. In colloquial American
English, tumble-bug. An Old English word for it was tordwifel turd weevil.


dungaree

1610s, dongerijns, from Hindi dungri coarse calico, from the name of a village, now one of the
quarters of Bombay.


dungarees (n.)

trousers made of dungaree, 1868.


dungeon (n.)

c.1300, great tower of a castle, from Old French donjon great tower of a castle (12c.), from Gallo-
Roman *dominionem, from Late Latin dominium, from Latin dominus master (of the castle; see domain).
Sense of castle keep led to strong (underground) cell in English early 14c. The original sense went
with the variant donjon.


dunghill (n.)

early 14c., from dung + hill (n.).


dunk (v.)

1919, American English, from Pennsylvania German dunke to dip, from Middle High German dunken, from
Old High German dunkon, thunkon to soak, from PIE root *teng- to soak (see tincture).    Basketball
sense is first recorded 1937 as a verb, 1971 as a noun (earlier dunk shot). German-American
Anabaptist sect of Dunkers (who baptize with triple immersion) first recorded by that name 1756.


Dunkirk

city on the northeast coast of France, French dunkerque, literally dune church, from Middle Dutch
dune (see dune) + kerke (see church (n.)); in reference to the 7c. church of St. Eloi.


dunno (v.)

colloquial for (I) don't know, first attested 1842 in American English.


duo (n.)

1580s, song for two voices, via either Italian or French, from Latin duo two (see two). Meaning two
people (especially as an entertainment team) attested by 1887.


duodecimal (adj.)

1714, from Latin in duodecimo (see duodecimo).


duodecimo

1650s, from Latin in duodecimo (folded) in a twelfth of a sheet, from ablative of duodecimus
twelfth, from duodecim (see dozen). Often abbreviated 12mo.; a book in which each page is the
twelfth part of the printer's sheet.


duodenal (adj.)

1817; see duodenum + -al (1).


duodenum (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin duodenum digitorium space of twelve digits, from Latin duodeni twelve
each. Coined by Gerard of Cremona (d.1187), who translated Canon Avicennae, a loan-translation of
Greek dodekadaktylon, literally twelve fingers long, the intestine part so called by Greek physician
Herophilus (c.353-280 B.C.E.) for its length, about equal to the breadth of twelve fingers.


dupe (n.)

1680s, from French dupe deceived person, from Middle French duppe (early 15c.), thieves' jargon,
perhaps from phrase de huppe of the hoopoe, an extravagantly crested and reputedly stupid bird.


dupe (v.)

1704, from dupe (n.). Related: Duped; duping.


duplex (adj.)

1817, composed of two parts, from Latin duplex, from duo two (see two) + -plex, from Greek plax
(genitive plakos) flat surface. The noun sense of house for two families; two-story apartment is
American English, 1922.


duplicate (adj.)

mid-15c., having two parts, double, from Latin duplicatus, past participle of duplicare to double,
from duo two (see two) + plicare to fold see ply (v.1)). Meaning exactly corresponding, that is an
exact copy of is from 1812.


duplicate (v.)

1620s, to double, from Latin duplicatus, past participle of duplicare (see duplicate (adj.)).
Meaning make an exact copy is from 1640s (implied in duplicated). Related: Duplicating. The noun is
first recorded 1530s.


duplication (n.)

early 15c., doubling, from Middle French duplicacion (13c.) and directly from Latin duplicationem
(nominative duplicatio), noun of action from past participle stem of duplicare (see duplicate
(adj.)). Meaning repetition is from 1580s.


duplicative (adj.)

1870; see duplicate (v.) + -ive.


duplicitous (adj.)

1831; see duplicity + -ous.


duplicity (n.)

early 15c., from Old French duplicite (13c.), from Late Latin duplicitatem (nominative duplicitas)
doubleness, in Medieval Latin ambiguity, noun of quality from duplex (genitive duplicis) twofold.
The notion is of being double in one's conduct (compare Greek diploos treacherous, double-minded,
literally twofold, double).


dura mater (n.)

tough outer membrane surrounding the brain, c.1400, from Medieval Latin dura mater cerebri,
literally hard mother of the brain, a loan-translation of Arabic umm al-dimagh as-safiqa, literally
thick mother of the brain. In Arabic, the words 'father,' 'mother,' and 'son' are often used to
denote relationships between things [Klein].


durability (n.)

late 14c., from Old French durabilit&eacute;, from Late Latin durabilitatem (nominative
durabilitas), noun of quality from Latin durabilis (see durable).


durable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French durable (11c.), from Latin durabilis lasting, permanent, from durare to
last, harden (see endure). Durable goods attested from 1930.


durance (n.)

late 15c., from Old French durance duration, from durer to endure, from Latin durare (see endure).


duration (n.)

late 14c., from Old French duration, from Medieval Latin durationem (nominative duratio), noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin durare harden (see endure). Old legalese phrase for the
duration popularized 1916 in reference to British enlistments in World War I.


duress (n.)

early 14c., harsh or severe treatment, from Old French duresse, from Latin duritia hardness, from
durus hard (see endure). The Old French suffix -esse is from Latin -itia, added to adjectives to
form nouns of quality (compare riches, largesse). Sense of coercion, compulsion is from 1590s.


Durham

c.1000, Dunholm city on a hill, a merger of Old English dun hill (see down (n.2)) and Scandinavian
holmr (see holm). The change from -n- to -r- is a result of Norman confusion (see Shrewsbury). As a
breed of cattle, by 1810.


durian (n.)

1580s, from Malay durian, from duri thorn, prickle. So called for its rind.


during (prep.)

late 14c., durand, present participle of obsolete verb duren to last, endure (mid-13c.), from Old
French durer, from Latin durare endure (see endure). During the day really is while the day endures,
and the usage is a transference into English of a Latin ablative absolute (compare durante bello
during (literally 'enduring') the war).


durst (v.)

see dare (v.).


durum (n.)

species of wheat, 1908, from Latin durum, neuter of durus hard (see endure). The seeds are tough.


Dushanbe

capital of Tajikistan, from Tajik dushanbe Monday (a compound of du two + Shanbe Saturday, literally
Sabbath; thus two days after Saturday); so called in reference to a regular Monday market there.
Known from 1929-1961 as Stalinabad.


dusk (n.)

c.1200, dosk obscure, to become dark, perhaps from Old English dox dark-haired, dark from the
absence of light (cognate with Swedish duska be misty, Latin fuscus dark, Sanskrit dhusarah dust-
colored; also compare Old English dosan chestnut-brown, Old High German tusin pale yellow) with
transposition of -k- and -s-, perhaps via a Northumbrian variant (compare colloquial ax for ask).
But OED notes that few of our words in -sk are of OE origin. A color word originally; the sense of
twilight is recorded from 1620s.


dusky (adj.)

1550s, somewhat dark, from dusk + -y (2). Related: Duskiness.


dust (n.)

Old English dust, from Proto-Germanic *dunstaz (cognates: Old High German tunst storm, breath,
German Dunst mist, vapor, Danish dyst milldust, Dutch duist), from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, smoke, vapor
(cognates: Sanskrit dhu- shake, Latin fumus smoke). Meaning that to which living matter decays was
in Old English, hence, figuratively, mortal life.


dust (v.)

c.1200, to rise as dust; later to sprinkle with dust (1590s) and to rid of dust (1560s); from dust
(n.). Related: Dusted; dusting. Sense of to kill is U.S. slang first recorded 1938 (compare bite the
dust under bite (v.)).


dust bowl

also dustbowl, drought-plagued region of the U.S. Midwest, first recorded 1936.


dustbin (n.)

1848, from dust (n.) + bin.


duster (n.)

1570s, dust brush for clothes, agent noun from dust (v.). Meaning sifter is from 1660s; that of
cloth worn to keep off dust is from 1864.


dustup (n.)

fight, 1897, from dust + up; perhaps from dust confusion, disturbance (1590s). To dust (someone's)
coat was ironical for to beat (someone) soundly (1680s).


dusty (adj.)

early 13c., from dust + -y (2). Related: Dustiness.


dusty miller (n.)

common name for auricula, 1825, so called from the powder on the leaves and flower; millers, by the
nature of their work, being famously dusty.


Dutch (adj.)

late 14c., used first of Germans generally, after c.1600 of Hollanders, from Middle Dutch duutsch,
from Old High German duit-isc, corresponding to Old English &thorn;eodisc belonging to the people,
used especially of the common language of Germanic people, from &thorn;eod people, race, nation,
from Proto-Germanic *theudo popular, national (see Teutonic), from PIE root *teuta- people
(cognates: Old Irish tuoth people, Old Lithuanian tauta people, Old Prussian tauto country, Oscan
touto community).    As a language name, first recorded as Latin theodice, 786 C.E. in
correspondence between Charlemagne's court and the Pope, in reference to a synodical conference in
Mercia; thus it refers to Old English. First reference to the German language (as opposed to a
Germanic one) is two years later. The sense was extended from the language to the people who spoke
it (in German, Diutisklant, ancestor of Deutschland, was in use by 13c.).    Sense narrowed to of
the Netherlands in 17c., after they became a united, independent state and the focus of English
attention and rivalry. In Holland, Duits (formerly duitsch) is used of the people of Germany. The
Middle English sense survives in Pennsylvania Dutch, name of the people who immigrated from the
Rhineland and Switzerland.    Since c.1600, Dutch (adj.) has been a pejorative label pinned by
English speakers on almost anything they regard as inferior, irregular, or contrary to 'normal'
(i.e., their own) practice [Rawson]. E.g. Dutch treat (1887), Dutch uncle (1838), etc. -- probably
exceeded in such usage only by Indian and Irish -- reflecting first British commercial and military
rivalry and later heavy German immigration to U.S.    The Dutch themselves spoke English well enough
to understand the unsavory connotations of the label and in 1934 Dutch officials were ordered by
their government to stop using the term Dutch. Instead, they were to rewrite their sentences so as
to employ the official The Netherlands. [Rawson]   Dutch oven is from 1769; OED lists it among the
words describing things from Holland, but perhaps it is here used in the slighting sense. Dutch elm
disease (1927) so called because it was first discovered in Holland (caused by fungus Ceratocystis
ulmi).


Dutchman (n.)

Dutch ship, 1650s, from Dutch (adj.) + man (n.). References to the ghost ship called the Flying
Dutchman seem to begin early 19c. (see flying).


dutiful (adj.)

1550s, from duty + -ful. Related: Dutifully.


duty (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French duete, from Old French deu due, owed; proper, just, from Vulgar Latin
*debutus, from Latin debitus, past participle of debere to owe (see debt). Related: Duties. The
sense of tax or fee on imports, exports, etc. is from late 15c.; duty-free as a noun is attested
from 1958.


duvet (n.)

1758, from French duvet down, earlier dumet, diminutive of dum down.


DVD

1995, initialism (acronym) from Digital Video Disc, later changed to Digital Versatile Disc.
Earlier this year, electronics giant Toshiba positioned the first DVD players available in the U.S.
as a home entertainment unit (retail price $600). [Black Enterprise magazine, June 1997]


dwarf (n.)

Old English dweorh, dweorg (West Saxon), duerg (Mercian), very short human being, from Proto-
Germanic *dweraz (cognates: Old Frisian dwerch, Old Saxon dwerg, Old High German twerg, German
Zwerg, Old Norse dvergr), perhaps from PIE *dhwergwhos something tiny, but with no established
cognates outside Germanic. The mythological sense is 1770, from German (it seems never to have
developed independently in English).    Whilst in this and other ways the dwarfs do at times have
dealings with mankind, yet on the whole they seem to shrink from man; they give the impression of a
downtrodden afflicted race, which is on the point of abandoning its ancient home to new and more
powerful invaders. There is stamped on their character something shy and something heathenish, which
estranges them from intercourse with christians. They chafe at human faithlessness, which no doubt
would primarily mean the apostacy from heathenism. In the poems of the Mid. Ages, Laurin is
expressly set before us as a heathen. It goes sorely against the dwarfs to see churches built, bell-
ringing ... disturbs their ancient privacy; they also hate the clearing of forests, agriculture, new
fangled pounding-machinery for ore. [Teutonic Mythology, Jacob Grimm, transl. Stallybrass, 1883]
The shift of the Old English guttural at the end of the word to modern -f is typical (compare
enough, draft). Old English plural dweorgas became Middle English dwarrows, later leveled down to
dwarfs. The use of dwarves for the legendary race was popularized by J.R.R. Tolkien. As an
adjective, from 1590s.


dwarf (v.)

to render dwarfish, 1620s, from dwarf (n.); sense of to cause to look small is from 1850. Related:
Dwarfed; dwarfing.


dwarfish (adj.)

1560s, from dwarf (n.) + -ish. Related: Dwarfishly; dwarfishness.


dweeb (n.)

1968, U.S. college student slang, probably a variant of feeb feeble person.


dwell (v.)

Old English dwellan to mislead, deceive, originally to make a fool of, lead astray, from Proto-
Germanic *dwelan to go or lead astray (cognates: Old Norse dv&ouml;l delay, dvali sleep; Middle
Dutch dwellen to stun, make giddy, perplex; Old High German twellen to hinder, delay; Danish dvale
trance, stupor, dvaelb&aelig;r narcotic berry, source of Middle English dwale nightshade), from PIE
*dhwel-, extended form of root *dheu- (1) dust, cloud, vapor, smoke (and related notions of
defective perception or wits).    Related to Old English gedweola error, heresy, madness. Sense
shifted in Middle English through hinder, delay, to linger (c.1200, as still in phrase to dwell
upon), to make a home (mid-13c.). Related: Dwelled; dwelt; dwells.


dweller (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from dwell (v.).


dwelling (n.)

place of residence, mid-14c., verbal noun from dwell (v.).


dwindle (v.)

1590s, apparently diminutive and frequentative of Middle English dwinen waste away, fade, vanish,
from Old English dwinan, from Proto-Germanic *dwinan (cognates: Dutch dwijnen to vanish, Old Norse
dvina, Danish tvine, Low German dwinen), from PIE *dheu- (3) to die (see die (v.)). Related:
Dwindled; dwindling.


dyad (n.)

1670s, from Latin dyad-, stem of dyas, from Greek dyas the number two, a group of two, from duo two
(see two). Specific sense in chemistry (a bivalent element) is by 1865; also used in biology,
poetics, mathematics. Related: Dyadic.


dybbuk (n.)

malevolent spirit of a dead person possessing the body of a living one, 1903, from Jewish folklore,
from Hebrew dibbuk, from dabak to cling, cleave to.


dye (n.)

Old English deah, deag a color, hue, tinge, perhaps related to deagol secret, hidden, dark, obscure,
from Proto-Germanic *daugilaz (cognates: Old Saxon dogol secret, Old High German tougal dark,
hidden, secret).


dye (v.)

Old English deagian to dye, from the source of dye (n.). Spelling distinction between dye and die
was not firm till 19c. Johnson in his Dictionary, spelled them both die, while Addison, his near
contemporary, spelled both dye [Barnhart]. Related: dyed. For dyed in the wool (or grain) see wool
(n.).


dyeing

c.1400, verbal noun and past participle adjective from dye (v.).


dyer (n.)

late 14c. (late 13c. as a surname), agent noun from dye (v.).


dying

late 13c., death, verbal noun from die (v.). From mid-15c. as a past participle adjective, in the
process of becoming dead.


dyke (n.)

1931, American English, perhaps a shortening of morphadike, dialectal garbling of hermaphrodite; but
bulldyker engage in lesbian activities is attested from 1921, and a source from 1896 lists dyke as
slang for the vulva.    [T]he word appears first in the long forms, bulldiker and bulldyking, both
used in the 1920s by American blacks. No African antecedents have been found for the term, however,
which leads to the possibility that this is basically just another backcountry, barnyard word,
perhaps a combination of BULL and DICK. [Rawson]


dynamic (adj.)

1817 as a term in philosophy; 1827 in the sense pertaining to force producing motion (the opposite
of static), from French dynamique introduced by German mathematician Gottfried Leibnitz (1646-1716)
in 1691 from Greek dynamikos powerful, from dynamis power, from dynasthai to be able, to have power,
be strong enough, of unknown origin. The figurative sense of active, potent, energetic is from 1856
(in Emerson). Related: Dynamically.


dynamic (n.)

energetic force; motive force, 1894, from dynamic (adj.).


dynamics (n.)

as a branch of physics, 1789, from dynamic (adj.); also see -ics.


dynamism (n.)

1831, dynamic energy, force, drive, from Greek dynamis power, might, strength (see dynamic (adj.)) +
-ism. As a philosophical system, from 1857.


dynamite (n.)

1867, from Swedish dynamit, coined 1867 by its inventor, Swedish chemist Alfred Nobel (1833-1896),
from Greek dynamis power (see dynamic (adj.)) + -ite (2). Figurative sense of something potentially
dangerous is from 1922. Positive sense of dynamic and excellent by mid-1960s, perhaps originally
Black English.


dynamite (v.)

1881, from dynamite (n.). Related: Dynamited; dynamiting.


dynamo (n.)

1882, short for dynamo-machine, from German dynamoelektrischemaschine dynamo-electric machine,
coined 1867 by its inventor, German electrical engineer Werner Siemans (1816-1892), from Greek
dynamis power.


dynast (n.)

hereditary ruler, 1630s, from Late Latin dynastes, from Greek dynastes (see dynasty).


dynastic (adj.)

1800; see dynasty + -ic.


dynasty (n.)

mid-15c. (earlier dynastia, late 14c.), from Middle French dynastie and directly from Late Latin
dynastia, from Greek dynasteia power, lordship, sovereignty, from dynastes ruler, chief, from
dynasthai have power.


dyne (n.)

metric unit of force, 1873, from German use of Greek dynamis power (see dynamic (adj.)); perhaps
also influenced by French dyne, which had been proposed c.1842 as a unit of force in a different
sense.


dys-

word-forming element meaning bad, ill, abnormal, from Greek dys-, inseparable prefix destroying the
good sense of a word or increasing its bad sense [Liddell &amp; Scott], bad, hard, unlucky, from PIE
root (and prefix) *dus- bad, ill, evil (cognates: Sanskrit dus-, Old Persian du&#353;- ill, Old
English to-, Old High German zur-, Gothic tuz- un-), a derivative of *deu- to lack, be wanting
(source of Greek dein to lack, want).    Very productive in ancient Greek, where it could attach
even to proper names (such as dysparis unhappy Paris); its entries take up nine columns in Liddell
and Scott. Among the words formed from it were some English might covet: dysouristos fatally
favorable, driven by a too-favorable wind; dysadelphos unhappy in one's brothers; dysagres unlucky
in fishing; dysantiblepos hard to look in the face.


dysentery (n.)

late 14c., dissenterie, from Old French disentere (13c.), from Latin dysenteria, from Greek
dysenteria, coined by Hippocrates, from dys- bad, abnormal, difficult (see dys-) + entera
intestines, bowels (see inter-). Related: Dysenteric.


dysfunction (n.)

1916, from dys- bad, abnormal, difficult + function (n.).


dysfunctional (adj.)

1917, from dysfunction + -al (1). Related: Dysfunctionally.


dyslexia (n.)

c.1887, from German dyslexie (1883), from Greek dys- bad, abnormal, difficult (see dys-) + lexis
word, from legein speak (see lecture (n.)). Dyslexic (n.) is first recorded 1961; dyslectic (adj.)
from 1964.


dyspepsia (n.)

1706, from Late Latin dyspepsia or a back-formation from dyspeptic (q.v.). Its opposite is eupepsia.


dyspeptic (adj.)

1690s, from Greek dyspeptos hard to digest, from dys- bad (see dys-) + peptos digested, from peptein
digest (see cook (n.)).


dysphemism (n.)

1884, substitution of a vulgar or derogatory word or expression for a dignified or normal one, from
Greek dys- bad, abnormal, difficult (see dys-) + pheme speaking, from phanai speak (see fame (n.);
Greek dysphemia meant ill language, words of ill omen). The opposite of euphemism. Rediscovered 1933
from French formation dysph&eacute;misme (1927, Carnoy).    The French psychologist Albert J. Carnoy
gave an extensive definition in his study Le Science du Mot, which in translation runs: Dysphemism
is unpitying, brutal, mocking. It is also a reaction against pedantry, rigidity and pretentiousness,
but also against nobility and dignity in language (1927, xxii, 351). [Geoffrey L. Hughes, An
Encyclopedia of Swearing, 2006]


dysplasia (n.)

1935, Modern Latin, from dys- + -plasia, from Greek plasis molding, conformation, from plassein (see
plasma).


dysprosium (n.)

element, obtained 1906 from an earth discovered in 1886, the last to be extracted from the complex
earth called yttria, and named dysprosia in reference to the difficulty of obtaining it, from Greek
dysprositos hard to get at, difficult of access, from dys- bad (see dys-) + prositos approachable.
With metallic element suffix -ium.


dystopia (n.)

imaginary bad place, 1868, apparently coined by J.S. Mill (Hansard Commons), from Greek dys- bad,
abnormal, difficult (see dys-) + utopia. Related: Dystopian.


dystrophy (n.)

also distrophy, defective nutrition, 1858, from Modern Latin dystrophia, distrophia, from Greek dys-
hard, bad, ill (see dys-) + trophe nourishment (see -trophy). Related: Dystrophic.


