&#039;em

Middle English, now taken as a colloquial abbreviation of them, but originally a form of hem, dative
and accusative of the third person plural pronoun.


-ean

variant of -an after names ending in -ea, -es, -eus.


-ectomy

word-forming element meaning surgical removal, from Greek -ektomia a cutting out of, from ektemnein
to cut out, from ek out (see ex-) + temnein to cut (see tome).


-ed

past participle suffix of weak verbs, from Old English -ed, -ad, -od (leveled to -ed in Middle
English), from Proto-Germanic *-do- (cognates: Old High German -ta, German -t, Old Norse -&thorn;a,
Gothic -da, -&thorn;s), from PIE *-to- (cognates: Sanskrit -tah, Greek -tos, Latin -tus; see -th
(1)).    Originally fully pronounced, as still in beloved (which, with blessed, accursed, and a few
others retains the full pronunciation through liturgical readings). In 16c.-18c. often written -t
when so pronounced (usually after a consonant or short vowel), and still so where a long vowel in
the stem is short in the past participle (as in crept, slept, etc.). In some older words both forms
exist, with different shades of meaning, as in gilded/gilt, burned/burnt.


-ee

word-forming element in legal English (and in imitation of it), representing the Anglo-French
-&eacute; ending of past participles used as nouns. As these sometimes were coupled with agent nouns
in -or, the two suffixes came to be used as a pair to denote the initiator and the recipient of an
action.


-een

anglicized form of French -in, -ine, ultimately from Latin -inus, -ina.


-eer

suffix meaning one who (operates, produces, deals in); anglicized form of French -ier, from Latin
-arius, -iarius; compare -ary.


-ella

diminutive word-forming element, from Latin -ella, fem. of -ellus.


-eme

in linguistics, noted as an active suffix and word-formation element from 1953; from French
-&egrave;me unit, sound, from phon&egrave;me (see phoneme).


-emia

word-forming element in medicine meaning condition of the blood, Modern Latin comb. form of Greek
haima (genitive haimatos) blood, possibly from PIE root *sai- thick liquid.


-en (1)

word-forming element making verbs (such as darken, weaken) from adjectives or nouns, from Old
English -nian, from Proto-Germanic *-inojan (also source of Old Norse -na), from PIE adjectival
suffix *-no-. Most active in Middle English.


-en (2)

suffix added to nouns to produce adjectives meaning made of, of the nature of (such as golden,
oaken), corresponding to Latin -ine. Common in Old and Middle English, surviving words with it now
are largely discarded in everyday use and the simple form of the noun serves as an adjective as
well.


-ence

see -ance.


-ency

word-forming element denoting quality or state, from Latin -entia. Derivatively identical with
-ence.


-ene

hydrocarbon suffix, from Greek name-forming element -ene. It has no real meaning in itself; in
chemistry terminology probably abstracted from methylene (1834). Put in systematic use by Hofmann
(1865).


-ent

word-forming element making adjectives from nouns or verbs, from French -ent and directly from Latin
-entem, present participle ending of verbs in -ere/-ire. Old French changed many to -ant but after
c.1500 some of these in English were changed back to what was supposed to be correct Latin (see
-ance).


-er (1)

English agent noun ending, corresponding to Latin -or. In native words it represents Old English
-ere (Old Northumbrian also -are) man who has to do with, from Proto-Germanic *-ari (cognates:
German -er, Swedish -are, Danish -ere), from Proto-Germanic *-arjoz. Some believe this root is
identical with, and perhaps a borrowing of, Latin -arius.    In words of Latin origin, verbs derived
from past participle stems of Latin ones (including most verbs in -ate) usually take the Latin
ending -or, as do Latin verbs that passed through French (such as governor), but there are many
exceptions (eraser, laborer, promoter, deserter, sailor, bachelor), some of which were conformed
from Latin to English in late Middle English.    The use of -or and -ee in legal language (such as
lessor/lessee) to distinguish actors and recipients of action has given the -or ending a tinge of
professionalism, and this makes it useful in doubling words that have both a professional and non-
professional sense (such as advisor/adviser, conductor/conducter, incubator/incubater,
elevator/elevater).


-er (2)

comparative suffix, from Old English -ra (masc.), -re (fem., neuter), from Proto-Germanic *-izon,
*-ozon (cognates: Gothic -iza, Old Saxon -iro, Old Norse -ri, Old High German -iro, German -er),
originally also with umlaut change in stem, but this was mostly lost in Old English by historical
times and has now vanished (except in better and elder).    For most comparatives of one or two
syllables, use of -er seems to be fading as the oral element in our society relies on more before
adjectives to express the comparative; thus prettier is more pretty, cooler is more cool [Barnhart].


-er (3)

suffix used to make jocular or familiar formations from common or proper names (soccer being one),
first attested 1860s, English schoolboy slang, Introduced from Rugby School into Oxford University
slang, orig. at University College, in Michaelmas Term, 1875 [OED, with unusual precision].


-ery

word-forming element making nouns meaning place for, art of, condition of, quantity of, from Middle
English -erie, from Latin -arius (see -ary).


-escence

word-forming element meaning process or state of being, from Latin -escentia, from -escentem (see
-escent).


-escent

word-forming element meaning beginning, becoming, tending to be, from Latin -escentem (nominative
-escens), ending of present participles of verbs in -escere.


-ese

word-forming element from Old French -eis (Modern French -ois, -ais), from Vulgar Latin, from Latin
-ensem, -ensis belonging to or originating in.


-esque

word-forming element meaning resembling or suggesting the style of, from French -esque like, in the
manner of, from Italian -esco, which, with Medieval Latin -iscus, is from a Germanic source (compare
Old High German -isc, German -isch; see -ish).


-ess

fem. suffix, from French -esse, from Late Latin -issa, from Greek -issa (cognate with Old English
fem. agent suffix -icge); rare in classical Greek but more common later, in diakonissa deaconess and
other Church terms picked up by Latin.


-etic

word-forming element meaning pertaining to, from Greek -etikos, adjectival suffix for nouns ending
in -esis.


-ette

diminutive formation, from Old French -ette (fem.), used indiscriminately in Old French with
masculine form -et. As a general rule, older words borrowed from French have -et in English, while
ones taken in since 17c. have -ette. In use with native words since 20c., especially among persons
who coin new product names, who tend to give it a sense of imitation, a sort of. Also in words like
sermonette, which, OED remarks, can scarcely be said to be in good use, though often met with in
newspapers.


e&#039;en

variant spelling of even, now archaic or poetic.


e&#039;er

variant spelling of ever, now archaic or poetic.


e-

the later Romans evidently found words beginning in sc-, sp-, st- difficult or unpleasant to
pronounce; in Late Latin forms begin to emerge in i- (such as ispatium, ispiritu), and from 5c. this
shifted to e-. The development was carried into the Romanic languages, especially Old French, and
the French words were modified further after 15c. by natural loss of -s- (the suppression being
marked by an acute accent on the e-), while in other cases the word was formally corrected back to
the Latin spelling (for example sp&#233;cial). Hence French &#233;tat for Old French estat for Latin
status, etc.


e-commerce (n.)

by 1998, from electronic (compare e-mail) + commerce.


e-mail

1982, short for electronic mail (1977; see electronic + mail (n.1)); this led to the contemptuous
application of snail mail (1983) to the old system.    Even aerial navigation in 1999 was found too
slow to convey and deliver the mails. The pneumatic tube system was even swifter, and with such
facilities at hand it is not surprising that people in San Francisco received four daily editions of
the Manhattan journals, although the distance between Sandy Hook and the Golden Gate is a matter of
3,600 miles. [Looking Forward, Arthur Bird, 1899]    Associated Press style guide collapsed it to
email 2011.


E. coli (n.)

bacteria inhabiting the gut of man and animals, short for Escherichia coli, named for German
physician Theodor Escherich (1857-1911) + Latin genitive of colon colon (see colon (n.2)).


e.g.

abbreviation of Latin exemplia gratia for the sake of example.


e.t.a.

abbreviation of estimated time (of) arrival, first attested 1939.


ea (n.)

the usual Old English word for river, running water; still in use in Lancashire. See aqua-. The
standard word in place-names for river denoting a watercourse of greater size than a broc or a burna
[Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names].


each (adj., pron.)

Old English &aelig;lc any, all, every, each (one), short for a-gelic ever alike, from a ever (see
aye (2)) + gelic alike (see like (adj.)). From a common West Germanic expression *aiwo galika
(cognates: Dutch elk, Old Frisian ellik, Old High German iogilih, German jeglich each, every).
Originally used as we now use every (which is a compound of each) or all; modern use is by influence
of Latin quisque. Modern spelling appeared late 1500s. Also see ilk, such, which.


each other

reciprocal pronoun, originally in late Old English a phrase, with each as the subject and other
inflected (as it were each to other, each from other, etc.).


eager (adj.)

late 13c., strenuous, ardent, fierce, angry, from Old French aigre sour, acid; harsh, bitter, rough;
eager greedy; lively, active, forceful, from Latin acrem (nominative acer) keen, sharp, pointed,
piercing; acute, ardent, zealous (see acrid).    Meaning full of keen desire (early 14c.) seems to
be peculiar to English. The English word kept an alternative meaning of pungent, sharp-edged till
19c. (as in Shakespeare's The bitter clamour of two eager tongues, in Richard II). Related: Eagerly;
eagerness.


eagle (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French egle, from Old Proven&ccedil;al aigla, from Latin aquila black eagle, fem.
of aquilus, often explained as dark colored (bird); see aquiline. The native term was erne. Golf
score sense is first recorded by 1908 (according to old golf sources, because it soars higher than a
birdie). The figurative eagle-eyed is attested from c.1600.


Eames

1946, type of modern office chair, named for U.S. architect and designer Charles Eames (1907-1978).


ear (n.1)

organ of hearing, Old English eare ear, from Proto-Germanic *auzon (cognates: Old Norse eyra, Danish
&oslash;re, Old Frisian are, Old Saxon ore, Middle Dutch ore, Dutch oor, Old High German ora, German
Ohr, Gothic auso), from PIE *ous- with a sense of perception (cognates: Greek aus, Latin auris,
Lithuanian ausis, Old Church Slavonic ucho, Old Irish au ear, Avestan usi the two ears).    The
belief that itching or burning ears means someone is talking about you is mentioned in Pliny's
Natural History (77 C.E.). Until at least the 1880s, even some medical men still believed piercing
the ear lobes improved one's eyesight. Meaning handle of a pitcher is mid-15c. (but compare Old
English earde having a handle). To be wet behind the ears naive is implied from 1914. Phrase walls
have ears attested from 1610s.


ear (n.2)

grain part of corn, from Old English ear (West Saxon), &aelig;her (Northumbrian) spike, ear of
grain, from Proto-Germanic *akhaz (genitive *akhizaz; cognates: Dutch aar, Old High German ehir,
German &Auml;hre, Old Norse ax, Gothic ahs ear of corn), from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (source
of Latin acus husk of corn, Greek akoste barley; see acrid).


earache (n.)

also ear-ache, 1789, from ear (n.1) + ache (n.).


eardrum (n.)

also ear-drum, 1640s, from ear (n.1) + drum (n.).


earful (n.)

a piece of one's mind, 1917, from ear (n.1) + -ful. Ear-bash (v.) is Australian slang (1944) for to
talk inordinately (to someone).


earl (n.)

Old English eorl brave man, warrior, leader, chief (contrasted with ceorl churl), from Proto-
Germanic *erlo-z, of uncertain origin. In Anglo-Saxon poetry, a warrior, a brave man; in later Old
English, nobleman, especially a Danish under-king (equivalent of cognate Old Norse jarl), then one
of the viceroys under the Danish dynasty in England. After 1066 adopted as the equivalent of Latin
comes (see count (n.)).


earldom (n.)

early 12c., from earl + -dom.


earlobe (n.)

by 1786, from ear (n.1) + lobe. Earlier was ear lap (Old English had earl&aelig;ppa external ear).


early (adv.)

Old English &aelig;rlic early, from &aelig;r soon, ere (see ere) + -lice, adverbial suffix (see -ly
(2)). Compare Old Norse arliga early. The early bird of the proverb is from 1670s. Related: Earlier;
earliest.


earmark (n.)

late 15c., from ear (n.1) + mark (n.1). Originally a cut or mark in the ear of sheep and cattle,
serving as a sign of ownership (also a punishment of certain criminals); first recorded 1570s in
figurative sense stamp of ownership.


earmark (v.)

1590s, to identify by an earmark, from earmark (n.). Meaning to set aside money for a special
purpose is attested by 1868. Related: Earmarked; earmarking.


earn (v.)

Old English earnian deserve, earn, merit, win, get a reward for labor, from Proto-Germanic *aznojan
(source also of Old Frisian esna reward, pay), from *azna labor especially field labor (source of
Old Norse &ouml;nn work in the field), from PIE *aznon to do harvest work, serve (source of Old High
German arnon to reap), denominative verb from *es-en- harvest, fall (cognates: Old High German aren
harvest, crop, German Ernte harvest, Old English ern harvest, Gothic asans harvest, summer, Old
Church Slavonic jeseni, Russian osen, Old Prussian assanis autumn).    Also from the same root are
Gothic asneis, Old High German esni hired laborer, day laborer, Old English esne serf, laborer, man.
Related: Earned; earning.


earner (n.)

1610s, agent noun from earn.


earnest (adj.)

from Old English eornoste (adj.) zealous, or from Old English noun eornost seriousness, serious
intent (surviving only in the phrase in earnest), from Proto-Germanic *ern vigor, briskness
(cognates: Old Saxon ernust, Old High German arnust seriousness, firmness, struggle, German Ernst
seriousness; Gothic arniba safely, securely; Old Norse ern able, vigorous, jarna fight, combat). The
proper name Ernest (literally resolute) is from the same root. Related: Earnestly; earnestness.


earnings (n.)

amount of money one makes (from labor or investment), 1732, from plural of verbal noun earning (Old
English earnung fact of deserving; what one deserves); see earn.


earring (n.)

Old English earhring, from ear (n.1) + hring (see ring (n.)). Also earspinl. Now including any sort
of ornament in the ear; the pendants were originally ear-drops (1720).The two groups which had
formerly a near monopoly on male earrings were Gypsies and sailors. Both has the usual traditions
about eyesight, but it was also said that sailors' earrings would save them from drowning, while
others argued that should a sailor be drowned and washed up on some foreign shore, his gold earrings
would pay for a proper Christian burial. [Dictionary of English Folklore]


earshot (n.)

c.1600, from ear (n.1) + shot (n.) in the sense of range (as in bowshot).


earth (n.)

Old English eor&thorn;e ground, soil, dry land, also used (along with middangeard) for the
(material) world (as opposed to the heavens or the underworld), from Proto-Germanic *ertho
(cognates: Old Frisian erthe earth, Old Saxon ertha, Old Norse j&ouml;r&eth;, Middle Dutch eerde,
Dutch aarde, Old High German erda, German Erde, Gothic air&thorn;a), from PIE root *er- (2) earth,
ground (cognates: Middle Irish -ert earth). The earth considered as a planet was so called from
c.1400.


Earth Day

as an annual ecological awareness event on April 22, dates to 1970; the idea and the name formed in
1969.


earth-mother (n.)

1904, folkloric spirit of the earth, conceived as sensual, maternal; a translation of German
erdmutter.


earthen (adj.)

early 13c., made of earth; see earth + -en (2). Not attested in Old English (where eor&eth;en meant
of or in the earth). Cognate of Old High German irdin, Gothic air&thorn;eins. Meaning made of clay
is attested from late 14c.


earthenware (n.)

1670s, from earthen + ware.


earthlight (n.)

1833, from earth + light (n.). Apparently coined by British astronomer John Herschel.


earthling (n.)

Old English yr&thorn;ling plowman (see earth + -ling); the sense of inhabitant of the earth is from
1590s. Earthman was originally (1860) a demon who lives in the earth; science fiction sense of
inhabitant of the planet Earth first attested 1949 in writing of Robert Heinlein. Earlier in this
sense was earthite (1825).


earthly (adj.)

Old English eor&thorn;lic earthly, worldly; see earth + -ly (1).


earthquake (n.)

late 13c., eorthequakynge, from earth + quake (n.). In this sense Old English had eor&eth;dyn,
eor&eth;hrernes, eor&eth;beofung, eor&eth;styren.


earthwork (n.)

1630s, from earth + work (n.). In this sense Old English had eor&eth;byrig; Old English
eor&eth;weorc meant work on the land.


earthworm (n.)

1590s, from earth + worm (n.). In this sense Old English had eor&eth;mata, also regnwyrm, literally
rain-worm. Old English also had angel-tw&aelig;cce earthworm used as bait (with second element from
root of twitch), sometimes used in medieval times as a medicament:    For the blake Jawndes take
angylltwacches, er &thorn;ei go in to the erth in the mornynge and fry hem. Take ix or x small
angyltwacches, and bray hem, and giff the syke to drynke fastynge, with stale ale, but loke
&thorn;at thei bene grounden so small that &thorn;e syke may nat se, ne witt what it is, for
lothynge. [Book of Medical Recipes in Medical Society of London Library, c.1450]


earthy (adj.)

1550s, from earth + -y (2). Figurative sense of coarse, unrefined is from 1590s. Related:
Earthiness.


earwax (n.)

late 14c., from ear (n.1) + wax (n.).


earwig (n.)

(Forficula auricularia), Old English earwicga, from eare (see ear (n.1)) + wicga beetle, worm,
probably related to wiggle. So called from the ancient and widespread (but false) belief that the
garden pest went into people's ears. Compare French perce-oreille, German ohr-wurm. A Northern
England name for it reported from 1650s is twitch-ballock.


ease (n.)

early 13c., from Old French aise comfort, pleasure, well-being; opportunity, of unknown origin,
despite attempts to link it to various Latin verbs.    The earliest senses in French appear to be 1.
elbow-room (from an 11th century Hebrew-French glossary) and 2. opportunity. This led Sophus Bugge
to suggest an origin in Vulgar Latin asa, a shortened form of Latin ansa handle, which could be used
in the figurative sense of opportunity, occasion, as well as being a possible synonym for elbow,
because Latin ansatus furnished with handles also was used to mean having the arms akimbo. OED
editors report this theory, and write, This is not very satisfactory, but it does not appear that
any equally plausible alternative has yet been proposed.


ease (v.)

c.1300, to help, assist, see ease (n.). Meaning to give ease is from mid-14c.; the sense of to relax
one's efforts is from 1863. Farmer reports ease in a slang sense of â&euro;&oelig;to content a
womanâ&euro;? sexually, with an 1861 date. Related: Eased; easing.


easel (n.)

1590s, from Dutch ezel easel, originally ass, from Middle Dutch esel, from Latin asinus ass (see ass
(n.1)); the comparison being of loading a burden on a donkey and propping up a painting or canvas on
a wooden stand (compare sawhorse).


easement (n.)

late 14c., compensation, redress, from Old French aisement comfort, convenience; use, enjoyment,
from aisier to ease, from aise (see ease). The meaning legal right or privilege of using something
not one's own is from early 15c.


easily (adv.)

late 13c., aisieliche, from easy + -ly (2).


east (n.)

Old English east east, easterly, eastward, from Proto-Germanic *aus-to-, *austra- east, toward the
sunrise (cognates: Old Frisian ast east, aster eastward, Dutch oost Old Saxon ost, Old High German
ostan, German Ost, Old Norse austr from the east), from PIE *aus- (1) to shine, especially dawn
(cognates: Sanskrit ushas dawn; Greek aurion morning; Old Irish usah, Lithuanian auszra dawn; Latin
aurora dawn, auster south), literally to shine (see aurora). The east is the direction in which dawn
breaks. For theory of shift in sense in Latin, see Australia.    Meaning the eastern part of the
world (from Europe) is from c.1300. French est, Spanish este are borrowings from Middle English,
originally nautical. The east wind in Biblical Palestine was scorching and destructive (as in Ezek.
xvii:10); in New England it is bleak, wet, unhealthful.    Cold War use of East for communist states
first recorded 1951. Natives of eastern Germany and the Baltics were known as easterlings 16c.-18c.
East End of London so called by 1846; East Side of Manhattan so called from 1882; East Indies (India
and Southeast Asia) so called 1590s to distinguish them from the West Indies.


Easter

Old English Easterd&aelig;g, from Eastre (Northumbrian Eostre), from Proto-Germanic *Austron, a
goddess of fertility and spring, probably originally of sunrise whose feast was celebrated at the
spring equinox, from *austra-, from PIE *aus- to shine (especially of the dawn).    Bede says Anglo-
Saxon Christians adopted her name and many of the celebratory practices for their Mass of Christ's
resurrection. Ultimately related to east. Almost all neighboring languages use a variant of Latin
Pascha to name this holiday (see paschal). Easter egg attested by 1825, earlier pace egg (1610s).
Easter bunny attested by 1904 in children's lessons; Easter rabbit is by 1888; the paganish customs
of Easter seem to have grown popular c. 1900; before that they were limited to German immigrants.
If the children have no garden, they make nests in the wood-shed, barn, or house. They gather
colored flowers for the rabbit to eat, that it may lay colored eggs. If there be a garden, the eggs
are hidden singly in the green grass, box-wood, or elsewhere. On Easter Sunday morning they whistle
for the rabbit, and the children imagine that they see him jump the fence. After church, on Easter
Sunday morning, they hunt the eggs, and in the afternoon the boys go out in the meadows and crack
eggs or play with them like marbles. Or sometimes children are invited to a neighbor's to hunt eggs.
[Phebe Earle Gibbons, Pennsylvania Dutch, Philadelphia 1882]


Easter Island

so called because it was discovered by Dutch navigator Jakob Roggeveen on April 2, 1722, which was
Easter Monday. It earlier had been visited by English pirate Edward Davis (1695), but he neglected
to name it. The native Polynesian name is Mata-kite-ran Eyes that Watch the Stars.


easterly (adv.)

1540s, from easter (late 14c.), variant of eastern + -ly (2). As a noun meaning easterly wind, by
1901. Old English easterlic meant pertaining to Easter.


eastern (adj.)

Old English easterne of the east, from the east; oriental; of the Eastern Orthodox Church; of the
eastern part of the globe, from east + -erne, suffix denoting direction. Cognate with Old Saxon
ostroni, Old High German ostroni, Old Norse austroenn. Eastern Shore of Maryland and Virginia so
called from 1620s.


Eastlake

style of furniture, 1878, often a mere debased Gothic, but at its best inspired by English designer
Charles Locke Eastlake (1836-1906) and his book Hints on Household Taste.I find American tradesmen
continually advertising what they are pleased to call 'Eastlake' furniture, with the production of
which I have had nothing whatever to do, and for the taste of which I should be very sorry to be
considered responsible [C.L. Eastlake, 1878]


eastward (adv.)

Old English eastw&aelig;rde; see east + -ward.


easy (adj.)

c.1200, at ease, from Old French aisie comfortable, at ease, rich, well-off (Modern French
ais&eacute;), past participle of aisier to put at ease, from aise (see ease).    Sense of not
difficult to deal with is mid-14c.; of conditions, comfortable, late 14c. The concept of not
difficult was expressed in Old English and early Middle English by ea&thorn;e (adv.), ie&thorn;e
(adj.), apparently common West Germanic, but of disputed origin. Easy Street first printed 1901 in
Peck's Red-Headed Boy. Easy money attested by 1896; to take it easy relax is from 1867; easy does it
recorded by 1891. Easy rider (1912) was U.S. black slang for sexually satisfying lover. The easy
listening radio format is from 1965, defined by William Safire (in 1986) as, the music of the 60's
played in the 80's with the style of the 40's.  Related: Easier; easiest.


easy chair (n.)

1707, from easy + chair (n.).


easy-going (adj.)

also easygoing, 1640s, originally of horses,  from easy + going.


eat (v.)

Old English etan (class V strong verb; past tense &aelig;t, past participle eten) to eat, devour,
consume, from Proto-Germanic *etanan (cognates: Old Frisian ita, Old Saxon etan, Middle Dutch eten,
Dutch eten, Old High German ezzan, German essen, Old Norse eta, Gothic itan), from PIE root *ed- to
eat (see edible).    Transferred sense of slow, gradual corrosion or destruction is from 1550s.
Meaning to preoccupy, engross (as in what's eating you?) first recorded 1893. Slang sexual sense of
do cunnilingus on is first recorded 1927. Eat out dine away from home is from 1933. The slang phrase
to eat one's words is from 1570s; to eat one's heart out is from 1590s; for eat one's hat, see hat.


eatable (adj.)

late 15c., from eat + -able.


eaten

Old English eten, past participle of eat.


eatery (n.)

restaurant, 1901; see eat + -ery.


eats (n.)

food, in use mid-19c. in U.S., considered colloquial, but the same construction with the same
meaning was present in Old English.


eau (n.)

French for water, from Old French eue (12c.), from Latin aqua (see aqua-). In various combinations
such as eau de vie brandy (1748), literally water of life; eau de toilette (1907). For eau de
Cologne see cologne.


eave (n.)

1570s, from Southwest Midlands dialectal eovese (singular), from Old English efes edge of a roof,
also edge of a forest, from Proto-Germanic *ubaswa-/*ubiswa (cognates: Old Frisian ose eaves, Old
High German obasa porch, hall, roof, German Obsen, Old Norse ups, Gothic ubizwa porch; German oben
above), from the root of over. Treated as plural and a new singular form eave emerged 16c.


eaves (n.)

see eave.


eavesdrop (v.)

c.1600, probably a back-formation from eavesdropper. Related: Eavesdropping.


eavesdropper (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle English eavesdrop, from Old English yfesdrype place around a house where the
rainwater drips off the roof, from eave (q.v.) + drip (v.). Technically, one who stands at walls or
windows to overhear what's going on inside.


ebb (n.)

Old English ebba ebb, low tide, perhaps from Proto-Germanic *abjon (cognates: Old Frisian ebba, Old
Saxon ebbiunga, Middle Dutch ebbe, Dutch eb, German Ebbe), from *ab-, from PIE root *apo- off, away
(see apo-). Figurative sense of decline, decay is c.1400.


ebb (v.)

Old English ebbian, from the root of ebb (n.). Related: Ebbed; ebbing.


Ebenezer

masc. proper name, sometimes also the name of a Protestant chapel or meeting house, from name of a
stone raised by Samuel to commemorate a victory over the Philistines at Mizpeh (I Sam. vii:12), from
Hebrew ebhen ezar stone of help, from ebhen stone + ezer help.


Ebionite

1640s, sect (1c.-2c.) that held Jesus was a mere man and Christians continued bound by Mosaic Law,
from Latin ebonita, from Hebrew ebyon poor.


Eblis

prince of the fallen angels in Arabic mythology and religion, from Arabic Iblis. Klein thinks this
may be Greek diablos, passed through Syriac where the first syllable was mistaken for the Syriac
genitive particle di and dropped.


ebola (n.)

virus, 1976, named for Ebola River valley in Congo, where it first was studied.


ebon

ebony wood, ebony tree, mid-15c.; see ebony. Figurative sense of dark, black is from 1590s; in some
cases a poetic shortening of ebony.


Ebonics (n.)

African-American vernacular English, 1975, as title of a book by U.S. professor R.L. Williams
(b.1930); a blend of ebony and phonics.


ebony (n.)

1590s, from hebenyf (late 14c.), perhaps a Middle English misreading of Latin hebeninus of ebony,
from Greek ebeninos, from ebenos ebony, probably from Egyptian hbnj or another Semitic source.
Figurative use to suggest intense blackness is from 1620s. As an adjective, from 1590s. French
&eacute;b&egrave;ne, Old High German ebenus (German Ebenholz) are from Latin ebenus.


ebriety (n.)

state or habit of being intoxicated, 1580s, from French &eacute;bri&eacute;t&eacute;, from Latin
ebrietatem (nominative ebrietas) drunknenness, from ebrius drunk, full, sated with drink, of unknown
origin. The opposite of sobriety. Related: Ebrious.


ebullience (n.)

1749, from Latin ebullientem, present participle of ebullire (see ebullient + -ence). Related:
Ebulliency (1670s).


ebullient (adj.)

1590s, boiling, from Latin ebullientem (nominative ebulliens), present participle of ebullire to
boil over, literally and figuratively, from ex- out (see ex-) + bullire to bubble (see boil (v.)).
Figurative sense of enthusiastic is first recorded 1660s.


ec-

typical form in English of Latin ex-, Greek ex-, ek- before consonants. See ex-.


ecarte (n.)

card game for two played with 32 cards, 1824, from French &eacute;cart&eacute;, literally discarded,
past participle of &eacute;carter to discard, from e- (see ex-) + carte (see card (n.)).


ecce homo

Latin, literally behold the man (John xix:5).


eccentric (n.)

early 15c., eccentric circle or orbit, originally a term in Ptolemaic astronomy, circle or orbit not
having the Earth precisely at its center, from Middle French eccentrique and directly from Medieval
Latin eccentricus (noun and adjective), from Greek ekkentros out of the center (as opposed to
concentric), from ek out (see ex-) + kentron center (see center (n.)). Meaning odd or whimsical
person attested by 1824.    June 4 [1800].--Died in the streets in Newcastle, William Barron, an
eccentric, well known for many years by the name of   Billy Pea-pudding. [John Sykes, Local Records,
or Historical Register of Remarkable Events which have Occurred Exclusively in the Counties of
Durham and Northumberland, Town and County of Newcastle Upon Tyne, and Berwick Upon Tweed,
Newcastle, 1824]


eccentric (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French eccentrique and directly from Medieval Latin eccentricus (noun and
adjective; see eccentric (n.)). Figurative sense of odd, whimsical first recorded 1620s.


eccentricity (n.)

1540s, of planetary orbits; 1650s, of persons (an instance of eccentricity); 1794, of persons (a
quality of eccentricity); from eccentric (adj.) + -ity. Related: Eccentricities.


Ecclesiastes (n.)

c.1300, name given to one of the Old Testament books, traditionally ascribed to Solomon, from Greek
ekklesiastes (see ecclesiastic), to render Hebrew qoheleth one who addresses an assembly, from qahal
assembly. The title is technically the designation of the speaker, but that word throughout is
usually rendered into English as The Preacher (which Klein calls erroneous).


ecclesiastic (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French eccl&eacute;siastique and directly from Late Latin ecclesiasticus,
from Greek ekklesiastikos of the (ancient Athenian) assembly, later, of the church, from
ekklesiastes speaker in an assembly or church, preacher, from ekkalein to call out, from ek out (see
ex-) + kalein to call (see claim (v.)).


ecclesiastical (adj.)

early 15c., from ecclesiastic + -al (1). Related: Ecclesiastically.


ecdysiast (n.)

H.L. Mencken's invented proper word for strip-tease artist, 1940, from Greek ekdysis a stripping or
casting off (used scientifically with reference to serpents shedding skin or crustacea molting),
from ekdyein to put off (contrasted with endyo to put on), from ek (see ex-) + dyein to enter, to
put on.


echelon (n.)

1796, step-like arrangement of troops, from French &eacute;chelon level, echelon, literally rung of
a ladder, from Old French eschelon, from eschiele ladder, from Late Latin scala stair, slope, from
Latin scalae (plural) ladder, steps, from PIE *skand- to spring, leap (see scan). Sense of level,
subdivision is from World War I.


echidna (n.)

Australian egg-laying hedgehog-like mammal, 1847, usually explained as from Greek ekhidna snake,
viper, from ekhis snake, from PIE *angwhi- snake, eel (cognates: Norwegian igle, Old High German
egala, German Egel leech, Latin anguis serpent, snake).    But this sense is difficult to reconcile
with this animal (unless it is a reference to the ant-eating tongue), and the name seems more
properly to belong to Latin echinus, Greek ekhinos sea-urchin, originally hedgehog (in Greek also
sharp points), which Watkins explains as snake-eater, from ekhis snake.


echinoderm (n.)

1835, from Modern Latin Echinodermata, name of the phylum that includes starfish and sea urchins,
from Greek ekhinos sea urchin, originally porcupine, hedgehog (see echidna) + derma (genitive
dermatos) skin (see derma); so called from its spiky shell.


echo (n.)

mid-14c., from Latin echo, from Greek echo, personified as a mountain nymph, from or related to ekhe
sound, ekhein to resound, from PIE root *swagh- to resound (cognates: Sanskrit vagnuh sound, Latin
vagire to cry, Old English swogan to resound). Related: Echoes.


echo (v.)

1550s, from echo (n.). Related: Echoed; echoing.


echoic (adj.)

1880; see echo (n.) + -ic.


echolalia (n.)

1885, from Greek ekho (see echo (n.)) + lalia talk, prattle, a speaking, from lalein to speak,
prattle, of echoic origin.


echolocation (n.)

1944, from echo (n.) + location.


echopraxia (n.)

1904, from Greek ekho (see echo (n.)) + praxis action (see praxis).


echovirus (n.)

also ECHO virus, 1955, acronym for enteric cytopathogenic human orphan; orphan because when
discovered they were not known to cause any disease.


eclair (n.)

1861, from French &eacute;clair, literally lightning, from Old French esclair light, daylight, flash
of light, from esclairare to light up, make shine (12c.), ultimately from Latin exclarare light up,
illumine, from ex- out (see ex-) + clarus clear (see clear (adj.)).


eclat (n.)

1670s, showy brilliance, from French &eacute;clat splinter, fragment (12c.), also flash of
brilliance, from eclater burst out, splinter, from Old French esclater smash, shatter into pieces,
of uncertain origin, perhaps from a West Germanic word related to slit or to Old High German sleizen
tear to pieces; to split, cleave. Extended sense of conspicuous success is first recorded in English
in 1741.


eclectic (adj.)

1680s, originally in reference to a group of ancient philosophers who selected doctrines from every
system; from French eclectique (1650s), from Greek eklektikos selective, literally picking out, from
eklektos selected, from eklegein pick out, select, from ek out (see ex-) + legein gather, choose
(see lecture (n.)). Broader sense of borrowed from diverse sources is first recorded 1847. As a noun
from 1817.


eclecticism (n.)

1798, from eclectic + -ism.


eclipse (n.)

late 13c., from Old French eclipse eclipse, darkness (12c.), from Latin eclipsis, from Greek
ekleipsis an abandonment, an eclipse, from ekleipein to forsake a usual place, fail to appear, be
eclipsed, from ek out (see ex-) + leipein to leave (cognate with Latin linquere; see relinquish).


eclipse (v.)

late 14c. (intransitive, a sense now obsolete), from eclipse (n.). Transitive use from late 15c.;
figurative use from 1580s. Related: Eclipsed; eclipsing.


ecliptic (n.)

late 14c., the circle in the sky followed by the Sun, from Medieval Latin ecliptica, from Late Latin
(linea) ecliptica, from Greek ekliptikos of an eclipse (see eclipse (n.)). So called because
eclipses happen only when the Moon is near the line. Related: Ecliptical.


eclogue (n.)

short poem, especially a pastoral dialogue, mid-15c., from Latin ecloga selection, short poem,
eclogue, from Greek ekloge selection, from eklegein to select (see eclectic).


eco-

word-forming element referring to the environment and man's relation to it, abstracted from ecology,
ecological; attested from 1969.


ecocentric (adj.)

also eco-centric, by 1975, from eco- + -centric.


ecofriendly (adj.)

also eco-friendly, by 1993, from eco- + friendly.


ecological (adj.)

1899, see ecology + -ical. Related: Ecologically.


ecologist (n.)

1893, see ecology + -ist.


ecology (n.)

1873, branch of science dealing with the relationship of living things to their environments, coined
by German zoologist Ernst Haeckel (1834-1919) as Okologie, from Greek oikos house, dwelling place,
habitation (see villa) + -logia study of (see -logy). In use with reference to anti-pollution
activities from 1960s.


econometric (adj.)

1933, from comb. form of economy + -metric.


economic (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to management of a household, perhaps shortened from economical or from French
&eacute;conomique or directly from Latin oeconomicus of domestic economy, from Greek oikonomikos
practiced in the management of a household or family, hence, frugal, thrifty, from oikonomia (see
economy (n.)). Meaning relating to the science of economics is from 1835 and now is the main sense,
economical retaining the older one of characterized by thrift.


economical (adj.)

1570s, pertaining to household management; from economic + -al (1). Meaning pertaining to political
economy is from 1781; that of thrifty is from 1780. Related: Economically.


economics (n.)

1580s, art of managing a household, perhaps from French &eacute;conomique (see economic); also see
-ics. Meaning science of wealth is from 1792.


economist (n.)

1580s, household manager, from Middle French &eacute;conomiste; meaning student of political economy
is from 1804; see economy + -ist.


economize (v.)

1640s, to govern a household, from economy + -ize. Meaning to spend less is from 1790. Related:
Economized; economizing; economization; economizer.


economy (n.)

1530s, household management, from Latin oeconomia, from Greek oikonomia household management,
thrift, from oikonomos manager, steward, from oikos house (cognate with Latin vicus district,
vicinus near; Old English wic dwelling, village; see villa) + nomos managing, from nemein manage
(see numismatic). The sense of wealth and resources of a country (short for political economy) is
from 1650s.


economy (adj.)

as a term in advertising, at first meant simply cheaper (1821), then bigger and thus cheaper per
unit or amount (1950). See economy (n.).


ecosphere (n.)

1953, the region around a star where conditions allow life-bearing planets to exist; see eco- +
sphere. Apparently coined by German-born U.S. physician and space medicine pioneer Hubertus
Strughold (1898-1986).


ecosystem (n.)

1935; see eco- + system. Perhaps coined by English ecologist Sir Arthur George Tansley (1871-1955).


ecotourism (n.)

by 1989, from eco- + tourism. Related: Ecotourist.


ecru (adj.)

1869, from French &eacute;cru raw, unbleached, from Old French escru raw, crude, rough (13c.), from
es- thoroughly (see ex-) + Latin crudus raw (see crude).


ecstasy (n.)

late 14c., in a frenzy or stupor, fearful, excited, from Old French estaise ecstasy, rapture, from
Late Latin extasis, from Greek ekstasis entrancement, astonishment; any displacement, in New
Testament a trance, from existanai displace, put out of place, also drive out of one's mind
(existanai phrenon), from ek out (see ex-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root *sta-
to stand (see stet).    Used by 17c. mystical writers for a state of rapture that stupefied the body
while the soul contemplated divine things, which probably helped the meaning shift to exalted state
of good feeling (1610s). Slang use for the drug 3,4-methylendioxymethamphetamine dates from 1985.


ecstatic (adj.)

1590s, mystically absorbed, stupefied, from Greek ekstatikos unstable, from ekstasis (see ecstasy).
Meaning characterized by intense emotions is from 1660s, now usually pleasurable ones, but not
originally always so. Related: Ecstatical; ecstatically.


ecto-

word-forming element generally meaning outside, external, before vowels ect-, comb. form of Greek
ektos outside (adv.), used to form scientific compounds in Greek; related to Greek ek, ex out, from
PIE *eghs- (see ex-).


ectoderm (n.)

1861, from ecto- + -derm. Coined by Prussian embryologist Robert Remak (1815-1865).


ectomorph (n.)

1940, coined by Sheldon from ecto- + Greek morphe (see morphine). Related: Ectomorphic.


ectopic (adj.)

1873, from ectopia (1847), coined in Modern Latin from Greek ektopos away from a place, from ek- out
(see ex-) + topos place (see topos).


ectoplasm (n.)

1883, of amoebas, 1901, of spirits, from ecto- + -plasm.


ecu (n.)

old French silver coin, 1704, from French &eacute;cu, from Old French escu (12c.) shield, coat of
arms, also the name of a coin, from Latin scutum shield (see hide (n.1)). First issued by Louis IX
(1226-1270); so called because the shield of France was imprinted on them.


Ecuador

from the Spanish form of equator (which runs through it). Before 1830 the region bore the name of
its chief city, Quito, which is from the name of a now-extinct native people, of unknown meaning.
Related: Ecuadorian; Ecuadorean.


ecumenical (adj.)

late 16c., representing the entire (Christian) world, formed in English as an ecclesiastical word,
from Late Latin oecumenicus general, universal, from Greek oikoumenikos, from he oikoumene ge the
inhabited world (as known to the ancient Greeks); the Greeks and their neighbors considered as
developed human society, from oikoumenos, present passive participle of oikein inhabit, from oikos
house, habitation (see villa).


ecumenism (n.)

1948, from ecumen- (see ecumenical) + -ism.


eczema (n.)

1753, from Greek ekzema, literally something thrown out by heat, from ekzein to boil out, from ek
out (see ex-) + zema boiling, from zein to boil, from PIE root *yes- to boil, foam, bubble (see
yeast). Said to have been the name given by ancient physicians to any fiery pustule on the skin.


edacious (adj.)

1829, from Latin edaci-, stem of edax voracious, gluttonous, from edere to eat (see edible) + -ous.
Related: Edacity (1620s).


Edam

1836, cheese named for Edam, village in Holland where it was originally made. The place name is
literally the dam on the River Ye, which flows into the Ijsselmeer there, and the river name is
literally river (see ea).


Edda (n.)

1771, by some identified with the name of the old woman in the Old Norse poem Rigs&thorn;ul, by
others derived from Old Norse o&eth;r spirit, mind, passion, song, poetry (cognate with Old Irish
faith poet, Welsh gwawd poem, Old English wo&thorn; sound, melody, song, Latin vates seer,
soothsayer; see wood (adj.)).    It is the name given to two Icelandic books, the first a miscellany
of poetry, mythology, and grammar by Snorri Sturluson (d.1241), since 1642 called the Younger or
Prose Edda; and a c.1200 collection of ancient Germanic poetry and religious tales, called the Elder
or Poetic Edda.


eddy (n.)

mid-15c., Scottish ydy, possibly from Old Norse i&eth;a whirlpool, from Proto-Germanic *ith- a
second time, again, which is related to the common Old English prefix ed- again, backwards;
repetition, turning (forming such words as ed&eth;ingung reconciliation, edgift restitution,
edniwian to renew, restore, edhwierfan to retrace one's steps, edgeong to become young again).
Compare Old English edwielle eddy, vortex, whirlpool. The prefix is cognate with Latin et, Old High
German et-, Gothic i&thorn; and, but, however. Related: Eddies.


eddy (v.)

1810, from eddy (n.). Related: Eddied; eddying.


edelweiss (n.)

1862, from German Edelwei&szlig;, literally noble white, from Old High German edili noble (see
atheling) + German weiss white (see white).


edema (n.)

c.1400, from medical Latin, from Greek oidema (genitive oidematos) a swelling tumor, from oidein to
swell, from oidos tumor, swelling, from PIE *oid- to swell (cognates: Latin aemidus swelling,
Armenian aitumn a swelling, Old Norse eista testicle, Old English attor poison (that which makes the
body swell), and the first element in Oedipus).


Eden (n.)

early 13c., delightful place, figurative use of the place described in Genesis, usually referred to
Hebrew edhen pleasure, delight, but perhaps from Ugaritic base 'dn and meaning a place that is well-
watered throughout (see also Aden).


Edgar

masc. proper name, from Old English Ead-gar, literally prosperity-spear, from ead prosperity + gar
(see gar).


edge (n.)

Old English ecg corner, edge, point, also sword (also found in ecgplega, literally edge play,
ecghete, literally edge hate, both used poetically for battle), from Proto-Germanic *agjo (cognates:
Old Frisian egg edge; Old Saxon eggia point, edge; Middle Dutch egghe, Dutch eg; Old Norse egg, see
egg (v.); Old High German ecka, German Eck corner), from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (cognates:
Sanskrit asrih edge, Latin acies, Greek akis point; see acrid).    Spelling development of Old
English -cg to Middle English -gg to Modern English -dge represents a widespread shift in
pronunciation. To get the edge on (someone) is U.S. colloquial, first recorded 1911. Edge city is
from Joel Garreau's 1992 book of that name. Razor's edge as a perilous narrow path translates Greek
epi xyrou akmes. To have (one's) teeth on edge is from late 14c., though It is not quite clear what
is the precise notion originally expressed in this phrase [OED].


edge (v.)

late 13c., to give an edge to (implied in past participle egged), from edge (n.). Meaning to move
edgeways (with the edge toward the spectator), advance slowly is from 1620s, originally nautical.
Meaning to defeat by a narrow margin is from 1953. The meaning urge on, incite (16c.) often must be
a mistake for egg (v.). Related: Edged; edging.


edgeways (adv.)

also edge-ways, 1560s, from edge (n.) + way (n.). First attested form of the word is edgewaie; the
adverbial genitive -s appears by 1640s. Edgewise (1715) appears to be a variant, based on otherwise,
etc. See edge (v.).    As if it were possible for any of us to slide in a word edgewise! [Mary
Mitford, Our Village, 1824].    To edge in a word in this sense is from 1680s.


edgewise

see edgeways.


edging (n.)

1570s, the putting of a border, verbal noun from edge (v.). Meaning a border is from 1660s; that of
the trimming of lawn edges is from 1858.


edgy (adj.)

having sharp edges, 1755, from edge (n.) + -y (2). Meaning tense and irritable is attested by 1837,
perhaps from notion of being on the edge, at the point of doing something irrational (a figurative
use attested from c.1600).


edible (adj.)

1590s, from Late Latin edibilis eatable, from Latin edere to eat, from PIE root *ed- to eat
(cognates: Sanskrit admi I eat; Greek edo I eat; Lithuanian edu I eat; Hittite edmi I eat, adanna
food; Old Irish ithim I eat; Gothic itan, Old Swedish and Old English etan, Old High German essan to
eat;    Avestan ad- to eat; Armenian utem I eat; Old Church Slavonic jasti to eat, Russian jest to
eat).


edict (n.)

late 15c., edycte; earlier edit, late 13c., proclamation having the force of law, from Old French
edit, from Latin edictum proclamation, ordinance, edict, neuter past participle of edicere publish,
proclaim, from e- out (see ex-) + dicere to say (see diction).


edification (n.)

mid-14c., in religious use, building up of the soul, from Old French edification and directly from
Latin aedificationem (nominative aedificatio) construction, building, in Late Latin spiritual
improvement, from past participle stem of aedificare (see edifice). Religious use is as translation
of Greek oikodome in I Cor. xiv. Meaning mental improvement is 1650s. Literal sense of building is
rare in English.


edifice (n.)

late 14c., from Old French edifice building, from Latin aedificium building, from aedificare to
erect a building, from aedis, variant of aedes temple, sanctuary, usually a single edifice without
partitions, also, in the plural, dwelling house, building, originally a place with a hearth + the
root of facere to make (see factitious).   &AElig;dis is from PIE *aidh- to burn (cognates: Greek
aithein to burn, Sanskrit inddhe burst into flames, Old Irish aed fire, Welsh aidd heat, zeal, Old
High German eit funeral pile), from root *ai- to burn.


edify (v.)

mid-14c., to build, construct, also, in figurative use, to build up morally or in faith, from Old
French edefiier build, install, teach, instruct (morally), from Latin aedificare to build,
construct, in Late Latin improve spiritually, instruct (see edifice). Related: Edified; edifying.


Edinburgh

older than King Edwin of Northumbria (who often is credited as the source of the name); originally
Din Eidyn, Celtic, perhaps literally fort on a slope. Later the first element was trimmed off and
Old English burh fort added in its place. Dunedin in New Zealand represents an attempt at the
original form.


edit (v.)

1791, perhaps a back-formation from editor, or from French &eacute;diter, or from Latin editus, past
participle of edere (see edition). Related: Edited; editing. As a noun, by 1960.


Edith

fem. proper name, Old English Eadgy&eth;, from ead wealth, prosperity, happiness + gu&eth; war. A
fairly common name; it survived through the Middle Ages, probably on the popularity of St.
Eadgy&eth; of Wilton (962-84, abbess, daughter of King Edgar of England), fell from favor 16c., was
revived in fashion 19c.


edition (n.)

early 15c., version, translation, a form of a literary work; 1550s, act of publishing, from French
&eacute;dition or directly from Latin editionem (nominative editio) a bringing forth, producing,
also a statement, account, from past participle stem of edere bring forth, produce, from ex- out
(see ex-) + -dere, comb. form of dare to give (see date (n.1)). It is awkward to speak of, e.g. 'The
second edition of Campbell's edition of Plato's The&aelig;tetus'; but existing usage affords no
satisfactory substitute for this inconvenient mode of expression [OED].


editor (n.)

1640s, publisher, from Latin editor one who puts forth, agent noun from editus, past participle of
edere (see edition). By 1712 in sense of person who prepares written matter for publication;
specific sense in newspapers is from 1803.


editorial (adj.)

1741; see editor + -al (2). Noun meaning newspaper article by an editor, is from 1830, American
English, from the adjective in reference to such writings (1802). Related: Editorially.


editorialize (v.)

introduce opinions into factual accounts, 1856, from editorial + -ize. Related: Editorialized;
editorializing.


Edmund

masc. proper name, Old English Eadmund, literally prosperity-protector. The second element is
related to Latin manus hand, from PIE *man- hand (see manual (adj.)).


Edna

fem. proper name, from Greek, from Hebrew ednah delight (see Eden). Related to Arabic ghadan luxury.
Among the top 20 names for girls born in the U.S. every year from 1889 to 1917.


Edsel

the make of car was introduced 1956, named for Henry and Clara Ford's only child; figurative sense
of something useless and unwanted is almost as old. Edsel is a family name, attested since 14c.
(William de Egeshawe), from High Edser in Ewhurst, Surrey.


educable (adj.)

1842 (implied in educability); see educate + -able.


educate (v.)

mid-15c., bring up (children), train, from Latin educatus, past participle of educare bring up,
rear, educate, which is related to educere bring out, lead forth, from ex- out (see ex-) + ducere to
lead (see duke (n.)). Meaning provide schooling is first attested 1580s. Related: Educated;
educating.


educated (adj.)

1660s, past participle adjective from educate (v.). As an abbreviated way to say well-educated,
attested from 1855. Educated guess first attested 1954.


education (n.)

1530s, childrearing, also the training of animals, from Middle French education (14c.) and directly
from Latin educationem (nominative educatio), from past participle stem of educare (see educate).
Originally of education in social codes and manners; meaning systematic schooling and training for
work is from 1610s.


educational (adj.)

1650s, due to education; 1831, pertaining to education; from education + -al (1). Related:
Educationally.


educationese (n.)

the jargon of school administrators, 1966, from education + -ese.


educative (adj.)

1844, from Latin educat-, past participle stem of educare (see educate) + -ive.


educator (n.)

1560s, one who nourishes or rears; 1670s, one who trains or instructs, from Latin educator (in
classical Latin, a foster father as well as a tutor), agent noun from past participle stem of
educare (see educate). Latin educatrix meant a nurse.


educe (v.)

early 15c., in the literal sense, from Latin educere to lead out, bring out (of troops, ships, etc.;
see educate). Meaning to draw a conclusion from data is from 1837.


educrat (n.)

1968, usually pejorative; first element from education, second from bureaucrat. Said to have been
coined by Claude R. Kirk Jr. (b.1926), governor of Florida.    While political leaders and corporate
CEOs, focusing as usual on the quarterly return, call for workers for the new economy, their
educational reforms are producing just that: students with a grab-bag of minor skills and
competencies and minds that are sadly uneventful, incapable of genuine intellectual achievement and
lacking any sense of continuity with the historical and cultural traditions of our society. Their
world is small, bleak, and limited; their world will become ours. [David Solway, The Turtle
Hypodermic of Sickenpods, Quebec, 2000]


Edward

masc. proper name, from Old English Eadweard, literally prosperity-guard, from ead wealth,
prosperity + weard guardian (see ward (n.)). Among the 10 most popular names for boys born in the
U.S. every year from 1895 to 1930.


Edwardian (adj.)

1861, in reference to the medieval English kings of that name; 1908 in the sense of of the time or
reign of Edward VII (1901-10), and, since 1934, especially with reference to the men's clothing
styles (as in teddy-boy, 1954, for which see Teddy). From Edward + -ian.


Edwin

masc. proper name, from Old English Ead-wine, literally prosperity-friend.


eek

sound of a squeak of fear, by 1940.


eel (n.)

Old English &aelig;l, from Proto-Germanic *&aelig;laz (cognates: Old Frisian -el, Middle Dutch ael,
Dutch aal, Old Saxon and Old High German al, German Aal, Old Norse all), of unknown origin, with no
certain cognates outside Germanic. Used figuratively for slipperiness from at least 1520s.


eeny

the children's counting-out rhyme is first attested 1855 as eeny meeny moany mite; form eene meenee
mainee mo is attested from 1923. Another variation is eeny meeny tipty te.


eerie (adj.)

c.1300, fearful, timid, north England and Scottish variant of Old English earg cowardly, fearful,
from Proto-Germanic *argaz (cognates: Old Frisian erg evil, bad, Middle Dutch arch bad, Dutch arg,
Old High German arg cowardly, worthless, German arg bad, wicked, Old Norse argr unmanly, voluptuous,
Swedish arg malicious).    Sense of causing fear because of strangeness is first attested 1792.
Related: Eerily. Finnish arka cowardly is a Germanic loan-word.


eff

1943, euphemism for fuck, representing the sound of its first letter. Related: Effing.


effable (adj.)

1630s, from French effable, from Latin effabilis, from effari to utter (see ineffable). Now obsolete
or archaic.


efface (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French effacer, from Old French esfacier (12c.) to wipe out, destroy,
literally to remove the face, from es- out (see ex-) + face appearance, from Latin facies face (see
face (n.)). Related: Effaced; effacing. Compare deface.


effect (n.)

late 14c., a result, from Old French efet (13c., Modern French effet) result, execution, completion,
ending, from Latin effectus accomplishment, performance, from past participle stem of efficere work
out, accomplish, from ex- out (see ex-) + facere to do (see factitious).    Meaning impression
produced on the beholder is from 1736. Sense in stage effect, sound effect, etc. first recorded
1881. The verb is from 1580s. Related: Effecting; effection.


effected (adj.)

brought about, past participle adjective from effect (v.). Sometimes used erroneously for affected.


effective (adj.)

late 14c., from French effectif, from Latin effectivus productive, effective, from effect-, stem of
efficere (see effect (n.)). Effectively in the sense of actually is attested by 1650s. Related:
Effectivity.


effectiveness (n.)

c.1600, from effective + -ness.


effects (n.)

goods, property, 1704, plural of effect (n.).


effectual (adj.)

late 14c., Old French effectuel, from Late Latin effectualis, from Latin effectus accomplishment,
performance (see effect (n.)). Used properly of actions (not agents) and with a sense having the
effect aimed at. Related: Effectually; effectuality.


effectuate (v.)

1570s, from French effectuer, from Latin effectus (see effect (n.)). Related: Effectuated;
effectuating.


effeminacy (n.)

c.1600; see effeminate + -acy.


effeminate (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin effeminatus womanish, effeminate, past participle of effeminare make a woman
of, from ex- out (see ex-) + femina woman (see feminine). Rarely used without reproach. Related:
Effeminately.


effendi (n.)

Turkish title of respect, 1610s, from Turkish efendi, title of respect applied to professionals and
officials, corruption of Greek authentes lord, master (in Modern Greek aphente; see authentic).


efferent (adj.)

1827, from Latin efferentem (nominative efferens), present participle of effere to carry out or
away, bring forth, from ef- (see ex-) + ferre to bear, carry (see infer).


effervesce (v.)

1702, from Latin effervescere (see effervescence). Related: Effervesced; effervescing.


effervescence (n.)

1650s, the action of boiling up, from French effervescence (1640s), from Latin effervescentem,
present participle of effervescere to boil up, boil over, from ex- out (see ex-) + fervescere begin
to boil, from fervere be hot, boil (see brew). Figurative sense of liveliness is from 1748. Related:
Effervescency.


effervescent (adj.)

1680s, from Latin effervescentem (nominative effervescens), present participle of effervescere (see
effervescence). Meaning exuberant is from 1833.


effete (adj.)

1620s, from Latin effetus (usually in fem. effeta) exhausted, unproductive, worn out (with bearing
offspring), past bearing, literally that has given birth, from a lost verb, *efferi, from ex- out
(see ex-) + fetus childbearing, offspring (see fetus). Figurative use is earliest in English;
literal use is rare. Sense of exhausted is 1660s; that of intellectually or morally exhausted (1790)
led to decadent (19c.).


efficacious (adj.)

sure to have the desired effect (often of medicines), 1520s, from Latin efficaci-, stem of efficax
(see efficacy) + -ous. Related: Efficaciously; efficaciousness.


efficacy (n.)

1520s, from Latin efficacia efficacy, efficiency, from efficax (genitive efficacis) powerful,
effective, from stem of efficere work out, accomplish (see effect). Earlier in same sense was
efficace (c.1200), from Old French eficace (14c.), from Latin efficacia; also efficacite (early
15c.), from Latin efficacitatem.


efficiency (n.)

1590s, power to accomplish something, from Latin efficientia (from efficientem; see efficient) +
-cy. In mechanics, ratio of useful work done to energy expended, from 1858. Attested from 1952 as
short for efficiency apartment (itself from 1930).


efficient (adj.)

capable of producing the desired effect, late 14c., making, producing immediate effect, from Old
French efficient and directly from Latin efficientem (nominative efficiens) effective, efficient,
producing, active, present participle of efficere work out, accomplish (see effect). Meaning
productive, skilled is from 1787. Related: Efficiently.


effigy (n.)

1530s, image of a person, from Middle French effigie (13c.), from Latin effigies copy or imitation
of something, likeness, from or related to effingere mold, fashion, portray, from ex- out (see ex-)
+ fingere to form, shape (see fiction). The Latin word was regarded as plural and the -s was lopped
off by 18c. Specifically associated with burning, hanging, etc., at least since 1670s.


effleurage (n.)

1886, from French effleurage, from effleurer to touch lightly.


effloresce (v.)

to come into flower, 1775, from Latin efflorescere to blossom, spring up, flourish, abound, from ex
out (see ex-) + florescere to blossom, from flos (see flora).


efflorescence (n.)

1620s, from French efflorescence, from Latin efflorescentem (nominative efflorescens), present
participle of efflorescere (see effloresce).


efflorescent (adj.)

1818, from Latin efflorescentem (nominative efflorescens), present participle of efflorescere (see
effloresce).


effluence (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin effluentia, from Latin effluentem (nominative effluens) flowing out, present
participle of effluere to flow out, from ex- out (see ex-) + fluere to flow (see fluent).


effluent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin effluentem (see effluence). As a noun, from 1859; meaning liquid industrial
waste is from 1930.


effluvia (n.)

Latin plural of effluvium.


effluvium (n.)

1640s, from Latin effluvium a flowing out, from effluere (see effluence).


efflux (n.)

1640s, from Latin effluxus, past participle of effluere (see effluence).


effort (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French effort, noun of action from Old French esforz force, impetuosity,
strength, power, back-formation from esforcier force out, exert oneself, from Vulgar Latin
*exfortiare to show strength (source of Italian sforza), from Latin ex- out (see ex-) + Latin fortis
strong (see fort).  Effort is only effort when it begins to hurt. [Ortega y Gasset, 1949]  Related:
Efforts.


effortless (adj.)

1801, passive, from effort + -less. Meaning easy is from 1831. Related: Effortlessly;
effortlessness.


effrontery (n.)

1715, from French effronterie, from effront&eacute; shameless, from Old French esfronte shameless,
brazen, probably from Late Latin effrontem (nominative effrons) barefaced, from Latin ex- out (see
ex-) + frontem (nominative frons) brow (see front (n.)).    Latin frontus had a sense of ability to
blush, but the literal sense of effrontery often has been taken to be putting forth the forehead.
Forehead in Johnson's Dictionary (1755) has a secondary sense of impudence; confidence; assurance;
audaciousness; audacity.


effulgence (n.)

1660s, from Late Latin effulgentia (from Latin effulgentum; see effulgent) + -ce.


effulgent (adj.)

1738, back-formation from effulgence, or else from Latin effulgentem (nominative effulgens), present
participle of effulgere, from ex out (see ex-) + fulgere to shine (see bleach (v.)).


effuse (v.)

late 14c., from Middle French effuser or directly from Latin effusus, past participle of effundere
to pour forth (see effusion). Related: Effused; effusing.


effusion (n.)

c.1400, a pouring out, from Middle French effusion (14c.) and directly from Latin effusionem
(nominative effusio) a pouring forth, noun of action from past participle stem of effundere pour
forth, spread abroad, from ex- out (see ex-) + fundere pour (see found (v.2)). Figuratively, of
speech, emotion, etc., from 1650s.


effusive (adj.)

1660s, from Latin effus-, stem of effundere (see effusion) + -ive. Related: Effusively.


eft (n.)

Old English efte, efeta small lizard-like animal, of unknown origin (see newt).


eftsoons (adv.)

obsolete or archaic way of saying soon afterward, from Old English eftsona a second time,
repeatedly, soon after, again, from eft afterward, again, a second time (from Proto-Germanic *aftiz,
from PIE root *apo- off, away; see apo-) + sona immediately (see soon). Not in living use since 17c.


egad

1670s, I gad, a softened oath, second element God, first uncertain; perhaps it represents
exclamation ah.


egalitarian (adj.)

1885, from French &eacute;galitaire, from Old French egalite, from Latin aequalitatem (see
equality). The noun is 1920.


egalitarianism (n.)

1932, from egalitarian + -ism.


Egbert

masc. proper name, from Old English Ecg-beorht, literally sword-bright. See edge (n.) + bright
(adj.).


egest (v.)

c.1600, from Latin egestus, past participle of egere, from ex- out (see ex-) + gere to carry.
Related: Egested; egesting.


egestion (n.)

early 15c., from Latin egestionem (nominative egestio), noun of action from past participle stem of
egere (see egest).


egg (n.)

mid-14c., from northern England dialect, from Old Norse egg, which vied with Middle English eye, eai
(from Old English &aelig;g) until finally displacing it after 1500; both are from Proto-Germanic
*ajja(m) (cognates: Old Saxon, Middle Dutch, Dutch, Old High German, German ei, Gothic ada),
probably from PIE *owyo-/*oyyo- egg (cognates: Old Church Slavonic aja, Russian jajco, Breton ui,
Welsh wy, Greek oon, Latin ovum); possibly derived from root *awi- bird. Caxton (15c.) writes of a
merchant (probably a north-country man) in a public house on the Thames who asked for eggs:And the
goode wyf answerde, that she coude speke no frenshe. And the marchaunt was angry, for he also coude
speke no frenshe, but wolde have hadde egges, and she understode hym not.She did, however, recognize
another customer's request for eyren. Bad egg in the figurative sense is from 1855. To have egg on
(one's) face be made to look foolish is attested by 1948.    [Young &amp; Rubincam] realize full
well that a crew can sometimes make or break a show. It can do little things to ruin a program or
else, by giving it its best, can really get that all-important rating. They are mindful of an emcee
of a variety show who already has been tabbed old egg in your face because the crew has managed to
get him in such awkward positions on the TV screen. [Billboard, March 5, 1949]   Eggs Benedict
attested by 1898. The figure of speech represented in to have all (one's) eggs in one basket is
attested by 1660s.


egg (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse eggja to goad on, incite, from egg edge (see edge (n.)). The unrelated verb
meaning to pelt with (rotten) eggs is from 1857, from egg (n.). Related: Egged; egging.


egg-beater (n.)

also eggbeater, 1828, from egg (n.) + beater. Slang sense of helicopter is from 1937 from notion of
whirling rotation.


egghead (n.)

1907, bald person, from egg (n.) + head (n.). Sense of intellectual is attested from 1918, among
Chicago newspapermen; popularized by U.S. syndicated columnist Stewart Alsop in 1952 in reference to
Adlai Stevenson's presidential campaign.    Adlai Stevenson once told what it was like to be the
rare intellectual in politics. Via ovicapitum dura est, he said, the way of the egghead is hard.
[New York Times, Oct. 28, 1982]


eggnog (n.)

also egg nog, c.1775, American English, from egg (n.) + nog strong ale.


eggplant (n.)

1767, from egg (n.) + plant (n.). Originally of the white variety. Compare aubergine.


eggshell (n.)

early 15c., from egg (n.) + shell (n.). Earlier ay-schelle (c.1300). Emblematic of thin and delicate
from 1835; as a color term, from 1894. The figure of treading on eggshells to move cautiously is
attested by 1734.


eglantine (n.)

sweet briar, c.1400, from French &eacute;glantine, from Old French aiglent dog rose, from Vulgar
Latin *aquilentus rich in prickles, from Latin aculeus spine, prickle, diminutive of acus needle
(see acuity).


ego (n.)

1714, as a term in metaphysics, from Latin ego I (cognate with Old English ic, see I).
Psychoanalytic sense is from 1894; sense of conceit is 1891. Ego trip first recorded 1969.    In the
book of Egoism it is written, Possession without obligation to the object possessed approaches
felicity. [George Meredith, The Egoist, 1879]


egocentric (adj.)

1900, from ego + -centric. Related: Egocentricity; egocentrism.


egoism (n.)

1785, in metaphysics (see egoist), from French &eacute;goisme (1755), from Modern Latin egoismus,
from Latin ego (see ego). Meaning self-interest is from 1800.


egoist (n.)

1785, in metaphysics, one who maintains there is no evidence of the existence of anything but the
self (taking ego in a sense of thinking subject), from French &eacute;goiste (1755); see ego + -ist.
Meaning selfish person is from 1879. Related: Egoistic; egoistical.


egomania (n.)

1825, from ego + mania.


egomaniac (n.)

1890, from egomania. Related: Egomaniacal.


egotism (n.)

1714, from ego + -ism (see egotist). Meaning selfishness is from 1800.


egotist (n.)

1714, first used by Joseph Addison; see ego + -ist. Addison credits the term to Port-Royalists who
used it in reference to obtrusive use of first person singular pronoun in writing, hence talking too
much about oneself. Meaning self-conceit, selfishness is 1800. The -t- is abnornmal, perhaps by
influence of dogmatism. Related: Egotistic; egotistical.


egregious (adj.)

1530s, distinguished, eminent, excellent, from Latin egregius distinguished, excellent,
extraordinary, from the phrase ex grege rising above the flock, from ex out of (see ex-) + grege,
ablative of grex herd, flock (see gregarious).    Disapproving sense, now predominant, arose late
16c., originally ironic and is not in the Latin word, which etymologically means simply exceptional.
Related: Egregiously; egregiousness.


egress (n.)

1530s, from Latin egressus a going out, noun use of past participle of egredi go out, from ex- out
(see ex-) + -gredi, comb. form of gradi step, go (see grade (n.)). Perhaps a back-formation from
egression (early 15c.).


egret (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French aigrette, from Old Proven&ccedil;al aigreta, diminutive of aigron heron,
perhaps of Germanic origin (compare Old High German heigaro; see heron).


Egypt

Old English Egipte, from French Egypte, from Greek Aigyptos the river Nile, Egypt, from Amarna
Hikuptah, corresponding to Egyptian Ha(t)-ka-ptah temple of the soul of Ptah, the creative god
associated with Memphis, the ancient city of Egypt.    Strictly one of the names of Memphis, it was
taken by the Greeks as the name of the whole country. The Egyptian name, Kemet, means black country,
possibly in reference to the rich delta soil. The Arabic is Misr, which is derived from Mizraim, the
name of a son of Biblical Ham.


Egyptian

late 14c., Egypcyan; see Egypt + -ian.


Egyptology (n.)

1859, from Egypt + -ology. Related: Egyptologist.


eh

1560s as an exclamation of sorrow; with questions, from 1773.


eider (n.)

1743, from German Eider or Dutch eider, both from Old Norse &aelig;&thorn;ar, genitive of
&aelig;&thorn;r duck, from a North Germanic root.


eiderdown (n.)

1774; see eider + down (n.). Ultimately from Icelandic &aelig;&eth;ardun, via a Scandinavian source
(compare Danish ederdunn) or German Eiderdon.


eidetic (adj.)

pertaining to the faculty of projecting images, 1924, from German eidetisch, coined by German
psychologist Erich Jaensch (1883-1940), from Greek eidetikos pertaining to images, also pertaining
to knowledge, from eidesis knowledge, from eidos form, shape (see -oid).


eidolon (n.)

1828, from Greek eidolon (see idol).


Eiffel Tower

erected in the Champ-de-Mars for the Paris Universal Exposition of 1889; at 984.25 feet the world's
tallest structure at the time. Designed by French engineer Alexandre Gustave Eiffel (1832-1923).


eight (n.)

late 14c., eighte, earlier ehte (c.1200), from Old English eahta, &aelig;hta, from Proto-Germanic
*akhto(u) (cognates: Old Saxon ahto, Old Frisian ahta, Old Norse atta, Swedish &#229;tta, Dutch
acht, Old High German Ahto, German acht, Gothic ahtau), from PIE *okto(u) eight (cognates: Sanskrit
astau, Avestan ashta, Greek okto, Latin octo, Old Irish ocht-n, Breton eiz, Old Church Slavonic
osmi, Lithuanian a&#353;tuoni).    Klein calls it an old dual form, orig. meaning 'twice four.'  For
spelling, see fight (v.). Meaning eight-man crew of a rowing boat is from 1847. The Spanish piece of
eight (1690s) was so called because it was worth eight reals (see piece (n.)). Figure (of) eight as
the shape of a race course, etc., attested from c.1600. To be behind the eight ball in trouble
(1932) is a metaphor from shooting pool.


eighteen (n.)

late 14c., eightene, earlier ahtene (c.1200), from Old English eahtatene, eahtatyne; see eight +
-teen. Cognate with Old Saxon ahtotian, Dutch achttien, Old High German ahtozehan, German achtzehn,
Old Norse attjan, Swedish adert&#229;n.


eighteenth (adj.)

mid-13c., egteten&#254;e, modified, by influence of eighteen, from Old English eahtateo&eth;a; from
eight + teo&eth;a tenth (see -ty (1)).


eighth (adj.)

late 14c., eighthe, from Old English eahto&eth;a; see eight + -th (1). Cognate with Old High German
ahtoda, Old Frisian achta, German achte, Gothic ahtuda.


eighties (n.)

1827 as the years of someone's life between ages 80 and 89; from 1833 as the ninth decade of years
in a given century; from 1854 with reference to Fahrenheit temperature. See eighty.


eighty (n.)

eigteti (late 13c.), from eight + -ty (1). Replacing Old English hundeahtatig, with hund- ten.
Related: Eightieth.


eighty-six (v.)

slang for eliminate, 1936, originated at lunch counters, a cook's word for none when asked for
something not available, probably rhyming slang for nix.


Eileen

fem. proper name, from Celtic (compare Irish Eibhlin) but influenced in form by Helen.


Einstein (n.)

as a type-name for a genius, 1920, in reference to German-born theoretical physicist Albert Einstein
(1879-1955). According to German-American Names (George F. Jones, 3rd ed., 2006) it means literally
place encompassed by a stone wall.


Einsteinium (n.)

discovered in the debris of a 1952 U.S. nuclear test in the Pacific, named 1955 for physicist Albert
Einstein (1879-1955).


Eire

see Irish.


eirenic (adj.)

1885, from Greek eirenikos, from eirene peace, time of peace. Earlier as irenic (1864), irenical
(1650s).


eisegesis (n.)

the reading of one's own ideas into scripture, 1878, from Greek eis in, into + ending from exegesis.


Eisenhower

surname, from German Eisenhauer, literally iron-cutter, iron-hewer, perhaps based on Fr. Taillefer
[George F. Jones, German-American Names, 3rd ed., 2006].


Eisteddfod (n.)

annual assembly of Welsh bards, 1822, from Welsh, literally session, from eistedd to sit (from sedd
seat, cognate with Latin sedere; see sedentary) + bod to be (cognate with Old English beon; see be).


either (adj.)

Old English &aelig;g&eth;er, contraction of &aelig;ghw&aelig;&eth;er each of two, both, from a
always (see aye (adv.)) + ge- collective prefix + hw&aelig;&eth;er which of two, whether (see
whether).    Cognate with Dutch ieder, Old High German eogiwedar, German jeder either, each, every).
Modern sense of one or the other of two is late 13c. Use of either-or to suggest an unavoidable
choice between alternatives (1931) in some cases reflects Danish enten-eller, title of an 1843 book
by Kierkegaard.


ejaculate (v.)

1570s, emit semen, from Latin eiaculatus, past participle of eiaculari to throw out, shoot out, from
ex- out (see ex-) + iaculari to throw, hurl, cast, dart, from iaculum javelin, dart, from iacere to
throw (see jet (v.)). Only other surviving sense is exclaim suddenly (1660s). Related: Ejaculated;
ejaculating.


ejaculation (n.)

c.1600, of fluids; 1620s, of utterances, from French &eacute;jaculation, from &eacute;jaculer, from
Latin ejaculari (see ejaculate).


eject (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin eiectus thrown out, past participle of eicere throw out, from ex- out (see ex-)
+ -icere, comb. form of iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Related: Ejected; ejecting.


ejection (n.)

1560s, from Middle French ejection and directly from Latin eiectionem, noun of action from past
participle stem of eicere (see eject). The jet pilot's ejection seat (also ejector seat) is from
1945.


eke (v.)

c.1200, eken to increase, lengthen, north England and E. Midlands variant of echen from Old English
ecan, eacan, eacian to increase, probably from eaca an increase, from Proto-Germanic *aukan
(cognates: Old Norse auka, Old Frisian aka, Old High German ouhhon, Gothic aukan), from PIE *aug- to
increase (see augment).    Now mainly in phrase to eke out (1590s). It means to make something go
further or last longer; you can eke out your income by taking a second job, but you can't eke out
your existence. Related: Eked; eking.


eke (adv.)

also (obsolete), from Old English eac, cognate with Old Saxon, Old Dutch ok, Old Norse and Gothic
auk, Old Frisian ak, Old High German ouh, German auch also; probably related to eke (v.).


el (n.)

American English abbreviation of elevated railroad, first recorded 1906 in O. Henry.


elaborate (adj.)

1590s, produced by labor, from Latin elaboratus, past participle of elaborare to exert oneself (see
elaboration). Meaning very detailed is from 1620s.


elaborate (v.)

c.1600, to build up from simple elements, from Latin elaboratus, past participle of elaborare (see
elaboration). Meaning to work out in detail is attested from 1610s. Related: Elaborated;
elaborating.


elaborately (adv.)

1630s, see elaborate (adj.) + -ly (2).


elaboration (n.)

1570s, in a physiological sense relating to tissue development, from Late Latin elaborationem
(nominative elaboratio), noun of action from past participle stem of elaborare work out, produce by
labor, from ex- out (see ex-) + laborare to labor (see labor (v.)).


elan (n.)

1877, from French &eacute;lan (16c.), spring, bound, impetus, noun derived from &eacute;lancer to
rush, dart, from Old French elancer, from e- out (see ex-) + lancer to throw, originally to throw a
lance, from Late Latin lanceare, from Latin lancea (see lance (n.)).


eland (n.)

large South African antelope, 1786, from Dutch eland elk, from a Baltic source akin to Lithuanian
elnias deer, from PIE *el- red, brown (see elk), cognate with first element in Greek Elaphebolion,
name of the ninth month of the Attic year (corresponding to late March-early April), literally deer-
hunting (month). Borrowed earlier as ellan (1610s, via French), ellend, from the German form of the
word.


elapse (v.)

1640s, from Middle French elapser, from Latin elapsus, past participle of elabi slip or glide away,
escape, from ex- out, away (see ex-) + labi to slip, glide (see lapse (n.)). The noun now
corresponding to elapse is lapse. Related: Elapsed; elapsing.


elasmosaurus (n.)

giant sea reptile from the Mezozoic, 1879, from Modern Latin (coined 1868 by E.D. Cope), from Greek
elasmos metal plate (from elan to strike; see elastic) + -saurus.


elastic (adj.)

1650s, coined in French (1650s) as a scientific term to describe gases, from Modern Latin elasticus,
from Greek elastos ductile, flexible, related to elaunein to strike, beat out, of uncertain origin.
Applied to solids from 1670s. Figurative use by 1859. The noun, cord or string woven with rubber, is
1847, American English.


elasticity (n.)

1660s; see elastic + -ity.


elate (v.)

1570s, literal, to raise, elevate, probably from Latin elatus uplifted, exalted, past participle of
effere (see elation), or else a back-formation from elation. Figurative use from 1610s. Related:
Elated; elating.


elated (adj.)

1610s, past participle adjective from elate.


elation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French elacion elation, conceit, arrogance, vanity, from Latin elationem
(nominative elatio), noun of action from elatus elevated, form used as past participle of efferre,
from ex- out + latus (see oblate (n.)), past participle of ferre carry (see infer). Metaphoric sense
of lifting spirits was in Latin and has always been the principal meaning in English.


elbow (n.)

c.1200, elbowe, from Old English elnboga, from ell length of the forearm + boga bow, arch, from West
Germanic *alinobogan, from Proto-Germanic *elino-bugon, literally bend of the forearm (cognates:
Middle Dutch ellenboghe, Dutch elleboog, Old High German elinbogo, German Ellenbogen, Old Norse
&ouml;lnbogi).    Second element related to Old English bugan to bend (see bow (v.)); first element
from *alina arm, from PIE *el- (1) elbow, forearm (see ell (n.1)). Phrase elbow grease hard rubbing
is attested from 1670s, from jocular sense of the best substance for polishing furniture. Elbow room
attested from mid-16c.


elbow (v.)

thrust with the elbow, c.1600, from elbow (n.). Figurative sense is from 1863. Related: Elbowed;
elbowing.


eld

poetic or archaic form of old; in some cases from Old English eald.


elder (adj.)

more old, Old English (Mercian) eldra, comparative of eald, ald (see old); only English survival of
umlaut in comparison. Superseded by older since 16c. Elder statesman (1921) originally was a
translation of Japanese genro (plural).


elder (n.2)

type of berry tree, c.1400, from earlier ellen, from Old English ell&aelig;n, ell&aelig;rn
elderberry tree, origin unknown, perhaps related to alder. Common Germanic, cognates: Old Saxon
elora, Middle Low German elre, Old High German elira, German Eller, Erle. Related: Elderberry.


elder (n.1)

senior citizen, c.1200, from Old English eldra older person, parent (used in biblical translation
for Greek presbyter); see elder (adj.). The Old English for grandfather was ealdf&aelig;der.


elderly (adj.)

1610s, from elder + -ly (1). Old English ealdorlic meant chief, princely, excellent, authentic. Old
English also had related eldernliche of old time, literally forefatherly.


eldest (adj.)

Old English (Mercian) eldrost, superlative of eald, ald old (see old). Superseded by oldest since
16c. Compare elder (adj.).


eldorado (n.)

1590s, from Spanish El Dorado the golden one, name given 16c. to country or city believed to lie in
the heart of the Amazon jungle, from past participle of dorar to gild, from Latin deaurare.


Eldred

masc. proper name, from Old English Ealdred, literally great in counsel, from eald old, great (see
old) + r&aelig;d advice, counsel (see read (v.)).


eldritch (adj.)

c.1500, apparently somehow from elf (compare Scottish variant elphrish), an explanation OED finds
suitable; Watkins connects its elements with Old English el- else, otherwise and rice realm.


Eleanor

also Elinor, from Proven&ccedil;al Ailenor, a variant of Leonore, introduced in England by Eleanor
of Aquitaine (1122-1204), wife of Henry II. The Old French form of the name was Elienor.


elect (v.)

early 15c., from Latin electus, past participle of eligere to pick out, choose (see election).
Related: Elected; electing.


elect (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin electus, past participle of eligere (see election).


electable (adj.)

1758; see elect (v.) + -able. Related: Electability.


election (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French eleccioun, Old French elecion choice, election, selection (12c.), from
Latin electionem (nominative electio), noun of action from past participle stem of eligere pick out,
select, from ex- out (see ex-) + -ligere, comb. form of legere to choose, read (see lecture (n.)).
Theological sense is from late 14c.


electioneer (v.)

1760 (implied in electioneering), from election, probably on model of auctioneer (see auction), as
the verb engineer was not yet in use.


elective (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin electivus, from electus, past participle of eligere (see election). In
reference to school subjects studied at the student's choice, first recorded 1847. As a noun, from
1701.


elector (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin elector chooser, selecter, agent noun from past participle stem of eligere (see
election).


electoral (adj.)

1670s, in reference to Germany, from elector + -al (1). In general sense from 1790. Related:
Electorally.


electorate (n.)

1670s, in reference to Germany, from elector + -ate (1). Meaning whole body of voters is from 1879.


Electra

daughter of Agamemnon and Clytaemnestra, responsible for the murder of her mother, from Greek
Elektra, literally shining, bright, related to elektor the beaming sun and perhaps to elektron
amber. Especially in psychological Electra complex (1913) in reference to a daughter who feels
attraction toward her father and hostility to her mother.


electric (adj.)

1640s, first used in English by physician Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682), apparently coined as Modern
Latin electricus (literally resembling amber) by English physicist William Gilbert (1540-1603) in
treatise De Magnete (1600), from Latin electrum amber, from Greek elektron amber (Homer, Hesiod,
Herodotus), also pale gold (a compound of 1 part silver to 4 of gold); of unknown origin.
Originally the word described substances which, like amber, attract other substances when rubbed.
Meaning charged with electricity is from 1670s; the physical force so called because it first was
generated by rubbing amber. In many modern instances, the word is short for electrical. Figurative
sense is attested by 1793. Electric toothbrush first recorded 1936; electric typewriter 1958.


electrical (adj.)

relating to electricity, run by electricity, 1746, from electric + -al (1). Earlier (1630s)
synonymous with electric. Related: Electrically.


electrician (n.)

1751, scientist concerned with electricity; 1869 as technician concerned with electrical systems;
see electric + -ian.


electricity (n.)

1640s (Browne), from electric + -ity. Originally in reference to friction.


electrification (n.)

1748; see electrify + -ation.


electrify (v.)

1745, to charge with electricity; see electric + -fy. Figurative sense recorded by 1752. Related:
Electrified; electrifying.


electro-

before vowels electr-, word-forming element meaning electrical, electricity, Latinized form of Greek
elektro-, comb. form of elektron amber (see electric).


electrocardiogram (n.)

1904, from electro- + cardiogram.


electrocute (v.)

execute by electricity, 1889, American English, from electro- + back half of execute. The method
first was used Aug. 6, 1890, in New York state, on William Kemmler, convicted of the murder of his
common-law wife. Sense involving accidental death is first recorded 1909. Electric chair is also
first recorded 1889, which is when the first one was introduced in New York state as a humane
alternative to hanging. Related: Electrocuted; electrocuting.


electrocution (n.)

1890; see electrocute + -ion. Meaning any death by electricity is from 1940.


electrode (n.)

1834, coined by English physicist and chemist Michael Faraday (1791-1867) from electro- + Greek
hodos way (see cede) on same pattern as anode, cathode.


electroencephalogram (n.)

1934, from electro- + encephalo- (see encephalitis) + -gram.


electrolysis (n.)

1834, introduced by Faraday on the suggestion of the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English
polymath, from electro- + Greek lysis a loosening, from lyein to loosen, set free (see lose).
Originally of tumors, later (1909) of hair removal.


electrolyte (n.)

substance decomposed by electrolysis, 1834, from electro- + Greek lytos loosed, from lyein to loose
(see lose).


electromagnet (n.)

1831; see electro- + magnet.


electromagnetic (adj.)

1821; see electro- + magnetic.


electromagnetism (n.)

1828; see electro- + magnetism.


electron (n.)

coined 1891 by Irish physicist George J. Stoney (1826-1911) from electric + -on, as in ion (q.v.).
Electron microscope translates German Elektronenmikroskop (1932).


electronic (adj.)

1902, pertaining to electrons; 1930 as pertaining to electronics; see electron + -ic. Related:
Electronically.


electronic mail (n.)

1977; see e-mail.


electronics (n.)

1910, from electronic; also see -ics. The science of how electrons behave in vacuums, gas, semi-
conductors, etc.


electrum (n.)

alloy of gold and up to 40% silver, late 14c. (in Old English elehtre), from Latin electrum alloy of
gold and silver, also amber (see electric). So called probably for its pale yellow color.


eleemosynary (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin eleemosynarius pertaining to alms, from Late Latin eleemosyna alms, from
Greek eleemosyne pity (see alms).


elegance (n.)

c.1500, tastefulness, correctness, harmoniousness, refinement, of speech or prose, from Middle
French &eacute;l&eacute;gance, from Latin elegantia taste, propriety, refinement, from elegantem
(see elegant). Earlier form was elegancy (early 15c.). Meaning refined luxury is from 1797.


elegant (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French &eacute;l&eacute;gant (15c.), from Latin elegantem (nominative
elegans) choice, fine, tasteful, collateral form of present participle of eligere select with care,
choose. Elegans was originally a term of reproach, dainty, fastidious; the notion of tastefully
refined emerged in classical Latin. Related: Elegantly.


elegiac (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French &eacute;l&eacute;giaque, from Latin elegiacus, from Greek elegeiakos, from
eleigeia (see elegy). Related: Elegiacally.


elegize (v.)

1702; see elegy + -ize. Related: Elegized; elegizing.


elegy (n.)

1510s, from Middle French elegie, from Latin elegia, from Greek elegeia ode an elegaic song, from
elegeia, fem. of elegeios elegaic, from elegos poem or song of lament, perhaps from a Phrygian word.


element (n.)

c.1300, earth, air, fire, or water, from Old French element (10c.), from Latin elementem rudiment,
first principle, matter in its most basic form (translating Greek stoikheion), origin unknown.
Meaning simplest component of a complex substance is late 14c. Modern sense in chemistry is from
1813. Elements atmospheric force is 1550s.


elemental (adj.)

late 15c., pertaining to the four elements, from Medieval Latin elementalis, from Latin elementum
(see element). Meaning simple, uncomplicated is from 1550s; that of relating to first principles is
from 1570s. The noun in the occult sense is from 1877.


elementary (adj.)

late 14c., having the nature of one of the four elements, from Middle French elementaire and
directly from Latin elementarius, from elementum (see element). Meaning rudimentary is from 1540s;
meaning simple is from 1620s. Elementary school is 1841.


elephant (n.)

c.1300, olyfaunt, from Old French oliphant (12c.), from Latin elephantus, from Greek elephas
(genitive elephantos) elephant, ivory, probably from a non-Indo-European language, likely via
Phoenician (compare Hamitic elu elephant, source of the word for it in many Semitic languages, or
possibly from Sanskrit ibhah elephant).    Re-spelled after 1550 on Latin model. As an emblem of the
Republican Party in U.S. politics, 1860. To see the elephant be acquainted with life, gain knowledge
by experience is an American English colloquialism from 1835.


elephantiasis (n.)

1580s, from Greek elephantos, genitive of elephas elephant (see elephant) + -iasis pathological or
morbid condition. It refers to two diseases, one characterized by thickening of a body part (E.
Arabum), the other, older meaning is disease characterized by skin resembling an elephant's (E.
Gr&aelig;corum, also called Egyptian leprosy).


elephantine (adj.)

1620s, huge, from Latin elephantinus pertaining to the elephant, from elephantus (see elephant).
Meaning pertaining to elephants is from 1670s.


Eleusinian (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to Eleusis, town outside Athens, site of the mystery associated with the cult of
Demeter, goddess of harvests, and her daughter.


eleutherian (adj.)

1620s, from Greek eleutherios like a free man, noble-minded, frank, liberal, literally freeing,
delivering, releaser, title of Zeus as protector of political freedom, from eleutheria freedom, from
PIE *leu-dheros.


elevate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin elevatus, past participle of elevare lift up, raise, figuratively, to lighten,
alleviate, from ex- out (see ex-) + levare lighten, raise, from levis light in weight (see lever).
Related: Elevated; elevating.


elevation (n.)

late 14c., a rising, height of something, from Old French elevation and directly from Latin
elevationem (nominative elevatio) a lifting up, noun of action from past participle stem of elevare
(see elevate). Meaning act of elevating is from 1520s.


elevator (n.)

1640s, originally of muscles, from Latin elevator, agent noun from past participle stem of elevare
(see elevate). As a name for a mechanical lift (originally for grain) attested from 1787. Elevator
music is attested by 1963. Elevator as a lift for shoes is from 1940.


eleven (n.)

c.1200, elleovene, from Old English endleofan, literally one left (over ten), from Proto-Germanic
*ainlif- (compare Old Saxon elleban, Old Frisian andlova, Dutch elf, Old High German einlif, German
elf, Old Norse ellifu, Gothic ainlif), a compound of *ain one (see one) + PIE *leikw- leave, remain
(source of Greek leipein to leave behind; see relinquish).  FIREFLY: Give me a number from 1 to
10.CHICOLINI: eleven! FIREFLY: Right!  Viking survivors who escaped an Anglo-Saxon victory were
daro&thorn;a laf the leavings of spears, while hamora laf the leavings of hammers was an Old English
kenning for swords (both from The Battle of Brunanburgh). Twelve reflects the same formation.
Outside Germanic the only instance of this formation is in Lithuanian, which uses -lika left over
and continues the series to 19 (vienio-lika eleven, dvy-lika twelve, try-lika thirteen, keturio-lika
fourteen, etc.) Phrase eleventh hour (1829) is from Matthew xx:1-16.


eleventh (adj.)

late 14c., eleventhe, superseding earlier ellefte (c.1300), enlefte (early 13c.), from Old English
endleofta; see eleven + -th (1).


elf (n.)

one of a race of powerful supernatural beings in Germanic folklore, Old English elf (Mercian,
Kentish), &aelig;lf (Northumbrian), ylfe (plural, West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *albiz (cognates:
Old Saxon alf, Old Norse alfr, German alp evil spirit, goblin, incubus), origin unknown, possibly
from PIE *albho- white. Used figuratively for mischievous person from 1550s.    In addition to
elf/&aelig;lf (masc.), Old English had parallel form *elfen (fem.), the plural of which was
*elfenna, -elfen, from Proto-Germanic *albinjo-. Both words survived into Middle English and were
active there, the former as elf (with the vowel of the plural), plural elves, the latter as elven,
West Midlands dialect alven (plural elvene).    The Germanic elf originally was dwarfish and
malicious (compare Old English &aelig;lfadl nightmare, &aelig;lfsogo&eth;a hiccup, thought to be
caused by elves); in the Middle Ages they were confused to some degree with faeries; the more noble
version begins with Spenser. Nonetheless a popular component in Anglo-Saxon names, many of which
survive as modern given names and surnames, such as &AElig;lfr&aelig;d Elf-counsel (Alfred),
&AElig;lfwine Elf-friend (Alvin), &AElig;lfric Elf-ruler (Eldridge), also women's names such as
&AElig;lffl&aelig;d Elf-beauty. Elf Lock hair tangled, especially by Queen Mab, which it was not
fortunate to disentangle [according to Robert Nares' glossary of Shakespeare] is from 1592.


elfin (adj.)

1590s, from elf; first found in Spenser, who may have been thinking of elven but the word also is a
proper name in the Arthurian romances (Elphin).


elfish (adj.)

c.1200, alvisc; see elf + -ish. Related: Elfishly; elfishness.


Elgin Marbles (n.)

1809, sculptures and marbles (especially from the frieze of the Parthenon) brought from Greece to
England and sold to the British government by Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin (1766-1841).


Eli

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, the name of a high priest of Israel, teacher of Samuel, from
Hebrew, literally high.


elicit (v.)

1640s, from Latin elicitus, past participle of elicere draw forth, from ex- out (see ex-) + -licere,
comb. form of lacere to entice, lure, deceive (related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace (n.)).
Related: Elicited; eliciting; elicits; elicitation.


elide (v.)

1590s, a legal term, to annul, do away with, from Middle French elider (16c.), from Latin elidere
strike out, from ex- out (see ex-) + -lidere, comb. form of laedere to strike. Phonological sense is
first recorded 1796. Related: Elided; eliding.


eligibility (n.)

1640s, see eligible + -ity.


eligible (adj.)

early 15c., fit or proper to be chosen, from Middle French eligible fit to be chosen (14c.), from
Late Latin eligibilis that may be chosen, from Latin eligere choose (see election). Related:
Eligibly.


Elihu

masc. proper name, Hebrew, literally he is my God.


Elijah

name of the great Old Testament prophet, from Hebrew Elijjah, literally the Lord is God. The Greek
form is Elias.


eliminate (v.)

1560s, from Latin eliminatus, past participle of eliminare thrust out of doors, expel, from ex
limine off the threshold, from ex off, out (see ex-) + limine, ablative of limen threshold (see
limit (n.)).    Used literally at first; sense of exclude first attested 1714; sense of expel waste
from the body is c.1795. Related: Eliminated; eliminating; eliminative; eliminatory.


elimination (n.)

c.1600, a casting out, noun of action from eliminate. Meaning expulsion of waste matter is from
1855.


Eliot

surname, Old French diminutive of Elias (French Elie; see Elijah) + -ot. It absorbed the Anglo-Saxon
proper names &AElig;&eth;elgeat and &AElig;lfweald Elf-ruler.


Elisha

masc. proper name, from Hebrew, literally God is salvation, from El God + yesha salvation.


elision (n.)

1580s, from Latin elisionem (nominative elisio) a striking out, noun of action from past participle
stem of elidere (see elide).


elite (n.)

1823, from French &eacute;lite selection, choice, from Old French eslite (12c.), fem. past
participle of elire, elisre pick out, choose, from Latin eligere choose (see election). Borrowed in
Middle English as chosen person (late 14c.), especially a bishop-elect; died out mid-15c.; re-
introduced by Byron's Don Juan. As an adjective by 1852. As a typeface, first recorded 1920.


elitism (n.)

1951; see elite + -ism.


elitist (n.)

1950; see elite + -ist.  The original examples were Freud, Nietzsche, and Carlyle.


elixir (n.)

mid-13c., from Medieval Latin elixir philosopher's stone, believed by alchemists to transmute baser
metals into gold and/or to cure diseases and prolong life, from Arabic al-iksir, probably from late
Greek xerion powder for drying wounds, from xeros dry (see xerasia). General sense of strong tonic
is 1590s; used for quack medicines from at least 1630s.


Elizabeth

fem. proper name, Biblical name of the wife of Aaron, from Late Latin Elisabeth, from Greek
Eleisabeth, Eleisabet, from Hebrew Elishebha God is an oath, the second element said by Klein to be
related to shivah (fem. sheva) seven, and to nishba he swore, originally he bound himself by (the
sacred number) seven. Has never ranked lower than 26th in popularity among the names given to baby
girls in the U.S. in any year since 1880, the oldest for which a reliable list is available.


Elizabethan (adj.)

1807 (Elizabethean); Coleridge (1817) has Elizabethian, and Carlyle (1840) finally attains the
modern form. Belonging to the period of Queen Elizabeth I (1558-1603). The noun is first attested
1881. See Elizabeth.    John Knox, one of the exiles for religion in Switzerland, publi&#383;hed his
Fir&#383;t Bla&#383;t of the Trumpet again&#383;t the Government of Women, in this reign [of
Elizabeth]. It was lucky for him that he was out of the queen's reach when he &#383;ounded the
trumpet. [The Rev. Mr. James Granger, A Biographical History of England, 1769]


elk (n.)

late Old English, from Old Norse elgr or from an alteration of Old English elh, eolh (perhaps via
French scribes), or possibly from Middle High German elch (OED's suggestion), all from Proto-
Germanic *elkh- (source also of Old High German elaho),    The Germanic words are related to the
general word for deer in Balto-Slavic (such as Russian losu, Czech los; also see eland), from PIE
*olki-, perhaps with reference to the reddish color from root *el- (2) red, brown (in animal and
tree names); compare Sanskrit harina- deer, from hari- reddish-brown. Greek alke and Latin alces
probably are Germanic loan-words. Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks founded N.Y.C. 1868,
originally a society of actors and writers.


ell (n.1)

unit of measure of 45 inches, Old English eln, originally forearm, length of the arm (as a measure,
anywhere from a foot and a half to two feet), from PIE *el- (1) elbow, forearm (cognates: Greek
olene elbow, Latin ulna, Armenian uln shoulder, Sanskrit anih part of the leg above the knee,
Lithuanian alkune elbow).    The exact distance varied, depending on whose arm was used as the base
and whether it was measured from the shoulder to the fingertip or the wrist: the Scottish ell was
37.2 inches, the Flemish 27 inches. Latin ulna also was a unit of linear measure, and compare
cubit.Whereas shee tooke an inche of liberty before, tooke an ell afterwardes [Humfrey Gifford, A
Posie of Gilloflowers, 1580].


ell (n.2)

type of building extension, 1773, American English; so called for resemblance to the shape of the
alphabet letter.


Ella

fem. proper name, when not a diminutive of Eleanor it is from Old High German Alia, from al all.


Ellen

fem. proper name, an older form of Helen (q.v.). Its popularity among U.S. birth names peaked in
1880s and 1940s.


ellipse (n.)

1753, from French ellipse (17c.), from Latin ellipsis ellipse, also, a falling short, deficit, from
Greek elleipsis (see ellipsis). So called because the conic section of the cutting plane makes a
smaller angle with the base than does the side of the cone, hence, a falling short. The Greek word
was first applied by Apollonius of Perga (3c. B.C.E.). to the curve which had been previously called
the section of the acute-angled cone, but it had previously been technically applied to a rectangle
one of whose sides coincides with a part of a given line (Euclid, VI. 27).


ellipsis (n.)

1560s, an ellipse, from Latin ellipsis, from Greek elleipsis a falling short, defect, ellipse, from
elleipein to fall short, leave out, from en- in + leipein to leave (see relinquish). Grammatical
sense first recorded 1610s.


ellipsoid (n.)

1721; see ellipse + -oid. From 1861 as an adjective (earlier adjective was ellipsoidal).


elliptic (adj.)

1726, from Greek elleiptikos pertaining to an ellipse, from elleipein (see ellipsis).


elliptical (adj.)

1650s, elliptic in shape; see elliptic + -al (1). Grammatical sense of missing essential words or
phrases is recorded from 1778 (see ellipsis). Related: Elliptically.


Ellis Island

sandy island in mouth of Hudson River, said to have been called Gull Island by local Indians and
Oyster Island by the Dutch, renamed Gull Island after the British took over, then Gibbet Island
because pirates were hanged there. Sold to Samuel Ellis in 1785, who made it a picnic spot and gave
it his name. Sold by his heirs in 1808 to New York State and acquired that year by the U.S. War
Department for coastal defenses. Vacant after the American Civil War until the government opened an
immigration station there in 1892 to replace Castle Island.


elm (n.)

Old English elm, from Proto-Germanic *elmaz (cognates: Danish elm, Old Norse almr, Old High German
elme), perhaps from PIE root *el- red, brown (see elk); cognate with Latin ulmus, Old Irish lem.
German Ulme, Dutch olm are from or influenced by the Latin word.


Elmo

of St. Elmo's Fire (for which see saint (n.)); probably from Greek elene torch, via an apocryphal
saint.


elocution (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin elocutionem (nominative elocutio) voice production, manner of expression,
in classical Latin, oratorical expression, noun of action from past participle stem of eloqui speak
out (see eloquence).


Elohim

a name of God in the Bible, c.1600, from Hebrew, plural (of majesty?) of Eloh God, a word of unknown
etymology, perhaps an augmentation of El God, also of unknown origin. Generally taken as singular,
the use of this word instead of Yahveh is taken by biblical scholars as an important clue to
authorship in the Old Testament, hence Elohist.


eloign (v.)

1530s, to remove to a distance (especially in an effort to avoid the law), from Anglo-French eloign,
Old French esloigner, from Late Latin exlongare (see elongate).


elongate (v.)

1530s, from Late Latin elongatus, past participle of elongare to prolong, protract (see elongation).
Earlier in the same sense was elongen (mid-15c.). Related: Elongated; elongating.


elongation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin elongationem (nominative elongatio), noun of action from elongare remove
to a distance, from Latin ex- out (see ex-) + longus long (see long (adj.)).


elope (v.)

1590s, to run off, probably from Middle Dutch (ont)lopen run away, from ont- away from (from Proto-
Germanic *und- which also gave the first element in until) + lopen to run, from Proto-Germanic
*hlaupan (see leap (v.)). Sense of run from parents to marry secretly is 19c.     However there is
an Anglo-French aloper run away from a husband with one's lover (mid-14c.) which complicates this
etymology; perhaps it is a modification of the Middle Dutch word, with Old French es-, or it is a
compound of that and Middle English lepen run, leap (see leap (v.)).    The oldest Germanic word for
wedding is represented by Old English brydlop (cognates: Old High German bruthlauft, Old Norse
bru&eth;hlaup), literally bride run, the conducting of the woman to her new home. Related: Eloped;
eloping.


elopement (n.)

1540s, from elope + -ment. (The word was in Anglo-French in 14c.).


eloquence (n.)

late 14c., from Old French eloquence (12c.), from Latin eloquentia, from eloquentem (nominative
eloquens) eloquent, present participle of eloqui speak out, from ex- out (see ex-) + loqui to speak
(see locution). Earlier in same sense was eloquency (mid-14c.).


eloquent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French eloquent, from Latin eloquentem (nominative eloquens), present participle
of eloqui to speak out (see eloquence). Related: Eloquently.


Elsa

fem. proper name, from German diminutive of Elisabet (see Elizabeth).


else (adj.)

Old English elles other, otherwise, different, from Proto-Germanic *aljaz (cognates: Gothic aljis
other, Old High German eli-lenti, Old English el-lende, both meaning in a foreign land; see also
Alsace), an adverbial genitive of the neuter of PIE root *al- (1) beyond (cognates: Greek allos
other, Latin alius; see alias (adv.)). Synonym of other, the nuances of usage are often arbitrary.
Productive of a number of handy compounds that somehow never got traction or have been suffered to
fall from use: elsehow (1660s) somehow or other; elsewards (adv.), 1882, somewhere else; Old English
elsewhat (pron.)  something else, anything else; elsewhen (adv.), early 15c., at another time;
elsewhence (c.1600); elsewho (1540s). Among the survivors are elsewhere, elsewise.


elsewhere (n.)

c.1400, elswher, from Old English elles hw&aelig;r (see else + where).


elsewise (adv.)

1540s, from else + -wise.


elucidate (v.)

1560s, perhaps via Middle French &eacute;lucider (15c.) or directly from Late Latin elucidatus, past
participle of elucidare make clear, from ex- out, away (see ex-) + lucidus clear (see lucid).
Related: Elucidated; elucidates; elucidating.


elucidation (n.)

1560s, noun of action from elucidate.


elude (v.)

1530s, delude, make a fool of, from Latin eludere escape from, make a fool of, win from at play,
from ex- out, away (see ex-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Sense of evade is first recorded
1610s in a figurative sense, 1630s in a literal one. Related: Eluded; eludes; eluding.


elusion (n.)

1540s, noun of action from elude, or from Medieval Latin elusionem (nominative elusio), noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin eludere.


elusive (adj.)

1719, from Latin elus-, past participle stem of eludere (see elude) + -ive. Related: Elusiveness.


elution (n.)

washing, purification, 1610s, from Latin elutionem (nominative elutio) a washing out, noun of action
from past participle stem of eluere to wash out, wash off, clean, from ex- out (see ex-) + luere to
wash (see lave).


elven (adj.)

Old English -&aelig;lfen (n.) an elf or fairy (see elf). Not a pure adjective in Middle English (see
elvish was used), but used in phrases such as elven land (c.1300). Apparently revived as an
adjective by Tolkien.


elver (n.)

young eel, 1640s, variant of eelfare (1530s), literally passage of young eels up a river; see eel +
fare.


Elvira

fem. proper name, from Spanish, of Germanic origin.


elvish (adj.)

c.1200, aluisc, belonging to or pertaining to the elves; supernatural, from elf + -ish. Old English
used ilfig in this sense.


Elysian (adj.)

1570s, from Greek Elysion pedion Elysian field, where heroes and the virtuous live after death, from
a pre-Greek word of unknown origin.


Elysium (n.)

1590s, from Latin Elysium, from Greek Elysion (pedion) abode of the blessed (see Elysian).


elytra (n.)

1774, plural of elytron hardened wing of an insect, from Greek elytron sheath, from elyein to roll
round, from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, roll, with derivatives referring to curved, enclosing
objects (see volvox).


elytro-

word-forming element used for vagina in medical terms, from Greek elytron, literally sheath (see
elytra). Related: Elytral.


em- (1)

from French assimilation of en- to following labial (see en- (1)). Also a prefix used to form verbs
from adjectives and nouns.


em- (2)

representing Latin ex- assimilated to following -m- (see ex-).


emaciate (v.)

1620s (implied in emaciating), from Latin emaciatus, past participle of emaciare make lean, waste
away, from ex- out (see ex-) + macies leanness, from macer thin (see macro-). Related: Emaciated;
emaciating.


emaciated (adj.)

1660s, past participle adjective from emaciate.


emaciation (n.)

1660s, from Latin emaciationem, noun of state from past participle stem of emaciare (see emaciate),
or perhaps a native formation from emaciate.


emaculate (adj.)

1620s, from Latin emaculatus freed from blemishes, past participle of emaculare, from ex- (see ex-)
+ maculare (see maculate (adj.)).


email (n.)

a type of pottery design pattern, c.1877, from French email (12c.), literally enamel (see enamel
(n.)).


emanant (n.)

1852, from Latin emanantem (nominative emanans), present participle of emanare (see emanate).


emanate (v.)

1680s, from Latin emanatus, past participle of emanare (see emanation). Related: Emanated;
emanating.


emanation (n.)

1560s, from Late Latin emanationem (nominative emanatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of Latin emanare flow out, arise, proceed, from ex- out (see ex-) + manare to flow, from PIE root
*ma- damp.


emancipate (v.)

1620s, from Latin emancipatus, past participle of emancipare declare (someone) free, give up one's
authority over, in Roman law, the freeing of a son or wife from the legal authority (patria
potestas) of the pater familias, to make his or her own way in the world; from ex- out, away (see
ex-) + mancipare deliver, transfer or sell, from mancipum ownership, from manus hand (see manual) +
capere take (see capable). Related: Emancipated; emancipating. Adopted in the cause of religious
toleration (17c.), then anti-slavery (1776). Also used in reference to women who free themselves
from conventional customs (1850).


emancipation (n.)

1630s, a setting free, from French &eacute;mancipation, from Latin emancipationem (nominative
emancipatio), noun of action from past participle stem of emancipare (see emancipate). Specifically
with reference to U.S. slavery from 1785. In Britain, with reference to easing of restrictions on
Catholics, etc.


emancipator (n.)

1782, agent noun in Latin form from emancipate.


emancipatory (adj.)

1650s; see emancipate + -ory.


emasculate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin emasculatus, past participle of emasculare castrate, from ex- out, away (see ex-)
+ masculus male, manly (see masculine). Originally and usually in a figurative sense. Related:
Emasculated; emasculating.


emasculation (n.)

1620s, agent noun from emasculate.


embalm (v.)

mid-14c., from Middle French embaumer preserve (a corpse) with spices, from en- in (see en- (1)) +
baume balm (see balm) + -er verbal suffix. The -l- inserted in English 1500s in imitation of Latin.
Related: Embalmed; embalming.


embankment (n.)

1786, from embank to enclose with a bank (1570s; see bank (n.2)) + -ment.


embargo (n.)

1590s, from Spanish embargo seizure, embargo, noun of action from embargar restrain impede, from
Vulgar Latin *imbarricare, from in- into, upon (see in- (2)) + *barra (see bar (n.1)). As a verb,
from 1640s. Related: Embargoed.


embark (v.)

1540s, from Middle French embarquer, from em- (see en- (1)) + barque small ship (see bark (n.)).
Related: Embarked; embarking.


embarkation (n.)

1640s, from French embarcation, noun of action from embarquer (see embark).


embarras (n.)

1660s, from French embarras obstacle; see embarrass.


embarrass (v.)

1670s, perplex, throw into doubt, from French embarrasser (16c.), literally to block, from embarras
obstacle, from Italian imbarrazzo, from imbarrare to bar, from in- into, upon (see in- (2)) + Vulgar
Latin *barra bar.    Meaning hamper, hinder is from 1680s. Meaning make (someone) feel awkward first
recorded 1828. Original sense preserved in embarras de richesse (1751), from French (1726): the
condition of having more wealth than one knows what to do with. Related: Embarrassed; embarrassing;
embarrassingly.


embarrassed (adj.)

perplexed, confused, 1680s, past participle adjective from embarrass.


embarrassment (n.)

1670s, state of being impeded, obstructed, entangled (of affairs, etc.), from embarrass + -ment, or
from French embarrassement, from embarrasser.    As a mental state of unease, from 1774. Meaning
thing which embarrasses is from 1729. Earlier words expressing much the same idea include baishment
embarrassment, confusion (late 14c.); baishednesse (mid-15c.).


embassador (n.)

identified by OED as a variant of ambassador still preferred in the U.S.


embassy (n.)

1570s, position of an ambassador, from Middle French embassee mission, charge, office of ambassador,
Old French ambassee, from Italian ambasciata, from Old Proven&ccedil;al ambaisada office of
ambassador, from Gaulish *ambactos dependant, vassal, literally one going around, from PIE *amb(i
)-ag-to, from *ambi- (see ambi-) + *ambi- around (see ambi-) + *ag- to drive, move (see act (n.)).
Meaning official residence and retinue of an ambassador is from 1764. In earlier use were embassade
(late 15c.), ambassade (early 15c.).


embattle (v.)

late 14c., prepare for a fight, from Old French embataillier to prepare for battle, from en- (see
en- (1)) + bataille (see battle (n.)). Related: Embattled; embattling. Originally of armies; of
individuals as well since 1590s (first attested in Spenser).


embattled (adj.)

under attack, by 1882; earlier it meant prepared to fight, and (of structures) fitted with
battlements; past participle adjective from embattle (v.).


embed (v.)

1778, from em- + bed (n.). Originally a geological term, in reference to fossils in rock; figurative
sense is from 1835; meaning place a journalist within a military unit at war is 2003. Related:
Embedded; embedding.


embellish (v.)

mid-14c., to render beautiful, from Old French embelliss-, stem of embellir make beautiful,
ornament, from em- (see en- (1)) + bel beautiful, from Latin bellus handsome, pretty, fine (see
bene-). Meaning dress up (a narration) with fictitious matter is from mid-15c. Related: Embellished;
embellishing.


embellishment (n.)

1590s, from embellish + -ment.


ember (n.)

Old English &aelig;merge ember, merged with or influenced by Old Norse eimyrja, both from Proto-
Germanic *aim-uzjon- ashes (cognates: Middle Low German emere, Old High German eimuria, German
Ammern); a compound from *aima- ashes (from PIE root *ai- to burn; see edifice) + *uzjo- to burn
(from PIE root *eus- to burn; source also of Latin urere to burn, singe). The -b- is intrusive.


ember days (n.)

Old English Ymbrendaeg, Ymbren, 12 days of the year (divided into four seasonal periods, hence Latin
name quatuor tempora) set aside by the Church for fasting and prayers, from Old English ymbren
recurring, corruption of ymbryne a circuit, revolution, course, anniversary, literally a running
around, from ymb round (cognate with Greek amphi, Latin ambo; see ambi-) + ryne course, running (see
run (n.)). Perhaps influenced by a corruption of the Latin name (compare German quatember).


embergoose (n.)

loon, 1744, from Norwegian emmer-gaas, perhaps so called from its appearing on the coast in the
ember days before Christmas.


embezzle (v.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French embesiler to steal, cause to disappear (c.1300), from Old French em-
(see en- (1)) + besillier torment, destroy, gouge, of unknown origin. Sense of to dispose of
fraudulently is first recorded 1580s. Related: Embezzled; embezzling.


embezzlement (n.)

1540s, from embezzle + -ment.


embezzler (n.)

1660s, agent noun from embezzle.


embitter (v.)

c.1600, from em- + bitter. Now rare in its literal sense; figurative meaning first attested 1630s.
Related: Embittered.


emblazon (v.)

inscribe conspicuously, also extol, 1590s, from en- (1) + blazon. Related: Emblazoned; emblazoning.


emblem (n.)

1580s, from French embl&egrave;me symbol (16c.), from Latin emblema inlaid ornamental work, from
Greek emblema (genitive emblematos) embossed ornament, literally insertion, from emballein to
insert, literally to throw in, from en in (see en- (2)) + ballein to throw (see ballistics).


emblematic (adj.)

1640s, perhaps via French embl&eacute;matique, from Greek emblematikos, from emblema (see emblem).


embodiment (n.)

1828; see embody + -ment.


embody (v.)

1540s, in reference to a soul or spirit invested with a physical form; of principles, ideas, etc.,
from 1660s; from en- (1) in + body. Related: Embodied; embodying.


embolden (v.)

1570s, from en- (1) + bold + -en (1). Related: Emboldened.


embolism (n.)

late 14c., intercalation of days into a calendar, from Old French embolisme, from Late Latin
embolismus insertion of days in a calendar to correct errors, from Greek embolimos, embolme
insertion, or embolos a plug, wedge (see embolus). Medical sense of obstruction of a blood vessel is
first recorded in English 1855.


embolus (n.)

1660s, stopper, wedge, from Latin embolus piston of a pump, from Greek embolos peg, stopper;
anything pointed so as to be easily thrust in, also a tongue (of land), beak (of a ship), from
emballein (see emblem). Medical sense is from 1866. Related: Embolic.


embonpoint (n.)

plumpness, 1751, from French embonpoint (16c.), from Old French en bon point, literally in good
condition.


emboss (v.)

late 14c., from Old French *embocer (compare embocieure boss, stud, buckle), from em- (see en- (1))
+ boce knoblike mass (see boss (n.2)). Related: Embossed; embossing.


embouchure (n.)

1760, in musical sense, from French embouchure river mouth, mouth of a wind instrument, from en- in
(see en- (1)) + bouche mouth (see bouche).


embrace (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French embracer (12c., Modern French embrasser) clasp in the arms, enclose;
covet, handle, cope with, from en- in (see en- (1)) + brace, braz the arms, from Latin bracchium
(neuter plural brachia); see brace (n.). Related: Embraced; embracing; embraceable. Replaced Old
English clyppan, also f&aelig;&eth;m.


embrace (n.)

1590s, from embrace (v.).


embrasure (n.)

1702, from French embrasure (16c.), from Old French embraser to cut at a slant, make a groove or
furrow in a door or window, from en- in (see en- (1)) + braser to cut at a slant.


embrocate (v.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin embrocatus, past participle of embrocare, from Greek embrokhe lotion,
fomentation, from embrekhein, from en (see en- (2)) + brekhein to water, wet, rain, send rain,
related to brokhe rain, from PIE root *mergh- to wet, sprinkle, rain. Related: Embrocated;
embrocating.


embroider (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French enbrouder, from en- in (see en- (1)) + broisder embroider, from
Frankish *brozdon, from Proto-Germanic *bruzdajan. Spelling with -oi- is from c.1600, perhaps by
influence of broiden, irregular alternative Middle English past participle of braid (v.). Related:
Embroidered; embroidering.


embroidery (n.)

late 14c., embrouderie art of embroidering; see embroider + -y (4).


embroil (v.)

c.1600, throw into disorder, from French embrouillier (cognate of Italian imbrogliare), from en- in
(see en- (1)) + brouiller confuse, from Old French brooillier (see broil (v.2)). Sense of involve in
a quarrel is first attested c.1610. Related: Embroiled; embroiling.


embryo (n.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin embryo, from Greek embryon a young one, in Homer, young animal, later,
fruit of the womb, literally that which grows, from en in (see en- (2)) + bryein to swell, be full.


embryology (n.)

1859, from embryon (see embryo) + -logy. Related: Embryologist (c.1850).


embryonic (adj.)

1849, from medical Latin embryonem (see embryo) + -ic. Figurative use is from 1856.


emcee (n.)

1933, abbreviation of M.C., for master of ceremonies, a phrase attested from the 1660s.


emend (v.)

c.1400, from Latin emendare to free from fault, from ex- out (see ex-) + mendum (nominative menda)
fault, blemish (see amend). Related: Emended; emending.


emendation (n.)

mid-15c., of ways of life; 17c., of texts; from Latin emendationem (nominative emendatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of emendare (see emend).


emerald (n.)

bright green precious stone, c.1300, emeraude, from Old French esmeraude (12c.), from Medieval Latin
esmaraldus, from Latin smaragdus, from Greek smaragdos green gem (emerald or malachite), from
Semitic baraq shine (compare Hebrew bareqeth emerald, Arabic barq lightning).    Sanskrit maragdam
emerald is from the same source, as is Persian zumurrud, whence Turkish z&uuml;mr&uuml;d, source of
Russian izumrud emerald. For the excrescent e-, see e-.In early examples the word, like most other
names of precious stones, is of vague meaning; the medi&aelig;val references to the stone are often
based upon the descriptions given by classical writers of the smaragdus, the identity of which with
our emerald is doubtful. [OED] Emerald Isle for Ireland is from 1795.


emerge (v.)

1560s, from Middle French &eacute;merger, from Latin emergere rise out or up, bring forth, bring to
light, from ex- out (see ex-) + mergere to dip, sink (see merge). The notion is of rising from a
liquid by virtue of buoyancy. Related: Emerged; emerging.


emergence (n.)

1640s, unforeseen occurrence, from French &eacute;mergence, from emerger, from Latin emergere (see
emerge). Meaning an emerging is from 1704.


emergency (n.)

unforeseen occurrence requiring immediate attention, 1630s, from Latin emergens, present participle
of emergere (see emerge). Or from emerge + -ency.


emergent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin emergentem (nominative emergens), present participle of emergere (see emerge).


emeritus (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin emeritus veteran soldier who has served his time, literally that has finished
work, past service, past participle of emerere serve out, complete one's service, from ex- out (see
ex-) + merere to serve, earn, from PIE *(s)mer- to get a share of something (see merit (n.)). First
used of retired professors 1794 in American English.


emersed (adj.)

1680s, past participle adjective from Latin emersus, past participle of emergere (see emerge).


emersion (n.)

1630s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin emergere (see emerge). Originally of
eclipses and occultations.


emery (n.)

granular mixture used as an abrasive, late 15c., from Middle French &eacute;meri, from Old French
esmeril, from Italian smeriglo, from Vulgar Latin *smyrilium, from Greek smyris abrasive powder used
for rubbing and polishing, probably a non-Greek word, perhaps from a Semitic source.


emesis (n.)

action of vomiting, 1875, medical Latin, from Greek emesis, from emein to vomit (see emetic).


emetic

1650s (n.), 1660s (adj.), from French &eacute;m&eacute;tique (16c.), from Latin emeticus, from Greek
emetikos causing vomiting, from emesis vomiting, from emein to vomit, from PIE *weme- to spit, vomit
(see vomit (v.)).


emic

1954, from phonemic.


emigrant (n.)

1754, from Latin emigrantem (nominative emigrans), present participle of emigrare (see emigration).


emigrate (v.)

1778, a back-formation from emigration, or else from Latin emigratus, past participle of emigrare
(see emigration). Related: Emigrated; emigrating.


emigration (n.)

1640s, from Late Latin emigrationem (nominative emigratio) removal from a place, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin emigrare move away, depart from a place, from ex- out (see ex-) +
migrare to move (see migration).


emigre (n.)

1792, from French &eacute;migr&eacute; an emigrant, noun use of past participle of &eacute;migrer
emigrate (18c.), from Latin emigrare (see emigration). Originally used of royalist refugees from the
French Revolution; extended 1920s to refugees from the Russian Revolution, then generally to
political exiles.


Emil

masc. personal name, from German Emil, from French Emil&eacute;, from Latin Aemilius, name of a
Roman gens, from aemulus imitating, rivaling (see emulation).


Emily

also Emilia, fem. proper name, from French &Eacute;milie, from Latin Aemilia; see Emil.


eminence (n.)

c.1400, projection, protuberance; early 15c., high or exalted position, from Old French eminence or
directly from Latin eminentia prominence, eminence, from eminentem (nominative eminens) excellent,
prominent (see eminent).    As a title of honor (now only of cardinals) it is attested from 1650s.
The original &Eacute;minence grise (French, literally gray eminence) was Fran&ccedil;ois Leclerc du
Trembley (1577-1638), confidential agent of Richelieu.


eminent (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French &eacute;minent (13c.) or directly from Latin eminentem (nominative
eminens), present participle of eminere stand out, project, from ex- out (see ex-) + minere, related
to mons hill (see mount (n.)). Related: Eminently. Legal eminent domain recorded from 1738.


emir (n.)

1590s, from Arabic amir commander (see admiral).


emirate (n.)

1863, rule or territory of an emir; see emir + -ate.


emissary (n.)

1620s, from French &eacute;missaire (17c.) or directly from Latin emissarius, literally that is sent
out, from emissus, past participle of emittere send forth (see emit).


emission (n.)

early 15c., something sent forth, from Middle French &eacute;mission (14c.) and directly from Latin
emissionem (nominative emissio) a sending out, projecting, hurling, letting go, releasing, from past
participle stem of emittere send out (see emit). Meaning a giving off or emitting is from 1610s.


emit (v.)

1620s, from Latin emittere send forth, from ex- out (see ex-) + mittere to send (see mission).
Related: Emitted; emitting.


Emma

fem. proper name, from German Emma, from Erma, contraction of Ermentrude or some similar name. With
lower-case -e-, as British telephone and radio enunciation of M to avoid confusion with N, attested
by 1891.


Emmanuel

masc. personal name, from Greek form of Hebrew 'Immanu'el, literally God is with us, from 'immanu
with us, from 'im with, + first person plural pronomial suffix, + El God.


Emmaus

Biblical town (Luke xxiv:13), from Aramaic hammat hot spring.


emmer (n.)

species of wheat, 1908, from German Emmer, variant of Amelkorn, from amel starch, from Latin amylum
(see amyl).


emmet (n.)

ant, from Old English &aelig;mete (see ant), surviving as a dialect word in parts of England; also,
in Cornwall, a colloquial name for holiday tourists.


Emmy (n.)

statuette awarded by the American Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, 1949, said to be an
alteration of Immy, from image.


emollient (adj.)

1640s, from French &eacute;mollient (16c.), from Latin emollientem (nominative emolliens), present
participle of emollire soften, from ex- out (see ex-) + mollire soften, from mollis soft (see melt
(v.)). The noun is recorded from 1650s.


emolument (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French &eacute;molument and directly from Latin emolumentum profit, gain,
perhaps originally payment to a miller for grinding corn, from emolere grind out, from ex- out (see
ex-) + molere to grind (see mallet).


emote (v.)

1917, American English, back-formation from emotion. Related: Emoted; emoting.


emoticon (n.)

by 1994, apparently from emotion + icon.


emotion (n.)

1570s, a (social) moving, stirring, agitation, from Middle French &eacute;motion (16c.), from Old
French emouvoir stir up (12c.), from Latin emovere move out, remove, agitate, from ex- out (see ex-)
+ movere to move (see move (v.)). Sense of strong feeling is first recorded 1650s; extended to any
feeling by 1808.


emotional (adj.)

1821, pertaining to emotion, from emotion + -al (1). Meaning liable to emotions attested by 1857.
Related: Emotionally. Emotional intelligence coined by mid-1960s, popular from mid-1980s.


emotive (v.)

1735, causing movement, from Latin emot-, past participle stem of emovere (see emotion) + -ive.
Meaning capable of emotion is from 1881; that of evoking emotions is from 1923, originally in
literary criticism.


empanada (n.)

1939, American English, from Spanish empanada, past participle adjective (fem.) of empanar to roll
and fry.


empanel (v.)

late 15c., from Anglo-French empaneller, Old French empaneller; see en- (1) + panel (n.).


empathetic (adj.)

1932, in psychology, from empathy on model of sympathetic and to distinguish it from empathic.
Related: Empathetically.


empathic (adj.)

1909, from empathy + -ic. Related: Empathically.


empathise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of empathize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Empathised;
empathising.


empathize (v.)

1924, in psychology, from empathy + -ize. Related: Empathized; empathizing.


empathy (n.)

1903, from German Einf&uuml;hlung (from ein in + F&uuml;hlung feeling), coined 1858 by German
philosopher Rudolf Lotze (1817-1881) as a translation of Greek empatheia passion, state of emotion,
from en in (see en- (2)) + pathos feeling (see pathos). A term from a theory of art appreciation
that maintains appreciation depends on the viewer's ability to project his personality into the
viewed object.


emperor (n.)

early 13c., from Old French empereor (accusative; nominative emperere; Modern French empereur), from
Latin imperiatorem (nominative imperiator) commander, emperor, from past participle stem of imperare
to command (see empire).    Originally a title conferred by vote of the Roman army on a successful
general, later by the Senate on Julius and Augustus Caesar and adopted by their successors except
Tiberius and Claudius. In the Middle Ages, applied to rulers of China, Japan, etc.; only non-
historical European application in English was to the Holy Roman Emperors (who in German documents
are called kaiser), from late 13c., until in 1804 Napoleon took the title Emperor of the French.


emphasis (n.)

1570s, from Latin emphasis, from Greek emphasis significance, indirect meaning, from emphainein to
present, show, indicate, from en in (see en- (2)) + phainein to show (see phantasm). In Greek and
Latin, it developed a sense of extra stress given to a word or phrase in speech as a clue that it
implies something more than literal meaning.


emphasise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of emphasize; for spelling, see -ize. Related: Emphasised;
emphasising.


emphasize (v.)

1828, from emphasis + -ize. Related: Emphasized; emphasizing.


emphatic (adj.)

1708, from Greek emphatikos, variant of emphantikos, from emphainein (see emphasis). Emphatical is
earlier (1550s). Related: Emphatically.


emphysema (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin, from Greek emphysema swelling, inflation, from emphysan inflate, from en
in (see en- (2)) + physan to blow, from physa breath, blast (see pustule).


empire (n.)

early 14c., from Old French empire rule, authority, kingdom, imperial rule, from Latin imperium
rule, command, from imperare to command, from im- in (see in- (2)) + parare to order, prepare (see
pare).    Not etymologically restricted to territory ruled by an emperor, but used that way. The
Empire, meaning the British Empire, first recorded 1772 (it officially devolved into The
Commonwealth in 1931); before that it meant the Holy Roman Empire (1670s). Empire style (especially
in reference to a style of dresses with high waistlines) is 1869, from the Second Empire rule of
Napoleon III of France (1852-70). New York has been called the Empire State since 1834.


empiric (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin empiricus a physician guided by experience, from Greek empeirikos experienced,
from empeiria experience, from empeiros skilled, from en in (see en- (2)) + peira trial, experiment,
from PIE *per- to try, risk. Originally a school of ancient physicians who based their practice on
experience rather than theory. Earlier as a noun (1540s) in reference to the sect, and earliest
(1520s) in a sense quack doctor which was in frequent use 16c.-19c.


empirical (adj.)

1560s, from empiric + -al (1).


empiricism (n.)

1650s, in the medical sense, from empiric + -ism. General sense is from 1796.    Were I obliged to
give a short name to the attitude in question, I should call it that of radical empiricism, in spite
of the fact that such brief nicknames are nowhere more misleading than in philosophy. I say
'empiricism' because it is contented to regard its most assured conclusions concerning matters of
fact as hypotheses liable to modification in the course of future experience; and I say 'radical,'
because it treats the doctrine of monism itself as an hypothesis, and, unlike so much of the half
way empiricism that is current under the name of positivism or agnosticism or scientific naturalism,
it does not dogmatically affirm monism as something with which all experience has got to square. The
difference between monism and pluralism is perhaps the most pregnant of all the differences in
philosophy. [William James, preface to The Sentiment of Rationality in The Will to Believe and Other
Essays in Popular Philosophy, 1897]


empiricist (n.)

c.1700, from empiric + -ist.


emplace (v.)

1865, back-formation from emplacement.


emplacement (n.)

1802, from French emplacement place, situation, from emplacer (16c.), from en- in (see en- (1)) +
placer to place (see place (v.)). Gunnery sense attested from 1811.


emplore (v.)

variant of implore.


employ (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French employer, from Old French emploiier (12c.) make use of, apply;
increase; entangle; devote, from Latin implicare enfold, involve, be connected with, from in- (see
in- (2)) + plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)).    Sense of hire, engage first recorded in English
1580s, from involve in a particular purpose, a sense which arose in Late Latin. Related: Employed;
employing. The noun is 1660s, from French emploi. Imply, which is the same word, retains more of the
original sense.


employe (n.)

person employed, 1834, from French employ&eacute; (fem. employ&eacute;e), noun use of past
participle of employer (see employ).


employee (n.)

person employed, 1850, mainly in U.S. use, from employ + -ee.


employer (n.)

1590s, agent noun from employ.


employment (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle English emploien (see employ) + -ment.


emporium (n.)

1580s, from Latin emporium, from Greek emporion trading place, market, from emporos merchant,
originally traveler, from en in (see en- (2)) + poros passage, voyage, related to peirein to pass
through (see port (n.1)). Greek emporos in the merchant sense meant especially one who trades on a
large scale, usually but not necessarily by sea [Buck], as opposed to kapelos local retail dealer,
shopkeeper.


empower (v.)

1650s, used by Milton, but the modern popularity dates from 1986; from en- (1) + power. Related:
Empowered; empowering; empowerment.


empress (n.)

mid-12c., emperice, from Old French emperesse, fem. of emperere (see emperor). Queen Victoria in
1876 became one as Empress of India.


emprise (n.)

c.1300, chivalrous endeavor, from Old French emprise (12c.) enterprise, venture, adventure,
undertaking, from Vulgar Latin *imprensa (source of Proven&ccedil;al empreza, Spanish empresa,
Italian impresa), from *imprendere to undertake, from in- + prehendere to take (see prehensile).
Archaic in English; in French now with a literal sense a hold, a grip.


emptiness (n.)

1530s, from empty + -ness.


emption (n.)

late 15c., purchase, from Latin emptionem (nominative emptio) a buying, purchasing, noun of action
from past participle stem of emere to buy (see exempt (adj.)).


empty (adj.)

c.1200, from Old English &aelig;mettig at leisure, not occupied, unmarried, from &aelig;metta
leisure, from &aelig; not + -metta, from motan to have (see might (n.)). The -p- is a euphonic
insertion.    Sense evolution from at leisure to empty is paralleled in several languages, such as
Modern Greek adeios empty, originally freedom from fear, from deios fear. The adj. adeios must have
been applied first to persons who enjoyed freedom from duties, leisure, and so were unoccupied,
whence it was extended to objects that were unoccupied [Buck].    The adjective also yielded a verb
(1520s), replacing Middle English empten, from Old English ge&aelig;mtigian. Related: Emptied;
emptying. Figurative sense of empty-nester first attested 1987. Empty-handed attested from 1610s.


empyreal (adj.)

late 15c.; see empyrean.


empyrean (n.)

mid-14c. (as empyre), from Greek empyros fiery, from en (see en- (2)) + pyr fire (see fire (n.));
confused by early writers with imperial. In Greek cosmology, the highest heaven, the sphere of pure
fire; later baptized with a Christian gloss as the abode of God and the angels.


emu (n.)

large Australian bird, 1610s, probably from Portuguese ema crane, ostrich, of unknown origin.


emulate (v.)

1580s, back-formation from emulation, or else from Latin aemulatus, past participle of aemulari to
rival. Related: Emulated; emulating.


emulation (n.)

1550s, from Middle French &eacute;mulation (13c.) and directly from Latin aemulationem (nominative
aemulatio), from past participle stem of aemulari to rival, strive to excel, from aemulus striving,
rivaling (also as a noun, a rival, fem. aemula), from Proto-Italic *aimo-, from PIE *aim-olo, from
root *aim- copy (see imitation).


emulator (n.)

1580s, from Latin aemulator, agent noun from aemulari (see emulation). Computer sense attested by
1965.


emulgent

1570s (adj.), 1610s (n.), from Latin emulgentem (nominative emulgens), present participle of
emulgere to milk out, drain out (see emulsion).


emulous (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin aemulus, from aemulari (see emulation). Related: Emulously.


emulsification (n.)

1858, noun of action from emulsify.


emulsifier (n.)

1872, agent noun from emulsify.


emulsify (v.)

1853, from Latin emulsus, past participle of emulgere to milk out (see emulsion) + -fy. Related:
emulsified.


emulsion (n.)

1610s, from French &eacute;mulsion (16c.), from Modern Latin emulsionem (nominative emulsio), from
emulsus, past participle of emulgere to milk out, from ex- out (see ex-) + mulgere to milk (see milk
(n.)). Milk is a classic instance of an emulsion, drops of one liquid dispersed throughout another.


en bloc

French, literally in a block.


en masse

French, literally in mass.


en passant

French, literally in passing, from present participle of passer to pass (see pass (v.)). In
reference to chess, first attested 1818.


en route

1779, French, literally on the way.


en suite

French, literally as part of a series or set.


en- (1)

word-forming element meaning in, into, from French and Old French en-, from Latin in- in, into (see
in- (2)). Typically assimilated to -p-, -b-, -m-, -l-, and -r-.    Also used with native elements to
form verbs from nouns and adjectives, put in or on (encircle), also cause to be, make (endear), and
used as an intensive (enclose). Spelling variants in French that were brought over into Middle
English account for parallels such as assure/ensure/insure.


en- (2)

word-forming element meaning near, at in, on, within, from Greek en in, cognate with Latin in (see
in), and with en- (1). Typically assimilated to -p-, -b-, -m-, -l-, and -r-.


enable (v.)

early 15c., to make fit; mid-15c., to make able to, from en- (1) make, put in + able. Related:
Enabled; enabling.


enabler (n.)

1610s, agent noun from enable.


enact (v.)

early 15c., from en- (1) make, put in + act (v.). Related: Enacted; enacting.


enactment (n.)

1817, from enact + -ment.


enamel (v.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French enamailler (early 14c.), from en- in (see en- (1)) + amailler to
enamel, variant of Old French esmailler, from esmal enamel, from Frankish *smalt, from Proto-
Germanic *smaltjan to smelt (see smelt (v.)). Related: Enameled; enameling.


enamel (n.)

early 15c., from enamel (v.).


enamor (v.)

c.1300, from Old French enamorer to fall in love with; to inspire love (12c., Modern French
enamourer), from en-, causative prefix (see en- (1)), + amour love, from amare to love (see Amy). An
equivalent formation to Proven&ccedil;al, Spanish, Portuguese enamorar, Italian innamorare.


enamored (adj.)

1630s, past participle adjective from enamor.


enamour (v.)

chiefly British English form of enamor; for spelling, see -or. Related: Enamoured.


encamp (v.)

1560s, from en- (1) make, put in + camp (v.). Related: Encamped; encamping.


encampment (n.)

1590s, from encamp + -ment.


encapsulate (v.)

1842 (implied in encapsulated), from en- (1) make, put in + capsule + -ate (2)). Related:
Encapsulating.


encapsulation (n.)

1859, noun of action from encapsulate.


encase (v.)

1630s, from en- (1) make, put in + case (n.2). Related: Encased; encasing.


encaustic

c.1600 (n.); 1650s (adj.), from Greek enkaustikos, from enkaiein to burn in from en (see en- (2)) +
kaiein to burn (see caustic).


enceinte (adj.)

c.1600, insente, from French enceinte pregnant (12c.), from Late Latin incincta (source of Italian
incinta), usually explained as ungirt, from Latin in-, privative prefix (see in- (1)), + cincta,
fem. of cinctus, past participle of cingere to gird (see cinch). Modern form is 18c., perhaps a
reborrowing from French.


encephalitis (n.)

1843, from medical Latin encephalon (from Greek enkephalos brain, literally within the head, from en
in + kephale head; see cephalo-) + -itis.


enchant (v.)

late 14c., literal and figurative, from Old French enchanter bewitch, charm, cast a spell (12c.),
from Latin incantare (see enchantment). Or perhaps a back-formation from enchantment. Related:
Enchanting; enchantingly. Enchanted in weakened sense of delighted is from 1590s.


enchanter (n.)

late 13c., agent noun from enchant or from Old French enchanteor.


enchantment (n.)

late 13c., from Old French encantement, from enchanter bewitch, charm, from Latin incantare,
literally enchant, cast a (magic) spell upon, from in- upon, into (see in- (2)) + cantare to sing
(see chant (v.)). Figurative sense of alluring is from 1670s. Compare Old English galdor song, also
spell, enchantment, from galan to sing, source of the second element in nightingale.


enchantress (n.)

late 14c., witch, from enchanter + -ess. Meaning charming woman is from 1713.


enchilada (n.)

1887, American English, from Mexican Spanish enchilada, fem. past participle of enchilar season with
chili, from en- in + chile chili (see chili).


enchiridion (n.)

1540s, a handbook, from Late Latin, from Greek enkheiridion, neuter of enkheiridios that which is
held in the hand, from en in (see en- (2)) + kheir hand (see chiro-) + diminutive suffix -idion.


encircle (v.)

c.1400, from en- (1) make, put in + circle. Related: Encircled; encircling; encirclement.


enclave (n.)

1868, from French enclave, from Old French enclaver enclose, comprise, include (13c.), from Late
Latin inclavare shut in, lock up, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + clavis key (see slot (n.2)).
Enclaved surrounded by land owned by another is attested in English from mid-15c., from Middle
French enclaver.


enclitic

1650s (adj.); 1660s (n.), from Late Latin encliticus, from Greek enklitikos throwing its accent
back, literally leaning on, from verbal adjectival stem of enklinein to bend, lean on, from en (see
en- (2)) + klinein to lean (see lean (v.)).


enclose (v.)

early 14c., from en- (1) + close, and partially from Old French enclos, past participle of enclore.
Specific sense of to fence in waste or common ground for the purpose of cultivation or to give it to
private owners, is from c.1500. Meaning place a document with a letter for transmission is from
1707. Related: Enclosed; enclosing.


enclosure (n.)

mid-15c., action of enclosing, from enclose + -ure. Meaning that which is enclosed is from 1550s.


encode (v.)

1919, from en- (1) make, put in + code. Computing sense is from 1955, usually shortened colloquially
to code. Related: Encoded; encoding.


encomiast (n.)

c.1600, from Greek enkomiastes one who praises, from enkomiazein, from enkomion (see encomium).
Related: Encomiastic (1590s).


encomienda (n.)

1810, from Spanish, commission, from encomendar to commit, charge. Estate granted to a Spaniard in
America with powers to tax the Indians.


encomium (n.)

1580s, from Late Latin encomium, from Greek enkomion (epos) laudatory (ode), eulogy, from en in (see
en- (2)) + komos banquet, procession, merrymaking (see comedy).


encompass (v.)

1550s, from en- (1) make, put in + compass. Related: Encompassed; encompasses; encompassing.


encore (interj.)

1712, from French encore still, yet, again (12c.), generally explained as being from Vulgar Latin
phrase *hinc ad horam from then to this hour (Italian ancora again, still, yet is said to be a
French loan-word).Whenever any Gentlemen are particularly pleased with a Song, at their crying out
Encore ... the Performer is so obliging as to sing it over again. [Steele, Spectator No. 314, 1712]
<hr />   There appears to be no evidence that either the Fr. or It. word was ever similarly used in
its native country. The corresponding word both in Fr. and It. is bis; in It. da capo was formerly
used. [OED]    As a noun, from 1763; as a verb, from 1748.


encounter (n.)

c.1300, meeting of adversaries, confrontation, from Old French encontre meeting; fight; opportunity,
noun use of preposition/adverb encontre against, counter to from Late Latin incontra in front of,
from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + contra against (see contra). Modern use of the word in psychology
is from 1967, from the work of U.S. psychologist Carl Rogers (1902-1987). Encounter group attested
from 1967.


encounter (v.)

c.1300, to meet as an adversary, from Old French encontrer confront, from encontre (see encounter
(n.). Weakened sense of casually meet first recorded in English early 16c.  Related: Encountered;
encountering.


encourage (v.)

early 15c., from Old French encoragier make strong, hearten, from en- make, put in (see en- (1)) +
corage (see courage). Related: Encouraged; encouraging.


encouragement (n.)

1560s, from encourage + -ment, or from Middle French encoragement.  As a general rule, Providence
seldom vouchsafes to mortals any more than just that degree of encouragement which suffices to keep
them at a reasonably full exertion of their powers. [Hawthorne, House of Seven Gables]


encroach (v.)

early 14c., acquire, get, from Old French encrochier seize, fasten on, hang on (to), cling (to);
hang up, suspend, literally to catch with a hook, from en- in (see en- (1)) + croc hook, from Old
Norse krokr hook (see crook). Meaning seize wrongfully is from c.1400. Sense of trespass is first
recorded 1530s. Related: Encroached; encroaches; encroaching.


encroachment (n.)

1520s, from encroach + -ment. In Anglo-French from mid-15c.


encrust (v.)

1640s, from French incruster, from Latin incrustare to cover with crust, from in- (see in- (2)) +
crusta (see crust). Related: Encrusted; encrusting.


encrypt (v.)

1975 in computer sense, from en- (1) + crypt (see crypto-). Related: Encrypted; encrypting;
encryption.


enculturation (n.)

1948 (Herskovits), from en- (1) +   culturation (compare acculturation).


encumber (v.)

early 14c., burden, vex, inconvenience, from Old French encombrer to block up, hinder, thwart, from
Late Latin incombrare, from in- in (see in- (2)) + combrus barricade, obstacle, probably from Latin
cumulus heap. Meaning hinder, hamper is attested in English from late 14c. Related: Encumbered;
encumbering.


encumbrance (n.)

early 14c., from Old French encombrance, from encombrer (see encumber).


encyclical (adj.)

in reference to a letter sent by the Pope to all the bishops, 1640s, from Late Latin encyclicus,
from Latin encyclius, from Greek enkyklios in a circle, circular (see encyclopedia). As a noun, from
1837.


encyclopaedia (n.)

see encyclopedia. The Latin spelling survives as a variant because many of the most prominent ones
(such as Britannica) have Latin names.


encyclopedia (n.)

1530s, course of instruction, from Modern Latin encyclopaedia (c.1500), thought to be a false
reading by Latin authors of Greek enkyklios paideia taken as general education, but literally
training in a circle, i.e. the circle of arts and sciences, the essentials of a liberal education;
from enkyklios circular, also general (from en in + kyklos circle) + paideia education, child-
rearing, from pais (genitive paidos) child (see pedo-).    Modern sense of reference work arranged
alphabetically is from 1640s, often applied specifically to the French Encyclop&eacute;die ou
Dictionnaire raisonn&eacute; des Sciences, des Arts, et des M&eacute;tiers (1751-65).


encyclopedic (adj.)

1824, from encyclopedia + -ic.


end (n.)

Old English ende end, conclusion, boundary, district, species, class, from Proto-Germanic *andja
(cognates: Old Frisian enda, Old Dutch ende, Dutch einde, Old Norse endir end; Old High German enti
top, forehead, end, German ende, Gothic andeis end), originally the opposite side, from PIE *antjo
end, boundary, from root *ant- opposite, in front of, before (see ante).    Original sense of
outermost part is obsolete except in phrase ends of the earth. Sense of destruction, death was in
Old English. Meaning division or quarter of a town was in Old English. The end the last straw, the
limit (in a disparaging sense) is from 1929.    The phrase end run is first attested 1902 in U.S.
football; extended to military tactics in World War II; general figurative sense is from 1968. End
time in reference to the end of the world is from 1917. To end it all commit suicide is attested by
1911. Be-all and end-all is from Shakespeare (Macbeth I.vii.5).Worldly wealth he cared not for,
desiring onely to make both ends meet. [Thomas Fuller, The History of the Worthies of England, 1662]


end (v.)

Old English endian, from the source of end (n.). Related: Ended; ending.


endanger (v.)

late 15c., from en- (1) make, put in + danger. Related: Endangered; endangering. Endangered species
first recorded 1964.


endangerment (n.)

1640s, from endanger + -ment.


endear (v.)

1580s, to enhance the value of, also win the affection of, from en- (1) make, put in + dear (adj.).
Meaning to make dear is from 1640s. Related: Endeared; endearing.


endearing (adj.)

1660s, present participle adjective from endear. Related: Endearingly.


endearment (n.)

act of endearing, 1610s, from endear + -ment. Meaning obligation of gratitude is from 1620s; that of
action expressive of love is from 1702.


endeavor (n.)

early 15c., pains taken to attain an object, literally in duty, from phrase put (oneself) in dever
make it one's duty (a partial translation of Old French mettre en deveir put in duty), from Old
French dever duty, from Latin debere to owe (see debt). One's endeavors meaning one's utmost effort
is from late 15c.


endeavor (v.)

c.1400; see endeavor (n.). Related: Endeavored; endeavoring.


endeavour

chiefly British English spelling of endeavor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or. Related: Endeavoured;
endeavoring; endeavours.


ended (adj.)

finished, completed, 1590s, past participle adjective from end (v.).


endemic (n.)

1660s, from Greek endemos native, dwelling in (a place), of or belonging to a people (from en in;
see en- (2) + demos people, district; see demotic) + -ic. From 1759 as an adjective. Endemical is
attested from 1650s.


endgame (n.)

1884, from chess, from end + game (n.). There is no formal or exact definition of it in chess, but
it begins when most of the pieces have been cleared from the board.


ending (n.)

a coming to an end, Old English endunge, verbal noun from end (v.).


endive (n.)

late 14c., from Old French endive (14c.), from Medieval Latin endivia or a related Romanic source,
from Latin intibus. Probably connected in some way with Medieval Greek entybon, which Klein says is
perhaps of Eastern origin (compare Egyptian tybi January, the time the plant grows in Egypt).


endless (adj.)

Old English endeleas; see end (n.) + -less. Related: Endlessly. Old English used endeleasnes for
infinity, eternity.


endlong (adv.)

Old English andlang from end to end, lengthwise (see along) with Middle English substitution of ende
(see end (n.)) for first element. Meaning at full length, horizontally is from early 15c. In Middle
English frequently paired with overthwart and together meaning lengthwise and crosswise, hence in
all directions. As a preposition c.1200.    see along.


endo-

word-forming element meaning inside, within, internal, comb. form of Greek endon in, within,
literally in the house of, from en in (see en- (2)) + base of domos house (see domestic).


endocrine (adj.)

secretly, internally, 1914, from endo- + Latinized form of Greek krinein to separate, distinguish
(see crisis).


endocrinology (n.)

1919, from endocrine + -ology. Related: Endocrinologist.


endoderm (n.)

1835, from endo- + -derm. Coined by Prussian embryologist Robert Remak (1815-1865).


endogamy (n.)

1865, from endogamous (1865); for which see endo- + gamete.


endogenous (adj.)

1830, from endo- within + -genous producing.


endometrium (n.)

1882, medical Latin, from endo- + Greek metra uterus, related to meter (see mother (n.1)).


endomorph (n.)

1940 as one of W.H. Sheldon's three types of human bodies, from endo- + Greek morphe form (see
Morpheus). Related: Endomorphic.


endorphin (n.)

1975, from French endorphine, from endog&egrave;ne endogenous, growing within (see endo- + genus) +
(mo)rphine.


endorse (v.)

late 14c. endosse alteration, from Old French endosser (12c.), literally to put on back, from en-
put on (see en- (1)) + dos back, from Latin dossum, variant of dorsum.    Sense of confirm, approve
(by signing on the back) is recorded in English first in 1847. Assimilated 16c. in form to Medieval
Latin indorsare. Related: Endorsed; endorsing.    You can endorse, literally, a cheque or other
papers, &amp;, metaphorically, a claim or argument, but to talk of endorsing material things other
than papers is a solecism. [Fowler]


endorsement (n.)

1540s, from endorse + -ment. Earlier endosement (early 15c.).


endoscopy (n.)

1861, from endo- + -oscopy (see -scope).


endoskeleton (n.)

1838, from endo- + skeleton.


endosperm (n.)

1819, perhaps from German, from endo- + sperm.


endospore (n.)

1859, perhaps from French, from endo- + spore.


endothermic (adj.)

1884, from French endothermique (1879); see endo- + thermal.


endow (v.)

late 14c., indowen provide an income for, from Anglo-French endover, from en- in + Old French douer
endow, from Latin dotare bestow (see dowry). Related: Endowed; endowing.


endowed (adj.)

1700, past participle adjective from endow.


endowment (n.)

mid-15c., action of endowing, from endow + -ment. Meaning property with which an institution or
person is endowed is from 1590s; that of gift, power, advantage is early 17c.


endpoint (n.)

also end-point, 1899, originally in chemistry, from end + point (n.). General use from 1920s.


endue (v.)

also indue, c.1400, from Old French enduire lead, drive, initiate, indoctrinate (12c.), from Latin
inducere to lead (see induce). Related: Endued.


endurable (adj.)

c.1600, able to endure, from endure + -able. Meaning able to be endured is from c.1800. Related:
Endurably.


endurance (n.)

late 15c., continued existence in time; see endure + -ance. Meaning ability to endure suffering,
etc. is from 1660s.


endure (v.)

early 14c., to undergo or suffer (especially without breaking); late 14c. to continue in existence,
from Old French endurer (12c.) make hard, harden; bear, tolerate; keep up, maintain, from Latin
indurare make hard, in Late Latin harden (the heart) against, from in- (see in- (2)) + durare to
harden, from durus hard, from PIE *dru-ro-, from root *deru- be firm, solid, steadfast (see true).
Replaced the important Old English verb dreogan (past tense dreag, past participle drogen), which
survives in dialectal dree. Related: Endured; endures.


enduring

late 14c., action of the verb endure; as a present participle adjective meaning lasting, from 1530s.


Endymion

beautiful youth loved by Moon-goddess Selene, from Greek, perhaps literally diver, plunger, from
endyein to enter into, sink into, plunge, dive, which was used in reference to the sun or stars
setting into the sea. On this theory, he originally was a solar deity, a personification of the
setting sun.


enema (n.)

early 15c., via Medieval Latin, from Greek enema injection, from enienai to send in, inject, from en
in (see en- (2)) + hienai send (cognate of Latin iacere; see jet (v.)).


enemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French enemi (12c.), earlier inimi (9c.) enemy, adversary, foe, demon, the
Devil, from Latin inimicus hostile, unfriendly; an enemy (source of Italian nemico, Catalan enamic,
Spanish enemigo, Portuguese inimigo), from in- not (see in- (1)) + amicus friend related to amare to
love (see Amy).    Most words for personal enemy cover also enemy in war, but certain languages have
special terms for the latter, such as Greek polemioi (distinct from ekhthroi), Latin hostis,
originally stranger (distinct from inimicus), Russian neprijatel' (distinct from vrag).    Russian
vrag (Old Church Slavonic vragu) is cognate with Lithuanian vargas misery (see urge (v.)), and
probably is related to Proto-Germanic *wargoz, source of Old Norse vargr outlaw, hence wolf;
Icelandic vargur fox, Old English wearg criminal, felon; which likely were the inspirations for
J.R.R. Tolkien's warg a kind of large ferocious wolf in The Hobbit (1937) and Lord of the Rings.
Related: Enemies.


energetic (adj.)

1650s, powerful, from Greek energetikos active, from energein to work, act upon (see energy). Of
persons, active, in English from 1796 (energetical is from c.1600).


energize (v.)

1751; see energy + -ize. Related: Energized; energizing.


energizer (n.)

1750, agent noun from energize.


energy (n.)

1590s, force of expression, from Middle French &eacute;nergie (16c.), from Late Latin energia, from
Greek energeia activity, operation, from energos active, working, from en at (see en- (2)) + ergon
work, that which is wrought; business; action (see organ).    Used by Aristotle with a sense of
force of expression; broader meaning of power is first recorded in English 1660s. Scientific use is
from 1807. Energy crisis first attested 1970.


enervate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin enervatus, past participle of enervare to weaken (see enervation). Related:
Ennervated; ennervating.


enervation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French &eacute;nervation, from Late Latin enervationem (nominative
enervatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin enervare weaken, literally cut the
sinews of, from ex- out (see ex-) + nervus sinew (see nerve). Figurative sense is from 1550s.


enfant terrible (n.)

1851, French, literally terrible child (see infant + terrible). One whose unorthodox or shocking
speech or manners embarrass his associates as a naughty child embarrasses his elders. French also
has enfant g&acirc;t&eacute;, spoiled child, hence person given excessive adulation.


enfeeble (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French enfeblir become weak, from en- (see en- (1)) + feble (see feeble).
Related: Enfeebled; enfeebling.


Enfield

type of rifle, 1854, named for government works in Enfield, Middlesex, England, where it was
manufactured.


enfilade (n.)

1706, from French enfilade, from Old French enfiler (13c.) to thread (a needle) on a string, pierce
from end to end, from en- put on (see en- (1)) + fil thread (see file (v.)).    Used of rows of
apartments and lines of trees before modern military sense came to predominate. As a verb from 1706.
Related: Enfiladed; enfilading.


enfold (v.)

also infold, early 15c., from en- (1) make, put in + fold. Related: Enfolded; enfolding.


enforce (v.)

early 14c., to drive by physical force; mid-14c., make an effort; strengthen a place; compel, from
Old French enforcier or from en- (1) make, put in + force. Related: Enforced; enforcing.


enforceable (adj.)

1580s, from enforce + -able. Related: Enforceability.


enforcement (n.)

late 15c., from Old French enforcement strengthening, fortification; rape, compulsion, coercion;
from enforcer; see enforce + -ment.


enforcer (n.)

1570s, agent noun from enforce. Meaning intimidator is from 1934, U.S. underworld slang.


enfranchise (v.)

early 15c., to set free, from Old French enfranchiss-, present participle stem of enfranchir to set
or make free; grant a franchise to; from en- make, put in (see en- (1)) + franc free (see
franchise).    Meaning to admit to membership in a state (generally with reference to voting
privileges) is from 1680s. Related: Enfranchised; enfranchisement.


engage (v.)

early 15c., to pledge, from Middle French engagier, from Old French en gage under pledge, from en
make + gage pledge, through Frankish from Proto-Germanic *wadiare pledge (see wed).    It shows the
common evolution of Germanic -w- to French -g-, as in Guillaume from Wilhelm). Meaning attract the
attention of is from 1640s; that of employ is from 1640s, from notion of binding as by a pledge.
Specific sense of promise to marry is 1610s (implied in engaged).


engagement (n.)

c.1600, formal promise, from engage + -ment. Meaning battle, fight is from 1660s; promise-of-
marriage sense is from 1742; meaning appointment is from 1806.


engaging (adj.)

interesting, 1650s (implied in engagingly), present participle adjective from engage.


engender (v.)

early 14c., beget, procreate, from Old French engendrer (12c.) engender, beget, bear; cause, bring
about, from Latin ingenerare to implant, engender, produce, from in- in (see in- (2)) + generare
beget, create (see generation). Meaning cause, produce is mid-14c. Related: Engendered; engendering.


engine (n.)

c.1300, mechanical device, also skill, craft, from Old French engin skill, cleverness, also trick,
deceit, stratagem; war machine (12c.), from Latin ingenium inborn qualities, talent (see ingenious).
At first meaning a trick or device, or any machine (especially military); sense of device that
converts energy to mechanical power is 18c., especially of steam engines.


engineer (n.)

early 14c., constructor of military engines, from Old French engigneor, from Late Latin ingeniare
(see engine); general sense of inventor, designer is recorded from early 15c.; civil sense, in
reference to public works, is recorded from c.1600. Meaning locomotive driver is first attested
1832, American English. A maker of engines in ancient Greece was a mekhanopoios.


engineer (v.)

1843 (but see engineering), from engineer (n.). Figurative sense of arrange, contrive is attested
from 1864, originally in a political context. Related: Engineered.


engineering (n.)

1680s, from engineer (n.). Meaning work done by an engineer is from 1720. As a field of study,
attested from 1792. An earlier word was engineership (1640s); engineery was attempted in 1793, but
it did not stick.


England (n.)

Old English Engla land, literally the land of the Angles (see English (n.1)), used alongside
Angelcynn the English race, which, with other forms, shows Anglo-Saxon persistence in thinking in
terms of tribes before place. By late Old English times both words had come to be used with a clear
sense of place; a Dane, Canute, is first to call himself King of England. The loss of one of the
duplicate syllables is a case of haplology.


English (n.1)

people of England; the speech of England, Old English Englisc (contrasted to Denisc, Frencisce,
etc.), from Engle (plural) the Angles, the name of one of the Germanic groups that overran the
island 5c., supposedly so-called because Angul, the land they inhabited on the Jutland coast, was
shaped like a fish hook (see angle (n.)).    The term was used from earliest times without
distinction for all the Germanic invaders -- Angles, Saxon, Jutes (Bede's gens Anglorum) -- and
applied to their group of related languages by Alfred the Great. After 1066, of the population of
England (as distinguished from Normans and French), a distinction which lasted only about a
generation.    In pronunciation, En- has become In-, but the older spelling has remained. Meaning
English language or literature as a subject at school is from 1889. As an adjective, of or belonging
to England, from late 13c. Old English is from early 13c.


English (n.2)

spin imparted to a ball (as in billiards), 1860, from French angl&eacute; angled (see angle (n.)),
which is similar to Anglais English.


Englishman

Old English Engliscman, from English (n.1) + man (n.). Englishwoman is from c.1400. Englander native
of England is from 1820; in some cases from German Engl&auml;nder.


engorge (v.)

1510s, from French engorger to obstruct, block, congest, Old French engorgier to swallow, devour,
from en- (see en- (1)) + gorge throat (see gorge (n.)). Probably originally in reference to hawks.
Related: Engorged; engorging.


engorgement (n.)

1610s, from engorge + -ment.


engraft (v.)

1580s, from en- (1) + graft (v.). Related: Engrafted; engrafting.


engrain (v.)

late 14c., originally (dye) in grain, from French phrase en graine, from graine seed of a plant,
also cochineal (the source of the dye was thought to be berries), thus fast-dyed. Later associated
with grain in the sense of the fiber of a thing. Related: Engrained.


engrave (v.)

late 15c. (implied in ingraved), from en- (1) + obsolete verb grave carve (see grave (v.)). Related:
Engraved; engraving.


engraver (n.)

1580s, agent noun from engrave.


engross (v.)

c.1400, to buy up the whole stock of (in Anglo-French from c.1300), from Old French en gros in bulk,
in a large quantity, at wholesale, as opposed to en detail. See gross.    Figurative sense of absorb
the whole attention is first attested 1709. A parallel engross, meaning to write (something) in
large letters, is from Anglo-French engrosser, from Old French en gros in large (letters). Related:
Engrossed; engrossing.


engulf (v.)

1550s, from en- (1) make, put in + gulf. Related: Engulfed; engulfing.


enhance (v.)

late 13c., anhaunsen to raise, make higher, from Anglo-French enhauncer, probably from Old French
enhaucier make greater, make higher or louder; fatten, foster; raise in esteem, from Vulgar Latin
*inaltiare, from Late Latin inaltare raise, exalt,  from altare make high, from altus high (see
old).    Meaning raise in station, wealth, or fame attested in English from c.1300. The -h- in Old
French supposedly from influence of Frankish *hoh high. Related: Enhanced; enhancing.


enhancement (n.)

1570s, from enhance + -ment.


enharmonic (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin enharmonicus, from Greek enharmonikos, from en (see en- (2)) + harmonikos
(see harmonic).


ENIAC

acronym from electronic numeral integrator and computer, device built 1946 at University of
Pennsylvania by John W. Mauchly Jr., J. Presper Eckert Jr., and J.G. Brainerd. It cost $400,000,
used 18,000 radio tubes, and was housed in a 30-foot-by-50-foot room.


Enid

fem. proper name, from Middle Welsh eneit, purity, literally soul, from PIE *ane-tyo-, from root
*ane- to breathe (see animus).


enigma (n.)

1580s, earlier enigmate (mid-15c.), from Latin aenigma riddle, from Greek ainigma (plural
ainigmata), from ainissesthai speak obscurely, speak in riddles, from ainos fable, riddle, of
unknown origin.


enigmatic (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin aenigmaticus, from aenigmat-, stem of aenigma (see enigma). Enigmatical in
the same sense is from 1570s. Related: Enigmatically.


enjambment (n.)

also enjambement, 1837, from French enjambement or from enjamb (c.1600), from French enjamber to
stride over, from en- (see en- (1)) + jambe leg (see jamb).


enjoin (v.)

early 13c., engoinen, from stem of Old French enjoindre (12c.) impose (on), inflict; subject to;
assign (to), from Latin iniungere to join, fasten, attach; figuratively to inflict, to attack,
impose, from in- on (see in- (2)) + iungere to join (see jugular). Related: Enjoined; enjoining.


enjoy (v.)

late 14c., rejoice, be glad (intransitive), from Old French enjoir to give joy, rejoice, take
delight in, from en- make (see en- (1)) + joir enjoy, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy); Sense of
have the use or benefit of first recorded early 15c. (replacing Old English brucan; see brook (v.)).
Meaning take pleasure in is mid-15c. In modern use it has a tendency to lose its connection with
pleasure: newspaper photo captions say someone enjoys an ice cream cone, etc., when all she is doing
is eating it, and Wright's English Dialect Dictionary (1900) reports widespread use in north and
west England of the phrase to enjoy bad health for one who has ailments. Related: Enjoyed; enjoying;
enjoys.


enjoyable (adj.)

1640s, capable of being enjoyed, from enjoy + -able. Meaning affording pleasure is from 1744.
Related: Enjoyably; enjoyableness.


enjoyment (n.)

1550s, from enjoy + -ment.


enkindle (v.)

1540s (literal), 1580s (figurative), from en- (1) + kindle. Related: Enkindled; enkindling.


enlace (v.)

late 14c., from Old French enlacer, from Late Latin *inlaciare, from in- + *lacius, from Latin
laqueus noose (see lace (n.)). Related: Enlaced; enlacing.


enlarge (v.)

mid-14c., grow fat, increase; c.1400, make larger, from Old French enlargier to make large, from en-
make, put in (see en- (1)) + large (see large). Related: Enlarged; enlarging.


enlargement (n.)

1540s, from enlarge + -ment. Photographic sense is from 1866.


enlighten (v.)

late 14c., to remove the dimness or blindness (usually figurative) from one's eyes or heart; see en-
(1) + lighten. Old English had inlihtan. Related: Enlightened; enlightening.


enlightened (adj.)

1630s, illuminated; 1660s in the sense well-informed; past participle adjective from enlighten.


enlightenment (n.)

1660s, action of enlightening, from enlighten + -ment. Used only in figurative sense, of spiritual
enlightenment, etc. Attested from 1865 as a translation of German Aufkl&auml;rung, a name for the
spirit and system of Continental philosophers in the 18c.The philosophy of the Enlightenment
insisted on man's essential autonomy: man is responsible to himself, to his own rational interests,
to his self-development, and, by an inescapable extension, to the welfare of his fellow man. For the
philosophes, man was not a sinner, at least not by nature; human nature -- and this argument was
subversive, in fact revolutionary, in their day -- is by origin good, or at least neutral. Despite
the undeniable power of man's antisocial passions, therefore, the individual may hope for
improvement through his own efforts -- through education, participation in politics, activity in
behalf of reform, but not through prayer. [Peter Gay, The Enlightenment]


enlist (v.)

1590s, from en- (1) make, put in + list (n.). Possibly suggested by Dutch inlijsten to write on a
list. Related: Enlisted; enlisting.


enlistment (n.)

1765, from enlist + -ment.


enliven (v.)

1630s, give life to (enlive in same sense is from 1590s); see en- (1) make, put in + life + -en (1).
Meaning make lively or cheerful is from 1690s. Related: Enlivened; enlivening.


enmesh (v.)

c.1600, from en- (1) + mesh (v.). Related: Enmeshed; enmeshing.


enmity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French enemisti&eacute; enmity, hostile act, aversion, from Vulgar Latin
*inimicitatem (nominative *inimicitas), from Latin inimicitia enmity, hostility, from inimicus enemy
(see enemy). Related: Enmities.


ennead (n.)

group of nine things, 1650s, from Greek enneas (genitive enneados) group of nine, from ennea nine
(see nine).


ennoble (v.)

late 15c. (implied in ennobled), from Middle French ennoblir; see en- (1) + noble (adj.). Related:
Ennobling.


ennui (n.)

1660s as a French word in English; nativized by 1758; from French ennui, from Old French enui
annoyance (13c.), back-formation from enuier (see annoy). Hence ennuy&eacute; afflicted with ennui;
ennuy&eacute;e a woman so afflicted.    So far as frequency of use is concerned, the word might be
regarded as fully naturalized; but the pronunciation has not been anglicized, there being in fact no
Eng. analogy which could serve as a guide. [OED]


Enoch

masc. proper name, in Old Testament eldest son of Cain, father of Methuselah, from Latin Enoch, from
Greek Enokh, from Hebrew Hanokh, literally dedicated, consecrated, from hanakh he dedicated, whence
also Hanukkah.


enormity (n.)

late 15c., transgression, crime, irregularity, from Old French &eacute;normit&eacute; extravagance,
enormity, atrocity, heinous sin, from Latin enormitatem (nominative enormitas) hugeness, vastness,
irregularity, from enormis (see enormous). Meaning extreme wickedness in English attested from
1560s; sense of hugeness (1792) is etymological but probably best avoided to prevent
misunderstanding.


enormous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin enormis out of rule, irregular, shapeless; extraordinary, very large, from ex- out
of (see ex-) + norma rule, norm (see norm), with English -ous substituted for Latin -is.    Meaning
extraordinary in size is attested from 1540s; original sense of outrageous is more clearly preserved
in enormity. Earlier in same sense was enormyous (mid-15c.). Related: Enormously.


Enos

masc. proper name, in Old Testament the son of Seth, from Greek Enos, from Hebrew Enosh, literally
man (compare nashim women, Arabic ins men, people).


enough (adj.)

c.1300, from Old English genog, a common Germanic formation (cognates: Old Saxon ginog, Old Frisian
enoch, Dutch genoeg, Old High German ginuog, German genug, Old Norse gnogr, Gothic ganohs).    This
is a compound of ge- with, together (also a participial, collective, intensive, or perfective
prefix) + root -nah, from PIE *nek- (2) to reach, attain (cognates: Sanskrit asnoti reaches, Hittite
ninikzi lifts, raises, Lithuanian ne&#353;ti to bear, carry, Latin nancisci to obtain). It is the
most prominent among the surviving examples of Old English ge-, the equivalent of Latin com- and
Modern German ge-, from PIE *kom- beside, near, by, with (see com-).    Meaning moderately, fairly,
tolerably (good enough) was in Middle English. Understated sense of have had enough have had too
much was in Old English (which relied heavily on double negatives and understatement). Colloquial
'nough said is attested from 1839.


enow (adj., n.)

Old English genoge (plural adjective); see enough. Until 18c., regarded as standard as the plural of
enough.


enquire (v.)

see inquire. An alternative form mainly used in sense of to ask a question. Related: enquired;
enquiring.


enquiry (n.)

alternative spelling of inquiry. Related: Enquiries.


enrage (v.)

late 14c. (implied in enraged), from Old French enragier go wild, go mad, lose one's senses, from
en- make, put in (see en- (1)) + rage rabies, rage (see rage (n.)). Related: Enraging. Intransitive
only in Old French; transitive sense is oldest in English.


enrapt (adj.)

c.1600, carried away by (prophetic) ecstasy, past participle adjective from en- make, put in (see
en- (1)) + rapt.


enrapture (v.)

1740, from en- (1) + rapture (n.). Related: Enraptured.


enrich (v.)

late 14c., to make wealthy, from Old French enrichir enrich, enlarge, from en- make, put in (see en-
(1)) + riche rich (see rich).    Figurative sense is from 1590s. Scientific sense of to increase the
abundance of a particular isotope in some material is first attested 1945. Related: Enriched;
enriching.


enrichment (n.)

1620s, from enrich + -ment.


enrol (v.)

alternative spelling of enroll.


enroll (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French enroller record in a register (13c., Modern French enr&ocirc;ler), from
en- make, put in (see en- (1)) + rolle (see roll (n.)). Related: Enrolled; enrolling.


enrollment (n.)

also enrolment, mid-15c., from Anglo-French enrollement, from Middle French enrollement, from Old
French enroller record in a register (see enroll).


ensample (n.)

precedent, c.1300, variant of asaumple, from Old French essample example (see example). The survival
of this variant form is due to its use in New Testament in KJV.


ensconce (v.)

1580s, to cover with a fort, from en- (1) make, put in + sconce small fortification, shelter,
perhaps via French, probably from Dutch schans earthwork (compare Middle High German schanze bundle
of sticks), of uncertain origin. Related: Ensconced.


ensemble (n.)

mid-15c., as an adverb, together, at the same time, from Middle French ensembl&eacute;e all the
parts of a thing considered together, from Late Latin insimul at the same time, from in- intensive
prefix + simul at the same time, related to similis (see similar). The noun is from 1703, parts of a
thing taken together; musical sense in English first attested 1844. Of women's dress and
accessories, from 1927.


enshrine (v.)

1580s, from en- (1) make, put in + shrine. Related: Enshrined; enshrining.


enshroud (v.)

1580s, from en- (1) make, put in + shroud (n.). Related: Enshrouded; enshrouding.


ensign (n.)

late 14c., via Scottish, from Old French enseigne (12c.) mark, symbol, signal; flag, standard,
pennant, from Latin insignia (plural); see insignia. Sense of banner, flag is c.1400; that of
soldier who carries one is first recorded 1510s. U.S. Navy sense of commissioned officer of the
lowest rank is from 1862. French navy had rank of enseigne de vaisseau since at least early 18c.


enslave (v.)

1640s, from en- (1) make, put in + slave (n.). Related: Enslaved; enslaving.


enslavement (n.)

1690s, from enslave + -ment.


ensnare (v.)

1570s, from en- (1) make, put in + snare (n.). Related: Ensnared; ensnaring.


ensue (v.)

late 14c., from Old French ensu-, past participle stem of ensivre follow close upon, come afterward,
from Late Latin insequere, from Latin insequi to pursue, follow, follow after; come next, from in-
upon (see in- (2)) + sequi follow (see sequel). Related: Ensued; ensues; ensuing.


ensure (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French enseurer, from en- make (see en- (1)) + Old French seur sure (see
sure); probably influenced by Old French asseurer assure. Related: Ensured; ensures; ensuring.


entablature (n.)

1610s, nativization of Italian intavolatura; see en- (1) + tablature.


entail (v.)

mid-14c., convert (an estate) into 'fee tail' (feudum talliatum), from en- (1) make + taile legal
limitation, especially of inheritance, ruling who succeeds in ownership and preventing it from being
sold off, from Anglo-French taile, Old French taillie, past participle of taillier allot, cut to
shape, from Late Latin taliare. Sense of have consequences is 1829, from notion of inseparable
connection. Related: Entailed; entailling.


entangle (v.)

early 15c., from en- (1) + tangle (n.). Related: Entangled; entangling.


entanglement (n.)

1640s, from entangle + -ment. Foreign entanglements does not appear as such in Washington's Farewell
Address, though he nonetheless warns against them. The phrase is found in William Coxe's 1798
memoirs of Sir Robert Walpole.


entelechy (n.)

c.1600, from Greek entelekheia, from en in (see en- (2)) + telei, dative of telos perfection (see
tele-) + ekhein to have (see scheme (n.)). In Aristotle, the condition in which a potentiality has
become an actuality.


entente (n.)

1854, from French &eacute;ntente understanding, from Old French entente intent (12c.), noun use of
fem. past participle of entendre to direct one's attention (see intent). Political sense arose in
19c. from entente cordial (1844), the best-known example being that between England and France
(1904), to which Russia was added in 1908.


enter (v.)

late 13c., from Old French entrer, from Latin intrare to go into, enter (source of Spanish entrar,
Italian entrare), from intra within, related to inter (prep., adj.) among, between (see inter-).
Related: Entered; entering.


enteric (adj.)

pertaining to the intestines, 1869, from Greek enterikos intestinal, first used in this sense by
Aristotle, from entera (plural; singular enteron) intestines, from PIE *enter-, comparative of *en
in (see inter-).


enteritis (n.)

1808, medical Latin, coined c.1750 by French pathologist Fran&ccedil;ois-Boissier de la Croix de
Sauvages (1706-1767), from enteron intestine (see enteric) + -itis.


entero-

before vowels enter-, word-forming element meaning intestine, from comb. form of Greek enteron an
intestine, piece of gut (see enteric).


enterovirus (n.)

1957; see entero- + virus.


enterprise (n.)

early 15c., an undertaking, from Old French enterprise an undertaking, noun use of fem. past
participle of entreprendre undertake, take in hand, from entre- between (see entre-) + prendre to
take, contraction of prehendere (see prehensile). Abstract sense of readiness to undertake
challenges, spirit of daring is from late 15c.


enterprising (adj.)

eager to undertake, 1610s, from enterprise. Until mid-19c. (at least in Britain) mostly in a bad
sense: scheming, ambitious, foolhardy. Earlier (1560s) as a verbal noun meaning action of
undertaking.


entertain (v.)

late 15c., to keep up, maintain, to keep (someone) in a certain frame of mind, from Middle French
entretenir (12c.), from Old French entretenir hold together, stick together, support, from entre-
among (from Latin inter; see inter-) + tenir to hold (from Latin tenere; see tenet).    Sense of
have a guest is late 15c.; that of amuse is 1620s. Meaning to allow (something) to consideration (of
opinions, notions, etc.) is 1610s. Related: Entertained; entertaining.


entertainer (n.)

public performer, 1530s, agent noun from  entertain.


entertainment (n.)

1530s, provision for support of a retainer; manner of social behavior, now obsolete, along with
other 16c. senses; from entertain + -ment. Meaning the amusement of someone is from 1610s; that
which entertains is from 1650s; public performance or display meant to amuse is from 1727.


enthalpy (n.)

1927, from Greek enthalpein to warm in, from en in (see en- (2)) + thalpein to heat.


enthrall (v.)

also enthral to hold in mental or moral bondage, 1570s, from en- (1) make, put in + thrall. Literal
sense is from 1610s. Related: Enthralled; enthralling.


enthrone (v.)

c.1600, from en- (1) + throne. Replacing enthronize (late 14c.), from Old French introniser (13c.),
from Late Latin inthronizare, from Greek enthronizein; also simply throne (v.), late 14c., from the
noun in English. Related: Enthroned; enthroning.


enthuse (v.)

1827, American English, back-formation from enthusiasm. Originally often humorous or with affected
ignorance. Related: enthused; enthusing.


enthusiasm (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French enthousiasme (16c.) and directly from Late Latin enthusiasmus, from Greek
enthousiasmos divine inspiration, from enthousiazein be inspired or possessed by a god, be rapt, be
in ecstasy, from entheos divinely inspired, possessed by a god, from en in (see en- (2)) + theos god
(see theo-). Acquired a derogatory sense of excessive religious emotion (1650s) under the Puritans;
generalized sense of fervor, zeal (the main modern sense) is first recorded 1716.


enthusiast (n.)

1560s, pejorative, one who believes himself possessed of divine revelations or special communication
from God, from Greek enthousiastes a person inspired, from enthousiazein (see enthusiasm). General
sense (not always entirely pejorative) is from mid-18c.


enthusiastic (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to possession by a deity, from Greek enthousiastikos inspired, from enthousiazein
(see enthusiasm). Meaning pertaining to irrational delusion in religion is from 1690s. The main
modern sense, in reference to feelings or persons, intensely eager, rapturous, is from late 18c.
Related: Enthusiastically.


enthymeme (n.)

a syllogism in which one premise is omitted, 1580s, from Latin enthymema, from Greek enthymema
thought, argument, from enthymesthai to think, consider, literally to keep in mind, take to heart,
from en in (see en- (2)) + thymos mind (see fume (n.)).


entice (v.)

late 13c., intice, from Old French enticier to stir up (fire), to excite, incite,  perhaps from
Vulgar Latin *intitiare set on fire, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + titio (genitive titionis)
firebrand, of uncertain origin. Meaning to allure, attract is from c.1300. Related: Enticed;
enticing.


enticement (n.)

c.1300, thing which entices; 1540s, action of enticing; from Old French enticement, from enticier
(see entice).


entire (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French entier whole, unbroken, intact, complete, from Latin integrum (nominative
integer; see integer).


entirely (adv.)

mid-14c., from entire + -ly (2).


entirety (n.)

also entierty, mid-14c., enterete, from Anglo-French entiertie, Old French entieret&eacute;
totality, entirety; integrity, purity, from Latin integritatem (nominative integritas) completeness,
soundness, integrity, from integer (see integer).


entitle (v.)

late 14c., to give a title to a chapter, book, etc., from Anglo-French entitler, Old French
entiteler (Modern French intituler), from Late Latin intitulare, from in- in (see in- (2)) + titulus
title (see title (n.)).    Meaning to bestow (on a person) a rank or office is mid-15c. Sense of to
give (someone) 'title' to an estate or property, hence to give that person a claim to possession or
privilege, is mid-15c.; this now is used mostly in reference to circumstances and actions. Related:
Entitled; entitling.


entitlement (n.)

1823, perhaps in some senses from French entitlement, which long had been used in legal language; in
part a native formation from entitle + -ment. Entitlement culture attested by 1994 (culture of
entitlement is from 1989).


entity (n.)

1590s, from Late Latin entitatem (nominative entitas), from ens (genitive entis) a thing, proposed
by Caesar as present participle of esse be (see is), to render Greek philosophical term to on that
which is (from neuter of present participle of einai to be; see essence). Originally abstract;
concrete sense in English is from 1620s.


ento-

word-forming element meaning within, inside, inner, from Greek ento-, comb. form of entos within,
inside (cognate with Latin intus), from PIE *entos, from *en in (see in) + adverbial suffix -tos,
denoting origin.


entomb (v.)

1570s, from Old French entomber place in a tomb, from en- in (see en- (1)) + tombe tomb (see tomb).
Related: Entombed; entombing. The earlier verb was simply tomb (c.1300).


entomologist (n.)

1771; see entomology + -ist.


entomology (n.)

1766, from French entomologie (1764), coined from Greek entomon insect + -logia study of (see
-logy). Entomon is neuter of entomos having a notch or cut (at the waist), from en in (see en- (2))
+ temnein to cut (see tome).    So called by Aristotle in reference to the segmented division of
insect bodies. Compare insect. Related: Entomological. Hybrid insectology (1766, from French
insectologie, 1744) is not much used.  I have given the name insectology to that part of natural
history which has insects for its object; that of entomology ... would undoubtedly have been more
suitable ... but its barbarous sound terryfy'd me. [Charles Bonnet's English translation of his
Contemplation de la nature, 1766]


entourage (n.)

1832, surroundings, environment, picked up by De Quincey from French entourage, from Middle French
entourer to surround (16c.), from Old French entour that which surrounds (10c.), from en- in (see
en- (1)) + tour a circuit (see tour). Sense of attendant persons first recorded in English by 1860.


entrails (n.)

c.1300, from Old French entrailles (12c.), from Late Latin intralia inward parts, intestines (8c.),
from Latin interanea, neuter plural of interaneus internal, that which is within, from inter
between, among (see inter-).


entrain (v.)

to draw along, 1560s, from French entrainer (12c.), from en- away (see en- (1)) + trainer to drag
(see train (n.)). Related: Entrained; entrainment. A word in chemistry; the word meaning to get on a
locomotive train is a native formation from the 1860s.


entrammel (v.)

1590s, from en- (1) + trammel.


entrance (n.)

1520s, act of entering, from Middle French entrance, from entrer (see enter). Sense of door, gate
first recorded in English 1530s.


entrance (v.)

to throw into a trance, 1590s, from en- (1) put in + trance (n.). Meaning to delight also is 1590s.
Related: Entranced; entrancing.


entrant (n.)

1630s, of professions, etc.; 1838, of contests; from French entrant, present participle of entrer
(see enter).


entrap (v.)

1530s, intrappe, from Old French entraper trap, catch in a trap; see en- (1) + trap (v.). Related:
Entrapped; entrapping.


entrapment (n.)

1590s, from entrap + -ment. Criminal investigation sense first attested 1899.


entre nous

in private, French, literally between ourselves.


entre-

in words from French, corresponds to English enter-, which is itself from French entre between,
among, from Latin inter (see inter-).


entreat (v.)

mid-14c., to enter into negotiations; early 15c., to treat (someone) in a certain way, also to plead
for (someone), from Anglo-French entretier, Old French entraiter to treat, from en- make (see en-
(1)) + traiter to treat (see treat (v.)). Meaning to beseech, implore is first attested c.1500.
Related: Entreated; entreating.


entreaty (n.)

mid-15c., treatment, negotiation; see entreat + -y (1). Meaning earnest request is from 1570s.
Related: Entreaties.


entree (n.)

1724, opening piece of an opera or ballet, from French entr&eacute;e, from Old French entree (see
entry). Cookery sense is from 1759; originally the dish which was introductory to the main course.
The word had been borrowed in Middle English as entre act of entering.


entrench (v.)

1550s, implied in intrenched, from en- (1) make, put in + trench. Figurative use is from 1590s.
Related: Entrenched; entrenching.


entrenchment (n.)

1580s, from entrench + -ment.


entrepot (n.)

warehouse, 1758, from French entrep&ocirc;t (16c.), from Latin interpositum that which is placed
between, neuter past participle of interponere (see interposition).


entrepreneur (n.)

1828, manager or promoter of a theatrical production, reborrowing of French entrepreneur one who
undertakes or manages, agent noun from Old French entreprendre undertake (see enterprise). The word
first crossed the Channel late 15c. but did not stay. Meaning business manager is from 1852.
Related: Entrepreneurship.


entrepreneurial (adj.)

1922, from entrepreneur + -al (1).


entropy (n.)

1868, from German Entropie measure of the disorder of a system, coined 1865 (on analogy of Energie)
by German physicist Rudolph Clausius (1822-1888) from Greek entropia a turning toward, from en in
(see en- (2)) + trope a turning (see trope). Related: Entropic.


entrust (v.)

c.1600, from en- (1) make, put in + trust (v.). Related: Entrusted; entrusting.


entry (n.)

late 13c., door, gate, that by which a place is entered; c.1300, an entering upon; right of
entering, from Old French entree entry, entrance (12c.), originally fem. past participle of entrer
to enter (see enter).


entwine (v.)

also intwine, 1590s, from en- (1) make, put in + twine (n.). Related: Entwined; entwining.


enucleation (n.)

1640s, from verb enucleate (1540s), from Latin enucleatus pure, clean, past participle of enucleare
to lay open, explain in detail, literally to remove the kernel of (see ex- + nucleus). Mostly
figurative in Latin (the notion is of getting at the core of some matter); until mid-19c. advances
in science and medicine, usually figurative in English.


enumerate (v.)

1610s, from or modeled on Latin enumeratus, past participle of enumerare (see enumeration). Middle
English had annumerate (early 15c.). Related: Enumerated; enumerating.


enumeration (n.)

1550s, from Middle French &eacute;num&eacute;ration, from Latin enumerationem (nominative
enumeratio) a counting up, noun of action from past participle stem of enumerare to reckon up, count
over, enumerate, from ex- from (see ex-) + numerare to count, number, from numerus number (see
number (n.)).


enunciate (v.)

1620s, declare, express, from Latin enuntiatus, past participle of enuntiare speak out, say,
express, assert; divulge, disclose, reveal, betray, from ex- out (see ex-) + nuntiare to announce
(see nuncio). Or perhaps a back-formation from enunciation. Meaning to articulate, pronounce is from
1759. Related: Enunciated; enunciating.


enunciation (n.)

1550s, declaration, from Latin enuntiationem (nominative enuntiatio) enunciation, declaration, noun
of action from past participle stem of enuntiare (see enunciate). Meaning articulation of words is
from 1750.


enunciative (adj.)

1530s, from Latin enuntiativus, from enuntiare (see enunciate).


enuresis (n.)

1800, medical Latin, from Greek enourein to urinate in, from en in (see en- (2)) + ourein to
urinate, from ouron (see urine).


envelop (v.)

late 14c., envolupen, be involved in, from Old French envoleper (10c., Modern French envelopper)
envelop, cover; fold up, from en- in (see en- (1)) + voloper wrap up, of uncertain origin, perhaps
Celtic (see Gamillscheg, Diez). Literal sense is from 1580s. Related: Enveloped; enveloping.


envelope (n.)

1705, from French enveloppe (13c.), a back-formation from envelopper to envelop (see envelop).


envelopment (n.)

1763, from envelop (v.) + -ment.


envenom (v.)

c.1300, envenymen, from Old French envenimer (12c.) to poison, taint; from en- (see en- (1)) + venim
(see venom). Figurative use is from late 14c. Related: Envenomed; envenoming.


enviable (adj.)

c.1600, from envy + -able. Related: Enviably.


envious (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French envious, Old French envieus (13c.), earlier envidius (12c., Modern French
envieux), from Latin invidiosus full of envy (source of Spanish envidioso, Italian invidioso,
Portuguese invejoso), from invidia (see envy). Related: Enviously; enviousness.


environ (v.)

late 14c. (implied in environing), to surround, from Old French environer to surround, enclose,
encircle, from environ round about, from en- in (see en- (1)) + viron circle, circuit, from virer to
turn (see veer). Related: Environed.


environment (n.)

c.1600, state of being environed (see environ + -ment); sense of nature, conditions in which a
person or thing lives first recorded 1827 (used by Carlyle to render German Umgebung); specialized
ecology sense first recorded 1956.


environmental (adj.)

1887, from environment + -al (1). Related: Environmentally (1884).


environmentalism (n.)

1923, as a psychological theory (in the nature vs. nurture debate), from environmental + -ism. The
ecological sense is from 1972. Related: Environmentalist (n.), 1916 in the psychological sense, 1970
in the ecological sense.


environs (n.)

outskirts, 1660s, from French environs, plural of Old French environ compass, circuit, from environ
(adv.) around, round about (see environ).


envisage (v.)

1778, from French envisager look in the face of, from en- cause to (see en- (1)) + visage face (see
visage). Related: Envisaged; envisaging.


envision (v.)

1914, from en- (1) make, put in + vision. Related: Envisioned; envisioning. Earlier (1827) is
envision'd in sense endowed with vision.


envoy (n.)

messenger, 1660s, from French envoy&eacute; messenger, literally one sent (12c.), noun use of past
participle of envoyer send, from Vulgar Latin *inviare send on one's way, from Latin in on (see in-
(2)) + via road (see via (adv.)). The same French word was borrowed in Middle English to mean a
stanza of a poem sending it off to find readers (late 14c.).


envy (n.)

late 13c., from Old French envie envy, jealousy, rivalry (10c.), from Latin invidia envy, jealousy,
from invidus envious, from invidere envy, earlier look at (with malice), cast an evil eye upon, from
in- upon (see in- (2)) + videre to see (see vision).    Similar formations in Avestan nipashnaka
envious, also look at; Old Church Slavonic zavideti to envy, from videti to see; Lithuanian pavydeti
to envy, related to veizdeti to see, to look at.


envy (v.)

late 14c., from Old French envier, from envie (see envy (n.)). Related: Envied; envying.


enwind (v.)

1590s (implied in inwinding), from en- (1) + wind (v.). Related: Enwound; enwinding.


enwrap (v.)

late 14c., from en- (1) make, put in + wrap (v.). Related: Enwrapped; enwrapping.


enzyme (n.)

1881, as a biochemical term, from German Enzym, coined 1878 by German physiologist Wilhelm
K&uuml;hne (1837-1900), from Modern Greek enzymos leavened, from en in (see en- (2)) + zyme leaven
(see zymurgy).


eo-

word-forming element used from mid-19c. (first in Eocene) in compound words formed by earth-
scientists and meaning characterized by the earliest appearance of, from Greek eos dawn, from PIE
*aus-, cognate with Modern English east (q.v.).  Piltdown Man, before exposed as a fraud, was known
as Eoanthropus.


Eocene (adj.)

in reference to the second epoch of the Tertiary Period, coined in English 1831, from eo- + Greek
kainos new (see recent); along with Miocene and Pliocene, by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866),
English polymath.


Eohippus (n.)

oldest known genus of the horse family, 1879, from Modern Latin, from Greek eos (see eo-) + hippos
horse (see equine).


eolian (adj.)

see Aeolian.


eolithic (adj.)

1890, from French &eacute;olithique (1883), from eo- (see eo-) + French lithique, as in
n&eacute;olithique (see neolithic). Related: eolith (1890).


eon (n.)

1640s, from Latin aeon, from Greek aion age, vital force, a period of existence, lifetime,
generation; in plural, eternity, from PIE root *aiw- vital force, life, long life, eternity
(cognates: Sanskrit ayu life, Avestan ayu age, Latin aevum space of time, eternity, Gothic aiws age,
eternity, Old Norse &aelig;vi lifetime, German ewig everlasting, Old English a ever, always).


EPA

initialism (acronym) for Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. federal agency proposed by President
Richard Nixon and created in December 1970.


epact (n.)

1550s, number of days by which the solar year exceeds a lunar one of 12 moons; also number of days
into the moon on which the solar year begins; from French &eacute;pacte (12c.), from Late Latin
epacta an intercalary day, from Greek epaktos, literally brought in, inported, verbal adjective of
epagein to intercalate, add, bring forward, from epi on (see epi-) + agein to bring, to lead (see
act (v.)).


epaulet (n.)

1783, from French &eacute;paulette (16c.), diminutive of &eacute;paule shoulder, from Old French
espaule (12c.), from Latin spatula flat piece of wood, splint, later shoulder blade, diminutive of
spatha broad wooden instrument, broad sword, from Greek spathe a broad flat sword (see spade (n.1)).


epee (n.)

1889, from French &eacute;p&eacute;e, literally sword from Old French espe (9c., spede) spear,
lance, from Latin spatha (see epaulet).


epeiric (adj.)

in reference to seas covering continental shelves, 1917, from Greek epeiros mainland + -ic.


epexegesis (n.)

words added to convey more clearly the meaning intended, 1620s, from Greek epexegesis, from epi in
addition (see epi) + exegeisthai to explain (see exegesis).


ephah (n.)

Hebrew dry measure, probably of Egyptian origin.


ephebic (adj.)

1880 (the noun, ephebe, is attested from 1690s), from Greek ephebos of age 18-20, from epi upon (see
epi-) + hebe early manhood, from PIE *yegw-a- power, youth, strength. In classical Athens, a youth
of 18 underwent his dokimasia, had his hair cut off, and was enrolled as a citizen. His chief
occupation for the next two years was garrison duty.


ephedra (n.)

genus of low, branchy desert shrubs, 1914, from Modern Latin (1737) from Greek ephedra, a name given
by Pliny to the horsetail, literally sitting upon, from fem. of ephedros, from epi on (see epi-) +
hedra seat, base, chair, face of a geometric solid (see sedentary). The reason for the name is not
known.


ephedrine (n.)

1889, named 1887 by Japanese organic chemist Nagai Nagayoshi (1844-1929), from the plant ephedra,
from which it was first extracted, + chemical suffix -ine (2).


ephemera (n.)

late 14c., originally a medical term, from Medieval Latin ephemera (febris) (fever) lasting a day,
from fem. of ephemerus, from Greek ephemeros lasting only one day, short-lived, from epi on (see
epi-) + hemerai, dative of hemera day, from PIE *amer- day.    Sense extended 17c. to short-lived
insects and flowers; general sense of thing of transitory existence is first attested 1751. Compare
Greek ephemeroi men, literally creatures of a day.


ephemeral (adj.)

1560s; see ephemera + -al (1). Related: Ephemerality. Originally of diseases and lifespans; extended
sense of transitory is from 1630s.


ephemeris (n.)

table showing predicted positions of heavenly bodies, 1550s, Modern Latin, from Greek ephemeris
diary, calendar, from ephemeros daily (see ephemera). The classical plural is ephemerides.


ephemeron (n.)

1620s, from Greek (zoon) ephemeron, neuter of ephemeros (see ephemera). Figurative use by 1771.


Ephesians (n.)

New Testament epistle, late 14c., addressed to Christian residents of the Greek city of Ephesus, in
what is now western Turkey.


Ephesus

Greek city in ancient Asia Minor, center of worship for Artemis, Greek Ephesos, traditionally
derived from ephoros overseer, in reference to its religious significance, but this might be folk
etymology.


ephialtes (n.)

nightmare or demon that causes nightmares, c.1600, from Greek Ephialtes, name of a demon supposed to
cause nightmares; the ancient explanation is that it was from ephallesthai to leap upon, but OED
finds considerable phonological difficulties with this.


ephod (n.)

Hebrew ephod, from aphad to put on.


ephor (n.)

Spartan magistrate, 1580s, from Greek ephoros overseer, from epi- over (see epi-) + horan to see,
possibly from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive (see ward (n.)).


Ephraim

masc. personal name, in Old Testament, younger son of Joseph; also the tribe descended from him,
sometimes used figuratively for Kingdom of Israel; Greek form of Hebrew Ephrayim, a derivative of
parah was fruitful (related to Aramaic pera fruit).


epi-

word-forming element meaning on, upon, above, also in addition to; toward, among, from Greek epi
upon, at, close upon (in space or time), on the occasion of, in addition, from PIE *epi, *opi near,
at, against (cognates: Sanskrit api also, besides; Avestan aipi also, to, toward; Armenian ev also,
and; Latin ob toward, against, in the way of; Oscan op, Greek opi- behind; Hittite appizzis younger;
Lithuanian ap- about, near; Old Church Slavonic ob on). Before unaspirated vowels, reduced to ep-;
before aspirated vowels, eph-. A productive prefix in Greek; also used in modern scientific
compounds (such as epicenter).


epic (adj.)

1580s, perhaps via Middle French &eacute;pique or directly from Latin epicus, from Greek epikos,
from epos word, story, poem, from PIE *wekw- to speak (see voice). Extended sense of grand, heroic
first recorded in English 1731. From 1706 as a noun in reference to an epic poem, A long narrative
told on a grand scale of time and place, featuring a larger-than-life protagonist and heroic actions
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry].


epicene (adj.)

mid-15c., epycen, originally a grammatical term for nouns that may denote either gender, from Latin
epicoenus common, from Greek epikoinos common to many, promiscuous, from epi on (see epi-) + koinos
common (see coeno-). Extended sense of characteristic of both sexes first recorded in English
c.1600; that of effeminate 1630s.


epicenter (n.)

1887, from Modern Latin epicentrum (1879 in geological use); see epi- + center. Related: Epicentral
(1866).


epicentre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of epicenter; for spelling, see -re.


epicure (n.)

late 14c., follower of Epicurus, from Latin Epicurus, from Greek Epicouros (341-270 B.C.E.),
Athenian philosopher who taught that pleasure is the highest good and identified virtue as the
greatest pleasure; the first lesson recalled, the second forgotten, and the name used pejoratively
for one who gives himself up to sensual pleasure (1560s), especially glutton, sybarite (1774).
Epicurus' school opposed by stoics, who first gave his name a reproachful sense. Non-pejorative
meaning one who cultivates refined taste in food and drink is from 1580s.


epicurean (n.)

late 14c., follower of the philosophical system of Epicurus; 1570s, one devoted to pleasure, from
Old French Epicurien, or from epicure + -ian. As an adjective, attested from 1580s in the
philosophical sense and 1640s with the meaning pleasure-loving.


epicureanism (n.)

1751, with reference to a philosophy; 1847 in a general sense, from epicurean + -ism. Earlier was
epicurism (1570s).


epicureous (adj.)

epicurean, 1550s, from Latin epicureus, from Greek epikoureios (see epicure).


epicycle (n.)

late 14c., from Latin epicyclus, from Greek epikyklos, from epi (see epi-) + kyklos (see cycle
(n.)).


epidemic (adj.)

c.1600, from French &eacute;pid&eacute;mique, from &eacute;pidemi&eacute; an epidemic disease, from
Medieval Latin epidemia, from Greek epidemia prevalence of an epidemic disease (especially the
plague), from epi among, upon (see epi-) + demos people, district (see demotic).


epidemic (n.)

1757, from epidemic (adj.); earlier epideme (see epidemy). An Old English noun for this (persisting
in Middle English) was man-cwealm.


epidemiology (n.)

study of epidemics, 1873, from Greek epidemios epidemic (see epidemic) + -logy. Related:
Epidemiological; epidemiologist.


epidemy (n.)

an epidemic disease, especially the plague, late 15c., ipedemye, impedyme, from Old French ypidime
(12c., Modern French &eacute;pid&eacute;mie), from Late Latin epidemia (see epidemic (adj.)).


epidermis (n.)

1620s, from Greek epidermis, from epi on (see epi-) + derma skin (see derma). Related: Epidermal;
epidermic.


epididymis (n.)

c.1600, fleshy mass at the back of the testicles, Modern Latin, literally that which is on the
testicles, from Greek epididymis, a word probably coined by Greek anatomist Herophilus (c.300
B.C.E.) from epi on (see epi-) + didymos testicle, literally double, twofold (adj.). To save his
Epididamies [Richard Brome, The Court Beggar, 1652].


epidural (adj.)

1882, from epi- + dura (mater) (see dura mater). The noun meaning â&euro;&oelig;injection into the
epidural regionâ&euro;? (usually during childbirth) is attested by 1970.


epiglottis (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin epiglottis, from Greek epiglottis, literally (that which is) upon the tongue,
from epi on (see epi-) + glottis, from glotta, variant of glossa tongue (see gloss (n.2)). An
earlier form was epiglote (c.1400), from Old French epiglotte. Related: Epiglottic.


epigone (n.)

also epigon, undistinguished scions of mighty ancestors, (sometimes in Latin plural form epigoni),
from Greek epigonoi, in classical use with reference to the sons of the Seven who warred against
Thebes; plural of epigonos born afterward from epi (see epi-) + -gonos, from root of gignesthai to
be born related to genos race, birth, descent (see genus).


epigram (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French &eacute;pigramme, from Latin epigramma an inscription, from Greek
epigramma an inscription, epitaph, epigram, from epigraphein to write on, inscribe (see epigraph).
Related: Epigrammatist.


epigrammatic (adj.)

1704, shortened from epigrammatical (c.1600); see epigram.


epigraph (n.)

1620s, inscription on a building, statue, etc., from Greek epigraphe an inscription, from
epigraphein to write on, from epi on (see epi-) + graphein to write (see -graphy). Sense of motto;
short, pithy sentence at the head of a book or chapter first recorded in English 1844.


epilepsy (n.)

1570s, from Middle French epilepsie (16c.), from Late Latin epilepsia, from Greek epilepsia seizure,
from epi upon (see epi-) + lepsis seizure, from leps-, future stem of lambanein take hold of, grasp
(see analemma).    Earlier was epilencie (late 14c.), from Middle French epilence, with form
influenced by pestilence. The native name was falling sickness.


epileptic (adj.)

c.1600, from French &eacute;pileptique, from Late Latin epilepticus, from Greek epileptikos, from
epilambanein (see epilepsy). Earlier adjective was epilentic (late 14c.), from a Greek variant. As a
noun from 1650s.


epilogue (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French epilogue (13c.), from Latin epilogus, from Greek epilogos conclusion
of a speech, from epi upon, in addition (see epi-) + logos a speaking (see lecture (n.)). Earliest
English sense was theatrical.


epinephrine (n.)

1883, from epi- upon + Greek nephros kidney (see nephron) + chemical suffix -ine (2). So called
because the adrenal glands are on the kidneys.


epiphany (n.)

early 14c., festival of the manifestation of Christ to the gentiles (celebrated Jan. 6; usually with
a capital -E-), from Old French epiphanie, from Late Latin epiphania, neuter plural (taken as
feminine singular), from late Greek epiphaneia manifestation, striking appearance (in New Testament,
advent or manifestation of Christ), from epiphanes manifest, conspicuous, from epiphainein to
manifest, display, from epi on, to (see epi-) + phainein to show (see phantasm).    Of divine beings
other than Christ, first recorded 1660s; general literary sense of any manifestation or revelation
appeared 1840, first in De Quincey.


epiphenomenon (n.)

1706, secondary symptom, from epi- + phenomenon. Plural is epiphenomena. Related: Epiphenomenal.


epiphyte (n.)

1816 (implied in epiphytous), from epi- upon + -phyte plant.


episcopacy (n.)

1640s; see episcopal + -cy.


episcopal (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French &eacute;piscopal (14c.), from Late Latin episcopalis, from Latin
episcopus an overseer (see bishop). Reference to a church governed by bishops is 1752. With a
capital E-, the ordinary designation of the Anglican church in the U.S. and Scotland.


episcopalian

1738 (n.), 1768 (adj.), from episcopal + -ian. Related: Episcopalianism.


episiotomy (n.)

1878, from comb. form of Greek epision the pubic region + -tomy a cutting.


episode (n.)

1670s, commentary between two choric songs in a Greek tragedy, also an incidental narrative or
digression within a story, poem, etc., from French &eacute;pisode or directly from Greek epeisodion
addition, noun use of neuter of epeisodios coming in besides, from epi in addition (see epi-) +
eisodos a coming in, entrance (from eis into + hodos way). Sense of outstanding incident, experience
first recorded in English 1773. Transferred by 1930s to individual broadcasts of serial radio
programs.


episodic (adj.)

1711, from episode + -ic. Episodical is from 1660s.


epistasis (n.)

medical Latin, from Greek epistasis a stopping, stoppage, from epi upon (see epi-) + stasis a
stopping or standing (see stasis).


epistaxis (n.)

medical Latin, from Greek epistaxis nosebleeding, from epi upon (see epi-) + stazein- to let fall in
drops (see stalactite).


epistemic (adj.)

1922, from Greek episteme knowledge (see epistemology) + -ic.


epistemology (n.)

theory of knowledge, 1856, coined by Scottish philosopher James F. Ferrier (1808-1864) from Greek
episteme knowledge, from Ionic Greek epistasthai know how to do, understand, literally overstand,
from epi over, near (see epi-) + histasthai to stand, (see histo-).    The scientific (as opposed to
philosophical) study of the roots and paths of knowledge is epistemics (1969). Related:
Epistemological; epistemologically.


epistle (n.)

Old English epistol, from Old French epistle, epistre (Modern French &eacute;pitre), from Latin
epistola letter, from Greek epistole message, letter, command, commission, whether verbal or in
writing, from epistellein send to, from epi to (see epi-) + stellein in its secondary sense of to
dispatch, send from PIE *stel-yo-, suffixed form of root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives
referring to a standing object or place (see stall (n.1)).    Also acquired in Old English directly
from Latin as pistol. Specific sense of letter from an apostle forming part of canonical scripture
is c.1200.


epistolary (adj.)

1650s, from French &eacute;pistolaire, from Latin epistolaris, from epistola (see epistle).


epistrophe (n.)

1640s, from Late Latin epistrophe, from Greek epistrophe a turning about, from epi upon (see epi-) +
strophe a turning (see strophe).


epitaph (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French epitaphe (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin epitaphium funeral
oration, eulogy, from Greek epitaphion a funeral oration, noun use of neuter of epitaphos of a
funeral, from epi at, over (see epi-) + taphos tomb, funeral rites, from PIE root *dhembh- to bury.
Among the Old English equivalents was byrgelsleo&eth;.


epithalamium (n.)

1590s, bridal song, from Latin epithalamium, from Greek epithalamion a bridal song, from epi at,
upon (see epi-) + thalamos bridal chamber, inner chamber  (see thalamus).


epithelium (n.)

1748, Modern Latin (Frederick Ruysch), from Greek epi upon (see epi-) + thele teat, nipple (see
fecund). Related: Epithelial.


epithet (n.)

1570s, descriptive name for a person or thing, from Middle French &eacute;pith&egrave;te or directly
from Latin epitheton, from Greek epitheton something added, adjective often used as noun, from
neuter of epithetos attributed, added, from epitithenai to add on, from epi in addition (see epi-) +
tithenai to put (see theme).


epitome (n.)

1520s, an abstract; brief statement of the chief points of some writing, from Middle French
&eacute;pitom&eacute; (16c.), from Latin epitome abridgment, from Greek epitome abridgment, from
epitemnein cut short, abridge, from epi into (see epi-) + temnein to cut (see tome). Sense of person
or thing that typifies something is first recorded c.1600.


epitomise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of epitomize. For spelling, see -ize. Related: Epitomising;
epitomises.


epitomize (v.)

1590s, shorten, condense, from epitome + -ize. Meaning typify, embody is from 1620s. Related:
Epitomized; epitomizing; epitomizes.


epizootic (n.)

animal equivalent of epidemic, 1748, from French &eacute;pizootique, from &eacute;pizootie,
irregularly formed from Greek epi (see epi-) + zoon (see zoo-).


epoch (n.)

1610s, epocha, point marking the start of a new period in time (such as the founding of Rome, the
birth of Christ, the Hegira), from Late Latin epocha, from Greek epokhe stoppage, fixed point of
time, from epekhein to pause, take up a position, from epi on (see epi-) + ekhein to hold (see
scheme (n.)). Transferred sense of a period of time is 1620s; geological usage (not a precise
measurement) is from 1802.


epochal (adj.)

1680s, from epoch + -al (1).


epode (n.)

1590s, a kind of lyric poem in which a short line follows a longer one (invented by Archilochus,
also used by Horace), from Latin epodos, from Greek epodus after-song, incantation, from epi after
(see epi-) + odein to sing (see ode).


eponym (n.)

one whose name becomes that of a place, a people, an era, an institution, etc., 1846, from Greek
eponymos given as a name, giving one's name to something, from epi upon (see epi-) + onyma, Aeolic
dialectal variant of onoma name (see name (n.)).


eponymous (adj.)

1846; see eponym + -ous.


epoxy (n.)

1916, in reference to certain chemical compounds, from epi- + first element of oxygen (epoxy- is
used as a prefix in chemistry). Resins from them are used as powerful glues. Hence the verb meaning
to bond with epoxy (1965). Related: Epoxied.


epsilon (n.)

from Greek, literally e psilon bare -e-, -e- and nothing else, in contradistinction to the diphthong
-ai-, which has the same sound. Greek psilon smooth, simple is of uncertain origin.


Epsom salts

magnesium sulphate, 1770, obtained from Epsom water, the water of a mineral spring at Epsom in
Surrey, England, the medicinal properties of which were discovered in Elizabethan times. The place
name is recorded c.973 as Ebbesham, literally Ebbi's homestead, from the name of some forgotten
Anglo-Saxon. The mineral supply there was exhausted 19c.


Epstein-Barr virus

1968, named for British virologist Michael Anthony Epstein and Irish-born virologist Yvonne M. Barr.


ept (adj.)

1938, back-formation from inept, usually with an attempt at comical effect. Related: Eptitude;
eptly.


equability (n.)

1530s, from Latin aequabilitas, from aequabilis (see equable).


equable (adj.)

1670s, back-formation from equability or else from Latin aequabilis equal, consistent, uniform, from
aequare make uniform (see equate).


equal (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin aequalis uniform, identical, equal, from aequus level, even, just, of unknown
origin. Parallel formation egal (from Old French egal) was in use late 14c.-17c. The noun is
recorded from 1570s.


equal (v.)

1580s, compare, liken, also match, rival, from equal (adj.). Related: Equaled; equaling.


equalitarian (adj.)

1799, in reference to the doctrine that all mankind are equal, from equality on model of
humanitarian, etc.


equality (n.)

late 14c., evenness of surface, uniformity of size; c.1400, in reference to amount or number, from
Old French equalit&eacute; (Modern French &eacute;galit&eacute;, which form dates from 17c.), from
Latin aequalitatem (nominative aequalitas) equality, similarity, likeness (also sometimes with
reference to civil rights), from aequalis (see equal (adj.)). Of privileges, rights, etc., from
1520s.


equalization (n.)

1793, from equalize + -ation.


equalize (v.)

1580s, from equal (adj.) + -ize. Related: Equalized; equalizing.


equalizer (n.)

1792, agent noun from equalize. Sports sense attested by 1930; in the U.S. underworld slang sense of
pistol, it is from c.1900.


equally (adv.)

late 14c., from equal (adj.) + -ly (2).


equanimity (n.)

c.1600, fairness, impartiality, from French &eacute;quanimit&eacute;, from Latin aequanimitatem
(nominative aequanimitas) evenness of mind, calmness, from aequus even, level (see equal (adj.)) +
animus mind, spirit (see animus). Meaning evenness of temper in English is from 1610s.


equanimous (adj.)

1650s, from Latin aequanimis (see equanimity) + -ous.


equate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin aequatus level, levelled, even, past participle of aequare make even or
uniform, make equal, from aequus level, even, equal (see equal (adj.)). Earliest use in English was
of astrological calculation, then to make equal; meaning to regard as equal is early 19c. Related:
Equated; equating.


equation (n.)

late 14c., a term in astrology; meaning action of making equal is from 1650s; mathematical sense is
from 1560s, on notion of equalizing the expressions; from Latin aequationem (nominative aequatio) an
equal distribution, community, from past participle stem of aequare (see equal (adj.)). Chemistry
sense is from 1807.


equator (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin aequator diei et noctis equalizer of day and night (when the sun is
on the celestial equator, twice annually, day and night are of equal length), agent noun from Latin
aequare make equal (see equate). Sense of celestial equator is earliest, extension to terrestrial
line midway between the poles first recorded in English 1610s.


equatorial (adj.)

1660s, from equator + -al (1).


equerry (n.)

1590s, short for groom of the equirrie, from esquiry stables (1550s), from Middle French escuerie
(Modern French &eacute;curie), perhaps from Medieval Latin scuria stable, from Old High German scura
barn; or from Old French escuier groom, from Vulgar Latin scutarius shield-bearer. In either case,
spelling influenced by Latin equus horse, which is unrelated.


equestrian (adj.)

1650s, formed in English from Latin equester (genitive equestris) of a horseman, from eques
horseman, knight, from equus horse (see equine). As a noun, one who rides on horseback, from 1791.
The pseudo-French fem. equestrienne is attested from 1848.


equi-

word-forming element meaning equal, from Latin aequi-, comb. form of aequus equal, even (see equal
(adj.)).


equiangular (adj.)

1650s; see equi- + angular.


equidistant (adj.)

1560s, from French &eacute;quidistant (14c.), from Late Latin aequidistantem (nominative
aequidistans), from aequi- (see equal) + distantem (see distant). In reference to a type of map
projection, from 1866.


equilateral (adj.)

1560s, from Late Latin aequilateralis, from aequi- (see equal (adj.)) + lateralis (see lateral).


equilibrium (n.)

c.1600, from Latin aequilibrium, from aequus equal (see equal (adj.)) + libra a balance, scale,
plummet (see Libra).


equine (adj.)

1765, from Latin equinus, from equus horse, from PIE root *ekwo- horse (cognates: Greek hippos, Old
Irish ech, Old English eoh, Gothic aihwa-, Sanskrit a&ccedil;va-, Avestan aspa-, Old Church Slavonic
ehu-, all meaning horse).


equinox (n.)

late 14c., from Old French equinoce (12c.) or directly from Medieval Latin equinoxium equality of
night (and day), from Latin aequinoctium the equinoxes, from aequus equal (see equal (adj.)) + nox
(genitive noctis) night (see night). The Old English translation was efnniht. Related: Equinoctial.


equip (v.)

1520s, from Middle French &eacute;quiper to fit out, from Old French esquiper fit out a ship (12c.),
probably from Old Norse skipa fit out a ship, from skip ship (see ship (n.)). Related: Equipped;
equipping. Spanish and Portuguese esquipar are from French.


equipage (n.)

1570s, from French &eacute;quipage (15c.), from &eacute;quiper (see equip). Now largely replaced by
equipment.


equiparation (n.)

from Latin aequiparationem (nominative aequiparatio) an equalizing, comparison, from aequiparare put
on equality, compare, from aequipar equal, alike, from aequus equal, even (see equal (adj.)) + par
(see par (n.)). Related: Equiparate.


equipment (n.)

1717, things equipped; 1748, action of equipping; from equip + -ment, or from French
&eacute;quipement. Superseding earlier equipage.


equipoise (n.)

1650s, a contraction of the phrase equal poise (1550s); see equal (adj.) + poise (n.).


equitable (adj.)

1640s, from French &eacute;quitable (16c.), from &eacute;quit&eacute; (see equity). Related:
Equitably.


equity (n.)

early 14c., from Old French equite (13c.), from Latin aequitatem (nominative aequitas) equality,
conformity, symmetry, fairness, from aequus even, just, equal (see equal (adj.)). As the name of a
system of law, 1590s, from Roman naturalis aequitas, the general principles of justice which
corrected or supplemented the legal codes.


equivalence (n.)

1540s, from French &eacute;quivalence, from Medieval Latin aequivalentia, from aequivalentem (see
equivalent). Related: Equivalency (1530s).


equivalent (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French equivalent and directly from Late Latin aequivalentem (nominative
aequivalens) equivalent, present participle of aequivalere be equivalent, from Latin aequus equal
(see equal (adj.)) + valere be well, be worth (see valiant). As a noun from c.1500.


equivocal (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin aequivocus of equal voice, of equal significance, ambiguous (see
equivocation) + -al (1). Earlier in same sense was equivoque (late 14c.). Related: Equivocally
(1570s).


equivocate (v.)

early 15c., equivocaten, from Medieval Latin equivocatus, past participle of equivocare to call by
the same name, from Late Latin aequivocus (see equivocation). Related: Equivocated; equivocating.


equivocation (n.)

late 14c., the fallacy of using a word in different senses at different stages of the reasoning (a
loan-translation of Greek homonymia, literally having the same name), from Old French equivocation,
from Late Latin aequivocationem (nominative aequivocatio), from aequivocus of identical sound, past
participle of aequivocare, from aequus equal (see equal (adj.)) + vocare to call (see voice (n.)).


equivocator (n.)

1590s, from Late Latin aequivocator, agent noun from aequivocare (see equivocation).


er

as a sound of hesitation or uncertainty, attested from mid-19c.


ER

abbreviation of emergency room, by 1965.


era (n.)

1716, earlier aera (1610s), from Late Latin aera, era an era or epoch from which time is reckoned,
probably identical with Latin aera counters used for calculation, plural of aes (genitive aeris)
brass, copper, money (see ore, also compare copper).    The Latin word's use in chronology said to
have begun in 5c. Spain (where, for some reason unknown to historians, the local era, aera
Hispanica, began 38 B.C.E.; some say it was because of a tax levied that year). Like epoch, in
English it originally meant the starting point of an age; meaning system of chronological notation
is c.1640s; that of historical period is from 1741, as in the U.S. Era of Good Feeling (which was
anything but) in reference to the Monroe Administration (1817-24), attested from 1817.


eradicate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin eradicatus, past participle of eradicare to root out (see eradication).
Related: Eradicated; eradicating; eradicable.


eradication (n.)

early 15c., from Latin eradicationem (nominative eradicatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of eradicare root out, extirpate, annihilate, from ex- out (see ex-) + radix (genitive radicis)
root (see radish).


erasable (adj.)

1849, from erase + -able.


erase (v.)

c.1600, from Latin erasus, past participle of eradere scrape out, scrape off, shave, from ex- out
(see ex-) + radere to scrape (see raze). Of magnetic tape, from 1945. Related: Erased; erasing.


eraser (n.)

thing that erases writing, 1790, American English, agent noun from erase. Originally a knife for
scraping off the ink. As a rubber product for removing pencil marks, from 1858.


Erasmus

masc. proper name, Latin, literally beloved; related to Greek erasmios lovely, pleasant, from eran
to love (see Eros).


Erastus

masc. proper name, Latin, literally beloved, from Greek erastos, verbal adjective of eran to love
(see Eros).


erasure (n.)

1734, from erase + -ure.


Erato

muse who presided over lyric poetry, from Greek erastos loved, beloved; lovely, charming, verbal
adjective of eran to love, to be in love with (see Eros).


erbium (n.)

1843, coined in Modern Latin with metallic element name -ium + erbia, name given by Swedish chemist
Carl Gustaf Mosander (1797-1858), who discovered it, from second element in Ytterby, name of a town
in Sweden where mineral containing it was found.


ere (prep.)

c.1200, from Old English &aelig;r (adv., conj., &amp; prep.) soon, before (in time), from Proto-
Germanic *airiz, comparative of *air early (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German er,
Dutch eer; German eher earlier; Old Norse ar early; Gothic air early, airis earlier), from PIE
*ayer- day, morning (cognates: Avestan ayar day; Greek eerios at daybreak, ariston breakfast). The
adverb erstwhile retains the Old English superlative &aelig;rest earliest.


Erebus

place of darkness between earth and Hades, from Latin Erebus, from Greek Erebos, of unknown origin,
perhaps from Semitic (compare Hebrew erebh sunset, evening), or from PIE *regw-es- darkness. Used
figuratively of darkness from 1590s.


Erechtheus

legendary first king and founder of Athens, from Latin Erechtheus, from Greek Erekhtheos, literally
render, shaker (of the earth), from erekhthein to rend, break, shatter, shake. Hence, Erechtheum,
the name of a temple on the Athenian acropolis.


erect (adj.)

late 14c., upright, not bending, from Latin erectus upright, elevated, lofty; eager, alert, aroused,
past participle of erigere raise or set up, from e- up + regere to direct, keep straight, guide (see
regal).


erect (v.)

c.1400, a back-formation from erect (adj.) or else from Latin erectus. Related: Erected; erecting.


erectile (adj.)

1830, from French &eacute;rectile, from Latin erect-, past participle stem of erigere (see erect).


erection (n.)

mid-15c., establishment; advancement, from Late Latin erectionem (nominative erectio), noun of
action from past participle stem of erigere (see erect (adj.)). Meaning the putting up (of a
building, etc.), stiffening of the penis are both from 1590s.


erector (n.)

1530s, agent noun in Latin form from erect (v.).


eremite (n.)

c.1200, learned form of hermit (q.v.), from Church Latin eremita. Since mid-17c. in poetic or
rhetorical use only, except in reference to specific examples in early Church history. Related:
Eremitic; eremitical.


erg (n.1)

unit of energy in the C.G.S. system, coined 1873 by the British Association for the Advancement of
Science from Greek ergon work (see organ).


erg (n.2)

region of drifting sand dunes, 1875, from French erg (1854), from North African Arabic 'irj, from a
Berber word.


ergative

1943, grammatical case used for the subjects of transitive verbs (in Eskimo, Basque, Caucasian
languages), from Greek ergatos workman, from ergos work (see organ) + -ive.


ergo

c.1400, from Latin ergo therefore, in consequence of, possibly from *ex rogo from the direction,
from ex out of (see ex-) + root of regere to guide (see regal).


ergonomics (n.)

scientific study of the efficiency of people in the workplace, coined 1950 from Greek ergon work
(see organ) + second element of economics.


ergophobia (n.)

fear of work, 1905, coinage by British medical man Dr. William Dunnett Spanton, from Greek ergos
work (see organ) + -phobia fear.    Mr. W.D. Spanton (Leeds) considered that the most prominent
causes of physical degeneration were--efforts to rear premature and diseased infants, absurd
educational high pressure, cigarette smoking in the younger generation, and late hours at night; in
fact, the love of pleasure and ergophobia in all classes of society. He considered that there was
too much cheap philanthropy, that life was made too easy for the young poor, and that by modern
educational methods proper parental discipline was rendered almost impossible. [report on the 73rd
annual meeting of the British Medical Association, Nature, Aug. 3, 1905]


ergot (n.)

fungal disease of rye and other grasses, 1680s, from French ergot, from Old French argot cock's spur
(12c.), of unknown origin. The blight so called from the shape the fungus forms on the diseased
grain. Ergotism disease caused by eating ergot-infected breadstuffs, first recorded 1853. An
alkaloid from the fungus, ergotamine (1921) is used to treat migraines.


Eric

masc. proper name, from Old Norse Eirikr, literally honored ruler, from Proto-Germanic *aiza- honor
+ *rik- ruler (see regal). The German form is Erich.


Erica

fem. proper name, feminine form of Eric.


Erie

one of the Great Lakes, named for a native Iroquoian people who lived nearby, from French Erie,
shortening of Rhiienhonons, said to mean raccoon nation, perhaps in reference to a totemic animal.


Erin

ancient name of Ireland, from Old English Erinn, dative of Eriu Ireland (see Irish). As a girl's
name in U.S., rare before 1954, popular 1976-1985.


Erinys (n.)

(plural erinyes), one of the three avenging spirits (Alecto, Tisiphone, Megaera) in Greek religion,
of unknown origin, perhaps the angry spirit (compare Arcadian erinein to be angry, Greek orinein to
raise, stir, excite, eris strife, discord). Related: Erinnic.


Eris

goddess of discord, from Greek eris strife, discord, of uncertain origin. Related: Eristic.


Eritrea

named 1890 when it was an Italian colony, from Mare Erythreum, Roman name of the Red Sea, from Greek
Erythre Thalassa, literally Red Sea (to the Greeks also including the Gulf of Arabia and the Indian
Ocean), from erythros red (see red (1)).


Erl-king

1797, in Scott's translation of Goethe, from German Erl-k&ouml;nig, literally alder-king, Herder's
erroneous translation of Danish ellerkonge king of the elves. Compare German Eller, Erle alder (see
alder).


Ermentrude

fem. proper name, from Old High German Ermentrudis, from ermin whole, universal + trut beloved,
dear.


ermine (n.)

late 12c., from Old French ermine (12c., Modern French hermine), both the animal and the fur,
apparently from a convergence of Latin (mus) Armenius Armenian (mouse), ermines being abundant in
Asia Minor; and an unrelated Germanic word for weasel (represented by Old High German harmo ermine,
stoat, weasel, adj. harmin; Old Saxon harmo, Old English hearma shrew, etc.) that happened to sound
like it.


erne (n.)

sea eagle, from Old English earn eagle, a common Germanic word (cognates: Old High German arn,
German Aar, Middle Dutch arent, Old Norse &ouml;rn, Gothic ara eagle), from PIE root *or- great
bird, eagle (cognates: Greek ornis bird, Old Church Slavonic orilu, Lithuanian erelis, Welsh eryr
eagle). The Germanic word also survives in the first element of old Germanic names such as Arnold
and Arthur.


Ernest

masc. proper name, from French Ernest, of German origin (compare Old High German Ernust, German
Ernst), literally earnestness (see earnest). Among the top 50 names for boys born in U.S. from 1880
through 1933.


Ernestine

fem. form of Ernest.


erode (v.)

1610s, a back-formation from erosion, or else from French &eacute;roder, from Latin erodere to gnaw
away, consume (see erosion). Related: Eroded; eroding. Originally of acids, ulcers, etc.; geological
sense is from 1830.


erogenous (adj.)

formed 1889 from Greek eros sexual love (see Eros) + -genous producing. A slightly earlier variant
was erogenic (1887), from French &eacute;rog&eacute;nique. Both, as OED laments, are improperly
formed. Erogenous zone attested by 1905.    In this connection reference may be made to the well-
known fact that in some hysterical subjects there are so-called erogenous zones simple pressure on
which suffices to evoke the complete orgasm. There is, perhaps, some significance, from our present
point of view, in the fact that, as emphasized by Savill (Hysterical Skin Symptoms, Lancet, January
30 1904) the skin is one of the very best places to study hysteria. [Havelock Ellis, Studies in the
Psychology of Sex, 1914]


Eros (n.)

god of love, late 14c., from Greek eros (plural erates), literally love, related to eran to love,
erasthai to love, desire, of uncertain origin.    Freudian sense of urge to self-preservation and
sexual pleasure is from 1922. Ancient Greek distinguished four ways of love: erao to be in love
with, to desire passionately or sexually; phileo have affection for; agapao have regard for, be
contented with; and stergo, used especially of the love of parents and children or a ruler and his
subjects.


erose (adj.)

1793, from Latin erosus, past participle of erodere (see erosion).


erosion (n.)

1540s, from Middle French erosion (16c.), from Latin erosionem (nominative erosio) a gnawing away,
noun of action from past participle stem of erodere gnaw away, from ex- away (see ex-) + rodere gnaw
(see rodent).


erotic (adj.)

1620s (implied in erotical), from French &eacute;rotique (16c.), from Greek erotikos caused by
passionate love, referring to love, from eros (genitive erotos) sexual love (see Eros).


erotica (n.)

1820, noun use of neuter plural of Greek erotikos amatory (see erotic); originally a booksellers'
catalogue heading.    Force Flame  And with a Blonde push  Over your impotence  Flits Steam  [Emily
Dickinson, #854, c.1864]


eroticism (n.)

1853, from erotic + -ism.


eroticize (v.)

1914, from erotic + -ize. Related: Eroticized; eroticizing.


erotomaniac (n.)

one driven mad by passionate love (sometimes also used in the sense of nymphomaniac), 1858, from
erotomania (1813, defined then as Desperate love; sentimentalism producing morbid feelings), from
comb. form of erotic + mania.


err (v.)

c.1300, from Old French errer go astray, lose one's way; make a mistake; transgress, from Latin
errare wander, go astray, be in error, from PIE root *ers- (1) be in motion, wander around
(cognates: Sanskrit arsati flows; Old English ierre angry, straying; Old Frisian ire angry; Old High
German irri angry, irron astray; Gothic airzi&thorn;a error, deception; the Germanic words
reflecting the notion of anger as a straying from normal composure). Related: Erred; erring.


errand (n.)

Old English &aelig;rende message, mission; answer, news, tidings, from Proto-Germanic
*&aelig;rundjam (cognates: Old Saxon arundi, Old Norse erendi, Danish &aelig;rende, Swedish
&auml;rende, Old Frisian erende, Old High German arunti message). Originally of important missions;
meaning short, simple journey and task is attested by 1640s. Related: Errands.


errant (adj.)

mid-14c., travelling, roving, from Anglo-French erraunt, from two Old French words that were
confused even before they reached English: 1. Old French errant, present participle of errer to
travel or wander, from Late Latin iterare, from Latin iter journey, way, from root of ire to go (see
ion); 2. Old French errant, past participle of errer (see err). The senses fused in English 14c.,
but much of the sense of the latter since has gone with arrant.


errata (n.)

plural of erratum (q.v.).


erratic (adj.)

late 14c., wandering, moving, from Old French erratique (13c.) and directly from Latin erraticus
wandering, straying, roving, from erratum an error, mistake, fault, past participle of errare to
wander, err (see err). Sense of irregular, eccentric is attested by 1841. The noun is from 1620s, of
persons; 1849, of boulders. Related: Erratically.


erratum (n.)

list of corrections attached to a printed book, 1580s, from Latin erratum (plural errata), neuter
past participle of errare (see err).


erroneous (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French erroneus and directly from Latin erroneus vagrant, wandering (in Late
Latin erroneous), from erronem (nominative erro) vagabond, from errare to wander, err (see err).
Related: Erroneously.


error (n.)

also, through 18c., errour, c.1300, from Old French error mistake, flaw, defect, heresy, from Latin
errorem (nominative error) a wandering, straying, mistake, from errare to wander (see err).    Words
for error in most Indo-European languages originally meant wander, go astray (but Irish has dearmad
error, from dermat a forgetting).


ersatz (adj.)

1875, from German Ersatz units of the army reserve, literally compensation, replacement, substitute,
from ersetzen to replace, from Old High German irsezzen, from ir-, unaccented variant of ur- +
setzen to set (see set (v.)). As a noun, from 1892.


Erse

late 14c., early Scottish variant of Old English Irisc or Old Norse Irskr Irish (see Irish); applied
by Lowland Scots to the Gaelic speech of the Highlanders (which originally is from Ireland); sense
shifted 19c. from Highlanders to Irish.


erstwhile (adv.)

1560s, from Middle English erest soonest, earliest, from Old English &aelig;rest, superlative of
&aelig;r (see ere) + while. As an adjective from 1903. Cognate with Old Saxon and Old High German
erist, German erst.


eructation (n.)

belching, 1530s, from Latin eructationem (nominative eructatio) a belching forth, noun of action
from past participle stem of eructare to belch forth, vomit, from ex- out (see ex-) + ructare to
belch, from PIE *reug- to belch (cognates: Lithuanian rugiu to belch, Greek eryge, Armenian orcam),
probably of imitative origin. Related: Eruct; eructate.


erudite (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin eruditus, past participle of erudire to educate, teach, instruct, polish,
literally to bring out of the rough, from ex- out (see ex-) + rudis unskilled, rough, unlearned (see
rude).


erudition (n.)

c.1400, instruction, education, from Latin eruditionem (nominative eruditio) an instructing, noun of
action from past participle stem of erudire (see erudite). Meaning learning, scholarship is from
1520s.


erupt (v.)

1650s, of diseases, etc., from Latin eruptus, past participle of erumpere to break out, burst (see
eruption). Of volcanoes, from 1770. Related: Erupted; erupting.


eruption (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French &eacute;ruption (14c.) and directly from Latin eruptionem (nominative
eruptio) a breaking out, noun of action from past participle stem of erumpere break out, burst
forth, from ex- out (see ex-) + rumpere to break, rupture (see rupture (n.)).


eruptive (adj.)

1640s; see erupt + -ive. Perhaps from French &eacute;ruptif.


erysipelas (n.)

late 14c., skin disease also known as St. Anthony's Fire, from Greek erysipelas, perhaps from
erythros red (see red (1)) + pella skin (see film (n.)).


erythema (n.)

medical Latin, from Greek erithema, from erythainein to become red, from erythros red (see red (1)).
Related: Erythematous.


erythro-

before vowels, erythr-, word-forming element meaning red, from Greek erythro-, comb. form of
erythros red (in Homer, also the color of copper and gold); see red (1).


Erzgebirge

German, literally ore mountains.


Esalen

alternative philosophy and human potential movement, 1966, from Esalen Institute in Big Sur,
California, U.S., from Esselen, name of an extinct Native American people of the California coast.


escadrille (n.)

from French escadrille, from Spanish escuadrilla, diminutive of escuadra square, squad, squadron,
from Vulgar Latin *exquadrare, from Latin quadrare to square (see quadrant).


escalade (n.)

1590s, action of using ladders to scale the walls of a fortified place, from Middle French escalade
(16c.) an assault with ladders on a fortification, from Italian scalata, fem. past participle of
scalare to climb by means of a ladder, from scala ladder, related to Latin scandere to climb (see
scan). For initial e-, see e-.


escalate (v.)

1922, back-formation from escalator, replacing earlier verb escalade (1801), from the noun escalade.
Escalate came into general use with a figurative sense of raise after 1959 in reference to the
possibility of nuclear war. Related: Escalated; escalating.


escalation (n.)

derived noun from escalate; in the figurative sense it is from 1938, in reference to the battleship
arms race among global military powers.


escalator (n.)

1900, American English, trade name of an Otis Elevator Co. moving staircase, coined from escalade +
-ator in elevator. Figurative use is from 1927.


escallop (n., v.)

late 15c., from Middle French escalope shell, from a Germanic source (see scallop). For initial e-,
see e-.


escapade (n.)

1650s, an escape from confinement, from French escapade (16c.) a prank or trick, from Spanish
escapada a prank, flight, an escape, noun use of fem. past participle of escapar to escape, from
Vulgar Latin *excappare (see escape). Or perhaps the French word is via Italian scappata, from
scappare, from the same Vulgar Latin source. Figurative sense (1814) is of breaking loose from rules
or restraints on behavior.


escape (v.)

c.1300, from Old North French escaper, Old French eschaper (12c., Modern French &eacute;chapper),
from Vulgar Latin *excappare, literally get out of one's cape, leave a pursuer with just one's cape,
from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) + Late Latin cappa mantle (see cap (n.)). Related: Escaped;
escaping.


escape (n.)

c.1400, from escape (v.); earlier eschap (c.1300). Mental/emotional sense is from 1853. Escape
clause in the legal sense first recorded 1945.


escapee (n.)

1865, American English, from escape (v.) + -ee.


escapism (n.)

1933, American English, from escape (v.) + -ism.


escapist

in the figurative sense, 1930 (adj.); 1933 (n.), from escape + -ist.


escapologist (n.)

performer who specializes in getting out of confinement, 1926; see escape + -ology.


escargot (n.)

edible snail, 1892, from French escargot, from Old French escargole (14c.), from Proven&ccedil;al
escaragol, ultimately from Vulgar Latin *coculium, from classical Latin conchylium edible shellfish
(see cockle). The form of the word in Proven&ccedil;al and French seems to have been influenced by
words related to scarab.


escarole (n.)

1897, from French escarole, from Italian scariola, from Late Latin escariola.


escarp (n.)

steep slope, 1680s, from French escarpe (16c.), from Italian scarpa (see scarp).


escarpment (n.)

1802, from French escarpment, from escarper make into a steep slope, from escarpe slope, from
Italian scarpa (see scarp). Earlier in same sense was escarp.


eschatology (n.)

1844, from Greek eskhatos last, furthest, uttermost, extreme, most remote (from ex out of, Boeotian
es-; see ex-) + -ology. Originally in theology, the study of the four last things: death, judgment,
heaven, hell. Related: Eschatological; eschatologically.


eschaton (n.)

divinely ordained climax of history, 1935, coined by Protestant theologian Charles Harold Dodd
(1884-1973) from Greek eskhaton, neuter of eskhatos (see eschatology).


escheat (n.)

the reverting of land to a king or lord in certain cases, early 14c., from Anglo-French eschete
(late 13c.), from Old French eschete succession, inheritance, originally fem. past participle of
escheoir, from Late Latin *excadere to fall out, from Latin ex- out, away (see ex-) + cadere to fall
(see case (n.1)). As a verb, from late 14c. Related: Escheated; escheating.


eschew (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French eschiver shun, eschew, avoid, dispense with, from Frankish *skiuhan dread,
avoid, shun, from Proto-Germanic *skeukhwaz (cognates: Old High German sciuhen to avoid, escape,
German scheuen to fear, shun, shrink from, scheu shy, timid); see shy (v.). Related: Eschewed;
eschewing. Italian schivare to avoid, shun, protect from, schivo shy, bashful also are loan words
from West Germanic.


esclavage (n.)

chain or bead necklace, 1758, from French esclavage, literally slavery, from esclave (13c.) slave
(see slave (n.)). So called from resemblance to a slave's neck chains.


escort (n.)

1570s, in military sense, from Middle French escorte (16c.), from Italian scorta, literally a
guiding, from scorgere to guide, from Vulgar Latin *excorrigere, from ex- out (see ex-) + corrigere
set right (see correct). The sense of person accompanying another to a social occasion is 1936.


escort (v.)

1708, from escort (n.); social sense is from 1890. Related: Escorted; escorting.


escritoire (n.)

1706, from French &eacute;critoire (12c.), from Late Latin scriptorium (see scriptorium).


escrow (n.)

1590s, from Anglo-French escrowe, from Old French escroue scrap, roll of parchment, from a Germanic
source akin to Old High German scrot a scrap, shred, a piece cut off (see shred (n.)). Originally a
deed delivered to a third person until a future condition is satisfied; sense of deposit held in
trust or security is from 1888.


escudo (n.)

Spanish and Portuguese coin, 1821, from Spanish/Portuguese escudo, from Latin scutum shield (see
hide (n.1)). Also see ecu.


esculent (adj.)

1620s, from Latin esculentus good to eat, eatable, from esca food, from PIE *eds-qa- (cognates:
Lithuanian eska appetite), from root *ed- to eat (see edible).


escutcheon (n.)

late 15c., from Old North French escuchon, variant of Old French escusson, from Vulgar Latin
*scutionem, from Latin scutum shield (see hide (n.1)).


esker (n.)

deposit left by a glacial stream, 1852, from Irish eiscir ridge of gravel.


Eskimo (n.)

1580s, from Danish Eskimo or Middle French Esquimaux (plural), both probably from an Algonquian
word, such as Abenaki askimo (plural askimoak), Ojibwa ashkimeq, traditionally said to mean
literally eaters of raw meat, from Proto-Algonquian *ask- raw + *-imo eat. Research from 1980s in
linguistics of the region suggests this derivation, though widely credited there, might be
inaccurate or incomplete, and the word might mean snowshoe-netter. See also Innuit. Eskimo pie
chocolate-coated ice cream bar introduced 1921.


Esmerelda

fem. proper name, from Spanish, literally emerald.


esne (n.)

Old English esne domestic slave, from Proto-Germanic *asnjoz- harvestman (cognates: Gothic asneis),
from *asanoz- harvest (see earn).


esophagus (n.)

late 14c., from Greek oisophagos gullet, literally what carries and eats, from oisein, future
infinitive of pherein to carry (see infer) + -phagos, from phagein to eat (see -phagous). Related:
Esophageal.


esoteric (adj.)

1650s, from Greek esoterikos belonging to an inner circle, from esotero more within, comparative
adverb of eso within, related to eis into, en in (see en- (2)).    In English, originally of
Pythagorean doctrines. According to Lucian, the division of teachings into exoteric and esoteric
originated with Aristotle.


esoterica (n.)

by 1807, Modern Latin, from plural of Greek esoterikos pertaining to those within (see esoteric).


ESP (n.)

1934, initialism (acronym) for extra-sensory perception.


espadrille (n.)

shoe with soles of hemp-rope (originally worn in the Pyrenees), 1892, from French espadrille (17c.),
from Proven&ccedil;al espardillo, from Latin spartum, from Greek sparton a rope made of spartos, an
imported fiber known as Spanish broom, from PIE *spr-to-, from root *sper- (2) to turn, twist (see
Sparta). For initial e- see e-.


espalier (n.)

1660s, from French espalier (16c.), from Italian spalliera stake-works shoulder-high, from spalla
shoulder, from Latin spatula (see spatula).


especial (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French especial pre-eminent, important, from Latin specialis belonging to a
particular kind or species, from species kind (see species). Latin words with initial sp-, st-, sc-
usually acquired an e- in Old French (see e-). Modern French has restored the word to
sp&eacute;cial. Originally with the same sense as special, later restricted to feelings, qualities,
etc.


especially (adv.)

c.1400, from especial + -ly (2).


Esperanto (n.)

1892, from Doktoro Esperanto, whose name means in Esperanto, one who hopes, pen name used on the
title page of a book about the artificial would-be universal language published 1887 by its
inventor, Lazarus Ludwig Zamenhof (1859-1917). Compare Spanish esperanza hope, from esperar, from
Latin sperare (see sperate). For initial e- see e-.


espionage (n.)

1793, from French espionnage spying, from Middle French espionner to spy, from Old French espion
spy, probably via Old Italian spione from a Germanic source akin to Old High German spehon spy (see
spy (v.)). For initial e- see e-.


esplanade (n.)

1590s, from French esplanade (15c.), from Spanish esplanada large level area, noun use of fem. past
participle of esplanar make level, from Latin explanare to level (see explain). Or perhaps the
French word is from or influenced by Italian spianata, from spianare


espousal (n.)

late 14c., from Old French esposailles (plural) act of betrothal (12c., Modern French
&eacute;poussailles), from Latin sponsalia betrothal, espousal, noun use of neuter plural of
sponsalis of a betrothal, from sponsa spouse (see  espouse). For the -e- see e-.


espouse (v.)

mid-15c., to take as spouse, marry, from Old French espouser marry, take in marriage, join in
marriage (11c., Modern French &eacute;pouser), from Latin sponsare, past participle of spondere make
an offering, perform a rite, hence to engage oneself by ritual act (see spondee).    Extended sense
of adopt, embrace a cause, party, etc., is from 1620s. Related: Espoused; espouses; espousing. For
initial e-, see e-.


espresso (n.)

1945, from Italian caffe espresso, from espresso pressed out, from past participle of esprimere,
from Latin exprimere press out (see express). In reference to the steam pressure.


esprit (n.)

1590s, from Middle French esprit spirit, mind, from Old French espirit, from Latin spiritus spirit
(see spirit (n.)). For initial e-, see e-. Esprit de corps first recorded 1780. French also has the
excellent phrase esprit de l'escalier, literally spirit of the staircase, defined in OED as, a
retort or remark that occurs to a person after the opportunity to make it has passed. It also has
espirit fort, a strong-minded person, one independent of current prejudices, especially a
freethinker in religion.


espy (v.)

early 13c., aspy, from Old French espier (12c., Modern French &eacute;pier), from Vulgar Latin
*spiare, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German spehon to spy; see spy (v.)). Related:
Espied. For initial e-, see e-.


esquire (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French esquier squire, literally shield-bearer (for a knight), from Old
French escuyer, from Vulgar Latin scutarius shield-bearer, guardsman (in classical Latin, shield-
maker), from scutum shield (see hide (n.1)).    For initial e-, see e-. Compare squire. Originally
the feudal rank below knight, sense broadened 16c. to a general title of courtesy or respect for the
educated class, especially, later, in U.S., for lawyers.


essay (n.)

1590s, short non-fiction literary composition (first attested in writings of Francis Bacon, probably
in imitation of Montaigne), from Middle French essai trial, attempt, essay, from Late Latin exagium
a weighing, weight, from Latin exigere test, from ex- out (see ex-) + agere (see act) apparently
meaning here to weigh. The suggestion is of unpolished writing.


essay (v.)

to put to proof, test the mettle of, late 15c., from Middle French essaier, from essai (see essay
(n.)). This sense has mostly gone with the divergent spelling assay. Meaning to attempt is from
1640s. Related: Essayed; essaying.


essayist (n.)

c.1600, from essay (n.) + -ist. French essayiste (19c.) is from English.


essence (n.)

late 14c., essencia (respelled late 15c. on French model), from Latin essentia being, essence,
abstract noun formed (in imitation of Greek ousia being, essence) from essent-, present participle
stem of esse to be, from PIE *es- (cognates: Sanskrit asmi, Hittite eimi, Old Church Slavonic jesmi,
Lithuanian esmi, Gothic imi, Old English eom I am; see be). Originally substance of the Trinity, the
general sense of basic element of anything is first recorded in English 1650s, though this is the
base meaning of the first English use of essential.


Essene (n.)

1550s, member of a Jewish sect (first recorded 2c. B.C.E.), from Latin, from Greek Essenoi, of
disputed etymology, perhaps from Hebrew tzenum the modest ones, or Hebrew hashaim the silent ones.
Klein suggests Syriac hasen, plural absolute state of hase pious.


essential (adj.)

mid-14c., that is such by its essence, from Late Latin essentialis, from essentia (see essence).
Meaning pertaining to essence is from late 14c., that of constituting the essence of something is
from 1540s; that of necessary is from 1520s. Essentials indispensable elements is from early 16c.
Related: Essentially.


essentialism (n.)

1939, from essential + -ism. Related: Essentialist.


Essex

Old English East-Seaxe East Saxons, who had a 7c. kingdom there.


essive (adj.)

1890, from Finnish essiivi, from Latin esse (see essence).


establish (v.)

late 14c., from Old French establiss-, present participle stem of establir (12c., Modern French
&eacute;tablir) cause to stand still, establish, stipulate, set up, erect, build, from Latin
stabilire make stable, from stabilis stable (see stable (adj.)). For the excrescent e-, see e-.
Related: Established; establishing. An established church or religion is one sanctioned by the
state.


establishment (n.)

late 15c., settled arrangement, also income, property, from establish + -ment. Meaning established
church is from 1731; Sense of place of business is from 1832. Meaning social matrix of ruling people
and institutions is attested occasionally from 1923, current use from 1955.


establishmentarian (n.)

adherent of the principle of an established church, 1846, from establishment.


estaminet (n.)

1814, from French, a caf&eacute; in which smoking is allowed (17c.), of unknown origin; some suggest
a connection to French estamine, a type of open woolen fabric used for making sieves, etc., from
Latin stamineus made of thread. Or [Watkins] from Walloon stamen post to which a cow is tied at a
feeding trough, from Proto-Germanic *stamniz (see stem (n.)). For the excrescent e-, see e-.


estate (n.)

early 13c., rank, standing, condition, from Anglo-French astat, Old French estat state, position,
condition, health, status, legal estate (Modern French &eacute;tat), from Latin status state or
condition, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).    For the excrescent e-, see e-. Sense of
property is late 14c., from that of worldly prosperity; specific application to landed property
(usually of large extent) is first recorded in American English 1620s. A native word for this was
Middle English ethel (Old English &aelig;&eth;el) ancestral land or estate, patrimony. Meaning
collective assets of a dead person or debtor is from 1830.    The three estates (in Sweden and
Aragon, four) conceived as orders in the body politic date from late 14c. In France, they are the
clergy, nobles, and townsmen; in England, originally the clergy, barons, and commons, later Lords
Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and commons. For Fourth Estate see four.


esteem (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French estimer (14c.), from Latin aestimare to value, appraise, perhaps
ultimately from *ais-temos one who cuts copper, i.e. mints money (but de Vaan finds this not very
credible). At first used as we would now use estimate; sense of value, respect is 1530s. Related:
Esteemed; esteeming.


esteem (n.)

(also steem, extyme), mid-14c., account, worth, from French estime, from estimer (see esteem (v.)).
Meaning high regard is from 1610s.


Estella

fem. proper name, Spanish, literally star, from Latin stella (see star (n.)).


ester (n.)

compound formed by an acid joined to an alcohol, 1852, coined in German in 1848 by German chemist
Leoipold Gmelin (1788-1853), professor at Heidelberg. [A]pparently a pure invention [Flood], perhaps
a contraction of or abstraction from Essig&auml;ther, the German name for ethyl acetate, from Essig
vinegar + &Auml;ther ether (see ether).   Essig is from Old High German ezzih, from a metathesis of
Latin acetum (see vinegar).


Esther

fem. proper name, Old Testament wife of the Persian king Ahasuerus, from Greek Esther, from Hebrew
Ester, from Persian sitareh star, related to Avestan star- (see star (n.)).


esthete (n.)

alternative form of aesthete (q.v.). Also see &aelig;.


esthetic (adj.)

alternative form of aesthetic (see aesthetic). Also see &aelig;. Related: esthetical; esthetically;
esthetician; esthetics.


estimable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French estimable and directly from Latin aestimabilis valuable, estimable, from
aestimare (see esteem (v.)).


estimate (n.)

1560s, valuation, from Latin aestimatus, verbal noun from aestimare (see esteem). Earlier in sense
power of the mind (mid-15c.). Meaning approximate judgment is from 1580s. As a builder's statement
of projected costs, from 1796.


estimate (v.)

1530s, appraise the worth of, from Latin aestimatus, past participle of aestimare to value, appraise
(see esteem). Meaning form an approximate notion is from 1660s. Related: Estimated; estimates;
estimating.


estimation (n.)

late 14c., action of appraising; manner of judging; opinion, from Old French estimacion, from Latin
aestimationem (nominative aestimatio) a valuation, from past participle stem of aestimare to value
(see esteem). Meaning appreciation is from 1520s. That of process of forming an approximate notion
is from c.1400.


estimator (n.)

1660s, from Latin aestimator, agent noun from aestimare (see estimate).


estivate (v.)

to spend the summer, mid-17c., from Latin aestivatus, past participle of aestivare to spend the
summer, from aestus heat, aestas summer, literally the hot season, from Proto-Italic *aissat-, from
PIE *aidh- to burn (see edifice). Related: Estivated; estivating.


Estonia

often said to be from a Germanic source akin to east, but perhaps rather from a native name meaning
waterside dwellers.


estop (v.)

1530s, from Anglo-French estopper to stop, bar, hinder (especially in a legal sense, by one's own
prior act or declaration), from Old French estoper plug, stop up, block; prevent, halt (also in
obscene usage), from estope tow, oakum, from Latin stuppa tow (used as a plug); see stop (v.).


estoppel (n.)

1530s, from Old French estopail, literally bung, cork, from estoper (see estop).


estrange (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French estrangier to alienate, from Vulgar Latin *extraneare to treat as a
stranger, from Latin extraneus foreign (see strange). Related: Estranged.


estrangement (n.)

1650s, from estrange + -ment.


estrogen (n.)

coined 1927 from estrus + -gen. So called for the hormone's ability to produce estrus.


estrus (n.)

1850, frenzied passion, from Latin oestrus frenzy, gadfly, from Greek oistros gadfly, breeze, sting,
mad impulse, perhaps from a PIE *eis, forming words denoting passion (cognates: Avestan ae&#353;ma-
anger, Lithuanian aistra violent passion, Latin ira anger). First attested 1890 with specific
meaning rut in animals, heat. Earliest use (1690s) was for a gadfly. Related: Estrous (1900).


estuary (n.)

1530s, from Latin aestuarium a tidal marsh or opening, from aestus boiling (of the sea), tide, heat,
from PIE *aidh- to burn (see edifice). Related: Estuaries; estuarine.


esurient (adj.)

1670s, from Latin esurientem (nominative esuriens), present participle of esurire to be hungry, from
stem of edere to eat (see edible). Related: Esurience; esuriency.


et al.

also et al, 1883, abbreviation of Latin et alii (masc.), et ali&aelig; (fem.), or et alia (neuter),
in any case meaning and others.


et cetera

also etcetera, early 15c., from Latin et cetera, literally and the others, from et and + neuter of
ceteri the others. The common abbreviation was &amp;c.; before 20c., but etc. now prevails.


etagere (n.)

1858, from French &eacute;tag&egrave;re (15c.), from &eacute;tage shelf, story, abode, stage, floor
(11c., Old French estage), from Vulgar Latin *staticum, from Latin statio station, post, residence
(see station (n.)).


etaoin shrdlu

1931, journalism slang, the sequence of characters you get if you sweep your finger down the two
left-hand columns of Linotype keys, which is what typesetters did when they bungled a line and had
to start it over. It was a signal to cut out the sentence, but sometimes it slipped past harried
compositors and ended up in print.


etc.

see et cetera.


etch (v.)

1630s, to engrave by eating away the surface of with acids, from Dutch etsen, from German &auml;tzen
to etch, from Old High German azzon cause to bite, feed, from Proto-Germanic *atjanan, causative of
*etanan eat (see eat). Related: Etched; etching.


etching (n.)

1630s, action of the verb etch, also the art of engraving; 1760s as a print, etc., made from an
etched plate.


eternal (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French eternel or directly from Late Latin aeternalis, from Latin aeternus of an
age, lasting, enduring, permanent, endless, contraction of aeviternus of great age, from aevum age
(see eon). Related: Eternally.


eternity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French eternit&eacute; (12c.), from Latin aeternitatem (nominative aeternitas),
from aeternus (see eternal). In the Mercian hymns, Latin aeternum is glossed by Old English ecnisse.


Ethan

masc. proper name, from Hebrew ethan strong, permanent, perennial, ever-flowing (of rivers).


ethane (n.)

1873, from ethyl + -ane, the appropriate suffix under Hofmann's system.


ethanol (n.)

1900, contracted from ethane, to which it is the corresponding alcohol, + -ol, here indicating
alcohol.


Ethel

fem. proper name, originally a shortening of Old English Etheldred, Ethelinda, etc., in which the
first element means nobility.


Ethelbert

Anglo-Saxon masc. proper name, Old English &AElig;&eth;elbryht, literally nobility-bright; see
atheling + bright (adj.).


Etheldred

Anglo-Saxon fem. proper name, Old English &AElig;&eth;el&eth;ry&eth;, literally of noble strength
(see Audrey).


ether (n.)

late 14c., upper regions of space, from Old French ether and directly from Latin aether the upper
pure, bright air, from Greek aither upper air; bright, purer air; the sky, from aithein to burn,
shine, from PIE root *aidh- to burn (see edifice).    In ancient cosmology, the element that filled
all space beyond the sphere of the moon, constituting the substance of the stars and planets.
Conceived of as a purer form of fire or air, or as a fifth element. From 17c.-19c., it was the
scientific word for an assumed frame of reference for forces in the universe, perhaps without
material properties. The concept was shaken by the Michelson-Morley experiment (1887) and discarded
after the Theory of Relativity won acceptance, but before it went it gave rise to the colloquial use
of ether for the radio (1899).    The name also was bestowed c.1730 (Frobenius; in English by 1757)
on a volatile chemical compound known since 14c. for its lightness and lack of color (its anesthetic
properties weren't fully established until 1842).


ethereal (adj.)

1510s, of the highest regions of the atmosphere, from ether + -al (1); extended sense of light, airy
is from 1590s. Meaning spiritlike, immaterial is from 1640s. Related: Ethereally.


etheric (adj.)

1878, pertaining to ether, from ether + -ic. Related: Etherical (1650s).


ethernet (n.)

1980, from ether + ending as in Internet, etc.


ethic (n.)

late 14c., ethik study of morals, from Old French etique (13c.), from Late Latin ethica, from Greek
ethike philosophia moral philosophy, fem. of ethikos ethical, from ethos moral character, related to
ethos custom (see ethos). Meaning a person's moral principles is attested from 1650s.


ethical (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to morality, from ethic + -al (1). Related: Ethicality; ethically.


ethics (n.)

the science of morals, c.1600, plural of Middle English ethik study of morals (see ethic). The word
also traces to Ta Ethika, title of Aristotle's work.


Ethiop

late 14c., from Latin &AElig;thiops Ethiopian, negro, from Greek Aithiops, perhaps from aithein to
burn + ops face (compare aithops fiery-looking, later sunburned).Who the Homeric &AElig;thiopians
were is a matter of doubt. The poet elsewhere speaks of two divisions of them, one dwelling near the
rising, the other near the setting of the sun, both having imbrowned visages from their proximity to
that luminary, and both leading a blissful existence, because living amid a flood of light; and, as
a natural concomitant of a blissful existence, blameless, and pure, and free from every kind of
moral defilement. [Charles Anthon, note to The First Six Books of Homer's Iliad, 1878]


Ethiopia

Latin Aethiopia, from Greek Aithiopia, from Aithiops (see Ethiop).  The native name is Abyssinia.


ethnic (adj.)

late 15c. (earlier ethnical, early 15c.) pagan, heathen, from Late Latin ethnicus, from Greek
ethnikos adopted to the genius or customs of a people, peculiar to a people, from ethnos band of
people living together, nation, people, properly people of one's own kind, from PIE *swedh-no-,
suffixed form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom). Earlier in English as a noun, a heathen, pagan, one who
is not a Christian or Jew (c.1400).     In Septuagint, Greek ta ethne translates Hebrew goyim,
plural of goy nation, especially of non-Israelites, hence Gentile nation, foreign nation not
worshipping the true God (see goy), and ethnikos is used as savoring of the nature of pagans, alien
to the worship of the true God, and as a noun the pagan, the Gentile. The classical sense of
peculiar to a race or nation in English is attested from 1851, a return to the word's original
meaning; that of different cultural groups is 1935; and that of racial, cultural or national
minority group is American English 1945. Ethnic cleansing is attested from 1991.    Although the
term 'ethnic cleansing' has come into English usage only recently, its verbal correlates in Czech,
French, German, and Polish go back much further. [Jerry Z. Muller, Us and Them: The Enduring Power
of Ethnic Nationalism, Foreign Affairs, March/April 2008]


ethnicity (n.)

ethnic character, 1953, from ethnic + -ity. Earlier it meant paganism (1772).


ethno-

word-forming element meaning race, culture, from Greek ethnos people, nation, class, caste, tribe; a
number of people accustomed to live together (see ethnic). Used to form modern compounds in the
social sciences.


ethnocentric (adj.)

1900, from ethno- + -centric; a technical term in social sciences until it began to be more widely
used in the second half of the 20th century. Related: Ethnocentricity; ethnocentrism.


ethnography (n.)

1834, perhaps from German Ethnographie; see ethno- + -graphy the study of. Related: Ethnographer;
ethnographic.


ethnology (n.)

1842, from ethno- + -logy.  Related: Ethnologist.


ethology (n.)

late 17c., mimicry, from Latin ethologia, from Greek ethologia, from ethos character (see ethos). As
a branch of zoology, from 1897.


ethos (n.)

revived by Palgrave in 1851 from Greek ethos moral character, nature, disposition, habit, custom,
from suffixed form of PIE root *s(w)e- (see idiom). An important concept in Aristotle (as in
Rhetoric II xii-xiv).


ethyl (n.)

1838, from German ethyl (Liebig, 1834), from ether + -yl. Ethyl alcohol, under other names, was
widely used in medicine by 13c.


ethylene (n.)

1852, from ethyl + -ene, probably suggested by methylene.


etic (adj.)

1954, coined by U.S. linguist K.L. Pike (1912-2000) from ending of phonetic.


etiolate (v.)

of plants, grown in darkness, 1791, from French &eacute;tiol&eacute;, past participle of
&eacute;tioler to blanch (17c.), perhaps literally to become like straw, from Norman dialect
&eacute;tule a stalk, Old French esteule straw, field of stubble, from Latin stipula straw (see
stipule). Related: Etiolated.


etiology (n.)

science of causes or causation, 1550s, from Late Latin aetiologia, from Greek aitiologia statement
of cause, from aitia cause + -logia a speaking (see -logy). Related: Etiologic; etiological.


etiquette (n.)

1750, from French &eacute;tiquette prescribed behavior, from Old French estiquette label, ticket
(see ticket).    The sense development in French perhaps is from small cards written or printed with
instructions for how to behave properly at court (compare Italian etichetta, Spanish etiqueta),
and/or from behavior instructions written on a soldier's billet for lodgings (the main sense of the
Old French word).


Etna

volcano in Sicily, from Latin Aetna, from an indigenous Sicilian language, *aith-na the fiery one,
from PIE *ai-dh-, from root *ai- to burn (see edifice).


Eton

collar (1887), jacket (1881, formerly worn by the younger boys there), etc., from Eton College,
public school for boys on the Thames opposite Windsor, founded by Henry VI. The place name is Old
English ea river (see ea) + tun farm, settlement.


Etruscan (n.)

1706, from Latin Etruscus an Etruscan, from Etruria, ancient name of Tuscany, of uncertain origin,
but containing an element that might mean water (see Basque) and which could be a reference to the
rivers in the region.


Etta

fem. proper name, originally a shortening of Henrietta.


ettin (n.)

an old word for a giant, extinct since 16c., from Old English eoten giant, monster, from Proto-
Germanic *itunoz giant (cognates: Old Norse iotunn, Danish j&aelig;tte).


etude (n.)

1837, from French &eacute;tude, literally study, from Old French estudie (12c.), from Latin studium
(see study (n.)). Popularized in English by the etudes of Chopin (1810-1849).


etui (n.)

1610s, from French &eacute;tui, Old French estui (12c.) case, box, container, back-formation from
estuier put in put aside, spare; to keep, shut up, imprison, of uncertain origin.


etymological (adj.)

1590s; see etymology + -ical. Related: Etymologically.


etymologicon (n.)

a work in which etymologies are traced, 1640s, from Latin etymologicon, from Greek etymologikon,
neuter of etymologikos (see etymology).


etymologist (n.)

1630s; see etymology + -ist. Also etymologer (1640s).


etymologize (v.)

1530s; see etymology + -ize. Related: Etymologized; etymologizing.


etymology (n.)

late 14c., ethimolegia facts of the origin and development of a word, from Old French et(h)imologie
(14c., Modern French &eacute;tymologie), from Latin etymologia, from Greek etymologia, properly
study of the true sense (of a word), from etymon true sense (neuter of etymos true, real, actual,
related to eteos true) + -logia study of, a speaking of (see -logy).    In classical times, of
meanings; later, of histories. Latinized by Cicero as veriloquium. As a branch of linguistic
science, from 1640s. Related: Etymological; etymologically.


etymon (n.)

primitive word, 1570s, from Greek etymon, neuter of etymos true, real, actual, related to eteos
true, which is perhaps cognate with Sanskrit satyah, Gothic sunjis, Old English so&eth; true.


eu-

word-forming element in modern use meaning good, well, from comb. form of Greek eus good, eu well
(adv.), also luckily, happily, from PIE *(e)su- good (cognates: Sanskrit su- good, Avestan hu-
good).


eubacteria (n.)

coined in German 1930; see eu- + bacteria.


eucalyptus (n.)

1809, from Modern Latin, coined 1788 by French botanist Charles Louis L'h&eacute;ritier de Brutelle
(1746-1800) from Greek eu well (see eu-) + kalyptos covered (see Calypso); so called for the
covering on the bud.


Eucharist (n.)

sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the Communion, mid-14c., from Old French eucariste, from Late Latin
eucharistia, from Greek eukharistia thanksgiving, gratitude, later the Lord's Supper, from
eukharistos grateful, from eu well (see eu-) + stem of kharizesthai show favor, from kharis favor,
grace, from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (see hortatory). Eukharisteo is the usual verb for to
thank, to be thankful in the Septuagint and New Testament. Related: Eucharistic.


euchre (n.)

card game, 1846, American English, of unknown origin.


Euclidean (adj.)

1650s, of or pertaining to Euclid, from Greek Eukleides, c.300 B.C.E. geometer of Alexandria. Now
often used in contrast to alternative models based on rejection of some of his axioms. His name in
Greek means renowned, from eu well (see eu-) + kleos fame (see Clio).


eudaemonic (adj.)

producing happiness, 1865, from Greek eudaimonikos conducive to happiness, from eudaimonia
happiness, from eu (see eu-) + daimon guardian, genius (see daimon). Related: Eudaimonia; eudemonia.


Eudora

fem. proper name, from Greek Eudora, literally generous, fem. of eudoros, from eu well (see eu-) +
doron gift (see date (n.1)).


Eugene

masc. proper name, from French Eug&egrave;ne, from Latin Eugenius, from Greek Eugenios, from eugenes
well-born (see eugenics).


Eugenia

fem. proper name, from Latin, from Greek Eugenia, literally nobility of birth, fem. of Eugenius (see
Eugene).


eugenics (n.)

1883, coined (along with adjective eugenic) by English scientist Francis Galton (1822-1911) on
analogy of ethics, physics, etc. from Greek eugenes well-born, of good stock, of noble race, from
eu- good (see eu-) + genos birth (see genus).  The investigation of human eugenics, that is, of the
conditions under which men of a high type are produced. [Galton, Human Faculty, 1883]


euhemerism (n.)

1846, the method of regarding myths as glorified accounts of actual events or persons, from
Euhemerus of Sicily (4c. B.C.E.), who wrote Iera Anagraphe, in which he maintained the Greek deities
actually were historical mortals. His name is literally good day, from eu well (see eu-) + hemera
day (see ephemera). Related: Euhemerist; euhemeristic.


eukaryotic (adj.)

also eucaryotic, characterized by well-defined cells (with nuclei and cell walls), 1957, from French
eucaryote (1925), from Greek eu well (see eu-) + karyon nut, kernel (see karyo-). Related:
Eukaryote; eucaryote.


eulogize (v.)

1810, from eulogy + -ize. Related: Eulogized; eulogizing.


eulogy (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin eulogium, from Greek eulogia praise; good or fine language, from eu well (see
eu-) + -logia speaking (see -logy). Eu legein meant speak well of.


Eumenides

Greek, literally the well-minded ones, a euphemism of the Erinys.


Eunice

fem. proper name, from Latin, from Greek Eunike, literally victorious, from eu well (see eu-) + nike
victory (see Nike).


eunuch (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French eunuque and directly from Latin eunuchus, from Greek eunoukhos
castrated man, originally guard of the bedchamber or harem, from euno-, comb. form of eune bed, of
unknown origin, + -okhos, from stem of ekhein to have, hold (see scheme (n.)).    The Greek and
Latin forms of the word were used to translate Hebrew saris, which sometimes meant merely palace
official, in Septuagint and Vulgate, probably without an intended comment on the qualities of
bureaucrats.Eunuches is he &thorn;at is i-gilded, and suche were somtyme i-made wardeynes of ladyes
in Egipt. [John of Trevisa, translation of Higdon's Polychronicon, 1387]


euphemism (n.)

1650s, from Greek euphemismos use of a favorable word in place of an inauspicious one, from
euphemizein speak with fair words, use words of good omen, from eu- good (see eu-) + pheme speaking,
from phanai speak (see fame (n.)).    In ancient Greece, the superstitious avoidance of words of
ill-omen during religious ceremonies, or substitutions such as Eumenides the Gracious Ones for the
Furies (see also Euxine). In English, a rhetorical term at first; broader sense of choosing a less
distasteful word or phrase than the one meant is first attested 1793. Related: Euphemistic;
euphemistically.


euphony (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French euphonie, from Late Latin euphonia, from Greek euphonia sweetness of
voice, from euphonos well-sounding, from eu- good (see eu-) + phone sound, voice, related to phanai
speak (see fame (n.)).    Hence, euphonium (1865), the musical instrument. Related: Euphonic;
euphonious.


euphoria (n.)

1727, a physician's term for condition of feeling healthy and comfortable (especially when sick),
medical Latin, from Greek euphoria power of enduring easily, from euphoros, literally bearing well,
from eu well (see eu-) + pherein to carry (see infer). Non-technical use, now the main one, dates to
1882 and is perhaps a reintroduction.


euphoric (adj.)

1888, with reference to hashish, from euphoria + -ic. The noun meaning a drug which causes euphoria
is from 1934.


Euphrates

Old English Eufrate, from Greek Euphrates, from Old Persian Ufratu, perhaps from Avestan huperethuua
good to cross over, from hu- good + peretu- ford. But Kent says probably a popular etymologizing in
O.P. of a local non-Iranian name [Old Persian, p.176]. In Akkadian, purattu.


Euphrosyne

name of one of the three Graces in Greek mythology, from Latin, from Greek Euphrosyne, literally
mirth, merriment, from euphron cheerful, merry, of a good mind, from eu well (see eu-) + phren
(genitive phrenos) mind, of unknown origin.


Eurafrican

coined 1890 by anthropologist D.G. Brinton to designate a race of dark-skinned people inhabiting
both sides of the Mediterranean; it was used 1920s to describe the colored population of South
Africa, and 1960s with reference to political situations involving both continents; see Euro- +
Africa.


Eurasia (n.)

from Euro- + Asia. First record seems to be in H. Reusche's Handbuch der Geographie (1858), but see
Eurasian.


Eurasian (n.)

1844, from Euro- + Asian. Originally of children of British-East Indian marriages; sense of of
Europe and Asia considered as one continent is from 1868.


eureka

c.1600, from Greek heureka I have found (it), first person singular perfect active indicative of
heuriskein to find (see heuristic). Supposedly shouted by Archimedes (c.287-212 B.C.E.) when he
solved a problem that had been set to him: determining whether goldsmiths had adulterated the metal
in the crown of Hiero II, king of Syracuse.


Euro (n.)

name for the basic monetary unit of a pan-European currency, from 1996.


Euro-

before vowels Eur-, word forming element meaning Europe, European, from comb. form of Europe.


Eurocentric (adj.)

1963, from Euro- + -centric.


Europe

from Latin Europa Europe, from Greek Europe, of uncertain origin; as a geographic name, first the
Homeric hymn to Apollo (522 B.C.E. or earlier):    Telphusa, here I am minded to make a glorious
temple, an oracle for men, and hither they will always bring perfect hecatombs, both those who live
in rich Peloponnesus and those of Europe and all the wave-washed isles, coming to seek oracles.
Often explained as broad face, from eurys wide (see aneurysm) + ops face. But also traditionally
linked with Europa, Phoenician princess in Greek mythology. Klein (citing Heinrich Lewy) suggests a
possible Semitic origin in Akkad. erebu to go down, set (in reference to the sun) which would
parallel orient. Another suggestion along those lines is Phoenician 'ereb evening, hence west.


European

c.1600, from French Europ&eacute;en, from Latin Europaeus, from Greek Europaios European, from
Europe (see Europe).


europium (n.)

rare earth element, 1901, named by its discoverer, French chemist Eug&egrave;ne Demar&ccedil;ay
(1852-1903) in 1896, from Europe + -ium.


Eurydice

wife of Orpheus in Greek mythology, from Latin, from Greek Eurydike, literally wide justice, from
eurys wide (see aneurysm) + dike right, custom, usage, law; justice (cognate with Latin dicere to
show, tell; see diction).


eurypterid (n.)

fossil swimming crustacean of the Silurian and Devonian, 1874, from Greek eurys broad, wide (see
aneurysm) + pteron feather, wing (see pterodactyl); so called from their swimming appendages.


eurythmic (adj.)

also eurhythmic, harmonious, 1831, from Greek eurythmia rhythmical order, from eurythmos rhythmical,
from eu well (see eu-) + rhythmos rhythm (see rhythm). Related: Eurythmics (1912); eurythmy.


Eustace

masc. proper name, from Old French Eustace (Modern French Eustache), from Latin Eustachius, probably
from Greek eustakhos fruitful, from eu well (see eu-) + stakhys ear (of grain); see spike (n.1).


Eustachian tube (n.)

so called for Italian physician Bartolomeo Eustachio (d.1574), who discovered the passages from the
ears to the throat. His name is from Latin Eustachius (see Eustace).


Euterpe

muse of music, from Greek Euterpe, literally pleasing, from eu well (see eu-) + terpein to delight,
please (see Terpsichore).


euthanasia (n.)

c.1600, from Greek euthanasia an easy or happy death, from eu- good (see eu-) + thanatos death (see
thanatology). Sense of legally sanctioned mercy killing is first recorded in English 1869.


euthanise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of euthanize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Euthanised;
euthanising.


euthanize (v.)

by 1915, in place of earlier and etymologically correct euthanatize (1873); see euthanasia + -ize.
Related: Euthanized; euthanizing.


Euxine

archaic name for the Black Sea, from Latin Pontus Euxinus, from Greek Pontos Euxenios, literally the
hospitable sea, a euphemism for Pontos Axeinos, the inhospitable sea.    According to Room, The Old
Persian name for the sea was akhshaena, literally dark, probably in reference to the sudden,
dangerous storms that make the sea perilous to sailors and darken its face, and the Greeks took this
untranslated as Pontos Axeinos, which was interpeted as the similar-sounding Greek word axenos
inhospitable. Thus the modern English name could reflect the Old Persian one.


evacuate (v.)

1520s, from Latin evacuatus, past participle of evacuare to empty, make void, nullify, used by Pliny
in reference to the bowels, used figuratively in Late Latin for clear out, from ex- out (see ex-) +
vacuus empty (see vacuum).    Earliest sense in English is medical. Meaning remove inhabitants to
safer ground is from 1934. Replaced Middle English evacuen (c.1400). Related: Evacuated; evacuating.


evacuation (n.)

c.1400, discharge from the body (originally mostly of blood), from Old French &eacute;vacuation and
directly from Late Latin evacuationem (nominative evacuatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of evacuare (see evacuate).


evacuee (n.)

1934, from French &eacute;vacu&eacute;, from &eacute;vacuer; see evacuate + -ee.


evade (v.)

1510s, escape, from Middle French evader, from Latin evadere to escape, get away, from ex- away (see
ex-) + vadere to go, walk (see vamoose). Related: Evaded; evading. Special sense of escape by
trickery is from 1530s.


evagation (n.)

action of wandering, 1650s, from French &eacute;vagation, from Latin evagationem (nominative
evagatio), from past participle stem of evagari, from ex- (see ex-) + vagari, from vagus roving,
wandering (see vague).


evaginate (v.)

to turn (a tube) inside out, 1650s, from Latin evaginatus, past participle of evaginare to
unsheathe, from ex- (see ex-) + vagina (see vagina). Related: Evaginated; evaginating.


evaluate (v.)

1842, from French &eacute;valuer or else a back-formation from evaluation. Originally in
mathematics. Related: Evaluated; evaluating.


evaluation (n.)

1755, from French &eacute;valuation, from &eacute;valuer to find the value of, from &eacute;- out
(see ex-) + valuer (see value).


evaluative (adj.)

1927, from evaluate + -ive.


Evan

masc. proper name, Welsh form of John, form influenced perhaps by Welsh ieuanc young man (cognate of
Latin juvenis), from Celtic *yowanko-, from PIE *yeu- vital force, youthful vigor (see young).


evanesce (v.)

1822, a back-formation from evanescence, or else from Latin evanescere to pass away, vanish (see
evanescent).


evanescence (n.)

1751; see evanescent + -ence. Evanescency is attested from 1660s.


evanescent (adj.)

1717, from French &eacute;vanescent, from Latin evanescentem (nominative evanescens), present
participle of evanescere disappear, vanish, from ex- out (see ex-) + vanescere vanish (see vanish).


evangel (n.)

mid-14c., gospel, from Old French evangile, from Church Latin evangelium, from Greek evangelion (see
evangelism).


evangelical

1530s (adj. and noun), from evangelic (early 15c., from Old French evangelique, from Late Latin
evangelicus; see evangelist) + -al (1). In reference to a tendency or school in Protestantism, from
mid-18c. Related: Evangelicalism (1831).


Evangeline

fem. proper name, from French &Eacute;vangeline, ultimately from Greek evangelion good news (see
evangelism).


evangelism (n.)

1620s, from evangel + -ism, or else from Medieval Latin evangelismus a spreading of the Gospel, from
Late Latin evangelium good news, gospel, from Greek euangelion (see evangelist). In reference to
evangelical Protestantism, from 1812.


evangelist (n.)

late 12c., Matthew, Mark, Luke or John, from Old French evangelist and directly from Late Latin
evangelista, from Greek euangelistes preacher of the gospel, literally bringer of good news, from
euangelizesthai bring good news, from eu- good (see eu-) + angellein announce, from angelos
messenger (see angel).    In early Greek Christian texts, the word was used of the four supposed
authors of the narrative gospels. Meaning itinerant preacher was another early Church usage, revived
in Middle English (late 14c.). Classical Greek euangelion meant the reward of good tidings; sense
transferred in Christian use to the glad tidings themselves. In Late Latin, Greek eu- regularly was
consonantized to ev- before vowels.


evangelistic (adj.)

1845, from evangelist + -ic.


evangelize (v.)

late 14c., from Old French evangeliser to spread or preach the Gospel, and directly from Medieval
Latin or Late Latin evangelizare, from Greek euangelizesthai (see evangelist). Related: Evangelized;
evangelizing; evangelization.


evaporate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin evaporatum, past participle of evaporare (see evaporation). Related:
Evaporated; evaporating.


evaporation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French &eacute;vaporation and directly from Latin evaporationem (nominative
evaporatio), noun of action from past participle stem of evaporare disperse in vapor or steam, from
ex- out (see ex-) + vapor steam (see vapor).


evasion (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French &eacute;vasion and directly from Late Latin evasionem (nominative
evasio) a going out, from past participle stem of Latin evadere to escape (see evade).


evasive (adj.)

1725, from French &eacute;vasif, from Latin evas-, past participle stem of evadere (see evasion).
Related: Evasively; evasiveness.


eve (n.)

evening, Old English &aelig;fen, with pre-1200 loss of terminal -n (which was mistaken for an
inflection), from Proto-Germanic *&aelig;bando- (cognates: Old Saxon aband, Old Frisian ewnd, Dutch
avond, Old High German aband, German Abend, Old Norse aptann, Danish aften), of uncertain origin.
Now superseded in its original sense by evening. Meaning day before a saint's day or festival is
from late 13c.


Eve

fem. proper name, from Biblical first woman, Late Latin, from Hebrew Hawwah, literally a living
being, from base hawa he lived (compare Arabic hayya, Aramaic hayyin).    Like most of the
explanations of names in Genesis, this is probably based on folk etymology or an imaginative playing
with sound. ... In the Hebrew here, the phonetic similarity is between hawah, Eve, and the verbal
root hayah, to live. It has been proposed that Eve's name conceals very different origins, for it
sounds suspiciously like the Aramaic word for serpent. [Robert Alter, The Five Books of Moses, 2004,
commentary on Gen. iii:20]


Evelyn

fem. proper name, a double diminutive of Eve or in some cases from Old High German Avelina, from
Avi. Popular (top 20) for girls born in U.S. c.1910-1930 and rising in popularity again 2000s.


even (adj.)

Old English efen level, also equal, like; calm, harmonious; quite, fully; namely, from Proto-
Germanic *ebnaz (cognates: Old Saxon eban, Old Frisian even level, plain, smooth, Dutch even, Old
High German eban, German eben, Old Norse jafn, Danish j&aelig;vn, Gothic ibns).    Etymologists are
uncertain whether the original sense was level or alike. Used extensively in Old English compounds,
with a sense of fellow, co- (as in efeneald of the same age; Middle English even-sucker foster-
brother). Of numbers, from 1550s. Modern adverbial sense (introducing an extreme case of something
more generally implied) seems to have arisen 16c. from use of the word to emphasize identity (Who,
me? Even you, etc.) Sense of on an equal footing is from 1630s. Rhyming reduplication phrase even
steven is attested from 1866; even break first recorded 1911. Even-tempered from 1875.


even (v.)

to make level, Old English efnan (see even (adj.)).


even (n.)

end of the day, Old English &aelig;fen, Mercian efen, Northumbrian efern (see eve).


evenhanded

c.1600, from even (adj.) + hand (n.).


evening (n.)

from Old English &aelig;fnung evening, sunset, verbal noun from &aelig;fnian become evening, grow
toward evening, from &aelig;fen evening (see eve). As a synonym of even (n.), it dates from mid-15c.
and now entirely replaces the older word in this sense. Another Old English noun for evening was
cwildtid.


evenly (adv.)

Old English efenlice; see even (adj.) + -ly (2).


evenness (n.)

Old English efenniss; see even (adj.) + -ness.


evensong (n.)

Old English &aelig;fensang; see even (n.) + song.


event (n.)

1570s, from Middle French event, from Latin eventus occurrence, accident, event, fortune, fate, lot,
issue, from past participle stem of evenire to come out, happen, result, from ex- out (see ex-) +
venire to come (see venue). Event horizon in astrophysics is from 1969.


eventful

c.1600, from event + -ful. In Shakespeare, once, and no record of it between then and Johnson's
Dictionary. Related: Eventfully; eventfulness.


eventide (n.)

Old English &aelig;fentid; see even (n.) + tide.


eventual (adj.)

1610s, from French &eacute;ventuel, from Latin event-, stem of evenire (see event).


eventuality (n.)

1759, a possible occurrence, from eventual + -ity, on model of French &eacute;ventualit&eacute;.


eventually

ultimately, 1670s, from eventual + -ly (2).


eventuate (v.)

1789, from Latin eventus, past participle of eventire (see event).


ever (adv.)

Old English &aelig;fre ever, at any time, always; no cognates in any other Germanic language;
perhaps a contraction of a in feore, literally ever in life (the expression a to fore is common in
Old English writings).    First element is almost certainly related to Old English a always, ever,
from Proto-Germanic *aiwo, from PIE *aiw- vital force, life, long life, eternity. (see eon).
Liberman suggests second element is comparative adjectival suffix -re.


Everest (n.)

mountain between Nepal and Tibet, named 1865 for Sir George Everest (1790-1866), surveyor-general of
India. The Tibetan name is Chomolangma mother goddess of the world.


Everglades (n.)

1823, from everglade, from ever, perhaps in sense of endless + glade.    The distance from the mouth
of Hilsborough river to the head of the lake, in a direct line, is about 110 statute miles. The
country between them is mostly, if not wholly, an everglade, by which is meant a low marsh
frequently covered with water, and in which there grows a sharp triangular grass, from ten to twelve
feet high, and impervious to men or animals. [American Mechanics' Magazine, 1825]


evergreen (n.)

1640s in reference to trees and shrubs, from ever + green (adj.). From 1660s as an adjective.
Figurative sense from 1871.


everlasting

early 13c., from ever + lasting. Related: Everlastingly.


evermore (adv.)

late 13c., from Old English &aelig;fre ma; see ever + more.


every (adj.)

early 13c., contraction of Old English &aelig;fre &aelig;lc each of a group, literally ever each
(Chaucer's everich), from each with ever added for emphasis. The word still is felt to want
emphasis; as in Modern English every last ..., every single ..., etc.    Compare everybody,
everything, etc. The word everywhen is attested from 1843 but never caught on; neither did everyhow
(1837). Slang phrase every Tom, Dick, and Harry dates from at least 1734, from common English given
names.


everybody (n.)

late 14c., from every + body.


everyday (adj.)

1630s, worn on ordinary days (adj.), as opposed to Sundays or high days, from noun meaning a week
day (late 14c.), from every + day. Extended sense of to be met with every day, common is from 1763.


everyman (n.)

name of the leading character in a popular 15c. morality play; from every + man (n.).


everyone (n.)

c.1200, from every + one.


everything (n.)

late 14c., from every + thing.


everywhere (adv.)

Old English &aelig;fre gehw&aelig;r; see every + where.


evict (v.)

mid-15c., recover (property) by judicial means, from Latin evictus, past participle of evincere
recover property, overcome and expel, conquer, from ex- out (see ex-) + vincere conquer (see
victor). Sense of expel by legal process first recorded in English 1530s. Related: Evicted;
evicting.


eviction (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French &eacute;viction, from Latin evictionem (nominative evictio) recovery of
one's property, noun of action from past participle stem of evincere (see evict).


evidence (n.)

c.1300, appearance from which inferences may be drawn, from Old French evidence, from Late Latin
evidentia proof, originally distinction, clearness, from Latin evidentem (see evident).    Meaning
ground for belief is from late 14c., that of obviousness is 1660s. Legal senses are from c.1500,
when it began to oust witness. As a verb, from c.1600. Related: Evidenced; evidencing.


evident (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French evident and directly from Latin evidentem (nominative evidens)
perceptible, clear, obvious, apparent from ex- fully, out of (see ex-) + videntem (nominative
videns), present participle of videre to see (see vision).


evidently (adv.)

late 14c., from evident + -ly (2).


evil (adj.)

Old English yfel (Kentish evel) bad, vicious, ill, wicked, from Proto-Germanic *ubilaz (cognates:
Old Saxon ubil, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch evel, Dutch euvel, Old High German ubil, German
&uuml;bel, Gothic ubils), from PIE *upelo-, from root *wap- (cognates: Hittite huwapp- evil).    In
OE., as in all the other early Teut. langs., exc. Scandinavian, this word is the most comprehensive
adjectival expression of disapproval, dislike or disparagement [OED]. Evil was the word the Anglo-
Saxons used where we would use bad, cruel, unskillful, defective (adj.), or harm, crime, misfortune,
disease (n.). The meaning extreme moral wickedness was in Old English, but did not become the main
sense until 18c. Related: Evilly. Evil eye (Latin oculus malus) was Old English eage yfel. Evilchild
is attested as an English surname from 13c.


evil (n.)

Old English yfel (see evil (adj.)).


evildoer (n.)

late 14c., from evil (n.) + doer.


evince (v.)

c.1600, disprove, confute, from French &eacute;vincer disprove, confute, from Latin evincere
conquer, elicit by argument, prove, from ex- out (see ex-) + vincere overcome (see victor).
Meaning show clearly is late 18c. Not clearly distinguished from evict until 18c. Related: Evinced;
evinces; evincing.


eviscerate (v.)

c.1600 (figurative); 1620s (literal), from Latin evisceratus, past participle of eviscerare to
disembowel, from ex- out (see ex-) + viscera internal organs. Sometimes used 17c. in figurative
sense of to bring out the deepest secrets of. Related: Eviscerated; eviscerating.


evitable (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin evitabilis avoidable, from evitare (see inevitable).


evocation (n.)

1570s, from Latin evocationem (nominative evocatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
evocare call out, rouse, summon, from ex- out (see ex-) + vocare to call (see voice (n.)).
Evocation was used of the Roman custom of petitioning the gods of an enemy city to abandon it and
come to Rome; it also was used to translate the Platonic Greek anamnesis a calling up of knowledge
acquired in a previous state of existence.


evocative (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin evocativus pertaining to summoning, from Latin evocatus, past participle of
evocare (see evoke).


evoke (v.)

1620s, from French &eacute;voquer or directly from Latin evocare call out, rouse, summon (see
evocation). Often more or less with a sense of calling spirits, or being called by them. Related:
Evoked; evokes; evoking.


evolution (n.)

1620s, an opening of what was rolled up, from Latin evolutionem (nominative evolutio) unrolling (of
a book), noun of action from evolvere (see evolve).    Used in medicine, mathematics, and general
writing in various senses including growth to maturity and development of an individual living thing
(1660s). Modern use in biology, of species, first attested 1832 in works of Scottish geologist
Charles Lyell. Charles Darwin used the word only once, in the closing paragraph of The Origin of
Species (1859), and preferred descent with modification, in part because evolution already had been
used in the 18c. homunculus theory of embryological development (first proposed under this name by
Bonnet, 1762) and in part because it carried a sense of progress not found in Darwin's idea. But
Victorian belief in progress prevailed (along with brevity), and Herbert Spencer and other
biologists popularized evolution.


evolutionary (adj.)

1846, from evolution + -ary.


evolutionist (n.)

1859, from evolution + -ist. Related: Evolutionism.


evolve (v.)

1640s, to unfold, open out, expand, from Latin evolvere to unroll, especially of books; figuratively
to make clear, disclose; to produce, develop, from ex- out (see ex-) + volvere to roll (see volvox).
Meaning to develop by natural processes to a higher state is from 1832. Related: Evolved; evolving.


ewe (n.)

Old English eowu, fem. of eow sheep, from Proto-Germanic *awi, genitive *awjoz (cognates: Old Saxon
ewi, Old Frisian ei, Middle Dutch ooge, Dutch ooi, Old High German ouwi sheep, Gothic awe&thorn;i
flock of sheep), from PIE *owi- (cognates: Sanskrit avih, Greek ois, Latin ovis, Lithuanian avis
sheep, Old Church Slavonic ovica ewe, Old Irish oi sheep, Welsh ewig hind).


Ewen

see Owen.


ewer (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French *ewiere, Old French eviere water pitcher, parallel form of aiguiere
(Modern French aigui&egrave;re), from fem. of Latin aquarius of or for water, from aqua water (see
aqua-).


ewigkeit

1877, from German, literally eternity.


ex (n.)

1827, originally short for ex-Catholic; ultimately from Latin ex (see ex-). Since 1929 as
abbreviation for ex-wife, ex-husband, etc. Also used in some commercial senses for from, out of.


ex cathedra

Latin, literally from the (teacher's) chair, from ex out of (see ex-) + cathedra (see cathedral).


ex libris

Latin, literally out of the books (of), from ex out of (see ex-) + ablative plural of liber book
(see library).


ex nihilo

Latin, literally out of nothing, from ex out of (see ex-) + nihilo, ablative of nihil nothing (see
nil).


ex officio

Latin, in discharge of one's duties, literally out of duty, from ex out of (see ex-) + officio,
ablative of officium duty (see office).


ex parte

Latin legal term, on the one side only, from ex out of (see ex-) + parte, ablative of pars part,
side.


ex post facto

from Medieval Latin ex postfacto, from what is done afterwards.


ex-

word-forming element, in English meaning mainly out of, from, but also upwards, completely, deprive
of, without, and former; from Latin ex out of, from within, from PIE *eghs out (cognates: Gaulish
ex-, Old Irish ess-, Old Church Slavonic izu, Russian iz). In some cases also from Greek cognate ex,
ek. PIE *eghs had comparative form *eks-tero and superlative *eks-t(e)r-emo-.


exacerbate (v.)

1650s, a back-formation from exacerbation or else from Latin exacerbatus, past participle of
exacerbare. Related: Exacerbated; exacerbating.


exacerbation (n.)

c.1400, from Late Latin exacerbationem (nominative exacerbatio), noun of action from past participle
stem Latin exacerbare exasperate, irritate, provoke, from ex- thoroughly (see ex-) + acerbus harsh,
bitter, from acer sharp, keen (see acrid).


exact (adj.)

precise, rigorous, accurate, 1530s, from Latin exactus precise, accurate, exact, past participle of
exigere demand, require, literally to drive or force out, also demand, finish, measure, from ex- out
(see ex-) + agere drive, lead, act (see act (n.)).


exact (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin exactus, past participle of exigere (see exact (adj.)). Older in English than
the adjective and retaining the literal sense of the Latin source. Related: Exacted; exacting.


exacta (n.)

type of horse-racing bet, 1964, said to have originated in New York; from exact (adj.).


exacting (adj.)

too demanding, 1580s, present participle adjective from exact (v.).


exaction (n.)

late 14c., from French exaction, from Latin exactionem (nominative exactio) a driving out;
supervision; exaction; a tax, tribute, impost, noun of action from past participle stem of exigere
(see exact (adj.)).


exactitude (n.)

1734, from French exactitude (17c.), from exact, from Latin exactus (see exact (adj.)).


exactly (adv.)

1530s, from exact (adj.) + -ly (2). Elliptical use for quite right not recorded before 1869.


exactness (n.)

1560s, perfection, from exact (adj.) + -ness. Meaning precision is 1640s.


exaggerate (v.)

1530s, to pile up, accumulate, from Latin exaggeratus, past participle of exaggerare heighten,
amplify, magnify, literally to heap, pile, load, fill, from ex- thoroughly (see ex-) + aggerare heap
up, from agger (genitive aggeris) heap, from aggerere bring together, carry toward, from ad- to,
toward (see ad-) + gerere carry (see gest). Sense of overstate first recorded in English 1560s.
Related: Exaggerated; exaggerating.


exaggeration (n.)

1560s, from Latin exaggerationem (nominative exaggeratio), noun of action from past participle stem
of exaggerare (see exaggerate).


exalt (v.)

late 14c., from Old French exalter (10c.), from Latin exaltare raise, elevate, from ex- out, up (see
ex-) + altus high (see old). Related: Exalted; exalting.


exaltation (n.)

late 14c, from Old French exaltacion enhancement, elevation, from Latin exaltationem (nominative
exaltatio) elevation, pride, from exaltare (see exalt).


exam (n.)

shortened form of examination, 1848.


examination (n.)

late 14c., action of testing or judging; judicial inquiry, from Old French examinacion, from Latin
examinationem (nominative examinatio), noun of action from past participle stem of examinare (see
examine). Sense of test of knowledge is attested from 1610s.


examine (v.)

c.1300, from Old French examiner interrogate, question, torture, from Latin examinare to test or
try; weigh, consider, ponder, from examen a means of weighing or testing, probably ultimately from
exigere weigh accurately (see exact (adj.)). Related: Examined; examining.


examiner (n.)

early 14c., examinour, agent noun from examine.


example (n.)

late 14c., partial re-Latinization of earlier essample, asaumple (mid-13c.), from Old French
essemple sample, model, example, precedent, cautionary tale, from Latin exemplum a sample, literally
that which is taken out, from eximere take out, remove (see exempt (adj.)). Oldest English senses
are of behavior and punishment.


exanimate (adj.)

1530s, from Latin exanimatus lifeless, dead, past participle of exanimare to deprive of air or
breath; tire, fatigue; to deprive of life; to terrify, from ex- (see ex-) + animare (see animate
(v.)).


exarch (n.)

from Late Latin exarchus, from Greek exarkhos, from ex (see ex-) + arkhos leader, chief, ruler (see
archon).


exasperate (v.)

1530s, from Latin exasperatus, past participle of exasperare roughen, irritate, provoke, from ex-
thoroughly (see ex-) + asper rough (see asperity). Related: Exasperated; exasperating.


exasperation (n.)

1540s, from Latin exasperationem (nominative exasperatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of exasperare (see exasperate).


Excalibur (n.)

King Arthur's sword, c.1300, from Old French Escalibor, corruption of Caliburn, in Geoffrey of
Monmouth (c.1140) Caliburnus, apparently from Welsh Caledvwlch probably a variant of the legendary
Irish sword name Caladbolg which might mean literally hard-belly, i.e. voracious. For first element,
see callus; for second, see belly (n.).


excavate (v.)

1590s, from Latin excavatus, past participle of excavare to hollow out, from ex- out (see ex-) +
cavare to hollow, hollow out, from cavus cave (see cave (n.)). Related: Excavated; excavating.


excavation (n.)

1610s, action of excavating, from Latin excavationem (nominative excavatio) a hollowing out, noun of
action from past participle stem of excavare (see excavate).


exceed (v.)

late 14c., from Old French exceder (14c.) exceed, surpass, go too far, from Latin excedere depart,
go beyond, be in excess, surpass, from ex- out (see ex-) + cedere go, yield (see cede). Related:
Exceeded; exceeding. Exceedingly (late 15c.) means very greatly or very much; excessively (mid-15c.)
means too greatly or too much.


excel (v.)

c.1400, from Latin excellere to rise, surpass, be eminent, from ex- out from (see ex-) + -cellere
rise high, tower, related to celsus high, lofty, great, from PIE root *kel- to rise, be elevated
(see hill). Related: Excelled; excelling.


excellence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French excellence, from Latin excellentia, from excellentem (see excellent).


excellency (n.)

high rank, c.1200, from Latin excellentia (see excellence); as a title of honor it dates from early
14c.


excellent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French excellent outstanding, excellent, from Latin excellentem (nominative
excellens), present participle of excellere (see excel). Related: Excellently.


excelsior

Latin excelsior higher, comparative of excelsus (adj.) high, elevated, lofty, past participle of
excellere (see excel). Taken 1778 as motto of New York State, where it apparently was mistaken for
an adverb. Popularized 1841 as title of a poem by Longfellow. As a trade name for thin shavings of
soft wood used for stuffing cushions, etc., first recorded 1868, American English.


except (v.)

late 14c., to receive, from Middle French excepter (12c.), from Latin exceptus, past participle of
excipere take out, from ex- out (see ex-) + capere to take (see capable). Meaning to leave out is
from 1510s. Related: Excepted; excepting. Adjectival function led to use as a preposition,
conjunction (late 14c.).


exception (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French excepcioun, Old French excepcion, from Latin exceptionem (nominative
exceptio), noun of action from past participle stem of excipere (see except).    The exception that
proves the rule is from law: exceptio probat regulam in casibus non exceptis, the exception proves
the rule in cases not excepted; exception here being action of excepting someone or something from
the rule in question, not the person or thing that is excepted. To take exception is from excipere
being used in Roman law as a modern attorney would say objection.


exceptionable (adj.)

1660s, from exception + -able. Related: Exceptionably.


exceptional (adj.)

1846, from exception + -al (1). Related: Exceptionally.


excerpt (v.)

early 15c. (implied in excerpte), from Latin excerptus, past participle of excerpere pluck out, pick
out, extract, excerpt, from ex- out (see ex-) + carpere pluck, gather, from PIE *kerp- to gather,
pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)). Related: Excerpted; excerpting.


excerpt (n.)

1630s, from Latin excerptum an extract, selection, noun use of neuter past participle of excerpere
(see excerpt (v.)). Related: excerpts.


excess (n.)

late 14c., from Old French exces (14c.) excess, extravagance, outrage, from Latin excessus
departure, a going beyond the bounds of reason or beyond the subject, from stem of excedere to
depart, go beyond (see exceed). As an adjective from late 15c.


excessive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French excessif excessive, oppressive, from Latin excess-, past participle stem
of excedere to depart, go beyond (see exceed). Related: Excessively; excessiveness.


exchange (n.)

late 14c., act of reciprocal giving and receiving, from Anglo-French eschaunge, Old French eschange
(Modern French &eacute;change), from Late Latin excambium, from excambiare, from Latin ex- out (see
ex-) + cambire barter (see change). Practice of merchants or lenders meeting to exchange bills of
debt led to meaning building for mercantile business (1580s).


exchange (v.)

late 15c., from Old French eschangier exchange, barter, from Vulgar Latin *excambiare (source of
Italian scambiare); see exchange (n.). Related: Exchanged; exchanging.


exchequer (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French escheker a chessboard, from Old French eschequier, from Medieval Latin
scaccarium chess board (see check (n.1); also see checker (n.2)). Government financial sense began
under the Norman kings of England and refers to a cloth divided in squares that covered a table on
which accounts of revenue were reckoned with counters, and which apparently reminded people of a
chess board. Respelled with an -x- based on the mistaken belief that it originally was a Latin ex-
word.


excise (n.)

tax on goods, late 15c., from Middle Dutch excijs (early 15c.), apparently altered from accijs tax
(by influence of Latin excisus cut out or removed, see excise (v.)), traditionally from Old French
acceis tax, assessment (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *accensum, ultimately from Latin ad- to (see ad-) +
census tax, census (see census). English got the word, and the idea for the tax, from Holland.


excise (v.)

cut out, 1570s, from Middle French exciser, from Latin excisus, past participle of excidere cut out,
cut down, cut off, from ex- out (see ex-) + -cidere, comb. form of caedere to cut down (see -cide).
Related: Excised; excising.


excision (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French excision (14c.) and directly from Latin excisionem (nominative
excisio), noun of action from past participle stem of excidere (see excise (v.)).


excitable (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin excitabilis inciting, animating, from excitare (see excite). Related:
Excitability.


excitation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French excitation, from Latin excitationem (nominative excitatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of excitare (see excite).


excite (v.)

mid-14c., to move, stir up, instigate, from Old French esciter (12c.) or directly from Latin
excitare rouse, call out, summon forth, produce, frequentative of exciere call forth, instigate,
from ex- out (see ex-) + ciere set in motion, call (see cite). Of feelings, from late 14c. Of bodily
organs or tissues, from 1831. Main modern sense of emotionally agitate is first attested 1821.


excited (adj.)

1650s, magnetically or electrically stimulated; modern sense of agitated attested 1855; past
participle adjective from excite. Related: Excitedly.


excitement (n.)

early 15c., encouragement; c.1600, something that tends to excite, from excite + -ment. Meaning
condition of mental and emotional agitation is from 1846.


exciting (adj.)

1811, causing disease, present participle adjective excite (v.). Sense of causing excitement is from
1826. Related: Excitingly.


exclaim (v.)

1560s, back-formation from exclamation or else from Middle French exclamer (16c.), from Latin
exclamare cry out loud, from ex- intensive prefix out (see ex-) + clamare cry, shout, call (see
claim (v.)). Spelling influenced by claim. Related: Exclaimed; exclaiming.


exclamation (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French exclamation, from Latin exclamationem (nominative exclamatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of exclamare cry out loud (see exclaim).    The punctuation symbol
known as the exclamation point (1824) or exclamation mark (1926) was earliest called an exclamation
note or note of exclamation (1650s), earlier note of admiration (1610s). Another name for it was
shriek-mark (1864).


exclamatory (adj.)

1590s, from Latin exclamat-, past participle stem of exclamare (see exclaim) + -ory.


exclude (v.)

mid-14c., from Latin excludere keep out, shut out, hinder, from ex- out (see ex-) + claudere to
close, shut (see close (v.)). Related: Excluded; excluding.


exclusion (n.)

c.1400, from Latin exclusionem (nominative exclusio), noun of action from past participle stem of
excludere (see exclude).


exclusionary (adj.)

1817, from exclusion + -ary.


exclusive (adj.)

mid-15c., so as to exclude, from Medieval Latin exclusivus, from exclus-, past participle stem of
excludere (see exclude).    Of monopolies, rights, franchises, etc., from 1760s; of social circles,
clubs, etc., unwilling to admit outsiders, from 1822. Related: Exclusively; exclusiveness.


exclusivity (n.)

1926, from exclusive + -ity.


excommunicate (v.)

early 15c., from Late Latin excommunicatus, past participle of excommunicare (see excommunication).
Related: Excommunicated; excommunicating.


excommunication (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin excommunicationem (nominative excommunicatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of excommunicare put out of the community, in Church Latin to expel from communion,
from ex- out (see ex-) + communicare, from communis common (see common).


excoriate (v.)

early 15c., from Late Latin excoriatus, past participle of excoriare flay, strip off the hide, from
Latin ex- off (see ex-) + corium hide, skin (see corium). Figurative sense of denounce, censure
first recorded in English 1708. Related: Excoriated; excoriating.


excoriation (n.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin excoriationem (nominative excoriatio), from past participle stem of
Late Latin excoriare (see excoriate).


excrement (n.)

1530s, waste discharged from the body, from Latin excrementum, from stem of excretus, past
participle of excernere to sift out, discharge, from ex- out (see ex-) + cernere sift, separate (see
crisis). Originally any bodily secretion, especially from the bowels; exclusive sense of feces is
since mid-18c.


excrescence (n.)

early 15c., action of growing out, from Latin excrescentia (plural) abnormal growths, from
excrescentem (nominative excrescens), present participle of excrescere grow out, grow up, from ex-
out (see ex-) + crescere to grow (see crescent). Meaning that which grows out abnormally (on a
living thing) is from 1570s (excrescency in this sense is 1540s).


excrescent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin excrescentem (nominative excrescens), present participle of excrescere (see
excrescence).


excrete (v.)

1610s, from Latin excretus, past participle of excernere (see excrement). Related: Excreted;
excreting.


excretion (n.)

c.1600, from French excr&eacute;tion (16c.), from Latin excretionem, noun of action from past
participle stem of excernere to discharge (see excrement).


excretory (adj.)

1680s, from excrete + -ory.


excruciate (v.)

1560s, from Latin excruciatus, past participle of excruciare to torture, torment, rack, plague;
figuratively to afflict, harass, vex, torment, from ex- out, thoroughly (see ex-) + cruciare cause
pain or anguish to, literally crucify, from crux (genitive crucis) cross.


excruciating (adj.)

1590s, present participle adjective from excruciate. Related: Excruciatingly.


exculpate (v.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin exculpatus, past participle of exculpare, from Latin ex culpa, from ex
from (see ex-) + culpa ablative of culpa blame, fault. Related: Exculpated; exculpating.


exculpation (n.)

1715, noun of action from exculpate.


exculpatory (adj.)

1780s, from exculpate + -ory.


excursion (n.)

1570s, a deviation in argument, also a military sally, from Latin excursionem (nominative excursio)
a running forth, sally, excursion, expedition, noun of action from past participle stem of excurrere
run out, run forth, hasten, from ex- out (see ex-) + currere to run (see current (adj.)). Sense of
journey recorded in English by 1660s.


excusable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French escusable, from Latin excusabilis, from excusare (see excuse (v.)).
Related: Excusably.


excuse (v.)

early 13c., attempt to clear (someone) from blame, from Old French escuser (12c., Modern French
excuser) apologize, make excuses; pardon, exonerate, from Latin excusare excuse, make an excuse for,
release from a charge, from ex- out, away (see ex-) + causa accusation, legal action (see cause).
Meaning to obtain exemption or release is from mid-15c.; that of to accept another's plea of excuse
is from early 14c. Related: Excused; excusing. Excuse me as a mild apology or statement of polite
disagreement is from c.1600.


excuse (n.)

late 14c., action of offering an apology, from Old French excuse, from excuser (see excuse (v.)).
The sense of that serves as a reason for being excused is recorded from late 15c.


execrable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French execrable, from Latin execrabilis/exsecrabilis execrable, accursed, from
execrari/exsecrari (see execrate). Related: Execrably.


execrate (v.)

1560s, from Latin execratus/exsecratus, past participle of execrari/exsecrari to curse, utter a
curse; hate, abhor, from ex- (see ex-) + sacrare to devote to (see sacred). Hence, to devote off or
away; to curse. Related: Execrated; execrating.


execration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin execrationem (nominative execratio), noun of action from past participle stem
of execrari to hate, curse, from ex- out (see ex-) + sacrare to devote to holiness or to
destruction, consecrate, from sacer sacred (see sacred).


execute (v.)

late 14c., to carry into effect, from Old French executer (14c.), from Medieval Latin executare,
from Latin execut-/exsecut-, past participle stem of exequi/exsequi to follow out (see execution).
Meaning to inflict capital punishment is from late 15c. Related: Executed; executing.


execution (n.)

late 14c., carrying out, putting into effect; enforcement; performance (of an act), the carrying out
(of a  plan, etc.), from Anglo-French execucioun (late 13c.), Old French execucion a carrying out
(of an order, etc.), from Latin executionem (nominative executio) an accomplishing, noun of action
from past participle stem of exequi/exsequi to follow out, from ex- out (see ex-) + sequi follow
(see sequel).    Sense of act of putting to death (mid-14c.) is from Middle English legal phrases
such as don execution of deth carry out a sentence of death. Literal meaning action of carrying
something into effect is from late 14c. John McKay, coach of the woeful Tampa Bay Buccaneers (U.S.
football team), when asked by a reporter what he thought of his team's execution, replied, I think
it would be a good idea. Executor and executioner were formerly used indifferently, because both are
carrying out legal orders.


executioner (n.)

headsman, 1560s; one who carries into effect, 1590s; agent noun from execution.


executive (adj.)

mid-15c., performed, carried out; 1640s, of the branch of government that carries out the laws, from
Middle French executif, from Latin executivus, from past participle stem of exequi (see execution).
The noun in this sense is from 1776, as a branch of government. Meaning businessman is 1902 in
American English. Executive privilege is attested by 1805, American English.


executor (n.)

c.1300, executor of a will, from Anglo-French executour, from Latin executorem/exsecutorem, agent
noun from exsequi/exsequi (see execution). Fem. form executrix is attested from late 14c.
(executrice).


exegesis (n.)

1610s, from Greek exegesis explanation, interpretation, from exegeisthai explain, interpret, from ex
out (see ex-) + hegeisthai to lead, guide, from PIE root *sag-. Related: Exegetical.


exegete (n.)

1730s, from Greek exegetes an expounder, interpreter (especially of the Bible), from exegeisthai
(see exegesis).


exemplar (n.)

late 14c., original model of the universe in the mind of God, later (mid-15c.) model of virtue, from
Old French exemplaire (14c.) and directly from Late Latin exemplarium, from Latin exemplum (see
example).


exemplary (adj.)

1580s, fit to be an example, from Middle French exemplaire, from Latin exemplaris that serves as an
example, from exemplum example (see example). Earlier (early 15c.) as a noun meaning a model of
conduct.


exemplification (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French exemplification, from Medieval Latin exemplificationem (nominative
exemplificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of exemplificare (see exemplify).


exemplify (v.)

early 15c., to illustrate by examples, to instruct by (good) example, from Medieval Latin
exemplificare to illustrate, from Latin exemplum (see example). Meaning to serve as an example is
recorded from 1793. Related: Exemplified; exemplifies; exemplifying.


exempt (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French exempt (13c.) and directly from Latin exemptus, past participle of
eximere remove, take out, take away; free, release, deliver, make an exception of, from ex- out (see
ex-) + emere buy, originally take, from PIE root *em- to take, distribute (cognates: Latin sumere to
take, obtain, buy, Old Church Slavonic imo to take, Lithuanian imui, Sanskrit yamati holds,
subdues). For sense shift from take to buy, compare Old English sellan to give, source of Modern
English sell to give in exchange for money; Hebrew laqah he bought, originally he took; and
colloquial English I'll take it for I'll buy it.


exempt (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French exempter, from exempt (adj.); see exempt (adj.). Related: Exempted;
exempting.


exemption (n.)

late 14c., from Old French exemption, exencion or directly from Latin exemptionem (nominative
exemptio) a taking out, removing, noun of action from past participle stem of eximere (see exempt
(adj.)).


exercise (n.)

mid-14c., condition of being in active operation; practice for the sake of training, from Old French
exercice (13c.) exercise, execution of power; physical or spiritual exercise, from Latin exercitium
training, exercise, from exercitare, frequentative of exercere keep busy, drive on, literally remove
restraint, from ex- off (see ex-) + arcere keep away, prevent, enclose, from PIE *ark- to hold,
contain, guard (see arcane).    Original sense may have been driving farm animals to the field to
plow. Meaning physical activity first recorded in English late 14c.; in reference to written
schoolwork from early 17c. The ending was abstracted for formations such as dancercise (1967);
jazzercise (1977); and boxercise (1985).


exercise (v.)

late 14c., to employ, put into active use, from exercise (n.); originally to make use of; also in
regard to mental and spiritual training; sense of engage in physical activity is from 1650s.
Related: Exercised; exercises; exercising.


exert (v.)

1660s, thrust forth, push out, from Latin exertus/exsertus, past participle of exerere/exserere
thrust out, put forth, from ex- out (see ex-) + serere attach, join (see series). Meaning put into
use is 1680s. Related: Exerted; exerting.


exertion (n.)

1660s, act of exerting, from exert + -ion. Meaning vigorous action or effort is from 1777.


Exeter

Old English Exanceaster, Escanceaster, from Latin Isca (c.150), from Celtic river name Exe the water
+ Old English ceaster Roman town (see Chester).


exeunt

stage direction, late 15c., from Latin, literally they go out, third person plural present
indicative of exire (see exit).


exfoliate (v.)

1610s, from Late Latin exfoliatus, past participle of exfoliare to strip of leaves, from ex- off
(see ex-) + folium leaf (see folio). Related: Exfoliated; exfoliating.


exfoliation (n.)

early 15c., noun of action from Latin exfoliare (see exfoliate).


exhalation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin exhalationem (nominative exhalatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of exhalare (see exhale).


exhale (v.)

c.1400, from Middle French exhaler (14c.), from Latin exhalare breathe out, evaporate, from ex- out
(see ex-) + halare breathe. Related: Exhaled; exhaling.


exhaust (v.)

1530s, to draw off or out, to use up completely, from Latin exhaustus, past participle of exhaurire
draw off, take away, use up, from ex- off (see ex-) + haurire to draw up (as water), from PIE *aus-
(3) to draw water. Of resources, etc., from 1630s. Related: Exhausted; exhausting.


exhaust (n.)

waste gas, 1848, originally from steam engines, from exhaust (v.). In reference to internal
combustion engines by 1896.


exhausted (adj.)

mid-17c., consumed, used up; of persons, tired out, past participle adjective from exhaust (v.).
Related: Exhaustedly.


exhaustion (n.)

fatigue, 1640s, noun of action from exhaust (v.) in sense of drawing off of strength.


exhaustive (adj.)

1780s, from exhaust (v.) + -ive. Related: Exhaustively; exhaustiveness.


exhibit (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin exhibitus, past participle of exhibere to hold out, display, show, present,
deliver (see exhibition). Related: Exhibited; exhibiting.


exhibit (n.)

1620s, document or object produced as evidence in court, from Latin exhibitum, neuter past
participle of exhibere (see exhibition). Meaning object displayed in a fair, museum, etc. is from
1862. Transferred use of exhibit A important piece of evidence is by 1906.


exhibition (n.)

early 14c., from Old French exhibicion, exibicion show, exhibition, display, from Late Latin
exhibitionem (nominative exhibitio), noun of action from past participle stem of exhibere to show,
display, literally to hold out, from ex- out (see ex-) + habere to hold (see habit (n.)).


exhibitionist (n.)

1821, one who takes part in an exhibition; psychosexual sense is from 1893, in Craddock's
translation of Krafft-Ebing; see exhibition + -ist. Related: Exhibitionism; exhibitionistic.


exhibitor (n.)

1650s (as exhibiter, 1590s), from Late Latin exhibitor, agent noun from past participle stem of
Latin exhibere (see exhibition).


exhilarate (v.)

1530s, from Latin exhilaratus cheerful, merry, past participle of exhilarare gladden, cheer, from
ex- thoroughly (see ex-) + hilarare make cheerful, from hilarus cheerful (see hilarity). Related:
Exhilarated; exhilarating.


exhilaration (n.)

1620s, from Late Latin exhilarationem (nominative exhilaratio), noun of action from past participle
stem of exhilarare (see exhilarate).


exhort (v.)

c.1400, from Old French exhorer (13c.) and directly from Latin exhortari to exhort, encourage,
stimulate (see exhortation). Related: Exhorted; exhorting.


exhortation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French exhortacion and directly from Latin exhortationem (nominative exhortatio)
an exhortation, encouragement, noun of action from past participle stem of exhortari, from ex-
thoroughly (see ex-) + hortari encourage, urge (see hortatory).


exhumation (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin exhumationem (nominative exhumatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of exhumare (see exhume).


exhume (v.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin exhumare to unearth (13c.), from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) + humare
bury, from humus earth (see chthonic). An alternative form was exhumate (1540s), taken directly from
Medieval Latin. Related: Exhumed; exhuming.


exigence (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French exigence or directly from Latin exigentia, from exigentem (nominative
exigens), present participle of exigere (see exact (v.)).


exigency (n.)

1580s, from Middle French exigence, from Latin exigentia urgency, from exigentem (nominative
exigens), from exigere to demand, require; drive out (see exact (v.)). Related: Exigencies (1650s).


exigent (adj.)

1660s, urgent, a back-formation from exigency or else from Latin exigentem (nominative exigens),
present participle of exigere to demand (see exact (v.)).


exiguous (adj.)

scanty, 1650s, from Latin exiguus small, petty, paltry, scanty in measure or number, from exigere
(see exact (v.)).


exile (v.)

c.1300, from Old French essillier exile, banish, expel, drive off, from Late Latin exilare/exsilare,
from Latin exilium/exsilium banishment, exile, from exul banished person, from ex- away (see ex-) +
PIE root *al- to wander (cognates: Greek alaomai to wander, stray, or roam about). In ancient times
folk etymology derived the second element from Latin solum soil. Related: Exiled; exiling.


exile (n.)

c.1300, forced removal from one's country; early 14c. as a banished person; from Old French exil,
essil (12c.), from Latin exilium (see exile (v.)).


exist (v.)

c.1600, from French exister (17c.), from Latin existere/exsistere to step out, stand forth, emerge,
appear; exist, be (see existence). The late appearance of the word is remarkable [OED]. Related:
Existed; existing.


existence (n.)

late 14c., reality, from Old French existence, from Medieval Latin existentia/exsistentia, from
existentem/exsistentem (nominative existens/exsistens) existent, present participle of Latin
existere/exsistere stand forth, appear, and, as a secondary meaning, exist, be; from ex- forth (see
ex-) + sistere cause to stand (see assist).


existent (adj.)

1560s, a back-formation from existence, or else from Latin existentem/exsistentem (nominative
existens/exsistens), present participle of existere/exsistere (see existence).


existential (adj.)

1690s, pertaining to existence, from Late Latin existentialis/exsistentialis, from
existentia/exsistentia (see existence). As a term in logic, from 1819; in philosophy, from 1937,
tracing back to the Danish works of Kierkegaard (see existentialism). Related: Existentially.


existentialism (n.)

1941, from German Existentialismus (1919), replacing Existentialforhold (1849), ultimately from
Danish writer S&oslash;ren Kierkegaard (1813-1855), who wrote (1846) of Existents-Forhold condition
of existence, existentielle Pathos, etc. (see existential), and whose name means, literally,
churchyard.


existentialist (adj.)

1945, from French existentialiste, from existentialisme (1940); see existentialism. Related:
Existentialistic.


exit (n.)

1530s, from Latin exit he or she goes out, third person singular present indicative of exire go out,
from ex- out (see ex-) + ire to go (see ion). Also from Latin exitus a leaving, a going out, noun of
action from exire. Originally in English a Latin stage direction (late 15c.); sense of door for
leaving is 1786. Meaning departure (originally from the stage) is from 1580s. The verb is c.1600,
from the noun; it ought to be left to stage directions and the clunky jargon of police reports.
Related: Exited; exiting.  Those who neither know Latin nor read plays are apt to forget or not know
that this is a singular verb with plural exeunt. [Fowler]


exo-

word-forming element meaning outer, outside, outer part used in scientific words (such as
exoskeleton), from Greek exo outside, related to ex out of (see ex-).


Exocet (n.)

1970, proprietary name of a rocket-propelled short-range guided missile, trademarked 1970 by
Soci&eacute;t&eacute; Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, from French exocet flying fish (16c.),
from Latin exocoetus, from Greek exokoitos sleeping fish, fish that sleeps upon the beach, from exo
outside (see exo-) + koitos bed.


Exodus

late Old English, the second book of the Old Testament, from Latin exodus, from Greek exodos a
military expedition; a solemn procession; departure; death, literally a going out, from ex- out (see
ex-) + hodos way (see cede). General sense (with lower-case -e-) is from 1620s.


exogamy (n.)

1865, Modern Latin, literally outside marriage, from exo- + -gamy. Related: Exogamous.


exogenous (adj.)

1830, from Modern Latin exogenus (on model of indigenus); see exo- + -genous.


exonerate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin exoneratus, past participle of exonerare remove a burden, discharge, unload,
from ex- off (see ex-) + onerare to unload; overload, oppress, from onus (genitive oneris) burden
(see onus). Related: Exonerated; exonerating.


exoneration (n.)

1630s, from Latin exonerationem (nominative exoneratio) an unloading, lightening, noun of action
from past participle stem of exonerare (see exonerate).


exorable (adj.)

1570s, susceptible of being moved by entreaty (a word much rarer than its opposite and probably used
now only as a back-formation from it), from Latin exorabilis, from exorare to persuade (see
inexorable). Related: Exorably.


exorbitance (n.)

mid-15c., from exorbitant + -ance.


exorbitant (adj.)

mid-15c., a legal term, deviating from rule or principle, eccentric; from Latin exorbitantem
(nominative exorbitans), present participle of exorbitare deviate, go out of the track, from ex- out
of (see ex-) + orbita wheel track (see orb). Sense of excessive, immoderate is from 1620s; of
prices, rates, etc., from 1660s. Related: Exorbitantly.


exorcise (v.)

c.1400, to invoke spirits, from Old French exorciser (14c.), from Late Latin exorcizare, from Greek
exorkizein banish an evil spirit; bind by oath (see exorcism). Sense of calling up evil spirits to
drive them out became dominant 16c. A rare case where -ise trumps -ize on both sides of the
Atlantic, perhaps by influence of exercise. Related: Exorcised; exorcising.


exorcism (n.)

early 15c., a calling up or driving out of evil spirits, from Late Latin exorcismus, from Greek
exorkismos, from exorkizein exorcize, bind by oath, from ex out of (see ex-) + horkizein cause to
swear, from horkos oath. Earlier in the same sense was exorcization (late 14c.).


exorcist (n.)

one who drives out evil spirits, late 14c., from Late Latin exorcista, from Ecclesiastical Greek
exorkistes an exorcist, from exorkizein (see exorcism).


exoskeleton (n.)

1847, from exo- + skeleton. Introduced by English anatomist Sir Richard Owen (1804-1892).


exoteric (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin exotericus, from Greek exoterikos, from exotero, comparative of exo (see
exo-).


exothermic (adj.)

1879, from French exothermique (1879), from exo- + thermique, ultimately from Greek therme heat (see
thermal).


exotic (adj.)

1590s, belonging to another country, from Middle French exotique (16c.) and directly from Latin
exoticus, from Greek exotikos foreign, literally from the outside, from exo outside (see exo-).
Sense of unusual, strange first recorded in English 1620s, from notion of alien, outlandish. In
reference to strip-teasers and dancing girls, it is first attested by 1942, American English.
Exotic dancer in the nightclub trade means a girl who goes through a few motions while wearing as
few clothes as the cops will allow in the city where she is working ... [Life, May 5, 1947]    As a
noun from 1640s.


exoticism (n.)

1827, from exotic + -ism.


expand (v)

early 15c., spread out, spread flat, from Anglo-French espaundre, Middle French espandre and
directly from Latin expandere to spread out, unfold, expand, from ex- out (see ex-) + pandere to
spread, stretch (see pace (n.)). Sense of grow larger first recorded 1640s. Related: Expanded;
expanding.


expanse (n.)

1660s, from Latin expansum, noun use of neuter of expansus, past participle of expandere (see
expand).


expansion (n.)

1610s, anything spread out; 1640s, act of expanding, from French expansion, from Late Latin
expansionem (nominative expansio) a spreading out, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
expandere (see expand).


expansionist (n.)

one who advocates the expansion of the territory of his nation, 1864, from expansion + -ist.
Related: Expansionism.


expansive (adj.)

1650s, tending to expand, from Latin expans-, past participle stem of expandere (see expand) + -ive.
Related: Expansively; expansiveness.


expat (n.)

1962, shortening of expatriate (n.).


expatiate (v.)

1530s, walk about, roam freely, from Latin expatiatus/exspatiatus, past participle of
expatiari/exspatiari wander, digress, from ex- out (see ex-) + spatiari to walk, spread out, from
spatium (see space). Meaning talk or write at length is 1610s. Related: Expatiated; expatiating.


expatriate (v.)

1768, from French expatrier banish (14c.), from ex- out of (see ex-) + patrie native land, from
Latin patria one's native country, from pater (genitive patris) father (see father (n.); also
compare patriot). Related: Expatriated; expatriating. The noun is from 1818, one who has been
banished; main modern sense of one who chooses to live abroad is 1902.


expatriation (n.)

1816, from French expatriation, noun of action from expatrier (see expatriate).


expect (v.)

1550s, wait, defer action, from Latin expectare/exspectare await, look out for, desire, hope, from
ex- thoroughly (see ex-) + spectare to look, frequentative of specere to look at (see scope (n.1)).
Figurative sense of anticipate, look forward to developed in Latin, attested in English from c.1600.
Used since 1817 as a euphemism for be pregnant. Related: Expected; expecting.


expectancy (n.)

1590s, from Latin expectantia (see expectant) + -ancy.


expectant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French expectant or directly from Latin expectantem/exspectantem (nominative
expectans/exspectans), present participle of expectare/exspectare (see expect). Related:
Expectantly. As a noun, from 1620s.


expectation (n.)

1530s, from Middle French expectation (14c.) or directly from Latin expectationem/exspectationem
(nominative expectatio/exspectatio) anticipation, an awaiting, noun of action from past participle
stem of expectare/exspectare (see expect). Related: Expectations.


expectorant (n.)

1782, from Latin expectorantem (nominative expectorans), present participle of expectorare (see
expectorate). From 1811 as an adjective.


expectorate (v.)

c.1600, to clear out the chest or lungs, from Latin expectoratus, past participle of expectorare
scorn, expel from the mind, literally make a clean breast, from ex- out (see ex-) + pectus (genitive
pectoris) breast (see pectoral (adj.)). Use as a euphemism for spit is first recorded 1827. Original
sense in expectorant. Related: Expectorated; expectorating.


expectoration (n.)

1670s, noun of action from expectorate.


expediate (v.)

a 17c. error for expedite that has gotten into the dictionaries.


expedience (n.)

mid-15c., advantage, benefit, from Old French expedience, from Late Latin expedientia, from
expedientem (see expedient). Related: Expediency (1610s).


expedient (adj.)

late 14c., advantageous, fit, proper, from Old French expedient (14c.) or directly from Latin
expedientem (nominative expediens) beneficial, present participle of expedire make fit or ready,
prepare (see expedite). The noun meaning a device adopted in an exigency, a resource is from 1650s.
Related: Expediential; expedientially (both 19c.)


expediently (adv.)

late 14c., from expedient (adj.) + -ly (2).


expedite (v.)

late 15c. (implied in past participle expedit), from Latin expeditus, past participle of expedire
extricate, disengage, liberate; procure, make ready, make fit, prepare, literally free the feet from
fetters, hence liberate from difficulties, from ex- out (see ex-) + *pedis fetter, chain for the
feet, related to pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)). Compare Greek pede fetter. Related:
Expedited; expediting.


expedition (n.)

early 15c., military campaign; the act of rapidly setting forth, from Middle French
exp&eacute;dition (13c.) and directly from Latin expeditionem (nominative expeditio), noun of action
from past participle stem of expedire (see expedite). Meaning journey for some purpose is from
1590s. Sense by 1690s also included the body of persons on such a journey. Related: Expeditionary.


expeditious (adj.)

late 15c., expedycius useful, fitting, from Latin expeditus disengaged, ready, prompt, past
participle of expidere (see expedite). Meaning speedy is from 1590s. Related: Expeditiously;
expeditiousness.


expel (v.)

late 14c., from Latin expellere drive out, from ex- out (see ex-) + pellere to drive (see pulse
(n.1)). Meaning to eject from a school is first recorded 1640s. Related: Expelled; expelling.


expellee (n.)

1888, from expel + -ee.


expend (v.)

early 15c., from Latin expendere pay out, weigh out money, from ex- out (see ex-) + pendere to pay,
weigh (see pendant). Related: Expended; expending.


expendable (adj.)

1805, from expend + -able.


expenditure (n.)

1769, from Medieval Latin expenditus, irregular past participle of expendere (see expend) + -ure.
Related: Expenditures.


expense (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French expense, Old French espense money provided for expenses, from Late
Latin expensa disbursement, outlay, expense, noun use of neuter plural past participle of Latin
expendere to weigh out money, to pay down (see expend).    Latin spensa also yielded Medieval Latin
spe(n)sa, whose sense specialized to outlay for provisions, then provisions, food, which was
borrowed into Old High German as spisa and is the root of German Speise food, now mostly meaning
prepared food, and speisen to eat.


expense (v.)

1909, from expense (n.). Related: Expensed; expensing.


expenses (n.)

charges incurred in the discharge of duty, late 14c. See expense (n.).


expensive (adj.)

1620s, given to profuse expenditure, from expense (n.) + -ive. Meaning costly is from 1630s. Earlier
was expenseful (c.1600). Expenseless was in use mid-17c.-18c., but there seems now nothing notable
to which it applies, and the dictionaries label it obsolete.


experience (n.)

late 14c., observation as the source of knowledge; actual observation; an event which has affected
one, from Old French esperience (13c.) experiment, proof, experience, from Latin experientia
knowledge gained by repeated trials, from experientem (nominative experiens), present participle of
experiri to try, test, from ex- out of (see ex-) + peritus experienced, tested, from PIE root *per-
to lead, pass over (see peril). Meaning state of having done something and gotten handy at it is
from late 15c.


experience (v.)

1530s, to test, try; see experience (n.). Sense of feel, undergo first recorded 1580s. Related:
Experienced; experiences; experiencing.


experienced (adj.)

having experience; skillful through expereince, 1570s, past participle adjective from experience
(v.).


experiential (adj.)

1640s (implied in experientially), from Latin experientia (see experience (n.)) + -al (1).


experiment (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French esperment practical knowledge, cunning, enchantment; trial, proof,
example, lesson, from Latin experimentum a trial, test, proof, experiment, noun of action from
experiri to test, try (see experience (n.)).


experiment (v.)

late 15c., from experiment (n.). Related: Experimented; experimenting.


experimental (adj.)

mid 15c., having experience, from experiment (n.) + -al (1). Meaning based on experience is from
1560s. Meaning for the sake of experiment is from 1792 (as in Experimental farm).


experimentation (n.)

1670s; see experiment (v.) + -ation.


expert (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French expert and directly from Latin expertus, past participle of experiri to
try, test (see experience). The noun sense of person wise through experience existed 15c.,
reappeared 1825. Related: Expertly.


expertise (n.)

1868, from French expertise (16c.) expert appraisal, expert's report, from expert (see expert).
Earlier in same sense was expertness (c.1600).


experto crede

Latin (Aeneid, xi.283), take it from one who knows; from dative singular of expertus (see expert
(adj.)) + imperative singular of credere (see credo).


expiate (v.)

c.1600 (OED entry has a typographical error in the earliest date), from Latin expiatus, past
participle of expiare to make amends, atone for (see expiation). Related: Expiable (1560s);
expiated; expiating.


expiation (n.)

early 15c., via Middle French expiation or directly from Latin expiationem (nominative expiatio)
satisfaction, atonement, noun of action from past participle stem of expiare make amends, from ex-
completely (see ex-) + piare propitiate, appease, from pius faithful, loyal, devout (see pious).The
sacrifice of expiation is that which tendeth to appease the wrath of God. [Thomas Norton,
translation of Calvin's Institutes of Christian Religion, 1561]


expiatory (adj.)

1540s, from Latin expiatorius, from expiat-, past participle stem of expiare (see expiation).


expiration (n.)

early 15c., vapor, breath, from Middle French expiration, from Latin expirationem/exspirationem
(nominative expiratio/exspiratio), noun of action from past participle stem of expirare/exspirare
(see expire). Meaning termination, end, close is from 1560s.


expire (v.)

c.1400, to die, from Middle French expirer (12c.) expire, elapse, from Latin expirare/exspirare
breathe out, breathe one's last, die, from ex- out (see ex-) + spirare to breathe (see spirit (n.)).
Die is the older sense in English; that of breathe out is first attested 1580s. Of laws, patents,
treaties, etc., mid-15c. Related: Expired; expiring.


expiry (n.)

close, termination, 1752, from expire + -y (4). Meaning dying, death is from 1790.


explain (v.)

early 15c., from Latin explanare to make level, smooth out; also to explain, make clear (see
explanation).    Originally explane, spelling altered by influence of plain. Also see plane (v.2).
In 17c., occasionally used more literally, of the unfolding of material things: Evelyn has buds that
explain into leaves [Sylva, or, A discourse of forest-trees, and the propagation of timber in His
Majesties dominions, 1664]. Related: Explained; explaining; explains.


explanation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin explanationem (nominative explanatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of explanare to make plain or clear, explain, literally make level, flatten, from ex- out (see
ex-) + planus flat (see plane (n.1)).


explanatory (adj.)

1610s, from or modeled on Late Latin explanatorius having to do with an explanation, from Latin
explanat-, past participle stem of explanare (see explanation).


expletive (n.)

1610s, originally a word or phrase serving to fill out a sentence or metrical line, from Middle
French expl&eacute;tif (15c.) and directly from Late Latin expletivus serving to fill out, from
explet-, past participle stem of Latin explere fill out, from ex- out (see ex-) + plere to fill (see
pleio-).    Sense of exclamation, often in the form of a cuss word, first recorded 1815 in Sir
Walter Scott, popularized by edited transcripts of Watergate tapes (mid-1970s), in which expletive
deleted replaced President Nixon's salty expressions. As an adjective, from 1660s.


expletive (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin expletivus (see expletive (n.)).


explicable (adj.)

1550s, from or on model of Latin explicabilis capable of being unraveled, that may be explained,
from explicare (see explicit). Middle English had a verb expliken explain, interpret (mid-15c.).


explicate (v.)

1530s, from Latin explicatus, past participle of explicare unfold, unravel, explain (see explicit).
Related: Explicated; explicating.


explication (n.)

1520s, from Middle French explication, from Latin explicationem (nominative explicatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of explicare (see explicit).


explicative (adj.)

1640s, having the function of explaining, from Latin explicativus, from past participle stem of
explicare (see explicit). As a noun, from 1775.


explicit (adj.)

c.1600, from French explicite, from Latin explicitus unobstructed, variant past participle of
explicare unfold, unravel, explain, from ex- out (see ex-) + plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)).
Explicitus was written at the end of medieval books, originally short for explicitus est liber the
book is unrolled. As a euphemism for pornographic it dates from 1971.


explicitly (adv.)

1630s, from explicit + -ly (2). Opposed to implicitly.


explode (v.)

1530s, to reject with scorn, from Latin explodere drive out or off by clapping, hiss off, hoot off,
originally theatrical, to drive an actor off the stage by making noise, hence drive out, reject (a
sense surviving in an exploded theory), from ex- out (see ex-) + plaudere to clap the hands,
applaud, of uncertain origin. Athenian audiences were highly demonstrative. clapping and shouting
approval, stamping, hissing, and hooting for disapproval. The Romans seem to have done likewise.
At the close of the performance of a comedy in the Roman theatre one of the actors dismissed the
audience, with a request for their approbation, the expression being usually plaudite, vos plaudite,
or vos valete et plaudite. [William Smith, A First Latin Reading Book, 1890]    English used it to
mean drive out with violence and sudden noise (1650s), later, go off with a loud noise (American
English, 1790); sense of to burst with destructive force is first recorded 1882; of population,
1959. Related: Exploded; exploding.


exploit (n.)

late 14c., outcome of an action, from Old French esploit (12c.), a very common word, used in senses
of action, deed, profit, achievement, from Latin explicitum a thing settled, ended, or displayed,
noun use of neuter of explicitus, past participle of explicare unfold, unroll, disentangle (see
explicit).    Meaning feat, achievement is c.1400. Sense evolution is from unfolding to bringing out
to having advantage to achievement. Related: Exploits.


exploit (v.)

c.1400 espleiten, esploiten to accomplish, achieve, fulfill, from Old French esploitier, espleiter,
from esploit (see exploit (n.)). The sense of use selfishly first recorded 1838, from French,
perhaps extended from use of the word with reference to mines, etc. (compare exploitation). Related:
Exploited; exploiting. As an adjective form, exploitative (1882) is from French; exploitive (by
1859) appears to be a native formation.


exploitation (n.)

1803, productive working of something, a positive word among those who used it first, though
regarded as a Gallicism, from French exploitation, noun of action from exploiter (see exploit (v.)).
Bad sense developed 1830s-50s, in part from influence of French socialist writings (especially Saint
Simon), also perhaps influenced by U.S. anti-slavery writing; and the insulting word was hurled at
activities it once had crowned as praise.    It follows from this science [conceived by Saint
Simon] that the tendency of the human race is from a state of antagonism to that of an universal
peaceful association -- from the dominating influence of the military spirit to that of the
industriel one; from what they call l'exploitation de l'homme par l'homme to the exploitation of the
globe by industry. [Quarterly Review, April &amp; July 1831]


exploration (n.)

1540s, from Middle French exploration and directly from Latin explorationem (nominative exploratio),
noun of action from past participle stem of explorare (see explore).


exploratory (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin exploratorius belonging to scouts, from explorator scout, from explorare (see
explore). Alternative explorative is from 1738.


explore (v.)

1580s, to investigate, examine, a back-formation from exploration, or else from Middle French
explorer (16c.), from Latin explorare investigate, search out, examine, explore, said to be
originally a hunters' term meaning set up a loud cry, from ex- out (see ex-) + plorare to weep, cry.
But second element also explained as to make to flow, from pluere to flow. Meaning to go to a
country or place in quest of discoveries is first attested 1610s. Related: Explored; exploring.


explorer (n.)

1680s, agent noun from explore. Replaced earlier exploratour (mid-15c.).


explosion (n.)

1620s, action of driving out with violence and noise, from French explosion, from Latin explosionem
(nominative explosio), noun of action from past participle stem of explodere drive out by clapping
(see explode for origin and sense evolution). Meaning going off with violence and noise is from
1660s. Sense of rapid increase or development is first attested 1953.


explosive (adj.)

1660s, tending to explode, from Latin explos- (past participle stem of explodere; see explosion) +
-ive. As a noun, from 1874. Related: Explosives. Related: Explosively.


exponent (n.)

1706, from Latin exponentem (nominative exponens), present participle of exponere put forth (see
expound). A mathematical term at first; the sense of one who expounds is 1812. As an adjective, from
1580s.


exponential (adj.)

1704, from exponent + -al (1). As a noun, from 1784. Related: Exponentially.


export (v.)

by 1610s; perhaps from late 15c., from Latin exportare to carry out, send away, from ex- away (see
ex-) + portare carry (see port (n.1)). The sense of send out (commodities) from one country to
another is first recorded in English 1660s. The noun is from 1680s.


expose (v.)

early 15c., to leave without shelter or defense, from Middle French exposer lay open, set forth
(13c.), from Latin exponere set forth (see expound), altered by confusion with poser to place, lay
down (see pose (v.1)). Meaning to exhibit openly is from 1620s; that of to unmask is from 1690s.
Photographic sense is from 1839. Related: Exposed; exposes; exposing.


expose (n.)

also expos&eacute;, display of discreditable information, 1803, initially as a French word; past
participle of French exposer (see expose (v.)). Earliest use was in reference to Napoleon.


exposition (n.)

late 14c., explanation, narration, from Old French esposicion (12c.), from Latin expositionem
(nominative expositio) a setting or showing forth, noun of action from past participle stem of
exponere (see expound).    The meaning public display is first recorded 1851 in reference to the
Crystal Palace Exposition in London. Abbreviation Expo is first recorded 1963, in reference to
planning for the world's fair held in Montreal in 1967.


expository (adj.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin expositorius, from expositus, past participle of exponere (see expound).
Earlier in English as a noun meaning an expository treatise, commentary (early 15c.).


expostulate (v.)

1530s, to demand, to claim, from Latin expostulatus, past participle of expostulare to demand
urgently, remonstrate, from ex- from (see ex-) + postulare to demand (see postulate (v.)).
Friendlier sense is first recorded in English 1570s. Related: Expostulated; expostulating.


expostulation (n.)

1580s, from Latin expostulationem (nominative expostulatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of expostulare (see expostulate).


exposure (n.)

c.1600, public exhibition, from expose (v.) + -ure. Sense of situation with regard to sun or weather
is from 1660s. Photographic sense is from 1839. Indecent exposure attested by 1825.


expound (v.)

c.1300, from Old French espondre expound (on), set forth, explain, from Latin exponere put forth,
explain, expose, exhibit, from ex- forth (see ex-) + ponere to put, place (see position); with
intrusive -d (compare sound (n.1)). The usual Middle English form was expoune. Related: Expounded;
expounding.


express (v.)

late 14c., from Old French espresser press, squeeze out; speak one's mind (Modern French exprimer),
Medieval Latin expressare, frequentative of exprimere represent, describe, literally to press out
(source of Italian espresso; the sense evolution here is perhaps via an intermediary sense of
something like clay that takes under pressure takes the form of an image), from ex- out (see ex-) +
pressare to press, push, from Latin premere (see press (v.1)). Related: Expressed; expresses;
expressing.


express (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French expres, from Latin expressus clearly presented, past participle of
exprimere (see express (v.)). This led to the noun (first attested 1610s) meaning special messenger.
Sense of business or system for sending money or parcels is 1794.  An express train (1841)
originally ran to a certain station.


expression (n.)

early 15c., action of pressing out; later (mid-15c.) action of manifesting a feeling; (late 15c.) a
putting into words, from Middle French expression (14c.), from Late Latin expressionem (nominative
expressio), noun of action from past participle stem of exprimere (see express (v.)). Meaning an
action or creation that expresses feelings is from 1620s. Of the face, from 1774. Occasionally the
word also was used literally, for the action of squeezing out.


expressionist

an artist who seeks to portray the emotional effect of the subject, first recorded 1850 (adj.), from
expression + -ist. Modern sense is from 1914, from expressionism (from 1908 as an artistic style or
movement).


expressionless (adj.)

1831, from expression + -less.


expressive (adj.)

c.1400, tending to press out, from French expressif, from expres clear, plain, from stem of Latin
exprimere (see express (v.)). Meaning full of expression is from 1680s. Related: Expressively;
expressiveness.


expressly (adv.)

late 14c., in detail, plainly, from express + -ly (2). Meaning for the express purpose is c.1600.


expresso (n.)

variant of espresso.


expressway (n.)

c.1938, American English, from express (adj.) + way (n.).


expropriate (v.)

1610s, back-formation from expropriation, or from earlier adjective (mid-15c.), or from Medieval
Latin expropriatus, past participle of expropriare to deprive of one's own. Related: Expropriated;
expropriating.


expropriation (n.)

mid-15c., renunciation of worldly goods, from Medieval Latin expropriationem (nominative
expropriatio), noun of action from Late Latin expropriare deprive of property, from ex- away from
(see ex-) + propriare to appropriate (see appropriate). Sense of a taking of someone's property,
especially for public use, is from 1848; as Weekley puts it, Current sense of organized theft
appears to have arisen among Ger. socialists.


expugn (v.)

early 15c., eradicate, exterminate, also conquer, defeat, from Old French expugner, from Latin
expugnare to take by assault, storm, capture, from ex- (see ex-) + pugnare to fight (see
pugnacious). Related: Expugned.


expulsion (n.)

c.1400, from Old French expulsion, from Latin expulsionem (nominative expropriatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of expellere drive out (see expel).


expunge (v.)

c.1600, from Latin expungere prick out, blot out, mark (a name on a list) for deletion by pricking
dots above or below it, literally prick out, from ex- out (see ex-) + pungere to prick, stab (see
pungent). Related: Expunged; expunging.


expurgate (v.)

1620s, back-formation from expurgation or from Latin expurgatus, past participle of expurgare to
cleanse out, purge, purify (see expurgation). Related: Expurgated; expurgating. The earlier verb was
simply expurge (late 15c.), from Middle French expurger.


expurgation (n.)

early 15c., a cleansing from impurity, from Latin expurgationem (nominative expurgatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of expurgare to cleanse out, purge, purify, from ex- out (see ex-)
+ purgare to purge (see purge (v.)). Sense of remove objectionable passages from a literary work
first recorded in English 1610s.


exquisite (adj.)

early 15c., carefully selected, from Latin exquisitus carefully sought out, thus, choice, from past
participle of exquirere search out thoroughly, from ex- out (see ex-) + quaerere to seek (see query
(v.)).    Of any thing (good or bad, torture as well as art) brought to a highly wrought condition,
sometimes shading into disapproval. A vogue word 15c.-18c., given wide extensions of meaning, none
of which survives. The main modern sense of of consummate and delightful excellence is first
attested 1579, in Lyly's Euphues. Related: Exquisitely; exquisiteness. The noun meaning a dandy, fop
is from 1819.


exsanguinate (v.)

1849, from Latin exsanguinatus bloodless, past participle of exsanguinare, from ex- out (see ex-) +
sanguinem (nominative sanguis) blood (see sanguinary). Related: Exsanguinated; exsanguinating;
exsanguination. As an adjective, exsanguine bloodless is attested from mid-17c. in literal and
figurative use.


exsert (v.)

to thrust forth, protrude, 1660s, biologists' variant of exert (q.v.).


extant (adj.)

1540s, standing out above a surface, from Latin extantem (nominative extans), present participle of
extare stand out, be visible, exist, from ex- out (see ex-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to
stand (see stet). Sense of in existence attested in English by 1560s.


extemporaneous (adj.)

1650s (earlier extemporal, 1560s), from Medieval Latin extemporaneus, from Latin ex tempore (see
extempore). Related: Extemporaneously.


extempore

1550s (adv.), 1630s (n.), from Latin phrase ex tempore offhand, in accordance with (the needs of)
the moment, literally out of time, from ex out of (see ex-) + tempore, ablative of tempus (genitive
temporis) time (see temporal). Of speaking, strictly without preparation, without time to prepare,
but now often with a sense merely of without notes or a teleprompter.


extemporize (v.)

1640s (implied in extemporizing), to speak ex tempore; see extempore + -ize. Related: Extemporized.


extend (v.)

early 14c., to value, assess; late 14c. to stretch out, lengthen, from Anglo-French estendre (late
13c.), Old French estendre stretch out, extend, increase, from Latin extendere stretch out, from ex-
out (see ex-) + tendere to stretch (see tenet). Related: Extended; extending.


extension (n.)

c.1400, from Old French extension (14c.) and directly from Latin extensionem/extentionem (nominative
extensio/extentio), noun of action from past participle stem of extendere (see extend). In a
concrete sense, extended portion of something (a railroad, etc.), from 1852. Telephone sense is from
1906.


extensive (adj.)

vast, far-reaching; c.1600 of immaterial, c.1700 of material things; from Late Latin extensivus,
from extens-, past participle stem of Latin extendere (see extend). Earlier in a medical sense,
characterized by swelling (early 15c.). Related: Extensively; extensiveness.


extensor (n.)

1713, short for medical Latin musculus extensor, from Late Latin extensor stretcher, agent noun from
Latin extensus (see extend).


extent (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French extente, Old French estente valuation of land, stretch of land, from
fem. past participle of Old French extendre extend, from Latin extendere (see extend). Meaning
degree to which something extends is from 1590s.


extenuate (v.)

1520s, from Latin extenuatus, past participle of extenuare lessen, make small, reduce, diminish,
from ex- out (see ex-) + tenuare make thin, from tenuis thin (see tenet). Related: Extenuated;
extenuating. Extenuating circumstances attested from 1660s.


extenuation (n.)

early 15c., from Latin extenuationem (nominative extenuatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of extenuare (see extenuate).


exterior (adj.)

1520s, from Latin exterior, comparative of exterus on the outside, outward, outer, of another
country, foreign, itself a comparative of ex out of (see ex-). As a noun from 1590s.


exterminate (v.)

1540s, drive away, from Latin exterminatus, past participle of exterminare drive out, expel, drive
beyond boundaries, also, in Late Latin destroy, from phrase ex termine beyond the boundary, from ex-
out of (see ex-) + termine, ablative of termen boundary, limit, end (see terminus).    Meaning
destroy utterly is from 1640s in English, a sense found in equivalent words in French and in the
Vulgate; earlier in this sense was extermine (mid-15c.). Related: Exterminated; exterminating.


extermination (n.)

mid-15c., repulsion; 1540s, utter destruction, from Middle French extermination and directly from
Latin exterminationem (nominative exterminatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
exterminare (see exterminate).


exterminator (n.)

c.1400, an angel who expells (people from a country), from Late Latin exterminator, from Latin
exterminatus, past participle stem of exterminare (see exterminate). As a substance for ridding a
place of rats, etc., by 1848. As a person whose job it is to do this, by 1938.


extern (n.)

outsider, c.1600, from French externe, from Latin externus (see external).


external (adj.)

early 15c. (implied in externalle), from Middle French externe or directly from Latin externus
outside, outward (from exterus; see exterior) + -al (1). This version won out over exterial.
Related: Externally.


externality (n.)

1713, from external + -ity.


externalize (v.)

1852, from external + -ize. Related: Externalized; externalizing.


extinct (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin extinctus/exstinctus, past participle of extinguere/exstinguere (see
extinguish). Originally of fires; the sense of the condition of dying out of a family or a
hereditary title, 1580s; of species by 1768. Also see extinction.


extinction (n.)

early 15c., from Latin extinctionem/exstinctionem (nominative extinctio/exstinctio), noun of action
from past participle stem of extinguere/exstinguere (see extinguish). Originally of fires, lights;
figurative use, of wiping out a material thing (a debt, a person, a family, etc.) from early 17c.;
of species by 1784.


extinguish (v.)

c.1500 (implied in extinguishable), from Latin extinguere/exstinguere quench, wipe out, obliterate,
from ex- out (see ex-) + stinguere quench, from PIE *steig- to prick, stick, pierce. Related:
Extinguished; extinguishing.


extinguisher (n.)

1550s, agent noun from extinguish. As a mechanical device for putting out fires, from 1887.


extirpate (v.)

1530s, usually figurative, from Latin extirpatus/exstirpatus, past participle of
extirpare/exstirpare (see extirpation). Related: Extirpated; extirpating.


extirpation (n.)

early 15c., removal; 1520s, rooting out, eradication, from Latin extirpationem/exstirpationem
(nominative extirpatio/exstirpatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
extirpare/exstirpare root out, from ex- out (see ex-) + stirps (genitive stirpis) a root, stock of a
tree.


extol (v.)

also extoll, c.1400, to lift up, from Latin extollere to place on high, raise, elevate, figuratively
to exalt, praise, from ex- up (see ex-) + tollere to raise, from PIE *tele- to bear, carry, with
derivatives referring to measured weights and thence money and payment [Watkins] (cognates: Greek
talantos bearing, suffering, tolman to carry, bear, telamon broad strap for bearing something,
talenton a balance, pair of scales, Atlas the 'Bearer' of Heaven; Lithuanian tiltas bridge; Sanskrit
tula balance, tulayati lifts up, weighs; Latin tolerare to bear, support, latus borne; Old English
&thorn;olian to endure; Armenian tolum I allow). Figurative sense of praise highly in English is
first attested c.1500. Related: Extolled; extolling.


extoll

variant of extol.


extort (v.)

1520s (as a past participle adj. from early 15c.), from Latin extortus, past participle of
extorquere (see extortion). Related: Extorted; extorting.


extortion (n.)

c.1300, from Latin extortionem (nominative extortio) a twisting out, extorting, noun of action from
past participle stem of extorquere wrench out, wrest away, to obtain by force, from ex- out (see
ex-) + torquere to twist (see torque (n.)).


extortionate (adj.)

1789, from extortion + -ate.


extortionist (n.)

1885, from extortion + -ist. Earlier in the same sense were extorter (1590s), extortioner (late
14c.).


extra

1650s as a stand-alone adjective; also used as an adverb and noun in 17c. (see extra-); modern
usages -- including sense of minor performer in a play (1777) and special edition of a newspaper
(1793) -- all probably are from shortenings of extraordinary, which was used extensively in 18c. as
noun and adverb in places we would use extra today.


extra-

only recorded in classical Latin in extraordinarius, but much used in Medieval Latin and modern
formations; it represents Latin extra (adv.) on the outside, without, except, the old fem. ablative
singular of exterus outward, outside, comparative of ex out of (see ex-).


extra-special (adj.)

1889, from extra + special (adj.). Originally of certain editions of daily newspapers.


extract (v.)

late 15c., from Latin extractus, past participle of extrahere draw out, from ex- out (see ex-) +
trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). Related: Extracted; extracting.


extract (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin extractum, noun use of neuter past participle of extrahere to draw out
(see extract (v.)).


extraction (n.)

early 15c., from Old French estraction (12c.) or directly from Medieval Latin extractionem
(nominative extractio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin extrahere (see extract
(v.)).


extracurricular (adj.)

1925, from extra- + curricular (see curriculum).


extradite (v.)

1864, back-formation from extradition. Related: Extradited; extraditing.


extradition (n.)

1833, from French extradition (18c.), apparently a coinage of Voltaire's, from Latin ex out (see
ex-) + traditionem (nominative traditio) a delivering up, handing over, noun of action from tradere
to hand over (see tradition).    This word might be adopted in our language with advantage, as we
have none which conveys the same meaning. Extradition signifies the delivering up of criminals who
may have sought refuge in any country, to the government whose subjects they are, on a claim being
made to this effect. [from a footnote to the word extradition in translation of Memoirs of Marshal
Ney, London, 1833]


extrajudicial (adj.)

also extra-judicial, 1580s (implied in extrajudicially); see extra- + judicial.


extramarital (adj.)

also extra-marital, by 1844, from extra- + marital.


extraneous (adj.)

1630s, from Latin extraneus external, strange, from extra outside of (see extra-).


extraordinaire (adj.)

1940, from French extraordinaire (14c.), literally extraordinary, unusual, out of the ordinary, but
used colloquially as a superlative; see extraordinary.


extraordinary (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin extraordinarius out of the common order, from extra ordinem out of order,
especially the usual order, from extra out (see extra-) + ordinem, accusative of ordo order (see
order (n.)). Related: Extraordinarily.


extrapolate (v.)

1862 (in a Harvard observatory account of the comet of 1858), from extra- + ending from interpolate.
Said in early references to be an expression of Sir George Airy (1801-1892), English mathematician
and astronomer. Related: Extrapolated; extrapolating.


extrapolation (n.)

1867, noun of action from extrapolate by analogy of interpolation; original sense was an inserting
of intermediate terms in a mathematical series. Transferred sense of drawing a conclusion about the
future based on present tendencies is from 1889.


extrasensory (adj.)

also extra-sensory, 1934, coined as part of extra-sensory perception in J.B. Rhine's work, from
extra- + sensory.


extraterrestrial (adj.)

also extra-terrestrial, 1812, from extra- + terrestrial. As a noun from 1956.


extraterritoriality (n.)

also extra-territoriality, 1803, from extraterritorial (from extra- + territorial) + -ity.


extravagance (n.)

1640s, from French extravagance, from Late Latin extravagantem (see extravagant). Specifically of
wasteful spending from 1727. Extravagancy is attested from c.1600.


extravagant (adj.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin extravagantem, originally a word in Canon Law for uncodified papal
decrees, present participle of extravagari wander outside or beyond, from Latin extra outside of
(see extra-) + vagari wander, roam (see vague). Extended sense of excessive, extreme first recorded
1590s; that of wasteful, lavish 1711. Related: Extravagantly.


extravaganza (n.)

1754, with reference to peculiar behavior, 1794 of a fantastic type of performance or writing, from
Italian extravaganza, literally an extravagance, from estravagante, from Medieval Latin
extravagantem (see extravagant).


extravasation (n.)

1670s, from Latin extra outside (see extra-) + form derived from vas vessel. Related: Extravasate
(1660s).


extraversion (n.)

1690s, a turning out, from Medieval Latin extraversionem, from extra outward (see extra-) +
versionem (see version). Psychological sense is from 1915; see extraverted.


extraverted (adj.)

in modern psychology, 1915, a variant of extroverted (see extrovert). Related: Extravert (n.), for
which also see extrovert. There was a verb extravert in mid- to late 17c. meaning to turn outward so
as to be visible, from Latin extra outward + vertere to turn.


extreme (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French extreme (13c.), from Latin extremus outermost, utmost, farthest, last,
superlative of exterus (see exterior).    In English as in Latin, not always felt as a superlative,
hence more extreme, most extreme (which were condemned by Johnson). The noun is first recorded
1540s, originally of the end of life, compare Latin in extremis. Extreme unction preserves the sense
of last, latest (15c.). Extremes opposite ends of anything is from 1550s.


extremely (adv.)

1530s, from extreme + -ly (2). Originally with great severity, later more loosely, in extreme degree
(1570s).


extremism (n.)

1848, from extreme + -ism.    I would remind you that extremism in the defense of liberty is no
vice! And let me remind you also that moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue. [Barry
Goldwater (1909-1998), acceptance speech as Republican candidate for President, 1963]


extremist (n.)

1840, from extreme + -ist.


extremities (n.)

hands and feet, uttermost parts of the body, early 15c., plural of extremity. Meaning a person's
last moments is from c.1600.


extremity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French estremite (13c.), from Latin extremitatem (nominative extremitas) the end
of a thing, from extremus; see extreme, the etymological sense of which is better preserved in this
word.


extricable (adj.)

1620s, from extricate + -able. Related: Extricably.


extricate (v.)

1610s, from Latin extricatus, past participle of extricare disentangle, perhaps from ex- out of +
tricae (plural) perplexities, hindrances, of unknown origin. Related: Extricated; extricating.


extrication (n.)

1640s, noun of action from extricate (v.).


extrinsic (adj.)

1540s, from French extrins&egrave;que, from Late Latin extrinsecus (adj.), from Latin extrinsecus
(adv.) outwardly, from exter outside + in, suffix of locality, + secus beside, alongside, originally
following (related to sequi to follow; see sequel).


extro-

word-forming element meaning outwards, a variant of extra- by influence of intro-.


extroversion (n.)

mid-17c., condition of being turned inside out, noun of action from obsolete verb extrovert (v.) to
turn inside out, from extro- + Latin vertere (see versus). Earliest as a word in mysticism;
pathological sense attested from 1836; modern use in psychology attested by 1920.


extrovert (n.)

1916, extravert (spelled with -o- after 1918, by influence of introvert), from German Extravert,
from extra outside (see extra-) + Latin vertere to turn (see versus). With introvert, words that had
been used in English by doctors and scientists in various literal senses since 1600s, but
popularized in a psychological sense by Carl Jung. Related: Extroverted.


extrude (v.)

1560s, from Latin extrudere to thrust out, drive away, from ex- out (see ex-) + trudere to thrust
(see extrusion). Related: Extruded; extruding.


extrusion (n.)

1530s, from Latin extrusionem (nominative extrusio), noun of action from past participle stem of
extrudere, from ex- out (see ex-) + trudere to thrust, push, from PIE *treud- to press, push,
squeeze (see threat).


extrusive (adj.)

1816, from Latin extrusus, past participle of extrudere (see extrusion) + -ive. Related:
Extrusively.


exuberance (n.)

1630s, from French exub&eacute;rance (16c.), from Latin exuberantia superabundance, noun of state
from exuberare be abundant, grow luxuriously (see exuberant). Exuberancy attested from 1610s.


exuberant (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French exub&eacute;rant and directly from Latin exuberantem (nominative
exuberans) overabundance, present participle of exuberare be abundant, grow luxuriously, from ex-
thoroughly + uberare be fruitful, related to uber udder, from PIE root *eue-dh-r- (see udder).
Related: Exuberantly; exuberate; exuberating.


exudation (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin exudationem/exsudationem, noun of action from neuter past participle of
exudere/exsudere (see exude). Related: Exudate (n.).


exude (v.)

1570s, from Latin exudare/exsudare ooze out like sweat, from ex- out (see ex-) + sudare to sweat,
from sudor sweat (see sweat (v.)). Related: Exuded; exudes; exuding.


exult (v.)

1560s, to leap up; 1590s, to rejoice, triumph, from Middle French exulter, from Latin
exultare/exsultare leap about, leap for joy, frequentative of exsilire to leap up, from ex- out (see
ex-) + salire to leap (see salient (adj.)). The notion is of leaping or dancing for joy. Related:
Exulted; exulting.


exultant (adj.)

1650s, from Latin exultantem/exsultantem, present participle of exultare/exsultare  (see exult).
Related: Exultantly.


exultation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French exultacion, from Latin exultationem/exsultationem, noun of action from
past participle stem of exultare/exsultare, frequentative of exsilire leap out or up (see exult).
Notion is of leaping or dancing for joy. An Old English word for it was heahbliss high bliss.


exurb (n.)

the outer, prosperous ring of the suburbs, 1955, American English, from exurban (adj.), by 1838 (it
seems to have arisen in the writings of the reform movement focused on getting cemeteries out of
cities), from ex- + -urb, on model of suburb. Related: Exurbanite; exurbia.


exuviae (n.)

1660s, Latin, literally that which is stripped off, hence clothing, equipment, arms, booty, spoils,
from stem of exuere, from PIE *eis- to dress.


eye (n.)

c.1200, from Old English ege (Mercian), eage (West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *augon (cognates: Old
Saxon aga, Old Frisian age, Old Norse auga, Swedish &ouml;ga, Danish &oslash;ie, Middle Dutch oghe,
Dutch oog, Old High German ouga, German Auge, Gothic augo eye), from PIE *okw- to see (cognates:
Sanskrit akshi the eye, the number two, Greek opsis a sight, Old Church Slavonic oko, Lithuanian
akis, Latin oculus, Greek okkos, Tocharian ak, ek, Armenian akn).    Until late 14c. the plural was
in -an, hence modern dialectal plural een, ene. The eye of a needle was in Old English; to see eye
to eye is from Isa. lii:8. Eye contact attested by 1965. Eye-opener anything that informs and
enlightens is from 1863. Have an eye on keep under supervision is attested from early 15c.


eye (v.)

early 15c., cause to see; 1560s, behold, observe, from eye (n.). Related: Eyed; eyeing.


eye-candy (n.)

also eye candy, attractive woman on a TV show, etc., by 1978, based on a metaphor also found in nose
candy cocaine (1930).


eye-catching (adj.)

1933; earlier was noun eye-catcher (1923); see eye + catch.


eye-service (n.)

work done only under inspection or while the master is watching, 1530s, from eye (n.) + service
(n.1). Related: Eye-servant.


eyeball (n.)

also eye-ball, 1580s, from eye (n.) + ball (n.1). As a verb, 1901, American English slang. Related:
Eyeballed; eyeballing.


eyebrow (n.)

also eye-brow, early 15c., from eye (n.) + brow (Old English eagbr&aelig;w meant eyelid).


eyelash (n.)

1752, from eye (n.) + lash (n.). Related: Eyelashes.


eyelet (n.)

small hole, late 14c., oilet, from Middle French oeillet, diminutive of oeil eye, from Latin oculus
(see eye (n.)). Spelling influenced by eye.


eyelid (n.)

mid-13c., from eye (n.) + lid (n.).


eyesight (n.)

c.1200, from eye (n.) + sight (n.).


eyesore (n.)

something offensive to the eye, 1520s, from eye (n.) + sore (n.).


eyetooth (n.)

also eye tooth, 1570s, so called for its position immediately under or next to the eye.


eyewash (n.)

a wash or lotion for the eyes, 1866, from eye (n.) + wash (n.). Colloquial use for blarney, humbug
(1884), chiefly British, is perhaps from the notion of something intended to obscure or conceal
facts or true motives. But this, and expression my eye also may be the verbal equivalent of the wink
that indicates one doesn't believe what has been said (compare French mon oeil in same sense,
accompanied by a knowing pointing of a finger to the eye).


eyewitness (n.)

1530s, from eye (n.) + witness (n.). As a verb from 1844. Related: Eyewitnessed; eyewitnessing.


eyot (n.)

small island, from Middle English eyt, from Old English igga&eth; small island, diminutive of eg,
ig, ieg island (see island). Ending influenced by French diminutive suffix -ot.


eyrie

see aerie.


Ezekiel

masc. proper name; in Old Testament, name of a book and of one of the great prophets of Israel, from
Late Latin Ezechiel, from Greek Iezekiel, from Hebrew Yehezqel, literally God strengthens, from
hazaq he was strong, he strengthened + El God.


Ezra

masc. proper name, in Old Testament name of a celebrated 5c. B.C.E. scribe, from Late Latin, from
Hebrew Ezra, contraction of Azaryah(u), literally God has helped, from ezer help + Yah, a shortened
form of Yahweh God.


