-fest

word-forming element in compounds such as hen-fest, gabfest, etc., 1889, American English, borrowed
from German Fest festival, abstracted from Volksfest, etc., from Middle High German v&#235;st, from
Latin festum (see festivity).


-fication

word-forming element meaning a making or causing, from Latin -ficationem (nominative -ficatio),
ultimately from facere to make, do (see factitious).


-fid

word-forming element meaning split, divided into parts, from Latin -fidus, related to findere to
split (see fissure).


-fold

multiplicative word-forming element, from Old English -feald, related to Old Norse -faldr; German
-falt; Gothic fal&thorn;s; from combining form of PIE *pel- (3) to fold (cognates: Greek -paltos,
-plos; Latin -plus; see fold (v.). Crowded out in English by Latinate double, triple, etc., but
still in manifold, hundredfold, etc.


-fuge

word-forming element meaning that which drives away or out, from Modern Latin -fugus, with sense
from Latin fugare to put to flight, but form from Latin fugere to flee.


-ful

word-forming element meaning full of, characterized by, Old English -full, -ful, suffix use of full
(adj.).


-fy

word-forming element meaning to make into, from French -fier, from Latin -ficare, from unstressed
form of facere to make, do (see factitious).


fa

fourth note in Guidonian scale; see gamut.


fab (adj.)

1957, slang shortening of fabulous.


Fabian

socialist, from Fabian Society, founded in Britain 1884, named for Quintus Fabius Maximus (surnamed
Cunctator the Delayer), the cautious tactician who opposed Hannibal in the Second Punic War. The
Fabians sought to draw a distinction between their slow-going tactics and those of anarchists and
communists. The Latin gens name is possibly from faba a bean.


fable (n.)

c.1300, falsehood, lie, pretense, from Old French fable (12c.) story, fable, tale; fiction, lie,
falsehood, from Latin fabula story, play, fable, narrative, account, tale, literally that which is
told, related to fari speak, tell, from PIE root *bha- (2) speak (see fame (n.)). Sense of animal
story (early 14c.) comes from Aesop. In modern folklore terms, defined as a short, comic tale making
a moral point about human nature, usually through animal characters behaving in human ways. Most
trace to Greece or India.


fabled (adj.)

c.1600, unreal, invented, past participle adjective from fable (v.) to tell tales (late 14c.), from
Old French fabler, from Latin fabulari, from fabula (see fable). Meaning celebrated in fable is from
1706.


fabric (n.)

late 15c., building, thing made, from Middle French fabrique (14c.), from Latin fabrica workshop,
also an art, trade; a skillful production, structure, fabric, from faber artisan who works in hard
materials, from PIE *dhabh- to fit together. Sense in English evolved via manufactured material
(1753) to textile (1791).


fabricate (v.)

mid-15c., to fashion, make, build, from Latin fabricatus, past participle of fabricare make,
construct, fashion, build, from fabrica (see fabric). In bad sense of to tell a lie, etc., it is
recorded by 1779. Related: Fabricated; fabricating.


fabrication (n.)

c.1500, manufacturing, construction, from Middle French fabrication and directly from Latin
fabricationem (nominative fabricatio), noun of action from past participle stem of fabricare (see
fabricate). Meaning lying, falsehood, forgery is from late 18c.


fabulist (n.)

1590s, from French fabuliste, from Latin fabula (see fable (n.)).


fabulous (adj.)

early 15c., mythical, legendary, from Latin fabulosus celebrated in fable; rich in myths, from
fabula (see fable (n.)).    Sense of incredible first recorded c.1600. Slang shortening fab first
recorded 1957; popularized in reference to The Beatles, c.1963.Fabulous (often contracted to fab(s))
and fantastic are also in that long list of words which boys and girls use for a time to express
high commendation and then get tired of, such as, to go no farther back than the present century,
topping, spiffing, ripping, wizard, super, posh, smashing. [Gower's 1965 revision of Fowler's Modern
English Usage]  Related: Fabulously.


facade (n.)

1650s, front of a building, from French fa&ccedil;ade (16c.), from Italian facciata, from faccia
face, from Vulgar Latin *facia (see face (n.)). Figurative use by 1845.


face (n.)

late 13c., front of the head, from Old French face (12c.) face, countenance, look, appearance, from
Vulgar Latin *facia (source also of Italian faccia), from Latin facies appearance, form, figure, and
secondarily visage, countenance; probably related to facere to make (see factitious).    Replaced
Old English andwlita (from root of wlitan to see, look) and ansyn, the usual word (from the root of
seon see). In French, the use of face for front of the head was given up 17c. and replaced by visage
(older vis), from Latin visus sight. To lose face (or save face), 1876, is said to be from Chinese
tu lien. Face value was originally (1878) of bank notes, postage stamps, etc.


face (v.)

confront with assurance, show a bold face, mid-15c., from face (n.) Related: Faced. To face the
music is theatrical.


facebook (n.)

directory listing names and headshots, by 1983, originally U.S. college students, from face (n.) +
book. The social networking Web site dates from 2004.


faceless (adj.)

1560s, from face (n.) + -less. Related: Facelessly; facelessness.


facelift (n.)

also face-lift, 1934, from face-lifting (1922); see face (n.) + lift.


facet (n.)

1620s, from French facette (12c., Old French facete), diminutive of face (see face (n.)). The
diamond-cutting sense is the original one. Related: Faceted; facets.


facetious (adj.)

1590s, from French fac&eacute;tieux, from fac&eacute;tie a joke (15c.), from Latin facetia jest,
witticism, from facetus witty, elegant, fine, courteous, of unknown origin, perhaps related to facis
torch.    It implies a desire to be amusing, often intrusive or ill-timed.  Related: Facetiously;
facetiousness. Faceti&aelig; in booksellers' catalogues, is, like curious, a euphemism for erotica.
[Fowler]


facia

variant of fascia.


facial (adj.)

c.1600, face to face, from French facial, from Medieval Latin facialis of the face, from facies (see
face (n.)). Meaning of the face is from 1818. The noun meaning beauty treatment for the face is from
1914, American English.


facile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French facile easy, from Latin facilis easy to do and, of persons, pliant,
courteous, from facere to do (see factitious).


facile princeps

Latin, literally easily first. An acknowledged leader or chief.


facilis descensus Averni

Latin, literally the descent of Avernus (is) easy [Aeneid, VI.126], in reference to Avernus, a deep
lake near Puteoli, a reputed entrance to the underworld; hence, it is easy to slip into moral ruin.


facilitate (v.)

1610s, from French faciliter to render easy, from Latin facilis easy (see facile). Related:
Facilitated; facilitates; facilitating.


facilitation (n.)

1610s, from facilitate + -ion.


facilitative (adj.)

1864, from facilitate + -ive.


facilitator (n.)

1824, agent noun in Latin form from facilitate.


facilities (n.)

opportunities, 1809, plural of facility. Sense of physical means of doing something is from 1872.


facility (n.)

early 15c., gentleness, from Middle French facilit&eacute;, from Latin facilitatem (nominative
facilitas) easiness, ease, fluency, willingness, from facilis easy (see facile). Its sense in
English moved from genteelness to opportunity (1510s), to aptitude, ease (1530s). Meaning place for
doing something, which makes the word so beloved of journalists and fuzzy writers, first recorded
1872.


facing (n.)

c.1400, disfiguring, from face. Meaning defiance is from 1520s; that of front of a garment is 1560s;
coating is from 1580s; front or outer part of a wall, building, etc., is from 1823.


facsimile (n.)

1660s, from Latin fac simile make similar, from fac imperative of facere to make (see factitious) +
simile, neuter of similis like, similar (see similar).


fact (n.)

1530s, action, especially evil deed, from Latin factum event, occurrence, literally thing done,
neuter past participle of facere to do (see factitious). Usual modern sense of thing known to be
true appeared 1630s, from notion of something that has actually occurred. Facts of life harsh
realities is from 1854; specific sense of human sexual functions first recorded 1913.


faction (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French faction (14c.) and directly from Latin factionem (nominative factio)
political party, class of persons, literally a making or doing, from past participle stem of facere
to do (see factitious). In ancient Rome, one of the companies of contractors for the chariot races
in the circus.


factional (adj.)

1640s, from faction + -al (1).


factionalism (n.)

1904, American English, from factional + -ism.


factious (adj.)

1530s, from Middle French factieux and directly from Latin factiosus partisan, seditious, inclined
to form parties, from factionem (see faction).


factitious (adj.)

1640s, from Latin factitius artificial, from factus, past participle of facere do (source of French
faire, Spanish hacer), from PIE root *dhe- to put, to do (cognates: Sanskrit dadhati puts, places;
Avestan dadaiti he puts; Old Persian ada he made; Hittite dai- to place; Greek tithenai to put, set,
place; Lithuanian deti to put; Polish dzia&#263; si&#281; to be happening; Russian delat' to do; Old
High German tuon, German tun, Old Saxon, Old English don to do; Old Frisian dua, Old Swedish duon,
Gothic gadeths a doing; Old Norse dalidun they did).


factoid (n.)

1973, from fact + -oid, first explained, if not coined, by Norman Mailer.Factoids ... that is, facts
which have no existence before appearing in a magazine or newspaper, creations which are not so much
lies as a product to manipulate emotion in the Silent Majority. [Mailer, Marilyn, 1973]


factor (n.)

early 15c., agent, deputy, from Middle French facteur agent, representative, from Latin factor doer
or maker, agent noun from past participle stem of facere to do (see factitious). Sense of
circumstance producing a result is from 1816.


factor (v.)

1610s, act as an agent, from factor (n.). The use in mathematics is attested from 1837. Related:
Factored; factoring.


factorial

1816 (n.), 1837 (adj.), from factor + -al (2).


factory (n.)

1550s, estate manager's office, from Middle French factorie, from Late Latin factorium office for
agents (factors), also oil press, mill, from Latin factor doer, maker (see factor (n.)). Sense of
building for making goods is first attested 1610s. Factory farm attested from 1890.


factotum (n.)

1560s, from Medieval Latin factotum do everything, from fac, imperative of facere do (see
factitious) + totum all (see total).


factual (adj.)

1834, from fact on model of  actual. Related: Factually.


faculties (n.)

early 16c., powers or properties of one's self, also physical functions; plural of faculty.


faculty (n.)

late 14c., ability, means, resources, from Old French facult&eacute; (14c.) skill, accomplishment,
learning, and directly from Latin facultatem (nominative facultas) power, ability, wealth, from
*facli-tat-s, from facilis (see facile).    Academic sense branch of knowledge probably was the
earliest in English (attested in Anglo-Latin from late 12c.), on notion of ability in knowledge.
Originally each department was a faculty; the use in reference to the whole teaching staff of a
college dates from 1767.


fad (n.)

1834, hobby, pet project; 1881 as fashion, craze, perhaps shortened from fiddle-faddle. Or perhaps
from French fadaise trifle, nonsense, ultimately from Latin fatuus stupid.


faddish (adj.)

1855, from fad + -ish.


fade (v.)

early 14c., lose brightness, grow pale, from Old French fader become weak, wilt, wither, from adj.
fade pale, weak, insipid (12c.), probably from Vulgar Latin *fatidus, some sort of blending of Latin
fatuus silly, tasteless + vapidus flat, flavorless. Related: Faded; fading. As a noun, from c.1300.


fader (n.)

sound control device, 1931, agent noun from fade (v.).


fado (n.)

popular music style of Portugal, 1902, from Latin fatum fate, destiny (see fate (n.)). Because the
songs tell the fates of their subjects.


faeces (n.)

see feces.


faerie (n.)

supernatural kingdom, Elfland, c.1300, from Old French fairie; see fairy.


faery

see faerie.


fag (v.)

to droop, decline, tire, 1520s, apparently an alteration of flag (v.) in its sense of droop.
Transitive sense of to make (someone or something) fatigued is first attested 1826. Related: Fagged;
fagging.


fag (n.)

British slang for cigarette (originally, especially, the butt of a smoked cigarette), 1888, probably
from fag-end extreme end, loose piece (1610s), from fag loose piece (late 15c.), which is perhaps
related to fag (v.).


faggot (n.1)

late 13c., bundle of twigs bound up, from Old French fagot bundle of sticks (13c.), of uncertain
origin, probably from Italian faggotto, diminutive of Vulgar Latin *facus, from Latin fascis bundle
of wood (see fasces).    Especially used for burning heretics (emblematic of this from 1550s), so
that phrase fire and faggot was used to indicate punishment of a heretic. Heretics who recanted were
required to wear an embroidered figure of a faggot on their sleeve, as an emblem and reminder of
what they deserved.


faggot (n.2)

male homosexual, 1914, American English slang (shortened form fag is from 1921), probably from
earlier contemptuous term for woman (1590s), especially an old and unpleasant one, in reference to
faggot (n.1) bundle of sticks, as something awkward that has to be carried (compare baggage
worthless woman, 1590s). It may also be reinforced by Yiddish faygele homosexual, literally little
bird. It also may have roots in British public school slang fag a junior who does certain duties for
a senior (1785), with suggestions of catamite, from fag (v.). This also was used as a verb.He [the
prefect] used to fag me to blow the chapel organ for him. [Boy's Own Paper, 1889]Other obsolete
senses of faggot were man hired into military service simply to fill out the ranks at muster (1700)
and vote manufactured for party purposes (1817).    The oft-reprinted assertion that male
homosexuals were called faggots because they were burned at the stake as punishment is an
etymological urban legend. Burning was sometimes a punishment meted out to homosexuals in Christian
Europe (on the suggestion of the Biblical fate of Sodom and Gomorrah), but in England, where
parliament had made homosexuality a capital offense in 1533, hanging was the method prescribed. Any
use of faggot in connection with public executions had long become an English historical obscurity
by the time the word began to be used for male homosexual in 20th century American slang, whereas
the contemptuous slang word for woman (and the other possible sources or influences listed here) was
in active use. It was used in this sense in early 20c. by D.H. Lawrence and James Joyce, among
others.


fagot (n.)

early spelling of faggot (n.1).


Fahrenheit

temperature scale, 1753, named for Gabriel Daniel Fahrenheit (1686-1736), Prussian physicist who
proposed the scale in 1714. The zero in it is arbitrary, based on the lowest temperature observed by
him in the winter of 1709. An abstract surname meaning literally experience.


faience (n.)

1714, from French fa&#239;ence (16c.), probably from Fayence, French form of Faenza, city in Italy
that was a noted ceramics center 16c. The city name is Latin faventia, literally silence,
meditation, perhaps a reference to a tranquil location.


fail (v.)

early 13c., from Old French falir (11c., Modern French faillir) be lacking, miss, not succeed, from
Vulgar Latin *fallire, from Latin fallere to trip, cause to fall; figuratively to deceive, trick,
dupe, cheat, elude; fail, be lacking or defective. Related: Failed; failing. Replaced Old English
abreo&eth;an.


fail (n.)

late 13c. (as in without fail), from Old French faile deficiency, from falir (see fail (v.)). The
Anglo-French form of the verb, failer, also came to be used as a noun, hence failure.


failing (n.)

defect, fault, 1580s, verbal noun from fail (v.).


failsafe (adj.)

also fail-safe, fail safe safe against failure, 1948, from fail (v.) + safe (adj.). Earliest
reference is to furnace burners.


failure (n.)

1640s, failer, from Anglo-French failer, from Old French falir (see fail (v.)). The verb in Anglo-
French used as a noun; ending altered 17c. to conform with words in -ure.


fain (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;gen, fagen glad, cheerful, happy, joyful, rejoicing, from a common Germanic root
(cognates: Old Saxon fagan, Old Norse feginn glad, Old High German faginon, Gothic faginon to
rejoice), perhaps from PIE *pek- (1) to make pretty. As an adverb, from c.1200.


faineant (adj.)

1610s (n.), from French fain&eacute;ant (16c.) do-nothing, from fait, third person singular present
tense of faire (see factitious) + n&eacute;ant nothing (compare dolce far niente).    A French folk
etymology of Old French faignant (14c.), present participle of faindre to feign (see feign). As an
adjective, from 1855.


faint (adj.)

c.1300, wanting in courage, now mostly in faint-hearted (mid-15c.), from Old French feint soft,
weak, sluggish, past participle of feindre hesitate, falter, be indolent, show weakness, avoid one's
duty by pretending (see feign). Sense of weak, feeble is early 14c. Meaning producing a feeble
impression upon the senses is from 1650s.


faint (v.)

grow weak (c.1300); lose heart (mid-14c.); see faint (adj.). Sense of swoon is c.1400. Related:
Fainted; fainting.


faint-hearted (adj.)

mid-15c., from faint (adj.) + hearted. Related: Faintheartedly; faintheartedness.


faintly (adv.)

late 13c., from faint (adj.) + -ly (2).


faintness (n.)

late 14c., from faint (adj.) + -ness.


fair (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;ger beautiful, lovely, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *fagraz (cognates: Old
Saxon fagar, Old Norse fagr, Old High German fagar beautiful, Gothic fagrs fit), perhaps from PIE
*pek- (1) to make pretty (cognates: Lithuanian puo&#353;iu I decorate).    The meaning in reference
to weather (c.1200) preserves the original sense (opposed to foul). Sense of light-complexioned
(1550s) reflects tastes in beauty; sense of free from bias (mid-14c.) evolved from another early
meaning, morally pure, unblemished (late 12c.). The sporting senses (fair ball, fair catch etc.)
began in 1856. Fair play is from 1590s; fair and square is from c.1600. Fair-haired in the
figurative sense of darling, favorite is from 1909. First record of fair-weather friends is from
1736.


fair (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French feyre (late 13c.), from Old French feire, from Vulgar Latin *feria
holiday, market fair, from Latin feriae religious festivals, holidays, related to festus solemn,
festive, joyous (see feast).


fairing (n.)

piece added for streamlining purposes, 1865, from fair (v.) a ship-building word meaning to make
fair or level, to correct curvatures, from fair (adj.).


fairly (adv.)

c.1400, handsomely, from fair (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning impartially is from 1670s; somewhat is from
1805; meaning totally is earlier (1590s).


fairness (n.)

Old English f&aelig;gernes beauty; see fair (adj.) + -ness. Meaning evenhandedness is from mid-15c.


fairway (n.)

1580s, navigational channel of a river, from fair (adj.) + way (n.). Golfing sense is from 1910.


fairy (n.)

c.1300, fairie, enchantment, magic, from Old French faerie land of fairies, meeting of fairies,
enchantment, magic, from fae fay, from Latin fata (plural) the Fates, from PIE *bha- to speak (see
fame (n.)).    As a supernatural creature from late 14c. [contra Tolkien; for example This maketh
that ther been no fairyes in Wife of Bath's Tale], perhaps via intermediate forms such as fairie
knight supernatural or legendary knight (early 14c.). The diminutive winged beings so-called in
children's stories seem to date from early 17c.    Yet I suspect that this flower-and-butterfly
minuteness was also a product of rationalization, which transformed the glamour of Elfland into mere
finesse, and invisibility into a fragility that could hide in a cowslip or shrink behind a blade of
grass. It seems to become fashionable soon after the great voyages had begun to make the world seem
too narrow to hold both men and elves; when the magic land of Hy Breasail in the West had become the
mere Brazils, the land of red-dye-wood. [J.R.R. Tolkien, On Fairy-Stories, 1947]     The slang
meaning effeminate male homosexual is first recorded 1895. Fairy ring is from 1590s. Fossil sea
urchins found on the English downlands were called fairy loaves.


fairy tale (n.)

oral narrative centered on magical tests, quests, and transformations, 1749, translating French
Conte de fe&eacute;s of Madame d'Aulnois (1698, translated into English 1699). As an adjective (also
fairytale), attested by 1963.


fairyland (n.)

1580s, from fairy + land (n.).


fait accompli (n.)

French, literally an accomplished fact (see feat).


faith (n.)

mid-13c., duty of fulfilling one's trust, from Old French feid, foi faith, belief, trust,
confidence, pledge, from Latin fides trust, faith, confidence, reliance, credence, belief, from root
of fidere to trust, from PIE root *bheidh- (source also of Greek pistis; see bid). For sense
evolution, see belief. Theological sense is from late 14c.; religions called faiths since c.1300.


faith-healer (n.)

Also faith healer, attested by 1874; from faith + healer.    The power which a man's imagination has
over his body to heal it or make it sick is a force which none of us is born without. The first man
had it, the last one will possess it. If left to himself, a man is most likely to use only the
mischievous half of the force--the half which invents imaginary ailments for him and cultivates
them; and if he is one of those very wise people, he is quite likely to scoff at the beneficent half
of the force and deny its existence. [Mark Twain, Christian Science, 1907]


faithful (adj.)

c.1300, full of faith, also firm in allegiance, from faith + -ful. Meaning true to the facts is from
1520s. The noun sense of true believers is from 1550s. Related: Faithfully; faithfulness. Old
Faithful geyser named 1870 by explorer Gen. H.D. Washburn, Surveyor-General of the Montana
Territory, in reference to the regularity of its outbursts.


faithless (adj.)

c.1300, unbelieving, from faith + -less. Meaning insincere is mid-14c. Related: Faithlessly;
faithlessness.


fajita (n.)

by 1979, from Spanish fajita, diminutive of faja bandage, wrapper, from Latin fascia band, bandage
(see fascia).


fake

attested in London criminal slang as adjective (1775), verb (1812), and noun (1851, of persons
1888), but probably older. A likely source is feague to spruce up by artificial means, from German
fegen polish, sweep, also to clear out, plunder in colloquial use. Much of our early thieves' slang
is Ger. or Du., and dates from the Thirty Years' War [Weekley]. Or it may be from Latin facere to
do. Related: Faked; fakes; faking.


faker (n.)

1885, agent noun from fake (v.).


fakir (n.)

c.1600, from Arabic faqir a poor man, from faqura he was poor. Term for Muslim holy man who lived by
begging, misapplied in 19c. English (possibly under influence of faker) to Hindu ascetics. Arabic
plural form fuqara may have led to variant early English forms such as fuckiere (1630s).


falafel (n.)

by 1951 as a traveler's word, not common or domestic in English until 1970s; from Arabic falafil,
said to mean crunchy.


Falange

Spanish political party founded 1933 as a fascist movement; see Falangist. Related: Falangista.


Falangist (n.)

1937, member of the Falange, the fascist party in Spain (founded 1933), from Spanish Falange
(Espa&ntilde;ola) (Spanish) Phalanx, from Latin phalanx (genitive phalangis); see phalanx.


Falasha (n.)

dark-skinned Jewish tribe of Abyssinia, 1710, from Ethiopian, literally exiled, wanderer, immigrant,
from falasa he wandered.


falcate (adj.)

1826, from Latin falcatus, from falcem (nominative falx) sickle.


falchion (n.)

broad sword, somewhat curved, c.1300, fauchoun, from Old French fauchon, from Vulgar Latin
*falcionem, from diminutive of Latin falx sickle.


falcon (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French faucon (12c.), from Late Latin falconem (nominative falco) falcon,
probably from Latin falx (genitive falcis) curved blade, pruning hook, sickle; the bird said to be
so called for the shape of its talons, legs, or beak, but also possibly from the shape of its spread
wings.    The other theory is that falx is of Germanic origin and means gray bird, which is
supported by the antiquity of the word in Germanic but opposed by those who point out that falconry
by all evidences was imported from the East, and the Germans got it from the Romans, not the other
way around.


falconer (n.)

late 14c., one who hunts with falcons (as a surname from late 12c.), from Old French fauconier
(Modern French fauconnier), from faucon (see falcon). Meaning one who keeps and trains hawks is from
early 15c.


falconry (n.)

1570s, from French fauconnerie, from faucon (see falcon).


falderol (n.)

also falderal, folderol, 1701, nonsense refrain in songs; meaning gewgaw, trifle is attested from
1820.


fall (v.)

Old English feallan (class VII strong verb; past tense feoll, past participle feallen) to fall;
fail, decay, die,  from Proto-Germanic *fallanan (cognates: Old Frisian falla, Old Saxon fallan,
Dutch vallen, Old Norse falla, Old High German fallan, German fallen), from PIE root *pol- to fall
(cognates: Armenian p'ul downfall, Lithuanian puola to fall, Old Prussian aupallai finds, literally
falls upon).    Most of the figurative senses had developed in Middle English. Meaning to be reduced
(as temperature) is from 1650s. To fall in love is attested from 1520s; to fall asleep is late 14c.
Fall through come to naught is from 1781. To fall for something is from 1903.


fall (n.)

c.1200, a falling; see fall (n.). Old English noun form, fealle, meant snare, trap. Sense of autumn
(now only in U.S.) is 1660s, short for fall of the leaf (1540s). That of cascade, waterfall is from
1570s. Wrestling sense is from 1550s. Of a city under siege, etc., 1580s. Fall guy is from 1906.


fall out (v.)

1570s in the literal sense; military use is from 1832. Meaning quarrel is attested from 1560s (to
fall out with quarrel with is from 1520s).


fallacious (adj.)

c.1500, from fallacy (Latin fallacia) + -ous. Related: Fallaciously; fallaciousness.


fallacy (n.)

late 15c., deception, false statement, from Latin fallacia deception, noun of quality from fallax
(genitive fallacis) deceptive, from fallere deceive (see fail (v.)). Specific sense in logic dates
from 1550s. An earlier form was fallace (c.1300), from Old French fallace.


fallback (n.)

also fall-back; 1767 as a type of chair; 1930 as a position to be used in an emergency; from fall
(v.) + back (adv.).


fallen (adj.)

c.1400, past participle adjective from fall (v.). Used figuratively for morally ruined by 1620s.
Meaning those who have died attested by 1765. Fallen angel is from 1680s; fallen woman by 1820.


fallibility (n.)

1630s; see fallible + -ity.


fallible (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin fallibilis liable to err, deceitful. literally that can be deceived,
from Latin fallere deceive (see fail).


falling (adj.)

present participle adjective from fall (v.). Falling star is from 1560s; falling out disagreement is
from 1560s. Falling evil epilepsy is from early 13c.


Fallopian tube (n.)

1706, from Latinized form of the name of Gabriello Fallopio (1523-1562), Italian anatomist who first
described them.


fallout (n.)

radioactive particles, 1950, from fall (v.) + out (adv.).


fallow (n.)

c.1300, from Old English fealh fallow land, from Proto-Germanic *falgo (cognates: Old High German
felga harrow, German Felge plowed-up fallow land, East Frisian falge fallow, falgen to break up
ground), perhaps from a derivation of PIE root *pel- (3) to turn, fold. Assimilated in English to
fallow (adj.) because of the color of plowed earth. Originally plowed land, then land plowed but not
planted (1520s). As an adjective, from late 14c.


fallow (adj.)

pale yellow, brownish yellow, Old English fealu reddish yellow, yellowish-brown, tawny, dusk-
colored, from Proto-Germanic *falwa- (cognates: Old Saxon falu, Old Norse f&ouml;lr, Middle Dutch
valu, Dutch vaal, Old High German falo, German falb), from PIE *pal-wo- dark-colored, gray
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic plavu, Lithuanian palvas sallow; Greek polios, Sanskrit palitah,
Welsh llwyd gray; Latin pallere to be pale), suffixed form of root *pel- (2) pale (see pallor). It
also forms the root of words for pigeon in Greek (peleia), Latin (palumbes), and Old Prussian
(poalis).


false (adj.)

late 12c., from Old French fals, faus (12c., Modern French faux) false, fake, incorrect, mistaken,
treacherous, deceitful, from Latin falsus deceived, erroneous, mistaken, past participle of fallere
deceive, disappoint, of uncertain origin (see fail).  Adopted into other Germanic languages
(cognates: German falsch, Dutch valsch, Danish falsk), though English is the only one in which the
active sense of deceitful (a secondary sense in Latin) has predominated. False alarm recorded from
1570s. Related: Falsely; falseness.


falsehood (n.)

late 13c., falshede, deceitfulness, also a lie, from false + -hood.


falseness (n.)

c.1300, from false + -ness.


falsetto (n.)

an artificial voice, 1774, Italian, diminutive of falso false, from Latin falsus (see false).


falsies (n.)

padded brassiere, 1943, from false + -ie.


falsifiable (adj.)

1610s, from falsify + -able. Related: Falsifiability.


falsification (n.)

1560s, from Late Latin falsificationem (nominative falsificatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of falsificare (see falsify).


falsify (v.)

mid-15c., to prove false, from Middle French falsifier (15c.), from Late Latin falsificare (see
falsify). Meaning to make false is from c.1500. Earlier verb was simply falsen (c.1200). Related:
Falsified; falsifying.


falsity (n.)

1550s, from Old French fauset&eacute; (12c., Modern French fausset&eacute;), from Late Latin
falsitatem (nominative falsitas), from Latin falsus (see false).


falter (v.)

mid-14c., of unknown origin, possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse faltrask be
burdened, hesitate, be troubled), or a frequentative of Middle English falden to fold, influenced by
fault. Related: Faltered; faltering.


fame (n.)

early 13c., character attributed to someone; late 13c., celebrity, renown, from Old French fame
fame, reputation, renown, rumor, from Latin fama talk, rumor, report, reputation, from PIE root
*bha- (2) to speak, tell, say (cognates: Sanskrit bhanati speaks; Latin fari to say, fabula
narrative, account, tale, story; Armenian ban, bay word, term; Old Church Slavonic bajati to talk,
tell; Old English boian to boast, ben prayer, request; Greek pheme talk, phone voice, sound, phanai
to speak; Old Irish bann law).    The goddess Fama was the personification of rumor in Roman
mythology. The Latin derivative fabulare was the colloquial word for speak, talk since the time of
Plautus, whence Spanish hablar.    I've always been afraid I was going to tap the world on the
shoulder for 20 years, and when it finally turned around I was going to forget what I had to say.
[Tom Waits, Playboy magazine interview, March, 1988]


famed (adj.)

much talked about, 1530s, past participle adjective from fame (v.), c.1300, from Old French famer,
from fame (see fame (n.)).


familial (adj.)

from French familial, from Latin familia (see family). Meaning hereditary is from 1900; family-like
is from 1903.


familiar (adj.)

mid-14c., intimate, very friendly, on a family footing, from Old French famelier, from Latin
familiaris domestic, of a household; also familiar, intimate, friendly, dissimilated from
*familialis, from familia (see family). The sense gradually broadened. Of things, from late 15c. The
noun meaning demon, evil spirit that answers one's call is from 1580s.


familiarise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of familiarize; for spelling, see -ize. Related: Familiarised;
familiarising.


familiarity (n.)

c.1200, from Old French familiarite and directly from Latin familiaritatem (nominative familiaritas)
intimacy, friendship, from familiaris friendly, intimate (see familiar). Meaning undue intimacy is
from late 14c. That of close acquaintance is from c.1600.


familiarization (n.)

1755, noun of action from familiarize.


familiarize (v.)

c.1600, to make well known, from familiar + -ize. Related: Familiarized; familiarizing.


familiarly (adv.)

c.1400, from familiar + -ly (2).


family (n.)

early 15c., servants of a household, from Latin familia family servants, domestics collectively, the
servants in a household, thus also members of a household, the estate, property; the household,
including relatives and servants, from famulus servant, of unknown origin. The Latin word rarely
appears in the sense parents with their children, for which domus (see domestic) was used.    In
English, sense of collective body of persons who form one household under one head and one domestic
government, including parents, children, and servants, and as sometimes used even lodgers or
boarders [Century Dictionary] is from 1540s. From 1660s as parents with their children, whether they
dwell together or not, also in a more general sense, persons closely related by blood, including
aunts, uncles, cousins; and in the most general sense those who descend from a common progenitor
(1580s). Meaning those claiming descent from a common ancestor, a house, a lineage is early 15c.
Hence, any group of things classed as kindred based on common distinguishing characteristics
(1620s); as a scientific classification, between genus and order, from 1753.    I have certainly
known more men destroyed by the desire to have wife and child and to keep them in comfort than I
have seen destroyed by drink and harlots. [William Butler Yeats, Autobiography]    Replaced Old
English hiwscipe. As an adjective from c.1600; with the meaning suitable for a family, by 1807.
Family values first recorded 1966. Phrase in a family way pregnant is from 1796. Family circle is
1809; family man man devoted to wife and children, man inclined to lead a domestic life is 1856
(earlier it meant thief, 1788, from family in a slang sense of the fraternity of thieves).
<b>Happy family</b> an assemblage of animals of diverse habits and propensities living amicably, or
at least quietly, together in one cage. [Century Dictionary, 1902]    The phrase is attested from
1844.


famine (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French famine hunger (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *famina, from Latin fames hunger,
starvation, famine, of unknown origin.


famish (v.)

c.1400, famyschen, alteration of famen (late 14c.), a shortening of Old French afamer, from Vulgar
Latin *affamare to bring to hunger, from ad famem, from Latin fames hunger (see famine).    Ending
changed mid-14c. to -ish under influence of ravish, anguish, etc. The intransitive sense is from
1520s. Related: Famished; famishing.


famous (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French famous, Old French fameus (Modern French fameux), from Latin famosus
much talked of, renowned, often infamous, notorious, of ill repute, from fama (see fame (n.)). A
native word for this was Old English namcu&eth;, literally name-known. Catch phrase famous last
words remark likely to be proved wrong is first attested 1948.


famously (adv.)

1570s, from famous + -ly (2).


fan (n.1)

device to make an air current, Old English fann (West Saxon) a basket or shovel for winnowing grain
(by tossing it in the air), from Latin vannus, perhaps related to ventus wind (see wind (n.1)), or
from PIE root *wet- (1) to blow (also to inspire, spiritually arouse; see wood (adj.)).    The
chaff, being lighter, would blow off. Sense of device for moving air first recorded late 14c.; the
hand-held version is first attested 1550s. A fan-light (1819) was shaped like a lady's fan.


fan (n.2)

devotee, 1889, American English, originally of baseball enthusiasts, probably a shortening of
fanatic, but may be influenced by the fancy, a collective term for followers of a certain hobby or
sport (especially boxing); see fancy. There is an isolated use from 1682, but the modern word is
likely a late 19c. formation. Fan club attested by 1930.


fan (v.)

late Old English fannian to winnow grain, from the noun (see fan (n.1)). Meaning to stir up air is
from early 15c. Related: Fanned; fanning. To fan out spread out like a hand-held fan, is from 1590s.


fanatic (n.)

1520s, insane person, from Latin fanaticus mad, enthusiastic, inspired by a god, also furious, mad,
originally, pertaining to a temple, from fanum temple, related to festus festive (see feast).
Meaning zealous person is mid-17c. As an adjective, in English, 1530s, furious; meaning
characterized by excessive enthusiasm, especially in religion (of Nonconformists), is from 1640s.A
fanatic is someone who can't change his mind and won't change the subject. [attributed to Winston
Churchill]


fanatical (adj.)

1540s, from fanatic + -al (1). Related: Fanatically.


fanaticism (n.)

1650s, from fanatic + -ism.


fancied (adj.)

imaginary, 1560s, past participle adjective from fancy (v.).


fanciful (adj.)

1620s, from fancy (n.) + -ful. Related: Fancifully.


fancy (n.)

mid-15c., contraction of fantasy, it took the older and longer word's sense of inclination, whim,
desire. Meaning fans of an amusement or sport, collectively is attested by 1735, especially (though
not originally) of the prize ring. The adjective is recorded from mid-18c.


fancy (v.)

take a liking to, 1540s, a contraction of fantasien to fantasize (about), from fantasy (n.). Meaning
to imagine is from 1550s. Related: Fancied; fancies; fancying. Colloquial use in fancy that, etc. is
recorded by 1813.


fancy-free (adj.)

free from the trammels of love, 1580s, from fancy (n.) + free (adj.).


fandangle

1835, Southern U.S., perhaps an alteration of fandango.


fandango (n.)

mid-18c., lively Spanish dance, the word of unknown etymology [OED says alleged to be of negro
origin], perhaps related to fado. Fado is lovely, but not lively, so perhaps the link, if any, is
thematic. But the late date argues against it.


fandom (n.)

the realm of avid enthusiasts, 1903, from fan (n.2) + -dom.


fane (n.)

weathercock, late 14c., from Old English fana flag, banner, from Proto-Germanic *fanon (cognates:
Old Frisian fana, Gothic fana piece of cloth, Old High German fano, German Fahne flag, standard);
possibly cognate with Latin pannus piece of cloth (see pane).


fanfare (n.)

c.1600, from French fanfare, from fanfarer blow a fanfare, perhaps echoic, or perhaps borrowed (with
Spanish fanfarron braggart, and Italian fanfano babbler) from Arabic farfar chatterer, of imitative
origin.


fang (n.)

Old English fang prey, spoils, plunder, booty; a seizing or taking, from gefangen, past participle
of fon seize, take, capture, from Proto-Germanic *fango- (cognates: Old Frisian fangia, Middle Dutch
and Dutch vangen, Old Norse fanga, German fangen, Gothic fahan), from PIE root *pag- to make firm,
fix; connected to Latin pax (genitive pacis) peace (see pact).    The sense of canine tooth (1550s)
probably developed from Old English fengto&eth;, literally catching- or grasping-tooth. Transferred
to the venom tooth of a serpent, etc., by 1800.


fangled (adj.)

1580s, foppish, from fangle (n.), based on a misinterpretation of newfangle as fashionable (see
newfangled).


Fannie Mae (n.)

1948, from FNMA, acronym of Federal National Mortgage Association, established 1938.


fanny (n.)

buttocks, 1920, American English, from earlier British meaning vulva (1879), perhaps from the name
of John Cleland's heroine in the scandalous novel Fanny Hill or Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure
(1748). The fem. proper name is a diminutive of Frances. The genital sense is still the primary one
outside U.S., but is not current in American English, a difference which can have consequences when
U.S. TV programs and movies air in Britain.


fantabulous (adj.)

1959, creative merger of fantastic and fabulous.


fantasia (n.)

musical composition that sounds extemporaneous, 1724, from Italian fantasia, from Latin phantasia
(see fantasy).


fantasise (v.)

artificial British English spelling of fantasize, not much attested before 1970s. For suffix, see
-ize. Related: Fantasised; fantasising.


fantasize (v.)

1926, from fantasy + -ize. Related: Fantasized; fantasizing. An earlier verb was fantasticate
(c.1600).


fantastic (adj.)

late 14c., existing only in imagination, from Middle French fantastique (14c.), from Medieval Latin
fantasticus, from Late Latin phantasticus imaginary, from Greek phantastikos able to imagine, from
phantazein make visible (middle voice phantazesthai picture to oneself); see phantasm. Trivial sense
of wonderful, marvelous recorded by 1938.


fantastical (adj.)

late 15c., from fantastic + -al (1). Related: Fantastically.


fantasy (n.)

early 14c., illusory appearance, from Old French fantaisie (14c.) vision, imagination, from Latin
phantasia, from Greek phantasia appearance, image, perception, imagination, from phantazesthai
picture to oneself, from phantos visible, from phainesthai appear, in late Greek to imagine, have
visions, related to phaos, phos light, phainein to show, to bring to light (see phantasm). Sense of
whimsical notion, illusion is pre-1400, followed by that of imagination, which is first attested
1530s. Sense of day-dream based on desires is from 1926.


fantods (n.)

1839, jocular formation, perhaps based on fantasy.


fantom (n.)

obsolete form of phantom.


fanzine (n.)

1949, from fan (n.2) + suffix abstracted from magazine.


fap

masturbate (or the sound of it), slang, by 2001, echoic. Earlier, drunk (late 16c.).


FAQ (n.)

acronym from frequently asked questions, by 1990.


faqir (n.)

see fakir.


far (adj.)

Old English feorr far, remote, distant, to a great distance, long ago, from Proto-Germanic *ferro
(cognates: Old Saxon ferr, Old Frisian fer, Old Norse fjarre, Dutch ver, Old High German ferro,
German fern, Gothic fairra), from PIE *per- through, across, beyond (cognates: Sanskrit parah
farther, remote, ulterior, Hittite para outside of, Greek pera across, beyond, Latin per through,
Old Irish ire farther). Far East China, Japan, and surrounding regions is from 1838.


far out (adj.)

also far-out, 1887, remote, distant; from far + out. Slang sense of excellent, wonderful, is from
1954, originally in jazz talk.


far-fetched (adj.)

also far fetched, farfetched, 1560s, brought from afar, from far + past participle of fetch. An
earlier form was far fet (1530s). Figurative sense is from c.1600.


far-flung (adj.)

1895, from far + past tense of fling.


far-off (adj.)

also faroff, 1590s, from far + off.


far-reaching (adj.)

1824, from far + present participle of reach (v.).


far-sighted (adj.)

also farsighted, 1640s, forecasting, prescient; 1878 as a defect of the eyes (hypermetropic); see
far + sight. Related: Farsightedness.


farad (n.)

unit of electric capacity, suggested 1861, first used 1868, named for English physicist Michael
Faraday (1791-1867). Related: Faradic.


farang (n.)

in Thai, white person, 1861, ultimately from Frank (see Feringhee).


faraway (adj.)

also far-away, 1816, from far + away.


farce (n.)

late 14c., force-meat, stuffing; 1520s, as a type of dramatic work, from Middle French farce comic
interlude in a mystery play (16c.), literally stuffing, from Old French farcir to stuff, (13c.),
from Latin farcire to stuff, cram, of unknown origin, perhaps related to frequens crowded.    The
pseudo-Latin farsia was applied 13c. in France and England to praise phrases inserted into
liturgical formulae (for example between kyrie and eleison), then in Old French farce was extended
to the impromptu buffoonery among actors that was a feature of religious stage plays.


farcical (adj.)

1716, from farce + -ical. Related: Farcically.


fardel (n.)

bundle, burden, c.1300, from Old French fardel (13c., Modern French fardeau) parcel, package, small
pack, diminutive of farde, perhaps from Arabic fardah package.


fare (n.)

Old English f&aelig;r journey, road, passage, expedition, strong neuter of faran to journey (see
fare (v.)); merged with faru journey, expedition, companions, baggage, strong fem. of faran.
Original sense is obsolete, except in compounds (wayfarer, sea-faring, etc.) Meaning food provided
is c.1200; that of conveyance appears in Scottish early 15c. and led to sense of payment for passage
(1510s).


fare (v.)

Old English faran to journey, set forth, go, travel, wander, get on, undergo, make one's way, from
Proto-Germanic *faran to go (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic faran, Old Norse and Old
Frisian fara, Dutch varen, German fahren), from PIE *por- going, passage, from root *per- (2) to
lead, pass over (see port (n.1)). Related: Fared; faring.


farewell (interj.)

late 14c., from Middle English faren wel, verbal phrase attested by c.1200 (see fare (v.) + well
(adv.)); usually said to the departing person, who replied with good-bye. As a noun, by early 15c.


farina (n.)

1707, from Latin farina ground wheat, flour, meal, from far (genitive farris) grits, spelt, a kind
of grain (see barley).


farinaceous (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin farinaceus, from farina (see farina).


farm (n.)

c.1300, fixed payment (usually in exchange for taxes collected, etc.), fixed rent, from Old French
ferme rent, lease, from Medieval Latin firma fixed payment, from Latin firmare to fix, settle,
confirm, strengthen, from firmus firm (see firm (adj.)).    Sense of tract of leased land is first
recorded early 14c.; that of cultivated land (leased or not) is 1520s. Phrase buy the farm die in
battle, is at least from World War II, perhaps a cynical reference to the draftee's dream of getting
out of the war and going home, in many cases to a peaceful farmstead. But fetch the farm is prisoner
slang from at least 1879 for get sent to the infirmary, with reference to the better diet and
lighter duties there.


farm (v.)

mid-15c., to rent (land), from Anglo-French fermer, from ferme (see farm (n.)). The agricultural
sense is from 1719. Original sense is retained in to farm out.


farmer (n.)

late 14c., one who collects taxes, etc., from Anglo-French fermer, French fermier, from Medieval
Latin firmarius, from firma (see farm (n.)). In the agricultural sense, 1590s, replacing native
churl and husbandman.


farmhand (n.)

by 1835, from farm (n.) + hand (n.).


farmhouse (n.)

1590s, from farm (n.) + house (n.).


farming (n.)

1590s, action of farming out, verbal noun from farm (v.). Meaning husbandry attested by 1733.


farmland (n.)

mid-14c., from farm (n.) + land (n.).


faro (n.)

1735, gambling game with cards, apparently altered from pharaoh; perhaps his image was on one of the
cards.


Farquhar

surname attested from late 12c., from Gaelic fearchar very dear one.


farrago (n.)

1630s, from Latin farrago medley, mix of grains for animal feed, from far grain (see barley).


Farrell

Irish surname, from Irish Fearghail man of valor.


farrier (n.)

1560s, from Middle French ferrier blacksmith, from Latin ferrarius of iron, also blacksmith, from
ferrum iron (in Medieval Latin, also horseshoe); see ferro-. An earlier form of it in English was
ferrer, ferrour ironsmith (late 12c., as a surname).


farrow (n.)

Old English fearh young pig, from Proto-Germanic *farkhaz young pig (cognates: Middle Low German
ferken, Dutch varken, both diminutives, Old High German farh, German Ferkel), from PIE *porkos- (see
pork (n.)). Sense of a litter of pigs first recorded 1570s. As a verb, early 13c.


Farsi (n.)

1878, modern Persian language, the usual Iranian word for it, from Fars, Arabic name for region of
Pars (no p in Arabic) in southwestern Iran, where the modern language evolved from Indo-European-
based Persian with many Arabic elements.


fart (v.)

Old English feortan, ultimately from PIE *perd- (cognates: Old High German ferzan, Old Norse freta,
Sanskrit pard, Greek perdein, Lithuanian perdzu, Russian perdet), of imitative origin. Related:
Farted; farting. As a noun, from late 14c.    Clatterer or clatterfart, which wyl disclose anye
light secreate. [Richard Huloet, Abecedarium Anglo-Latinum, 1552.]


farther (adj.)

c.1300, variant of further (q.v.), by 17c. it replaced ferrer as comparative of the descendant of
Old English fierr far (itself a comparative but no longer felt as one). Vowel change influenced by
the root vowel, and confusion with Middle English fer&thorn;eren to assist, promote, advance (see
forth). There is no historical basis for the notion that farther is of physical distance and further
of degree or quality.


farthest (adj.)

late 14c., superlative of far.


farthing (n.)

Old English feor&eth;ung quarter of a penny, a diminutive derivative of feor&eth;a fourth (from
feower four) + -ing fractional part. Cognate with Old Frisian fiardeng, Middle Low German verdink,
Old Norse fjordhungr.    Used in biblical translation of Latin quadrans quarter of a denarius; the
English coin (of silver until 17c., later of copper or bronze), first was minted under Edward I and
abolished 1961.I shall geat a fart of a dead man as soone As a farthyng of him. [Heywood, Proverbs,
1562]


farthingale (n.)

1550s, from Middle French verdugale, from Spanish verdugado hooped, hooped skirt, from verdugo rod,
stick, young shoot of a tree, from verde green, from Latin viridis (see verdure). Originally made
from cane hoops or rods.


fartlek (n.)

1952, Swedish, from fart speed (cognate with Old Norse fara to go, move; see fare (v.)) + lek play
(cognate with Old Norse leika play; see lark (v.)).


fasces (n.)

1590s, from Latin fasces bundle of rods containing an axe with the blade projecting (plural of
fascis bundle of wood, etc.), perhaps from PIE *bhasko- band, bundle (cognates: Middle Irish basc
neckband, Welsh baich load, burden, Old English b&aelig;st inner bark of the linden tree). Carried
before a lictor, a superior Roman magistrate, as a symbol of power over life and limb: the sticks
symbolized punishment by whipping, the axe head execution by beheading.


fascia (n.)

1560s, from Latin fascia a band, bandage, swathe (see fasces). Originally in architecture;
anatomical use is from 1788.


fascicle (n.)

1620s, from Latin fasciculus a small bundle, a bunch, diminutive of fascis (see fasces). As part of
a work published in installments, 1640s (also fascicule, from French). Related: Fasciculate;
fasciculation.


fasciitis (n.)

1893, from fascia + -itis.


fascinate (v.)

1590s, bewitch, enchant, from Middle French fasciner (14c.), from Latin fascinatus, past participle
of fascinare bewitch, enchant, fascinate, from fascinus spell, witchcraft, of uncertain origin.
Possibly from Greek baskanos bewitcher, sorcerer, with form influenced by Latin fari speak (see fame
(n.)).    The Greek word might be from a Thracian equivalent of Greek phaskein to say; compare also
enchant, and German besprechen to charm, from sprechen to speak. Earliest used of witches and of
serpents, who were said to be able to cast a spell by a look that rendered one unable to move or
resist. Sense of delight, attract is first recorded 1815. Related: Fascinated; fascinating.


fascination (n.)

c.1600, from Latin fascinationem (nominative fascinatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of fascinare (see fascinate).


fascinous (adj.)

1660s, caused by witchcraft, from Latin fascinum charm, enchantment, witchcraft (see fascinate) +
-ous.


fascism (n.)

1922, originally used in English 1920 in its Italian form (see fascist). Applied to similar groups
in Germany from 1923; applied to everyone since the rise of the Internet.A form of political
behavior marked by obsessive preoccupation with community decline, humiliation or victimhood and by
compensatory cults of unity, energy and purity, in which a mass-based party of committed nationalist
militants, working in uneasy but effective collaboration with traditional elites, abandons
democratic liberties and pursues with redemptive violence and without ethical or legal restraints
goals of internal cleansing and external expansion. [Robert O. Paxton, The Anatomy of Fascism, 2004]


fascist (adj.)

1921, (as a noun 1922), from Italian partito nazionale fascista, the anti-communist political
movement organized 1919 under Benito Mussolini (1883-1945); from Italian fascio group, association,
literally bundle (see fasces).    With fascism, originally used in English in its Italian form, as
an Italian word. [Fowler: Whether this full anglicization of the words is worth while cannot be
decided till we know whether the things are to be temporary or permanent in England -- probably an
addition to the 1930 reprint, retained in 1944 U.S. edition.] Fasci groups of men organized for
political purposes had been a feature of Sicily since c.1895, and the 20c. totalitatrian sense
probably came directly from this, but influenced by the Roman fasces, which became the party symbol.
Related: Fascistic.


fascitis (n.)

see fasciitis.


fashion (n.)

c.1300, shape, manner, mode, from Old French fa&ccedil;on (12c.) face, appearance; construction,
pattern, design; thing done; beauty; manner, characteristic feature, from Latin factionem
(nominative factio) group of people acting together, literally a making or doing, from facere to
make (see factitious).    Sense of prevailing custom is from late 15c.; that of style of attire is
from 1520s.  To call a fashion wearable is the kiss of death. No new fashion worth its salt is
wearable. [Eugenia Sheppard, New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 13, 1960] Fashion plate (1851) originally
was full-page picture in a popular magazine showing the prevailing or latest style of dress, in
reference to the typographic plate from which it was printed. Transfered sense of well-dressed
person had emerged by 1920s.


fashion (v.)

early 15c.; see fashion (n.). Related: Fashioned; fashioning.


fashionable (adj.)

stylish, c.1600, capable of being fashioned, also conformable to prevailing tastes, from fashion +
-able. Related: Fashionably.


fashionista (n.)

by 1996, from fashion + -ista (see -ist). In the same sense were fashionist (1610s, alive as late as
1850); fashion-monger (1590s); fashion-fly (1868).


fast (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;st firmly fixed, steadfast, secure, enclosed, probably from Proto-Germanic
*fastuz (cognates: Old Frisian fest, Old Norse fastr, Dutch vast, German fest), from PIE root *past-
firm (source of Sanskrit pastyam dwelling place).    The adverb meaning quickly, swiftly was perhaps
in Old English, or from Old Norse fast, either way developing from the sense of firmly, strongly,
vigorously (to run hard means the same as to run fast; also compare fast asleep), or perhaps from
the notion of a runner who sticks close to whatever he is chasing.    The sense of living an
unrestrained life (usually of women) is from 1746 (fast living is from 1745). Fast buck recorded
from 1947; fast food is first attested 1951. Fast-forward first recorded 1948. Fast lane is by 1966;
the fast track originally was in horse-racing (1934); figurative sense by 1960s. To fast talk
someone (v.) is recorded by 1946.


fast (v.)

Old English f&aelig;stan to fast (as a religious duty), from Proto-Germanic *fastejan (cognates: Old
Frisian festia, Old High German fasten, German fasten, Old Norse fasta), from the same root as fast
(adj.).    The original meaning was hold firmly, and the sense evolution is via firm control of
oneself, to holding to observance (compare Gothic fastan to keep, observe, also to fast). Presumably
the whole group is a Germanic translation of Medieval Latin observare to fast. Related: Fasted;
fasting.


fast (n.)

Old English f&aelig;stan, festen, or Old Norse fasta; from the root of fast (v.).


fast and loose

described as a cheating game played with a stick and a belt or string, so arranged that a spectator
would think he could make the latter fast by placing a stick through its intricate folds, whereas
the operator could detach it at once. [James O. Halliwell, Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial
Words, 1847]. The figurative sense (1550s) is recorded earlier than the literal (1570s).


fasten (v.)

Old English f&aelig;stnian make fast, firm, also ratify, betroth, from Proto-Germanic *fastinon to
make firm or fast (cognates: Old Frisian festnia to make firm, bind fast, Old Saxon fastnon, Old
High German fastnion, Old Norse fastna to pledge, betroth), from *fastuz (see fast (adj.)). Related:
Fastened; fastener; fastening.


faster (n.)

one who fasts, c.1300, agent noun from fast (v.).


fastidious (adj.)

mid-15c., full of pride, from Latin fastidiosus disdainful, squeamish, exacting, from fastidium
loathing, squeamishness, most likely from *fastu-taidiom, a compound of fastus contempt, arrogance
and taedium aversion, disgust. Early use in English was both in passive and active senses. Meaning
squeamish, over-nice emerged in English 1610s. Related: Fastidiously; fastidiousness.


fastly (adv.)

former adverbial cousin to fast (adj.), from Old English f&aelig;stlic firm, fixed, steadfast,
resolute; obsolete in 19c., simple fast taking its place.


fastness (n.)

a place not easily forced, a stronghold, late Old English f&aelig;stnes, from fast (adj.) in its
older sense of firm, fixed in place + -ness.


fat (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;tt fat, fatted, plump, obese, originally a contracted past participle of
f&aelig;ttian to cram, stuff, from Proto-Germanic *faitaz fat (cognates: Old Frisian fatt, Old Norse
feitr, Dutch vet, German feist), from PIE *poid- to abound in water, milk, fat, etc. (source also of
Greek piduein to gush forth), from root *peie- to be fat, swell (cognates: Sanskrit payate swells,
exuberates, pituh juice, sap, resin; Lithuanian pienas milk; Greek pion fat, wealthy; Latin pinguis
fat).    Teen slang meaning attractive, up to date (also later phat) is attested from 1951. Fat cat
privileged and rich person is from 1928; fat chance no chance at all attested from 1905, perhaps
ironic (the expression is found earlier in the sense good opportunity). Fathead is from 1842; fat-
witted is from 1590s; fatso is first recorded 1943. Expression the fat is in the fire originally
meant the plan has failed (1560s).


fat (n.)

mid-14c.; see fat (v.). Figurative sense of best or most rewarding part is from 1560s.


Fata Morgana (n.)

1818, literally Fairy Morgana, mirage especially common in the Strait of Messina, Italy, from
Morgana, the Morgan le Fay of Anglo-French poetry, sister of King Arthur, located in Calabria by
Norman settlers. Morgan is Welsh, sea-dweller. There is perhaps, too, here an influence of Arabic
marjan, literally pearl, also a fem. proper name, popularly the name of a sorceress.


fatal (adj.)

late 14c., decreed by fate, from Middle French fatal (14c.) and directly from Latin fatalis ordained
by fate, from fatum (see fate (n.)); sense of causing death is early 15c.


fatalism (n.)

1670s, from fatal + -ism.


fatalist (n.)

1640s, in reference to the philosophical doctrine that all things are determined by fate; from fatal
+ -ist. General sense of one who accepts every event as inevitable is from 1734.


fatalistic (adj.)

1832, from fatalist + -ic.


fatality (n.)

late 15c., quality of causing death, from French fatalit&eacute;, from Late Latin fatalitatem
(nominative fatalitas), from Latin fatalis (see fatal). Senses in 16c.-17c. included determined by
fate and a destiny. Meaning an occurrence resulting in widespread death is from 1840. Related:
Fatalities.


fatally (adv.)

1570s, predestined, from fatal + -ly (2). Meaning in a deadly manner is from 1590s.


fatback (n.)

1903, from fat + back (n.). So called because taken from the back of the animal.


fate (n.)

late 14c., from Latin fata, neuter plural of fatum prophetic declaration, oracle, prediction, thus
that which is ordained, destiny, fate, literally thing spoken (by the gods), from neuter past
participle of fari to speak, from PIE *bha- (2) speak (see fame (n.)).    The Latin sense evolution
is from sentence of the Gods (Greek theosphaton) to lot, portion (Greek moira, personified as a
goddess in Homer), also one of the three goddesses (Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos) who determined
the course of a human life. The native word was wyrd (see weird).


fate (v.)

to preordain as if by fate; to be destined by fate, c.1600, from fate (n.). Related: Fated; fating.
Earlier it meant to destroy (c.1400).


fateful (adj.)

1710s, prophetic, from fate + -ful. Meaning of momentous consequences is from c.1800. Related:
Fatefully.


father (n.)

Old English f&aelig;der father, male ancestor, from Proto-Germanic *fader (cognates: Old Saxon
fadar, Old Frisian feder, Dutch vader, Old Norse fa&eth;ir, Old High German fater, German vater),
from PIE *p&#601;ter (cognates: Sanskrit pitar-, Greek pater, Latin pater, Old Persian pita, Old
Irish athir father), presumably from baby-speak sound like pa.    The classic example of Grimm's
Law, where PIE p- becomes Germanic f-. Spelling with -th- (15c.) reflects widespread phonetic shift
in Middle English that turned -der to -ther in many words; spelling caught up to pronunciation in
1500s (compare burden, murder, mother, weather).


father (v.)

c.1400, from father (n.). Related: Fathered; fathering.


Father&#039;s Day

1910, begun in Spokane, Washington, U.S., but not widespread until 1943; an imitation of Mother's
Day.


fatherhood (n.)

early 14c., faderhade; see father (n.) + -hood.


fatherland (n.)

1620s, from father (n.) + land (n.). In modern use often a loan-translation of German Vaterland,
itself a loan-translation of Latin patria (terra), literally father's land. Late Old English/Middle
English f&aelig;derland (c.1100) meant parental land, inheritance.


fatherless (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;derleas; see father (n.) + -less.


fatherly (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;derlic; see from father (n.) + -ly (1).


fathom (n.)

Old English f&aelig;&eth;m length of the outstretched arm (a measure of about six feet), also arms,
grasp, and, figuratively power, from Proto-Germanic *fathmaz embrace (cognates: Old Norse fa&eth;mr
embrace, bosom, Old Saxon fathmos the outstretched arms, Dutch vadem a measure of six feet), from
PIE *pot(e)-mo-, from root *pete- to spread, stretch out (see pace (n.)). There are apparent
cognates in Old Frisian fethem, German faden thread, which OED explains by reference to spreading
out.


fathom (v.)

Old English f&aelig;&eth;mian to embrace, surround, envelop; see fathom (n.). The meaning take
soundings is from c.1600; its figurative sense of get to the bottom of, understand is 1620s.
Related: Fathomed; fathoming.


fathomable (adj.)

1630s, figurative; 1690s, literal; from fathom (v.) + -able.


fathomless (adj.)

1630s, literal; 1640s, figurative; from fathom + -less.


fatigue (n.)

1660s, that which causes weariness, from French fatigue weariness, from fatiguer to tire, from Latin
fatigare, originally to cause to break down, later, to weary, fatigue, tire out, from pre-Latin adj.
*fati-agos driving to the point of breakdown, from Old Latin *fatis (of unknown origin, related to
adv. affatim sufficiently and to fatisci crack, split) + root of agere to drive (see act (n.)).
Meaning weariness from exertion is from 1719.


fatigue (v.)

1690s, from French fatiguer (15c.), from fatigue (see fatigue (n.). Earlier in same sense was
fatigate (1530s). Related: Fatigued; fatiguing.


fatigues (n.)

extra duties of a soldier, 1776, from fatigue. As a military clothing outfit, from 1836, short for
fatigue dress (1833).


Fatimid

Arab dynasty that ruled 908-1171 in North Africa and sometimes Egypt and Syria, from Fatima,
daughter of Muhammad by his first wife, Khadija; Fatima married Ali, and from them the dynasty
claimed descent.


fatten (v.)

1550s, from fat + -en (1). Related: Fattened. The earlier verb was simply fat (Old English
f&aelig;ttian to become fat, fatten), as in fatted calf.


fattening (adj.)

that makes fat, 1690s, present participle adjective from fatten. Earlier word was fatting (1530s).


fatty (adj.)

late 14c., from fat + -y (2). As a name for a fat person, attested by 1797 (with -y (3)).


fatuity (n.)

1530s, from Middle French fatuit&eacute; (14c.), from Latin fatuitatem (nominative fatuitas)
foolishness, from fatuus foolish, insipid, of uncertain origin.


fatuous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin fatuus foolish, insipid, silly; of uncertain origin (Buck suggests originally
stricken in the head). Related: Fatuously; fatuousness.


fatwa (n.)

1620s, from Arabic fetwa a decision given by a mufti, related to fata to instruct by a legal
decision. Popularized 1989 when Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran issued a ruling sentencing author Salman
Rushdie to death for publishing The Satanic Verses (1988). It was lifted 1998.


faubourg (n.)

suburb, late 15c., from Middle French faux bourg, said by French authorities to be from Old French
forsbourc (12c.) suburbs, outskirts, literally that which is outside the town, from fors outside
(from Latin foris) + bourc town, of Frankish origin (cognate with English borough), altered in
Middle French by folk-etymology to faux bourg false town (suburbs were seen as inauthentic).


faucet (n.)

c.1400, from Old French fausset (14c.) breach, spigot, stopper, peg (of a barrel), of unknown
origin; perhaps diminutive of Latin faux, fauces upper part of the throat, pharynx, gullet. Barnhart
and others suggest the Old French word is from fausser to damage, break into, from Late Latin
falsare (see false).   Spigot and faucet was the name of an old type of tap for a barrel or cask,
consisting of a hollow, tapering tube, which was driven at the narrow end into a barrel, and a screw
into the tube which regulated the flow of the liquid. Properly, it seems, the spigot was the tube,
the faucet the screw, but the senses have merged or reversed over time. Faucet is now the common
word in American English for the whole apparatus.


fault (n.)

late 13c., faute, deficiency, from Old French faute (12c.) opening, gap; failure, flaw, blemish;
lack, deficiency, from Vulgar Latin *fallita a shortcoming, falling, noun use of fem. past
participle, from Latin falsus deceptive, feigned, spurious, past participle of fallere deceive,
disappoint (see fail (v.)).    The -l- was restored 16c., probably in imitation of Latin, but was
not pronounced till 18c. Sense of physical defect is from early 14c.; that of moral culpability is
first recorded late 14c. Geological sense is from 1796. The use in tennis (c.1600) is closer to the
etymological sense.


fault (v.)

late 14c., Scottish, be deficient; see fault (n.). Meaning find fault with is from mid-15c. Related:
Faulted; faulter; faulting.


faultless (adj.)

mid-14c., having no blemishes or imperfections, from fault (n.) + -less. Meaning having no blame,
culpability, or guilt is from 1570s. Related: Faultlessly; faultlessness.


faulty (adj.)

late 14c., from fault (n.) + -y (2). Related: Faultiness.


faun (n.)

late 14c., from Latin Faunus, a word of unknown origin. A god of the countryside, worshipped
especially by farmers and shepherds, equivalent of Greek Pan. Formerly men with goat horns and
tails, later with goat legs, which caused them to be assimilated to satyrs, but they have diverged
again lately.    The faun is now regarded rather as the type of unsophisticated &amp; the satyr of
unpurified man; the first is man still in intimate communion with Nature, the second is man still
swayed by bestial passions. [Fowler]    The plural is fauni.


fauna (n.)

1771, collective name for animals of a certain region or time, from Late Latin Fauna, a Roman
fertility goddess, wife, sister, or daughter (or some combination thereof) of Faunus (see faun).
Popularized by Linnaeus, who adopted it as a companion word to flora and used it in the title of his
1746 catalogue of the animals of Sweden, Fauna Suecica. First used in English by naturalist Gilbert
White.


faunal (adj.)

1877, from fauna + -al (1).


Fauntleroy

in various usages, from the gentle boy hero of Frances Hodgson Burnett's popular novel Little Lord
Fauntleroy (1885). The family name is from mid-13c., literally son of the king (Anglo-French Le
Enfant le Roy).


Faustian

1876, in reference to Johann Faust (c.1485-1541), German wandering astrologer and wizard, who was
reputed to have sold his soul to the Devil. Fantastic tales of his life were told as early as the
late 16c., and he was the hero of dramas by Marlowe and Goethe. The Latinized form of his name,
faustus, means of favorable omen.


Fauvist (n.)

movement in painting associated with Henri Matisse, 1915, from French fauve, wild beast (12c., in
Old French fawn-colored horse, dark-colored thing, dull, from Frankish *falw-, from the Germanic
root of fallow (adj.)). Coined by French art critic Louis Vauxcelles at Autumn Salon of 1905. It was
a reaction against impressionism, featuring vivid use of colors. Related: Fauvism.


faux (adj.)

from French faux false (12c., see false). Used with English words at least since 1676 (Etheredge,
faux-prude). Used by itself, with French pronunciation, from 1980s to mean fake.


faux pas (n.)

1670s, French, literally false step.


fave

1938, slang shortening of favorite.


Favonius

personification of the west wind in Roman mythology, OED says from Latin favere to favor; Klein says
by dissimilation from *fovonius, literally the warming wind, from fovere to warm (see fever). This
is the source (via Old High German phonno, 10c., via Vulgar Latin contraction *faonius) of German
F&ouml;hn warm, dry wind blowing down Alpine valleys.


favor (n.)

c.1300, attractiveness, charm, from Old French favor (13c., Modern French faveur) favor, approval,
partiality, from Latin favorem (nominative favor) good will, inclination, partiality, support,
coined by Cicero from stem of favere to show kindness to, from PIE *ghow-e- to honor, revere,
worship. Meaning act of kindness is from late 14c. Meaning thing given as a mark of favor is from
1580s. Phrase in favor of recorded from 1560s.


favor (v.)

to regard with favor, indulge, treat with partiality, mid-14c., from Old French favorer, from favor
(see favor (n.)). Related: Favored; favoring.


favorable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French favorable well-disposed, favorable, partial, from Latin favorabilis
favored, in favor, from favor (see favor (n.)). Related: Favorably.


favorite (n.)

1580s, from Middle French favorit, perhaps via Italian favorito, past participle of favorire, from
favore, from Latin favorem (see favor (n.)). In racing, attested from 1813. As an adjective, by
1711.


favoritism (n.)

1763, from favorite + -ism.


favour

chiefly British English spelling of favor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or. Related: Favourite;
favouritism.


favourable (adj.)

chiefly British English spelling of favorable; for spelling, see -or. Related: Favourably.


favous (adj.)

resembling a honeycomb, 1670s, from Latin favus honeycomb.


fawn (n.)

young deer, mid-14c., from Anglo-French (late 13c.), Old French faon, feon young animal (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *fetonem (nominative *feto), from Latin fetus an offspring (see fetus). Still used of
the young of any animal in King James I's private translation of the Psalms, but mainly of deer from
15c. Color use is 1881.


fawn (v.)

Old English f&aelig;gnian rejoice, be glad, exult, from f&aelig;gen glad (see fain); used in Middle
English to refer to expressions of delight, especially a dog wagging its tail (early 13c.), hence
court favor, grovel, act slavishly (early 14c.). Related: Fawned; fawning.


fawney (n.)

1781, from Irish fainne ring.


fax (n.)

1948, short for facsimile (telegraphy). The verb attested by 1970. Related: Faxed; faxing.


fay (n.)

fairy, late 14c., from Old French fae (12c., Modern French f&eacute;e), from Vulgar Latin *fata
goddess of fate, fem. singular of Latin fata (neuter plural), literally the Fates (see fate).
Adjective meaning homosexual is attested from 1950s.


Fay

fem. proper name, in some cases from Middle English fei, Old French fei faith, or else from fay
fairy.


faze (v.)

1830, American English variant of Kentish dialect feeze to frighten, alarm, discomfit (mid-15c.),
from Old English fesian, fysian drive away, from Proto-Germanic *fausjan (cognates: Swedish
f&ouml;sa drive away, Norwegian f&ouml;ysa). Related: Fazed; fazing.


FBI

U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, formed 1935 from the former United States Bureau of
Investigation (1908).


FCC

U.S. Federal Communications Commission, formed 1934 from the former Federal Radio Commission.


FDA

U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 1930, shortened from Food, Drug, and Insecticide Administration.


feal (v.)

to hide, conceal, early 14c., a Northern English and Northern Midlands word, from Old Norse fela to
hide, cognate with Gothic filhan to hide, bury, Old English feolan.


feal (adj.)

faithful, 1560s, from Old French feal, collateral form of feeil, from Latin fidelis loyal (see
fidelity).


fealty (n.)

c.1300, from Old French feaut&eacute; loyalty, fidelity; homage sworn by a vassal to his overlord;
faithfulness, from Latin fidelitatem (nominative fidelitas) fidelity, from fidelis loyal, faithful
(see fidelity).


fear (n.)

Old English f&aelig;r calamity, sudden danger, peril, from Proto-Germanic *feraz danger (cognates:
Old Saxon far ambush, Old Norse far harm, distress, deception, Dutch gevaar, German Gefahr danger),
from PIE verbal root *per- (3) to try, risk (source also of Greek peira trial, attempt, experience,
Latin periculum trial, risk, danger), related to *per- (1) forward, through (see per).    Sense of
uneasiness caused by possible danger developed late 12c. Old English words for fear as we now use it
were ege, fyrhto; as a verb, ondr&aelig;dan.


fear (v.)

Old English f&aelig;ran terrify, frighten, originally transitive (sense preserved in archaic I fear
me and somewhat revived in digital gaming). Meaning feel fear is late 14c. Cognate with Old Saxon
faron to lie in wait, Middle Dutch vaeren to fear, Old High German faren to plot against, Old Norse
f&aelig;ra to taunt. See fear (n.). Related: Feared; fearing.


fearful (adj.)

mid-14c., causing fear, from fear + -ful. Meaning full of fear, timid (now less common) also is from
mid-14c. As a mere emphatic, from 1630s. Related: Fearfully; fearfulness.


fearless (adj.)

early 15c., from fear (n.) + -less. Related: Fearlessly; fearlessness.


fearsome (adj.)

1768, from fear + -some (1). Related: Fearsomely; fearsomeness.


feasance (n.)

1530s, from Anglo-French fesance, from Old French faisance action, deed, enactment, from faisant,
present participle of faire to make, do (from Latin facere; see factitious).


feasibility (n.)

1620s, from feasible + -ity.


feasible (adj.)

capable of being done, accomplished or carried out, mid-15c., from Anglo-French faisible, from Old
French faisable possible, easy, convenient, from fais-, stem of faire do, make, from Latin facere
do, perform (see factitious). Fowler recommends this word only for those who feel that the use of an
ordinary word for an ordinary notion does not do justice to their vocabulary or sufficiently exhibit
their cultivation.


feasibly (adv.)

1640s, from feasible + -ly (2).


feast (v.)

c.1300, partake of a feast, from Old French fester, from feste (see feast (n.)). Related: Feasted;
feasting.


feast (n.)

c.1200, religious anniversary characterized by rejoicing (rather than fasting), from Old French
feste (12c., Modern French f&ecirc;te) religious festival; noise, racket, from Vulgar Latin *festa
(fem. singular; also source of Italian festa, Spanish fiesta), from Latin festa holidays, feasts,
noun use of neuter plural of festus festive, joyful, merry, related to feriae holiday and fanum
temple, from PIE *dhes- root of words in religious concepts [Watkins]. The spelling -ea- was used in
Middle English to represent the sound we mis-call long e. Meaning abundant meal (whether public or
private) is from late 14c.


feat (n.)

mid-14c., action, deeds, from Anglo-French fet, from Old French fait (12c.) action, deed,
achievement, from Latin factum thing done, a noun based on the past participle of facere make, do
(see factitious). Sense of exceptional or noble deed arose c.1400 from phrase feat of arms (French
fait d'armes).


feather (n.)

Old English fe&eth;er feather, in plural, wings, from Proto-Germanic *fethro (cognates: Old Saxon
fethara, Old Norse fio&thorn;r, Swedish fj&auml;der, Middle Dutch vedere, Dutch veder, Old High
German fedara, German Feder), from PIE *pet-ra-, from root *pet- to rush, to fly (see petition
(n.)). Feather-headed silly is from 1640s. Feather duster attested by 1858. Figurative use of
feather in (one's) cap attested by 1734.


feather (v.)

Old English fi&eth;erian to furnish with feathers or wings, from fe&eth;er (see feather (n.)).
Meaning to fit (an arrow) with feathers is from early 13c.; that of to deck, adorn, or provide with
plumage is from late 15c. In reference to oars (later paddles, propellers, etc.) from 1740. Phrase
feather one's nest enrich oneself is from 1580s. Related: Feathered; feathering.


feather-bed (n.)

Old English fe&thorn;erbedd; see feather (n.) + bed (n.).


featherweight

also feather-weight, the lightest allowable, 1812 (earlier as simply feather, 1760), from feather
(n.) + weight. Originally in horse-racing; boxing use dates from 1889.


feature (n.)

early 14c., make, form, fashion, from Anglo-French feture, from Old French faiture deed, action;
fashion, shape, form; countenance, from Latin factura a formation, a working, from past participle
stem of facere make, do, perform (see factitious). Sense of facial characteristic is mid-14c.; that
of any distinctive part first recorded 1690s. Entertainment sense is from 1801; in journalism by
1855. Meaning a feature film is from 1913.


feature (v.)

1755, to resemble, from feature (n.). The sense of make special display or attraction of is 1888;
entertainment sense from 1897. Related: Featured; featuring.


features (n.)

parts of the visible body (especially the face), c.1300, from feature (n.).


febrifuge (n.)

1680s, from French f&eacute;brifuge, literally driving fever away, from Latin febris (see fever) +
fugare to put to flight (see fugitive).


febrile (adj.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin febrilis pertaining to fever, from Latin febris a fever (see fever).


February (n.)

late 14c., from Latin februarius mensis month of purification, from februa purifications, expiatory
rites (plural of februum), of unknown origin, said to be a Sabine word. The last month of the
ancient (pre-450 B.C.E.) Roman calendar, so named in reference to the Roman feast of purification,
held on the ides of the month. In Britain, replaced Old English solmona&eth; mud month. English
first (c.1200) borrowed it from Old French Feverier, which yielded feoverel before a respelling to
conform to Latin.


fecal (adj.)

1540s; see feces + -al (1).


feces (n.)

also faeces, c.1400, dregs, from Latin faeces sediment, dregs, plural of faex (genitive faecis)
grounds, sediment, lees, dregs, of unknown origin. Specific sense of human excrement is from 1630s.


feckless (adj.)

1590s, from feck, effect, value, vigor (late 15c.), Scottish shortened form of effect, + -less.
Popularized by Carlyle, who left its opposite, feckful, in dialectal obscurity. Related: Fecklessly;
fecklessness.


feculent (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French f&eacute;culent, from Latin faeculentus abounding in dregs, from stem
faec- (see feces). Related: Feculence.


fecund (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French fecond, from Latin fecundus fruitful, fertile, productive, from *fe-
kwondo-, suffixed form of Latin root *fe-, corresponding to PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, also
produce, yield (cognates: Sanskrit dhayati sucks, dhayah nourishing; Greek thele mother's breast,
nipple, thelys female, fruitful; Old Church Slavonic dojiti to suckle, dojilica nurse, deti child;
Lithuanian dele leech; Old Prussian dadan milk; Gothic daddjan to suckle; Old Swedish dia suckle;
Old High German tila female breast; Old Irish denaim I suck, dinu lamb).    Also from the same Latin
root come felare to suck; femina woman (*fe-mna-, literally she who suckles); felix happy,
auspicious, fruitful; fetus offspring, pregnancy; fenum hay (probably literally produce); and
probably filia/filius daughter/son, assimilated from *felios, originally a suckling.


fecundity (n.)

early 15c., from Latin fecunditatem (nominative fecunditas) fruitfulness, fertility, from fecundus
(see fecund).


fed (n.)

1788, short for Federalist; as colloquial for official of the federal government, from 1916,
especially, after 1930s, of FBI agents.


fed (adj.)

past participle adjective from feed (v.). Fed up surfeited, disgusted, bored, is British slang first
recorded 1900, extended to U.S. by World War I; probably from earlier phrases like fed up to the
back teeth.


fedayeen (n.)

partisans or irregulars in the Middle East, from Arabic plural of fedai devotee, zealot, one who
risks life for a cause, from Persian fidai.


federal (adj.)

1640s, as a theological term, from French f&eacute;d&eacute;ral, from Latin foedus (genitive
foederis) covenant, league, treaty, alliance, related to fides faith (see faith).    Meaning
pertaining to a treaty (1650s) led to political sense  of state formed by agreement among
independent states (1707), from phrases like federal union union based on a treaty, popularized by
formation of U.S.A. 1776-1787.


federalism (n.)

1793, American English, from French f&eacute;d&eacute;ralisme, from f&eacute;d&eacute;ral (see
federal).


federalist (n.)

member or supporter of the Federal party in U.S. politics, originally of supporters of the
Philadelphia constitution, 1787, American English, from federal + -ist. General sense of one who
supports federal union is from 1792.


federate (v.)

1814 (implied in federated), back-formation from federation, or else from Latin foederatus having a
treaty, bound by treaty, past participle of foederare to establish by treaty, from foedus (see
federal). Related: Federating. As an adjective, by 1710.


federation (n.)

1721, union by agreement, from French f&eacute;d&eacute;ration, from Late Latin foederationem
(nominative foederatio), noun of action from Latin foederare league together, from foedus covenant,
league (genitive foederis); see federal.


fedora (n.)

1887, American English, from F&eacute;dora, a popular play by Victorien Sardou (1831-1908) that
opened 1882, in which the heroine, a Russian princess named F&eacute;dora Romanoff, originally was
performed by Sarah Bernhardt. During the play, Bernhardt, a notorious cross-dresser, wore a center-
creased, soft brimmed hat. Women's-rights activists adopted the fashion. The proper name is Russian
fem. of Fedor, from Greek Theodoros, literally gift of god, from theos god + doron gift (see date
(n.1)).


fee (n.)

late 13c., from Old French fieu, fief fief, possession, holding, domain; feudal duties, payment,
from Medieval Latin feodum land or other property whose use is granted in return for service, widely
said to be from Frankish *fehu-od payment-estate, or a similar Germanic compound, in which the first
element is cognate with Old English feoh money, movable property, cattle (also German Vieh cattle,
Gothic faihu money, fortune), from PIE *peku- cattle (cognates: Sanskrit pasu, Lithuanian pekus
cattle; Latin pecu cattle, pecunia money, property); second element similar to Old English ead
wealth.    OED rejects this, and suggests a simple adaptation of Germanic fehu, leaving the Medieval
Latin -d- unexplained. Sense of payment for services first recorded late 14c. Fee-simple is absolute
ownership, as opposed to fee-tail entailed ownership, inheritance limited to some particular class
of heirs (second element from Old French taillir to cut, to limit).


feeble (adj.)

late 12c., from Old French feble (12c., Modern French faible) weak, feeble, from Latin flebilis
lamentable, literally that is to be wept over, from flere weep, cry, shed tears, lament, from PIE
*bhle- to howl (see bleat). The first -l- was dropped in Old French by dissimilation. The noun
meaning feeble person is recorded from mid-14c.


feebleminded (adj.)

1530s; see feeble + mind. Related: Feeblemindedness.


feebleness (n.)

c.1300, from feeble + -ness.


feebly (adv.)

late 13c., from feeble + -ly (2).


feed (v.)

Old English fedan nourish, feed, sustain, foster, from Proto-Germanic *fodjan (cognates: Old Saxon
fodjan, Old Frisian feda, Dutch voeden, Old High German fuotan, Old Norse foe&eth;a, Gothic fodjan
to feed), from PIE *pa- to protect, feed (see food). Feeding frenzy is from 1989, metaphoric
extension of a phrase that had been used of sharks since 1950s.


feed (n.)

action of feeding, 1570s, from feed (v.). Meaning food for animals is first attested 1580s. Of
machinery, from 1892.


feedback (n.)

1920, in the electronics sense, from feed + back (adj.). Transferred use, information about the
results of a process is attested by 1955.


feeder (n.)

early 15c., one who feeds an animal; 1560s, one who eats; agent noun from feed. As a mechanical
apparatus, from 1660s. Of cattle and streams, by 1790s; of roads and railroads, by 1850s.


feel (v.)

Old English felan to touch, perceive, from Proto-Germanic *foljan (cognates: Old Saxon gifolian, Old
Frisian fela, Dutch voelen, Old High German vuolen, German f&uuml;hlen to feel, Old Norse falma to
grope), from PIE root *pal- to touch, feel, shake, strike softly (cognates: Greek psallein to pluck
(the harp), Latin palpare to touch softly, stroke, palpitare to move quickly), perhaps ultimately
imitative.    The sense in Old English was to perceive through senses which are not referred to any
special organ. Sense of be conscious of a sensation or emotion developed by late 13c.; that of to
have sympathy or compassion is from c.1600. To feel like want to attested from 1829.


feel (n.)

early 13c., sensation, understanding, from feel (v.). Meaning action of feeling is from mid-15c.
Sensation produced by something is from 1739. Noun sense of sexual grope is from 1932; from verbal
phrase to feel (someone) up (1930).


feeler (n.)

early 15c., one who feels, agent noun from feel (v.). Of animal organs, 1660s. Transferred sense of
proposal put forth to observe the reaction it gets is from 1830. Related: Feelers.


feeling (n.)

late 12c., act of touching, sense of touch, verbal noun from feel (v.). Meaning emotion is mid-14c.
Meaning what one feels (about something), opinion is from mid-15c. Meaning capacity to feel is from
1580s. Related: Feelingly.


feelings (n.)

tender or sensitive side of one's nature, 1771, from plural of feeling.


feet (n.)

plural of foot (n.).


feign (v.)

c.1300, from Old French feign-, present participle stem of feindre pretend, represent, imitate,
shirk (12c.), from Latin fingere to touch, handle; devise; fabricate, alter, change (see fiction).
Related: Feigned; feigning.


feint (n.)

1670s, a false show, a pretended blow, from French feinte a feint, sham, abstract noun from Old
French feint (13c.) false, deceitful, originally fem. past participle of feindre (see feign).
Borrowed late 13c. as adjective, but now obsolete in that sense. Also as a noun in Middle English
with sense false-heartedness (early 14c.), also bodily weakness (c.1400).


feint (v.)

c.1300, feinten, to deceive, pretend, also become feeble or exhausted; to lack spirit or courage,
from feint (adj.); see feint (n.). Compare Old French feintir be slow, delay. Sense of to make a
sham attack is first attested 1833. Related: Feinted; feinting.


feist (n.)

also fist, a breaking wind, foul smell, fart, mid-15c. (Old English had present participle fisting),
a general West Germanic word with cognates in Middle Dutch veest, Dutch vijst (see feisty).


feisty (adj.)

1896, aggressive, exuberant, touchy, American English, with -y (2) + feist small dog, earlier fice,
fist (American English, 1805); short for fysting curre stinking cur, attested from 1520s, from
Middle English fysten, fisten break wind (mid-15c.); related to Old English fisting stink, from
Proto-Germanic *fistiz- a fart, said to be from PIE *pezd- (see fart), but there are difficulties.
The 1811 slang dictionary defines fice as a small windy escape backwards, more obvious to the nose
than ears; frequently by old ladies charged on their lap-dogs. Compare also Danish fise to blow, to
fart, and obsolete English aske-fise, fire-tender, literally ash-blower (early 15c.), from an
unrecorded Norse source, used in Middle English for a kind of bellows, but originally a term of
reproach among northern nations for an unwarlike fellow who stayed at home in the chimney corner
[OED].


feldspar (n.)

1785, earlier feldspath (1757), from older German Feldspath (Modern German Feldspat), from Feld
field (see field (n.)) + spath spar, non-metallic mineral, gypsum (see spar (n.2)); spelling
influenced by English spar mineral.


Felicia

fem. proper name, from Latin felix (genitive felicis) happy (see felicity).


felicide (n.)

killing of a cat, 1832, from Latin feles cat (see feline) + -cide.


felicitate (v.)

1620s, to render happy; 1630s, to reckon happy; from Latin felicitatus, past participle of
felicitare to make happy, from felicitas fruitfulness, happiness, from felix (see felicity). Meaning
congratulate is from 1630s. Related: Felicitated; felicitating.


felicitation (n.)

1709, noun of action from felicitate. Related: Felicitations.


felicitous (adj.)

1530s (implied in felicitously), from felicity + -ous.


felicity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French felicite (14c.) happiness, from Latin felicitatem (nominative felicitas)
happiness, fertility, from felix (genitive felicis) happy, fortunate, fruitful, fertile, from Latin
root *fe-, equivalent of PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, produce, yield (see fecund).


feline (adj.)

1680s, from Late Latin felinus of or belonging to a cat, from Latin feles (genitive felis) cat, wild
cat, marten, of uncertain origin. As a noun, from 1861.


Felix

masc. proper name, from Latin felix happy (see felicity).


fell (v.1)

Old English f&aelig;llan (Mercian), fyllan (West Saxon) make fall, cause to fall, also strike down,
demolish, kill, from Proto-Germanic *falljan strike down, cause to fall (cognates: Old Frisian
falla, Old Saxon fellian, Dutch fellen, Old High German fellen, German f&auml;llen, Old Norse fella,
Danish f&aelig;lde), causative of *fallan (source of Old English feallan, see fall (v.)), showing
i-mutation. Related: Felled; feller; felling.


fell (adj.)

cruel, late 13c., from Old French fel cruel, fierce, vicious, from Medieval Latin fello villain (see
felon). Phrase at one fell swoop is from Macbeth.


fell (n.1)

rocky hill, c.1300, from Old Norse fiall   mountain, from Proto-Germanic *felzam- rock (cognates:
German Fels stone, rock), from PIE root *pel(i)s- rock, cliff.


fell (v.2)

Old English feoll; past tense of fall (v.).


fell (n.2)

skin or hide of an animal, Old English fel, from Proto-Germanic *felnam- (cognates: Old Frisian fel,
Old Saxon fel, Dutch vel, Old High German fel, German fell, Old Norse fiall, Gothic fill), from PIE
*pel-no-, suffixed form of root *pel- (4) skin, hide (see film (n.)).


fella (n.)

attempt at phonetic spelling of a casual pronunciation of fellow, attested by 1864. Feller, along
the same lines, is recorded by 1825.


fellah (n.)

Egyptian peasant, 1743, from Arabic fallah plowman, from falaha to till the soil.


fellahin (n.)

1743, plural of Arabic fallah (see fellah).


fellate (v.)

1968, verbal derivative of fellatio. Related: Fellated; fellating.


fellatio (n.)

1887, from Latin fellatus, past participle of fellare to suck, from PIE root *dhe(i)- (see fecund).
The sexual partner performing fellatio is a fellator; if female, a fellatrice or fellatrix.


fellation (n.)

1888, from fellatio + -ion.


felloe (n.)

rim of a spoked wheel, early 15c., from felie (c.1200), from Old English felga, plural of felg rim
of a wheel, from Proto-Germanic *felz- (cognates: Old Saxon felga, Middle Dutch velge, Dutch velg,
Old High German felga, German Felge).


fellow (n.)

c.1200, from Old English feolaga fellow, partner, from Old Norse felagi, from fe money (see fee) +
verbal base denoting lay (see lay (v.)). Sense is of one who puts down money with another in a joint
venture. Used familiarly since mid-15c. for man, male person, but not etymologically masculine.
University senses (mid-15c.), corresponding to Latin socius) evolved from notion of one of the
corporation who constitute a college and who are paid from its revenues. First record of fellow-
traveler in sense of one who sympathizes with the Communist movement but is not a party member, is
from 1936, translating Russian poputchik. The literal sense is attested in English from 1610s.


fellow-feeling (n.)

1610s, an attempt to translate Latin compassio and Greek sympatheia. It yielded a back-formed verb,
fellow-feel in 17c.


fellowship (n.)

c.1200, feolahschipe companionship, from fellow + -ship. In Middle English it was at times a
euphemism for sexual intercourse (carnal fellowship).   To fellowship with is to hold communion
with; to unite with in doctrine and discipline. This barbarism now appears with disgusting frequency
in the reports of ecclesiastical conventions, and in the religious newspapers generally. [Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


felo-de-se (n.)

Latin, suicide, literally one guilty concerning himself.


felon (n.)

late 13c., from Old French felon evil-doer, scoundrel, traitor, rebel, the Devil (9c.), from
Medieval Latin fellonem (nominative fello) evil-doer, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Frankish
*fillo, *filljo person who whips or beats, scourger (source of Old High German fillen to whip); or
from Latin fel gall, poison, on the notion of one full of bitterness.    Another theory (advanced by
Professor R. Atkinson of Dublin) traces it to Latin fellare to suck (see fecund), which had an
obscene secondary meaning in classical Latin (well-known to readers of Martial and Catullus), which
would make a felon etymologically a cock-sucker. OED inclines toward the gall explanation, but finds
Atkinson's most plausible of the others.


felonious (adj.)

mid-15c. (implied in feloniously), from felony + -ous. Replaced felonous (mid-14c.) by c.1600.
Felonly (c.1300) was another variation.


felony (n.)

late 13c. as a term in common law, in Anglo-French, from Old French felonie (12c.) wickedness, evil,
treachery, perfidy, crime, cruelty, sin, from Gallo-Roman *fellonia, from fellonem (see felon).


felsic (adj.)

1912, from feldspar + silica + -ic.


felt (n.)

Old English felt, from West Germanic *feltaz something beaten, compressed wool (cognates: Old Saxon
filt, Middle Dutch vilt, Old High German filz, German Filz, Danish filt), from Proto-Germanic *felt-
to beat, from PIE *pel- (6) to thrust, strike, drive (source also of Old Church Slavonic plusti),
with a sense of beating (see pulse (n.1)).


felt (v.1)

to make into felt, early 14c. (implied in felted); see felt (n.).


felt (v.2)

past tense and past participle of feel (v.).


fem (n.)

slang for woman, by 1936, from female.


female (n.)

early 14c., from Old French femelle (12c.) woman, female, from Medieval Latin femella a female, from
Latin femella young female, girl, diminutive of femina woman (see feminine).    Sense extended in
Vulgar Latin from humans to female of other animals. Spelling altered late 14c. on mistaken parallel
of male. As an adjective, from early 14c. Reference to sockets, etc., is from 1660s.


femaleness (n.)

1889, from female + -ness.


feme covert (n.)

married woman (legalese), c.1600, French, from Old French feme coverte, second element fem. of
covert covered. Contrasted to feme sole.


feminine (adj.)

mid-14c., of the female sex, from Old French femenin (12c.) feminine, female; with feminine
qualities, effeminate, from Latin femininus feminine (in the grammatical sense at first), from
femina woman, female, literally she who suckles, from root of felare to suck, suckle (see fecund).
Sense of woman-like, proper to or characteristic of women is recorded from mid-15c.    The interplay
of meanings now represented in female, feminine, and effeminate, and the attempt to make them clear
and separate, has led to many coinages: feminitude (1878); feminile feminine (1640s); feminility
womanliness (1838); femality (17c., effeminacy; 1754 female nature). Also feminality (1640s, quality
or state of being female), from rare adjective feminal (late 14c.), from Old French feminal. And
femineity quality or state of being feminine, from Latin femineus of a woman, pertaining to a woman.


femininity (n.)

late 14c., femynynytee, from feminine + -ity.


feminism (n.)

1851, state of being feminine; sense of advocacy of women's rights is 1895, from French
f&eacute;minisme (1837); see feminine + -ism.


feminist (n.)

1893, from French f&eacute;ministe (1872); also see feminism. As an adjective by 1897. Womanist
sometimes was tried as a native alternative.


feminity (n.)

quality or state of being feminine, late 14c., from Old French feminit&eacute;, from Latin femina
(see feminine).


feminization (n.)

1844, noun of action from feminize.


feminize (v.)

1650s, from Latin femina (see feminine) + -ize. Related: Feminized; feminizing. Femalize (1670s,
intransitive, 1709, transitive) and femininize (1868) are more rare.


femme (n.)

French, literally woman, from Old French feme, from Latin femina (see feminine). Slang meaning
passive and more feminine partner in a lesbian couple attested by 1961.


femme fatale (n.)

attractive and dangerous woman, 1895, from French femme fatale, attested by 1844, from French femme
woman, from Latin femina (see feminine) + fatale (see fatal).   Une femme fatale est une femme qui
porte malheur. [Jules Claretie, La Vie a Paris, 1896]    Earlier, such a woman might be called a
Circe.


femoral (adj.)

1782, from Latin femoris, genitive of femur thigh (see femur) + -al (1).


femur (n.)

1560s, from Latin femur thigh, of unknown origin; borrowed first as an architectural term, 1799 as
thighbone.


fen (n.)

Old English fenn mud, mire, dirt; fen, marsh, moor, from Proto-Germanic *fanjam- (cognates: Old
Saxon feni, Old Frisian fenne, Middle Dutch venne, Dutch veen, Old High German fenna, German Fenn
marsh, Old Norse fen, Gothic fani mud), from PIE *pen- swamp (cognates: Gaulish anam water, Sanskrit
pankah bog, marsh, mud, Old Prussian pannean swampland). Italian and Spanish fango, Old French fanc,
French fange mud are loan-words from Germanic. The native Latin word was limus or lutum.


fence (n.)

early 14c., action of defending, shortening of defens (see defense). Spelling alternated between -c-
and -s- in Middle English. Sense of enclosure is first recorded mid-15c. on notion of that which
serves as a defense. Sense of dealer in stolen goods is thieves' slang, first attested c.1700, from
notion of such transactions taking place under defense of secrecy. To be figuratively on the fence
uncommitted is from 1828, perhaps from the notion of spectators at a fight, or a simple literal
image: A man sitting on the top of a fence, can jump down on either side with equal facility.
[Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848].


fence (v.)

mid-15c., surround with a fence; c.1500, defend, screen, protect; 1590s, fight with swords; the last
from the noun in this sense (1530s); see fence (n.). Related: Fenced, fencing.


fencible (adj.)

early 14c., capable of making a defense, short for defensible; see fence (n.) + -ible.


fencing (n.)

mid-15c., defending, act of protecting; 1580s in the sword-fighting sense; noun from present
participle of fence (v.). In spite of the re-enactment in 1285 of the Assize of Arms of 1181,
fencing was regarded as unlawful in England. The keeping of fencing schools was forbidden in the
City of London, as fools who delight in mischief do learn to fence with buckler, and thereby are
encouraged in their follies. Meaning putting up fences is from 1620s; that of an enclosure is from
1580s; meaning receiving stolen goods is from 1851 (see fence (n.)); meaning materials for an
enclosure is from 1856.


fend (v.)

late 13c., shortening of defend. To fend for oneself (1620s) is to see to one's own defense.
Related: Fended; fending.


fender (n.)

late 13c., shortening of defender. Used of attachments to boats at first, of fireplaces since 1680s;
application to automobiles is 1919.


fenestration (n.)

1870 in the anatomical sense, noun of action from Latin fenestrare, from fenestra window, opening
for light, perhaps from Etruscan. Meaning arrangement of windows is from 1846. Related: Fenestrated.


feng shui (n.)

also feng-shui, 1797, from Chinese, from feng wind + shui water. A system of spiritual influences in
natural landscapes and a means of regulating them.


Fenian

1816, blend of Old Irish feinne, plural of fiann, name of a band of Irish warriors + Old Irish Fene,
name of the ancient inhabitants of Ireland. Reference to Irish-American brotherhood of that name
first attested 1864.


fennec (n.)

fox-like animal of Africa, 1790, from Arabic fenek, fanak a name vaguely applied to various fur-
bearing animals [OED].


fennel (n.)

Old English fenol, finul, perhaps via (or influenced by) Old French fenoil or directly from Vulgar
Latin fenuculum, from Latin feniculum, diminutive of fenum, faenum hay, probably literally produce
(see fecund). Apparently so called from its hay-like appearance and sweet odor.


fenugreek (n.)

Old English fenograecum, from Latin faenugraecum, literally Greek hay, from faenum (see fennel) +
Graecum. The modern form in English is from Middle French fenugrec.


fer de lance (n.)

large poisonous snake of American tropics, 1880, from French, lance-head, literally iron of a lance.
So called for its shape.


feral (adj.)

c.1600, from Middle French feral wild, from Latin fera, in phrase fera bestia wild animal, from
ferus wild (see fierce).


Ferdinand

masc. proper name, of Germanic origin, first element perhaps Proto-Germanic *farthi, abstract noun
from root *far- to fare, travel (see fare (v.)); second element perhaps related to Old English
ne&eth;an, Old High German nendan to risk, venture.


fere (n.)

companion (obsolete), from Middle English fere, a shortening of Old English gefera associate,
comrade, fellow-disciple; wife, man, servant, from root of faran to go, travel (see fare (v.)).
Compare German Gef&auml;hrte companion, from the same root.


Fergus

masc. proper name, from Gaelic Fearghus or Old Irish Fergus man-ability, first element cognate with
Latin vir man, second from Old Irish gus ability, excellence, strength, inclination, from Celtic
root *gustu- choice, from PIE root *geus- to taste (see gusto).


ferhoodle (v.)

to confuse, perplex, from Pennsylvania German verhuddle to confuse, tangle, related to German
verhudeln to bungle, botch. Related: Ferhoodled; ferhoodling.


ferial (adj.)

pertaining to holidays, late 14c., from Old French ferial, from Medieval Latin ferialis, from Latin
feriae (see feast (n.)).


ferine (adj.)

1630s, from Latin ferinus pertaining to wild animals, from fera wild beast (see fierce).


Feringhee (n.)

name used in India for European, 1630s, from Persian Farangi, from Arabic Faranji (10c.), from Old
French Franc Frank (see Frank) + Arabic ethnic suffix -i. The fr- sound is not possible in Arabic.


fermata (n.)

1876, musical term, Italian, literally stop, pause, from fermare to fasten, to stop, from fermo
strong, fastened, from Latin firmus (see firm (adj.)).


ferment (v.)

late 14c., from Old French fermenter (13c.) and directly from Latin fermentare to leaven, ferment,
from fermentum substance causing fermentation, leaven, from root of fervere to boil, seethe (see
brew). Figurative use from 1650s. Related: Fermented; fermenting.


ferment (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French ferment, from Latin fermentum (see ferment (v.)). Figurative sense of
anger, passion is from 1670s.


fermentation (n.)

late 14c., in alchemy, with a broad sense; modern scientific sense is from c.1600; from Late Latin
fermentationem (nominative fermentatio), noun of action from fermentare (see ferment (v.)).
Figurative use attested from 1650s.


Fermium (n.)

discovered in the debris of a 1952 U.S. nuclear test in the Pacific, named 1955 for Italian-born
U.S. physicist Enrico Fermi (1901-1954).


fern (n.)

Old English fearn, from Proto-Germanic *farno- (cognates: Old Saxon farn, Middle Dutch vaern, Dutch
varen, Old High German farn, German Farn), possibly with a sense of having feathery fronds and from
PIE *por-no-, a root which has yielded words for feather, wing (cognates: Sanskrit parnam feather;
Lithuanian papartis fern; Russian paporot'; Greek pteris fern, pteron feather), from root *per- (see
petition (n.)). The plant's ability to appear as if from nothing accounts for the ancient belief
that fern seeds conferred invisibility.


ferocious (adj.)

1640s, from Latin ferocis, oblique case of ferox fierce, wild-looking (see ferocity). Related:
Ferociously; ferociousness.


ferocity (n.)

c.1600, from French f&eacute;rocit&eacute;, from Latin ferocitatem (nominative ferocitas)
fierceness, from ferocis, oblique case of ferox wild, bold, courageous, warlike, fierce, literally
wild-looking, a derivative of ferus wild (see fierce) + -ox, -ocem (genitive -ocis), a suffix
meaning looking or appearing (cognate with Greek ops eye, sight).


ferret (v.)

early 15c., from ferret (n.), in reference to the use of half-tame ferrets to kill rats and flush
rabbits from burrows; the extended sense of search out, discover is 1570s. Related: Ferreted;
ferreting.


ferret (n.)

late 14c., from Old French furet, diminutive of fuiron weasel, ferret, literally thief, probably
from Late Latin furionem (related to furonem cat, also robber), from Latin fur (genitive furis)
thief.


ferric (adj.)

1799, from Latin ferrum iron (see ferro-) + -ic. Of iron, especially with a valence of three.


ferrier (n.)

ferryman, mid-15c., from ferry + -er (1).


Ferris wheel (n.)

1893, American English, from U.S. engineer George W.G. Ferris (1859-1896), who designed it for the
World's Columbian Exposition, held in Chicago, 1893. It was 250 feet tall and meant to rival the
Eiffel Tower, from the 1889 Paris Exposition.


ferrite (n.)

1851, from Latin ferrum iron (see ferro-) + -ite (2).


ferro-

before vowels ferr-, word-forming element indicating the presence of iron, from Latin ferro-, comb.
form of ferrum iron, possibly of Semitic origin, via Etruscan [Klein].


ferromagnetic (adj.)

1840, from ferro- iron + magnetic.


ferrous (adj.)

pertaining to or containing iron, 1865, from Latin ferreus made of iron, from ferrum iron (see
ferro-). In chemistry, containing iron, especially with a valence of two.


ferrule (n.)

metal cap on a rod, 1610s, ferule, earlier verrel (early 15c.), from Old French virelle, from Latin
viriola bracelet, diminutive of viriae bracelets, from a Gaulish word (compare Old Irish fiar bent,
crooked); spelling influenced by Latin ferrum iron.


ferry (v.)

Old English ferian to carry, convey, bring, transport, from Proto-Germanic *farjan to ferry
(cognates: Old Frisian feria carry, transport, Old Norse ferja to pass over, to ferry, Gothic farjan
travel by boat), from PIE root *per- (2) to lead, pass over (see port (n.1)). Related to fare (v.).
Related: Ferried; ferries; ferrying.


ferry (n.)

early 15c., a passage over a river, from Old Norse ferju- passage across water, ultimately from the
same Germanic root as ferry (v.). The modern noun (1580s) is a shortening of ferry boat (mid-15c.).


fertile (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French fertil and directly from Latin fertilis bearing in abundance, fruitful,
productive, from ferre to bear (see infer). Fertile Crescent (1914) was coined by U.S. archaeologist
James H. Breasted (1865-1935).


fertilisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of fertilization. For spelling, see -ize.


fertility (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French fertilit&eacute;, from Latin fertilitatem (nominative fertilitas)
fruitfulness, fertility, from fertilis (see fertile).


fertilization (n.)

1857, noun of action from fertilize.


fertilize (v.)

1640s, make fertile; see fertile + -ize. Its biological sense of unite with an egg cell is first
recorded 1859. Related: Fertilized; fertilizing.


fertilizer (n.)

1660s, a person who fertilizes, agent noun from fertilize. As a euphemism for manure, from 1846.


ferule (n.)

rod for punishing children, 1590s, earlier giant fennel (early 15c.), from Middle English ferula
fennel plant (late 14c.), from Latin ferula reed, whip, rod, ferule, staff; fennel plant or rod,
probably related to festuca stalk, straw, rod.


fervent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French fervent, from Latin ferventem (nominative fervens) boiling, hot, glowing,
figuratively violent, impetuous, furious, present participle of fervere to boil, glow, from PIE root
*bhreue- (see brew (v.)). The figurative sense of impassioned is first attested c.1400. Related:
Fervency; fervently.


fervid (adj.)

1590s, from Latin fervidus glowing, burning; vehement, fervid, from fervere to boil, glow (see brew
(v.)). Figurative sense of impassioned is from 1650s. Related: Fervidly.


fervor (n.)

mid-14c., warmth or glow of feeling, from Old French fervor (Modern French ferveur) heat,
enthusiasm, ardor, passion, from Latin fervor a boiling, violent heat; passion, ardor, fury, from
fervere to boil (see brew (v.)).


fervour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of fervor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


Fescennine (adj.)

vulgar, obscene, scurrilous, from Latin Fescenninus (versus), a rude form of dramatic or satiric
verse, from Fescennia, city in Etruria, noted for such productions.    The Fescennine Songs were the
origin of the Satire, the only important species of literature not derived from the Greeks, and
altogether peculiar to Italy. These Fescennine Songs were rude dialogues, in which the country
people assailed and ridiculed one another in extempore verses, and which were introduced as an
amusement in various festivals. [William Smith, A Smaller History of Rome, London, 1870]


fescue (n.)

1510s, teacher's pointer, alteration of festu piece of straw, twig (late 14c.), from Old French
festu (Modern French f&eacute;tu), a kind of straw, from Vulgar Latin festucum, from Latin festuca
straw, stalk, rod, probably related to ferula (see ferule). Sense of pasture, lawn grass is first
recorded 1762.


fess (v.)

shortened form of confess, attested by 1840, American English. Related: Fessed; fesses; fessing.


fess (n.)

white horizontal band across an escutcheon, late 15c., from Old French faisce, from Latin fascia
(see fasces).


fest

see -fest.


festal (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French festal, from Late Latin festalis, from Latin festum feast (see feast
(n.)).


fester (v.)

late 14c., from Old French festre small sore discharging pus, from Latin fistula pipe, ulcer (see
fistula). The noun is from c.1300. Related: Festered; festering.


festival (n.)

1580s, from earlier adjective (14c.), from Old French festival suitable for a feast, solemn,
magnificent, joyful, happy, and directly from Medieval Latin festivalis of a church holiday (see
festivity).


festive (adj.)

1650s, pertaining to a feast, from Latin festivus festive, joyous, gay, from festum festival,
holiday, noun use of neuter of adjective festus (see feast (n.)).    Meaning mirthful is attested by
1774. Unattested from 1651 to 1735; modern use may be a back-formation from festivity. Related:
Festively; festiveness.


festivity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French festivit&eacute;, from Latin festivitatem (nominative festivitas) good
fellowship, generosity, from festivus festive, from festum festival or holiday, neuter of festus of
a feast (see feast (n.)). Related: Festivities.


festoon (n.)

1620s, from French feston (16c.), from Italian festone, literally a festive ornament, apparently
from festa celebration, feast, from Vulgar Latin *festa (see feast (n.)). The verb is attested from
1789. Related: Festooned.


festschrift (n.)

1898, from German Festschrift, literally festival writing.


Festus

male proper name, from Latin, literally solemn, joyous, festive (see feast (n.)).


fet (v.)

to fetch, Old English fetian to bring near, fetch, obtain, of uncertain origin. See fetch (v.).


fetal (adj.)

1811, from fetus + -al (1).


fetch (v.)

Old English feccan, apparently a variant of fetian, fatian to fetch, bring near, bring back, obtain;
induce; to marry, probably from Proto-Germanic *fetan (cognates: Old Frisian fatia to grasp, seize,
contain, Old Norse feta to find one's way, Middle Dutch vatten, Old High German sih faggon to mount,
climb, German fassen to grasp, contain), from PIE verbal root *ped- to walk, from root *ped- (1)
foot (see foot (n.)). Variant form fet, a derivation of the older Old English version of the word,
survived as a competitor until 17c. Related: Fetched; fetching.


fetch (n.)

apparition, specter, a double, 1787, of unknown origin (see OED for discussion).


fetching (adj.)

1580s, crafty, scheming, present participle adjective from fetch (v.). The sense of alluring,
fascinating is by 1880. Related: Fetchingly.


fete (n.)

1754, from French f&ecirc;te festival, feast, from Old French feste (see feast (n.)). Apparently
first used in English by Horace Walpole (1717-1797).


fete (v.)

1819, from fete (n.). Related: Feted; fetes; feting.


fetial (adj.)

1530s, pertaining to the Fetiales, the Roman diplomatic corps, a college of 20 priests whose duty
was to act as heralds and maintain the laws of war, from Latin fetiales speaking, negotiating,
diplomatic, of unknown origin.


feticide (n.)

also foeticide, 1844; see fetus + -cide.


fetid (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin fetidus (commonly, but incorrectly, foetidus) stinking, from fetere have a
bad smell, stink. Perhaps connected with fimus dung, or with fumus smoke.


fetish (n.)

1610s, fatisso, from Portuguese feiti&ccedil;o charm, sorcery, from Latin facticius made by art,
from facere to make (see factitious).    Latin facticius in Spanish has become hechizo magic,
witchcraft, sorcery. Probably introduced by Portuguese sailors and traders as a name for charms and
talismans worshipped by the inhabitants of the Guinea coast of Africa. Popularized in anthropology
by C. de Brosses' Le Culte des Dieux F&eacute;tiches (1760), which influenced the word's spelling in
English (French f&eacute;tiche, also from the Portuguese word). Figurative sense of something
irrationally revered is American English, 1837.    Any material image of a religious idea is an
idol; a material object in which force is supposed to be concentrated is a Fetish; a material
object, or a class of material objects, plants, or animals, which is regarded by man with
superstitious respect, and between whom and man there is supposed to exist an invisible but
effective force, is a Totem. [J. Fitzgerald Lee, The Greater Exodus, London, 1903]    For sexual
sense, see fetishism.


fetishism (n.)

1801, worship of fetishes; in the purely psycho-sexual sense first recorded 1897 in writings of
Henry Havelock Ellis (1859-1939), from fetish + -ism.  In certain perversions of the sexual
instinct, the person, part of the body, or particular object belonging to the person by whom the
impulse is excited, is called the fetish of the patient. [E. Morselli in Baldwin Dictionary of
Philosophy, 1901]  Related: Fetishist (1845; psycho-sexual sense from 1897).


fetlock (n.)

early 14c., fetlak, from a Germanic source (cognates: Dutch vetlock, Middle High German fizlach,
German Fiszloch), perhaps related to the root of German fessel pastern.    The Middle English
diminutive suffix -ok (from Old English -oc) was misread and the word taken in folk etymology as
being a compound of feet and lock (of hair).


fetor (n.)

offensive smell, mid-15c., from Latin fetor, foetor, from fetere (see fetid).


fetta (n.)

1956, from Modern Greek (tyri) pheta, from tyri cheese + pheta, from Italian fetta a slice, from
Latin offa a morsel, piece.


fetter (n.)

Old English fetor chain or shackle for the feet, from Proto-Germanic *fetero (cognates: Old Saxon
feteros (plural), Middle Dutch veter fetter, in modern Dutch lace, string, Old High German fezzera,
Old Norse fi&ouml;turr, Swedish fj&auml;tter), from PIE root *ped- foot (see foot (n.)). The
generalized sense of anything that shackles had evolved in Old English. Related Fetters.


fetter (v.)

c.1300, from Old English gefetrian (see fetter (n.)). Related: Fettered; fettering.


fettle (n.)

condition, state, trim, c.1750, Lancashire dialect, from fettle (v.) to make ready, arrange (14c.),
perhaps from Old English fetel a girdle, belt, from Proto-Germanic *fatilaz (cognates: German fessel
fetter, chain, Old Norse fetill strap, brace), from PIE *ped- (2) container (see vat).


fettuccine (n.)

1922, from Italian fettuccine, plural of fettuccina, literally little ribbon, diminutive of fetta
slice, ribbon (see fetta).


fettuccini (n.)

see fettuccine.


fetus (n.)

late 14c., the young while in the womb or egg, from Latin fetus (often, incorrectly, foetus) the
bearing, bringing forth, or hatching of young, from Latin base *fe- to generate, bear, also to suck,
suckle (see fecund).    In Latin, fetus sometimes was transferred figuratively to the newborn
creature itself, or used in a sense of offspring, brood (as in Horace's Germania quos horrida
parturit Fetus), but this was not the basic meaning. Also used of plants, in the sense of fruit,
produce, shoot. The spelling foetus is sometimes attempted as a learned Latinism, but it is not
historic.


feu de joie (n.)

public bonfire, French, literally fire of joy.


feud (n.)

c.1300, fede enmity, hatred, hostility, northern English and Scottish; perhaps from an unrecorded
Old English word or else from Old French fede, which is from Germanic (compare Old High German
fehida contention, quarrel, feud), from Proto-Germanic *faihitho noun of state from adjective
*faiho- (cognates: Old English f&aelig;h&eth; enmity, fah hostile; German Fehde feud; Old Frisian
feithe enmity), from PIE root *peig- (2), also *peik- evil-minded, hostile (see foe). Sense of
vendetta is early 15c. Alteration of spelling in 16c. is unexplained.


feud (v.)

1670s, from feud (n.). Related: Feuded; feuding.


feudal (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin feudalis, from feudum feudal estate, of Germanic origin (cognates: Gothic
faihu property, Old High German fihu cattle; see fee). Related to Middle English feodary one who
holds lands of an overlord in exchange for service (late 14c.). Not related to feud.


feudalism (n.)

a coinage of historians, first attested 1839; see feudal. Feudal system attested from 1776.


feuilleton (n.)

part of a French newspaper devoted to light literature and criticism (usually at the bottom of a
page and separated by a rule), 1845, from French feuilleton (18c.), literally a leaflet (added to a
newspaper), diminutive of feuille leaf, from Latin folium (see folio).  Esp. applied in F. to the
short story or serial with which newspapers filled up after the fall of Napoleon left them short of
war news. This was the beginning of Dumas' and Eug&egrave;ne Sue's long novels. [Weekley]


fever (n.)

late Old English fefor, fefer fever, from Latin febris fever, related to fovere to warm, heat,
probably from PIE root *dhegh- burn (cognates: Gothic dags, Old English d&aelig;g day, originally
the heat); but some suggest a reduplication of a root represented by Sanskrit *bhur- to be restless.
The Latin word was adopted into most Germanic languages (German Fieber, Swedish feber, Danish
feber), but not in Dutch. English spelling influenced by Old French fievre. Replaced Old English
hri&eth;ing. Extended sense of intense nervous excitement is from 1580s.


feverfew (n.)

Old English feferfuge, from Late Latin febrifugia, from Latin febris fever (see fever) + fugare put
to flight; so called for its medical usage. The modern English word probably is from an Anglo-French
source.


feverish (adj.)

late 14c., causing fever; 1630s, excited; 1640s, having symptoms of fever, from fever + -ish.
Earlier in same sense was feverous (late 14c.). Related: Feverishly; feverishness.


feverously (adv.)

late 14c., from fever + -ous. Related: Feverously.


few (adj.)

Old English feawe (plural; contracted to fea) few, seldom, even a little, from Proto-Germanic *faw-,
from PIE root *pau- (1) few, little (cognates: Latin paucus few, little, paullus little, parvus
little, small, pauper poor; Greek pauros few, little, pais (genitive paidos) child; Latin puer
child, boy, pullus young animal; Oscan puklu child; Sanskrit potah a young animal, putrah son; Old
English fola young horse; Old Norse fylja young female horse; Old Church Slavonic puta bird;
Lithuanian putytis young animal, young bird). Always plural in Old English.    Phrase few and far
between attested from 1660s. Unusual ironic use in quite a few many (1883), earlier a good few
(1828). The noun is late 12c., fewe, from the adjective.  Never in the field of human conflict was
so much owed by so many to so few. [Winston Churchill, 1940]


fey (adj.)

of excitement that presages death, from Old English f&aelig;ge doomed to die, fated, destines, also
timid, feeble; and/or from Old Norse feigr, both from Proto-Germanic *faigjo- (cognates: Old Saxon
fegi, Old Frisian fai, Middle Dutch vege, Middle High German veige doomed, also timid, German feige
cowardly), from PIE *peig- (2) evil-minded, hostile (see foe). Preserved in Scottish. Sense of
displaying unearthly qualities and disordered in the mind (like one about to die) led to modern
ironic sense of affected.


fez (n.)

1802, from French fez, from Turkish fes, probably ultimately from Fez, the city in Morocco, where
this type of tasseled cap was principally made.


fiance (n.)

man to whom one is betrothed, 1864, from French fianc&eacute;, past participle of fiancer to betroth
(see fiancee).


fiancee (n.)

woman to whom one is betrothed, 1853, from French fiance&eacute;, fem. of fianc&eacute;, past
participle of fiancer to betroth, from fiance a promise, trust, from fier to trust, from Vulgar
Latin *fidare (see affiance). Has all but expelled native betrothed. The verb fiance, now obsolete,
was used c.1450-1600 for to engage to be married.


fianchetto (n.)

chess move, Italian, diminutive of fianco flank (attack), from Old French flanc hip, side (see flank
(n.)).


fiasco (n.)

1855, theater slang for a failure, by 1862 acquired the general sense of any dismal flop, on or off
the stage. Via French phrase fiare fiasco turn out a failure (19c.), from Italian far fiasco suffer
a complete breakdown in performance, literally make a bottle, from fiasco bottle, from Late Latin
flasco, flasconem (see flask).    The reason for all this is utterly obscure today, but the usual
range of fanciful theories has been advanced [Ayto]. Weekley finds it utterly mysterious and
compares French ramasser un pelle to come a cropper (in bicycling), literally to pick up a shovel.
OED makes nebulous reference to alleged incidents in Italian theatrical history. Klein suggests
Venetian glass-crafters tossing aside imperfect pieces to be made later into common flasks. But
according to an Italian dictionary, fare il fiasco used to mean to play a game so that the one that
loses will pay the fiasco, in other words, he will buy the next bottle (of wine). That plausibly
connects the word with the notion of a costly mistake.


fiat (n.)

authoritative sanction, 1630s, from Latin fiat let it be done (also used in the opening of Medieval
Latin proclamations and commands), third person singular present subjunctive of fieri, used as
passive of facere to make, do (see factitious). Also sometimes a reference to fiat lux let there be
light in the Book of Genesis.


fib (n.)

1610s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from fibble-fable nonsense (1580s), a reduplication of fable.


fib (v.)

1680s, from fib (n.). Related: Fibbed; fibbing.


fibber (n.)

1723, agent noun from fib (v.).


fiber (n.)

1530s, from French fibre (14c.), from Latin fibra a fiber, filament, of uncertain origin, perhaps
related to Latin filum thread, or from root of findere to split. Fiberboard is from 1897; Fiberglas
is 1937, U.S. registered trademark name; and fiber optics is from 1956.


fibre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of fiber (q.v.); for spelling, see -re.


fibril (n.)

1680s, back-formation from Modern Latin fibrilla, diminutive of Latin fibra (see fiber).


fibrillate (v.)

c.1840, from fibrilla (see fibril) + -ate (2). Related: Fibrillated; fibrillating.


fibrillation (n.)

c.1840, noun of action from fibrillate.


fibrin (n.)

blood-clotting substance, 1800, from Latin fibra (see fiber) + chemical suffix -in (2). So called
because it is deposited as a network of fibers that cause the blood to clot.


fibromyalgia (n.)

1981, said to have been coined by U.S. rheumatologist Mohammed Yunus, from Latin fibra (see fiber) +
Greek mys (genitive myos) muscle (see muscle) +  -algia. The earlier name for the condition was
fibrositis.


fibrosis (n.)

1873, a Modern Latin hybrid, from Latin fibra (see fiber) + Greek suffix -osis.


fibrous (adj.)

1620s, from Modern Latin fibrosus, from Latin fibra (see fiber).


fibula (n.)

1670s, clasp, buckle, brooch; 1706 as smaller bone in the lower leg, from Latin fibula clasp,
brooch, related to figere to fasten, fix (see fix (v.)).    Used in reference to the outer leg bone
as a loan-translation of Greek perone small bone in the lower leg, originally clasp, brooch;
anything pointed for piercing or pinning; the bone was so called because it resembles a clasp like a
modern safety pin.


fiche (n.)

1949, slip of paper, form, from French fiche card, index card, slip, form, from Old French fichier
to attach, stick into, pin on, from Vulgar Latin *figicare, from Latin figere to fix, fasten (see
fix (v.)). Sense of card, strip of film is a shortening of microfiche (1950).


fichu (n.)

1803, from French fichu (18c. in this sense), apparently a noun use of the adjective fichu
carelessly thrown on, from Latin figere to fasten (see fix (v.)). [M]od. substitution for a coarser
word [Weekley].


fickle (adj.)

c.1200, probably from Old English ficol deceitful, cunning, tricky, related to befician deceive, and
to facen deceit, treachery. Common Germanic (compare Old Saxon fekan deceit, Old High German feihhan
deceit, fraud, treachery), from PIE *peig- (2) evil-minded, treacherous, hostile (see foe). Sense of
changeable is first recorded late 13c. Related: Fickleness.


fiction (n.)

late 14c., something invented, from Old French ficcion (13c.) dissimulation, ruse; invention, and
directly from Latin fictionem (nominative fictio) a fashioning or feigning, noun of action from past
participle stem of fingere to shape, form, devise, feign, originally to knead, form out of clay,
from PIE *dheigh- to build, form, knead (source also of Old English dag dough; see dough). As a
branch of literature, 1590s.


fictional (adj.)

pertaining to fiction, 1843, from fiction + -al (1). Earlier fictitious also was used in this sense
(1773).


fictionalization (n.)

1946, noun of action from fictionalize.


fictionalize (v.)

1925, from fictional + -ize. Related: Fictionalized; fictionalizing.


fictitious (adj.)

1610s, artificial, counterfeit, from Medieval Latin fictitus, a misspelling of Latin ficticius
artificial, counterfeit, from fictus feigned, fictitious, false, past participle of fingere (see
fiction). Related: Fictitiously.


ficus (n.)

c.1400, from Latin ficus fig, fig tree (see fig).


fiddle (n.)

late 14c., fedele, earlier fithele, from Old English fi&eth;ele, which is related to Old Norse
fi&eth;la, Middle Dutch vedele, Dutch vedel, Old High German fidula, German Fiedel; all of uncertain
origin.    Perhaps from Medieval Latin vitula stringed instrument, which is perhaps related to Latin
vitularia celebrate joyfully, from Vitula, Roman goddess of joy and victory, who probably, like her
name, originated among the Sabines [Klein, Barnhart]. Unless the Medieval Latin word is from the
Germanic ones.   Fiddle has been relegated to colloquial usage by its more proper cousin, violin, a
process encouraged by phraseology such as fiddlesticks, contemptuous nonsense word fiddlededee
(1784), and fiddle-faddle. Fit as a fiddle is from 1610s.


fiddle (v.)

late 14c., from fiddle (n.); the figurative sense of to act nervously or idly is from 1520s.
Related: Fiddled; fiddling.


fiddle-faddle

1570s (n.); 1630s (v.), apparently a reduplication of obsolete faddle to trifle.


fiddlehead (n.)

one with a head as hollow as a fiddle, 1854 (fiddleheaded), from fiddle (n.) + head (n.). As a name
for young fern fronds, from 1882, from resemblance to a violin's scroll.


fiddler (n.)

late 13c., from Old English fi&eth;elere fiddler (fem. fi&eth;elestre), agent noun from fiddle (v.).
Fiddler's Green first recorded 1825, from sailors' slang. Fiddler crab is from 1714.


fiddlestick (n.)

15c., originally the bow of a fiddle, from fiddle (n.) and stick (n.). Meaning nonsense (usually
fiddlesticks) is from 1620s.


fideism (n.)

1885, from Latin fides faith (see faith) + -ism.


fidelity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French fid&eacute;lit&eacute; (15c.), from Latin fidelitatem (nominative
fidelitas) faithfulness, adherence, from fidelis faithful, true, from fides faith (see faith).


fidget (n.)

1670s, as the fidget uneasiness, later the fidgets, from a 16c. verb fidge move restlessly, perhaps
from Middle English fiken to fidget, hasten, from Old Norse fikjask to desire eagerly (source also
of German ficken to move about briskly; see fuck).


fidget (v.)

1670s (implied in fidgetting); see fidget (n.). Related: Fidgeted.


fidgety (adj.)

1730s, from fidget (n.) + -y (2). Related: Fidgetiness.


fiducial (adj.)

1570s, from Latin fiducialis reliable, from fiducia trust (see faith).


fiduciary (adj.)

1630s, from Latin fiduciarius (holding) in trust, from fiducia trust from root of fidere to trust
(see faith). In Roman law, fiducia was a right transferred in trust; paper currency sense (1878) is
because its value depends on the trust of the public. As a noun, from 1630s.


fie (interj.)

late 13c., possibly from Old French fi, exclamation of disapproval, and reinforced by a Scandinavian
form (compare Old Norse fy); it's a general sound of disgust that seems to have developed
independently in many languages.


fief (n.)

also feoff, 1610s, from French fief (12c.) possession, holding, domain, a variant of Old French fieu
fee (see fee).


fiefdom (n.)

1814, from fief + -dom.


field (n.)

Old English feld plain, open land (as opposed to woodland), also a parcel of land marked off and
used for pasture or tillage, probably related to Old English folde earth, land, from Proto-Germanic
*felthuz flat land (common West Germanic, cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian feld field, Old Saxon
folda earth, Middle Dutch velt, Dutch veld Old High German felt, German Feld field, but not found
outside it; Swedish f&auml;lt, Danish felt are borrowed from German), from PIE *pel(e)-tu-, from
root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane (n.1)).    Finnish pelto field is believed to have been
adapted from Proto-Germanic. The English spelling with -ie- probably is the work of Anglo-French
scribes (compare brief, piece). Collective use for all engaged in a sport (or, in horseracing, all
but the favorite) is 1742; play the field avoid commitment (1936) is from notion of gamblers betting
on other horses than the favorite. Field glasses attested by 1836.


field (v.)

to go out to fight, 16c., from field (n.) in the specific sense of battlefield (Old English). The
meaning to stop and return the ball is first recorded 1823, originally in cricket; figurative sense
is from 1902. Related: Fielded; fielding.


field day (n.)

1747, originally a day of military exercise and review (see field (v.)); figurative sense is from
1827.


fielder (n.)

early 14c., one who works in a field, agent noun from field (n.). Sporting sense is from 1832 (in
cricket; by 1868 in baseball).


fielding (n.)

1823 in cricket (by 1884 in baseball), verbal noun from field (v.).


fieldstone (n.)

1797, from field (n.) + stone (n.).


fiend (n.)

Old English feond enemy, foe, originally present participle of feogan to hate, from Proto-Germanic
*fijand- hating, hostile (cognates: Old Frisian fiand enemy, Old Saxon fiond, Middle Dutch viant,
Dutch vijand enemy, Old Norse fjandi, Old High German fiant, Gothic fijands), from suffixed form of
PIE root *pe(i)- to hurt (source also of Gothic faian to blame; see passion).    As spelling
suggests, it was originally the opposite of friend, but the word began to be used in Old English for
Satan (as the enemy of mankind), which shifted its sense to diabolical person (early 13c.). The old
sense of the word devolved to foe, then to the imported word enemy. For spelling with -ie- see
field. Meaning devotee (of whatever is indicated), as in dope fiend, is from 1865.


fiendish (adj.)

1520s, from fiend + -ish. Related: Fiendishly; fiendishness.


fierce (adj.)

mid-13c., proud, noble, bold, from Old French fers, nominative form of fer, fier strong,
overwhelming, violent, fierce, wild; proud, mighty, great, impressive (Modern French fier proud,
haughty), from Latin ferus wild, untamed, from PIE root *ghwer- wild, wild animal (cognates: Greek
ther, Old Church Slavonic zveri, Lithuanian zveris wild beast).    Original English sense of brave,
proud died out 16c., but caused the word at first to be commonly used as an epithet, which accounts
for the rare instance of a French word entering English in the nominative case. Meaning ferocious,
wild, savage is from c.1300. Related: Fiercely; fierceness.


fieri facias

writ concerning a sum awarded in judgment (often requiring seizure and sale of property for debt),
Latin, literally cause it to be done, the first words of the writ.


fiery (adj.)

late 13c., from Middle English fier fire (see fire (n.)) + -y (2). The spelling is a relic of one of
the attempts to render Old English y in fyr in a changing system of vowel sounds. Related:
Fieriness.


fiesta (n.)

1844, Spanish, literally feast (see feast (n.)).


FIFA

1915, acronym from F&eacute;d&eacute;ration Internationale de Football Association, founded 1904 in
Paris.


fife (n.)

1550s, from German Pfeife fife, pipe, from Old High German pfifa, or via Middle French fifre (15c.)
from the same Old High German word; ultimately imitative. German musicians provided music for most
European courts in those days. As a verb from 1590s. Agent noun fifer is recorded earlier (1530s).
Fife and drum is from 1670s.


fifteen (n.)

Old English fiftyne, from fif five (see five) + tyne (see -teen). Cognate with Old Saxon fiftein,
Old Frisian fiftine, Old Norse fimtan, Swedish femton, Dutch vijftien, German f&uuml;nfzehn, Gothic
fimftaihun fifteen. French quinze, Italian quindici fifteen are from Latin quindecim (see Quatorze).


fifteenth (adj.)

late 14c., from fifteen + -th (1). By 15c. displacing forms derived from Old English fifteo&eth;a.
Compare Old Frisian fiftuda, Dutch vijftiende, German f&uuml;nfzehnte, Old Norse fimmtandi, Gothic
fimftataihunda.


fifth (adj.)

c.1200, fift, from Old English fifta, from fif five (see five) + -ta (see -th (1)). Altered 14c. by
influence of fourth. Compare Old Frisian fifta, Old Saxon fifto, Old Norse fimmti, Dutch vijfde, Old
High German fimfto, German f&uuml;nfte, Gothic fimfta.    Noun meaning fifth part of a gallon of
liquor is first recorded 1938, American English. Fifth Avenue (in New York City) has been used
figuratively for elegance, taste since at least 1858. Fifth wheel superfluous person or thing first
attested 1902. Fifth-monarchy-man, 17c. for anrachist zealot, is a reference to Dan. ii:44.


fifth column (n.)

1936, from Gen. Emilio Mola's comment at the siege of Madrid during the Spanish Civil War that he
would take the city with his four columns of troops outside it and his fifth column (quinta columna)
in the city.


fifties (n.)

1826 as the years of someone's life between 50 and 59; 1853 as the sixth decade of years in a given
century. See fifty.


fiftieth (adj.)

Old English fiftigo&eth;a; see fifty + -th (1). Compare Old Norse fimmtugande, and, with a different
suffix, Old Frisian fiftichsta, Dutch vijftigste, Old High German fimfzugsto, German
f&uuml;nfzigste.


fifty (n.)

Old English fiftig, from fif five (see five) + -tig group of ten (see -ty (1)). Compare Old Frisian
fiftich, Old Norse fimm tigir, Dutch vijftig, Old High German fimfzug, German f&uuml;nfzig, Gothic
fimf tigjus. U.S. colloquial fifty-fifty in an even division is from 1913.


fig (n.)

early 13c., from Old French figue (12c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al figa, from Vulgar Latin *fica,
from Latin ficus fig tree, fig, which, with Greek sykon, Armenian t'uz is prob. fr. a common
Mediterranean source [Buck], possibly a Semitic one (compare Phoenician pagh half-ripe fig). A
reborrowing of a word that had been taken directly from Latin as Old English fic.    The insulting
sense of the word in Shakespeare, etc. (A fig for ...) is 1570s, in part from fig as small,
valueless thing, but also from Greek and Italian use of their versions of the word as slang for
vulva, apparently because of how a ripe fig looks when split open [Rawson, Weekley]. Giving the fig
(French faire la figue, Spanish dar la higa) was an indecent gesture of ancient provenance, made by
putting the thumb between two fingers or into the mouth, with the intended effect of the modern
gesture of flipping the bird (see bird (n.3)). Also compare sycophant. Use of fig leaf in figurative
sense of flimsy disguise (1550s) is from Gen. iii:7.


fight (v.)

Old English feohtan to fight (class III strong verb; past tense feaht, past participle fohten), from
Proto-Germanic *fehtan (cognates: Old High German fehtan, German fechten, Middle Dutch and Dutch
vechten, Old Frisian fiuhta to fight), from PIE *pek- (2) to pluck out (wool or hair), apparently
with a notion of pulling roughly (cognates: Greek pekein to comb, shear, pekos fleece, wool; Persian
pashm wool, down, Latin pectere to comb, Sanskrit paksman- eyebrows, hair).    Spelling substitution
of -gh- for a hard H sound was a Middle English scribal habit, especially before -t-. In some late
Old English examples, the middle consonant was represented by a yogh. To fight back resist is
recorded from 1890.


fight (n.)

Old English feohte, gefeoht a fight; see fight (v.). Compare Old Frisian fiucht, Old Saxon fehta,
Dutch gevecht, Old High German gifeht, German Gefecht.


fighter (n.)

Old English feohtere; agent noun from fight (v.). Compare German Fechter. Meaning fast military
airplane used for combat is from 1917.


fighting (adj.)

present participle adjective from fight (v.). Fighting chance is from 1877; fighting mad is attested
by 1750.


figment (n.)

early 15c., from Latin figmentum something formed or fashioned, creation, related to figura shape
(see figure (n.)).


figurative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French figuratif metaphorical, from Late Latin figurativus, from figurat-, past
participle stem of figurare to form, shape, from figura a shape, form, figure (see figure (n.)). Of
speech, language, etc., involving figures of speech, from 1845. Related: Figuratively.


figure (v.)

late 14c., to represent (in a picture); see figure (n.). Meaning to shape into is early 15c.; to
picture in the mind is from c.1600; to make an appearance is c.1600. Meaning work out a sum is from
1833, American English. Related: Figured; figuring.


figure (n.)

c.1200, numeral; mid-13c. as visible appearance of a person; late 14c. as form of anything, from Old
French figure (10c.) shape, body, form, figure; symbol, allegory, from Latin figura a shape, form,
figure, from PIE *dheigh- to form, build (see dough).    Philosophical and scientific senses are
from Latin figura being used to translate Greek skhema. The rhetorical use of figure dates to late
14c.; hence figure of speech (1824). Figure eight as a shape was originally figure of eight
(c.1600).


figurehead (n.)

1765, from figure (n.) + head (n.). Originally the ornament on the bow of a ship; sense of leader
without real authority is first attested 1883.


figurine (n.)

1854, from French figurine (16c.), from Italian figurina, diminutive of figura, from Latin figura
(see figure (n.)).


filament (n.)

1590s, from Modern Latin filamentum, from Late Latin filare to spin, draw out in a long line, from
Latin filum thread (see file (v.)).


filbert (n.)

hazelnut, late 14c., from Anglo-French philber (late 13c.), from Norman dialect noix de filbert, in
reference to St. Philbert, 7c. Frankish abbot, so called because the hazel nuts ripen near his feast
day, Aug. 22 (Old Style). Weekley compares German Lambertsnuss filbert, associated with St. Lambert
(Sept. 17); also German Johannisbeere red currant, associated with St. John's Day (June 24). The
name is Old High German Filu-berht, literally very bright.


filch (v.)

steal, 1560s, slang, perhaps from c.1300 filchen to snatch, take as booty, of unknown origin.
Liberman says filch is probably from German filzen comb through. Related: Filched; filching.


filcher (n.)

1570s, agent noun from filch.


file (v.)

to place (papers) in consecutive order for future reference, mid-15c., from Middle French filer
string documents on a wire for preservation or reference, from fil thread, string (12c.), from Latin
filum a thread, string, from PIE *gwhis-lom (cognates: Armenian jil sinew, string, line, Lithuanian
gysla vein, sinew, Old Church Slavonic zila vein), from root *gwhi- thread, tendon. The notion is of
documents hung up on a line. File (filacium) is a threed or wyer, whereon writs, or other exhibits
in courts, are fastened for the better keeping of them. [Cowel, The Interpreter, 1607]    Methods
have become more sophisticated, but the word has stuck. Related: Filed; filing.


file (n.2)

metal tool, Old English feol (Mercian fil), from Proto-Germanic *finkhlo (cognates: Old Saxon and
Old High German fila, Middle Dutch vile, Dutch vijl, German Feile), probably from PIE *peig- (1) to
cut, mark by incision (see paint (v.)). The verb in this sense is from early 13c., from Old English
filian. Related: Filed; filing.


file (n.1)

1520s, string or wire on which documents are strung, from French file row, from Middle French filer
(see file (v.)). The meaning arranged collection of papers is from 1620s; computer sense is from
1954. The military sense line or row of men (1590s) is from the French verb in the sense of spin out
(thread); march in file.


filet (n.)

1841 in cookery, reborrowing from French of the same word that had been taken 14c. and anglicized as
fillet (q.v.). Filet mignon is attested as a French word in English from 1815.  The 'Chateaubriand,'
the 'entrec&ocirc;te,' and the 'filet mignon' (of mutton), with other forms, are all due to the more
enlarged sympathies of the French butcher for what is perfect. We must entirely change the mode of
cutting up the carcase before we can arrive at the same perfection in form of meat purchasable, and
as that is hopeless, so is it useless to insist further on the subject on behalf of the public. [The
Kitchen and the Cellar, Quarterly Review, April 1877]


filial (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle French filial, from Late Latin filialis of a son or daughter, from Latin
filius son, filia daughter, possibly from a suffixed form of PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, grow
(see be), though *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle (see fecund) is more likely [Watkins].


filiation (n.)

1520s, from French filiation, from Medieval Latin filiationem (nominative filiatio), noun of action
from filiare to have a child, from Latin filius/filia (see filial).


filibuster (n.)

1580s, flibutor pirate, probably ultimately from Dutch vrijbuiter freebooter, a word which used of
pirates in the West Indies in Spanish (filibustero) and French (flibustier) forms, either or both of
which gave the word to American English (see freebooter).    Used 1850s and '60s of lawless
adventurers from the U.S. who tried to overthrow Central American governments. The legislative sense
is not in Bartlett (1859) and seems not to have been in use in U.S. legislative writing before 1865.
Probably the extension in sense is because obstructionist legislators pirated debate or overthrew
the usual order of authority. Not technically restricted to U.S. Senate, but that's where the
strategy works best.


filibuster (v.)

1853 in both the freebooting and the legislative senses, from filibuster (n.). Related:
Filibustered; filibustering.


filicide (n.)

1660s, action of killing a son or daughter, from Latin filius/filia son/daughter (see filial) +
-cide. Meaning one who kills a son or daughter is from 1823. Related: Filicidal.


filigree (n.)

1690s, shortening of filigreen (1660s), from French filigrane filigree (17c.), from Italian
filigrana, from Latin filum thread (see file (v.)) + granum grain (see corn (n.1)). Related:
Filigreed.


Filipino (n.)

1898 (fem. Filipina), Spanish, from las Islas Filipinas the Philippine Islands (see Philippines).


fill (v.)

Old English fyllan fill up, replenish, satisfy, from Proto-Germanic *fullijan (cognates: Old Saxon
fulljan, Old Norse fylla, Old Frisian fella, Dutch vullen, German f&uuml;llen to fill), a derivative
of adj. *fullaz full (see full (adj.)). Related: Filled.    To fill the bill (1882) originally was
U.S. theatrical slang, in reference to a star whose name would be the only one on a show's poster.
To fill out write in required matter is recorded from 1880. Fill-in substitute (n.) is from 1918.


fill (n.)

a full supply, mid-13c., fille, from Old English fylle, from Proto-Germanic *fullin- (cognates: Old
High German fulli, German F&uuml;lle, Old Norse fyllr), noun of state from *fullaz full (see full
(adj.)). Meaning extra material in music is from 1934.


filler (n.)

late 15c., one who fills, agent noun from fill (v.). Meaning something used to fill is from 1590s.
Specifically of food products by 1901.


fillet (n.)

early 14c., headband, from Old French filet (12c.) thread, filament; strip, ligament, diminutive of
fil thread (see file (v.)). Sense of cut of meat or fish is from late 14c., apparently so called
because it was prepared by being tied up with a string. As a verb, from c.1600, to bind with a
narrow band; meaning to cut in fillets is from 1846. Related: Filleted; filleting.


filling (n.)

verbal noun from fill (v.). Dentistry sense is from 1848. Filling station attested by 1921.


fillip (v.)

mid-15c., philippen to flip something with the fingers, snap the fingers, possibly of imitative
origin. As a noun, from 1520s, fyllippe.


filly (n.)

c.1400, fyly, possibly from Old Norse fylja, fem. of foli foal (see foal (n.)). Slang sense of young
girl is from 1610s.


film (n.)

Old English filmen membrane, thin skin, from West Germanic *filminjan (cognates: Old Frisian filmene
skin, Old English fell hide), extended from Proto-Germanic *fello(m) animal hide, from PIE *pel- (4)
skin, hide (cognates: Greek pella, Latin pellis skin).    Sense of a thin coat of something is
1570s, extended by 1845 to the coating of chemical gel on photographic plates. By 1895 this also
meant the coating plus the paper or celluloid. First used of motion pictures in 1905.


film (v.)

c.1600, to cover with a film, from film (v.). Meaning to make a movie of is from 1899. Related:
Filmed; filming.


film noir (n.)

1958, from French, literally black film, from noir (12c.), from Latin niger (see Negro).


filmmaker (n.)

from film (n.) + maker.


filmography (n.)

1962, from film (n.) + ending from bibliography, etc.


filmstrip (n.)

1930, from film (n.) + strip (n.).


filmy (adj.)

c.1600, from film (n.) + -y (2). Related: Filminess.


filoque

Latin, and from the son (see filial). Clause in Nicene Creed which separates Eastern Church from
Western [Weekley].


filter (n.)

early 15c., from Old French filtre and directly from Medieval Latin filtrum felt, which was used to
strain impurities from liquid, from West Germanic *filtiz (see felt (n.)). Of cigarettes, from 1908.


filter (v.)

1570s, from Medieval Latin filtrare, from filtrum (see filter (n.)). The figurative sense is from
1830. Related: Filtered; filtering.


filth (n.)

Old English fyl&eth; uncleanness, impurity, from Proto-Germanic *fulitho (cognates: Old Saxon
fulitha foulness, filth, Dutch vuilte, Old High German fulida), noun derivative of *fulo- foul (see
foul (adj.)). A classic case of i-mutation.


filthy (adj.)

late 12c., fulthe, corrupt, sinful, from filth + -y (2). Meaning physically unclean is from late
14c. Meaning morally dirty, obscene is from 1530s.    In early use often hardly more emphatic than
the mod. dirty; it is now a violent expression of disgust, seldom employed in polite colloquial
speech. [OED]    Related: Filthiness.


filtrate (v.)

1610s, probably a back-formation from filtration. As a noun, from 1846.


filtration (n.)

c.1600, perhaps from French filtration (1570s), noun of action from filter to filter (see filter
(v.)).


fimbria (n.)

Latin, literally fringe, border, shred.


fin (n.)

Old English finn, from Proto-Germanic *finno (cognates: Middle Low German vinne, Dutch vin), perhaps
from Latin pinna feather, wing (see pin (n.)); or, less likely, from Latin spina thorn, spine (see
spine).    U.S. underworld slang sense of $5 bill is 1925, from Yiddish finif five, from German
f&uuml;nf (see five) and thus unrelated. The same word had been used in England in 1868 to mean five
pound note (earlier finnip, 1839).


fin de siecle (adj.)

1890, from French fin de si&egrave;cle end of century, phrase used as an adjective. At the time it
meant modern; now it means from the 1890s. App. first in title of a comedy, Paris fin de
si&egrave;cle, produced at the Gymnase, Feb. 1890 [Weekley]. French si&egrave;cle century, age is
from Latin saeculum (see secular).


finagle (v.)

1926, American English, possibly a variant of English dialectal fainaigue to cheat or renege (at
cards), of unknown origin. Liberman says finagle is from figgle, phonetic variant of fiddle fidget
about, frequentative of fig. Related: Finagled; finagling.


final (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French final and directly from Latin finalis of or pertaining to an end,
concluding, final, from finis end (see finish (v.)). As a noun, late 14c., that which comes last;
meaning final contest in a sporting sense is from 1880. As a shortening of final examination, from
1880.


final solution (n.)

1947, translation of German Endl&ouml;sung, name given to Nazi Jewish policy from 1941.


finale (n.)

1783, borrowed as a musical term from Italian finale final, from Latin finalis (see final). From
1724 as an Italian word in English. Figurative use by 1810.


finalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of finalize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Finalised; finalising.


finalist (n.)

competitor remaining after eliminations, 1898, from final + -ist.


finality (n.)

1540s, from Middle French finalit&eacute;, from Late Latin finalitatem (nominative finalitas) state
of being final, from Latin finalis (see final).


finalize (v.)

1850, from final + -ize. Related: Finalized; finalizing.


finally (adv.)

late 14c., fynaly, from final + -ly (2).


finals (n.)

short for final exams, by 1890.


finance (n.)

c.1400, an end, settlement, retribution, from Middle French finance ending, settlement of a debt
(13c.), noun of action from finer to end, settle a dispute or debt, from fin (see fine (n.)).
Compare Medieval Latin finis a payment in settlement, fine or tax.    The notion is of ending (by
satisfying) something that is due (compare Greek telos end; plural tele services due, dues exacted
by the state, financial means). The French senses gradually were brought into English: ransom (mid-
15c.), taxation (late 15c.); the sense of management of money first recorded in English 1770.


finance (v.)

late 15c., to ransom; see finance (n.). Sense of to manage money is recorded from 1827; that of to
furnish with money is from 1866. Related: Financed; financing.


finances (n.)

pecuniary resources, 1730, modeled on the French cognate, from plural of finance (n.).


financial (adj.)

1769, from finance (n.) + -al (1). Related: Financially.


financier (n.)

1610s, one concerned with finances (especially public), from French financier (16c.), agent noun
from finance (see finance (n.)). Sense of capitalist is first recorded 1867.


finch (n.)

Old English finc, from Proto-Germanic *finkiz, *finkjon (cognates: Middle Low German and Middle
Dutch vinke, Dutch vink, Old High German finco, German Fink), perhaps imitative of the bird's note
(compare Breton pint chaffinch, Russian penka wren).


find (v.)

Old English findan come upon, meet with, discover; obtain by search or study (class III strong verb;
past tense fand, past participle funden), from Proto-Germanic *finthan to come upon, discover
(cognates: Old Saxon findan, Old Frisian finda, Old Norse finna, Middle Dutch vinden, Old High
German findan, German finden, Gothic fin&thorn;an), originally to come upon.    The Germanic word is
from PIE root *pent- to tread, go (cognates: Old High German fendeo pedestrian; Sanskrit panthah
path, way; Avestan panta way; Greek pontos open sea, patein to tread, walk; Latin pons (genitive
pontis) bridge; Old Church Slavonic poti path, peta heel; Russian put' path, way). To find out to
discover by scrutiny is from 1550s (Middle English had a verb, outfinden, c.1300).


find (n.)

person or thing discovered, 1825, from find (v.).


finding (n.)

c.1300, an abandoned child, verbal noun from find (v.). See foundling. Later, a discovery; that
which is found out (1590s). Meaning result of a judicial examination is from 1859. Related:
Findings.


fine (adj.)

mid-13c., unblemished, refined, pure; of superior quality, from Old French fin perfected, of highest
quality (12c.), from Latin finis end, limit (see finish (v.)); hence acme, peak, height, as in finis
boni the highest good.    In French, the main meaning remains delicate, intricately skillful; in
English since mid-15c. fine is also a general expression of admiration or approval, the equivalent
of French beau (as in fine arts, 1767, translating French beaux-arts). Finer; finest. Fine print is
from 1861 as type small and close-set; by 1934 as qualifications and limitations of a deal.


fine (n.)

c.1200, termination, from Old French fin end, limit, boundary; death; fee, payment, finance, money
(10c.), from Medieval Latin finis a payment in settlement, fine or tax, from Latin finis end (see
finish (v.)).    Modern meaning is via sense of sum of money paid for exemption from punishment or
to compensate for injury (mid-14c., from the same sense in Anglo-French, late 13c.) and from phrases
such as to make fine make one's peace, settle a matter (c.1300). Meaning sum of money imposed as
penalty for some offense is first recorded 1520s.


fine (v.)

late 13c., pay as a ransom or penalty, from fine (n.). Inverted meaning to punish by a fine is from
1550s. Related: Fined; fining.


fine tune (v.)

also fine-tune, 1969, a back-formation from fine-tuning (1924), originally in reference to radio
receivers. From fine (adj.) + tune (v.). Related: Fine-tuning.


finely (adv.)

early 14c., perfectly, completely, from fine (adj.) + -ly (1). Meaning delicately, minutely is from
1540s; that of excellently is from 1680s.


finery (n.)

1670s, showy dress, from fine (adj.) + -ery. Literally, something that is fine.


finesse (n.)

1520s, from Middle French finesse fineness, subtlety, from Old French fin subtle, delicate (see fine
(adj.)).


finesse (v.)

1746, originally as a term in whist; see finesse (n.). Related: Finessed; finessing.


finger (n.)

Old English fingor, from Proto-Germanic *fingraz (cognates: Old Saxon fingar, Old Frisian finger,
Old Norse fingr, Dutch vinger, German Finger, Gothic figgrs), with no cognates outside Germanic;
perhaps connected with PIE *penkwe-, the root meaning five.    As a unit of measure (Middle English)
it represents the breadth of a finger, about three-quarters of an inch. They generally are numbered
from the thumb, and named index finger, fool's finger, leech- or physic-finger, and ear-finger.


finger (v.)

early 15c., to touch or point to with the finger (but see fingering from late 14c.), from finger
(n.). Sense of play upon a musical instrument is from 1510s. The meaning identify a criminal is
underworld slang first recorded 1930. Related: Fingered; fingering.


fingering (n.1)

action of using the fingers in playing a musical instrument, late 14c., fyngerynge, from finger
(n.).


fingering (n.2)

fine woolen yarn, from fingram, from French fin grain, literally fine grain.


fingerless (adj.)

1838, of gloves, from finger (n.) + -less.


fingernail (n.)

early 13c., from finger (n.) + nail (n.).


fingerprint (n.)

1834, from finger (n.) + print (n.). Proposed as a means of identification from c.1892.
Admissibility as evidence as valid proof of guilt in murder trials in U.S. upheld in 1912. From 1905
as a verb. Related: Fingerprinted; fingerprinting.


fingertip (n.)

1824, from finger (n.) + tip (n.). Related: Fingertips.


finial (n.)

ornament at the top of a spire, gable, etc., mid-15c., from fyniall putting an end to, binding
(early 15c.), a variant of final.


finical (adj.)

1590s; see finicky.


finicky (adj.)

1825, dainty, mincing, from finical too particular (1590s), perhaps from fine (adj.) + -ical as in
cynical, ironical. The -k- between the final -c- and a suffix beginning in -i, -y, or -e is an
orthographic rule to mark the pronunciation of -c- as k (compare picnicking, trafficking, panicky,
shellacked).


finis (n.)

Latin, literally the end (see finish (v.)).


finish (v.)

late 14c., to bring to an end; mid-15c., to come to an end, from Old French finiss-, present
participle stem of fenir (13c.) stop, finish, come to an end, die, from Latin finire to limit, set
bounds, put an end to, come to an end, from finis boundary, limit, border, end, of unknown origin,
perhaps related to figere to fasten, fix (see fix (v.)). Meaning to kill is from 1755. Related:
Finished; finishing. Finishing school is from 1836.


finish (n.)

1779, that which finishes or gives completion, from finish (v.). Meaning the end is from 1790.
Finish line attested from 1873.


finite (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin finitus, past participle of finire to limit, set bounds, end, from finis (see
finish (v.)). Related: Finitely.


finitude (n.)

1640s, from finite + -ude.


fink (n.)

1902, of uncertain origin, possibly from German Fink a frivolous or dissolute person, originally
finch; the German word also had a sense of informer (compare stool pigeon). The other theory traces
it to Pinks, short for Pinkerton agents, the private police force hired to break up the 1892
Homestead strike. As a verb, 1925 in American English slang. Related: Finked; finking.


Finn (n.)

Old English finnas, from Old Norse finnr, the Norsemen's name for the Suomi. Some suggest a
connection with fen. Attested in Tacitus as Fenni.


finned (adj.)

mid-14c., adjective in past participle form from fin.


Finnish (adj.)

c.1790, from Finn + -ish. Earlier was Finnic (1660s).


finny (adj.)

1580s, from fin + -y (2).


fiord (n.)

alternative form of fjord (q.v.).


fippeny

1802, short for five penny; further contracted form fip attested by 1822.


fir (n.)

14c.; Old English had furhwudu pine wood, but the modern word is more likely from Old Norse fyri-
fir or Old Danish fyr, all from Proto-Germanic *furkhon (cognates: Old High German foraha, German
F&ouml;hre fir), from PIE root *perkos, originally oak (cognates: Sanskrit paraktah the holy fig
tree, Hindi pargai the evergreen oak, Latin quercus oak, Lombardic fereha a kind of oak).


Firbolgs (n.)

1797, ancient supernatural people of Ireland (enemies of the Dannans), perhaps from Old Irish fir,
plural of fear man + bolg, genitive plural of bolg bag, belly; or second element may be cognate with
Gaulish Belgae.


fire (n.)

Old English fyr, from Proto-Germanic *fuir (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian fiur, Old Norse
f&uuml;rr, Middle Dutch and Dutch vuur, Old High German fiur, German Feuer), from PIE *perjos, from
root *paewr- (cognates: Armenian hur fire, torch, Czech pyr hot ashes, Greek pyr, Umbrian pir,
Sanskrit pu, Hittite pahhur fire).    Current spelling is attested as early as 1200, but did not
fully displace Middle English fier (preserved in fiery) until c.1600.    PIE apparently had two
roots for fire: *paewr- and *egni- (source of Latin ignis). The former was inanimate, referring to
fire as a substance, and the latter was animate, referring to it as a living force (see water
(n.1)).   Fire applied in English to passions, feelings, from mid-14c. Meaning action of guns, etc.
is from 1580s. Firecracker is American English coinage for what is in England just cracker, but the
U.S. word distinguishes it from the word meaning biscuit. Fire-engine attested from 1680s. The
figurative expression play with fire risk disaster is from 1887; phrase where's the fire? what's the
hurry? first recorded 1924.


fire (v.)

c.1200, furen, figurative, arouse, excite; literal sense of set fire to is from late 14c., from fire
(n.). The Old English verb fyrian to supply with fire apparently did not survive into Middle
English.    The sense of sack, dismiss is first recorded 1885 in American English (earlier throw
(someone) out of some place, 1871), probably from a play on the two meanings of discharge: to
dismiss from a position, and to fire a gun, fire in the second sense being from set fire to
gunpowder, attested from 1520s. Of bricks, pottery, etc., from 1660s. Related: Fired; firing. Fired
up angry is from 1824. Firing squad is attested from 1904.


firearm (n.)

1640s, from fire (n.) + arm (n.2). Related: Firearms.


fireball (n.)

1550s, from fire (n.) + ball (n.1).


firebomb (n.)

1895, from fire (n.) + bomb (n.). As a verb, from 1950 as an act of vandalism or terrorism, from
1941 as a military aviation tactic. Related: Firebombed; firebombing.


firebrand (n.)

c.1200, piece of wood kindled at a fire, from fire (n.) + brand (n.). Figurative sense of one who
kindles mischief or passions is from late 14c.


firebug (n.)

arsonist, 1872, from fire (n.) + bug (n.).


firefighter (n.)

1903, from fire (n.) + fighter.


firefly (n.)

1650s, from fire (n.) + fly (n.).


firelight (n.)

Old English fyrleoht; see fire (n.) + light (n.).


fireman (n.)

late 14c., tender of a fire, from fire (n.) + man (n.). As person hired to put out (rather than
tend) fires it is attested from 1714.


fireplace (n.)

c.1700, from fire (n.) + place (n.).


fireplug (n.)

1713, from fire (n.) + plug (n.).


fireproof (adj.)

1630s, from fire (n.) + proof. As a verb, from 1867. Related: Fireproofed; fireproofing.


fireside (n.)

1560s, from fire (n.) + side (n.). Symbolic of home life by 1848.


firewall (n.)

1851 as a physical wall meant to prevent the spread of fire in a structure, from fire (n.) + wall
(n.). Computer sense is by 1990.


firewater (n.)

alcoholic liquor, 1826, American English, supposedly from American Indians, from fire (n.) + water
(n.1).


firewood (n.)

late 14c., from fire (n.) + wood (n.).


fireworks (n.)

1570s, from fire (n.) + works (see work (n.)).


firkin (n.)

small cask, fourth part of a barrel, late 14c., apparently from Middle Dutch *vierdekijn, diminutive
of vierde, literally fourth, fourth part (see fourth).


firm (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ferm (12c.) firm, strong, vigorous, steadfast; loyal, faithful, from
Latin firmus firm, strong, steadfast, enduring, stable, from PIE root *dher- (1) to hold, support
(cognates: Sanskrit dharmah custom, law, Greek thronos seat, Lithuanian dirzmas strong, Welsh dir
hard, Breton dir steel). The return in late 1500s to -i- from Middle English ferme was modeled on
Latin. Related: Firmly; firmness.


firm (n.)

business house, 1744, from German Firma a business,  name of a business, originally signature, from
Italian firma signature, from firmare to sign, from Latin firmare make firm, affirm, in Late Latin,
confirm (by signature), from firmus firm, stable (see firm (adj.)).


firm (v.)

c.1300, fermen make firm, establish, from Old French fermer (12c.) or directly from Latin firmare,
from   firmus (see firm (adj.)). Related: Firmed; firming.


firmament (n.)

mid-13c., from Latin firmamentum firmament, literally a support or strengthening, from firmus firm
(see firm (adj.)), used in Vulgate to translate Greek stereoma firm or solid structure, which
translated Hebrew raqia, a word used of both the vault of the sky and the floor of the earth in the
Old Testament, probably literally expanse, from raqa to spread out, but in Syriac meaning to make
firm or solid, hence the erroneous translation.


firmware (n.)

1968, from firm (adj.) + ending from software.


firn (n.)

consolidated snow, the raw material of glaciers, 1853, literally last year's snow,
n&eacute;v&eacute;, from German Firn, from Swiss dialectal firn of last year, from Middle High
German virne old, from Old High German firni, related to Old English fyrn old, Gothic fairns of last
year, from Proto-Germanic *fur-/*for- (see first). The only English relic of a useful word meaning
of last year that was widespread in Indo-European languages. It has cognates in Lithuanian pernai
last year, Greek perysi a year ago, last year, Sanskrit parut of last year.


first (adj., adv.)

Old English fyrst foremost, superlative of fore; from Proto-Germanic *furisto- (cognates: Old Saxon
fuirst first, Old High German furist, Old Norse fyrstr, Danish f&oslash;rste, Old Frisian ferist,
Middle Dutch vorste prince, Dutch vorst first, German F&uuml;rst prince), superlative of
*fur-/*for-, from PIE root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).   First-class (adj.) is from 1837;
first-rate (1660s) is from classes of warships in the British navy. First aid is that given at the
scene, pending the arrival of a doctor.   First Lady as an informal title for the wife of a U.S.
president was in use by 1908, short for First lady of the land (by 1863 with reference to the
president's wife). First name is attested from mid-13c.; first-born is from mid-14c. First base a
start (1938) is a figurative use from the game of baseball.


firsthand (adj.)

also first-hand, first hand, 1690s, from the image of the first hand as the source or origin of
something.


firstly (adv.)

1530s, but never a common word (simple first usually serving its place), from first + -ly (2).


firth (n.)

arm of the sea, estuary of a river, early 15c., Scottish, from Old Norse fj&ouml;r&eth;r (see
fjord).


fiscal (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to public revenue, from Middle French fiscal, from Late Latin fiscalis of or
belonging to the state treasury, from Latin fiscus treasury, originally purse, basket made of twigs
(in which money was kept), of unknown origin. The general sense of financial (1865, American
English) was abstracted from phrases like fiscal calendar, fiscal year. Related: Fiscally.


fish (n.)

Old English fisc, from Proto-Germanic *fiskaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German
fisc, Old Norse fiskr, Middle Dutch visc, Dutch vis, German Fisch, Gothic fisks), from PIE *peisk-
fish (cognates: Latin piscis, Irish iasc, and, via Latin, Italian pesce, French poisson, Spanish
pez, Welsh pysgodyn, Breton pesk).   Fish story attested from 1819, from the tendency to exaggerate
the size of the catch (or the one that got away). Figurative sense of fish out of water first
recorded 1610s.


fish (v.)

Old English fiscian (cognates: Old Norse fiska, Old High German fiscon, German fischen, Gothic
fiskon), from the root of fish (n.). Related: Fished; fishing.


fish-hook

late 14c., from fish (n.) + hook (n.).


fisher (n.)

Old English fiscere, agent noun from fish (v.). It began to be used of certain animals, hence
perhaps the rise of the formation fisherman (1520s).


fishery (n.)

business of fishing, 1670s; place where fish are caught, 1690s; see fish (v.) + -ery. Related:
Fisheries.


fishing (n.)

verbal noun from fish (v.), c.1300, fysschynge; figurative use from 1540s. Fishing rod (1550s) is
older than fishing pole (1791). To go fishing is as old as Old English on fisco&eth; gan.  [O]f all
diversions which ingenuity ever devised for the relief of idleness, fishing is the worst qualified
to amuse a man who is at once indolent and impatient. [Scott, Waverly, 1814]


fishmonger (n.)

mid-15c., from fish (n.) + monger (n.).


fishtail (n.)

1840, from fish (n.) + tail (n.). As a verb, 1927, originally of aircraft, later automobiles.
Related: Fishtailed; fishtailing.


fishwife (n.)

1520s, from fish (n.) + wife in the woman sense.


fishy (adj.)

late 15c., from fish (n.) + -y (2). Sense of shady, questionable is first recorded 1840, perhaps
from the notion of slipperiness, or of giving off a bad odor.


fisk (v.)

2002, an Internet argument tactic involving a reprinting of an article or blog post, interlarded
with rebuttals and refutations, often intended to show the original is a sandpile of flawed facts,
unfounded assertions, and logical fallacies. Named for English journalist Robert Fisk (b.1946),
Middle East correspondent for the Independent, whose writing often criticizes America and Israel and
is somewhat noted for looseness with details. Related: Fisked; fisking.


fissile (adj.)

1660s, from Latin fissilis that which may be cleft or split, from fissus, past participle of findere
(see fissure).


fission (n.)

1841, division of a cell or organism, from Latin fissionem (nominative fissio) a breaking up,
cleaving, from past participle stem of findere to split (see fissure). Cognate with Old English
bitan to bite. Nuclear physics sense is 1939. As a verb, from 1929.


fissure (n.)

c.1400, from Old French fissure (13c.) and directly from Latin fissura a cleft, from root of findere
to split, cleave, from PIE *bhi-n-d-, from root *bheid- to split (cognates: Sanskrit bhinadmi I
cleave, Old High German  bizzan to bite, Old English  bita a piece bitten off,  morsel, Old Norse
beita to  hunt with dogs, beita  pasture, food).


fist (n.)

Old English fyst, from West Germanic *fustiz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German fust, Old
Frisian fest, Middle Dutch vuust, Dutch vuist, German Faust), from Proto-Germanic *fukhstiz,
probably ultimately from PIE *penkwe- five (see five, and compare Old Church Slavonic pesti, Russian
piasti fist).


fistful (n.)

1610s, from fist (n.) + -ful.


fistic (adj.)

1806, from fist (n.) + -ic. Historically not considered proper English.


fisticuffs (n.)

c.1600, from fist (n.) + cuff, perhaps in imitation of handiwork. Related: Fisticuff.


fistula (n.)

long, narrow ulcer, late 14c., from Latin fistula pipe; ulcer, of uncertain origin.


fit (n.1)

1823, the fitting of one thing to another, later (1831) the way something fits. Originally an
adversary of equal power (mid-13c.), obscure, possibly from Old English fitt a conflict, a struggle
(see fit (n.2)).


fit (v.)

be suitable, probably from early 15c.; to be the right shape, 1580s, from fit (adj.). Related:
Fitted; fitting. Fitted sheets is attested from 1963.


fit (n.2)

paroxysm, sudden attack (as of anger), 1540s, probably via Middle English sense of painful, exciting
experience (early 14c.), from Old English fitt conflict, struggle, of uncertain origin, with no
clear cognates outside English. Perhaps ultimately cognate with fit (n.1) on notion of to meet.
Phrase by fits and starts first attested 1610s.


fit (adj.)

suited to the circumstances, proper, mid-15c., of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English noun
fit an adversary of equal power (mid-13c.), which is perhaps connected to fit (n.1). Related:
Fitter; fittest. Survival of the fittest (1867) coined by H. Spencer.


fit (n.3)

part of a poem, Old English fitt, of unknown origin.


fitful (adj.)

used once by Shakespeare (Macbeth, 1605) in sense of characterized by fits, then revived by Scott
(1810) with a sense of shifting, changing. From fit (n.2) + -ful. Related: Fitfully; fitfulness.


fitness (n.)

1570s, from fit (adj.) + -ness.


fitter (n.)

1650s, agent noun from fit (v.).


fitting

1530s (adj.); c.1600 (n.), from present participle of fit (v.).


fitz

Anglo-French fitz, from Old French fils, from Latin filius son of (see filial); used regularly in
official rolls and hence the first element of many modern surnames; in later times used of
illegitimate issue of royalty.


five (n.)

Old English fif, from Proto-Germanic *fimfe (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon fif, Dutch vijf,
Old Norse fimm, Old High German funf, Gothic fimf), from PIE *penkwe- (cognates: Sanskrit panca,
Greek pente, Latin quinque, Old Church Slavonic peti, Lithuanian penke, Old Welsh pimp). The sound
shift that removed the *-m- is a regular development involving Old English, Old Frisian, and Old
Saxon (as in thought, from stem of think; couth from  *kunthaz; us from *uns.    Slang five-finger
discount theft is from 1966. Five o'clock shadow attested by 1937. The original five-year plan was
1928 in the U.S.S.R.


fivefold (adv.)

Old English fiffeald; see five + -fold.


fiver (n.)

1843, five-pound note, from five + -er.


fix (v.)

late 14c., set (one's eyes or mind) on something, probably from Old French *fixer, from fixe fixed,
from Latin fixus fixed, fast, immovable, established, settled, past participle of figere to fix,
fasten, from PIE root *dhigw- to stick, to fix.    Sense of fasten, attach is c.1400; that of
settle, assign is pre-1500 and evolved into adjust, arrange (1660s), then repair (1737). Sense of
tamper with (a fight, a jury, etc.) is 1790. As euphemism for castrate a pet it dates from 1930.
Related: Fixed; fixedly (1590s); fixing.


fix (n.)

position from which it is difficult to move, 1809, American English, from fix (v.). Meaning dose of
narcotic is from 1934, shortened from fix-up (1867, originally in reference to liquor).


fixable (adj.)

late 15c., from fix (v.) + -able.


fixate (v.)

1885, to fix, make stable, from fix (v.) + -ate. Meaning to gaze upon is from 1889. Psychological
sense is from 1926, originally in Freudian theory, in this case perhaps a back-formation from
fixation.  Related: Fixated; fixating.


fixation (n.)

late 14c., fixacion, an alchemical word, from Medieval Latin fixationem (nominative fixatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of Latin fixare, frequentative of figere to fix (see fix (v.)).
Used in the Freudian sense since 1910.


fixative (adj.)

1640s, from fix (v.) + -ative, suffix meaning of or related to; tending to. As a noun, from 1870.


fixer (n.)

1849, of chemicals, etc.; 1885 as a person who makes things right; agent noun from fix (v.).


fixings (n.)

apparatus, 1820, from present participle of fix (v.). American English sense of food, garnishing is
attested from 1839.


fixity (n.)

1660s in physics; general use from 1791; see fix (v.) + -ity.


fixture (n.)

1590s, act of fixing, perhaps from fix (v.) on model of mixture. Meaning anything fixed or securely
fastened is from 1812.


fizgig (n.)

light, frivolous woman, 1520s, first element of uncertain origin, second element is Middle English
gig frivolous person (see gig (n.1)).


fizz (v.)

1660s, of imitative origin. Related: Fizzed; fizzing. The noun is recorded from 1812; meaning
effervescent drink is from 1864.


fizzle (v.)

1530s, to break wind without noise, probably altered from obsolete fist, from Middle English fisten
break wind (see feisty) + frequentative suffix -le. Related: Fizzled; fizzling.    Noun sense of
failure, fiasco is from 1846, originally U.S. college slang for failure in an exam. Barnhart says it
is not considered as derived from the verb. The verb in this sense is from 1847.


fizzy (adj.)

1885, from fizz + -y (2).


fjord (n.)

1670s, from Norwegian fiord, from Old Norse fj&ouml;r&eth;r, from North Germanic *ferthuz, from PIE
*prtus, from *per- going, passage (see port (n.1)).


flab (n.)

fat, flabbiness, 1951, back-formation from flabby.


flabbergasted (adj.)

1772, mentioned (with bored) in a magazine article as a new vogue word, perhaps from some dialect
(in 1823 flabbergast was noted as a Sussex word), likely an arbitrary formation from flabby or
flapper and aghast.


flabby (adj.)

1690s, variant of flappy, which is recorded in the sense of softly fleshy from 1590s; see flap.
Related: Flabbily; flabbiness.


flaccid (adj.)

1610s, from French flaccide or directly from Latin flaccidus flabby, from flaccus flabby, flap-
eared, of uncertain origin (OED suggests it's imitative). Related: Flaccidly; flaccidity.


flack (n.)

publicity or press agent, 1945, also as a verb by that year, said to have been coined in show biz
magazine Variety (but this is not the first attested use), supposedly from name of Gene Flack, a
movie agent, but influenced by flak. There was a Gene Flack who was an advertising executive in the
U.S. during the 1940s, but he seems to have sold principally biscuits, not movies.


flag (n.1)

cloth ensign, late 15c., now in all modern Germanic languages, but apparently first recorded in
English, origin unknown, but likely connected with flag (v.) or else, like it, perhaps imitative. A
less likely guess is that it is from the flag in flagstone on notion of being square and flat. U.S.
Flag Day (1894) is in reference to the adopting of the Stars and Stripes by the Continental Congress
on June 14, 1777.


flag (v.)

1540s, flap about loosely, perhaps a variant of Middle English flakken, flacken to flap, flutter
(late 14c.), probably from Old Norse flakka to flicker, flutter, perhaps imitative of something
flapping lazily in the wind.    Sense of go limp, droop is first recorded 1610s. Meaning to
designate as someone who will not be served more liquor is from 1980s, probably from use of flags to
signal trains, etc., to halt, which led to the verb in this sense (1856, American English). Related:
Flagged; flagging.


flag (n.2)

flat, split stone, c.1600, earlier piece cut from turf or sod (mid-15c.), from Old Norse flaga stone
slab, perhaps related to Old Norse flak (see flake (n.)).


flag (n.3)

aquatic plant, late 14c., reed, rush, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish fl&aelig;g
yellow iris) or Dutch flag; perhaps ultimately connected to flag (v.) on notion of fluttering in the
breeze.


flagellant (n.)

late 16c., from Latin flagellantem (nominative flagellans), present participle of flagellare to
scourge, lash (see flagellum).


flagellate (v.)

1620s, from Latin flagellatus, past participle of flagellare to scourge, lash (see flagellum).
Related: Flagellated; flagellating. An earlier verb for this was flagellen (mid-15c.).


flagellation (n.)

early 15c., the scourging of Christ, from French flagellation or directly from Latin flagellationem
(nominative flagellatio) a scourging, from past participle stem of flagellare (see flagellum).


flagellum (n.)

1852, in reference to microbes, from Latin flagellum whip, scourge, diminutive of flagrum whip, from
PIE root *bhlag- to strike.


flagitious (adj.)

shamefully wicked, criminal, late 14c., from Old French flagicieux or directly from Latin
flagitiosus shameful, disgraceful, infamous, from flagitium shameful act, passionate deed,
disgraceful thing, related to flagrum a whip, scourge, lash, flagitare to demand importunately, from
PIE root *bhlag- to strike. Related: Flagitiously; flagitiousness.


flagon (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French flacon, Old French flascon, from Late Latin flasconem (nominative
flasco) bottle (see flask).


flagrance (n.)

1610s, from French flagrance or directly from Latin flagrantia, noun of quality from flagrantem (see
flagrant).


flagrant (adj.)

c.1500, resplendent, from Latin flagrantem (nominative flagrans) burning, blazing, glowing,
figuratively glowing with passion, eager, vehement, present participle of flagrare to burn, blaze,
glow from Latin root *flag-, corresponding to PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, burn (cognates: Greek
phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin fulgere to shine), from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Sense of glaringly offensive first recorded 1706, probably from common legalese phrase
in flagrante delicto red-handed, literally with the crime still blazing. Related: Flagrantly.


flagship (n.)

1670s, ship bearing an admiral's flag, from flag (n.) + ship (n.). Figurative use by 1933.


flagstaff (n.)

1610s, from flag (n.) + staff (n.). The settlement in Arizona, U.S., so called for a July 4, 1876,
celebration in which a large flag was flown from a tall tree.


flagstone (n.)

1730, from flag (n.2) flat, split stone + stone (n.).


Flaherty

surname, Irish Flaithbheartach, literally Bright-Ruler.


flail (n.)

implement for threshing grain, c.1100, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English *flegel, which
probably represents West Germanic *flagil (cognates: Middle Dutch and Low German vlegel, Old High
German flegel, German flegel), a borrowing of Late Latin flagellum winnowing tool, flail, from Latin
flagellum whip (see flagellum).


flail (v.)

15c., from flail (n.); originally to scourge; sense of to move like a flail is from 1874. Related:
Flailed; flailing.


flair (n.)

mid-14c., an odor, from Old French flair odor or scent, from flairer to smell, from Vulgar Latin
*flagrare, dissimilated from Latin fragrare emit (a sweet) odor (see fragrant). Sense of special
aptitude is American English, 1925, perhaps from notion of a hound's ability to track scent.


flak (n.)

1938, from German Flak, condensed from Fliegerabwehrkanone, literally pilot warding-off cannon.
Sense of anti-aircraft fire is 1940; metaphoric sense of criticism is c.1963 in American English.


flake (n.)

thin, flat piece, early 14c., possibly from Old English *flacca flakes of snow, from Old Norse flak
loose or torn piece (related to Old Norse fla to skin, see flay), from Proto-Germanic *flago-
(cognates: Middle Dutch vlac, Dutch vlak flat, level, Middle High German vlach, German Flocke
flake); from PIE *plak- (1) to be flat, extended form of root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane
(n.1)).


flake (v.)

early 15c., to fall in flakes, from flake (n.). Related: Flaked; flaking.


flaky (adj.)

1570s, from flake + -y (2). Meaning eccentric, crazy first recorded 1959, said to be American
English baseball slang, but probably from earlier druggie slang flake cocaine (1920s). Flake
eccentric person is a 1968 back-formation from it.  The term 'flake' needs explanation. It's an
insider's word, used throughout baseball, usually as an adjective; someone is considered 'flaky.' It
does not mean anything so crude as 'crazy,' but it's well beyond 'screwball' and far off to the side
of 'eccentric.' [New York Times, April 26, 1964]


flam (n.)

1630s, sham story, fabrication (n.); also to deceive by flattery (v.); see flim-flam.


flambe (adj.)

1886, of certain types of porcelain, 1906 as a term in cookery, from French flamb&eacute;, past
participle of flamber to singe, blaze, from Old French flambe flame (see flamboyant).


flambeau (n.)

also flambeaux, 1630s, from French flambeau, from flambe flame (see flamboyant).


flamboyance (n.)

1891, from flamboyant + -ance.


flamboyant (adj.)

1832, first used of a 15c.-16c. architectural style with flame-like curves, from French flamboyant
flaming, wavy, present participle of flamboyer to flame, from Old French flamboier (12c.), from
flambe flame, from flamble, variant of flamme, from Latin flammula (see flame (n.)). Extended sense
of showy, ornate is 1879. Related: Flamboyantly.


flame (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French flaume, Old French flamme (10c.), from Latin flammula small flame,
diminutive of flamma flame, blazing fire, from PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, from root *bhel- (1) to
shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)).    The meaning a sweetheart is attested from 1640s; the
figurative sense of burning passion was in Middle English. Flame-thrower (1917) translates German
flammenwerfer (1915).


flame (v.)

early 14c., flamen, from Old French flamer, from flamme (see flame (n.)). The sense of unleash
invective on a computer network is from 1980s. Related: Flamed; flaming.


flamen (n.)

ancient Roman priest, 1530s, from Latin flamen, of unknown origin, perhaps from PIE root *bhlad- to
worship (cognates: Gothic blotan, Old English blotan to sacrifice). Also used from early 14c. in
reference to the ancient pre-Christian British priests, in imitation of Geoffrey of Monmouth.


flamenco (n.)

1896, from Spanish flamenco, first used of Gypsy dancing in Andalusia. The word means Fleming,
native of Flanders (Dutch Vlaming) and also flamingo.    Speculation are varied and colorful about
the connection between the bird, the people, and the gypsy dance of Andalusia. Spain ruled Flanders
for many years, and King Carlos I brought with him to Madrid an entire Flemish court. One etymology
suggests the dance was so called from the bright costumes and energetic movements, which the Spanish
associated with Flanders; another is that Spaniards, especially Andalusians, like to name things by
their opposites, and because the Flemish were tall and blond and the gypsies short and dark, the
gypsies were called Flemish; others hold that flamenco was the general Spanish word for all
foreigners, gypsies included; or that Flemish noblemen, bored with court life, took to partying with
the gypsies.


flamer (n.)

agent noun from flame (v.). For homosexual slang sense, see flaming.


flaming (adj.)

intensifying adjective, late 19c., from present participle of flame (v.). Meaning glaringly
homosexual is homosexual slang, 1970s (along with flamer (n.) conspicuously homosexual man); but
flamer glaringly conspicuous person or thing (1809) and flaming glaringly conspicuous (1781) are
much earlier in the general sense, both originally with reference to wenches.


flamingo (n.)

1560s, from Portuguese flamengo, Spanish flamengo, literally flame-colored (compare Greek
phoinikopteros flamingo, literally red-feathered), from Proven&ccedil;al flamenc, from flama flame
(see flame (n.)) + Germanic suffix -enc -ing, belonging to.


flammable (adj.)

1813, from Latin flammare to set on fire (from flamma; see flame) + -able.


flan (n.)

open tart, 1846, from French flan custard tart, cheesecake, from Old French flaon (12c.), from
Medieval Latin flado, probably a Germanic borrowing (compare Frankish *flado, Old High German flado
offering cake, Middle High German vlade a broad, thin cake, Dutch vla baked custard), from Proto-
Germanic *flatho(n), akin to words for flat and probably from PIE root *plat- to spread (see place).
Borrowed earlier as flawn (c.1300), from Old French.


Flanders

probably a compound of roots represented by Flemish vlakte plain + wanderen to wander.


flaneur (n.)

loafer, idler, 1854, from French fl&acirc;neur, from fl&acirc;ner to stroll, loaf, saunter, probably
from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian flana, flanta to gad about).


flange (n.)

1680s, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Old French flanche flank, side, fem. of flanc (see
flank (n.)).


flank (n.)

late Old English flanc fleshy part of the side, from Old French flanc, from Frankish, from Proto-
Germanic *hlanca (cognates: Old High German (h)lanca, Middle High German lanke hip joint, German
lenken to bend, turn, lead), from PIE root *kleng- to bend, turn (see link (n.)). The military sense
is first attested 1540s, as is the verb. Related: Flanked; flanking.


flannel (n.)

c.1500, probably from Welsh gwlanen woolen cloth, from gwlan wool, from Celtic *wlana, from PIE
*wele- (1) wool (see wool).    The Welsh origin is not a universally accepted etymology, due to the
sound changes involved; some (Barnhart, Gamillscheg) suggest the English word is from an Anglo-
French diminutive of Old French flaine a kind of coarse wool. As flannel was already in the 16th c.
a well-known production of Wales, a Welsh origin for the word seems antecedently likely [OED].
Modern French flanelle is a 17c. borrowing from English.


flap (n.)

mid-14c., flappe a blow, slap, probably imitative of the sound of striking. Meaning something that
hangs down is first recorded 1520s. Sense of motion or noise like a bird's wing is 1774; meaning
disturbance, noisy tumult is 1916, British slang.


flap (v.)

early 14c., dash about, shake; later strike, hit; see flap (n.). Meaning to swing loosely is from
1520s. Related: Flapped; flapping.


flapdoodle (n.)

1833, originally the stuff they feed fools on [Marryat]; an arbitrary formation.


flapjack (n.)

pre-1600, from flap + jack (n.), using the personal name in its generic object sense.


flapper (n.)

forward young woman, 1921 slang, from flap (v.), but the exact connection is disputed. Perhaps from
flapper young wild-duck or partridge (1747), with reference to flapping wings while learning to fly,
of which many late 19c. examples are listed in Wright's English Dialect Dictionary (1900), including
one that defines it as A young partridge unable to fly. Applied in joke to a girl of the bread-and-
butter age.    But other suggested sources are late 19c. northern English dialectal use for teen-age
girl (on notion of one with the hair not yet put up), or an earlier meaning prostitute (1889), which
is perhaps from dialectal flap young woman of loose character (1610s). Any or all of these might
have converged in the 1920s sense. Wright also has flappy, of persons, wild, unsteady, flighty, with
the note that it was also Applied to a person's character, as 'a flappy lass,' and further on he
lists flappy sket (n.) an immoral woman.    In Britain the word took on political tones in reference
to the debate over voting rights.Flapper is the popular press catch-word for an adult woman worker,
aged twenty-one to thirty, when it is a question of giving her the vote under the same conditions as
men of the same age. [Punch, Nov. 30, 1927]


flare (v.)

mid-16c., originally spread out (hair), of unknown origin, perhaps from Dutch vlederen. Related:
Flared; flaring. The notion of spreading out in display is behind the notion of spreading gradually
outward (1640s). Flare-up a sudden burst is from 1837.


flare (n.)

bright, unsteady light, 1814, from flare (v.), which led to the sense of signal fire (1883).  Flares
flared trousers is from 1964.


flash (v.)

late 14c., from flasken (c.1300) to dash or splash (as water), probably imitative. Related: Flashed;
flashing. Sense of give off a sudden burst of light or flame is 1540s. Flash flood is from 1940.
Flash card is from 1923. Flash cube (remember those?) is from 1965.


flash (n.)

1560s, from flash (v.); originally of lightning. Meaning first news report is from 1857. Meaning
photographic lamp is from 1913. The comic book character dates to 1940. Flash in the pan (1809) is
from old-style guns, where the powder might ignite in the pan but fail to spark the main charge.


flashback (n.)

1903, in reference to fires in engines or furnaces, from flash + back (adj.). Movie plot device
sense is from 1916. The hallucinogenic drug sense is attested in psychological literature from 1970,
which means probably hippies were using it a few years before.


flasher (n.)

male genital exhibitionist, 1960s (though meat-flasher in this sense was attested in 1890s); agent
noun from flash (v.).


flashing (adj.)

1570s, of light; present participle adjective from flash (v.).


flashing (n.)

indecent exposure, 1896, verbal noun from flash (v.). The meaning strip of metal used in roofing,
etc. is from 1782, earlier simply flash (1570s), but it is of unknown origin and might be an
unrelated word.


flashlight (n.)

American English for what the British might call an electric torch; 1919, from flash + light (n.).


flashpoint (n.)

also flash point, 1878, from flash (v.) + point (n.). Figurative use by 1955.


flashy (adj.)

showy, cheaply attractive, 1680s, from flash + -y (2). Earlier it meant splashing (1580s);
sparkling, giving off flashes (c.1600). Related: Flashily; flashiness.


flask (n.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin flasco container, bottle, from Late Latin flasconem bottle, perhaps
from a Germanic source (compare Old English flasce, Old High German flaska, Middle Dutch flasce,
German Flasche bottle), and if so, perhaps originally meaning a bottle plaited round, case bottle
(compare Old High German flechtan to weave, Old English fleohtan to braid, plait), from Proto-
Germanic base *fleh- (see flax).    Another theory traces it to a metathesis of Latin vasculum. The
assumption that the word is of Teut. origin is chronologically legitimate, and presents no
difficulty exc. the absence of any satisfactory etymology [OED].


flat (adj.)

early 14c., from Old Norse flatr, from Proto-Germanic *flataz (cognates: Old Saxon flat flat,
shallow,: Old High German flaz flat, level, Old English flet, Old High German flezzi floor), perhaps
from PIE *plat- to spread (source of Greek platys broad, flat; see plaice (n.)).    Sense of
prosaic, dull is from 1570s; used of drink from c.1600; of musical notes from 1590s, because the
tone is lowered. Flat-out (adv.) openly, directly is from 1932; earlier it was a noun meaning total
failure (1870, U.S. colloquial).


flat (n.)

1801, from Scottish flat floor or story of a house, from Old English flet a dwelling, floor, ground,
from the same source as flat (adj.).


flat-footed (adj.)

c.1600, with flat feet; meaning unprepared is from 1912, U.S. baseball slang, on notion of not on
one's toes; earlier in U.S. colloquial use it meant straightforwardly, downright (1828), from notion
of standing firmly.


flat-top (n.)

aircraft carrier, 1943, U.S. Navy, from flat (adj.) + top (n.). As a style of haircut, from 1956.


flatboat (n.)

1650s, from flat (adj.) + boat (n.).


flatfish (n.)

1710, from flat (adj.) + fish (n.).


flatline (v.)

by 1998, from the flat line on an electrocardiogram or electroencephalogram when the patient is
dead. Related: Flatlined; flatlining.


flatly (adv.)

early 15c., in a literal sense, from flat (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning in a plain manner is from 1560s;
sense of in a dull manner is from 1640s.


flatness (n.)

mid-15c., from flat (adj.) + -ness.


flats (n.)

level tidal tract, 1540s, from flat (n.) level piece of ground (late 12c.), from flat (adj.).


flatten (v.)

late 14c., to prostrate oneself, also to fall flat, from flat (adj.) + -en (1). Meaning to make flat
is 1620s. Related: Flattened; flattening.


flatter (v.)

early 13c., from Old French flater to flatter (13c.), originally stroke with the hand, caress, from
Frankish *flat palm, flat of the hand (see flat (adj.)). [O]ne of many imitative verbs beginning
with fl- and denoting unsteady or light, repeated movement [Liberman]. Related: Flattered;
flattering.


flatterer (n.)

mid-14c., agent noun from flatter. Fem. form flatteress is attested from late 14c.-18c.


flattering (adj.)

late 14c., pleasing to the imagination, present participle adjective from flatter. Meaning
gratifying to self-esteem is from 1757. Related: Flatteringly.


flattery (n.)

early 14c., from Old French flaterie, from flater (see flatter).


flatulence (n.)

1711, from French flatulence, from flatulent (see flatulent). Flatulency is from 1650s.


flatulent (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French flatulent, from Modern Latin flatulentus, from Latin flatus a blowing, a
breaking wind, past participle of flare to blow, puff, which is cognate with Old English blawan (see
blow (v.1)).


flatus (n.)

1660s, from Latin flatus a blowing, from flare to blow (see blow (v.1)).


flatware (n.)

1851, from flat (adj.) + ware (n.). Originally as distinguished from hollow ware; U.S. sense of
domestic cutlery recorded by 1895.


flaunt (v.)

1560s, to display oneself in flashy clothes, of unknown origin; perhaps a variant of flout or vaunt.
It looks French, but it corresponds to no known French word. Transitive sense is from 1827. Related:
Flaunted; flaunting.


flautist (n.)

1860, from Italian flautista, from flauto flute (from Late Latin flauta; see flute (n.)) + Greek-
derived suffix -ista.


Flavius

masc. proper name, from Latin Flavius, a Roman gens name, related to flavus golden-yellow, blond
(see blue), and probably originally meaning yellow-haired.


flavor (n.)

c.1300, a smell, odor (usually a pleasing one), from Old French flaour smell, odor, from Vulgar
Latin flator odor, literally that which blows, from Latin flator blower, from flare to blow, puff,
which is cognate with Old English blawan (see blow (v.1)).    The same Vulgar Latin source produced
Old Italian fiatore a bad odor. Sense of taste, savor is 1690s, perhaps 1670s; originally the
element in taste which depends on the sense of smell. The -v- is perhaps from influence of savor.


flavor (v.)

1730s, from flavor (n.). Related: Flavored; flavoring.


flavorful (adj.)

1927, from flavor (n.) + -ful. Earlier flavorsome (1853), flavory (1727), flavorous (1690s).


flavoring (n.)

1845, thing that gives flavor, verbal noun from flavor (v.). Middle English flauryng meant perfume.


flavour

chiefly British English spelling of flavor; for spelling, see -or. Related: Flavourful; flavouring.


flaw (n.)

early 14c., a flake (of snow), also in Middle English a spark of fire; a splinter, from Old Norse
flaga stone slab, flake (see flagstone); sense of defect, fault first recorded 1580s, first of
character, later (c.1600) of material things; probably via notion of a fragment broken off.


flaw (v.)

early 15c. (implied in flawed); see flaw (n.). Related: Flawing.


flawless (n.)

1640s, from flaw + -less. Related: Flawlessly; flawlessness.


flax (n.)

Old English fleax cloth made with flax, linen, from Proto-Germanic *flakhsan (cognates: Old Frisian
flax, Middle Dutch and Dutch vlas, Old Saxon flas, Old High German flahs, German Flachs), probably
from Proto-Germanic base *fleh-, corresponding to PIE *plek- to weave, plait (see ply (v.1)). But
some connect it with PIE *pleik- (see flay) from the notion of stripping fiber to prepare it.


flaxen (adj.)

made of flax, mid-15c., from flax + -en (2). As the color of flax (usually with reference to hair)
it is attested from 1520s.


flaxseed (n.)

1560s, from flax + seed (n.).


flay (v.)

Old English flean to skin (strong verb, past tense flog, past participle flagen), from Proto-
Germanic *flahan (cognates: Middle Dutch vlaen, Old High German flahan, Old Norse fla), from PIE
root *pl(e)ik-, *pleik- to tear (cognates: Lithuanian ple&#353;iu to tear). Related: Flayed;
flaying.


flea (n.)

Old English flea, from Proto-Germanic *flauhaz (cognates: Old Norse flo, Middle Dutch vlo, German
Floh), perhaps related to Old English fleon to flee, with a notion of the jumping parasite, or
perhaps from PIE *plou- flea (cognates: Latin pulex, Greek psylla; see puce).   Flea-bag bed is from
1839; flea circus is from 1886; flea collar is from 1953.    A man named 'Mueller' put on the first
trained-flea circus in America at the old Stone and Austin museum in Boston nearly forty years ago.
Another German named 'Auvershleg' had the first traveling flea circus in this country thirty years
ago. In addition to fairs and museums, I get as high as $25 for a private exhibition. [Professor
William Heckler, quoted in Popular Mechanics, February 1928. Printed at the top of his programs were
Every action is visible to the naked eye and No danger of desertion.]


flea market (n.)

1917, especially in reference to the march&eacute; aux puces in Paris, so-called because there are
so many second-hand articles sold of all kinds that they are believed to gather fleas. [E.S.
Dougherty, In Europe, 1922].


fleam (n.)

sharp instrument for opening veins in bloodletting, late Old English, from Old French flieme (Modern
French flamme), from Medieval Latin fletoma, from Late Latin flebotomus, from Greek phlebotomos a
lancet (see phlebotomy).


fleck (v.)

late 14c., probably from Old Norse flekka to spot, from Proto-Germanic *flekk- (cognates: Middle
Dutch vlecke, Old High German flec, German Fleck), from PIE *pleik- to tear (see flay). Related:
Flecked; flecking.


fleck (n.)

1590s, from fleck (v.) or else from Middle Dutch vlecke or Old Norse flekkr.


fled

past tense and past participle of flee (q.v.).


fledge (v.)

Old English *-flycge (Kentish -flecge),an adjective meaning having the feathers, fit to fly, from
West Germanic *fluggja- (cognates: Middle Dutch vlugge, Low German fl&uuml;gge), from root meaning
to fly (see fly (v.)). As a verb, it is first attested in English 1560s. Related: Fledged; fledging.


fledgling

1830 (adj.), 1846 as a noun meaning young bird, from fledge + diminutive suffix -ling. Of persons,
from 1856.


flee (v.)

Old English fleon take flight, fly from, avoid, escape (contracted class II strong verb; past tense
fleah, past participle flogen), from Proto-Germanic *fleuhan (cognates: Old High German fliohan, Old
Norse fl&ouml;ja, Old Frisian flia, Dutch vlieden, German fliehen, Gothic &thorn;liuhan to flee),
possibly from PIE *pleu- to flow (see pluvial).    Weak past tense and past participle fled emerged
Middle English, under influence of Scandinavian. Old English had a transitive form, geflieman put to
flight, which came in handy in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. Related: Fleeing.


fleece (v.)

1530s in the literal sense of to strip a sheep of fleece; 1570s in the figurative meaning to cheat,
swindle, from fleece (n.). Related: Fleeced; fleecing.


fleece (n.)

Old English fleos, from West Germanic *flusaz (cognates: Middle Dutch vluus, Dutch vlies, Middle
High German vlius, German Vlies), probably from PIE *pleus- to pluck, also a feather, fleece
(cognates: Latin pluma feather, down, Lithuanian plunksna feather).


fleecy (adj.)

1560s, from fleece (n.) + -y (2).


fleer (v.)

c.1400, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare dialectal Norwegian flira, dialectal Danish flire to
grin, titter). Related: Fleered; fleering.


fleet (n.)

Old English fleot ship, raft, floating vessel, from fleotan to float (see fleet (v.)). Sense of
naval force is pre-1200. The Old English word also meant creek, inlet, flow of water, especially one
into the Thames near Ludgate Hill, which lent its name to Fleet Street (home of newspaper and
magazine houses, standing for the English press since 1882), Fleet prison, etc.


fleet (adj.)

swift, 1520s, but probably older than the record; apparently from or cognate with Old Norse fliotr
swift, and from the root of fleet (v.)). Related: Fleetness.


fleet (v.)

Old English fleotan to float, drift, flow, swim, sail, later (c.1200) to flow, from Proto-Germanic
*fleut- (cognates: Old Frisian fliata, Old Saxon fliotan to flow, Old High German fliozzan to float,
flow, German flieszen to flow, Old Norse fliota to float, flow), from PIE root *pleu- to flow, run,
swim (see pluvial).    Meaning to glide away like a stream, vanish imperceptibly is from c.1200;
hence to fade, to vanish (1570s). Related: Fleeted; fleeting.


fleeting (adj.)

early 13c., fickle, shifting, unstable, from Old English fleotende floating, drifting, later flying,
moving swiftly, from present participle of fleotan (see fleet (v.)). Meaning existing only briefly
is from 1560s.


Fleming (n.)

Old English Fl&aelig;ming native or inhabitant of Flanders, and Old Frisian Fleming, from Proto-
Germanic *Flam- (source also of Medieval Latin Flamingus); see Flanders.


Flemish (adj.)

early 14c., flemmysshe, probably from Old Frisian Flemische, or from Fleming + -ish.


flense (v.)

also flench, 1814, from Danish flense, perhaps from PIE root *(s)plei- to splice, split. Related:
Flenser; flensing.


flesh (n.)

Old English fl&aelig;sc flesh, meat, also near kindred (a sense now obsolete except in phrase flesh
and blood), common West and North Germanic (compare Old Frisian flesk, Middle Low German vlees,
German Fleisch flesh, Old Norse flesk pork, bacon), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Proto-Germanic
*flaiskoz-.    Figurative use for animal or physical nature of man (Old English) is from the Bible,
especially Paul's use of Greek sarx, which yielded sense of sensual appetites (c.1200). Flesh-wound
is from 1670s; flesh-color, the hue of Caucasian skin, is first recorded 1610s, described as a tint
composed of a light pink with a little yellow [O'Neill, Dyeing, 1862]. An Old English poetry-word
for body was fl&aelig;sc-hama, literally flesh-home.


flesh (v.)

1520s, to render (a hunting animal) eager for prey by rewarding it with flesh from a kill, with
figurative extensions, from flesh (n.). Meaning to clothe or embody with flesh, with figurative
extensions, is from 1660s. Related: Fleshed; fleshing.


fleshly (adj.)

Old English fl&aelig;sclic; see flesh (n.) + -ly (1).


fleshpot (n.)

from flesh (n.) + pot (n.1); literally pot in which flesh is boiled, hence luxuries regarded with
envy, especially in fleshpots of Egypt, from Exodus xvi:3:  Whan we sat by ye Flesh pottes, and had
bred ynough to eate. [Coverdale translation, 1535]


fleshy (adj.)

plump, mid-14c., from flesh (n.) + -y (2). Related: Fleshiness.


fletch (v.)

mid-17c., variant of fledge (v.); also see fletcher. Related: Fletched; fletching.


fletcher (n.)

arrow-maker, early 14c. (as a surname attested from 1203), from Old French flechier, from fleche
arrow, probably from Frankish, from Proto-Germanic *fleug-ika- (compare Old Low German fliuca,
Middle Dutch vliecke), from PIE *pleuk-, extended form of root *pleu- to flow (see pluvial).


fleur-de-lis (n.)

also fleur de lis, mid-14c., from Old French, literally flower of the lily, especially borne as a
heraldic device on the royal arms of France. Perhaps originally representing an iris, or the head of
a scepter, or a weapon of some sort.


fleuret (n.)

small flower, 1811, from French fleurette, diminutive of fleur (see flower (n.)).


flew

past tense of fly (v.1).


flex (v.)

1520s, probably a back-formation from flexible. Related: Flexed; flexing.


flexibility (n.)

1610s, of physical things, from French flexibilit&eacute; or directly from Late Latin flexibilitatem
(nominative flexibilitas), from Latin flexibilis (see flexible). Of immaterial things from 1783.


flexible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French flexible or directly from Latin flexibilis that may be bent, pliant,
flexible, yielding; figuratively tractable, inconstant, from flexus, past participle of flectere to
bend, of uncertain origin. Related: Flexibly.


flexion (n.)

c.1600, from Latin flexionem (nominative flexio) a bending, swaying; bend, turn, curve, noun of
action from past participle stem of flectere to bend (see flexible).


flexor (n.)

1610s, Modern Latin, short for musculus flexor a bending muscle, agent noun from past participle
stem of Latin flectere to bend (see flexible).


flextime (n.)

1972, translating German Gleitzeit sliding time. See flex + time (n.).


flibbertigibbet (n.)

1540s, chattering gossip, flighty woman, probably a nonsense word meant to sound like fast talking;
as the name of a devil or fiend it dates from c.1600.


flick (n.)

mid-15c., probably imitative of a light blow with a whip. Earliest recorded use is in phrase not
worth a flykke useless. As slang for film, it is first attested 1926, a back-formation from flicker
(v.), from their flickering appearance.


flick (v.)

1816, from flick (n.); meaning quick turn of the wrist is from 1897, originally in cricket. Related:
Flicked; flicking.


flicker (n.)

1849, wavering, unsteady light or flame; 1857 as a flickering, from flicker (v.).


flicker (v.)

Old English flicorian to flutter, flap quickly and lightly, originally of birds. Onomatopoeic and
suggestive of quick motion. Sense of shine with a wavering light is c.1600, but not common till 19c.
Related: Flickered; flickering.


flicker (n.)

woodpecker, 1808, American English, possibly echoic of bird's note, or from white spots on plumage
that seem to flicker as it flits from tree to tree.


flier (n.)

see flyer.


flight (n.1)

act of flying, Old English flyht a flying, flight, from Proto-Germanic *flukhtiz (cognates: Dutch
vlucht flight of birds, Old Norse flugr, Old High German flug, German Flug flight), from root of
*fleugan to fly (see fly (v.1)).    Spelling altered late 14c. from Middle English fliht (see fight
(v.)). Meaning an instance of flight is 1785, originally of ballooning. Meaning series of stairs
between landings is from 1703.


flight (n.2)

act of fleeing, from Middle English fluht (c.1200), not found in Old English, but presumed to have
existed. Related to Old English fleon flee (see flee), and cognate with Old Saxon fluht, Old Frisian
flecht act of fleeing, Dutch vlucht, Old High German fluht, German Flucht, Old Nprse flotti, Gothic
&thorn;lauhs.


flightless (adj.)

1875, from flight (n.1) + -less.


flighty (adj.)

1550s, swift, later (1768) fickle or frivolous, originally of skittish horses; from flight (n.1) +
-y (2). Related: Flightiness.


flim-flam (n.)

also flimflam, 1530s, a contemptuous echoic construction, perhaps connected to some unrecorded
dialectal word from Scandinavian (compare Old Norse flim a lampoon). From 1650s as a verb.


flimsy (adj.)

1702, of unknown origin, perhaps a metathesis of film (n.) gauzy covering + -y (2). Related:
Flimsily; flimsiness.


flinch (v.)

1570s, from obsolete flecche to bend, flinch, probably from Old French flenchir to bend, probably
from Frankish *hlankjan or some other Germanic source (cognates: Middle High German linken, German
lenken to bend, turn, lead), from PIE root *kleng- to bend, turn (see link (n.)). Related: Flinched;
flinching. As a noun, from 1817.


flinders (n.)

mid-15c., Scottish flendris, probably related to Norwegian flindra chip, splinter, or Dutch flenter
fragment; ultimately from the same PIE root that produced flint.


fling (v.)

c.1300, probably from or related to Old Norse flengja to flog, of uncertain origin. The Middle
English intransitive sense is that suggested by phrase have a fling at make a try. An obsolete word
for streetwalker, harlot was fling-stink (1670s). Related: Flung; flinging.


fling (n.)

attempt, attack, early 14c.; see fling (v.). Sense of period of indulgence on the eve of
responsibilities first attested 1827. Meaning vigorous dance (associated with the Scottish
Highlands) is from 1806.


flint (n.)

Old English flint flint, rock, common Germanic (cognates Middle Dutch vlint, Old High German flins,
Danish flint), from PIE *splind- to split, cleave, from root *(s)plei- to splice, split (cognates:
Greek plinthos brick, tile, Old Irish slind brick), perhaps a variant of *spel- (1) to split, break
off. Transferred senses were in Old English.


flintlock (n.)

1680s as a type of musket-firing mechanism, from flint + lock (n.1).


flintstone (n.)

early 14c., from flint + stone (n.).


flinty (adj.)

hard-hearted, 1530s, from flint + -y (2). Literal sense of resembling flint is from 1640s. Related:
Flintily; flintiness.


flip (v.)

1590s (1520s in flip-flop), imitative or else a contraction of fillip (q.v.), which also is held to
be imitative. Sense of get excited is first recorded 1950; flip one's lid lose one's head, go wild
is from 1950. For flip (adj.) glib, see flippant. Meaning to flip a coin (to decide something) is by
1879. As a noun by 1690s. Related: Flipped. Flipping (adj.) as euphemism for fucking is British
slang first recorded 1911 in D.H. Lawrence. Flip side (of a gramophone record) is by 1949.


flip (n.)

sailors' hot drink usually containing beer, brandy and sugar, 1690s, from flip (v.); so called from
notion of it being whipped up or beaten.


flip-flop (n.)

also flip flop, thong sandal, by 1972, imitative of the sound of walking in them (flip-flap had been
used in various echoic senses, mostly echoic, since 1520s); sense of complete reversal of direction
dates from 1900.   Flip-flaps, a peculiar rollicking dance indulged in by costermongers, better
described as the double shuffle; originally a kind of somersault. [Hotten's Slang Dictionary, 1864]


flippancy (n.)

1746, from flippant + -cy.


flippant (adj.)

c.1600, talkative; 1670s, displaying unbecoming levity, apparently an extended form of flip (v.).
Shortened form flip is attested from 1847. Related: Flippantly.


flipper (n.)

limb used to swim with, 1822, agent noun from flip (v.). Sense of rubber fin for underwater swimming
is from 1945. Slang meaning the hand dates from 1836. Related: Flippers.


flirt (v.)

1550s, originally to turn up one's nose, sneer at, then to rap or flick, as with the fingers
(1560s). The noun is first attested 1540s, from the verb, with the meaning stroke of wit. It's
possible that the original word was imitative, along the lines of flip (v.), but there seems to be
some influence from flit, such as in the flirt sense of to move in short, quick flights, attested
from 1580s.    Meanwhile flirt (n.) had come to mean a pert young hussey [Johnson] by 1560s, and
Shakespeare has flirt-gill (i.e. Jill) a woman of light or loose behavior, while flirtgig was a 17c.
Yorkshire dialect word for a giddy, flighty girl. All or any of these could have fed into the main
modern verbal sense of play at courtship (1777), which also could have grown naturally from the
earlier meaning to flit inconstantly from object to object (1570s), perhaps influenced by Old French
fleureter talk sweet nonsense, also to touch a thing in passing, diminutive of fleur flower and
metaphoric of bees skimming from flower to flower.    The noun meaning person who flirts is from
1732. The English word also is possibly related to East Frisian flirt a flick or light blow, and
flirtje a giddy girl. French flirter to flirt is a 19c. borrowing from English. Related: Flirted;
flirting.


flirtation (n.)

1718, noun of action from flirt (v.).


flirtatious (adj.)

1834, from flirtation + -ous. Related: Flirtatiously; flirtatiousness.


flirty (adj.)

1840, from flirt (v.) + -y (2). Related: Flirtiness.


flit (v.)

c.1200, flutten convey, move, take, carry away, go away, perhaps from Old Norse flytja to remove,
bring.Theire desire ... is to goe to theire newe masters eyther on a Tewsday, or on a Thursday; for
... they say Munday flitte, Neaver sitte. [Henry Best, farming &amp; account book, 1641]  Related:
Flitted; flitting. As a noun, from 1835.


flitch (n.)

side of bacon, Middle English flicche (early 13c.), from Old English flicce, related to Old Norse
flikki, Middle Low German vlicke piece of flesh. Not immediately connected to flesh (n.), but
perhaps from the same PIE root. A flitch was presented every year at Dunmow, in Essex, to any
married couple who could prove they had lived together without quarreling for a year and a day, a
custom mentioned as far back as mid-14c.


flitter (v.)

1540s, from flit with frequentative suffix. Flitter-mouse (1540s) is occasionally used in English,
in imitation of German fledermaus bat, from Old High German fledaron to flutter. Related: Flittered;
flittering. As a noun, from 1892.


flitty (adj.)

1640s, from flit + -y (2). Related: Flittiness.


flivver (n.)

cheap car, especially Model-T Ford, 1910, of unknown origin.


float (v.)

late Old English flotian to float (class II strong verb; past tense fleat, past participle floten),
from Proto-Germanic *flotan to float (cognates: Old Norse flota, Middle Dutch vloten), from PIE root
*pleu- to flow (see pluvial). Of motion through air, from 1630s. Related: Floated; floating.


float (n.)

early 12c., state of floating (Old English flot meant body of water), from float (v.). Meaning
platform on wheels used for displays in parades, etc. is from 1888, probably from earlier sense of
flat-bottomed boat (1550s). As a type of fountain drink, by 1915.   <b>Float</b>.--An ade upon the
top of which is floated a layer of grape juice, ginger ale, or in some cases a disher of fruit
sherbet or ice cream. In the latter case it would be known as a sherbet float or an ice-cream float.
[The Dispenser's Formulary: Or, Soda Water Guide, New York, 1915]   <hr />   Few soda water
dispensers know what is meant by a Float Ice Cream Soda. This is not strange since the term is a
coined one. By a float ice cream soda is meant a soda with the ice cream floating on top, thus
making a most inviting appearance and impressing the customer that you are liberal with your ice
cream, when you are not really giving any more than the fellow that mixes his ice cream out of
sight. [The Spatula, Boston, July, 1908]


floatation (n.)

1806, the older, more etymological, but less popular spelling of flotation.


floater (n.)

dead body found in water, 1890, U.S. slang, agent noun from float (v.).


floc (n.)

1921, diminutive of flocculus (see flocculate).


floccinaucinihilipilification (n.)

action or habit of estimating as worthless, 1741, a combination of four Latin words (flocci, nauci,
nihili, pilifi) all signifying at a small price or for nothing, which were listed together in a rule
of the well-known Eton Latin Grammar. The kind of jocular formation that was possible among educated
men in Britain in those days. Just so, as in praesenti, the opening words of mnemonic lines on
conjugation in Lilley's 16c. Latin grammar, could stand alone as late as 19c. and be understood to
mean rudiments of Latin.


flocculate (v.)

1877, from flocculus (1799, from Modern Latin diminutive of Latin floccus flock of wool) + -ate.
Related: Flocculated; flocculating.


flocculation (n.)

1885, from flocculate + -ion.


flocculent (adj.)

resembling wool, 1800, from Latin floccus lock of hair, flock of wool + -ulent. Related: Floculence.


flock (n.1)

Old English flocc a group of persons, company, troop, related to Old Norse flokkr crowd, troop,
band, Middle Low German vlocke crowd, flock (of sheep); not found in other Germanic languages;
perhaps related to folc people, but the metathesis would have been unusual for Old English.
Extended c.1200 to a number of animals of one kind moving or feeding together; of domestic animals
c.1300. Transferred to bodies of Christians, in relation to Christ or their local pastor, from mid-
14c.


flock (n.2)

tuft of wool, mid-13c., probably from Old French floc, from Latin floccus flock of wool, lock of
hair.


flock (v.)

gather, congregate, c.1300, from flock (n.). Related: Flocked; flocking.


floe (n.)

1817, first used by Arctic explorers, probably from Norwegian flo layer, slab, from Old Norse flo,
related to first element in flagstone (q.v.). Earlier explorers used flake.


flog (v.)

1670s, slang, perhaps a schoolboy shortening of Latin flagellare flagellate. Related: Flogged;
flogging.


flood (n.)

Old English flod a flowing of water, flood, an overflowing of land by water, Noah's Flood; mass of
water, river, sea, wave, from Proto-Germanic *floduz flowing water, deluge (cognates: Old Frisian
flod, Old Norse flo&eth;, Middle Dutch vloet, Dutch vloed, German Flut, Gothic flodus), from PIE
verbal stem *pleu- flow, float (see pluvial). Figurative use by mid-14c.


flood (v.)

1660s, from flood (n.). Related: Flooded; flooding.


floodgate (n.)

early 13c. in the figurative sense (especially with reference to tears or rain); literal sense is
mid-15c.; from flood (n.) + gate (n.).


floodplain (n.)

also flood plain, 1873, from flood (n.) + plain (n.).


floor (v.)

early 15c., to furnish with a floor, from floor (n.). Sense of puzzle, confound is 1830, from notion
of knock down to the floor (1640s). Related: Floored; flooring.


floor (n.)

Old English flor floor, pavement, ground, bottom (of a lake, etc.), from Proto-Germanic *floruz
floor (cognates: Middle Dutch and Dutch vloer, Old Norse flor floor, Middle High German vluor,
German Flur field, meadow), from PIE *plaros flat surface (source also of Welsh llawr ground),
enlarged from *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane (n.1)).    Meaning level of a house is from
1580s. The figurative sense in legislative assemblies (as opposed to the platform) is first recorded
1774. Spanish suelo floor is from Latin solum bottom, ground, soil; German Boden is cognate with
English bottom. Floor plan attested from 1867.


flooring (n.)

materials of a floor, 1620s, verbal noun from floor (v.).


floozie (n.)

also floozy, woman of disreputable character, 1902, perhaps a variation of flossy fancy, frilly
(1890s slang), with the notion of fluffiness.


flop (v.)

c.1600, probably a variant of flap with a duller, heavier sound. Sense of fall or drop heavily is
1836, that of collapse, fail is 1919; though the figurative noun sense of a failure is recorded from
1893. Related: Flopped; flopping.


flop (n.)

1823, in the literal sense, from flop (v.). Figurative use by 1893.


flophouse (n.)

cheap hotel, hobo slang, 1904, probably related to slang flop (v.) lie down for sleep (1907); see
flop (v.) + house (n.).    In one of [Cincinnati's] slum districts stands the Silver Moon, a flop
house (i.e., a house where the occupants are flopped out of their hanging bunks by letting down the
ropes) .... [McClure's magazine, November 1904]    (But this explanation is not found in other early
references.)


floppy (adj.)

1858, from flop + -y (2). Floppy disc attested from 1972 (short form floppy by 1974).


flora (n.)

1777, the plant life of a region or epoch, from Latin Flora, Roman goddess of flowers, from flos
(genitive floris) flower, from *flo-s-, Italic suffixed form of PIE *bhle- to blossom, flourish
(cognates: Middle Irish blath, Welsh blawd blossom, flower, Old English blowan to flower, bloom),
extended form of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom, possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Used as the title of descriptive plant catalogues since 1640s, but popularized by Linnaeus in
his 1745 study of Swedish plants, Flora Suecica.


floral (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to Flora, from French floral (16c.), from Latin floralis of flowers (see flora).
Meaning pertaining to flowers is from 1753.


Florence

fem. proper name, from Latin Florentia, fem. of Florentius, literally blooming, from florens
(genitive florentis), present participle of florere to flower (see flourish). The c.1700 Dictionary
of the Canting Crew defines Florence as a slang word for a Wench that is touz'd and ruffled. This
was also the Italian city name (Roman Colonia Florentia, flowering colony, either literal or
figurative), which became Old Italian Fiorenze, in modern Italian Firenze.


Florentine (adj.)

1540s, literally of or pertaining to the Italian city of Florence, from Latin Florentinus, from
Florentia (see Florence). Earliest reference in English is to a type of textile fabric.


florescence (n.)

1793, from Modern Latin florescentia, from Latin florescentem (nominative florescens) blooming,
present participle of florescere to begin to bloom, inceptive of florere to blossom (see flourish
(v.)).


florescent (adj.)

1821, from Latin florescentem, present participle of florescere (see florescence).


floret (n.)

c.1400, flourette, from Old French florete little flower; cheap silk material, diminutive of flor
flower, from Latin flora (see flora). Botany sense is from 1670s.


floricide (n.)

one who destroys flowers, 1841, from Latin floris, genitive of flos flower (see flora) + -cide.


floriculture (n.)

1822, from Latin floris, genitive of flos flower (see flora) + -culture on analogy of agriculture.
Related: Floricultural; floriculturist.


florid (adj.)

1640s, strikingly beautiful, from French floride flourishing, from Latin floridus flowery, in bloom,
from flos flower (see flora). Sense of ruddy is first recorded 1640s. Meaning profusely adorned, as
with flowers, is from 1650s. Related: Floridly.


Florida

U.S. state, formerly a Spanish colony, probably from Spanish Pascua florida, literally flowering
Easter, a Spanish name for Palm Sunday, because the peninsula was discovered on that day (March 20,
1513) by the expedition of Spanish explorer Ponce de Le&oacute;n (1474-1521). From Latin floridus
(see florid).


florin (n.)

c.1300, from Old French florin, from Italian fiorino, from fiore flower, from Latin florem flower
(see flora). The 13c. gold Florentine coin was stamped on the obverse with the image of a lily, the
symbol of the city. As the name of an English gold coin, from late 15c.


florist (n.)

1620s, formed on analogy of French fleuriste, from Latin floris, genitive of flos flower (see flora)
+ -ist.


floruit

used now mainly in sense of period during which a historical person's life work was done, 1843,
Latin, literally he flourished, third person singular perf. indicative of florere (see flourish
(v.)). Usually in abbreviation fl.


floss (n.)

rough silk, 1759, perhaps from French floche tuft of wool (16c.), from Old French floc tuft, lock,
from Latin floccus tuft of wool. Or from an unrecorded Old English or Old Norse word from the root
found in Dutch flos plush (17c.). Compare the surname Flossmonger, attested 1314, which might
represent a direct borrowing from Scandinavian or Low German. In The Mill on the Floss the word is
the proper name of a fictitious river in the English Midlands.


flossy (adj.)

resembling floss, 1839, from floss + -y (2).


flotation (n.)

1850s, from float (v.) + -ation. Spelling influenced by French (compare floatation).


flotilla (n.)

1711, a small fleet, from Spanish flotilla, diminutive of flota float, from flotar to float, of
Germanic origin (see float (v.)).


flotsam (n.)

c.1600, from Anglo-French floteson, from Old French flotaison a floating, from floter to float (of
Germanic origin; see float) + -aison, from Latin -ation(em). Spelled flotsen till mid-19c. when it
altered, perhaps under influence of many English words in -some.    In British law, flotsam are
goods found floating on the sea as a consequence of a shipwreck or action of wind or waves; jetsam
are things cast out of a ship in danger of being wrecked, and afterward washed ashore, or things
cast ashore by the sailors. Whatever sinks is lagan. Figurative use for odds and ends attested by
1861.


flounce (v.)

1540s, to dash, plunge, flop, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare dialectal Swedish flunsa to plunge,
Norwegian flunsa to hurry, but first record of these is 200 years later than the English word), said
to be of imitative origin. Spelling likely influenced by bounce. Notions of anger, impatience began
to adhere to the word 18c. Related: Flounced; flouncing. As a noun, from 1580s as a motion.


flounce (n.)

wide ruffle, 1713, from Middle English frounce pleat, wrinkle, fold (late 14c.), from Old French
fronce line, wrinkle; pucker, crease, fold, from Frankish *hrunkjan to wrinkle, from Proto-Germanic
*hrunk-. Influenced in form by flounce (v.).


flounder (v.)

1590s, perhaps an alteration of founder (q.v.), influenced by Dutch flodderen to flop about, or
native verbs in fl- expressing clumsy motion. Figurative use is from 1680s. Related: Floundered;
floundering. As a noun derived from this sense, from 1867.


flounder (n.)

flatfish, c.1300, from Anglo-French floundre, from Old North French flondre, from Old Norse flydhra;
related to Middle Low German vlundere, Danish flynder; ultimately cognate with Greek platys flat,
wide, broad (see plaice (n.)).


flour (n.)

early 13c., flur flower (see flower (n.)); meaning finer portion of ground grain is mid-13c., from
the notion of flour as the finest part of meal (compare French fleur de farine), as distinguished
from the coarser parts (meal). Spelled flower until flour became the accepted form c.1830 to end
confusion.


flour (v.)

to sprinkle with flour, 1650s, from flour (n.). Related: Floured; flouring.


flourish (v.)

c.1300, to blossom, grow, from Old French floriss-, stem of florir blossom, flower, bloom, flourish,
from Latin florere to bloom, blossom, flower, figuratively to flourish, be prosperous, from flos a
flower (see flora).    Metaphoric sense of thrive is mid-14c. Meaning to brandish (a weapon) first
attested late 14c. Related: Flourished; flourishing.


flourish (n.)

c.1500, a blossom, from flourish (v.). Meaning ostentatious waving of a weapon is from 1550s; that
of literary or rhetorical embellishment is from c.1600.


flout (v.)

1550s, perhaps a special use of Middle English flowten to play the flute (compare Middle Dutch
fluyten to play the flute, also to jeer). Related: Flouted; flouting.


flow (v.)

Old English flowan to flow, stream, issue; become liquid, melt; abound, overflow (class VII strong
verb; past tense fleow, past participle flowen), from Proto-Germanic *flo- (cognates: Middle Dutch
vloyen, Dutch vloeien to flow, Old Norse floa to deluge, Old High German flouwen to rinse, wash),
probably from PIE *pleu- flow, float (see pluvial). The weak form predominated from 14c., but strong
past participle flown is occasionally attested through 18c. Related: Flowed; flowing.


flow (n.)

mid-15c., action of flowing, from flow (v.). Meaning amount that flows is from 1807. Flow chart
attested from 1920.


flower (n.)

c.1200, from Old French flor flower, blossom; heyday, prime; fine flour; elite; innocence, virginity
(Modern French fleur), from Latin florem (nominative flos) flower (source of Italian fiore, Spanish
flor; see flora).    Modern spelling is 14c. Ousted Old English cognate blostm (see blossom (n.)).
Also used from 13c. in sense of finest part or product of anything and from c.1300 in the sense of
virginity. Flower children gentle hippies is from 1967.


flower (v.)

c.1200, be vigorous, prosper, thrive, from flower (n.). Of a plant or bud, to blossom, c.1300.
Related: Flowered; flowering.


flowerpot (n.)

1590s, from flower (n.) + pot (n.1).


flowery (adj.)

mid-14c., from flower (n.) + -y (2). Related: Floweriness.


flown

past participle of fly (v.).


flu (n.)

1839, flue, shortening of influenza. Spelling flu attested from 1893. For choice of middle syllable,
not a common method of shortening in English, Weekley compares tec for detective, scrip for
subscription.


flub (v.)

1924, American English, perhaps suggested by fluff, flop, etc. Related: Flubbed; flubbing. As a
noun, by 1952.


fluctuant (adj.)

1550s, from Latin fluctuantem (nominative fluctuans), present participle of fluctuare to move in
waves (see fluctuation).


fluctuate (v.)

1630s, from Latin fluctuatus, past participle of fluctuare to undulate (see fluctuation). Related:
Fluctuated; fluctuates; fluctuating.


fluctuation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French fluctuation (12c.) or directly from Latin fluctuationem (nominative
fluctuatio) a wavering, vacillation, noun of action from past participle stem of fluctuare to
undulate, to move in waves, from fluctus wave, billow, surge, from past participle of fluere to flow
(see fluent).


flue (n.)

smoke channel in a chimney, 1580s, perhaps related to 15c. word meaning mouthpiece of a hunting
horn, or perhaps from Old English flowan to flow, and/or Old French fluie stream.


fluency (n.)

1620s, abundance, later smooth and easy flow (1630s), from fluent + -cy. Replaced earlier fluence
(c.1600).


fluent (adj.)

1580s, flowing freely (of water, also of speech), from Latin fluentem (nominative fluens) lax,
relaxed, figuratively flowing, fluent, present participle of fluere to flow, stream, run, melt, from
PIE *bhleugw-, extended form of *bhleu- to swell, well up, overflow (cognates: Latin flumen river;
Greek phluein to boil over, bubble up, phlein to abound), an extension of root *bhel- (2) to blow,
inflate, swell; see bole. Used interchangeably with fluid in Elizabethan times. Related: Fluently.


fluff (n.)

light, feathery stuff, 1790, apparently a variant of floow wooly substance, down, nap (1580s),
perhaps from Flemish vluwe, from French velu shaggy, hairy, from Latin vellus fleece, or Latin
villus tuft of hair (see velvet). OED suggests fluff as an imitative modification of floow,
imitating the action of puffing away some light substance. Slang bit of fluff young woman is from
1903. The marshmallow confection Fluff dates to c.1920 in Massachusetts, U.S.


fluff (v.)

to shake into a soft mass, 1875, from fluff (n.). Meaning make a mistake is from 1884, originally in
theater slang. Related: Fluffed; fluffing.


fluffer (n.)

track sweeper on the London underground, by 1956.


fluffy (adj.)

1825, from fluff + -y (2). Related: Fluffiness.


flugelhorn (n.)

1854, from German fl&uuml;gelhorn, from fl&uuml;gel wing (related to fliegen to fly; see fly (v.1))
+ horn horn (see horn (n.)).


fluid (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French fluide (14c.) and directly from Latin fluidus fluid, flowing, moist,
from fluere to flow (see fluent). Figurative use from 1640s. Related: Fluidly.


fluid (n.)

1660s, from fluid (adj.).


fluidity (n.)

c.1600, from French fluidit&eacute;, from fluide (see fluid (adj.)), or else formed in English from
fluid.


fluke (n.1)

flat end of an arm of an anchor, 1560s, perhaps from fluke (n.3) on resemblance of shape, or from
Low German fl&uuml;gel wing. Meaning whale's tail (in plural, flukes) is 1725.


fluke (n.2)

lucky stroke, chance hit, 1857, originally a lucky shot at billiards, of uncertain origin.


fluke (n.3)

flatfish, Old English floc flatfish, related to Old Norse floke flatfish, flak disk, floe (see flake
(n.)). The parasite worm (1660s) so called from resemblance of shape.


fluky (adj.)

1867, from fluke (n.2) + -y (2).


flume (n.)

late 12c., stream, from Old French flum running water, stream, river, from Latin flumen flood,
stream, running water, from fluere to flow (see fluent). In U.S., used especially of artificial
streams channeled for some industrial purpose.


flummery (n.)

1620s, a type of coagulated food, from Welsh llymru sour oatmeal jelly boiled with the husks, of
uncertain origin. Figurative use, of flattery, empty talk, is from 1740s.


flummox (v.)

1837, cant word, origin uncertain, probably from some forgotten British dialect. Candidates cluster
in Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, southern Cheshire and also in Sheffield. The formation seems to
be onomatop&#339;ic, expressive of the notion of throwing down roughly and untidily. Never let it be
said that the OED editors lacked imagination. Related: Flummoxed.


flung

past participle of fling (v.).


flunk (v.)

1823, American English college slang, original meaning to back out, give up, fail, traditionally
said to be an alteration of British university slang funk to be frightened, shrink from (see funk
(n.1)). Related: Flunked; flunking.


flunky (n.)

also flunkey, 1782, Scottish dialect, footman, liveried servant, of uncertain origin, perhaps a
diminutive variant of flanker. Sense of flatterer, toady first recorded 1855.


fluor (n.)

16c., and old chemistry term for minerals which were readily fusible and useful as fluxes in
smelting [Flood], Latin fluor, originally meaning a flowing, flow (see fluent). Since 1771 applied
to minerals containing fluorine, especially calcium fluoride (fluorspar or fluorite).


fluorescence (n.)

1852, glowing in ultraviolet light, coined by English mathematician and physicist Sir George G.
Stokes (1819-1903) from fluorspar (see fluorine), because in it he first noticed the phenomenon, +
-escence, on analogy of phosphorescence.


fluorescent (adj.)

1853, from fluor- + -escent (see fluorescence). The fluorescent electric lamp patent was applied for
in 1896 by U.S. inventor Thomas A. Edison, but such lights were rare before 1938.


fluoridate (v.)

1949, back-formation from fluoridation. Related: Fluoridated; fluoridating.


fluoridation (n.)

1904, from fluoride + -ation. In reference to adding traces of fluoride to drinking water as a
public health policy, from 1949.


fluoride (n.)

1826, binary compound of fluorine with another element, from fluorine + -ide.


fluorine (n.)

non-metallic element, 1813, coined by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) from fluorspar
(calcium fluoride, modern fluorite), the late 18c. name of the mineral where it was first found; see
fluor + chemical suffix -ine (2). Not isolated until 1886.


fluoroscopy (n.)

1896, from fluor- (see fluorescence) + -oscopy (see -scope).


flurry (n.)

snow squall 1828, American English, with earlier senses of commotion, etc., dating to 1680s; perhaps
imitative, or else from 17c. flurr to scatter, fly with a whirring noise, perhaps from Middle
English flouren to sprinkle, as with flour (late 14c.).


flurry (v.)

1757 in the commotion sense, from flurry (n.); 1883 in the snow sense. Related: Flurried; flurries;
flurrying.


flush (v.)

fly up suddenly, c.1300, perhaps imitative of the sound of beating wings, or related to flash via
its variant flushe. Probably not connected to Old French flux, source of flush (n.).    Transitive
meaning to cause to fly, start is first attested mid-15c. The sense of spurt, rush out suddenly,
flow with force (1540s) is probably the same word, with the connecting notion being sudden movement,
but its senses seem more to fit the older ones of flash (now all transferred to this word except in
flash flood). Meaning cleanse a drain, etc., with a rush of water is from 1789. The noun sense of
sudden redness in the face (1620s) probably belongs here, too. The verb in this sense is from 1660s.
A very puzzling word [Weekley]. Related: Flushed; flushing.


flush (adj.)

1550s, perfect, faultless; c.1600, abundant; plentifully supplied (with money, etc.), perhaps from
flush (v.) through the notion of a river running full, hence level with its banks. Meaning even,
level is from 1620s.


flush (n.)

hand of cards all of one suit, 1520s, perhaps from Middle French flus (15c.), from Old French flux a
flowing, with the sense of a run (of cards), from Latin fluxus flux, from fluere to flow (see
fluent). The form in English probably was influenced by flush (v.).


Flushing

New York village established 1645 by English Puritans (now a neighborhood in Queens), an English
corruption of Dutch Vlissingen, name of Dutch town where the Puritans had taken refuge, literally
flowing (so called for its location on an estuary of the West Scheldt), related to flush (v.).


fluster (v.)

early 15c. (implied in flostyrynge), from a Scandinavian source (compare Icelandic flaustr bustle,
flaustra to bustle).  Originally to excite, especially with drink; sense of to flurry, confuse is
from 1724. Related: Flustered; flustering. As a noun, 1710, from the verb.


flustrated (adj.)

1712, jocular formation from fluster + frustrated.


flute (n.)

early 14c., from Old French flaute (12c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al flaut, of uncertain origin,
perhaps imitative or from Latin flare to blow; perhaps influenced by Proven&ccedil;al laut lute. The
other Germanic words (such as German fl&ouml;te) are likewise borrowings from French.    Ancient
flutes were blown through a mouthpiece, like a recorder; the modern transverse or German flute
developed 18c. The older style then sometimes were called fl&#251;te-a-bec (French, literally flute
with a beak). The modern design and key system of the concert flute were perfected 1834 by Theobald
Boehm. The architectural sense of furrow in a pillar (1650s) is from fancied resemblance to the
inside of a flute split down the middle. Meaning tall, slender wine glass is from 1640s.


flute (v.)

late 14c., to play upon the flute, from flute (n.). Meaning to make (architectural) flutes is from
1570s. Related: Fluted; fluting.


fluted (adj.)

1610s, past participle adjective from flute (v.).


flutist (n.)

c.1600, probably from French fl&#251;tiste; replaced Middle English flouter (early 13c., from Old
French flauteor) and is preferred in U.S. The British preference is flautist (q.v.), a Continental
reborrowing that returns the original diphthong.


flutter (v.)

Old English floterian to flutter, fly, flicker, float to and fro, be tossed by waves, frequentative
of flotian to float (see float (v.)). Related: Fluttered; fluttering. As a noun from 1640s; meaning
state of excitement is 1740s.


fluvial (adj.)

pertaining to a river, late 14c., from Latin fluvialis of a river, from fluvius river, related to
fluere to flow (see flow (v.)).


flux (n.)

late 14c., from Old French flus flowing, rolling, bleeding, or directly from Latin fluxus flowing,
loose, slack, past participle of fluere to flow (see fluent). Originally excessive flow (of blood or
excrement); an early name for dysentery; sense of continuous succession of changes is first recorded
1620s. The verb is early 15c., from the noun.


fly (n.)

Old English fleoge fly, winged insect, from Proto-Germanic *fleugjon (cognates: Old Saxon fleiga,
Old Norse fluga, Middle Dutch vlieghe, Dutch vlieg, Old High German flioga, German Fliege fly);
literally the flying (insect) (compare Old English fleogende flying), from same source as fly (v.1).
Originally any winged insect (hence butterfly, etc.); long used by farmers and gardeners for any
insect parasite. The Old English plural in -n (as in oxen) gradually normalized 13c.-15c. to -s. Fly
on the wall unseen observer first recorded 1881. An Old English word for curtain was fleonet fly-
net. Fly-swatter as a bit of wire mesh on a handle first attested 1917. Fly-fishing is from 1650s.
From the verb and the notion of flapping as a wing does comes the noun sense of tent flap (1810),
which yielded covering for buttons that close up a garment (1844). The sense of a flight, flying is
from mid-15c. Baseball fly ball attested by 1866.  To do something on the fly is 1856, apparently
from baseball.    When the catcher sees several fielders running to catch a ball, he should name the
one he thinks surest to take it, when the others should not strive to catch the ball on the fly, but
only, in case of its being missed, take it on the bound. [The American Boys Book of Sports and
Games, New York, 1864]


fly (v.1)

to soar through air, Old English fleogan to fly (class II strong verb; past tense fleag, past
participle flogen), from Proto-Germanic *fleugan to fly (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German
fliogan, Old Norse fl&uuml;gja, Old Frisian fliaga, Middle Dutch vlieghen, Dutch vliegen, German
fliegen), from PIE *pleu- flowing, floating (see pluvial). Related: Flew; flied (baseball); flying.
Slang phrase fly off the handle lose one's cool dates from 1825.


fly (v.2)

run away, Old English fleon (see flee). Fleogan and fleon were often confused in Old English, too.
Modern English distinguishes in preterite: flew/fled.


fly (adj.)

slang, clever, alert, wide awake, late 18c., perhaps from fly (n.) on the notion of the insect being
hard to catch. Other theories, however, trace it to fledge or flash. Slang use in 1990s might be a
revival or a reinvention.


fly-by-night (n.)

1796, slang, said to be an old term of reproach to a woman signifying that she was a witch; extended
1823 to anyone who departs hastily from a recent activity, especially while owing money. The two
senses involve the two verbs fly.


fly-over (n.)

also flyover, 1901 of bridges, 1931, of aircraft flights, from fly (v.1) + over (adv.).


flyer (n.)

also flier, mid-15c., something that flies, agent noun of fly (v.1). Meaning something that goes
fast is from 1795; that of aviator is from 1934. Meaning speculative investment is from 1846 (on the
notion of a flying leap). Meaning small handbill or fly-sheet is from 1889, U.S. slang (originally
especially of police bulletins), on notion of made to be scattered broadcast. Meaning aviator is
from World War I. Related: Fliers; flyers.


flying (adj.)

Old English fleogende flying, winged, present participle of fly (v.1). Flying buttress is from
1660s; flying fish is from 1510s. Flying saucer first attested 1947, though the image of saucers for
unidentified flying objects is from at least 1880s. Flying Dutchman, ghost ship off the Cape of Good
Hope, attested since 1803 [John Leyden, Scenes of Infancy, who describes it as a common superstition
of mariners]. Flying colors (1706) probably is from the image of a naval vessel with the national
flag bravely displayed.


Flynn

surname, from Irish flann red.


flypaper (n.)

1851 (though the item itself is said to have become commonly available in London in 1848), from fly
(n.1) + paper (n.).


flyte (v.)

Old English flitan to contend, struggle, quarrel; related to German flei&szlig;, Dutch vlijt
diligence, industry.


flyway (n.)

1891, originally of bird migration paths, from fly (v.1) + way (n.).


flywheel (n.)

1784, from fly (n.) speed-regulating device (from fly (v.1)) + wheel (n.).


fo&#039;c&#039;sle (n.)

see forecastle.


foal (n.)

Old English fola foal, colt, from Proto-Germanic *fulon (cognates: Old Saxon folo, Middle Dutch and
Dutch veulen, Old Norse foli, Old Frisian fola, Old High German folo, German Fohlen, Gothic fula),
from PIE *pulo- young of an animal (cognates: Greek polos foal, Latin pullus a young animal,
Albanian pele mare), from root *pau- few, little (see few).


foal (v.)

give birth (to a foal), late 14c., from foal (n.). Related: Foaled; foaling.


foam (n.)

Old English fam foam, saliva froth, from West Germanic *faimo- (cognates: Old High German veim,
German Feim), from PIE *(s)poi-mo-, a root with connotations of foam, froth (cognates: Sanskrit
phenah; Latin pumex pumice, spuma foam; Old Church Slavonic pena foam; Lithuanian spaine a streak of
foam). The rubber or plastic variety so called from 1937.


foam (v.)

Old English famgian to foam, from the source of foam (n.). Related: Foamed; foaming.


foamy (adj.)

Old English faemig; see foam (n.) + -y (2). Related: Foaminess.


fob (n.)

1650s, small pocket for valuables, probably related to Low German fobke pocket, High German fuppe
pocket, a dialectal word used in Livonia [Klein]. Meaning chain attached to a watch carried in the
fob is from 1885.


fob (v.)

to cheat, late 14c., from obsolete noun fobbe cheat, trickster (late 14c.), perhaps from Old French
forbe cheat [OED]. Alternative etymology holds that the word is perhaps related to German foppen to
jeer at, make a fool of (see fop); or from German fuppen, einfuppen to pocket stealthily, which
would connect it to fob (n.). To fob (someone) off is first recorded 1590s. Related: Fobbed;
fobbing.


focal (adj.)

1690s, from Modern Latin focalis; see focus (n.) + -al (1).


foci (n.)

plural of focus (n.).


focus (n.)

1640s, from Latin focus hearth, fireplace (also, figuratively, home, family), of unknown origin,
used in post-classical times for fire itself, taken by Kepler (1604) in a mathematical sense for
point of convergence, perhaps on analogy of the burning point of a lens (the purely optical sense of
the word may have existed before Kepler, but it is not recorded). Introduced into English 1650s by
Hobbes. Sense transfer to center of activity or energy is first recorded 1796.


focus (v.)

1775 in the literal sense; 1807 in the figurative sense, from focus (n.). Related: Focused;
focusing; less commonly focussed; focussing.


fodder (n.)

Old English fodder food, especially food for cattle, from Proto-Germanic *fodran (cognates: Old
Norse fo&eth;r, Middle Dutch voeder, Old High German fuotar, German Futter), from PIE *patrom, from
*pa- to feed (see food).


foe (n.)

Old English gefa foe, enemy, adversary in a blood feud (the prefix denotes mutuality), from fah at
feud, hostile, from Proto-Germanic *fakhaz (cognates: Old High German fehan to hate, Gothic faih
deception), probably from PIE root *peig- (2) evil-minded, treacherous, hostile (cognates: Sanskrit
pisunah malicious, picacah demon; Greek pikros bitter; Latin piget it irks, troubles, displeases,
piger reluctant, lazy; Lithuanian piktas wicked, angry, pekti to blame). Weaker sense of adversary
is first recorded c.1600.


foetal (adj.)

see fetal; for spelling, see oe.


foetid (adj.)

see fetid; for spelling, see oe.


foetus (n.)

see fetus; for spelling, see oe.


fog (v.)

1590s, from fog (n.1). Related: Fogged; fogging.


fog (n.1)

thick, obscuring mist, 1540s, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Danish fog spray, shower,
snowdrift, Old Norse fok snow flurry, fjuk snow storm. Compare also Old English fuht, Dutch vocht,
German Feucht moist. Figurative phrase in a fog at a loss what to do first recorded c.1600.


fog (n.2)

long grass, c.1300, probably of Scandinavian origin; compare Norwegian fogg long grass in a moist
hollow, Icelandic fuki rotten sea grass. The connection to fog (n.1), via a notion of long grass
growing in moist dells of northern Europe, is tempting but not proven. Watkins suggests derivation
from PIE *pu- to rot, decay.


Fogarty

surname, from Old Irish fogartach banished.


fogey (n.)

also fogy, an old, dull fellow, 1780, Scottish foggie, originally army pensioner or veteran, perhaps
connected to fogram (1775) old-fashioned person; or from fog in obsolete senses of moss or bloated
fat (1580s).


foggy (adj.)

1540s, perhaps from a Scandinavian source, or formed from fog (n.1) + -y (2). Foggy Bottom U.S.
Department of State, from the name of a marshy region of Washington, D.C., where many federal
buildings are (also with a suggestion of political murkiness) popularized 1947 by James Reston in
New York Times, but he said it had been used earlier by Edward Folliard of The Washington Post.


foghorn (n.)

1858, from fog (n.1) + horn (n.).


foible (n.)

1640s, weak point of a sword blade (contrasted to forte), from French foible (n.), from obsolete
foible (adj.) weak, from Old French foible feeble, dissimilated from Lain flebilis (see feeble).
Extended sense of weak point of character is first recorded 1670s. Related: Foibles.


foie gras (n.)

1818, short for p&acirc;t&eacute; de foie gras (see pate (n.2)). P&acirc;t&eacute; de foie gras
(1827 in English) is literally pie of fat liver; originally served in a pastry (as still in Alsace),
the phrase now chiefly in English with reference to the filling.


foil (v.)

c.1300, foilen to spoil a trace or scent by running over it, irregularly from Old French fouler
trample, from Vulgar Latin *fullare to clean cloth (by treading on it), from Latin fullo one who
cleans cloth, fuller, of unknown origin.    Hence, to overthrow, defeat (1540s). Sense of frustrate
the efforts of first recorded 1560s. Related: Foiled; foiling. Foiled again! as a cry of defeat and
dismay is from at least 1847.


foil (n.)

thin sheet of metal, early 14c., from Old French fueille leaf, from Latin folia leaves, plural
(mistaken for fem. singular) of folium leaf (see folio).    The sense of one who enhances another by
contrast (1580s) is from the practice of backing a gem with metal foil to make it shine more
brilliantly. The meaning light sword used in fencing (1590s) could be from this sense, or from foil
(v.). The modern sense of metallic food wrap is from 1946.


foist (v.)

1540s, from Dutch vuisten take in hand, from Middle Dutch vuist fist (see fist). Earliest sense was
cheating at dice by concealing a loaded one in the palm of the hand with the intention of
introducing it into play; meaning introduce surreptitiously is from 1560s. Related: Foisted;
foisting.


Fokker

German monoplane, 1913, from name of A.H.G. Fokker (1890-1939), Dutch engineer and inventor.


fold (v.)

Old English faldan (Mercian), fealdan (West Saxon), transitive, to bend cloth back over itself,
class VII strong verb (past tense feold, past participle fealden), from Proto-Germanic *falthan,
*faldan (cognates: Middle Dutch vouden, Dutch vouwen, Old Norse falda, Middle Low German volden, Old
High German faldan, German falten, Gothic fal&thorn;an).    The Germanic words are from PIE *pel-to-
(cognates: Sanskrit putah fold, pocket, Albanian pale fold, Middle Irish alt a joint, Lithuanian
pleta I plait), from root *pel- (3) to fold (also source of Greek ploos fold, Latin -plus).    The
weak form developed from 15c. In late Old English also of the arms. Intransitive sense, become
folded is from c.1300 (of the body or limbs); earlier give way, fail (mid-13c.). Sense of to yield
to pressure is from late 14c. Related: Folded; folding.


fold (n.1)

pen or enclosure for sheep or other domestic animals, Old English fal&aelig;d, falud stall, stable,
cattle-pen, a general Germanic word (cognates: East Frisian folt enclosure, dunghill, Dutch vaalt
dunghill, Danish fold pen for sheep), of uncertain origin. Figurative use by mid-14c.


fold (n.2)

a bend or ply in anything, mid-13c., from fold (v.).


fold-out (n.)

1961, from fold (v.) + out.


folder (n.)

1550s as one who folds; 1911 as folding cover for loose papers; agent noun from fold (v.).


foliage (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French feuillage, from Old French feuille leaf (see foil (n.)). The form has
altered by influence of Latin folium.


foliate (adj.)

1620s, from Latin foliatus leaved, leafy, from folium (see folio).


foliate (v.)

1660s, to apply silver leaf, from Latin foliatus leaved, leafy, from folium (see folio). Meaning to
put forth leaves is from 1775. Related: Foliated; foliating.


foliation (n.)

1620s, from French foliation or formed in English from Latin foliatus (see foliate (v.)).


folic (adj.)

in reference to type of acid, 1941, coined from Latin folium leaf (see folio) + -ic. So called for
its abundance in green leaves, such as those of spinach.


folio (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin folio leaf or sheet of paper, from Latin folio, ablative of folium leaf,
from PIE *bhulyom leaf (cognates: Greek phyllon leaf, Gaelic bile leaflet, blossom), from root
*bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). Ablative of location, because this was used in page
references. Meaning volume of the largest size first attested 1620s.


folium (n.)

see folio.


folk (n.)

Old English folc common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army, from
Proto-Germanic *folkom (cognates: Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, German Volk people), from
Proto-Germanic *fulka-, perhaps originally host of warriors; compare Old Norse folk people, also
army, detachment; and Lithuanian pulkas crowd, Old Church Slavonic pluku division of an army, both
believed to have been borrowed from Proto-Germanic. Old English folcstede could mean both dwelling-
place and battlefield.    Some have attempted to link the word to Greek plethos multitude; Latin
plebs people, mob, populus people or vulgus; OED and Klein discount this theory but it is accepted
in Watkins. The plural form has been usual since 17c. Superseded in most senses by people. Old
English folc was commonly used in forming compounds, such as folccwide popular saying, folcgemot
town or district meeting; folcwoh deception of the public. Folk-etymology is attested from 1890.
By Folk-etymology is meant the influence exercised upon words, both as to their form and meaning, by
the popular use and misuse of them. In a special sense, it is intended to denote the corruption
which words undergo, owing either to false ideas about their derivation, or to a mistaken analogy
with other words to which they are supposed to be related. [The Rev. A. Smythe Palmer, Folk-
Etymology, 1890]


folk music

1889, from folk (also see folklore). In reference to the branch of modern popular music (originally
associated with Greenwich Village in New York City) it dates from 1958.


folkie (n.)

devotee of (modern) folk music, attested by 1966, with -ie.


folklore (n.)

1846, coined by antiquarian William J. Thoms (1803-1885) as an Anglo-Saxonism (replacing popular
antiquities) and first published in the Athenaeum of Aug. 22, 1846, from folk + lore. Old English
folclar meant homily.    This word revived folk in a modern sense of of the common people, whose
culture is handed down orally, and opened up a flood of compound formations, as in folk art (1892),
folk-hero (1874), folk-medicine (1877), folk-tale/folk tale (1850; Old English folctalu meant
genealogy), folk-song (1847), folk singer (1876), folk-dance (1877).


folkloric (adj.)

1883, from folklore + -ic.


folklorist (n.)

1881, from folklore + -ist.


folks (n.)

people of one's family, 1715, colloquial, from plural of folk.


folksy (adj.)

sociable, unpretentious, 1852, U.S. colloquial, from folks + -y (2).


folkways (n.)

coined 1907 in book of the same name by U.S. sociologist William Graham Sumner (1840-1910), who also
is credited with ethnocentrism, found in the same book. See folk (n.) + way (n.).    Folkways are
habits of the individual and customs of the society which arise from efforts to satisfy needs. ...
Then they become regulative for succeeding generations and take on the character of a social force.
[Sumner, Folkways]


folky (adj.)

characteristic of the common people, 1914, from folk + -y (2). Old English had folcisc popular,
secular, common.


follicle (n.)

early 15c., from French follicule or directly from Latin folliculus little bag, diminutive of follis
bellows, inflated ball, from PIE *bhol-n-, suffixed form of root *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole).


follies (n.)

revue with glamorous female performers, 1908, from French folies (mid-19c.), from folie (see folly),
probably in its sense of extravagance (compare extravaganza).


follow (v.)

Old English folgian, fylgan follow, accompany; follow after, pursue, also obey, apply oneself to a
practice or calling, from Proto-Germanic *fulg- (cognates: Old Saxon folgon, Old Frisian folgia,
Middle Dutch volghen, Dutch volgen, Old High German folgen, German folgen, Old Norse fylgja to
follow).    Probably originally a compound, *full-gan with a sense of full-going; the sense then
shifting to serve, go with as an attendant (compare fulfill). Related: Followed; following. To
follow one's nose go straight on first attested 1590s. The full phrase is, 'Follow your nose, and
you are sure to go straight.'  [Farmer].


follow up (n.)

also follow-up, 1923, originally in the argot of personnel management, from verbal phrase follow up
(1847).


follow-through (n.)

1897, of golf swings, from verbal phrase follow through. Figurative use from 1926.


follower (n.)

Old English folgere retainer, servant, disciple; successor, agent noun from follow. Related:
Followers.


following (n.)

c.1300, verbal noun from follow (v.). Meaning a body of disciples or retainers is from mid-15c.


folly (n.)

early 13c., mental weakness; unwise conduct (in Middle English including wickedness, lewdness,
madness), from Old French folie (12c.) folly, madness, stupidity, from fol (see fool (n.)). Sense of
costly structure considered to have shown folly in the builder is attested from 1650s. Used since
Middle English of place names, especially country estates, as a form of Old French folie in its
meaning delight. Meaning glamorous theatrical revue with lots of pretty girls is from 1880, from
French.


Fomalhaut

bright star in the constellation Piscis Austrinis, 1594, from Arabic Fum al Hut the Fish's Mouth,
which describes its position in the imaginary star-picture.


foment (v.)

early 15c., apply hot liquids, from Old French fomenter (13c.) apply hot compress (to a wound), from
Late Latin fomentare, from Latin fomentum warm application, poultice, contraction of *fovimentum,
from fovere to warm; cherish, encourage (see fever). Extended sense of stimulate, instigate (1620s)
was in the French. Related: Fomented; fomenting.


fomentation (n.)

c.1400, from Late Latin fomentationem, noun of action from past participle stem of fomentare, from
Latin fomentum (see foment).


Fomorian

pertaining to the monstrous race in Irish mythology, 1876, from Irish fomor pirate, monster, from fo
under + mor sea. Cognate with Gaelic famhair.


fond (adj.)

mid-14c., originally foolish, silly, from past tense of fonnen to fool, be foolish, perhaps from
Middle English fonne fool (early 14c.), of uncertain origin; or possibly related to fun.    Meaning
evolved by 1590 via foolishly tender to having strong affections for. Another sense of fonne was to
lose savor, which may be the original meaning of the word (as in Wyclif: Gif &thorn;e salt be fonnyd
it is not wor&thorn;i, c.1380). Related: Fonder; fondest.


fondant (n.)

1877, from French fondant, noun use of present participle of fondre to melt (see found (v.2)).


fondle (v.)

1690s, treat with indulgence and affection, frequentative of fond dote upon (see fond). Sense of
caress first recorded 1796. Related: Fondled; fondling (1670s as a past participle adjective).


fondly (adj.)

mid-14c., foolishly, from fond + -ly (2). Meaning affectionately is from 1590s.


fondness (n.)

late 14c., from fond + -ness.


fondue

1878, French cooking term (15c.), literally melted, properly fem. past participle of fondre to melt
(see found (v.2)).


font (n.1)

basin, Old English font, from Latin fons (genitive fontis) fountain (see fountain), especially in
Medieval Latin fons baptismalis baptismal font.


font (n.2)

typeface, set of letters of a particular type, 1680s, earlier a casting (1570s), from Middle French
fonte a casting, noun use of fem. past participle of fondre to melt (see found (v.2)). So called
because all the letters in a given set were cast at the same time.


fontanelle (n.)

also fontanel, 1540s, hollow between two muscles, from French fontanelle (16c.), from Old French
fontenele small source, fountain, spring; fontanelle, diminutive of fontaine spring (see fountain),
on analogy of the dent in the earth where a spring arises. In reference to the hollow in a baby's
skull, it is first recorded 1741.


food (n.)

Old English foda food, nourishment; fuel, also figurative, from Proto-Germanic *fodon (cognates:
Gothic fodeins), from Germanic root *fod-, equivalent of PIE *pa- to tend, keep, pasture, to
protect, to guard, to feed (cognates: Greek pateisthai to feed; Latin pabulum food, fodder, panis
bread, pasci to feed, pascare to graze, pasture, feed, pastor shepherd, literally feeder; Avestan
pitu- food; Old Church Slavonic pasti feed cattle, pasture; Russian pishcha food).   Food chain is
from 1917. Food poisoning attested by 1864; food processor in the kitchen appliance sense from 1973.


foodie (n.)

gourmet, 1982, from food + -ie.


foodstuff (n.)

1870, from food + stuff (n.). Related: Foodstuffs.


fool (n.)

late 13c., silly or stupid person, from Old French fol madman, insane person; idiot; rogue; jester,
also blacksmith's bellows, also an adjective meaning mad, insane (12c., Modern French fou), from
Latin follis bellows, leather bag (see follicle); in Vulgar Latin used with a sense of windbag,
empty-headed person. Compare also Sanskrit vatula- insane, literally windy, inflated with wind.
The word has in mod.Eng. a much stronger sense than it had at an earlier period; it has now an
implication of insulting contempt which does not in the same degree belong to any of its synonyms,
or to the derivative foolish. [OED]    Meaning jester, court clown first attested late 14c., though
it is not always possible to tell whether the reference is to a professional entertainer or an
amusing lunatic on the payroll. As the name of a kind of custard dish, it is attested from 1590s
(the food also was called trifle, which may be the source of the name).    There is no foole to the
olde foole [Heywood, 1546] Feast of Fools (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin festum stultorum) refers
to the burlesque festival celebrated in some churches on New Year's Day in medieval times. Fool's
gold iron pyrite is from 1829. Fool's paradise state of illusory happiness is from mid-15c.
Foolosopher, a most useful insult, turns up in a 1549 translation of Erasmus. Fool's ballocks is
described in OED as an old name for the green-winged orchid.


fool (v.)

mid-14c., to be foolish, act the fool, from fool (n.). The meaning to make a fool of is recorded
from 1590s. Also as a verb 16c.-17c. was foolify. Related: Fooled; fooling. Fool around is 1875 in
the sense of pass time idly, 1970s in sense of have sexual adventures.


fool (adj.)

foolish, silly, considered modern U.S. colloquial, but it is attested from early 13c., from fool
(n.).


foolery (n.)

1550s, from fool (n.) + -ery.


foolhardy (adj.)

early 13c., from fool (n.) + Middle English hardi bold; hence foolishly brave (see hardy). Compare
Old French fol hardi.


foolish (adj.)

early 14c., from fool (n.) + -ish. Related: Foolishly; foolishness. Old English words for this were
dysig, stunt, dol.


foolproof (adj.)

also fool-proof, 1902, American English, safe against the incompetence of a fool, from fool (n.) +
proof.


foolscap (n.)

literally fool's cap; cap worn by jesters, 1630s; c.1700 as a type of paper, so called because this
type of paper originally was watermarked with a court jester's cap.


foosball (n.)

debuted in U.S. 1963 and was a craze on some college campuses for a few years thereafter. Said to
have been designed c.1930s in Switzerland. The name is presumably from the pronunciation of
Fu&szlig;ball, the German form of (Association) football.


foot (n.)

Old English fot, from Proto-Germanic *fot (cognates: Old Saxon fot, Old Norse fotr, Dutch voet, Old
High German fuoz, German Fu&szlig;, Gothic fotus foot), from PIE *ped- (cognates: Avestan pad-;
Sanskrit pad-, accusative padam foot; Greek pos, Attic pous, genitive podos; Latin pes, genitive
pedis foot; Lithuanian padas sole, peda footstep). Plural form feet is an instance of i-mutation. Of
a bed, grave, etc., first recorded c.1300.  The linear measurement of 12 inches was in Old English,
from the length of a man's foot. Colloquial exclamation my foot! expressing contemptuous
contradiction [OED] is first attested 1923, probably a euphemism for my ass, in the same sense,
which dates back to 1796 (also see eyewash). The metrical foot (Old English, translating Latin pes,
Greek pous in the same sense) is commonly taken as a reference to keeping time by tapping the foot.
To get off on the right foot is from 1905; to put one's best foot foremost first recorded 1849
(Shakespeare has the better foot before, 1596). To put one's foot in (one's) mouth say something
stupid is attested by 1942; the expression put (one's) foot in something make a mess of it is from
1823.


foot (v.)

c.1400, dance, move on foot, from foot (n.). To foot a bill is attested from 1848, from the process
of tallying the expenses and writing the figure at the bottom (foot) of the bill.


footage (n.)

1892, piece work system to pay miners; 1916, the length of film used in a scene, etc., from foot
(n.) as a measure of length + -age.


football (n.)

open-air game, first recorded c.1400; see foot (n.) + ball (n.1). Forbidden in a Scottish statute of
1424. The first reference to the ball itself is late 15c. Figurative sense of something idly kicked
around is first recorded 1530s. Ball-kicking games date back to the Roman legions, at least, but the
sport seems to have risen to a national obsession in England, c.1630. Rules first regularized at
Cambridge, 1848; soccer (q.v.) split off in 1863.    The U.S. style (known to some in England as
stop-start rugby with padding) evolved gradually 19c.; the first true collegiate game is considered
to have been played Nov. 6, 1869, between Princeton and Rutgers, at Rutgers, but the rules there
were more like soccer. A rematch at Princeton Nov. 13, with the home team's rules, was true U.S.
football. The earliest recorded application of the word football to this is from 1881.


footer (n.)

c.1600, pedestrian; 1781, a kick at football; 1863, British student slang, the game of football; see
foot (n.), football, -er.


footfall (n.)

c.1600; see foot (n.) + fall (n). Perhaps first in Shakespeare.


foothill (n.)

a hill that leads up to a mountain, 1850, American English, from foot (n.) + hill.


foothills (n.)

see foothill.


foothold (n.)

1620s, from foot (n.) + hold (n.). Figurative use by 1650s.


footing (n.)

position of the feet on the ground, stance, late 14c., from foot (n.). Figurative meaning firm or
secure position is from 1580s; that of condition on which anything is established is from 1650s.


footle (v.)

to trifle, 1892, from dialectal footer to trifle, footy mean, paltry (1752), perhaps from French se
foutre to care nothing, from Old French foutre to copulate with, from Latin futuere, originally to
strike, thrust (see confute). But OED derives the English dialect words from foughty (c.1600), from
Dutch vochtig or Danish fugtig damp, musty; related to fog (n.).


footless (adj.)

late 14c., from foot (n.) + -less.


footlights (n.)

1836, from foot (of the stage) + light (n.).


footloose (adj.)

1690s, in literal sense of free to move the feet, unshackled, from foot (n.) + loose. Figurative
sense of free to act as one pleases is from 1873.


footman (n.)

c.1300, foot soldier; late 14c., one who goes on foot; as a personal attendant, originally one who
ran before or alongside his master's carriage, announcing its arrival (and keeping it from tipping
over). The modern, non-jogging servant sense is from c.1700, though the running footmen still were
in service mid-18c. From foot (n.) + man (n.).


footnote (n.)

1841, from foot (n.) + note (n.). So called from its original position at the foot of a page. Also
sometimes formerly Bottom note. As a verb, from 1864. Related: Footnoted; footnoting.


footpad (n.)

highway robber, 1680s, from foot (n.) + pad pathway, from Middle Dutch pad way, path, from Proto-
Germanic *patha- way, path (see path).


footpath (n.)

also foot-path 1520s, from foot (n.) + path.


footprint (n.)

1550s, from foot (n.) + print. Related: Footprints. Old English had fotspor, fotsw&aelig;&eth;.


footsie (n.)

amorous play with the feet [OED], 1944, from foot (n.).


footsore (adj.)

also foot-sore, 1719, from foot (n.) + sore (adj.).


footstep (n.)

early 13c., footprint, from foot (n.) + step (n.). Meaning a tread or fall of the foot is first
attested 1530s. Figurative expression to follow in (someone's) footsteps is from 1540s.


footstool (n.)

also foot-stool, 1520s, from foot (n.) + stool.


fop (n.)

mid-15c., foolish person, of unknown origin, perhaps related to fob (v.), German foppen jeer at,
make a fool of. Sense of dandy is from 1660s.


foppery (n.)

1540s, foolish action, from fop + -ery. Meaning behavior and manner of a fop is from 1690s; meaning
foppish attire is from 1711.


foppish (adj.)

c.1600, from fop + -ish. Related: Foppishly; fopishness.


for (prep.)

Old English for for, before, on account of, from Proto-Germanic *fura (cognates: Old Saxon furi
before, Old Frisian for, Middle Dutch vore, Dutch voor for, before; German f&uuml;r for; Danish for
for, f&oslash;r before; Gothic faur for, faura before); see fore (adv.).    Use of for and fore
gradually was differentiated in Middle English. Its use alone as a conjunction (not found before
12c.) probably is a shortening of common Old English phrases such as for &thorn;on &thorn;y
therefore, literally for the (reason) that.


for-

prefix usually meaning away, opposite, completely, from Old English for-, indicating loss or
destruction, or completion, also used as an intensive or pejorative element, which is related to Old
Norse for-, Dutch ver-, Old High German fir-, German ver-; from PIE *pr-, from root *per- (1)
forward, through (see per). Probably originally in Germanic with a sense of forward, forth, but with
complex sense developments in the various languages. Ultimately from the same root as fore (adv.).


forage (n.)

early 14c. (late 13c. as Anglo-Latin foragium), from Old French forrage fodder, foraging, pillaging,
looting (12c., Modern French fourrage), from fuerre hay, straw, forage, fodder (Modern French
feurre) fodder, straw, from Frankish *fodr food or a similar Germanic source (compare Old High
German fuotar, Old English fodor); see fodder. Military forage cap attested by 1827.


forage (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French fourrager, from fourage (Old French forrage; see forage (n.)).
Related: Foraged; foraging.


forager (n.)

late 14c., from Old French foragier, from forrage (see forage (n.)).


foramen (n.)

plural foramina, 1670s, from Latin foramen hole, opening, aperture, orifice, from forare to pierce
(see bore (v.)).


Foraminifera

1835, Modern Latin, neuter plural of foraminifer bearing holes, from Latin foramen hole, opening,
orifice (see foramen) + -fer bearing, from ferre to bear (see infer). So called because the shells
usually are perforated by pores. Related: Foraminiferous.


foray (n.)

late 14c., Scottish, from the verb (14c.), perhaps a back-formation of Middle English forreyer
raider, forager (mid-14c.), from Old French forrier, from forrer to forage (see forage (n.)).
Disused by 18c.; revived by Scott.


forb (n.)

1924, from Greek phorbe fodder, forage.


forbade

past tense of forbid.


forbear (v.)

to abstain, Old English forberan bear up against, control one's feelings, endure, from for- + beran
to bear (see bear (v.)). Related: Forbearer; forbearing; forbore.


forbear (n.)

ancestor, late 15c., from fore before + be-er one who exists; agent noun from be.


forbearance (n.)

1570s, originally legal, in reference to enforcement of debt obligations, from forbear (v.) + -ance.
General sense of refraining from is from 1590s.


Forbes

U.S. financial publication, founded 1917 by Scottish-born Wall Street journalist B.C. Forbes
(1880-1954) and publisher Walter Drey.


forbid (v.)

Old English forbeodan forbid, prohibit, from for- against + beodan to command (see bid). Common
Germanic compound (cognates: Dutch verbieden, Old High German farbiotan, German verbieten, Old Norse
fyrirbjo&eth;a, Gothic faurbiudan to forbid). Related: Forbade; forbidden.


forbidding (adj.)

uninviting, 1712, present participle adjective from forbid. Related: Forbiddingly; forbiddingness.


forbore

past tense of forbear (v.).


force (n.)

c.1300, physical strength, from Old French force (12c.) force, strength, courage, fortitude;
violence, power, compulsion, from Vulgar Latin *fortia (source also of Spanish fuerza, Italian
forza), noun use of neuter plural of Latin fortis strong (see fort). Meaning body of armed men, army
first recorded late 14c. (also in Old French). Physics sense is from 1660s; force field attested by
1920.


force (v.)

c.1300, from Old French forcier conquer by violence, from force (see force (n.)). Its earliest sense
in English was to ravish (a woman); sense of to compel, oblige to do something is from c.1400.
Related: Forced; forcing.


force majeure

1883, French, literally superior strength.


force-feed (v.)

by 1909, from force (n.) + feed (v.). Related: Force-fed; force-feeding.


forced (adj.)

not spontaneous or voluntary, 1570s, past participle adjective from force (v.). The flier's forced
landing attested by 1917.


forceful (adj.)

1570s, from force (n.) + -ful. Related: Forcefully; forcefulness.


forcemeat (n.)

also force-meat, mincemeat, 1680s, from force to stuff, a variant of farce (q.v.) + meat.


forceps (n.)

1560s, from Latin forceps pair of tongs, pincers, compound of formus hot (see warm (adj.)) + root of
capere to hold, take (see capable). Originally a smith's implement. The classical plural is
forcipes.


forcible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French forcible, from Old French forcier (see force (n.)). Related:
Forcibly.


ford (v.)

1610s, from ford (n.). Related: Forded; fording.


ford (n.)

Old English ford shallow place where water can be crossed, from Proto-Germanic *furdhus (cognates:
Old Frisian forda, Old High German furt, German Furt ford), from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage
(cognates: Latin portus harbor, originally entrance, passage; Old Welsh rit, Welsh rhyd ford; Old
English faran to go; see port (n.1)). The line of automobiles is named for U.S. manufacturer Henry
Ford (1863-1947).


fore (adv.)

Old English fore (prep.) before, in front of; (adv.) before, previously, common Germanic (cognates:
Old High German fora, Old Frisian fara, German vor, Gothic faiura, Old Norse fyrr for); from PIE
*pr-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).    As a noun, from 1630s. The warning cry in
golf is first recorded 1878, probably a contraction of before.


fore (adj.)

mid-15c., forward; late 15c., former, earlier; early 16c., at the front; all senses apparently from
fore- compounds, which frequently were written as two words in Middle English.


fore-

from fore (adv.), which was used as a prefix in Old English and other Germanic languages with a
sense of before in time, rank, position, etc., or designating the front part or earliest time.


forearm (n.)

1741, from fore- + arm (n.1).


forearm (v.)

1590s, from fore- + arm (v.) take up weapons. Related: Forearmed; forearming.


forebear

see forbear.  Related: Forebearance; forebears.


forebode (v.)

feel a secret premonition, c.1600, from fore- + bode. Related: Foreboded; foreboding. Old English
forebodian meant to announce, declare.


foreboding (n.)

late 14c., a predilection, portent, omen, from fore- + verbal noun from bode. Meaning sense of
something bad about to happen is from c.1600. Old English forebodung meant prophecy.


forecast (v.)

late 14c., to scheme, from fore- before + casten in the sense of contrive, plan, prepare (late 14c.;
see cast (v.)). Meaning predict events first attested late 15c. (cast (v.) to perceive, notice is
from late 14c.). Related: Forecasted; forecasting.


forecast (n.)

early 15c., probably from forecast (v.); earliest sense was forethought, prudence; meaning
conjectured estimate of a future course is from 1670s. A Middle English word for weather forecasting
was aeromancy.


forecaster (n.)

1630s, agent noun from forecast (v.).


forecastle (n.)

c.1400, earlier Anglo-French forechasteil (mid-14c.), from Middle English fore- before + Anglo-
French castel fortified tower, the short raised deck in the fore part of the ship used in warfare
(see castle (n.)). Spelling fo'c'sle reflects sailors' pronunciation.


foreclose (v.)

late 13c., from Old French forclos, past participle of forclore exclude (12c.), from fors out
(Modern French hors; from Latin foris outside; see foreign) + clore to shut (see close (v.)). Senses
in English influenced by words in for-. Specific mortgage law sense is first attested 1728. Related:
Foreclosed; foreclosing.


foreclosure (n.)

1728, from foreclose + -ure.


forefather (n.)

ancestor, c.1300, from fore- + father (n.); perhaps directly from Old Norse forfa&eth;ir.


forefinger (n.)

mid-15c., from fore- + finger (n.). So called because it is considered the first next to the thumb.


forefront (n.)

late 15c., a Germanic-Latin hybrid, from fore- + front (n.). Originally of buildings; the main
modern sense is from military meaning front rank of an army (1510s).


forego (v.)

to go before, Old English foregan to go before, from fore- + go.  The similarly constructed foredone
killed, destroyed, now is archaic, replaced by done for. Related: Foregoing; foregone.    Phrase
foregone conclusion popularized in Othello [III.iii], but Shakespeare's sense was not necessarily
the main modern one of a decision already formed before the case is argued. Othello says it of
Cassio's dream, and it is clear from the context that Othello means Cassio actually has been in bed
with Desdemona before he allegedly dreamed it.


foreground (n.)

1690s, in the landscape sense, from fore- + ground (n.). First used in English by Dryden (Art of
Painting); compare Dutch voorgrond.


forehand

tennis stroke, 1879 (adj.), 1909 (n.), from fore- + hand (n.). Earlier it meant position in front or
above (16c.); hence forehanded prudent. Earliest use of the word is in archery, forehand shaft arrow
for shooting straight in front (1540s).


forehead (n.)

Old English forheafod, from fore- + heafod (see head (n.)).


foreign (adj.)

mid-13c., ferren, foreyne out of doors, from Old French forain strange, foreign; outer, external,
outdoor; remote, out-of-the-way (12c.), from Medieval Latin foranus on the outside, exterior, from
Latin foris outside, literally out of doors, related to for1s door, from PIE *dhwor-ans-, from root
*dhwer- door, doorway (see door). Spelling altered 17c. perhaps by influence of reign, sovereign.
Replaced native fremd. Sense of not in one's own land is first attested late 14c.


foreigner (n.)

early 15c., foreyner; see foreign + -er (1).    In ordinary use chiefly applied to those who speak a
foreign language as their native tongue; thus in England the term is not commonly understood to
include Americans. [OED]


foreknowledge (n.)

1530s, from fore- + knowledge. Compare foreknow to know beforehand (late 14c.).


foreleg (n.)

late 15c., from fore- + leg (n.).


forelock (n.)

lock of hair growing above the forehead, Old English forelocca; see fore- + lock (n.2).
Opportunity has hair in front, behind she is bald; if you seize her by the forelock, you may hold
her; but, if she once escapes, not Jupiter himself can catch her again. [Dictionary of Latin
Quotations, Proverbs, Maxims and Mottos, H.T. Riley, London, 1866]


foreman (n.)

1530s in the sense of principal juror; 1570s in the sense of principal workman; from fore- + man
(n.). Earliest attested meaning (early 13c.) was a leader. In 17c., a slang word for penis.


forementioned (adj.)

1580s; see fore- + mention (v.). A verb foremention is attested from 1650s.


foremost (adj.)

Old English fyrmest earliest, first, most prominent, from Proto-Germanic *formo- (related to Old
English fruma beginning), superlative of the root of fore + additional superlative suffix -est. See
-most, and similarly formed Old Frisian formest, Gothic frumists. Altered on the assumption that it
is a compound of fore and most.


forename (n.)

1530s, from fore- + name (n.). The equivalent of Latin praenomen.


forenoon (n.)

c.1500, from fore- + noon.


forensic (adj.)

pertaining to or suitable for courts of law, 1650s, from Latin forensis of a forum, place of
assembly, from forum public place (see forum). Used in sense of pertaining to legal trials, as in
forensic medicine (1845). Related: Forensical (1580s).


foreordained (adj.)

early 15c., for-ordenede; see fore- + ordain (v.). A hybrid word. Related: Foreordain.


foreplay (n.)

in sexual sense, by 1911, from fore- + play (n.). Earlier as a theatrical term (by 1857).    In fact
the poem which Mr. Brooks has translated is but the prologue to the swelling theme, the fore-play to
the actual drama of Faust. [The Christian Examiner and Religious Miscellany, Jan.-May 1857]


forerunner (n.)

c.1300, from fore + runner. Middle English rendition of Latin praecursor, in reference to John the
Baptist as the forerunner of Christ. The Old English word was foreboda.


foresee (v.)

Old English foreseon have a premonition, from fore- before + seon to see, see ahead (see see (v.)).
Related: Foresaw; foreseeing; foreseen.


foreseeable (adj.)

1804, from foresee + -able. Related: Foreseeably.


foreshadow (v.)

1570s, from fore- + shadow (v.); the notion is of a shadow thrown before an advancing material
object as an image of something suggestive of what is to come. Related: Foreshadowed; foreshadowing.


foreshorten (v.)

c.1600, from fore- + shorten. Related: Foreshortened; foreshortening.


foresight (n.)

c.1300, from fore- + sight (n.). Compare German Vorsicht attention, caution, cautiousness.


foreskin (n.)

1530s, from fore- + skin (n.). A loan-translation of Latin prepuce.


forest (n.)

late 13c., extensive tree-covered district, especially one set aside for royal hunting and under the
protection of the king, from Old French forest forest, wood, woodland (Modern French for&ecirc;t),
probably ultimately from Late Latin/Medieval Latin forestem silvam the outside woods, a term from
the Capitularies of Charlemagne denoting the royal forest; perhaps via Old High German forst, from
Latin foris outside (see foreign), with a sense of beyond the park, the park being the main or
central fenced woodland.    Another theory traces it through Medieval Latin forestis, originally
forest preserve, game preserve, from Latin forum in legal sense court, judgment; in other words land
subject to a ban [Buck]. Replaced Old English wudu.


forest (v.)

1818 (forested is attested from 1610s), from forest (n.).


forestall (v.)

late 14c. (implied in forestalling), to lie in wait for; also to intercept goods before they reach
public markets and buy them privately (formerly a crime; mid-14c. in this sense in Anglo-French),
from Old English noun foresteall intervention, hindrance (of justice); an ambush, a waylaying,
literally a standing before (someone), from fore- before + steall standing position (see stall
(n.1)). Modern sense of to anticipate and delay is from 1580s. Related: Forestalled; forestalling.


forester (n.)

late 13c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French forestier forest ranger, forest-dweller (also,
as an adjective, wild, rough, coarse, unsociable), from forest (see forest (n.)).


forestry (n.)

1690s, privilege of a royal forest, from Old French foresterie, from forest (see forest). Meaning
science of managing forests is from 1859.


foretaste (n.)

early 15c., from fore- + taste (n.). As a verb, from mid-15c.


foretell (v.)

c.1300, from fore- + tell (v.). Related: Foretold; foretelling.


forethought (n.)

c.1300, from fore- + thought. Old English had fore&eth;encan to premeditate, consider.


foretime (n.)

1530s, from fore- + time (n.).


forever (adv.)

late 14c., for ever; from for + ever. One word from late 17c.


forewarn (v.)

early 14c., from fore- + warn. Related: Forewarned; forewarning.


foreword (n.)

1842, from fore- + word (n.); perhaps a loan-translation of German Vorwort preface, modeled on Latin
praefatio preface.


forfeit (n.)

c.1300, misdeed, from Old French forfait crime, punishable offense (12c.), originally past
participle of forfaire transgress, from for- outside, beyond (from Latin foris; see foreign) + faire
to do (from Latin facere; see factitious). Translating Medieval Latin foris factum. Sense shifted
mid-15c. from the crime to the penalty: something to which the right is lost through a misdeed. As
an adjective from late 14c., from Old French forfait.


forfeit (v.)

c.1300, to lose by misconduct; see forfeit (n.). Related: Forfeited; forfeiting.


forfeiture

mid-14c., from Old French forfaiture crime, transgression; penalty for committing a crime, from
forfait (see forfeit).


forfend (v.)

also forefend, late 14c., to protect, prohibit; to avert, prevent, a hybrid from for- + fend, from
Latin defendere to ward off.


forgave

past tense of forgive (q.v.).


forge (n.)

late 14c., a smithy, from Old French forge (12c.) forge, smithy, earlier faverge, from Latin fabrica
workshop, from faber (genitive fabri) workman in hard materials, smith (see fabric). As the heating
apparatus itself, from late 15c.


forge (v.2)

1610s, make way, move ahead, of unknown origin, perhaps an alteration of force (v.), but perhaps
rather from forge (n.), via notion of steady hammering at something. Originally nautical, in
reference to vessels.


forge (v.1)

c.1300, to make, shape, create, from Old French forgier, from Latin fabricari to frame, construct,
build, from fabrica workshop (see forge (n.)). Meaning to counterfeit is early 14c. Related: Forged;
forging.


forger (n.)

late 14c., a maker, a smith, agent noun from forge (v.). Meaning a counterfeiter is from 1550s.


forgery (n.)

1570s, a thing made fraudulently, from forge (n.) + -ery. Meaning act of counterfeiting is 1590s.


forget (v.)

Old English forgietan, from for-, used here with negative force, away, amiss, opposite + gietan to
grasp (see get). To un-get, hence to lose from the mind. A common Germanic construction (compare Old
Saxon fargetan, Old Frisian forjeta, Dutch vergeten, Old High German firgezzan, German vergessen to
forget). The literal sense would be to lose (one's) grip on, but that is not recorded in any
Germanic language. Related: Forgetting; forgot; forgotten.


forget-me-not (n.)

the flowering plant Myosotis palustris, 1530s, from Old French ne m'oubliez mye; in 15c. the flower
was supposed to ensure that those wearing it should never be forgotten by their lovers. Similar
loan-translations took the name into other languages, such as German Vergi&szlig;meinnicht, Swedish
forg&auml;tmigej, Hungarian nefelejcs, Czech nezabudka.


forgetful (adj.)

late 14c., from forget + -ful. Related: Forgetfully; forgetfulness.


forgettable (adj.)

1827, from forget + -able. First attested in a translation from German by Carlyle.


forgivable (adj.)

1540s, from forgive + -able.


forgive (v.)

Old English forgiefan give, grant, allow; forgive, also to give up and to give in marriage; from
for- completely + giefan give (see give).    The modern sense of to give up desire or power to
punish is from use of the compound as a Germanic loan-translation of Latin perdonare (such as Old
Saxon fargeban, Dutch vergeven, German vergeben, Gothic fragiban; see pardon (v.)). Related:
Forgave; forgiven; forgiving.


forgiveness (n.)

Old English forgiefnes pardon, forgiveness, indulgence; see forgive + -ness.


forgiving (adj.)

inclined to forgive, 1680s, from present participle of forgive. Related: Forgivingness.


forgo (v.)

to relinquish, Old English forgan go away, pass over, leave undone, from for- away + gan go (see
go). Related: Forgoing; forgone.


forgotten (adj.)

early 15c., past participle adjective from forget.


fork (n.)

Old English forca forked instrument used by torturers, a Germanic borrowing (cognate with Old Norse
forkr) from Latin furca pitchfork; fork used in cooking, of uncertain origin.    Table forks were
not generally used in England until 15c. The word is first attested in this sense in English in a
will of 1463, probably from Old North French forque (Old French furche, Modern French fourche), from
the Latin word. Of rivers, from 1753; of roads, from 1839.


fork (v.)

to divide in branches, go separate ways (early 14c.), from fork (n.). Related: Forked; forking. The
slang verb phrase fork up (or out) give over is from 1831.


forkful (n.)

1640s; see fork (n.) + -ful.


forklift (n.)

also fork-lift (truck), 1946, from fork (n.) + lift (n.).


forlorn (adj.)

mid-12c., forloren disgraced, depraved, past participle of obsolete forlesan be deprived of, lose,
abandon, from Old English forleosan to lose, abandon, let go; destroy, ruin, from for- completely +
leosan to lose (see lose). In the Mercian hymns, Latin perditionis is glossed by Old English
forlorenisse.    Sense of forsaken, abandoned is 1530s; that of wretched, miserable first recorded
1580s. A common Germanic compound (cognates: Old Saxon farilosan, Old Frisian urliasa, Middle Dutch
verliesen, Dutch verliezen, Old High German virliosan, German verlieren, Gothic fraliusan to lose).
Commonly in forlorn hope (1570s), which is a partial translation of Dutch verloren hoop, in which
hoop means troop, band, literally heap, and the sense of the whole phrase is of a suicide mission.
The phrase is usually used incorrectly in English, and the misuse has colored the sense of forlorn.
Related: Forlornly; forlornness.


form (n.)

early 13c., from Old French forme physical form, appearance, pleasing looks; shape, image, from
Latin forma form, contour, figure, shape; appearance, looks' model, pattern, design; sort, kind
condition, origin unknown. One theory holds that it is from Greek morphe form, beauty, outward
appearance (see Morpheus) via Etruscan [Klein]. Sense of behavior is first recorded late 14c.
Meaning a document with blanks to be filled in is from 1855.


form (v.)

c.1300, from Old French fourmer, from Latin formare, from forma form, contour, figure, shape (see
form (n.)). Related: Formed; forming.


formable (adj.)

late 14c., from form (v.) + -able.


formal (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French formel (13c.) and directly from Latin formalis, from forma (see form
(n.)). As a noun, c.1600 (plural) things that are formal; as a short way to say formal dance,
recorded by 1906, U.S. college students.


formaldehyde (n.)

pungent gas formed by oxidation of methyl alcohol, 1869, a contraction of formic aldehyde; see
formic + aldehyde. Discovered in 1863 by German chemist August Wilhelm von Hofmann (1818-1892).


formalism (n.)

1840, strict adherence to prescribed forms, from formal + -ism. Attested from 1943 in reference to
the Russian literary movement (1916-30). Related: Formalist; formalistic.


formality (n.)

1530s, agreement as to form, from Middle French formalit&eacute; (15c.) or directly from Latin
formalis formal (see formal). Originally literary form; meaning something done for the sake of form
is from 1590s. Related: Formalities.


formalize (v.)

1590s, from formal + -ize. Related: Formalized; formalizing.


formally (adv.)

c.1400, in good form, from formal + -ly (2). Meaning in prescribed or customary form is from 1560s.


format (v.)

used chiefly of computers, 1964, from format (n.). Related: Formatted; formatting.


format (n.)

1840, via French format (18c.), ultimately from Modern Latin liber formatus a book formed (in such
and such a way), referring to shape, size; from past participle of formare to form (see form (v.)).


formation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French formacion (12c.) or directly from Latin formationem (nominative formatio)
a forming, shaping, noun of action or condition from past participle stem of formare to form (see
form (v.)).


formative (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French formatif, from Latin format-, past participle stem of formare (see
form (n.)).


former (adj.)

earlier in time, mid-12c., comparative of forme first, patterned on formest foremost (see foremost).
An unusual case of a comparative formed from a superlative (the -m- is a superlative element).


former (n.)

one who gives form, mid-14c., agent noun from form (v.).


formerly (adv.)

1580s, from former + -ly (2). A Middle English word for this was andersith formerly, at former times
(early 14c.).


formic (adj.)

1791 (in formic acid), coined from Latin formica ant (see Formica (n.2)). The acid apparently first
was noticed by Samuel Fisher and John Wray in 1670; it was first obtained in a fairly pure form in
1749 by German chemist Andreas Sigismund Marggraf (1709-1782), who prepared it by distilling red
ants. It also is found in bee stings and stinging nettles.


Formica (1)

proprietary name (1922), originally manufactured by Formica Insulation Co. of Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.
(founded 1913). According to the company, the material (originally marketed as an industrial
insulator) was so called because it could be used for mica, i.e., in place of mica, a more expensive
natural insulator. Primarily used in consumer goods since c.1945.


Formica (2)

ant genus, 1865, from Latin formica ant, dissimilated from PIE *morwi- ant (cognates: Sanskrit
vamrah ant, Greek myrmex, Old Church Slavonic mraviji, Old Irish moirb, Old Norse maurr, Welsh
myrion; and compare pismire).


formicary (n.)

ant nest, 1816, from Medieval Latin formicarium, from Latin formica ant (see Formica (n.2)).


formication (n.)

crawling sensation as of ants on the skin, 1707, from Latin formicationem, noun of action from
formicare to crawl like ants, from formica ant (see Formica (n.2)).


formidable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French formidable (15c.), from Latin formidabilis causing fear, terrible, from
formidare to fear, from formido fearfulness, fear, terror, dread. Related: Formidably.


formless (adj.)

1590s, from form (n.) + -less. Related: Formlessly; formlessness.


Formosa

old name of Taiwan, given by Portuguese, from Portuguese Formosa insula beautiful island, from fem.
of Latin formosus beautiful, handsome, finely formed, from forma (see form (n.)).


formula (n.)

1630s, words used in a ceremony or ritual, from Latin formula form, draft, contract, regulation;
rule, method, formula, literally small form, diminutive of forma form (see form (n.)).    Modern
sense is colored by Carlyle's use (1837) of the word for rule slavishly followed without
understanding [OED].  Men who try to speak what they believe, are naked men fighting men quilted
sevenfold in formulae. [Charles Kingsley, Letters, 1861]  Mathematical use is from 1796; use in
chemistry is from c.1846.


formulae

plural of formula.


formulaic (adj.)

1882, from formula + -ic.


formular (n.)

1560s, from Latin formula (see formula) + -ar. As an adjective, from 1773.


formulary (n.)

1540s, from French formulaire collection of formulae, from Latin formularius from formula (see
formula).


formulate (v.)

1860, to express in a formula, from formula + -ate. Related: Formulated; formulating.


formulation (n.)

1876, from formulate + -ion.


Fornax (n.)

goddess of ovens in ancient Rome, from Latin fornax furnace, oven, kiln (see furnace). The dim
constellation (representing a chemical furnace) was added by de Lacaille in 1756.


fornicate (v.)

1550s, from Late Latin fornicatus, past participle of fornicari (see fornication). Perhaps in some
cases a back-formation from fornication. Related: Fornicated; fornicating.


fornication (n.)

c.1300, from Old French fornicacion (12c.), from Late Latin fornicationem (nominative fornicatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of fornicari fornicate, from Latin fornix (genitive
fornicis) brothel (Juvenal, Horace), originally arch, vaulted chamber (Roman prostitutes commonly
solicited from under the arches of certain buildings), from fornus oven of arched or domed shape.
Strictly, voluntary sex between an unmarried man and an unmarried woman; extended in the Bible to
adultery.


fornicator (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin fornicator, agent noun from fornicat-, stem of fornicari (see
fornication).


fornix (n.)

1680s, from Latin fornix arch, vaulted chamber (see fornication).


forsake (v.)

Old English forsacan object to, decline, oppose, refuse, deny, from for- completely + sacan to deny,
refuse (see sake). Related: Forsaking.


forsaken (adj.)

mid-13c., past participle adjective from forsake. Related: Forsakenly.


forsook

past tense of forsake.


forsooth (adv.)

Old English forso&eth; indeed, verily, from for-, perhaps here with intensive force (or else the
whole might be for a truth), + so&eth; truth (see sooth).


forswear (v.)

Old English forswerian swear falsely, also abandon or renounce on oath, from for- completely +
swerian to swear. Related: Forswore; forsworn; forswearing.


forsworn (adj.)

from Old English forsworenne, past participle of forswerian (see forswear).


forsythia (n.)

1814, coined 1805 in Modern Latin as a genus name in honor of William Forsyth (1737-1804), Scottish
horticulturalist who brought the shrub from China. The family name is from Gaelic Fearsithe man of
peace.


fort (n.)

mid-15c., fortified place, stronghold, from Middle French fort, from noun use in Old French of fort
(adj.) strong, fortified (10c.), from Latin fortis strong, mighty, firm, steadfast, from Old Latin
forctus, possibly from PIE root *bhergh- (2) high, elevated, with derivatives referring to hills and
hill-forts (cognates: Sanskrit brmhati strengthens, elevates, Old High German berg hill; see barrow
(n.2)).


Fort Sumter

military installation in South Carolina, U.S., begun in 1827, named for U.S. Revolutionary War
officer and Congressman Thomas Sumter (1734-1832), The Carolina Gamecock. The family name is
attested from 1206, from Old French sommetier driver of a pack horse (see sumpter).


forte (n.)

1640s, from French fort strong point (of a sword blade), also fort, from Middle French fort (see
fort). Meaning strong point of a person is from 1680s. Final -e- added 18c. in imitation of Italian
forte strong.


forte (adj.)

music instruction, loud, loudly, from Italian forte, literally strong, from Latin fortis strong (see
fort).


forth (adv.)

Old English for&eth; forward, onward, further, continually, perfective of fore, from Proto-Germanic
*furtha- (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon forth forward, onward, Old Norse for&eth;, Dutch voort,
German fort), from PIE *prto-, from *pr-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).


forthcoming (adj.)

about to happen, 1530s; earlier was Old English for&eth;cuman to come forth, come to pass; see forth
+ come (v.). Meaning informative, responsive is from 1835.


forthright (adj.)

Old English for&eth;riht direct, plain; see forth + right. Related: Forthrightly; forthrightness.


forthwith

c.1200 (prep); early 14c. (adv.), from forth + with. The Old English equivalent was for&eth; mid.


forties (n.)

1843 as the years of someone's life between 40 and 49; from 1840 as the fifth decade of years in a
given century. See forty. Also a designation applied in various places and times to certain
oligarchies, ruling classes, or governing bodies.    It is well known that society in the island
[Guernsey] is, or perhaps we ought to say, for many years was, divided into two sets, called
respectively the Sixties and the Forties, the former composed of the old families and those allied
to them, the latter of families of newly-acquired wealth and position. [The Dublin Review, October
1877]   Roaring Forties are rough parts of the ocean between 40 and 50 degrees latitude.


fortieth (adj.)

Old English feowertigo&eth;a, from feowertig (see forty) + -th (1). Compare Old Norse fertugonde,
Swedish fyrationde, Danish fyrretyvende.


fortification (n.)

early 15c., strengthening, also defensive earthworks, tower (mid-15c.), from Middle French
fortification strengthening, fortification, from Late Latin fortificationem (nominative
fortificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of fortificare (see fortify).


fortify (v.)

early 15c., increase efficacy (of medicine); mid-15c., provide (a town) with walls and defenses,
from Old French fortifiier (14c.) to fortify, strengthen, from Late Latin fortificare to strengthen,
make strong, from Latin fortis strong (see fort) + facere to make (see factitious).    Sense of to
strengthen mentally or morally is from late 15c. Meaning add liquor or alcohol is from 1880.
Related: Fortified; fortifying.


fortissimo

1724, from Italian fortissimo, superlative of forte loud, strong, from Latin fortis strong (see
fort).


fortitude (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French fortitude, from Latin fortitudo strength, force, firmness, from
fortis strong, brave (see fort).


fortitudinous (adj.)

from Latin fortitudinem (nominative fortitudo; see fortitude) + -ous. Related: Fortitudinously.


fortnight (n.)

17c. contraction of Middle English fourteniht, from Old English feowertyne niht, literally fourteen
nights, preserving the ancient Germanic custom of reckoning by nights, mentioned by Tacitus in
Germania xi. Related: Fortnightly.


Fortran (n.)

computer programming language, 1956, from combination of elements from formula + translation.


fortress (n.)

early 14c., from Old French forteresse strong place (12c.), variant of fortelesse, from Medieval
Latin fortalitia, from Latin fortis strong (see fort) + English -ess, a fairly uncommon suffix
(duress, largess being other examples), from Latin -itia, forming nouns of quality or condition.


fortuitous (adj.)

1650s, from Latin fortuitus happening by chance, casual, accidental, from forte by chance, ablative
of fors chance (related to fortuna; see fortune). It means accidental, undesigned not fortunate.
Earlier in this sense was fortuit (late 14c.), from French. Related: Fortuitously; fortuitousness.


fortuity (n.)

1747, from fortuitous + -ity.


fortunate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin fortunatus prospered, prosperous; lucky, happy, past participle of fortunare
to make prosperous, from fortuna (see fortune). Fortunate Islands mythical abode of the blessed
dead, in the Western Ocean, early 15c., translates Latin Fortunatae Insulae.


fortunately (adv.)

1540s, from fortunate + -ly (2).


fortune (n.)

c.1300, chance, luck as a force in human affairs, from Old French fortune lot, good fortune,
misfortune (12c.), from Latin fortuna chance, fate, good luck, from fors (genitive fortis) chance,
luck, possibly from PIE *bhrtu- and related to base *bher- (1) to carry (see infer).    Often
personified as a goddess; her wheel betokens vicissitude. Sense of owned wealth first found in
Spenser; probably it evolved from senses of one's condition or standing in life, hence position as
determined by wealth, then wealth itself. Soldier of fortune first attested 1660s. Fortune 500 most
profitable American companies is 1955, from the list published annually in Fortune magazine.


fortune cookie (n.)

by 1955, said to have been invented in 1918 by David Jung, Chinese immigrant to America who
established Hong Kong Noodle Co., who handed out cookies that contained uplifting messages as a
promotional gimmick.


fortuneteller (n.)

also fortune-teller, 1580s, from fortune + teller. Verbal phrase tellen fortune is from early 15c.


forty (n.)

Old English feowertig, from feower four (see four) + tig group of ten (see -ty (1)). Compare Old
Saxon fiwartig, Old Frisian fiuwertich, Dutch veertig, Old High German fiorzug, German vierzig, Old
Norse fjorir tigir, Gothic fidwor tigjus.    [T]he number 40 must have been used very frequently by
Mesha's scribe as a round number. It is probably often used in that way in the Bible where it is
remarkably frequent, esp. in reference to periods of days or years. ... How it came to be so used is
not quite certain, but it may have originated, partly at any rate, in the idea that 40 years
constituted a generation or the period at the end of which a man attains maturity, an idea common,
it would seem, to the Greeks, the Israelites, and the Arabs. [The International Standard Bible
Encyclopedia, James Orr, ed., Chicago, 1915]   Forty winks short sleep is attested from 1821, In
early use associated with, and perhaps coined by, eccentric English lifestyle reformer William
Kitchiner M.D. (1775-1827).


forum (n.)

mid-15c., place of assembly in ancient Rome, from Latin forum marketplace, open space, public place,
apparently akin to foris, foras out of doors, outside, from PIE root *dhwer- (see door). Sense of
assembly, place for public discussion first recorded 1680s.


forward (adv.)

Old English forewearde toward the front; see fore + -ward. Adjectival sense of early is from 1520s;
that of presumptuous is attested from 1560s.


forward (v.)

1590s, to help push forward, from forward (adv.). Meaning to send (a letter, etc.) on to another
destination is from 1757. Related: Forwarded; forwarding.


forward (n.)

Old English, the fore or front part of something; see forward (adv.). The position in football so
called since 1879.


forwardness (n.)

1520s, from forward (adj.) + -ness. Meaning presumptuousness is from c.1600.


forwards (adv.)

Middle English, from forward + adverbial genitive -s. British English until mid-20c. preserved the
distinction between forward and forwards, the latter expressing a definite direction viewed in
contrast with other directions. In American English, however, forward prevails in all senses since
Webster (1832) damned forwards as a corruption.


Fosbury flop

high-jumping technique, 1968, in reference to U.S. athlete Dick Fosbury (b.1947), who used it to win
the 1968 Olympic gold medal.


fosse (n.)

early 14c. (late 13c. in place names), ditch, trench, mid-15c., from Old French fosse ditch, grave,
dungeon (12c.), from Latin fossa ditch, in full fossa terra, literally dug earth, from fem. past
participle of fodere to dig (see fossil).    The Fosse-way (early 12c.), one of the four great Roman
roads of Britain, probably was so called from the ditch on either side of it.


fossil (n.)

1610s, any thing dug up; 1650s (adj.) obtained by digging, from French fossile (16c.), from Latin
fossilis dug up, from fossus, past participle of fodere to dig, from PIE root *bhedh- to dig,
pierce.    Restricted noun sense of geological remains of a plant or animal is from 1736; slang
meaning old person first recorded 1859. Fossil fuel (1835) preserves the earlier, broader sense.


fossiliferous (adj.)

by 1830, from fossil + -ferous producing, containing, from ferre to bear (see infer).


fossilize (v.)

1794, from fossil + -ize. Figurative use from 1856. Related: Fossilized; fossilizing.


foster (v.)

Old English *fostrian to supply with food, nourish, support, from fostor food, nourishment, bringing
up, from Proto-Germanic *fostrom, from root *foth-/*fod- (see food).    Meaning to bring up a child
with parental care is from c.1200; that of to encourage or help grow is early 13c. of things; 1560s
of feelings, ideas, etc. Old English also had the adjective meaning in the same family but not
related, in fostorf&aelig;der, etc. Related: Fostered; fostering.


fought

past tense and past participle of fight (v.). The past participle form foughten (Old English fohten)
has been archaic since 18c. but occasionally appears in the phrase foughten field.


foul (adj.)

Old English ful rotten, unclean, vile, corrupt, offensive to the senses, from Proto-Germanic *fulaz
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian ful, Middle Dutch voul, Dutch vuil, Old High German f&uuml;l,
German faul, Gothic f&uuml;ls), from root *fu-, corresponding to PIE *pu-, perhaps from the sound
made in reaction to smelling something bad (compare Sanskrit puyati rots, stinks, putih foul,
rotten; Greek puon discharge from a sore; Latin pus putrid matter, putere to stink, putridus rotten;
Lithuanian puviu to rot).  Old English ful occasionally meant ugly (as contrasted with f&aelig;ger
(adj.), modern fair (adj.)), a sense frequently found in Middle English, and the cognate in Swedish
is the usual word for ugly. Of weather, first recorded late 14c. In the sporting sense of irregular,
unfair it is first attested 1797, though foul play is recorded from mid-15c. Baseball sense of out
of play attested by 1860. Foulmart was a Middle English word for polecat (from Old English mear&eth;
marten).


foul (v.)

Old English fulian to become foul, rot, from ful (see foul (adj.)). Related: Fouled; fouling.


foul-mouthed (adj.)

also foulmouthed, 1590s, apparently first in Shakespeare [Henry IV, 1596].


foully (adv.)

Old English fullice; see foul (adj.) + -ly (2).


foulness (n.)

Old English fulness foulness, filthy smell; see foul (adj.) + -ness.


found (v.1)

establish, late 13c., from Old French founder (12c., Modern French fonder), from Latin fundare to
lay the bottom or foundation of something, from fundus bottom, foundation (see fund (n.)). Related:
Founded; founding. Phrase founding fathers with reference to the creators of the American republic
is attested from 1916.


found (v.2)

cast metal, late 14c., to mix, mingle, from Middle French fondre pour out, melt, mix together, from
Old French fondre, from Latin fundere melt, cast, pour out, from PIE *gheud- (cognates: Gothic
giutan, German gie&szlig;en, Old English geotan to pour), from root *gheu- to pour (cognates: Greek
khein to pour, khoane funnel, khymos juice). Meaning to cast metal is from 1560s.


found (adj.)

discovered, late 14c., past participle adjective from find (v.). Expression and found in old
advertisements for job openings, travelling berths, etc., attached to the wages or charges,
indicates that meals are provided, from the expression to find one's self to provide for one's self.
When a laborer engages to provide himself with victuals, he is said to find himself, or to receive
day wages  [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]. Hence, so much and found for wages + meals
provided.


foundation (n.)

late 14c., action of founding, from Old French fondacion (14c.) or directly from Latin fundationem
(nominative fundatio) a founding, noun of action from past participle stem of fundare (see found
(v.1)). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by sta&thorn;ol. Meaning that which is founded (a
college, hospital, etc.) is from 1510s; meaning funds endowed is early 15c. Sense of solid base of a
structure is from late 15c.


foundational (adj.)

1680s, from foundation + -al (1).


founder (v.)

early 14c., from Old French fondrer collapse; submerge, sink, fall to the bottom, from fond bottom,
from Latin fundus bottom, foundation (see fund (n.)). Related: Foundered; foundering.


founder (n.1)

one who establishes, one who sets up or institutes something, mid-14c., from Anglo-French fundur,
Old French fondeor, from Latin fundator, agent noun from fundare (see found (v.1)).


founder (n.2)

one who casts metal, c.1400, agent noun from found (v.2).


foundling (n.)

deserted infant, c.1300, from Middle English founden found, past participle of finden (see find
(v.)) + diminutive suffix -ling. Compare Dutch vondeling, German Findling.


foundry (n.)

c.1600, from French fonderei, from fondre to cast (see found (v.2)).


fount (n.)

mid-15c., probably a shortening of fountain, influenced by Middle French font fount.


fountain (n.)

early 15c., spring of water that collects in a pool, from Old French fontaine natural spring (12c.),
from Late Latin fontana fountain, spring (source of Spanish and Italian fontana), from noun use of
fem. of Latin fontanus of a spring, from fons (genitive fontis) spring (of water); cognate with
Sanskrit dhanvati flows, runs.    The extended sense of artificial jet of water (and the structures
that make them) is first recorded c.1500. A French fountain-pen is described in 1658 and Miss Burney
used one in 1789 [Weekley].


fountainhead (n.)

spring from which a stream flows, 1580s, from fountain + head (n.). Figurative use is from c.1600.


four (n.)

Old English feower, from Proto-Germanic *fedwor- (cognates: Old Saxon fiwar, Old Frisian fiuwer,
Frankish *fitter-, Dutch and German vier, Old Norse fjorir, Danish fire, Swedish fyra, Gothic fidwor
four), from PIE *kwetwer- four (cognates: Sanskrit catvarah, Avestan &#269;athwaro, Persian
&#269;atvar, Greek tessares, Latin quattuor, Oscan petora, Old Church Slavonic &#269;etyre,
Lithuanian keturi, Old Irish cethir, Welsh pedwar). The phonetic evolution of the Germanic forms has
not been fully explained; Watkins explains the -f- as being from the following number (Modern
English five).    Slang four-eyes person who wears glasses first recorded 1874. Four-letter word
first attested 1934; four-letter man, however, is recorded from 1923 (as a euphemism for a shit). A
four-in-hand (1793) was a carriage with four horses driven by one person; in the sense of loosely
tied necktie it is attested from 1892. To study The History of the Four Kings (1760, compare French
Livres des Quatre Rois) contains euphemistic slang phrase for a pack of cards from the time when
card-playing was considered a wicked pastime for students. Slang 4-1-1 essential information (by
1993) is from the telephone number called to get customer information.


four-door (adj.)

of cars, 1957, from four + door.


four-flusher (n.)

cheat, dishonest person, 1900, from verb four-flush to bluff a poker hand, claim a flush (n.) while
holding only four cards in the suit (1896).


four-footed (adj.)

Old English feowerfote; see four + foot (n.).


fourfold (adj.)

Old English feowerfeald; see four + -fold.


Fourierism (n.)

1841, in reference to ideas of French socialist Fran&ccedil;ois-Marie-Charles Fourier (1772-1837),
whose plan also was called phalansterianism.


fourscore (n.)

eighty, mid-13c., formerly current as an ordinary numeral [OED], from four + score (n.).


foursome (n.)

early 16c., from four + -some (1). Golf sense is from 1867.


fourteen (n.)

c.1300, from Old English feowertyne; see four + -teen. Compare Old Saxon fiertein, Old Frisian
fiuwertine, Dutch veertien, Old High German fiorzehan, German vierzehn, Gothic fidwortaihun.


fourteenth (adj.)

c.1300, by influence of fourteen, replacing or modifying fourtende, fowrtethe, from Old English
feowerteo&eth;a, Old Norse *feowertandi (see fourteen) + -th (1). Compare Dutch veertiende, German
vierzehnte.


fourth (adj.)

mid-15c., alteration, by influence of four, of ferthe, from Old English feor&eth;a; see four + -th
(1). Compare Old Saxon fiortho, Old Norse fior&eth;e, Dutch vierde, Old High German fiordo, German
vierte.


fourth estate (n.)

the press, by 1824, and especially from 1831, British English. For the other three, see estate.
Earlier the term had been applied in various senses that did not stick, including the mob (1752),
the lawyers (1825). The extension to the press is perhaps an outgrowth of the former.  Hence,
through the light of letters and the liberty of the press, public opinion has risen to the rank of a
fourth estate in our constitution; in times of quiet and order, silent and still, but in the
collisions of the different branches of our government, deciding as an umpire with unbounded
authority. [Memoir of James Currie, M.D., 1831]   <hr />   [Newspapers] began to assume some degree
of political importance, during the civil wars of the seventeenth century, in England; but it is not
until within the last fifty years that they have become, -- as they are now justly styled, -- a
Fourth Estate, exercising a more powerful influence on the public affairs of the countries in which
they are permitted to circulate freely, than the other three put together. [Alexander H. Everett,
Address to the Phi Beta Kappa Society of Bowdoin College, 1834]


fovea (n.)

1849, from Latin fovea small pit, related to favissae underground reservoirs; of unknown origin,
perhaps from Etruscan.


fowl (n.)

Old English fugel bird, representing the general Germanic word for them, from Proto-Germanic *foglaz
(cognates: Old Frisian fugel, Old Norse fugl, Middle Dutch voghel, Dutch vogel, German vogel, Gothic
fugls), probably by dissimilation from *flug-la-, literally flyer, from the same root as Old English
fleogan, modern fly (v.1).    Originally bird; narrower sense of domestic hen or rooster (the main
modern meaning) is first recorded 1570s; in U.S. also extended to ducks and geese. As a verb, Old
English fuglian to catch birds. Related: Fowled; fowling.


fowler (n.)

Old English fugelere, agent noun from fuglian to hunt fowl (see fowl).


fox (n.)

Old English fox, from Proto-Germanic *fukhs (cognates Old Saxon vohs, Middle Dutch and Dutch vos,
Old High German fuhs, German Fuchs, Old Norse foa, Gothic fauho), from Proto-Germanic base *fuh-,
corresponding to PIE *puk- tail (source also of Sanskrit puccha- tail).    The bushy tail is also
the source of words for fox in Welsh (llwynog, from llwyn bush); Spanish (raposa, from rabo tail);
and Lithuanian (uodegis fox, from uodega tail). Metaphoric extension to clever person is early 13c.
Meaning sexually attractive woman is from 1940s; but foxy in this sense is recorded from 1895.


Fox

Algonquian people, translating French renards, which itself may be a translation of an Iroquoian
term meaning red fox people. Their name for themselves is /me&#353;kwahki:-haki/ red earths. French
renard fox is from Reginhard, the name of the fox in old Northern European fables (as in Low German
Reinke de Vos), originally strong in council, wily.


fox (v.)

1560s (but perhaps implied in Old English foxung foxlike wile, craftiness), from fox (n.). Foxed in
booksellers' catalogues means stained with fox-colored marks. In other contexts, it typically meant
drunk (1610s).


fox trot (n.)

also fox-trot, foxtrot, pace with short steps, such as a fox's, 1872, from fox (n.) + trot (n.). As
a type of popular dance, from 1915.


fox-fire (n.)

also foxfire, late 15c., from fox (n.) + fire (n.).


fox-hunting (n.)

1670s, from fox (n.) + hunting. Related: Fox-hunt; fox-hunter.


foxglove (n.)

Old English foxes glofa; the reason for fox is uncertain. Compare Old English foxesfot (fox foot)
xiphion; foxesclate burdock.


foxhole (n.)

also fox-hole, Old English fox-hol a fox's den, from fox (n.) + hole (n.). Military sense is from
World War I.


foxhound (n.)

1763, from fox (n.) + hound (n.).


foxy (adj.)

1520s, crafty, cunning, from fox (n.) + -y (2). Of colors, stains, tints, etc. from 18c. Meaning
attractive is 1895, American English slang. Related: Foxiness.


foy (n.)

parting entertainment, Scottish and dialectal, late 15c., probably ultimately from French voie way,
journey (see voyage (n.)).


foyer (n.)

1859, from French foyer green room, room for actors when not on stage, literally fireplace, from Old
French foier furnace, stove, hearth, fireplace (12c.), from Latin focarium, noun use of neuter of
adjective focarius having to do with the hearth, from focus hearth, fireplace (see focus (n.)).


fracas (n.)

1727, from French fracas (15c.), from Italian fracasso uproar, crash, back-formation from fracassare
to smash, crash, break in pieces, from fra-, a shortening of Latin infra below + Italian cassare to
break, from Latin quassare to shake (see quash).


fractal

1975, from French fractal, from Latin fractus interrupted, irregular, literally broken, past
participle of frangere to break (see fraction). Coined by French mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot in
Les Objets Fractals.Many important spatial patterns of Nature are either irregular or fragmented to
such an extreme degree that ... classical geometry ... is hardly of any help in describing their
form. ... I hope to show that it is possible in many cases to remedy this absence of geometric
representation by using a family of shapes I propose to call fractals -- or fractal sets.
[Mandelbrot, Fractals, 1977]


fraction (n.)

late 14c., originally in the mathematical sense, from Anglo-French fraccioun (Old French fraccion,
12c., breaking) and directly from Late Latin fractionem (nominative fractio) a breaking, especially
into pieces, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin frangere to break, from PIE root
*bhreg- to break (cognates: Sanskrit (giri)-bhraj breaking-forth (out of the mountains); Gothic
brikan, Old English brecan to break; Lithuanian brasketi crash, crack; Old Irish braigim break
wind). Meaning a breaking or dividing is from early 15c.; sense of broken off piece, fragment, is
from c.1600.


fractional (adj.)

1670s, from fraction + -al (1).


fractious (adj.)

1725, from fraction in an obsolete sense of a brawling, discord (c.1500) + -ous; probably on model
of captious. Related: Fractiously; fractiousness.


fracture (n.)

early 15c., a breaking of a bone, from Middle French fracture (14c.), from Latin fractura a breach,
break, cleft, from fractus, past participle of frangere to break (see fraction).


fracture (v.)

1610s (implied in fractured), from fracture (n.). Related: Fracturing.


frag (v.)

by 1970, U.S. military slang, from slang noun shortening of fragmentation grenade (1918). Related:
Fragged; fragging.  Fragging is a macabre ritual of Vietnam in which American enlisted men attempt
to murder their superiors. The word comes from the nickname for hand grenades, a weapon popular with
enlisted men because the evidence is destroyed with the consummation of the crime. [Saturday Review,
Jan. 8, 1972]


fragile (adj.)

1510s, liable to sin, morally weak; c.1600, liable to break; a back-formation from fragility, or
else from Middle French fragile (14c.), from Latin fragilis (see fragility). Transferred sense of
frail (of persons) is from 1858.


fragility (n.)

late 14c., moral weakness, from Old French fragilit&eacute; debility, frailty (12c.), from Latin
fragilitatem (nominative fragilitas) brittleness, from fragilis brittle, easily broken, from root of
frangere to break (see fraction). Meaning quality of being easily broken first recorded in English
late 15c.


fragment (n.)

early 15c., from Latin fragmentum a fragment, remnant, literally a piece broken off, from root of
frangere to break (see fraction).


fragment (v.)

by 1788 (implied in fragmented), from fragment (n.). Related: Fragmenting.


fragmentary (adj.)

1835 (with an isolated use in Donne from 1611), from fragment + -ary.


fragmentation (n.)

1881, from fragment + -ation. Fragmentation grenade attested from 1918.


fragrance (n.)

1660s, from French fragrance or directly from Late Latin fragrantia, from fragrantem (see fragrant).


fragrant (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin fragrantem (nominative fragrans) sweet-smelling, present participle of fragrare
emit (a sweet) odor, from PIE root *bhrag- to smell (cognates: Middle High German br&aelig;hen to
smell, Middle Dutch bracke, Old High German braccho hound, setter; see brach).


fraidy-cat (n.)

coward, by 1871, American English slang, from 'fraid, childish or dialectal (African, West Indies)
pronunciation of afraid (by 1816), + cat.


frail (adj.)

mid-14c., morally weak, from Old French fraile weak, frail, sickly, infirm (Modern French
fr&ecirc;le), from Latin fragilis easily broken (see fragility). Sense of liable to break is first
recorded in English late 14c. The U.S. slang noun meaning a woman is attested from 1908.


frailty (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French frailet&eacute; frailty, weakness, from Latin fragilitatem (nominative
fragilitas), from fragilis fragile (see fragility). Related: Frailties.


fraktur (n.)

German black-lettering, 1886, from German Fraktur, from Latin fractura (see fracture (n.)); so
called from its angular, broken letters. The style was commonly used in German printing from c.1540.
Sense often transferred to Pennsylvania German arts that incorporate the lettering.


framboise (n.)

1570s, from French framboise raspberry (12c.), usually explained as a corruption of Dutch braambezie
(cognate with German brombeere blackberry, literally bramble-berry). But some French scholars doubt
this [OED].


frame (v.)

Old English framian to profit, be helpful, avail, benefit, from fram active, vigorous, bold,
originally going forward, from fram forward; from (see from).    Influenced by related Old English
fremman help forward, promote, further, do, perform, accomplish, and by Old Norse fremja to further,
execute. Sense focused in Middle English from make ready (mid-13c.) to prepare timber for building
(late 14c.). Meaning compose, devise is first attested 1540s.    The criminal slang sense of blame
an innocent person (1920s) is probably from earlier sense of plot in secret (1900), perhaps
ultimately from meaning fabricate a story with evil intent, first attested 1510s. Related: Framed;
framing.


frame (n.)

c.1200, profit, benefit; mid-13c. composition, plan, from frame (v.) and in part from Scandinavian
(Old Norse frami advancement). In late 14c. it also meant the rack.    Meaning building is from
early 15c.; that of border or case for a picture or pane of glass is from c.1600. The meaning
established order, plan and that of human body are both first recorded 1590s. Of bicycles, from
1871; of motor cars, from 1900. Frame of mind is from 1711. Frame of reference is 1897, from
mechanics and graphing; the figurative sense is attested from 1924.


frame (adj.)

(of buildings), made of wood, 1790, American English, from frame (n.).


framework (n.)

1640s, from frame (n.) + work (n.). Figurative sense is from 1816.


franc (n.)

French coin, late 14c., from Medieval Latin Francorum Rex King of the Franks, inscribed on gold
coins first made during the reign of Jean le Bon (1350-64). An official monetary unit of France from
1795.


franc-tireur (n.)

sharpshooter of the irregular infantry, 1808, French, literally free-shooter, from franc free (see
frank) + tireur shooter, from tirer to draw, shoot (see tirade). A term from the French Revolution.


Frances

fem. proper name, from French, from Old French Franceise (Modern French Fran&ccedil;oise), fem. of
Franceis (see Francis).


franchise (n.)

late 13c., from Old French franchise freedom, exemption; right, privilege (12c.), from variant stem
of franc free (see frank (adj.)). Sense narrowed 18c. to particular legal privilege, then right to
vote (1790). Meaning authorization by a company to sell its products or services is from 1959.


franchise (v.)

late 14c., from Old French franchiss-, past participle stem of franchir to free (12c.), from franc
(see frank (adj.)). Franchising is from 1570s; the commercial licensing sense is from 1966. Related:
Franchisee; franchiser; franchisor.


Francis

masc. proper name, from French Fran&ccedil;ois, from Old French Franceis, from Late Latin
Franciscus, literally Frankish; cognate with French and frank.


Franciscan

1590s, friar of the order founded in 1209 by St. Francis (Medieval Latin Franciscus) of Assisi
(1182-1226). Also as an adjective.


Franco-

word-forming element meaning French, from Medieval Latin comb. form of Franci the Franks, hence, by
extension, the French (see Frank). Used in forming English compound words from early 18c.


Francophile (adj.)

1875, from Franco- + -phile. A newspaper word [OED]. Its opposite, Francophobe, is recorded from
1890 (implied in Francophobic; Francophobia is from 1862).


Francophone (adj.)

1900, from Franco- + -phone.


frangible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French frangible, from Medieval Latin frangibilis, from Latin frangere to
break (see fraction).


frangipani (n.)

type of shrub, 1864; earlier frangipane, a type of perfume (1670s), from French frangipane (16c.),
said to be from Frangipani, the family name of the Italian inventor.    FRANGIPANI, an illustrious
and powerful Roman House, which traces its origin to the 7th c., and attained the summit of its
glory in the 11th and 12th centuries. ... The origin of the name Frangipani is attributed to the
family's benevolent distribution of bread in time of famine. [Chambers's Encyclop&aelig;dia, 1868]


Franglais (n.)

French marred by many English words, 1959, from French, from fran&ccedil;ais French + anglais
English.


frank (adj.)

c.1300, free, liberal, generous, from Old French franc free (not servile), sincere, genuine, open,
gracious; worthy (12c.), from Medieval Latin Franc a freeman, a Frank (see Frank). The connection is
that only Franks, as the conquering class, had the status of freemen. Sense of outspoken first
recorded in English 1540s.


Frank

one of the Germanic people that conquered Celtic northern Gaul from the Romans c.500 C.E. and made
it into France, from Frankish *Frank (cognate with Old High German Franko, Old English Franca). The
origin of the ethnic name is uncertain; it traditionally is said to be from the old Germanic word
*frankon javelin, lance (compare Old English franca), their preferred weapon, but the reverse may be
the case. Compare also Saxon, traditionally from root of Old English seax knife. In the Levant, this
was the name given to anyone of Western nationality (compare Feringhee and lingua franca).


frank (n.)

short for frankfurter, by 1916, American English. Franks and beans attested by 1953.


frank (v.)

to free a letter for carriage or an article for publication, 1708, from shortened form of French
affranchir, from the same source as frank (adj.). Related: Franked; franking.


Frankenstein

allusive use dates to 1838, from Baron Frankenstein (German, free stone), character in Mary
Shelley's 1818 novel Frankenstein: The Modern Prometheus. Commonly used, mistakenly, as the proper
name of the monster he created, and thus franken- extended 1990s as a prefix to mean non-natural.


frankfurter (n.)

hot dog, 1894, American English, from German Frankfurter of Frankfurt, because a smoked-beef-and-
pork sausage somewhat like a U.S. hot dog was originally made in Germany, where it was associated
with the city of Frankfurt am Main (literally ford of the Franks on the River Main). Attested from
1877 as Frankfort sausage.


frankincense (n.)

late 14c., apparently from Old French franc encense, from franc noble, true (see frank (adj.)), in
this case probably signifying of the highest quality + encens incense (see incense (n.)).


Frankish (adj.)

1802, from Frank + -ish. As the name of the West Germanic language spoken by the ancient Franks,
from 1863. (Frenkis is recorded c.1400.). The language influenced French, especially in the northern
regions from which the Normans conquered England in 1066.


Franklin

surname attested from late 12c., Middle English Frankeleyn, from Anglo-French fraunclein a land-
owner of free but not noble birth, from Old French franc free (see frank (adj.)), with Germanic
suffix also found in chamberlain.    The Franklin stove (1787) so called because it was invented by
U.S. scientist/politician Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790). In early 19c., lightning rods often were
called Franklins.


frankly (adv.)

1530s, from frank (adj.) + -ly (2).


frankness (n.)

1550s, from frank (adj.) + -ness.


frantic (adj.)

mid-14c., insane, unexplained variant of Middle English frentik (see frenetic). Transferred meaning
affected by wild excitement is from late 15c. Of the adverbial forms, frantically (1749) is later
than franticly (1540s).


frap (v.)

early 14c., from Old French fraper (12c., Modern French frapper) to strike, hit beat, cognate with
Italian frappare to strike, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative (compare rap (n.)). Nautical sense
of bind tightly is from 1540s. Related: Frapped; frapping.


frappe (n.)

iced drink, 1922, American English (earlier as an adjective, iced, 1848), from French frapp&eacute;,
from past participle of frapper to chill, literally to beat, from Old French fraper to hit, strike
(see frap (v.)).


frass (n.)

insect excrement, 1854, from German frasz, from root of fressen to devour, to eat as a beast does
(see fret (v.)).


frat (n.)

student slang shortening of fraternity, by 1888.


fraternal (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French fraternel and directly from Medieval Latin fraternalis, from Latin
fraternus brotherly (see fraternity). The noun meaning fraternal twin is recorded by 1911.


fraternally (adv.)

1610s, from fraternal + -ly (2).


fraternity (n.)

early 14c., body of men associated by common interest, from Old French fraternit&eacute; (12c.),
from Latin fraternitatem (nominative fraternitas) brotherhood, from fraternus brotherly, from frater
brother, from PIE *bhrater (see brother). Meaning state or condition of being as brothers is from
late 15c. College Greek-letter organization sense is from 1777, first in reference to Phi Beta
Kappa.


fraternization (n.)

1792, act of uniting as brothers, from French fraternization (see fraternity); of relations between
occupying soldiers and occupied civilians, from mid-19c; explicitly from 1944 (see fraternize).


fraternize (v.)

1610s, to sympathize as brothers, from French fraterniser, from Medieval Latin fraternizare, from
fraternus brotherly (see fraternity). Military sense of cultivate friendship with enemy troops is
from 1897 (used in World War I with reference to the Christmas Truce). Used oddly by World War II
armed forces to mean have sex with women from enemy countries.   A piece of frat, Wren-language for
any attractive young woman -- ex-enemy -- in occupied territory. [John Irving, Royal Navalese, 1946]
Related: Fraternized; fraternizing.


fratricidal (adj.)

1804, from fratricide + -al (1).


fratricide (n.)

mid-15c., person who kills a brother; 1560s, act of killing a brother, from Latin fratricida
brother-slayer, from frater brother (see brother) + cida killer, or cidum a killing, both from
caedere to kill, to cut down (see -cide). Among several Old English words for this were
bro&#240;orbana one who kills a brother; bro&#240;orcwealm act of killing a brother.


frau (n.)

married woman, 1813, from German Frau woman, wife, from Middle High German vrouwe lady, mistress,
from Old High German frouwa mistress, lady (9c.), from Proto-Germanic *frowo- lady, fem. of *frawan
lord, from PIE root *per- (1) beyond, forward, in extended senses chief, first (see per).


fraud (n.)

criminal deception, early 14c., from Old French fraude deception, fraud (13c.), from Latin fraudem
(nominative fraus) deceit, injury. The noun meaning impostor, humbug is attested from 1850. Pious
fraud deception practiced for the sake of what is deemed a good purpose is from 1560s.


fraudster (n.)

1975, from fraud + -ster. Earlier words were fraudsman (1610s); frauditor (1550s).


fraudulent (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French fraudulent, from Latin fraudulentus cheating, deceitful, from fraus
(see fraud). Related: Fraudulently.


frauendienst (n.)

excessive chivalry toward women, from the title of a work by Ulrich von Lichtenstein (13c.), from
German frauen, plural of frau + dienst service.


fraught (v.)

early 14c., laden (of vessels), past participle of Middle English fraughten to load (a ship) with
cargo, from fraght cargo, lading of a ship (early 13c.), variant of freight; influenced by Middle
Dutch vrachten to load or furnish with cargo, from Proto-Germanic *fra-aihtiz (see freight (n.)).
Figurative sense is first attested 1570s.


fraulein (n.)

German Fr&auml;ulein unmarried woman (Middle High German vrouwelin), diminutive of Frau lady (see
frau).


fray (n.)

mid-14c., feeling of alarm, shortening of affray (q.v.; see also afraid). Meaning a brawl, a fight
is from early 15c. (but late 14c. in Anglo-Latin). Fraymaker fighter, brawler is an excellent word
from a 1530s statute.


fray (v.)

wear out by rubbing, c.1400, from Middle French frayer to rub against, from Old French froiier rub,
scrape, from Latin fricare to rub, rub down (see friction). Related: Frayed; fraying.


frayed (adj.)

worn by rubbing, 1814, past participle adjective from fray (v.).


frazzle (v.)

c.1825, to unravel (of clothing), from East Anglian variant of 17c. fasel to unravel, fray (as the
end of a rope), from Middle English facelyn to fray (mid-15c.), from fasylle fringe, frayed edge,
diminutive of Old English f&aelig;s fringe. Related: Frazzled, frazzling. Compare German Faser
thread, fiber, filament, Middle Dutch vese fringe, fiber, chaff. Probably influenced in form by fray
(v.). As a noun, from 1865, American English.


freak (n.)

1560s, sudden turn of mind, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Old English frician to dance (not
recorded in Middle English, but the word may have survived in dialect) [OED, Barnhart], or perhaps
from Middle English frek bold, quickly, from Old English frec greedy, gluttonous (compare German
frech bold, impudent).    Sense of capricious notion (1560s) and unusual thing, fancy (1784)
preceded that of strange or abnormal individual (first in freak of nature, 1847; compare Latin lusus
natur&#230;, which was used in English from 1660s). The sense in health freak, ecology freak, etc.
is attested from 1908 (originally Kodak freak, a camera buff). Freak show attested from 1887.


freak (v.)

change, distort, 1911, from freak (n.). Earlier, to streak or fleck randomly (1630s). Related:
Freaked; freaking.


freak out (n.)

also freakout bad psychedelic drug trip or something comparable to one, 1966 (despite an amusing
coincidental appearance of the phrase dug up by the OED in Fanny Hill from 1749), from verbal phrase
freak out, attested from 1965 in the drug sense (from 1902 in a sense change, distort, come out of
alignment); see freak (n.). Freak (n.) drug user is attested from 1945.    She had had her freak
out, and had pretty plentifully drowned her curiosity in a glut of pleasure .... [Cleland, Memoirs
of a Woman of Pleasure, 1749]


freakish (adj.)

1650s, capricious, from freak (n.) + -ish. Meaning grotesque is recorded from 1805. Related:
Freakishly; freakishness.


freaky (adj.)

1824, from freak (n.) + -y (2). Psychedelic sense is from 1966.


freckle (n.)

late 14c., also frecken, probably from Old Norse freknur (plural) freckles (cognates: Icelandic
frekna, Danish fregne, Swedish fr&auml;gne freckle), from PIE *(s)preg- to jerk, scatter (see sprout
(v.)). Related: Freckles.


freckle (v.)

late 14c. (implied in fracled spotted, from freckle (n.); freckle as a verb is recorded from 1610s.
Related: Freckled; freckling.


Freddie Mac

by 1992, vaguely from Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.


Frederick

masc. proper name, from French Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric, from German Friedrich, from Old High German
Fridurih, from Proto-Germanic *Frid-ric, literally peace-rule. Not a common name in medieval
England, found mostly in the eastern counties.


free (adj.)

Old English freo free, exempt from, not in bondage, also noble; joyful, from Proto-Germanic *frijaz
(cognates: Old Frisian fri, Old Saxon and Old High German vri, German frei, Dutch vrij, Gothic freis
free), from PIE *prijos dear, beloved, from root *pri- to love (cognates: Sanskrit priyah own, dear,
beloved, priyate loves; Old Church Slavonic prijati to help, prijatelji friend; Welsh rhydd free).
The primary sense seems to have been beloved, friend, to love; which in some languages (notably
Germanic and Celtic) developed also a sense of free, perhaps from the terms beloved or friend being
applied to the free members of one's clan (as opposed to slaves; compare Latin liberi, meaning both
free and children).    Compare Gothic frijon to love; Old English freod affection, friendship, friga
love, fri&eth;u peace; Old Norse fri&eth;r, German Friede peace; Old English freo wife; Old Norse
Frigg wife of Odin, literally beloved or loving; Middle Low German vrien to take to wife, Dutch
vrijen, German freien to woo.  Of nations, not subject to foreign rule or to despotism, it is
recorded from late 14c. (Free world non-communist nations attested from 1950.) Sense of given
without cost is 1580s, from notion of free of cost. Free lunch, originally offered in bars to draw
in business, by 1850, American English. Free pass on railways, etc., attested by 1850. Free speech
in Britain used of a privilege in Parliament since the time of Henry VIII. In U.S., as a civil
right, it became a prominent phrase in the debates over the Gag Rule (1836).   Free enterprise
recorded from 1890; free trade is from 1823. Free will is from early 13c. Free association in
psychology is from 1899. Free love sexual liberation attested from 1822. Free range (adj.) is
attested by 1960. Free and easy unrestrained is from 1690s.


free (v.)

Old English freogan to free, liberate, manumit, also to love, think of lovingly, honor, from freo
(see free (adj.)). Compare Old Frisian fria to make free; Old Saxon friohan to court, woo; German
befreien to free, freien to woo; Old Norse frja to love; Gothic frijon to love. Related: Freed;
freeing.


free verse (n.)

1908; see vers libre.


free-born (adj.)

mid-14c., from free (adj.) + born.


free-for-all (n.)

mass brawl (one in which all may participate), 1881.


free-hand (adv.)

of drawing, from 1848; see free (adj.) + hand.


free-spirited (adj.)

also freespirited, 1670s, from free (adj.) + spirited.


free-thinker (n.)

1690s, from free (adj.) + agent noun from think (v.).


freebase

1980 (noun and verb), in reference to cocaine. As a chemical process, it returns a salt form of an
alkaloid to its pure form. Related: Freebased; freebasing.


freebie

also freeby, 1942 (adj.); 1946 (n.); perhaps as early as 1900; formed arbitrarily [OED] from free
(adj.).


freebooter (n.)

1560s, loan-translation of Dutch vrijbuiter plunderer, robber, from vrijbuiten to rob, plunder, from
vrijbuit plunder, literally free booty, from vrij free + buit booty, from buiten to exchange or
plunder, from Middle Dutch buten, related to Middle Low German bute exchange (see booty). See
filibuster. The back-formed verb freeboot is recorded from 1590s.


freedman (n.)

manumitted slave, c.1600, from past participle of free (adj.) + man (n.). Also see freeman.


freedom (n.)

Old English freodom freedom, state of free will; charter, emancipation, deliverance; see free (adj.)
+ -dom. Freedom-rider recorded 1961, in reference to civil rights activists in U.S. trying to
integrate bus lines.    It has been said by some physicians, that life is a forced state. The same
may be said of freedom. It requires efforts, it presupposes mental and moral qualities of a high
order to be generally diffused in the society where it exists. [John C. Calhoun, speech, U.S. House
of Representatives, Jan. 31, 1816]   <hr />   Freedom Rider Situation Cuts Into Montgomery Juke,
Game Revenues [headline, Billboard, July 24, 1961]   Freedom fighter attested by 1903 (originally
with reference to Cuba).


freefall

also free fall, free-fall, 1919, originally of parachutists and in rocketry, from free (adj.) + fall
(v.).


freehold (n.)

early 15c. (implied in freeholder), translating Anglo-French fraunc tenement; see free (adj.) + hold
(n.). Related: Freeholder.


freelance (n.)

also free lance, free-lance, medieval mercenary warrior, 1820 (Ivanhoe), from free (adj.) + lance
(n.); apparently a coinage of Sir Walter Scott's. Figurative sense is from 1864; specifically of
journalism by 1882.


freelance (v.)

1902, from freelance (n.). Related: Freelancer (1898); freelanced; freelancing.


freeloader (n.)

also free-loader, by 1939, from free (adj.) + agent noun from load (v.). Related: Freeloading. As a
verb, freeload is attested by 1967.


freely (adv.)

Old English freolice; see free (adj.) + -ly (2).


freeman (n.)

Old English freoman; see free (adj.) + man (n.).


Freemason (n.)

late 14c., originally a traveling guild of masons with a secret code; in the early 17c. they began
accepting honorary members and teaching them the secrets and lore, which by 1717 had developed into
the fraternity of Free and Accepted Masons.    The exact origin of the free- is a subject of
dispute. Some [such as Klein] see a corruption of French fr&egrave;re brother, from
fr&egrave;rema&ccedil;on brother mason; others say it was because the masons worked on free-standing
stones; still others see them as free from the control of local guilds or lords [OED].


Freemasonry (n.)

mid-15c., from freemason + -ry.


freer (n.)

one who sets free, c.1600, from free + -er (1).


freer (adj.)

comparative of  free. See -er (2).


freestyle (n.)

1912, in swimming, in reference to a distance race in which the swimmers may use whatever stroke
they choose; 1950 in general use, from free + style. As an adjective, from 1957; as a verb, by 1970
(in martial arts).


freewheeling (adj.)

1903, from free wheel (1899, see free (adj.) + wheel); a bicycle wheel that turns even when not
being pedaled, later from the name of a kind of automobile drive system that allowed cars to coast
without being slowed by the engine. Figurative sense is from 1911.


freeze (v.)

Old English freosan turn to ice (class II strong verb; past tense freas, past participle froren),
from Proto-Germanic *freusan to freeze (cognates: Old Norse frjosa, Old High German friosan, German
frieren to freeze, Gothic frius frost), from Proto-Germanic *freus-, equivalent to PIE root *preus-
to freeze, also to burn (cognates: Sanskrit prusva, Latin pruina hoarfrost, Welsh rhew frost,
Sanskrit prustah burnt, Albanian prus burning coals, Latin pruna a live coal).    Transitive sense
first recorded 14c., figurative sense c.1400. Meaning become rigid or motionless attested by 1720.
Sense of fix at a certain level, make non-transactable is 1922. Freeze frame is from 1960,
originally a briefly Frozen Shot after the Jingle to allow ample time for Change over at the end of
a T.V. 'Commercial.'  [ABC of Film &amp; TV, 1960].


freeze (n.)

c.1400, from freeze (v.).


freezer (n.)

1847 as the name of an item in ice-cream manufacture; from freeze (v.) + -er (1). As a household
appliance, from 1945. Freezer burn attested from 1929.


freight (n.)

early 13c., fraght, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German vracht, vrecht, meaning originally cost
of transport and probably from a lost Old Frisian word, from Proto-Germanic *fra-aihtiz absolute
possession, property (source also of Old High German freht earnings), from *fra-, intensive prefix,
+ *aik to be master of, possess, from PIE *aik- (see owe). Meaning transporting of goods or
passengers for money is from late 14c. Danish fragt, Swedish frakt apparently also are from Frisian.
As a verb, from late 14c.


freightage (n.)

1690s, a hybrid word, from freight + -age.


freighter (n.)

1620s, one who loads, agent noun from freight (v.). Meaning a cargo vessel is from 1839, American
English.


French (adj.)

Old English frencisc of the Franks, from Franca (see Frank). The noun is from Old English Frencisc.
As the name of a language, from late 13c.    Euphemistic meaning bad language (pardon my French) is
from 1895. Used in many combination-words, often dealing with food or sex. French dressing recorded
by 1860; French toast is from 1630s. French letter condom (c.1856, perhaps on resemblance of
sheepskin and parchment), French (v.) perform oral sex on (c.1917) and French kiss (1923) all
probably stem from the Anglo-Saxon equation of Gallic culture and sexual sophistication, a sense
first recorded 1749 in the phrase French novel.    To take French leave, depart without telling the
host, is 1771, from a social custom then prevalent. However, this is said to be called in France
filer &agrave; l'anglaise, literally to take English leave.


French fries (n.)

1903, American English, earlier French fried potatoes (by 1883). French frieds (1944) never caught
on. Simple short form fries attested by 1973. In the Upper Midwest of the U.S., sometimes called
American fries (1950).


Frenchify (v.)

1590s, from French + -ify. Usually contemptuous (Richardson in his introduction to Pamela, beseeches
the editor not to Frenchify our English solidity into froth and whip-syllabub). Related:
Frenchified; Frenchifying.


frenetic (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French frenetike, from Latin phreneticus delirious, alteration of Greek
phrenitikos, from phrenitis frenzy, literally inflammation of the brain, from phren mind, reason
(from PIE *gwhren- to think) + -itis. The classical ph- was restored mid-16c. Related: Frenetically.


frenzied (adj.)

1796; see frenzy.


frenzy (n.)

mid-14c., delirium, insanity, from Old French frenesie, from Medieval Latin phrenesia, from
phrenesis, back-formation from Latin phreneticus delirious (see frenetic). Meaning excited state of
mind is from c.1400.


Freon (n.)

refrigerant chemical, 1932, proprietary name in U.S. for fluorocarbons used in refrigeration
technology. The name was apparently constructed from fre(eze) + -on used as an arbitrary suffix
[Flood].


frequence (n.)

1530s, from French fr&eacute;quence, from Latin frequentia (see frequent).


frequency (n.)

1640s, fact of occurring often, from Latin frequentia a crowding, crowd, from frequentem (see
frequent).    Earlier it had been used in a now-obsolete sense of state of being crowded (mid-16c.);
sense in physics, rate of recurrence, especially of a vibration, is from 1831. In radio electronics,
frequency modulation (1922, abbreviated F.M.) as a system of broadcasting is distinguished from
amplitude modulation (or A.M.).


frequent (adj.)

mid-15c., ample, profuse, from Middle French frequent, or directly from Latin frequentem (nominative
frequens) crowded, repeated, of uncertain origin. Meaning common, usual is from 1530s; that of
happening at short intervals, often recurring is from c.1600.


frequent (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French frequenter, from Latin frequentare visit regularly, from frequentem
(see frequent (adj.)). Related: Frequented; frequenting.


frequentative (n.)

verb which expresses repetition of action, 1520s, from French fr&eacute;quentatif, from Late Latin
frequentativus that which denotes the repetition of an act, from Latin frequentatus, past participle
of frequentare visit regularly, from frequentem (see frequent (adj.)).


frequently (adv.)

1530s, from frequent (adj.) + -ly (2).


fresco (n.)

1590s, in fresco, literally in fresh, with a sense of painted on fresh mortar or plaster, from
Italian fresco cool, fresh, from Proto-Germanic *friskaz (see fresh (adj.1)).


fresh (adj.1)

late 13c. unsalted, pure, sweet, eager, metathesis of Old English fersc unsalted, from West Germanic
*friskaz (cognates: Old Frisian fersk, Middle Dutch versch, Dutch vers, Old High German frisc,
German frisch fresh).    Probably cognate with Old Church Slavonic presinu fresh, Lithuanian preskas
sweet. The metathesis, and the expanded Middle English senses of new, pure, eager are probably by
influence of (or in some instances, from) Old French fres (fem. fresche), from Proto-Germanic
*frisko-, and thus related to the English word. The Germanic root also is the source of Italian and
Spanish fresco. Related: Freshly; freshness.


fresh (adj.2)

impudent, presumptuous, 1848, U.S. slang, probably from German frech insolent, cheeky, from Old High
German freh covetous, related to Old English frec greedy, bold (see freak (n.)).


freshen (v.)

1690s, from fresh (adj.1) + -en (1). Related: Freshened; freshening. To freshen a drink, top it off
is from 1961. The earlier verb was simply fresh (mid-14c.).


freshet (n.)

1590s, stream flowing into the sea, from fresh (adj.1) in a now obsolete sense of flood, stream of
fresh water (1530s). Old English had fersceta in the same sense. Meaning flood caused by rain or
melting snow is from 1650s.


freshman (n.)

mid-16c., newcomer, novice, from fresh (adj.1) + man (n.). Sense of university student in first year
is attested from 1590s. Related: Freshmen.


freshwater (adj.)

also fresh water, 1520s, from fresh (adj.1) + water (n.1).


fret (v.)

be peevish or worried, early 12c., from Old English fretan eat, devour (in Old English used of
monsters and Vikings; in Middle English used of animals' eating), from Proto-Germanic compound *fra-
for- + *etan to eat (cognates: Dutch vreton, Old High German freggan, German fressen, Gothic
fraitan). Transitive sense of eat away is from late 12c. Figurative sense of irritate, worry, eat
one's heart out is c.1200. Modern German still distinguishes essen for humans and fressen for
animals. Related: Fretted; fretting. As a noun, from early 15c.


fret (n.)

ornamental interlaced pattern, late 14c., from Old French frete interlaced work, trellis work,
probably from Frankish *fetur or another Germanic source (cognates: Old English fetor, Old High
German feggara fetter) perhaps from notion of decorative anklet, or of materials bound together. The
other noun, ridge on the fingerboard of a guitar, is c.1500 of unknown origin but possibly another
sense of Old French frete.


fretful (adj.)

1590s, from fret (v.) + -ful. Related: Fretfully.


fretwork (n.)

also fret-work, c.1600, from fret (n.) + work (n.).


Freudian (adj.)

1910, used at first in a general way for sexual, from name of Sigmund Freud (1856-1939), Austrian
psychiatrist. Freudian slip first attested 1959.


Freya

goddess of love and beauty in Norse mythology, Old Norse Freyja, related to Old English frea lord,
Old Saxon frua, Middle Dutch vrouwe woman, wife, German Frau; see frau).Frigga is usually considered
the goddess of married love; Freya, the goddess of love, the northern Venus. Actually, Frigga is of
the Aesir family of Scandinavian myth; Freya, of the Vanir family; the two lines of belief merged,
and the two goddesses are sometimes fused, and sometimes confused. [Joseph T. Shipley, The Origins
of English Words, 1984]


friable (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French friable and directly from Latin friabilis easily crumbled or broken, from
friare rub away, crumble into small pieces, related to fricare to rub (see friction). Related:
Friability.


friar (n.)

late 13c., from Old French frere brother, friar (9c.), originally the mendicant orders (Franciscans,
Augustines, Dominicans, Carmelites), who reached England early 13c., from Latin frater brother (see
brother).


fricassee (n.)

1560s, from Middle French fricass&eacute;e, fem. past participle of fricasser mince and cook in
sauce (15c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps related to or compounded from Middle French frire to fry
(see fry (v.)) and casser, quasser break, cut up. As a verb, from 1650s.


fricative

1860 (adj.), 1863 (n.), from Modern Latin fricativus, from Latin fricatus, past participle of
fricare to rub (see friction).


fricking (adj.)

euphemism for fucking, by 1913. Related: Frick (v.).


friction (n.)

1560s, a chafing, rubbing, from Middle French friction (16c.) and directly from Latin frictionem
(nominative frictio) a rubbing, rubbing down, noun of action from past participle stem of fricare to
rub, of uncertain origin. Sense of resistance to motion is from 1722; figurative sense of
disagreement, clash first recorded 1761. Related: Frictional.


Friday (n.)

sixth day of the week, Old English friged&aelig;g Frigga's day, from Frige, genitive of Frig (see
Frigg), Germanic goddess of married love, a West Germanic translation of Latin dies Veneris day of
(the planet) Venus, which itself translated Greek Aphrodites hemera.    Compare Old Norse frijadagr,
Old Frisian frigendei, Middle Dutch vridach, Dutch vrijdag, German Freitag Friday, and the Latin-
derived cognates Old French vendresdi, French vendredi, Spanish viernes.    In the Germanic
pantheon, Freya (q.v.) corresponds more closely in character to Venus than Frigg does, and some
early Icelandic writers used Freyjudagr for Friday.   Black Friday as the name for the busy shopping
day after U.S. Thanksgiving holiday is said to date from 1960s and perhaps was coined by those who
had the job of controlling the crowds, not by the merchants; earlier it was used principally of days
when financial markets crashed.


fridge (n.)

shortened and altered form of refrigerator, 1926, perhaps influenced by Frigidaire (1919), a popular
early brand name of the appliances. Frigerator as a colloquial shortening is attested by 1886.


fried (adj.)

mid-14c., past participle adjective from fry (v.).


friend (n.)

Old English freond friend, from Proto-Germanic *frijand- lover, friend (cognates: Old Norse
fr&aelig;ndi, Old Frisian friund, Middle High German friunt, German Freund, Gothic frijonds friend),
from PIE *priy-ont-, present participle form of root *pri- to love (see free (adj.)).    Meaning a
Quaker (a member of the Society of Friends) is from 1670s. Feond (fiend, originally enemy) and
freond often were paired alliteratively in Old English; both are masculine agent nouns derived from
present participle of verbs, but are not directly related to one another (see fiend). Related:
Friends.


friend (v.)

in the Facebook sense, attested from 2005, from the noun, but friend has been used as a verb in
English since late 14c. Related: Friended; friending. Old English had freonsped an abundance of
friends (see speed (n.)); freondleast want of friends; freondspedig rich in friends, all of which
would be useful now.


friendless (adj.)

Old English freondleas; see friend (n.) + -less. Related: Friendlessly; friendlessness.


friendly (adj.)

Old English freondlic; see friend (n.) + -ly (1). Related: Friendlily; friendliness.


friendship (n.)

Old English freondscipe; see friend (n.) + -ship.


frieze (n.)

sculptured horizontal band in architecture, 1560s, from Middle French frise, originally a ruff, from
Medieval Latin frisium embroidered border, variant of frigium, probably from Latin Phrygium
Phrygian, Phrygian work, from Phrygia, the ancient country in Asia Minor known for its embroidery
(compare Phrygiae vestes ornate garments). Meaning decorative band along the top of a wall was in
Old French.


frig (v.)

to move about restlessly, mid-15c., perhaps a variant of frisk (q.v.). As a euphemism for to fuck it
dates from 1680s, earlier as to masturbate (1670s). Related: Frigged; frigging.


frigate (n.)

1580s, from Middle French fr&eacute;gate (1520s), from Italian fregata (Neapolitan fregate), like
many ship names, of unknown origin. Originally a small, swift vessel; the word was applied to
progressively larger types over the years, but since 1943 it is used mainly of escort ships.


Frigg

Old English, but only in compounds such as friged&aelig;g Friday, Frige&aelig;fen (what we would
call Thursday evening). In Germanic religion, wife of Odin, goddess of heaven and married love. The
English word is from Old Norse, a noun use of the fem. adjective meaning beloved, loving, also wife,
from Proto-Germanic *frijaz noble, dear, beloved (from the same root as Old English freogan to love;
ultimately from the root of free (adj.)). Also compare Frau.


frigging (adj.)

by 1936 as an expletive, from present participle of frig.


fright (n.)

Old English (Northumbrian) fryhto, metathesis of fyrhtu fear, dread, trembling, horrible sight, from
Proto-Germanic *furkhtaz afraid (cognates: Old Saxon forhta, Old Frisian fruchte, Old High German
forhta, German Furcht, Gothic faurhtei fear). Not etymologically related to the word fear, which
superseded it 13c. as the principal word except in cases of sudden terror. For spelling evolution,
see fight.


frighten (v.)

1660s, from fright + -en (1). Related: Frightened; frightening. The earlier verb was simply fright
(Old English fyrhtan) to frighten.


frightful (adj.)

mid-13c., timid; c.1600 alarming; from fright + -ful. In common with most -ful adjectives, it once
had both an active and passive sense. Meaning dreadful, horrible, shocking (often hyperbolic) is
attested from c.1700; Johnson noted it as a cant word among women for anything unpleasing. Related:
Frightfully.


frigid (adj.)

1620s, from Latin frigidus cold, chill, cool, figuratively indifferent, from stem of frigere be
cold; related to frigus cold, coldness, frost, from PIE root *srig- cold.    The meaning wanting in
sexual heat is attested from 1650s. Frigidaire as the proprietary name of a brand of self-contained
automatically operated iceless refrigerator dates from 1919 (Frigidaire Corporation, Detroit,
Michigan, U.S.).


frigidity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French frigidit&eacute; (15c.), from Late Latin frigiditatem (nominative
frigiditas) the cold, from Latin frigidus cold (see frigid).


frigorific (adj.)

causing cold, 1660s, from French frigorifique, from Late Latin frigorificus cooling, from Latin
frigus (genitive frigoris) cold, cool, coolness (see frigid) + -ficus making, root of facere make,
do (see factitious).


frijoles (n.)

1570s, from Spanish frijoles (plural) beans, from Latin phaseolus, phaselus kidney bean, from Greek
phaselos a kind of bean.


frill (n.)

wavy ornamental edging, 1801 (with a doubtful attestation from 1590s), of uncertain origin despite
much speculation [see OED]; figurative sense of useless ornament first recorded 1893. The verb
meaning to furnish with a frill is recorded in 1570s. Related: Frilled.


frills (n.)

mere embellishments, 1893, often in negative constructions; earlier affectation of dress or manner
(1845); see frill.


frilly (adj.)

1843, from frill + -y (2). Related: Frilliness.


fringe (n.)

early 14c., from Old French frenge thread, strand, fringe, hem (early 14c.), from Vulgar Latin
*frimbia, metathesis of Latin fimbriae (plural) fibers, threads, fringe, of uncertain origin.
Figurative sense of outer edge, margin, is first recorded 1894. Related: Fringes. Fringe benefits is
recorded from 1952.


fringe (v.)

late 15c., from fringe (n.). Related: Fringed; fringing.


frippery (n.)

1560s, old clothes, cast-off garments, from Middle French friperie old clothes, an old clothes shop,
from Old French freperie, feuperie old rags, rubbish (13c.), from frepe, feupe fringe; rags, old
clothes, from Late Latin faluppa chip, splinter, straw, fiber. The notion is of things worn down,
clothes rubbed to rags. The ironic meaning finery (but with overtones of tawdriness) dates from
1630s.


Frisbee

1957, trademark registered 1959 by Wham-O Co., the prototype modeled on pie tins from Mrs. Frisbie's
Pies, made by the Frisbie Bakery of Bridgeport, Connecticut, U.S. Middlebury College students began
tossing them around in the 1930s (though Yale and Princeton also claim to have discovered their
aerodynamic qualities).  Thirteen years ago the Wham-O Manufacturing Company of San Gabriel, Calif.,
... brought out the first Frisbee. Wham-O purchased the rights from a Los Angeles building inspector
named Fred Morrison, who in turn had been inspired by the airworthy pie tins of the Frisbie Bakery
in Bridgeport, Conn. (which went out of business in March of 1958). He changed the spelling to avoid
legal problems. [Sports Illustrated, Aug. 3, 1970]  The family name is attested in English records
from 1226, from a place name in Leicestershire (Frisby on the Wreak), attested from 1086, from Old
Danish, meaning farmstead or village of the Frisians.


Frisco

colloquial shortening of San Francisco, California, U.S., attested by 1856.


Frisian (adj.)

of or pertaining to the people of Frisia, or belonging to the tribe of the Frisii, 1590s, from Latin
Frisii, from a Germanic tribal name (source also of Old Frisian Frise, Middle Dutch Vriese, Old High
German Friaso, Old English Frisa), perhaps originally meaning curly-headed (compare Old Frisian
frisle curly hair). As a noun, West Germanic language spoken in Friesland, the lowland coast of the
North Sea and nearby islands, closely related to Dutch and Old English.


frisk (v.)

1510s, to dance, frolic, from Middle English frisk lively (mid-15c.), from Middle French frisque
lively, brisk, from Old French frisque fresh, new; merry, animated (13c.), possibly from a Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch vrisch fresh, Old High German frisc lively; see fresh (adj.1)). Sense
of pat down in a search first recorded 1781. Related: Frisked; frisking. As a noun from 1520s.


frisky (adj.)

c.1500, from frisk lively + -y (2). Related: Friskiness.


frisson (n.)

1777, from French frisson, literally shiver, thrill (12c.), from Latin frigere to be cold (see
frigid).


frist (n.)

a space of time, Old English frist, first space of time (compare Old Frisian first, Old High German
frist, Old Norse frest). As a verb, meaning delay, from early 13c.


frit (n.)

material for glass-making, 1660s, from Italian fritta, fem. past participle of friggere to fry, from
Latin frigere to roast, poach, fry (see fry (v.)).


fritillary (n.)

type of butterfly, 1857, earlier a type of plant (Fritillaria Meleagris, 1633), from Latin fritillus
dice-box, from fritinnire to twitter, imitative of the rattle of dice. The butterfly so called
perhaps from resemblance of its markings to those of dice; or the names may have been given in
confusion, perhaps on the notion that fritillus meant chessboard.


frittata (n.)

1884, from Italian frittata, from fritto fried (see frit).


fritter (v.)

whittle away, 1728, from fritters fragment or shred, possibly from a noun sense, but this is not
recorded as early as the verb; perhaps an alteration of 16c. fitters fragments or pieces, perhaps
ultimately from Old French fraiture a breaking, from Latin fractura. Or perhaps from a Germanic
source (compare Middle High German vetze clothes, rags).


fritter (n.)

fried batter, late 14c., from Old French friture fritter, pancake, something fried (12c.), from Late
Latin frictura a frying, from frigere to roast, fry (see fry (v.)).


Fritz

German familiar form of masc. proper name Friedrich; as a characteristic name for a German, from
1883, especially in World War I. On the fritz inoperative (1903) is American English slang, of
unknown origin. Earliest references suggest a theatrical origin.


frivolity (n.)

1796, from French frivolit&eacute;, from Old French frivole frivolous, from Latin frivolus (see
frivolous).


frivolous (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin frivolus silly, empty, trifling, worthless, brittle, diminutive of *frivos
broken, crumbled, from friare break, rub away, crumble. Related: Frivolously; frivolousness.


frizz (v.)

also friz, 1610s (implied in frizzed), probably from French friser to curl, dress the hair (16c.),
perhaps from stem of frire to fry, cook. Assimilated to native frizzle. Related: Frizzed; frizzing.
As a noun from 1660s, frizzed hair.


frizzle (v.)

curl hair, 1560s, perhaps related to Old English fris curly and Old Frisian frisle. Or else from
Middle French friser to curl (see frizz (v.)). Related: Frizzled; frizzling. As a noun from 1610s,
crisp curl, from the verb.


frizzy (adj.)

1870, from frizz + -y (2). Related: Frizziness.


fro

away, backwards, c.1200, North English and Scottish dialectal fra, Midlands dialect fro, from Old
Norse fra from (see from).


frock (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French froc a monk's habit (12c.), of unknown origin; perhaps from Frankish *hrok
or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German hroc mantle, coat; Old Norse rokkr, Old
English rocc, Old Frisian rokk, German Rock coat), from PIE root *rug- to spin.    Another theory
traces it to Medieval Latin floccus, from Latin floccus flock of wool. Meaning outer garment for
women or children is from 1530s. Frock-coat attested by 1823.


frog (n.1)

Old English frogga, a diminutive of frox, forsc, frosc frog, from Proto-Germanic *fruska-z
(cognates: Old Norse froskr, Middle Dutch vorsc, German Frosch frog), probably literally hopper,
from PIE root *preu- to hop (cognates: Sanskrit provate hops, Russian prygat to hop, jump).    The
Latin word (rana) is imitative of croaking. Collateral Middle English forms frude, froud are from
Old Norse frau&eth;r frog, and frosk frog survived in English dialects into the 19c.    I always eat
fricasseed frogs regretfully; they remind one so much of miniature human thighs, and make one feel
cannibalistic and horrid .... [H. Ellen Brown, A Girl's Wanderings in Hungary, 1896]     As a
derogatory term for Frenchman, 1778 (short for frog-eater), but before that (1650s) it meant Dutch
(from frog-land marshy land). To have a frog in the throat be hoarse is from 1892, from the croaking
sound.


frog (n.2)

fastening for clothing, 1719, originally a belt loop for carrying a weapon, of unknown origin;
perhaps from Portuguese froco, from Latin floccus flock of wool.


frog march

also frog-march, 1871, a term that originated among London police and referred to their method of
moving a drunken or refractory prisoner by carrying him face-down between four people, each holding
a limb; the connection with frog (n.1) perhaps being the notion of going along belly-down. By the
1930s, the verb was used in reference to the much more efficient (but less frog-like) method of
getting someone in an arm-behind-the-back hold and hustling him or her along like that.


froggy (adj.)

1610s, full of frogs, from frog (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning frog-like is from 1837. As a disparaging
term for a Frenchman, from 1872. Related: Frogginess.


frogman (n.)

scuba diver in rubber suit, 1945, from frog (n.1) + man (n.).


frolic

1530s, as an adjective, joyous, merry, from Middle Dutch vrolyc (adj.) happy, from vro- merry, glad
+ lyc like (see like (adj.)). Cognate with German fr&ouml;hlich happy. The stem is cognate with Old
Norse frar swift, Middle English frow hasty, from PIE *preu- (see frog (n.1)), giving the whole an
etymological sense akin to jumping for joy. The verb is first attested 1580s. Related: Frolicked;
frolicking. As a noun, from 1610s.


frolicsome (adj.)

1690s, from frolic + -some (1).


from (prep.)

Old English fram from, since, by, as a result, originally forward movement, advancement, evolving
into sense of movement away, from Proto-Germanic *fr- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic
fram from, away, Old Norse fra from, fram forward), corresponding to PIE *pro (see pro-).


fromage (n.)

French for cheese, from French fromage, formage (13c.), from Medieval Latin formaticum (source also
of Italian formaggio), a derivation from Latin forma shape, form, mold (cf Medieval Latin casei
forma; see form (v.)).


fromward

Old English framweard about to depart; doomed to die; with back turned; see froward.


frond (n.)

1785, from Latin frons (genitive frondis) leafy branch, green bough, foliage. Adopted by
Linn&aelig;us in a sense distinct from folium.


Fronde (n.)

1798, from French fronde (14c.), sling, from Old French fonde, from Latin funda casting net, of
unknown origin.    Name given to the party which rose against Mazarin and the court during the
minority of Louis XIV, supposedly from the use of stone-casting slings to attack property of their
opponents. Hence, sometimes used figuratively for violent political opposition.


front (n.)

late 13c., forehead, from Old French front forehead, brow (12c.), from Latin frontem (nominative
frons) forehead, brow, front; facade, forepart; appearance, perhaps literally that which projects,
from PIE *bhront-, from root *bhren- to project, stand out. Or from PIE *ser- (4), base of
prepositions and preverbs with the basic meaning 'above, over, up, upper' [Watkins, not in Pokorny].
Sense of foremost part of anything developed in Latin. The military sense of foremost part of an
army (mid-14c.) led to the meaning field of operations in contact with the enemy (1660s). Home front
is from 1919. Sense of public facade is from 1891; that of something serving as a cover for illegal
activities is from 1905. Meteorological sense first recorded 1921. Front yard first attested 1767.


front (v.)

1520s, from Middle French fronter, from Old French front (see front (n.)). Related: Fronted;
fronting.


frontage (n.)

1620s, from front (n.) + -age.


frontal (adj.)

1650s, of the forehead; 1971 with reference to the naked body; from Modern Latin frontalis, from
front-, stem of frons brow, forehead (see front). Or in some cases probably from front (n.) +
adjectival suffix -al (1).


frontier (n.)

c.1400, from Old French frontier prow of a ship, front rank of an army (13c.), noun use of adjective
frontier facing, neighboring, from front brow (see front (n.)).    Originally the front line of an
army, sense of borderland is first attested early 15c. In reference to North America, from 1670s;
later with a specific sense:What is the frontier? ... In the census reports it is treated as the
margin of that settlement which has a density of two or more to the square mile. [F.J. Turner, The
Frontier in American History, 1920]Frontiersman is from 1782.


frontispiece (n.)

1590s, decorated entrance of a building, from Middle French frontispice, probably from Italian
frontespizio and Late Latin frontispicium facade, originally a view of the forehead, judgment of
character through facial features, from Latin frons (genitive frontis) forehead (see front (n.)) +
specere to look at (see scope (n.1)). Sense of illustration facing a book's title page first
recorded 1680s. The spelling alteration is apparently from confusion with piece.


frontlet (n.)

from Old French frontelet, diminutive of frontel (Modern French fronteau) forehead, front of a
helmet, hairband, from Late Latin frontale an ornament for the forehead, from frons (see front
(n.)).


frontline

also front-line, 1899 (n.), 1915 (adj.), from front (adj.) + line (n.).


frontrunner (n.)

also front-runner, of political candidates, 1908, American English, a metaphor from horse racing
(where it is used by 1903 of a horse that runs best while in the lead).


frore (adj.)

frosty, frozen, archaic (but found in poetry as late as Keats), from Old English froren, past
participle of freosan (see freeze (v.)).


frosh (n.)

student colloquial shortening and alteration of freshman, attested by 1915, perh. under influence of
German frosch frog, (dial.) grammar-school pupil [OED].


frost (n.)

Old English forst, frost a freezing, becoming frozen, extreme cold, from Proto-Germanic *frusta-
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German frost, Middle Dutch and Dutch vorst), related to
freosan to freeze, from PIE *preus- to freeze; burn (see freeze (v.)). Both forms of the word were
common in English till late 15c.; the triumph of frost may be due to its similarity to the forms in
other Germanic languages.


frost (v.)

1630s, from frost (n.). Related: Frosted; frosting.


frostbite (n.)

also frost-bite, 1813, from frost (n.) + bite (n.).


frostbitten (adj.)

also frost-bitten, 1550s, from frost (n.) + bitten.


frosted (adj.)

1640s of whitening hair; 1680s of glass; 1734 of sugar or icing, past participle adjective from
frost.


frosting (n.)

1610s as an action; 1756 as a substance; meaning cake icing is from 1858; verbal noun from frost
(v.).


frosty (adj.)

Old English forstig, fyrstig (cognates: Dutch vorstig, German frostig); see frost (n.) + -y (2).
Figurative use from late 14c. Related: Frostily; frostiness.


froth (n.)

c.1300, from an unrecorded Old English word, or else from Old Norse fro&eth;a froth, from Proto-
Germanic *freuth-. Old English had afreo&eth;an to froth, from the same root. The modern derived
verb is from late 14c. Related: Frothed; frothing.


frothy (adj.)

1530s, from froth + -y (2). Related: Frothiness.


frottage (n.)

1933, from French frottage rubbing, friction, from frotter to rub, from Old French froter to rub,
wipe; beat, thrash (12c.), from Latin fricare to rub (see friction). As a paraphilia, it is known as
frotteurism.


frou-frou

1870, a rustling, from French (19c.), possibly imitative of the rustling of a dress. Meaning fussy
details is from 1876.


frounce (v.)

c.1300, to gather in folds, from Old French froncier, from fronce (n.), of unknown origin. Related:
Frounced; frouncing.


frow (n.)

Dutchwoman, late 14c., from Middle Dutch vrouwe (Dutch vrow), cognate with German Frau (see frau).


froward (adv.)

Old English fromweard turned from or away, from from + -weard (see -ward). Opposite of toward, it
renders Latin pervertus in early translations of the Psalms, and also meant about to depart,
departing, and doomed to die. Related: Frowardly; frowardness.


frown (v.)

late 14c., from Old French frognier to frown or scowl, snort, turn one's nose up, related to froigne
scowling look, probably from Gaulish *frogna nostril (compare Welsh ffroen nose), with a sense of
snort, or perhaps haughty grimace. Related: Frowned; frowning.


frown (n.)

1580s, from frown (v.).


frowsty (adj.)

having an unpleasant smell, 1865, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Old French frouste ruinous,
decayed, or to Old English &thorn;roh rancid; both of which also are of uncertain origin.


frowzy (adj.)

also frowsy, 1680s, possibly related to dialectal frowsty (q.v.).


frozen (adj.)

mid-14c., past participle adjective from freeze (v.). Figurative use is from 1570s. Of assets, bank
accounts, etc., from 1922.


fructify (v.)

early 14c., from Old French fructifiier (12c.) bear fruit, grow, develop, from Late Latin
fructificare bear fruit, from Latin fructus (see fruit) + root of facere make (see factitious).
Related: Fructified; fructifying.


fructose (n.)

sugar found in fruit, 1857, coined in English from Latin fructus (see fruit) + chemical suffix -ose.


frug (n.)

1964, popular U.S. dance derived from the Twist, of unknown origin.


frugal (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French frugal, from Latin frugalis, from undeclined adj. frugi useful, proper,
worthy, honest; temperate, economical, originally dative of frux (plural fruges) fruit, produce,
figuratively value, result, success, related to fructus (see fruit). Sense evolved in Latin from
useful to profitable to economical. Related: Frugally.


frugality (n.)

1530s, from Middle French frugalit&eacute; (14c.), from Latin frugalitatem (nominative frugalitas)
thriftiness, temperance, frugality, from frugalis (see frugal).


frugivorous (adj.)

from Latin frugi-, stem of frux fruit, produce, related to fructus (see fruit) + -vorous.


fruit (n.)

late 12c., from Old French fruit fruit, fruit eaten as dessert; harvest; virtuous action (12c.),
from Latin fructus an enjoyment, delight, satisfaction; proceeds, produce, fruit, crops, from frug-,
stem of frui to use, enjoy, from PIE *bhrug- agricultural produce, also to enjoy (see brook (v.)).
Classical sense preserved in fruits of one's labor. Originally in English meaning vegetables as
well. Modern narrower sense is from early 13c. Meaning odd person, eccentric is from 1910; that of
male homosexual is from 1935. The term also is noted in 1931 as tramp slang for a girl or woman
willing to oblige, probably from the fact of being easy picking. Fruit salad recorded from 1861.


fruitcake (n.)

1838 in the literal sense, from fruit + cake (n.). Slang meaning lunatic person is first attested
1952.


fruitful (adj.)

c.1300, of trees, from fruit + -ful. Related: Fruitfully; fruitfulness. Of animals or persons from
early 16c.; of immaterial things from 1530s.


fruition (n.)

early 15c., act of enjoying, from Middle French fruition and directly from Late Latin fruitionem
(nominative fruitio) enjoyment, noun of action from Latin frui to use, enjoy. Sense of act or state
of bearing fruit is first recorded 1885 by mistaken association with fruit; figurative sense is from
1889.


fruitless (adj.)

mid-14c., unprofitable, from fruit + -less. Meaning barren, sterile is from 1510s. Related:
Fruitlessly.


fruity (adj.)

1650s, from fruit + -y (2). Related: Fruitiness.


frumbierding (n.)

an excellent Old English word meaning a youth; from fruma first, beginning + beard + -ling.


frumious (adj.)

1871, coined by Lewis Carroll, who said it was a blend of fuming and furious. He used it in both
Jabberwocky and The Hunting of the Snark (1876).


frump (n.)

cross, unstylish person 1817, perhaps from frumple (v.) to wrinkle (late 14c.), from Middle Dutch
verrompelen to wrinkle (see frumpy).


frumpy (adj.)

1746, cross-tempered, from frump (n.) bad temper (1660s) and an earlier verb meaning to mock,
browbeat (1550s), of obscure origin, perhaps imitative of a sneer or derisive snort. Sense of sour-
looking, unfashionable is from 1825, but this may be a shortening of frumple to wrinkle, crumple
(late 14c.), from Middle Dutch verrompelen, from ver- completely + rompelen to rumple. Related:
Frumps. See also frump.


frustrate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin frustratus, past participle of frustrari to deceive, disappoint, frustrate,
from frustra (adv.) in vain, in error, related to fraus injury, harm (see fraud). Related:
Frustrated; frustrating.


frustrated (adj.)

disappointed, 1640s, past participle adjective from frustrate.


frustration (n.)

act of frustrating, 1550s, from Latin frustrationem (nominative frustratio) a deception, a
disappointment, noun of action from past participle stem of frustrari (see frustrate). Earlier (mid-
15c.) with a sense of nullification.


frustum (n.)

1650s, from Latin frustum piece broken off, from PIE *bhrus-to-, from root *bhreu- to cut, break up
(see bruise (v.)).


fry (v.)

late 13c., from Old French frire to fry (13c.), from Latin frigere to roast or fry, from PIE *bher-
(4) to cook, bake (cognates: Sanskrit bhrjjati roasts, bharjanah roasting; Persian birishtan to
roast; Greek phrygein to roast, bake).    Meaning execute in the electric chair is U.S. slang from
1929. To go out of the frying pan into the fire is first attested in Thomas More (1532). The related
noun is from 1630s. Related: Fried; frying. Frying pan recorded from mid-14c.


fry (n.)

young fish, late 13c., from Anglo-French frei, from Old French frai spawn, from froier to rub, spawn
(by rubbing abdomen on sand). First applied to human offspring 14c. in Scottish, though OED and some
other sources trace this usage to Old Norse frjo, fr&aelig; seed, offspring.


fryer (n.)

also frier, 1851 of fish for frying, 1923 of chickens; from fry (v.).


fubar (adj.)

by 1944, acronym from fucked up beyond all recognition. Said to be military slang originally.


fuchsia (n.)

red color, 1923, from the ornamental shrub, which was named 1753 from the Latinized name of German
botanist Leonhard Fuchs (1501-1566). Not related to Latin fucus seaweed, sea wrack, tangle, which
also gave its name to a red color prepared from it. Latin fucus is from or related to Greek phykos
seaweed, also red paint, rouge.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


fud (n.)

backside, buttocks, 1785, a Scottish and Northern dialect word of unknown origin, perhaps from
Scandinavian.


fuddle (v.)

1580s, originally to get drunk, later to confuse as though with drink (c.1600), of uncertain origin,
perhaps from Low German fuddeln work in a slovenly manner (as if drunk), from fuddle worthless
cloth. The more common derivative befuddle appeared 1887. Related: Fuddled; fuddling.


fuddy-duddy (n.)

old-fashioned person, 1871, American English, of uncertain origin.


fudge (v.)

put together clumsily or dishonestly, 1610s, perhaps an alteration of fadge make suit, fit (1570s),
of unknown origin. As an interjection meaning lies, nonsense from 1766; the noun meaning nonsense is
1791. It could be a natural extension from the verb. But Farmer suggests provincial French fuche,
feuche, an exclamation of contempt from Low German futsch = begone.  The traditional English story
traces fudge in this sense to a sailor's retort to anything considered lies or nonsense, from
Captain Fudge, who always brought home his owners a good cargo of lies [Isaac Disraeli, 1791, citing
a pamphlet from 1700]. It seems there really was a late 17c. Captain Fudge, called Lying Fudge, and
perhaps his name reinforced this form of fadge in the sense of contrive without the necessary
materials. The surname is from Fuche, a pet form of the masc. proper name Fulcher, from Germanic and
meaning literally people-army.


fudge (n.)

type of confection, 1895, American English, apparently a word first used among students at women's
colleges; perhaps a special use of fudge (v.).    'He lies,' answered Lord Etherington, 'so far as
he pretends I know of such papers. I consider the whole story as froth -- foam, fudge, or whatever
is most unsubstantial. ...' [Scott, St. Ronan's Well, 1823]


fuel (n.)

early 14c., from Old French foaile bundle of firewood, from Vulgar Latin legal term *focalia right
to demand material for making fire, neuter plural of Latin focalis pertaining to a hearth, from
focus hearth (see focus (n.)). Figurative use from 1570s.


fuel (v.)

1590s, from fuel (n.). Related: Fueled; fueling.


fug (n.)

thick, close, stuffy atmosphere, 1888.


fugacious (adj.)

fleeing, likely to flee, 1630s, from Latin fugaci-, stem of fugax apt to flee, timid, figuratively
transitory, fleeting, from fugere to flee (see fugitive) + -ous. Related: Fugaciously;
fugaciousness.


fugal (adj.)

1854, from fugue + -al (1).


fugitive

late 14c. (adjective and noun), from Old French fugitif, from Latin fugitivus fleeing (but commonly
used as a noun meaning runaway, fugitive slave, deserter), from past participle stem of fugere run
away, flee, from PIE root *bheug- (1) to flee (cognates: Greek pheugein to flee, Lithuanian bugstu
be frightened). Replaced Old English flyma.


fugly (adj.)

by 1995, a contraction of fucking ugly.


fugue (n.)

1590s, fuge, from Italian fuga ardor, literally flight, from Latin fuga act of fleeing, from fugere
to flee (see fugitive). Current spelling (1660s) is from the French version of the Italian word.   A
Fugue is a composition founded upon one subject, announced at first in one part alone, and
subsequently imitated by all the other parts in turn, according to certain general principles to be
hereafter explained. The name is derived from the Latin word fuga, a flight, from the idea that one
part starts on its course alone, and that those which enter later are pursuing it. [Fugue, Ebenezer
Prout, 1891]


Fuhrer (n.)

1934, from F&uuml;hrer und Reichskanzler, title assumed by Hitler in 1934 as head of the German
state, from German F&uuml;hrer leader, from f&uuml;hren to lead, from Middle High German v&uuml;eren
to lead, drive, from Old High German fuoren to set in motion, lead, causative of Old High German
faran to go, travel, which is cognate with Old English faran (see fare (v.)). Hitler's title was
modeled on Mussolini's Duce.


Fulbright

typically a reference to U.S. Sen. J. William Fulbright (1905-1995) of Arkansas, especially to the
Fulbright Act of 1946, which authorized proceeds from sales of U.S. war surplus materials to be used
to fund higher education overseas.


fulcrum (n.)

1670s, a prop, a support (on which a lever turns), from Latin fulcrum bedpost, from fulcire to prop
up, support (see balk).


fulfil (v.)

see fulfill. Related: fulfilment.


fulfill (v.)

Old English fullfyllan fill up, make full, from full + fyllan (see fill, which is ultimately from
the root of full). Used early of prophecy and perhaps a translation of Latin implere, adimplere.
Related: Fulfilled; fulfilling.


fulfillment (n.)

1775, from fulfill + -ment.


fulgent (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin fulgentem (nominative fulgens) shining, bright, present participle of fulgere
to shine (see fulminate).


full (adj.)

Old English full completely, full, perfect, entire, utter, from Proto-Germanic *fullaz (cognates:
Old Saxon full, Old Frisian ful, Old Norse fullr, Old High German fol, German voll, Gothic fulls),
from PIE *pele- (1) to fill (see poly-).    Adverbial sense was common in Middle English (full well,
full many, etc.). Related: Fuller; fullest. Full moon was Old English fulles monan; first record of
full-blood in relation to racial purity is from 1812. Full house is 1710 in the theatrical sense,
1887 in the poker sense.


full (v.)

to tread or beat cloth to cleanse or thicken it, late 14c., from Old French fouler, from Latin fullo
(see foil (v.)); Old English had the agent-noun fullere, probably directly from Latin fullo.


full time

also fulltime, full-time, 1898; full-timer is attested from 1868; see full (adj.) + time (n.).


full-blown (adj.)

1640s, of flowers, from full (adj.) + past participle of blow (v.2) to bloom. Figuratively complete,
fully developed from 1650s.  Blown that has blossomed is from Old English geblowenne. Full-blown
also was used 17c.-18c. of cheeks, sails, bladders and in this case is from blow (v.1) and the
figurative sense might also partake of these.


full-fledged (adj.)

1883 in figurative sense; see full (adj.) + fledge.


fuller (n.)

one who fulls cloth, Old English fullere, from Latin fullo fuller (see foil (v.)). The substance
called fuller's earth (silicate of alumina) is first recorded 1520s, so called because it was used
in cleansing cloth.


fullness (n.)

early 14c., from full (adj.) + -ness. Apparently not a survival of Old English fulnes.


fully (adv.)

Old English fullice entirely, perfectly, completely; see full (adj.) + -ly (2).


fulminant (adj.)

c.1600, from French fulminant or directly from Latin fulminantem (nominative fulminans), present
participle of fulminare (see fulminate). As a noun from 1808.


fulminate (v.)

early 15c., publish a 'thundering' denunciation, from Latin fulminatus, past participle of fulminare
hurl lightning, lighten, from fulmen (genitive fulminis) lightning flash, related to fulgere to
shine, flash, from PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Metaphoric sense (the original sense in English) is via its use in reference to a
formal ecclesiastical censure. Related: Fulminated; fulminating.


fulmination (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French fulmination, from Latin fulminationem (nominative fulminatio) discharge
of lightning, noun of action from past participle stem of fulminare (see fulminate).


fulsome (adj.)

Middle English compound of ful full (see full (adj.)) + -som (see -some (1)). Sense evolved from
abundant, full (mid-13c.) to plump, well-fed (mid-14c.) to overgrown, overfed (1640s) and thus, of
language, offensive to taste or good manners (1660s). Since the 1960s, however, it commonly has been
used in its original, favorable sense, especially in fulsome praise. Related: Fulsomely;
fulsomeness.


fumble (v.)

mid-15c., handle clumsily, possibly from Old Norse falma to fumble, grope. Similar words in
Scandinavian and North Sea Germanic suggest onomatopoeia from a sound felt to indicate clumsiness
(compare bumble, stumble, and obsolete English famble, fimble of roughly the same meaning). Related:
Fumbled; fumbling.


fumble (n.)

1640s, from fumble (v.).


fume (n.)

late 14c., from Old French fum smoke, steam, vapor, breath, from Latin fumus smoke, steam, fume
(source of Italian fumo, Spanish humo), from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, vapor, smoke; to rise in a cloud,
to fly about (like dust) (cognates: Sanskrit dhumah, Old Church Slavonic dymu, Lithuanian dumai, Old
Prussian dumis smoke, Middle Irish dumacha fog, Greek thymos spirit, mind, soul).


fume (v.)

c.1400, to fumigate, from Old French fumer, from Latin fumare to smoke, steam, from fumus smoke,
steam, fume (see fume (n.)). Figurative sense of show anger is first recorded 1520s. Related: Fumed;
fumes; fuming.


fumigate (v.)

1520s, back-formation from fumigation. Related: Fumigated; fumigating.


fumigation (n.)

late 14c., make aromatic smoke as part of a ceremony, from Old French fumigation, from Latin
fumigationem (nominative fumigatio) a smoking, noun of action from past participle stem of fumigare
to smoke, from fumus smoke, fume (see fume) + root of agere to drive (see act (n.)). Sense of
exposure (of someone or something) to aromatic fumes is c.1400, originally as a medicinal or
therapeutic treatment.


fun (n.)

diversion, amusement, 1727, earlier a cheat, trick (c.1700), from verb fun (1680s) to cheat, hoax,
of uncertain origin, probably a variant of Middle English fonnen befool (c.1400; see fond).
Stigmatized by Johnson as a low cant word. Older sense is preserved in phrase to make fun of (1737)
and funny money counterfeit bills (1938, though this may be more for the sake of the rhyme). See
also funny.


funambulist (n.)

rope-walker, 1793, coined from Latin funis rope + ambulare to walk (see amble (v.)).


function (n.)

1530s, proper work or purpose, from Middle French fonction (16c.) and directly from Latin functionem
(nominative functio) performance, execution, noun of action from functus, past participle of fungi
perform, execute, discharge, from PIE root *bheug- (2) to use, enjoy (see brook (v.)). Use in
mathematics probably begun by Leibnitz (1692).


function (v.)

1856, from function (n.). Related: Functioned; functioning.


functional (adj.)

1630s; as a term in architecture, utilitarian, 1928; see function (n.) + -al (1). Related:
Functionally; functionality.


functionalism (n.)

1914 as a term in social sciences; 1930 in architecture; from functional + -ism. Related:
functionalist.


functionary (n.)

one who has a certain function, 1791, from or patterned on French fonctionnaire, a word of the
Revolution; from Old French function (see function).


fund (n.)

1660s, from French fond a bottom, floor, ground (12c.), also a merchant's basic stock or capital,
from Latin fundus bottom, foundation, piece of land, from PIE root *bhudh- bottom, base (cognates:
Sanskrit budhnah, Greek pythmen foundation, bottom, Old English botm lowest part; see bottom (n.)).
Funds money at one's disposal is from 1728. Fund-raiser (also fundraiser) first attested 1957.


fund (v.)

1776, from fund (n.). Related: Funded; funding.


fundament (n.)

late 13c., buttocks, anus, from Old French fondement foundation, bottom; anus (12c.), from Latin
fundamentum a foundation, from fundare to found (see bottom). So called because it is where one
sits.Alle &thorn;e fil&thorn; of his magh ['maw'] salle breste out atte his fondament for drede.
[Cursor Mundi, early 14c.]


fundamental (adj.)

mid-15c., primary, original, pertaining to a foundation, modeled on Late Latin fundamentalis of the
foundation, from Latin fundamentum foundation (see fundament). Fundamentals primary principles or
rules of anything is from 1630s.


fundamentalist (adj.)

1920 in the religious sense (as is fundamentalism), from fundamental + -ist. Coined in American
English to name a movement among Protestants c.1920-25 based on scriptural inerrancy, etc., and
associated with William Jennings Bryan, among others.   Fundamentalist is said (by George McCready
Price) to have been first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws (1868-1946), editor of The Watchman
Examiner, a Baptist newspaper. The movement may have roots in the Presbyterian General Assembly of
1910, which drew up a list of five defining qualities of true believers which other evangelicals
published in a mass-circulation series of books called The Fundamentals. A World's Christian
Fundamentals Association was founded in 1918. The words reached widespread use in the wake of the
contentious Northern Baptist Convention of 1922 in Indianapolis.    Fundamentalism is a protest
against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity which seeks to discredit supernaturalism.
This rationalism, when full grown, scorns the miracles of the Old Testament, sets aside the virgin
birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the
New Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the fact that death did not end his
existence, and sweeps away the promises of his second coming as an idle dream. It matters not by
what name these modernists are known. The simple fact is that, in robbing Christianity of its
supernatural content, they are undermining the very foundations of our holy religion. They boast
that they are strengthening the foundations and making Christianity more rational and more
acceptable to thoughtful people. Christianity is rooted and grounded in supernaturalism, and when
robbed of supernaturalism it ceases to be a religion and becomes an exalted system of ethics. [Laws,
Herald &amp; Presbyter, July 19, 1922]    The original opposition to fundamentalist (within the
denominations) was modernist.    A new word has been coined into our vocabulary -- two new words --
'Fundamentalist' and 'Fundamentalism.' They are not in the dictionaries as yet -- unless in the very
latest editions. But they are on everyone's tongue. [Address Delivered at the Opening of the
Seminary, Sept. 20, 1922, by Professor Harry Lathrop Reed, Auburn Seminary Record]    Applied to
other religions, especially Islam, since 1957.


fundamentally (adv.)

c.1600, from fundamental + -ly (2).


fundus (n.)

from Latin fundus bottom (see fund (n.)).


funeral (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French fun&eacute;railles (plural) funeral rites (15c.), from Medieval Latin
funeralia funeral rites, originally neuter plural of Late Latin funeralis having to do with a
funeral, from Latin funus (genitive funeris) funeral, funeral procession, burial rites; death,
corpse, origin unknown, perhaps ultimately from PIE root *dheu- (3) to die. Singular and plural used
interchangeably in English until c.1700.


funerary (adj.)

1690s, from Late Latin funerarius, from funer-, root of funus (see funeral (n.)).


funereal (adj.)

1725, from funeral by influence of Middle French funerail, from Latin funereus of a funeral, from
funus funeral; death.


funest (adj.)

portending death, 1550s (implied in funestal), from Middle French funeste unlucky (14c.), from Latin
funestus causing death, destructive; mournful, from funus (see funeral (n.)).


fungal (adj.)

1835, from Modern Latin fungalis, from fungus (see fungus).


fungi (n.)

Latin plural of fungus.


fungible (adj.)

capable of being used in place of another, 1818, a word in law originally, from Medieval Latin
fungibilis, from Latin fungi perform, as in fungi vice to take the place (see function). Earlier as
a noun (1765).


fungicide (n.)

1889; see fungus + -cide.


fungo (n.)

1867, baseball slang, perhaps from dialectal fonge catch, a relic of Old English fon seize (see
fang), or possibly from the German cognate fangen. Not in OED 2nd ed. (1989).


fungous (adj.)

spongy, early 15c., from Latin fungosus, from fungus (see fungus).


fungus (n.)

1520s, from Latin fungus a mushroom, in English as a learned alternative to mushroom. (Funge was
used in this sense late 14c.) The Latin word is believed to be cognate with (or derived from) Greek
sphongos, the Attic form of spongos sponge (see sponge).


funicular (adj.)

1660s, from Latin funiculus, diminutive of funis a cord, rope.


funk (n.1)

depression, ill-humor, 1743, probably originally Scottish and northern English; earlier as a verb,
panic, fail through panic, (1737), said to be 17c. Oxford University slang, perhaps from Flemish
fonck perturbation, agitation, distress, possibly related to Old French funicle wild, mad.


funk (n.2)

bad smell, 1620s, from dialectal French funki&egrave;re smoke, from Old French fungier give off
smoke; fill with smoke, from Latin fumigare to smoke (see fume (n.)). In reference to a style of
music, it is first attested 1959, a back-formation from funky.


funky (adj.)

1784, old, musty, in reference to cheeses, then repulsive, from funk (n.2) + -y (2). It began to
develop an approving sense in jazz slang c.1900, probably on the notion of earthy, strong, deeply
felt. Funky also was used early 20c. by white writers in reference to body odor allegedly peculiar
to blacks. The word reached wider popularity c.1954 (it was defined in Time magazine, Nov. 8, 1954)
and in the 1960s acquired a broad slang sense of fine, stylish, excellent.


funnel (n.)

c.1400, from Middle French fonel, from Proven&ccedil;al enfounilh, a word from the Southern wine
trade [Weekley], from Late Latin fundibulum, shortened from Latin infundibulum a funnel or hopper in
a mill, from infundere pour in, from in- in + fundere pour (see found (v.2)).


funnel (v.)

1590s, from funnel (n.). Related: Funneled; funneling.


funnily (adv.)

1814, from funny + -ly (2).


funny (adj.)

humorous, 1756, from fun + -y (2). Meaning strange, odd is 1806, said to be originally U.S.
Southern. The two senses of the word led to the retort question funny ha-ha or funny peculiar, which
is attested from 1916. Related: Funnier; funniest. Funny farm mental hospital is slang from 1962.
Funny bone elbow end of the humerus is 1826; funnies newspaper comic strips is from 1852.


fur (n.)

late 14c. trimming or lining of a garment (implied c.1300 in surname Furhode fur hood), probably
from Old French fourrer to line, sheathe, from fuerre sheath, covering, from Frankish *fodr or
another Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *fodram sheath (cognates: Old Frisian foder coat
lining, Old High German fotar a lining, German Futter, Gothic fodr sword sheath).    Sense
transferred in English from the notion of a lining to the thing used in it. First applied early 15c.
to animal hair still on the animal.  I'le make the fur Flie 'bout the eares of the old Cur. [Butler,
Hudibras, 1663]  As a verb, from c.1300, from Old French fourrer. Related: Furred; furring.


furbelow (n.)

c.1700, alteration of falbala, from French falbala (17c., cognate with Proven&ccedil;al farbello),
from Italian falda fold, flap, pleat, from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *faldan, from PIE
*pel- (3) to fold (see fold (v.)). As a verb from 1701.


furbish (v.)

late 14c. (implied mid-13c. in surname Furbisher), from Old French forbiss-, present participle stem
of forbir to polish, burnish; mend, repair (12c., Modern French fourbir), from a Germanic source
(compare Old High German furban to polish), from PIE root *prep- to appear. Related: Furbished;
furbishing.


furcate (adj.)

forked, 1819, from Medieval Latin furcatus, from Latin furca (see fork). As a verb, from 1828
(implied in furcated).


furious (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French furieus (14c., Modern French furieux), from Latin furiosus full of rage,
mad, from furia rage, passion, fury. Furioso, from the Italian form of the word, was used in English
17c.-18c. for an enraged person, probably from Ariosto's Orlando Furioso.


furiously (adv.)

1550s, from furious + -ly (2).


furl (v.)

1550s, of uncertain origin, possibly from Middle French ferler to furl, from Old French ferliier
chain, tie up, lock away, perhaps from fer firm (from Latin firmus; see firm (adj.)) + -lier to bind
(from Latin ligare). Related: Furled; furling.


furlong (n.)

Old English furlang measure of distance of roughly 220 yards, originally the length of a furrow in
the common field of 10 acres, from furh furrow + lang long. The acre of the common field being
variously measured, the furlong was fixed 9c. on the classical stadium, one-eighth of a Roman mile.


furlough (n.)

1620s, vorloffe, from Dutch verlof, literally permission, from Middle Dutch ver- completely, for +
laf, lof permission, which is related to the second element in believe and to leave (n.).    The -gh
spelling developed by 1770s and represents an f that was once pronounced at the end of the word but
disappeared fairly soon thereafter in English.


furlough (v.)

1783, from furlough (n.). Related: Furloughed; furloughing.


furnace (n.)

early 13c., from Old French fornaise oven, furnace (12c.), from Latin fornacem (nominative fornax)
an oven, kiln, related to fornus, furnus oven, and to formus warm, from PIE root *gwher- warm
(cognates: Greek thermos, Old English wearm; see warm (adj.)).


furnish (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French furniss-, present participle stem of furnir furnish, accomplish, from
Old French fornir (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *fornire, alteration of *fromire, from West Germanic
*frumjan forward movement, advancement (source also of Old High German frumjan to do, execute,
provide), from Proto-Germanic *fram- forwards (see from). Meaning to provide (something) is from
1520s. Related: Furnished; furnishing.


furnished (adj.)

equipped, 1550s, past participle adjective from furnish. Of rooms, houses, etc. from 1640s.


furnishings (n.)

articles of furniture, c.1600, plural verbal noun from furnish (v.).


furniture (n.)

1520s, act of furnishing, from Middle French fourniture, from fournir furnish (see furnish). Sense
of chairs, tables, etc.; household stuff (1570s) is unique to English; most other European languages
derive their words for this from Latin mobile movable.


furor (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French fureur, from Latin furor a ravaging, rage, madness, passion; related
to furia rage, passion, fury (see fury).


furore (n.)

1790, Italian form of furor, borrowed originally in the sense enthusiastic, popular admiration; it
later descended to mean the same thing as furor and lost its usefulness.


furrier (n.)

late 13c., furrere, via Anglo-French, from Old French forreor, from fourrer to line or trim with
fur.


furrow (n.)

Old English furh furrow, trench, from Proto-Germanic *furkh- (cognates: Old Frisian furch furrow;
Middle Dutch vore, Dutch voor; German Furche furrow; Old Norse for furrow, drainage ditch), from PIE
*perk- (cognates: Latin porca ridge between two furrows, Old Irish -rech, Welsh rhych furrow). Some
scholars connect this word with Latin porcus, Eng. FARROW, assigning to the common root the sense
'to root like a swine.'  [OED]


furrow (v.)

early 15c., to plow, from furrow (n.). Meaning to make wrinkles in one's face, brow, etc. is from
1590s. Related: Furrowed; furrowing.


furry (adj.)

1670s, from fur + -y (2). As a noun, in reference to anthropomorphic animal characters with human
personalities, by 1996. Related: Furriness.


further (adv., adj.)

Old English fur&eth;or (adv.), fur&eth;ra (adj.), etymologically representing either forth-er or
fore-ther. The former would be from fur&eth;um (see forth) + comparative suffix *-eron-, *-uron-
(see also inner, outer).    Alternative etymology traces it to Proto-Germanic *fur&thorn;eron-, from
PIE *pr-tero (source also of Greek proteros former), from root of fore + comparative suffix also
found in after, other. Senses of in addition, to a greater extent are later metaphoric developments.


further (v.)

Old English (ge)fyr&eth;an further, impel; see further (adj.). Compare Middle Low German vorderen,
Old High German furdiran, German f&ouml;rdern. Related: Furthered; furthering.


furtherance (n.)

mid-15c., from further + -ance.


furthermore (adv.)

c.1200, from further + more.


furthest (adj.)

late 14c., formed to correspond to further (adj.).


furtive (adj.)

late 15c. (implied in furtively), from French furtif, from Latin furtivus stolen, hidden, secret,
from furtum theft, robbery, from fur (genitive furis) thief, probably from PIE *bhor-, from root
*bher- (1) to carry (see infer). Related: Furtiveness.


furtively (adv.)

late 15c.; from furtive + -ly (2).


furuncle (n.)

a boil, 1670s, from Latin furunculus, a boil, literally little thief, diminutive of fur thief.
Related: Furuncular; furunculous.


fury (n.)

late 14c., fierce passion, from Old French furie (14c.), from Latin furia violent passion, rage,
madness, related to furere to rage, be mad. Romans used Furi&aelig; to translate Greek Erinyes, the
collective name for the avenging deities sent from Tartarus to punish criminals (in later accounts
three in number and female). Hence, figuratively, an angry woman (late 14c.).


furze (n.)

evergreen shrub, Old English fyrs, of unknown origin, with no known connections.


fuscous (adj.)

dark-colored, 1660s, from Latin fuscus dark, swarthy (see dusk).


fuse (v.)

1680s, to melt (transitive), back-formation from fusion. Intransitive sense, to become liquid,
attested from 1800. Figurative sense of blend different things is first recorded 1817. Related:
Fused; fusing.


fuse (n.)

combustible cord or tube for lighting an explosive device, also fuze, 1640s, from Italian fuso
spindle (so called because the originals were long, thin tubes filled with gunpowder), from Latin
fusus spindle, of uncertain origin. Influenced by French fus&eacute;e spindleful of hemp fiber, and
obsolete English fusee musket fired by a fuse. Meaning device that breaks an electrical circuit
first recorded 1884, so named for its shape, but erroneously attributed to fuse (v.) because it
melts.


fusee (n.)

also fuzee, type of light musket, 1660s, from French fusil (see fusilier).


fuselage (n.)

1909, from French fuselage, from fusel&eacute; spindle-shaped, from Old French *fus spindle, from
Latin fusus spindle (see fuse (n.)). So called from its shape.


fusible (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French fusible, from Medieval Latin fusibilis, from Latin fus-, stem of fundere
pour, melt (see found (v.2)).


fusiform (adj.)

spindle-shaped, 1746, from Latin fusus spindle (see fuse (n.)) + -form.


fusil (n.)

flintlock musket, 1670s, from French fusil (see fusilier).


fusilier (n.)

1670s, soldier armed with a musket, from French fusilier, from Old French fusil musket, earlier
steel for a tinderbox, from Vulgar Latin *focilis (petra) (stone) producing fire, from Latin focus
hearth, in Vulgar Latin fire (see focus (n.)). Retained by certain regiments of the British army
that were formerly armed with fusils.


fusillade (n.)

simultaneous discharge of firearms, 1801, from French fusillade, from fusiller to shoot, from fusil
musket (see fusilier). As a verb from 1816.


fusion (n.)

1550s, from Middle French fusion, from Latin fusionem (nominative fusio) an outpouring, effusion,
noun of action from fusus, past participle of fundere pour, melt (see found (v.2)). In nuclear
physics sense, first recorded 1947; in jazz sense, by 1972.


fuss (n.)

1701, perhaps an alteration of force, or imitative of bubbling or sputtering sounds, or from Danish
fjas foolery, nonsense. First attested in Anglo-Irish writers, but no obvious connections to Irish.
To make a fuss was earlier to keep a fuss (1726).


fuss (v.)

1792, from fuss (n.). Related: Fussed; fussing.


fussbudget (n.)

1904, from fuss (n.) + budget (n.). One of several similar formulations around this time: Compare
fussbox (1901); fusspot (1921).


fussy (adj.)

1831, from fuss (n.) + -y (2). Related: Fussily; fussiness.


fustian (n.)

thick cotton cloth, c.1200, from Old French fustaigne, from Medieval Latin fustaneum, probably from
Latin fustis staff, stick of wood, probably a loan-translation of Greek xylina lina linens of wood
(i.e. cotton), but the Medieval Latin word also is sometimes said to be from Fostat, town near Cairo
where this cloth was manufactured. [Klein finds this derivation untenable.] Figurative sense of
pompous, inflated language recorded by 1590s.


fusty (adj.)

stale-smelling, late 14c., from Old French fust&eacute; fusty, tasting of the cask, from Old French
fuist wine cask, originally stick, stave, from Latin fustis staff, stick of wood. Related:
Fustiness.


futhorc (n.)

1851, historians' name for the Germanic runic alphabet; so called from its first six letters, on the
model of alphabet.


futile (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French futile, from Latin futilis vain, worthless, futile, literally pouring out
easily (of a vessel), hence easily emptied, leaky, unreliable, from base of fundere pour, melt, from
PIE root *gheu- to pour (see found (v.2)). Related: Futilely.


futility (n.)

1620s, from French futilit&eacute; or directly from Latin futilitatem (nominative futilitas)
worthlessness, from futilis (see futile). Hence, jocular futilitarian (1827).


futon (n.)

1876, from Japanese, said to mean bedroll or place to rest.


future (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French futur, from Latin futurus going to be, yet to be, as a noun, the future,
irregular suppletive future participle of esse to be, from PIE *bheue- (see be). The English noun
(late 14c.) is modeled on Latin futura, neuter plural of futurus.


futures (n.)

goods sold on agreement for future delivery, 1880; see future.


futurism (n.)

1909, from Italian futurismo, coined 1909 by Italian poet Filippo Tommaso Marinetti (1876-1944); see
future + -ism. Futurist is attested from 1842, originally theological.


futuristic (adj.)

1915, avant garde, from futurism. Meaning pertaining to the future is from 1958, from future +
-istic.


futurity (n.)

c.1600, from future + -ity.


futurology (n.)

1946, from future + -ology.


futz (v.)

loaf, waste time, 1932, American English, perhaps from Yiddish. Related: Futzed; futzing.


fuze (n.)

see fuse (n.).


fuzz (n.)

1590s, fusse, first attested in fusball puff ball of tiny spores, of uncertain origin. Meaning the
police is American English, 1929, underworld slang, origin and connection to the older word unknown.
Perhaps a variant of fuss, with a notion of hard to please.


fuzzy (adj.)

1610s, soft, spongy, from fuzz + -y (2). Compare Low German fussig weak, loose, spongy, Dutch voos
spongy. From 1713 as covered with fuzz; 1778 as blurred; and 1937 as imprecise, with reference to
thought, etc. Related: Fuzzily; fuzziness.


fylfot (n.)

supposedly a native name for the swastika (used as a decorative device), but only attested in a
single, damaged c.1500 manuscript, and there it may refer to any sort of device used to fill the
bottom (foot) of a design. [I]t is even possible that it may have been a mere nonce-word [OED].


