-gamous

word-forming element meaning marrying, from Greek gamos marriage (see gamete) + -ous.


-gamy

word-forming element meaning marriage; fertilization, from Greek -gamia, from gamos marriage (see
gamete).


-gate

suffix attached to any word to indicate scandal involving, 1973, abstracted from Watergate, the
Washington, D.C., building complex, home of the National Headquarters of the Democratic Party when
it was burglarized June 17, 1972, by operatives later found to be working for the staff and re-
election campaign of U.S. President Richard Nixon.


-gen

word-forming element technically meaning something produced, but mainly, in modern use, thing that
produces or causes, from French -g&egrave;ne (18c.), from Greek -genes born of, produced by, related
to genos birth (see genus). Originally in late 18th century chemistry and probably reflecting
misunderstanding of -genes, as though it meant that which produces.


-genic

word-forming element meaning producing; see -gen + -ic.


-genous

word-forming element meaning generating, producing, yielding; see -gen + -ous.


-geny

word-forming element meaning genesis, origin, production, from French -g&eacute;nie, from Greek
-geneia, from genes born, produced (see genus).


-gram

suffix from telegram (1852), first abstracted 1979 (in Gorillagram, a proprietary name in U.S.), and
put to wide use in forming new words, such as stripagram (1981). The construction violates Greek
grammar, as an adverb could not properly form part of a compound noun.


-graph

word-forming element meaning instrument for recording; something written, from Greek graphe writing,
from graphein to write, express by written characters, earlier to draw, represent by lines drawn
(see -graphy).


-graphy

word-forming element meaning process of writing or recording or a writing, recording, or
description, from French or German -graphie, from Greek -graphia description of, from graphein
write, express by written characters, earlier to draw, represent by lines drawn, originally to
scrape, scratch (on clay tablets with a stylus), from PIE root *gerbh- to scratch, carve (see
carve). In modern use, especially in forming names of descriptive sciences.


G

for history of the letter's development, see C. As a movie rating in the U.S., 1966, standing for
general. Standing for gravity in physics since 1785.


g spot (n.)

also g-spot, 1981, short for Gr&auml;fenberg spot, named for German gynecologist Ernst
Gr&auml;fenberg (1881-1957), who described it in 1950.


G-man (n.)

FBI agent, 1930, shortening of government man; used earlier in an Irish context (1917), but the
abbreviation is perhaps the same one.


G-string (n.)

1878, geestring, loincloth worn by American Indian, originally the string that holds it up,
etymology unknown. The spelling with G (1882) is perhaps from influence of violin string tuned to a
G (in this sense G string is first recorded 1831), the lowest and heaviest of the violin strings.
First used of women's attire 1936, with reference to strip-teasers.    I AM the spirit of the silver
G:  I am silvered sadness,  I am moonlit gladness,  I am that fine madness  Of reverence half, and
half of ecstasy  [from Spirit of the 'G' String, Alfred L. Donaldson, in Songs of My Violin, 1901]


G.I.

also GI, 1936 as an adjective meaning U.S. Army equipment, American English, apparently an
abbreviation of Government Issue, and applied to anything associated with servicemen. Transferred
sense of U.S. Army soldier arose during World War II (first recorded 1943), apparently from the
jocular notion that the men themselves were manufactured by the government.    An earlier G.I.
(1908) was an abbreviation of galvanized iron, especially in G.I. can, a type of metal trash can;
the term was picked up by U.S. soldiers in World War I as slang for a similar-looking type of German
artillery shells. But it is highly unlikely that this G.I. came to mean soldier. No two sources seem
to agree on the entire etymology, but none backs the widespread notion that it stands for *General
Infantry. GI Joe any U.S. soldier attested from 1942 (date in OED is a typo).


gab (v.)

to reproach, c.1200, via Scottish and northern England dialect, from a Scandinavian source, such as
Old Norse gabba to mock, or from Old French gabber mock, boast, both perhaps ultimately imitative.
Related: Gabbed; gabbing. Meaning to talk much is from 1786, probably a back-formation from gabble.


gab (n.)

early 14c., mockery, from Old French gab, from gaber (see gab (v.)); meaning idle talk is by 1737.
Gift of the gab talent for speaking is from 1680s.


gabardine (n.)

1590s, dress, covering, variant of gaberdine. Meaning closely woven cloth is from 1904.


gabble (n.)

c.1600, from gabble (v.).


gabble (v.)

1570s, frequentative of gab (v.), or else imitative. Related: Gabbled; gabbling.


gabbro (n.)

type of igneous rock, 1837, from Italian (Tuscan) gabbro, from Latin glaber bare, smooth, bald (see
glad).


gabby (adj.)

garrulous, talkative, 1710, originally Scottish, from gab (n.) + -y (2). Related: Gabbiness.


Gabe

masc. proper name, usually short for Gabriel.


gaberdine (n.)

long, loose outer garment, 1510s, from Spanish gabardina, from Middle French galverdine, which is
perhaps from Middle High German wallevart pilgrimage (German Wallfahrt) in the sense of pilgrim's
cloak (from Old High German wallon to roam; see gallant (adj.) + faran to go, travel; see fare
(v.)). The Spanish form perhaps influenced by gab&aacute;n overcoat and tabardina coarse coat.


gabfest (n.)

session of conversation, 1895, American English colloquial, from gab + -fest.


gable (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French gable facade, front, gable, from Old Norse gafl gable, gable-end (in north
of England, the word probably is directly from Norse), probably from Proto-Germanic *gablaz top of a
pitched roof (cognates: Middle Dutch ghevel, Dutch gevel, Old High German gibil, German Giebel,
Gothic gibla gable), from PIE *ghebhel.    Cognates seem to be words meaning both fork (such as Old
English gafol, geafel, Old Saxon gafala, Dutch gaffel, Old High German gabala pitchfork, German
Gabel fork; Old Irish gabul forked twig) and head (such as Old High German gibilla, Old Saxon
gibillia skull).    Possibly the primitive meaning of the words may have been 'top', 'vertex'; this
may have given rise to the sense of 'gable', and this latter to the sense of 'fork', a gable being
originally formed by two pieces of timber crossed at the top supporting the end of the roof-tree.
[OED]    Related: Gabled; gables.


Gabriel

masc. proper name, also name of an Old Testament angel, from Hebrew Gabhri el, literally man of God,
from gebher man + El God. First element is from base of verb gabhar was strong (compare Arabic jabr
strong, young man; jabbar tyrant).


gad (v.)

to rove about, mid-15c., perhaps a back-formation from Middle English gadeling (Old English
g&aelig;deling) kinsman, fellow, companion in arms, but which had a deteriorated sense of rogue,
vagabond by c.1300 (it also had a meaning wandering, but this is attested only from 16c.); or else
it should be associated with gad (n.) a goad for driving cattle. Related: Gadding.


gad (n.)

goad, metal rod, early 13c., from Old Norse gaddr spike, nail, from Proto-Germanic *gadaz pointed
stick (see yard (n.2)).


gadabout (n.)

1837, from earlier phrase gadder about (1560s); see gad (v.) + about (adv.).


gadfly (n.)

1620s, fly which bites cattle, probably from gad (n.) goad, metal rod, here in the sense of stinger;
but the sense is entangled with gad (v.) and another early meaning of gadfly was someone who likes
to go about, often stopping here and there (1610s). Sense of one who irritates another is from 1640s
(equivalent of Latin oestrus).


gadget (n.)

1886, gadjet (but said to date back to 1850s), sailors' slang word for any small mechanical thing or
part of a ship for which they lacked, or forgot, a name; perhaps from French g&acirc;chette
catchpiece of a mechanism (15c.), diminutive of g&acirc;che staple of a lock.


gadolinium

metallic element, named 1886 by J.C. Marginac in honor of Johan Gadolin (1760-1852), Finnish
mineralogist and chemist, who in 1794 first began investigation of the earth which eventually
yielded this element and several others.


gadzooks (interj.)

1690s, a condensed form of some exclamation, possibly God's hooks (nails of the cross) or even God's
hocks. Compare godsookers (1670s). The use of Gad for God (as in egad) is first attested 1590s.
Among other similar phraseological combinations (all from 17c.) were gadsbobs, gadslid, and
gadsniggers; in all of which the second elements are sometimes said to be mere fanciful syllables.


Gaea

see Gaia.


Gael (n.)

1810, from Scottish Gaelic Gaidheal member of the Gaelic race, corresponding to Old Irish Goidhel
(compare Latin Gallus). The native name in both Ireland and Scotland, Gael was first used in English
exclusively of Scottish Highlanders.


Gaelic

1774 (adj.); 1775 (n.), earlier Gathelik (1590s), from Gael (Scottish Gaidheal; see Gael) + -ic.


gaff (n.1)

iron hook, c.1300, gaffe, from Old French gaffe boat hook (see gaffe). Specifically of the hook on a
fishing spear from 1650s.


gaff (n.2)

loud, rude talk, 1825, from Scottish dialect, perhaps a survival of Old English gafspr&aelig;c
blasphemous or ribald speech, or from gaff (n.1), and compare gaffe.


gaff (n.3)

cheap music hall or theater; place of amusement for the lowest classes, 1850s, British slang,
earlier a fair (1753), of unknown origin.


gaffe (n.)

blunder, 1909, perhaps from French gaffe clumsy remark, originally boat hook, from Middle French
gaffe (15c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al gaf, probably from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*gafa. Sense connection is obscure; the gaff was used to land big fish. Or it may derive from
British slang gaff to cheat, trick (1893); or gaff criticism (1896), from Scottish dialect sense of
loud, rude talk (see gaff (n.2)).


gaffer (n.)

1580s, elderly rustic, apparently a contraction of godfather (compare gammer); originally old man,
it was applied from 1841 to foremen and supervisors, which sense carried over 20c. to electrician in
charge of lighting on a film set.


gag (v.)

mid-15c., to choke, strangle, possibly imitative or influenced by Old Norse gaghals with head thrown
back. The sense of stop a person's mouth is first attested c.1500. Related: Gagged; gagging.


gag (n.1)

joke, 1863, probably related to theatrical sense of matter interpolated in a written piece by the
actor (1847); or from the sense made-up story (1805); or from slang verbal sense of to deceive, take
in with talk (1777), all perhaps on notion of stuff, fill (see gag (v.)).


gag (n.2)

act of gagging, 1550s, from gag (v.); figurative use from 1620s.


gaga (adj.)

crazy, silly, 1920, probably from French gaga senile, foolish, probably imitative of meaningless
babbling.


gage (n.)

pledge, c.1300, from Old French gage pledge (of battle), security, guarantee (11c.), from Frankish
*wadja-, from Proto-Germanic *wadi- (see wed). Italian gaggio, Spanish and Portuguese gage are
French loan-words. The verb is late 15c., from French gager. Related: Gaged, gaging.


gage (v.)

see gauge. The spelling variants gauge and gage have existed since the first recorded uses in Middle
English, though in American English gage is found exclusively in technical uses [Barnhart]. Related:
Gaged; gaging.


gaggle (n.)

late 15c., gagyll, with reference to both geese and women. Barnhart says possibly from Old Norse
gagl small goose, gosling, bird; OED calls it one of the many artificial terms invented in the 15th
c. as distinctive collectives referring to particular animals or classes of persons. Possibly of
imitative origin (compare Dutch gagelen to chatter; Middle English gaggle to cackle, used of geese,
attested from late 14c.).


Gaia

Earth as a goddess, from Greek Gaia, spouse of Uranus, mother of the Titans, personification of gaia
earth, as opposed to heaven, land, as opposed to sea, a land, country, soil, a collateral form of ge
(Dorian ga) earth, of unknown origin, perhaps pre-Indo-European. The Roman equivalent goddess of the
earth was Tellus (see tellurian), sometimes used in English poetically or rhetorically for Earth
personified or the Earth as a planet.


gaiety (n.)

1630s, from French gaiet&eacute;, from gai gay (see gay). In the 1890s, especially with reference to
a London theater of that name, and the kind of musical shows and dancing girls found there.


Gail

fem. proper name, in some cases short for Abigail, or from the Hebrew root in that name meaning
rejoicing. Attained its greatest popularity in U.S. as a given name for girls born c.1945-1955.


gaily (adj.)

also gayly, late 14c., from Middle English gai (see gay) + -ly (2). The spelling gaily is the more
common, and is supported by the only existing analogy, that of daily [OED].


gain (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French gain, from Old French gaaigne gain, profit, advantage; booty; arable
land (12c.), from gaaignier to gain (see gain (v.)). The original French sense enfolded the notions
of profit from agriculture and booty, prey. Implied earlier in Middle English gaignage (late 14c.)
profit from agriculture.


gain (v.)

1520s, from Middle French gagner, from Old French gaaignier to earn, gain; trade; capture, win, also
work in the fields, cultivate land, from Frankish *waidanjan hunt, forage, also graze, pasture, from
Proto-Germanic *wartho hunting ground (cognates: Old English wa&thorn; hunting, German Weide
pasture, pasturage, Old Norse vei&eth;r hunting, catch of fish), from PIE *weie- to strive after,
pursue with vigor, desire (see venison). Related: Gained; gaining; gainer. To gain on advance nearer
is from 1719. To gain ground (1620s) was originally military.


gainful (adj.)

1540s (implied in gainfully), from gain + -ful. Phrase gainfully employed attested from 1796.


gainsay (v.)

contradict, c.1300, literally say against, from Old English gegn- against (see again) + say (v.).
Solitary survival of a once common prefix [Weekley], which was used to form such now-obsolete
compounds as gain-taking taking back again, gainclap a counterstroke, gainbuy redeem, and gainstand
to oppose. Related: Gainsaid; gainsaying.


gainst

shortened form of against.


gait (n.)

c.1300, gate a going or walking, departure, journey, earlier way, road, path (c.1200), from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse gata way, road, path), cognate with Old High German gazza
street, German Gasse, Gothic gatwo. Meaning manner of walking is from mid-15c. Modern spelling
developed before 1750, originally in Scottish. Related: Gaited.


gaiter (n.)

leather cover for the ankle, 1775, perhaps from French gu&ecirc;tre belonging to peasant attire,
from Middle French *guestre, probably from Frankish *wrist instep, from Proto-Germanic *wirstiz
(source also of German Rist instep; see wrist). Related: Gaiters.


gal (n.)

slang pronunciation of girl, 1795, execrated as a Cockney vulgarism. Gal Friday is 1940, in
reference to Robinson Crusoe.


gala (n.)

1620s, festive dress or attire, from French en gala, perhaps from Old French gale merriment, from
galer rejoice, make merry (see gallant). Klein suggests the French word is from Italian gala (as in
phrase vestito di gala robe of state), perhaps from Arabic khil'a fine garment given as a
presentation. Sense of festive occasion (characterized by display of finery) first recorded 1777.


galactic (adj.)

1839, of the Milky Way, from Late Latin galacticus, from galaxias (see galaxy). In modern scientific
sense pertaining to (our) galaxy, from 1849.


Galapagos

islands named for the tortoises (Spanish galapagos) who live there; discovered by Europeans in 1535.


Galatians

from Galatia, region in Asia Minor, from Greek Galatia, based on Gaul, in reference to the Gaulish
people who conquered the region and settled there 3c. B.C.E.


galavant (v.)

variant of gallivant. Related: Galavanted; galavanting.


galaxy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French galaxie, from Late Latin galaxias Milky Way, from Greek galaxias (adj.),
in galaxias kyklos, literally milky circle, from gala (genitive galaktos) milk (see lactation). The
technical astronomical sense emerged 1848. Figurative sense of brilliant assembly of persons is from
1580s. Milky Way is a translation of Latin via lactea.See yonder, lo, the Galaxy&#235; Which men
clepeth the Milky Wey, For hit is whyt. [Chaucer, House of Fame]  Astronomers began to speculate by
mid-19c. that some of the spiral nebulae they could see in telescopes were actually immense and
immensely distant structures the size and shape of the Milky Way. But the matter was not settled
until the 1920s.


Galbraith

surname, from Old Gaelic Gall-Bhreathnach stranger-Briton, a name given to Britons settled among
Gaels.


gale (n.)

storm at sea, 1540s, from gaile wind, origin uncertain, perhaps from Old Norse gol breeze, or Old
Danish gal bad, furious (often used of weather), from Old Norse galinn bewitched. Or perhaps it is
from Old English galan to sing (the second element in nightingale), or giellan to yell. In technical
meteorological use, a wind between 32 and 63 miles per hour.


galena (n.)

lead ore, lead sulphide, c.1600, from Latin galena mix of silver and lead; dross from smelting lead,
of unknown origin.


Galicia

region in Central Europe, perhaps ultimately from Lithuanian galas end, peak, in reference to the
Carpathian Mountains which rise there, or from the root of Gaul. The region in northwestern Spain of
the same name is perhaps from the Celtic root cala watercourse, or else it, too, might be from Gaul.


Galilee

northernmost province of Palestine, late 12c., from Latin Galilaea, Greek Galilaia, from Hebrew
Haggalil, literally The District, a compressed form of Gelil haggoyim the District of Nations (see
Isa. viii:23). The adjective Galilean is used both of Christ (1630s), who was born there, and of the
Italian astronomer Galileo (1727).


gall (n.1)

bile, Old English galla (Anglian), gealla (West Saxon) gall, bile, from Proto-Germanic *gallon- bile
(cognates: Old Norse gall, Old Saxon, Old High German galla, German Galle), from PIE root *ghel- (2)
to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold, and bile or gall (see glass).
Informal sense of impudence, boldness first recorded American English 1882; but meaning embittered
spirit, rancor is from c.1200, from the medieval theory of humors. Gall bladder recorded from 1670s.


gall (n.2)

sore spot on a horse, Old English gealla painful swelling, from Latin galla gall, lump on plant,
originally oak apple, of uncertain origin. Perhaps from or influenced by gall (1) on notion of
poison-sore. German galle, Dutch gal also are from Latin.


gall (v.)

to make sore by chafing, mid-15c., from gall (n.2). Earlier to have sores, be sore (early 14c.).
Figurative sense of harass, irritate is from 1570s. Related: Galled; galling.


Gallagher

surname, from Irish Gallchobhar foreign-help.


gallant (n.)

man of fashion and pleasure, mid-15c., earlier dissolute man, rake (early 15c.); from gallant
(adj.).


gallant (adj.)

mid-15c., showy, finely dressed; gay, merry, from Old French galant courteous, earlier amusing,
entertaining; lively, bold (14c.), present participle of galer rejoice, make merry, generally held
to be from Latinized verb form of Frankish *wala- good, well, from Proto-Germanic *wal- (source also
of Old High German wallon to wander, go on a pilgrimage), from PIE root *wel- (2) to wish, will (see
will (v.)), but the transition of sense offers difficulties that are not fully cleared up [OED].
Sense of politely attentive to women was adopted 17c. from French.


gallantly (adv.)

1550s, showily, from gallant + -ly (2). Meaning with exaggerated courtesy is from 1610s.


gallantry (n.)

1590s, fine appearance, from French galanterie (16c.), from Old French galant (see gallant). Meaning
gallant behavior is from 1630s. Middle English had gallantness merriment, gaiety, high living (late
15c.).


galleon (n.)

large ship, 1520s, from Old French galion little ship (13c.), from Spanish gale&oacute;n galleon,
armed merchant ship, from Byzantine Greek galea galley (see galley) + augmentative suffix -on. In
English use, especially of Spanish ships involved in the American trade.


galleria (n.)

Italian form of gallery.


gallery (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French galerie a long portico (14c.), from Medieval Latin galeria, of uncertain
origin, perhaps an alteration of galilea church porch, which is probably from Latin Galilaea
Galilee, the northernmost region of Palestine (see Galilee); church porches sometimes were so called
from being at the far end of the church.  Super altare Beat&aelig; Mari&aelig; in occidentali porte
ejusdem ecclesi&aelig; qu&aelig; Galil&aelig; a vocatur. [c.1186 charter in Durham Cathedral]  Sense
of building to house art first recorded 1590s; that of people who occupy a (theater) gallery
(contrasted with gentlemen of the pit) first by Lovelace, 1640s, hence to play to the gallery
(1867).


galley (n.)

c.1300, from Old French galie, from Medieval Latin galea or Catalan galea, from Late Greek galea, of
unknown origin. The word has made its way into most Western European languages. Originally low,
flat-built seagoing vessel of one deck, once common in the Mediterranean; meaning cooking range on a
ship dates from 1750. The printing sense is from 1650s, from French gal&eacute;e in the same sense,
in reference to the shape of the oblong tray that holds the type. As a short form of galley-proof it
is attested from 1890.


galleywest

as a destination where you knock something or someone, American English slang, by 1835; considered
by OED to be a corruption of western England dialectal collyweston, name of a village in
Northamptonshire (Colin's West Farmstead) that somehow came to signify askew, not right. But Farmer
calls it an Americanism and goes in for it as an indefinite superlative, and DAS also does not
consider the obscure English term to be the source. Early nautical references suggest it might
simply be what it looks like: a sailor's generic way of indicating something has been thrown pretty
far by impact.     Matter? why d--n my old shoes, Captain Williams, here is one of that bloody Don
Dego's shot gone right through the galley-door, and through the side of the big copper, and knocked
all the beef and hot water galley-west. ... [N.Ames, Old Sailor's Yarns, New York, 1835]


Gallic (adj.)

1670s, from Latin Gallicus pertaining to Gaul or the Gauls, from Latin Gallia Gaul and Gallus a Gaul
from a native Celtic name (see Gaelic), though some connect the word with prehistoric West Germanic
*walkhoz foreigners (see Welsh). Originally used in English rhetorically or mockingly for French.
The cock as a symbol of France is based on the pun of Gallus a Gaul and Latin gallus cock (see
gallinaceous).    It means not simply 'French,' but 'characteristically', 'delightfully',
'distressingly', or 'amusingly' 'French' ... not 'of France', but 'of the typical Frenchman'.
[Fowler]


Gallicism (n.)

French word or idiom, 1650s, from Gallic + -ism.


gallimaufry (n.)

a medley, 1550s, from French galimafr&eacute;e hash, ragout, from Old French calimafree sauce made
of mustard, ginger, and vinegar; a stew of carp (14c.), origin unknown, perhaps from Old French
galer to make merry, live well (see gallant) + Old North French mafrer to eat much, from Middle
Dutch maffelen [Klein]. Weekley sees in the second element the proper name Maufr&eacute;.


gallinaceous (adj.)

of or resembling domestic fowl, 1783, from Latin gallinaceus, from gallina hen, a fem. formation
from gallus cock, probably from PIE root *gal- (2) to call, shout (see call (v.)) as the calling
bird. But it also has an ancient association with Gaul (see Gallic), and some speculate that this is
the source of the word, on the assumption that the Romans became acquainted with the cock from Gaul,
where it was brought by the Phoenicians [Buck].


galling (adj.)

irritating, offensive, 1580s, figurative use of present participle of gall (v.).


gallium (n.)

metalic element, discovered by spectral lines in 1875 by French chemist Lecoq de Boisbaudran
(1838-1912), who named it apparently in honor of his homeland (see Gallic), but it has been
suggested that he also punned on his own name (compare Latin gallus cock).


gallivant (v.)

1809, of uncertain origin, perhaps a playful elaboration of gallant in an obsolete verbal sense of
play the gallant, flirt, gad about. Related: Gallivanted; gallivanting.    Young Lobski said to his
ugly wife,  I'm off till to-morrow to fish, my life;  Says Mrs. Lobski, I'm sure you a'nt,  But you
brute you are going to gallivant.    What Mrs. Lobski said was right, Gay Mr. Lobski was out all
night.  He ne'er went to fish, 'tis known very well  But where he went I shall not tell.  [Songs
from the Exile, in Literary Panorama, London, 1809]


Gallo-Roman (adj.)

belonging to Gaul when it was part of the Roman Empire, from comb. form of Gaul + Roman. In
reference to a language, and as a noun, it means the language spoken in France from the end of the
fifth century C.E. to the middle of the ninth, a form of Vulgar Latin with local modifications and
additions from Gaulish that then developed into what linguists call Old French.


gallon (n.)

liquid measure, late 13c., from Old North French galon, corresponding to Old French jalon liquid
measure, related to jale bowl, from Medieval Latin diminutive form galleta bucket, pail, also a
measure of wine, of unknown origin, perhaps from Gaulish galla vessel.


gallop (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French galoper (12c.), cognate of Old North French waloper, from Frankish
*wala hlaupan to run well (see wallop). Related: Galloped; galloping.


gallop (n.)

1520s, from gallop (v.).


gallow

singular of gallows.


Galloway

district in southwestern Scotland, Medieval Latin Gallovidia, from Welsh Gallwyddel, Irish
Gallgaidhil, literally foreign Gaels. The adjective Galwegian is on analogy of Norwegian.


gallows (n.)

c.1300, plural of Middle English galwe gallows (mid-13c.), from Old Norse galgi gallows, or from Old
English galga (Mercian), gealga (West Saxon) gallows; all from Proto-Germanic *galgon- pole
(cognates: Old Frisian galga, Middle High German galge gallows, cross, German Galgen gallows, Gothic
galga cross), from PIE *ghalgh- branch, rod (cognates: Lithuanian zalga pole, perch, Armenian dzalk
pole). In Old English, also used of the cross of the crucifixion. Plural because made of two poles.


gallstone (n.)

1758, from gall (n.1) + stone (n.).


Gallup poll

1940, from George H. Gallup (1901-1984), U.S. journalist and statistician, who in 1935 set up the
American Institute of Public Opinion.


galoot (n.)

awkward or boorish man, 1812, nautical, raw recruit, green hand, apparently originally a sailor's
contemptuous word for soldiers or marines, of uncertain origin. Dictionary of American Slang
proposes galut, Sierra Leone creole form of Spanish galeoto galley slave.


galore (adj.)

1670s, from Irish go le&oacute;r, corresponding to Gaelic gu le&oacute;ir sufficiently, enough. The
particle go/gu usually means to, but it also is affixed to adjectives to form adverbs, as here.


galoshes (n.)

mid-14c., kind of footwear consisting of a wooden sole fastened onto the foot with leather thongs,
perhaps from Old French galoche (singular), from Late Latin gallicula, diminutive of gallica (solea)
a Gallic (sandal) [Klein]. Alternative etymology [Barnhart, Hatz.-Darm.] is from Vulgar Latin
*galopia, from Greek kalopodion, diminutive of kalopous shoemaker's last, from kalon wood + pous
foot (see foot (n.)). The surname Galocher is attested from c.1300. Modern meaning rubber covering
of a boot or shoe is from 1853.


galumph (v.)

to prance about in a self-satisfied manner, 1872, coined by Lewis Carroll in Jabberwocky, apparently
by blending gallop and triumph. Related: Galumphing.


galvanic (adj.)

1797; see galvanism + -ic.


galvanise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of galvanize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Galvanised;
galvanising.


galvanism (n.)

electricity produced by chemical action, 1797, from French galvanisme or Italian galvanismo, from
Italian physicist Luigi Galvani (1737-1798) who discovered it c.1792 while running currents through
the legs of dead frogs.


galvanization (n.)

1798, noun of action from galvanize.


galvanize (v.)

1802, from French galvaniser, from galvanisme (see galvanism). Figurative sense of excite, stimulate
(as if by electricity) first recorded 1853. Meaning to coat with metal by means of galvanic
electricity (especially to plate iron with tin, but now typically to plate it with zinc) is from
1839.He'll swear that in her dancing she cuts all others out,Though like a Gal that's galvanized,
she throws her legs about.[Thomas Hood, Love has not Eyes, 1845]  Related: Galvanized; galvanizing.


galvanometer (n.)

1802, from comb. form of galvanism + -meter.


gam (n.)

a leg, 1781, see gams.


Gamaliel

masc. proper name, from Greek Gamaliel, from Hebrew Gamli'el, literally reward of God.


gambit (n.)

chess opening in which a pawn is risked for advantage later, 1650s, gambett, from Italian gambetto,
literally a tripping up (as a trick in wrestling), from gamba leg, from Late Latin gamba (see
gambol). Applied to chess openings in Spanish in 1561 by Ruy Lopez, who traced it to the Italian
word, but the form in Spanish generally was gambito, which led to French gambit, which has
influenced the English spelling of the word. Broader sense of opening move meant to gain advantage
in English is recorded from 1855.


gamble (v.)

1726 (implied in gambling), from a dialectal survival of Middle English gammlen, variant of gamenen
to play, jest, be merry, from Old English gamenian to play, joke, pun, from gamen (see game). Or
possibly gamble is from a derivative of gamel to play games (1590s), itself likely a frequentative
from game. Originally regarded as a slang word. The intrusive -b- may be from confusion with gambol.
Related: Gambled; gambling.


gamble (n.)

risky venture, 1823, from gamble (v.).


gambler (n.)

1747, agent noun from gamble (v.).


gambol (n.)

frolic, merrymaking, 1590s, originally gambolde a leap or spring (c.1500), from Middle French
gambade (15c.), from Late Latin gamba horse's hock or leg, from Greek kampe a bending (on notion of
a joint), from PIE *kamp- to bend (see campus).


gambol (v.)

1580s; earlier gambade (c.1500), from Middle French gambader, from gambade (see gambol (n.)).
Related: Gamboled; gamboling; gambolling.


gambrel (n.)

hipped roof, 1851, short for gambrel roof, so called for its shape, from gambrel horse's hind leg
(c.1600), earlier wooden bar to hang carcasses (1540s), perhaps from Old North French gamberel, from
gambe leg, from Late Latin gamba (see gambol).


game (adj.2)

brave, spirited, 1725, especially in game-cock bird for fighting, from game (n.). Middle English had
gamesome (adj.) joyful, playful, sportive.


game (n.)

Old English gamen game, joy, fun, amusement, common Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian game joy, glee,
Old Norse gaman, Old Saxon, Old High German gaman sport, merriment, Danish gamen, Swedish gamman
merriment), regarded as identical with Gothic gaman participation, communion, from Proto-Germanic
*ga- collective prefix + *mann person, giving a sense of people together.    Meaning contest played
according to rules is first attested c.1300. Sense of wild animals caught for sport is late 13c.;
hence fair game (1825), also gamey. Game plan is 1941, from U.S. football; game show first attested
1961.


game (adj.1)

lame, 1787, from north Midlands dialect, of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of gammy (tramps'
slang) bad, or from Old North French gambe leg (see gambol (n.)).


game (v.)

Old English gamenian to play, jest, joke; see game (n.). Modern usages probably represent recent
formations from the noun. Related: Gamed; gaming.


game-cock

1670s, from game (adj.) in the sporting sense + cock (n.1). Figurative use by 1727.


gamekeeper (n.)

1660s, from game (n.) in the animal sense + agent noun from keep (v.).


gamelan (n.)

East Indian orchestra, 1817, from Javanese gamel to handle.


gamely (adv.)

courageously, 1861, from game (n.) + -ly (2).


gamer (n.)

1620s, an athlete, agent noun from game (v.). Meaning one devoted to playing video or computer games
is attested from 1993. Gamester is attested from 1590s but meant prostitute (compare old slang the
first game ever played copulation), later a man fit and ready for anything, a player (mid-17c.).


gamete (n.)

sexual protoplasmic body, 1880, coined 1878 by German cytologist Eduard Strasburger (1844-1912), the
widespread attribution to  Mendel being apparently erroneous; from Greek gamete a wife, gametes a
husband, from gamein to take to wife, to marry, from PIE root *gem(e)- to marry (cognates: Greek
gambros son-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law; Sanskrit jamih brother, sister, jama daughter-in-
law; Avestan zama-tar son-in-law; Latin gener son-in-law). See also -gamy. The seventh month of the
ancient Attic calendar (corresponding to late January and early February) was Gamelion, Month of
Marriages.


gamey (adj.)

also gamy, 1844, spirited, plucky, from game (n.) + -y (2). Meaning tasting or smelling strongly is
from 1863.


gamin (n.)

street urchin, 1837, from French gamin (18c.), perhaps from Berrichon dialect gamer to steal.
Introduced in English in translations of Hugo.   Un groupe d'enfants, de ces petits sauvages vanu-
pieds qui ont de tout temps battu le pav&eacute; de Paris sous le nom &eacute;ternel de gamins, et
qui, lorsque nous &eacute;tions enfants aussi, nous ont jet&eacute; des pierres &agrave; tous, le
soir, au sortir de classe, parce que nos pantalons n'&eacute;taient pas d&eacute;chir&eacute;s; etc.
[Hugo, Notre-Dame de Paris]


gamine (n.)

small, slim, pert young girl, 1899, from French gamine, fem. of gamin.


gaming (n.)

c.1500, gambling, verbal noun from present participle of game (v.).


gamma

third letter of the Greek alphabet, c.1400, from Greek gamma, from Phoenician gimel, literally camel
(see camel); so called for a fancied resemblance of its shape to some part of a camel. Gamma rays
(1903) originally were thought to be a third type of radiation, now known to be identical with very
short X-rays.


gammadion (n.)

swastika-like figure formed of four capital gammas, Medieval Greek gammadion, diminutive of Greek
gamma (see gamma).


gammer (n.)

old woman, 1570s, contraction of grandmother (compare gaffer).


gammon (n.)

early 15c., ham or haunch of a swine, from Old North French gambon ham (French jambon), from gambe
leg, from Late Latin gamba leg of an animal (see gambol (n.)).


gams (n.)

legs, 1781, low slang, probably the same word as gamb leg of an animal on a coat of arms (1727) and
ultimately from Middle English gamb leg, from Old North French (see gammon). Now, in American
English slang, especially with reference to well-formed legs of pretty women, but this was not the
original sense.


gamut (n.)

1520s, originally, lowest note in the medieval musical scale, in the system of notation devised by
Guido d'Arezzo, contraction of Medieval Latin gamma ut, from gamma, the Greek letter, indicating a
note below A, + ut, the low note on the six-note musical scale that took names from corresponding
syllables in a Latin hymn for St. John the Baptist's Day:<b>Ut</b> queant laxis <b>re</b>sonare
fibris  <b>Mi</b>ra gestorum <b>fa</b>muli tuorum  <b>Sol</b>ve polluti <b>la</b>bii reatum,etc.
Gamut came to be used for the whole musical scale; the figurative sense of entire scale or range of
anything is first recorded 1620s. When the modern octave scale was set early 16c., si was added,
changed to ti in Britain and U.S. to keep the syllables as different from each other as possible. Ut
later was replaced by more sonorous do (n.). See also solmisation.


gamy (adj.)

see gamey.


ganch (v.)

to impale on hooks or pointed stakes as a means of capital punishment, 1610s, from French *ganchor,
from Italian *ganciare, from gancio hook, from Turkish kanca hook, barb, grapnel. Related: Ganched;
ganching. Also, as a noun, the name of the thing used in killing.


gander (v.)

take a long look, slang, 1886, from gander (n.) on the notion of craning one's neck like a goose;
earlier it meant to wander foolishly (1680s). Related: Gandered; gandering.


gander (n.)

Old English gandra male goose, from Proto-Germanic *gan(d)ron- (cognates: Dutch gander, Middle Low
German ganre), from PIE *ghans- goose (see goose (n.)). OED suggests perhaps originally the name of
some other water-bird and cites Lithuanian gandras stork. Sometimes used 19c. like stag in reference
to single men or male-only gatherings. Meaning a long look is 1912, from gander (v.).


gandy dancer

railroad maintenance worker, 1918, American English slang, of unknown origin; dancer perhaps from
movements required in the work of tamping down ties or pumping a hand-cart, gandy perhaps from the
name of a machinery belt company in Baltimore, Maryland.


gang (v.)

1856, from gang (n.). Related: Ganged; ganging. To gang up (on) is first attested 1919.


gang (n.)

from Old English gang a going, journey, way, passage, and Old Norse gangr a group of men, a set,
both from Proto-Germanic *gangaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Danish, Dutch, Old High German,
German gang, Old Norse gangr, Gothic gagg act of going), from PIE root *ghengh- to step (cognates:
Sanskrit jangha shank, Avestan zanga- ankle, Lithuanian zengiu I stride). Thus not considered to be
related to go.    The sense evolution is probably via meaning a set of articles that usually are
taken together in going (mid-14c.), especially a set of tools used on the same job. By 1620s this
had been extended in nautical speech to mean a company of workmen, and by 1630s the word was being
used, with disapproving overtones, for any band of persons traveling together. Gangway preserves the
original sense of the word, as does gangplank.


Gang of Four

1976, translating Chinese sirenbang, the nickname given to the four leaders of the Cultural
Revolution who took the fall in Communist China after the death of Mao.


gang-bang (n.)

1953, group sex (especially many men on one woman or girl, regardless of consent), from gang + bang
with slang meaning do the sex act. Earlier was gang-shag (1927). Sense of participate in a street
gang is by 1968. Related: Gang-banger; gang-banging.


gangbusters (n.)

to come on like gangbusters (c.1940) is from U.S. radio crimefighting drama Gangbusters (1937-57)
which opened with a cacophony of sirens, screams, shots, and jarring music.


Ganges

from Sanskrit ganga current, river.


gangland (n.)

1912, from gang (n.) + land (n.).


ganglia (n.)

Latin plural of ganglion.


gangling (adj.)

by 1812, a frequentative of gang in some sense involving looseness.    GANGLING. Tall, slender,
delicate, generally applied to plants. Warw. [James O. Halliwell, A Dictionary of Archaic and
Provincial Words, 1846]


ganglion (n.)

1680s, from Greek ganglion tumor, used by Galen for nerve bundle. Of unknown origin; according to
Galen, the proper sense of the word was anything gathered into a ball.


gangly (adj.)

1872, American English alteration of gangling.


gangplank (n.)

1846, American English, from gang + plank. Replacing earlier gang-board.


gangrene (n.)

1540s, from Latin gangraena, from Greek gangraina an eating or gnawing sore, literally that which
eats away, reduplicated form of gran- to gnaw, from PIE root *gras- (see gastric).


gangrenous (adj.)

1610s, from gangrene + -ous.


gangsta

rap style generally credited to West Philly hip hop artist Schoolly D, but his Gangster Boogie
(1984) used the conventional spelling; NWA was spelling it gangsta by 1988.


gangster (n.)

1896, American English, from gang in its criminal sense + -ster.


gangway (n.)

Old English gangweg road, passage, thoroughfare; see gang (n.) in its original sense + way (n.). As
a command to clear way, attested by 1912, American English.


ganja (n.)

powerful preparation of cannabis sativa, 1800,  from Hindi ganjha.


gank (v.)

by 2000 as the verb to describe a situation of many players or NPCs attacking one; gamer slang,
perhaps borrowed from hip-hop and drug-abuse slang (where it is attested by 1995 in the sense of to
rob, to rip off); perhaps by 1990 in sports jargon. Of unknown origin; perhaps ultimately based on
gang. Related: Ganked; ganking.


gannet (n.)

Old English ganot gannet, sea-bird, water fowl, from Proto-Germanic *ganito (cognates: Dutch gent,
Middle High German ganiz, Old High German ganazzo), from PIE *ghans- (see goose (n.)). Old French
gante is from Germanic.


gantlet

see gauntlet (n.1).


gantry (n.)

1570s, originally four-footed stand for a barrel, probably from Old North French gantier (Old French
chantier, 13c., store-room, stock-room), from Latin cantherius rafter, frame, also a gelding, from
Greek kanthelios pack ass, related to kanthelion rafter, of unknown origin. The connecting notion in
all this seems to be framework for carrying things. Meaning frame for a crane, etc. is from 1810.
Railway signal sense attested by 1889.


Ganymede

Trojan youth whom Zeus made his cup-bearer, from Greek Ganymedes, literally rejoicing in his
virility, from ganymai I rejoice, am glad + medea (plural) counsels, plans, cunning (see Medea), but
here taken by many to mean genitals. Used figuratively of serving-boys (c.1600) and catamites
(1590s).


gaol

see jail, you tea-sodden football hooligan.


gaoler (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of jailer.


gap (n.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. in place names), from Old Norse gap chasm, related to gapa to gape, from PIE
*ghai- to yawn, gape (see yawn (v.)). Originally hole in a wall or hedge; broader sense is 16c. In
U.S., common in place names in reference to a break or pass in a long mountain chain (especially one
that water flows through). As a verb from 1847.


gape (v.)

early 13c., from an unrecorded Old English word or else from Old Norse gapa to open the mouth, gape,
common Proto-Germanic (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch gapen, German gaffen to gape, stare, Swedish
gapa, Danish gabe), from PIE *ghai- (see gap). Related: Gaped; gaping. As a noun, from 1530s.


gaper (n.)

1630s, agent noun from gape (v.). Gaper delay in traffic control parlance attested by 1995.


gaping

1570s (implied in gapingly), present participle adj. from gape (v.).


gar (n.)

pike-like fish, 1765, American English, shortening of garfish (mid-15c.), from Old English gar
spear, from Proto-Germanic *gaizo- (cognates: Old Norse geirr, Old Saxon, Old High German ger,
German Ger spear), from PIE *ghaiso- stick, spear (see goad (n.)).


garage (v.)

1906, from garage (n.). Related: Garaged; garaging.


garage (n.)

1902, from French garage shelter for a vehicle, originally a place for storing something, from verb
garer to shelter, from Middle French garer to shelter, dock ships, from Frankish *waron to guard or
some other Germanic source (compare Old High German waron take care), from Proto-Germanic *war-,
from PIE root *wer- (5) to cover (see warrant (n.)).    Influenced no doubt by the success of the
recent Club run, and by the fact that more than 100 of its members are automobile owners, the
N.Y.A.C. has decided to build a garage, the French term for an automobile stable, at Travers Island,
that will be of novel design, entirely different from any station in the country. [New York Athletic
Club Journal, May 1902]   Garage sale first attested 1966.


Garamond

typeface, named for 16c. French typefounder Claude Garamond.


garb (n.)

1590s, elegance, stylishness, from Middle French garbe graceful outline (Modern French galbe), from
Italian garbo grace, elegance, perhaps from Germanic (compare Old High German gar(a)wi dress,
equipment, preparation; see gear). Sense of fashion of dress is first attested 1620s.


garb (v.)

1836, from garb (n.). Related: Garbed; garbing.


garbage (n.)

early 15c., giblets of a fowl, waste parts of an animal, later confused with garble in its sense of
siftings, refuse. Perhaps some senses derive from Old French garbe a bundle of sheaves, entrails,
from Proto-Germanic *garba- (cognates: Dutch garf, German garbe sheaf), from PIE *ghrebh- (1) to
seize, reach (see grab (v.)). Sense of refuse, filth is first attested 1580s; used figuratively for
worthless stuff from 1590s. Garbology study of waste as a social science is from 1976.


garbanzo (n.)

chick-pea, 1759, from Spanish garbanzo, said to be ultimately from Greek or Basque.


garble (v.)

early 15c., to inspect and remove refuse from (spices), from Anglo-French garbeler to sift (late
14c.), from Medieval Latin and Italian garbellare, from Arabic gharbala to sift and select spices,
related to kirbal sieve, perhaps from Late Latin cribellum, diminutive of Latin cribrum sieve (see
crisis). Apparently a widespread word among Mediterranean traders (compare Italian garbellare,
Spanish garbillo); sense of mix up, confuse, distort language (by selecting some things and omitting
others) first recorded 1680s. Related: Garbled; garbling.


garcon (n.)

boy, c.1300, from Old French gar&ccedil;un (11c.; Modern French gar&ccedil;on) menial, servant-boy,
page; man of base condition, originally objective case of gars, perhaps from Frankish *wrakjo-, from
Proto-Germanic *wrakjon- (cognates: Old High German recko, Old Saxon wrekkio a banished person,
exile; English wretch). Meaning waiter (especially one in a French restaurant) is from 1788.


garden (n.)

c.1300, from Old North French gardin (13c., Modern French jardin), from Vulgar Latin hortus gardinus
enclosed garden, via Frankish *gardo, from Proto-Germanic *gardaz- (cognates: Old Frisian garda, Old
Saxon gardo, Old High German garto, German Garten garden, Old English geard enclosure, see yard
(n.1)). Italian giardino, Spanish jardin are from French.   Garden-party is by 1843. Garden variety
in figurative sense first recorded 1928. To lead someone up the garden path entice, deceive is
attested by 1925.


garden (v.)

1570s, from garden (n.). Related: Gardened; gardening.


gardener (n.)

c.1300 (early 12c. as a surname), from Old North French *gardinier (12c., Modern French jardinier),
from gardin (see garden). Compare German G&auml;rtner. An Old English word for it was wyrtweard,
literally plant-guard.


gardenia

1757, Modern Latin, named for Scottish-born American naturalist Dr. Alexander Garden (1730-1791),
Vice President of the Royal Society.


gardening (n.)

1570s, verbal noun from garden (v.).


garderobe

early 14c., from Old French garderobe (Old North French warderobe; see wardrobe).


gare (n.)

French for train station, 1840, from earlier sense river port, pier (17c.), from garer (see garage).


garfish (n.)

see gar + fish (n.).


gargantuan (adj.)

1590s, from Gargantua, large-mouthed giant in Rabelais' novels, supposedly from Spanish/Portuguese
garganta gullet, throat, which is from the same imitative root as gargle.


gargle (v.)

1520s, from Middle French gargouiller to gurgle, bubble (14c.), from Old French gargole throat,
waterspout, perhaps from garg-, imitative of throat sounds, + *goule, dialect word for mouth, from
Latin gula throat. Related: Gargled; gargling. The earlier, native, form of the word was Middle
English gargarize (early 15c.).


gargle (n.)

1650s, from gargle (v.).


gargoyle (n.)

grotesque carved waterspout, late 13c., gargurl, from Old French gargole throat, waterspout (see
gargle).


Garibaldi

1862, blouse worn by women in imitation of red shirts worn by followers of Giuseppe Garibaldi
(1807-1882), liberator of Italy.


garish (adj.)

1540s, possibly from obsolete Middle English gawren to stare (c.1200), which is of uncertain origin
(perhaps from Old Norse gaurr rough fellow) + -ish. Related: Garishness.


garishly (adv.)

1590s, from garish + -ly (2).


garland (n.)

wreath of flowers, c.1300 (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French garlande, perhaps from Frankish
*weron adorn, bedeck (cognate with Middle High German wieren adorn, bedeck), from PIE *wei- to turn,
twist (see wire (n.)).


garland (v.)

early 15c., to make a garland; 1590s, to crown with a garland, from garland (n.). Related:
Garlanded; garlanding.


garlic (n.)

Old English garleac (Mercian), garlec (W. Saxon) garlic, from gar spear (in reference to the clove),
see gar + leac leek (see leek).


garlicky (adj.)

1775, from garlic + -y (2).


garment (n.)

c.1400, variant of garnement (early 14c.), from Old French garnement garment, attire, clothes, from
garnir fit out, provide, adorn (see garnish (v.)).


garner (v.)

late 15c., from garner (n.). Related: Garnered; garnering.


garner (n.)

late 12c., gerner, from Old French gernier, metathesized variant of grenier storehouse, loft for
grain, from Latin granarium a store-house (see granary).


garnet (n.)

early 14c., metathesized from Old French grenat garnet, originally an adjective, of a dark red
color, from Medieval Latin granatum, originally an adjective, of dark red color, perhaps abstracted
from pomegranate (q.v.), from the stone's resemblance either to the shape of the seeds or the color
of the pulp. But perhaps the word is from Medieval Latin granum grain, in its sense of cochineal,
red dye.


garnish (v.)

late 14c., from Old French garniss-, present participle stem of garnir provide, furnish; fortify,
reinforce, from a Germanic stem related to Proto-Germanic *warnejan be cautious, guard, provide for
(cognates: Old High German warnon to take heed, Old English warnian to take warning, beware; see
warn). Sense evolution is from arm oneself to fit out to embellish, which was the earliest meaning
in English, though the others also were used in Middle English. Culinary sense of to decorate a dish
for the table predominated after c.1700. Older meaning survives in legal sense of warning of
attachment of funds (1570s). Related: Garnished; garnishing.


garnish (n.)

late 14c., set of tableware (probably a dozen; usually pewter), from garnish (v.). Sense of
embellishments to food is from 1670s.


garnishee (n.)

1620s, from garnish (v.) + -ee.


garnishment (n.)

1520s, from garnish + -ment.


garret (n.)

c.1300, turret, small tower on the roof of a house or castle, from Old French garite watchtower,
place of refuge, from garir defend, preserve, from a Germanic source (compare Gothic warjan forbid,
Old High German warjan to defend), from Proto-Germanic *warjan, from PIE root *wer- (5) to cover
(see warrant (n.)). Meaning room on uppermost floor of a house is from early 14c. See attic. As the
typical wretched abode of a poor poet, by mid-18c.


Garrett

surname, from mid-13c., from Gerald or Gerard, with loss of consonant.


garrison (v.)

1560s, from garrison (n.). Related: Garrisoned; garrisoning.


garrison (n.)

c.1300, store, treasure, from Old French garison defense (Modern French gu&eacute;rison cure,
recovery, healing) from garir defend (see garret). Meaning fortified stronghold is from early 15c.;
that of body of troops in a fortress is from mid-15c., a sense taken over from Middle English
garnison body of armed men (late 14c.), from Old French garnison provision, munitions, from garnir
to furnish, provide.


garrot (n.)

kind of duck, from French garrot, of unknown origin.


garrote (v.)

to execute with a garrote, 1851, from garrote (n.); sense of choke and then rob is from 1852.
Related: Garotted; garotting.


garrote (n.)

also garrotte, 1620s, Spanish method of capital punishment by strangulation, from Spanish garrote
stick for twisting cord, of unknown origin, perhaps from Old French guaroc club, stick, rod, shaft
of a crossbow, probably ultimately Celtic, but possibly from Frankish *wrokkan to twist (cognate
with Middle Dutch wroken to twist).   I have no hesitation in pronouncing death by the garrot, at
once the most manly, and the least offensive to the eye. [Major John Richardson, British Legion,
1837]


garrulity (n.)

1580s, from Middle French garrulit&eacute;, from Latin garrulitatem (nominative garrulitas)
chattering, loquacity, from garrulus (see garrulous).


garrulous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin garrulus talkative, from garrire to chatter, from PIE root *gar- to call, cry, of
imitative origin (compare Greek gerys voice, sound, Ossetic zar song, Welsh garm, Old Irish gairm
noise, cry). Related: Garrulously; garrulousness.


garter (n.)

early 14c., from Old North French gartier band just above or below the knee (Old French jartier,
14c., Modern French jarreti&egrave;re), from garet bend of the knee, perhaps from Gaulish (compare
Welsh garr leg). Garter as the highest order of knighthood (mid-14c.), according to Froissart was
established c.1344 by Edward III, though the usual story of how it came about is late (1614) and
perhaps apocryphal. The verb is mid-15c., from the noun. Garter snake (U.S.) so called from
resemblance to a ribbon. Garter belt first noticed 1913.


garth (n.)

small piece of enclosed ground, northern and western English dialect word, mid-14c., from Old Norse
gar&eth;r yard, courtyard, fence, cognate of Old English geard (see yard (n.1)).


Gary

masc. proper name, also a surname, from Norman form of Old Norse geiri, Old Danish geri spear (see
gar).


gas (n.)

1650s, from Dutch gas, probably from Greek khaos empty space (see chaos). The sound of Dutch g is
roughly equivalent to that of Greek kh. First used by Flemish chemist J.B. van Helmont (1577-1644),
probably influenced by Paracelsus, who used khaos in an occult sense of proper elements of spirits
or ultra-rarified water, which was van Helmont's definition of gas.    Modern scientific sense began
1779, with later specialization to combustible mix of vapors (1794, originally coal gas); anesthetic
(1894, originally nitrous oxide); and poison gas (1900). Meaning intestinal vapors is from 1882. The
success of this artificial word is unique [Weekley]. Slang sense of empty talk is from 1847; slang
meaning something exciting or excellent first attested 1953, from earlier hepster slang gasser in
the same sense (1944). Gas also meant fun, a joke in Anglo-Irish and was used so by Joyce (1914). As
short for gasoline, it is American English, first recorded 1905.


gas (v.)

1886, to supply with gas, from gas (n.). Sense of poison with gas is from 1889 as an accidental
thing, from 1915 as a military attack. Related: Gassed; gassing; gasses.


gas-guzzler (n.)

car with low fuel-efficiency, 1973, American English, from gas (short for gasoline) + guzzler.


Gascon

native of Gascony, late 14c., from Middle French Gascon, from Vulgar Latin *Wasco, from Latin Vasco,
singular of Vascones, the name of the ancient inhabitants of the Pyr&eacute;n&eacute;es (see
Basque). Proverbially a boastful people, hence gasconade (n.), bragging talk.


gasconade

1709 (n.); 1727 (v.), from French gasconade (see Gascon + -ade); from gasconner (16c.) to boast,
brag, literally to talk like a Gascon.


gaselier (n.)

gas-burning chandelier, 1849, from gas (n.) + chandelier.


gaseous (adj.)

1799, from gas (n.) + -ous.


gash (v.)

1560s, alteration of garsen (late 14c.), from Old North French garser to cut, slash (see gash (n.)).
Related: Gashed; gashing.


gash (n.)

1540s, from Middle English garce (early 13c.), from Old North French garser to scarify, cut, slash
(Old French *garse), apparently from Vulgar Latin *charassare, from Greek kharassein engrave, from
PIE *gher- to scrape, scratch (see character). Loss of -r- is characteristic (see ass (n.2)). Slang
use for vulva dates to mid-1700s.


gashouse (n.)

1880 as a power-generating station, from gas (n.) + house (n.). By 1926, emblematic of a run-down
district of a U.S. city, a typical abode of gangsters.


gasket (n.)

1620s, caskette small rope or plaited coil used to secure a furled sail, of uncertain origin,
perhaps from French garcette little girl, maidservant, diminutive of Old French garce (13c.) young
woman, young girl; whore, harlot, concubine, fem. of gar&ccedil;on (see garcon). Sense of packing
(originally of braided hemp) to seal metal joints first recorded 1829.


gasohol (n.)

gasoline and ethanol mixture, 1975, from gasoline + (ethyl) alcohol.


gasoline (n.)

1864 (alternative spelling gasolene is from 1865), from gas + -ol (probably here representing Latin
oleum oil) + chemical suffix -ine (2). Shortened form gas was in common use in U.S. by 1897. Gas
station as a fuel filling station for automobiles recorded by 1924.


gasometer (n.)

1790, from gas + -meter. Related: Gasometric.


gasp (n.)

1570s, from gasp (v.).


gasp (v.)

late 14c., gaspen, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse geispa to yawn, or its Danish
derivative gispe gasp, which probably are related to Old Norse gapa (see gape). Related: Gasped;
gasping.


gassy (adj.)

1757, from gas + -y (2).


gast (adj.)

â&euro;&oelig;animal which does not produce in season,â&euro;? 1729, an East Anglian dialect word,
perhaps from Middle Dutch gast â&euro;&oelig;barren soil.â&euro;?


gastrectomy (n.)

1886, from gastro- + -ectomy.


gastric (adj.)

1650s, with -ic + Greek gaster (genitive gastros) stomach, by dissimilation from *graster, literally
eater, devourer, from gran to gnaw, eat, from PIE root *gras- to devour (cognates: Greek grastis
green fodder, Latin gramen fodder, grass, Old English c&aelig;rse cress).


gastritis (n.)

1806, medical Latin, from gastro- + -itis. Coined by French pathologist Fran&ccedil;ois-Boissier de
la Croix de Sauvages (1706-1767).


gastro-

scientific word-forming element meaning stomach, before vowels gastr-, from Greek gastro-, comb.
form of gaster (genitive gastros) belly, paunch (see gastric).


gastrocnemius (n.)

1670s, from Latinized form of Greek gastroknemia calf of the leg, from gaster belly (see gastric) +
kneme leg. So called for its form. Related: Gastrocnemical.


gastroenteritis (n.)

1820s, from gastro- + enteritis.


gastroenterology (n.)

1904, from gastro- + enterology.  Related: Gastroenterologist.


gastrointestinal (adj.)

1831, from gastro- + intestinal.


gastrolator (n.)

belly-worshipper, 1690s, from gastro- + Greek -latros serving (see -latry).


gastrology (n.)

cooking, good eating, 1810, from gastro- stomach + -logy.


gastronome (n.)

1823, from French gastronome, a back-formation from gastronomie (see gastronomy). Alternative
gastronomer is recorded from 1820.


gastronomic (adj.)

1828, from French gastronomique, from gastronomie (see gastronomy). Related: Gastronomical;
gastronomically.


gastronomy (n.)

1814, from French gastronomie, coined 1800 by Joseph de Berchoux (1762-1838) as title of poem on
good living, after Gastrologia, title of a now-lost poem of antiquity, quoted by Athenaeus (see
gastrology). Berchoux's word is from gaster + nomos arranging, regulating. Related: Gastronomer.


gastropod (n.)

1826, gasteropod (modern spelling by 1854), from Modern Latin Gasteropoda, name of a class of
mollusks, from Greek gaster (genitive gastros) stomach (see gastric) + pous (genitive podos) foot
(see foot (n.)). From the ventral position of the mollusk's foot.


gastrula (n.)

1877, Modern Latin, from Greek gaster (genitive gastros) stomach (see gastric) + Latin -ula,
diminutive suffix. Related: Gastrulation.


gat (n.)

revolver, 1904, slang shortening of Gatling (gun); by 1880, gatlin was slang for a gun of any sort.


gate (n.)

opening, entrance, Old English geat (plural geatu) gate, door, opening, passage, hinged framework
barrier, from Proto-Germanic *gatan (cognates: Old Norse gat opening, passage, Old Saxon gat eye of
a needle, hole, Old Frisian gat hole, opening, Dutch gat gap, hole, breach, German Gasse street), of
unknown origin. Meaning money collected from selling tickets dates from 1896 (short for gate money,
1820). Gate-crasher is from 1927. Finnish katu, Lettish gatua street are Germanic loan-words.


gate (v.)

provide with a gate, 1906, from gate (n.). Originally of moulds. Related: Gated (1620s). Gated
community recorded by 1989 (earliest reference to Emerald Bay, Laguna Beach, Calif.


gateau (n.)

1845, from French g&acirc;teau cake, from Old French gastel, from Frankish *wastil cake, from Proto-
Germanic *was-tilaz, from PIE *wes- to eat, consume.


gatehouse (n.)

house for a gatekeeper, late 14c., from gate (n.) + house (n.).


gatekeeper (n.)

1570s, from gate (n.) + keeper. Figurative use by 1872.


gateway (n.)

1707, from gate (n.) + way (n.). Figurative use from 1842.


gather (v.)

Old English gadrian, g&aelig;drian unite, agree, assemble; gather, collect, store up, used of
flowers, thoughts, persons; from Proto-Germanic *gadurojan bring together, unite (cognates: Old
English g&aelig;d fellowship, companionship, g&aelig;deling companion; Middle Low German gadderen;
Old Frisian gaderia; Dutch gaderen to gather, gade spouse; German Gatte husband; Gothic gadiliggs),
from PIE *ghedh- to unite, join (see good (adj.)). Change of spelling from -d- to -th- is 1500s,
reflecting earlier change in pronunciation. Related: Gathered; gathering.


gatherer (n.)

c.1200, agent noun from gather.


gathering (n.)

a meeting, mid-12c., from late Old English gaderung, verbal noun from gather.


Gatling gun

1870, named for designer Dr. Richard Jordan Gatling (1818-1903); patented by 1862 but not used in
American Civil War until the Petersburg campaign of June 1864 as an independent initiative by U.S.
Gen. Ben Butler.    For the first time in this war, the Gatling gun was used by Butler in repelling
one of Beauregard's midnight attacks. Dispatches state that it was very destructive, and rebel
prisoners were very curious to know whether it was loaded all night and fired all day. ... Gatling,
like Mann, has found it very difficult to get fair trials of his gun, and to have it introduced by
the War Department, for the Government leaves all such things to the Ordnance Office, and that
office is under the control of old fogies, who work by red tape, and who are slow to perceive the
value of ordnance improvements, and still slower to introduce them into practice. [Scientific
American, June 18, 1864]


gator (n.)

1844, colloquial shortening of alligator.


GATT

1947, acronym from General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


gau (n.)

ancient German territorial and administrative division, originally comprising several villages,
surviving in place names such as Breisgau and Oberammergau; also in gauleiter (from leiter leader),
title of the local political leaders under the Nazi system. Compare the first element in yeoman.


gauche (adj.)

awkward, tactless, 1751 (Chesterfield), from French gauche left (15c., replacing Old French senestre
in that sense), originally awkward, awry, from Middle French gauchir turn aside, swerve, from Proto-
Germanic *wankjan (cognates: Old High German wankon, Old Norse vakka to stagger, totter), from PIE
*weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).


gaucherie (n.)

1798, from French gaucherie, from gauche (see gauche).


gaucho (n.)

1824, from Spanish, probably from a native South American language, compare Araucanian cauchu
wanderer.


gaud (n.)

late 14c., jest, joke, prank, trick; also fraud, deception, trick, artifice. Also large, ornamental
bead in a rosary (mid-14c.); a bauble, trinket, plaything (mid-15c.). In some senses, from gaudy
(n.) (see gaudy). In some, from Latin gaudium joy, gaude rejoice thou (in hymns), or from Old French
gaudie, noun of action from gaudir. As a verb, to furnish with gauds, from late 14c. Related:
Gauded; gauding.


gaudily (adv.)

1610s, from gaudy + -ly (2).


gaudiness (n.)

c.1600, from gaudy + -ness.


gaudy (adj.)

showy, tastelessly rich, 1580s, probably ultimately from Middle English gaudi large, ornamental bead
in a rosary (early 14c.); but there is a parallel sense of gaudy as full of trickery (1520s), from
Middle English gaud deception, trick, from gaudi a jest, trick, possibly from Anglo-French gaudir be
merry, scoff, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy).    Alternative etymology of the adjective is
from Middle English gaudegrene yellowish-green (early 14c.), originally green dye obtained from a
plant formerly known as weld, from a Germanic source (see weld (n.)), which became gaude in Old
French. The English term supposedly shifted sense from weld-dye to bright. As a noun, feast,
festival 1650s, from gaudy day day of rejoicing (1560s).


gauge (v.)

ascertain by exact measurements, mid-15c., from Anglo-French gauge (mid-14c.), from Old North French
gauger (Old French jauger), from gauge gauging rod, perhaps from Frankish *galgo rod, pole for
measuring or another Germanic source (compare Old Norse gelgja pole, perch, Old High German galgo;
see gallows). Related: Gauged; gauging. The figurative use is from 1580s.


gauge (n.)

fixed standard of measure, early 15c. (surname Gageman is early 14c.), from Old North French gauge
gauging rod (see gauge (v.)). Meaning instrument for measuring is from 1680s.


Gaul (n.)

1560s, from French Gaule, from Latin Gallia, from Gallus a Gaul. Also used somewhat facetiously for
a Frenchman. Gauloise, popular brand of French cigarettes, dates to 1910.


Gaulish

1650s (adj.); 1660s (n.), from Gaul + -ish.


gaunt (adj.)

mid-15c. (as a surname from mid-13c.), from Middle French gant, of uncertain origin; perhaps from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse gand a thin stick, also a tall thin man) and somehow
connected with the root of gander. Connection also has been suggested to Old French jaunet yellowish
[Middle English Dictionary].


gauntlet (n.1)

glove, early 15c., gantelet, from Old French gantelet (13c.) gauntlet worn by a knight in armor,
also a token of one's personality or person, and symbolizing a challenge, as in tendre son gantelet
throw down the gauntlet (a sense found in English by 1540s); semi-diminutive or double-diminutive of
gant glove (12c.), earlier wantos (7c.), from Frankish *wanth-, from Proto-Germanic *wantuz glove
(cognates: Middle Dutch want mitten, East Frisian want, wante, Old Norse v&ouml;ttr glove, Danish
vante mitten), which apparently is related to Old High German wintan, Old English windan turn
around, wind (see wind (v.)).    The name must orig. have applied to a strip of cloth wrapped about
the hand to protect it from sword-blows, a frequent practice in the Icelandic sagas. [Buck]
Italian guanto, Spanish guante are likewise ultimately from Germanic. The spelling with -u- was
established from 1500s.


gauntlet (n.2)

military punishment in which offender runs between rows of men who beat him in passing, 1660s,
earlier gantlope (1640s), from Swedish gatlopp passageway, from Old Swedish gata lane (see gate
(n.)) + lopp course, related to l&ouml;pa to run (see leap (v.)). Probably borrowed by English
soldiers during Thirty Years' War. Modern spelling, influenced by gauntlet (n.1), not fixed until
mid-19c.


gauss

C.G.S. unit of intensity of a magnetic field, 1882, named for German mathematician Karl Friedrich
Gauss (1777-1855). Related: Gaussage.


Gautama

surname of the Buddha, from Sanskrit Gotamah, properly a patronymic, literally descendant of the
greatest ox, from superlative of gauh ox, bull, cow.


gauze (n.)

1560s, gais, from French gaze, conjectured to be from Arabic gazz raw silk [Barnhart], or from Gaza,
Palestinian city associated with production of this fabric [Klein, Du Cagne].


gauzy (adj.)

1796, from gauze + -y (2). Related: Gauziness.


gavage (n.)

1889, from French gavage, from gaver to stuff (17c.; see gavotte).


gave

past tense of give.


gavel (n.)

small mallet used by presiding officers at meetings, 1805, American English, of unknown origin;
perhaps connected with German dialectal gaffel brotherhood, friendly society, from Middle High
German gaffel society, guild, related to Old English gafol tribute, giefan to give (see habit). But
in some sources gavel also is identified as a type of mason's tool, in which case the extended
meaning may be via freemasonry. As a verb, by 1887, from the noun. Old English had tabule wooden
hammer struck as a signal for assembly among monks, an extended sense of table (n.).


gavotte (n.)

lively dance, 1690s, from French gavotte (17c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al gavoto mountaineer's
dance, from gavot, a local name for an Alpine resident, literally boor, glutton, from gaver to
stuff, force-feed poultry, from Old Proven&ccedil;al gava crop. From the same source is French
gavache coward, dastard.


gawk (v.)

1785, American English, perhaps from gaw, a survival from Middle English gowen to stare (c.1200),
from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse ga to heed, from Proto-Germanic *gawon-, from PIE
*ghow-e- to honor, revere, worship (see favor (n.)); and altered perhaps by gawk hand (see gawky).
Liberman writes that it need not have been derived from gowk. It is possibly another independent
imitative formation with the structure g-k. Related: Gawked; gawking.


gawky (adj.)

awkward, ungainly, 1724, from gawk hand left hand (1703), perhaps a contraction of gaulick, thus
gaulish hand, derogatory slang that could have originated during some period of strained Anglo-
French relations, i.e. most of recorded history.


gawp (n.)

fool, simpleton, 1825, perhaps from the verb meaning to yawn, gape (as in astonishment), which is
attested from 1680s, a dialectal survival of galp (c.1300), which is related to yelp or gape.


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


gaydar (n.)

by 1996, in gay literature, from gay + radar.


gayety (n.)

see gaiety.


Gaylord

masc. proper name, also a surname (from early 13c.), also Galliard, from Old French Gaillart, from
Proto-Germanic *Gailhard lofty-hard, or Old French gaillard lively, brisk, gay, high-spirited, from
PIE root *gal- (3) to be able, have power.


Gaza

Arabic form of Hebrew 'az force, strength. Gaza Strip was created by the division of 1949.


gaze (v.)

late 14c., probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Norwegian, Swedish dialectal gasa to gape),
perhaps related somehow to Old Norse ga heed (see gawk). Related: Gazed; gazing.


gaze (n.)

1540s, thing stared at; 1560s as long look, from gaze (v.).


gazebo

1752, supposedly a facetious formation from gaze + -bo, Latin first person singular future tense
suffix (as in videbo I shall see), on model of earlier belvedere cupola, from Italian bello verde
handsome sight. But perhaps rather a corruption of some oriental word.


gazelle

c.1600, from French gazelle, Old French gazel (14c.), probably via Spanish, ultimately from North
African pronunciation of Arabic ghazal.


gazette (n.)

newspaper, c.1600, from French gazette (16c.), from Italian gazzetta, Venetian dialectal gazeta
newspaper, also the name of a small copper coin, literally little magpie, from gazza; applied to the
monthly newspaper (gazeta de la novit&agrave;) published in Venice by the government, either from
its price or its association with the bird (typical of false chatter), or both.  First used in
English 1665 for the paper issued at Oxford, whither the court had fled from the plague.    The coin
may have been so called for its marking; Gamillscheg writes the word is from French gai (see jay).
The general story of the origin of the word is broadly accepted, but there are many variations in
the details:    We are indebted to the Italians for the idea of newspapers. The title of their
gazettas was, perhaps, derived from gazzera, a magpie or chatterer; or, more probably, from a
farthing coin, peculiar to the city of Venice, called gazetta, which was the connom price of the
newspapers. Another etymologist is for deriving it from the Latin gaza, which would colloquially
lengthen into gazetta, and signify a little treasury of news. The Spanish derive it from the Latin
gaza, and likewise their gazatero, and our gazetteer, for a writer of the gazette and, what is
peculiar to themselves, gazetista, for a lover of the gazette. [Isaac Disraeli, Curiosities of
Literature, 1835]   <hr />  <b>Gazzetta</b> It., Sp. gazeta, Fr. E. gazette; prop. the name of a
Venetian coin (from gaza), so in Old English. Others derive gazette from gazza a magpie, which, it
is alleged, was the emblem figured on the paper; but it does not appear on any of the oldest
Venetian specimens preserved at Florence. The first newspapers appeared at Venice about the middle
of the 16th century during the war with Soliman II, in the form of a written sheet, for the
privilege of reading which a gazzetta (= a crazia) was paid. Hence the name was transferred to the
news-sheet. [T.C. Donkin, Etymological Dictionary of the Romance Languages (based on Diez), 1864]
<hr />   GAZETTE. A paper of public intelligence and news of divers countries, first printed at
Venice, about the year 1620, and so called (some say) because una gazetta, a small piece of Venetian
coin, was given to buy or read it. Others derive the name from gazza, Italian for magpie,  i.e.
chatterer.--Trusler. A gazette was printed in France in 1631; and one in Germany in 1715. [Haydn's
Dictionary of Dates, 1857]


gazette (v.)

â&euro;&oelig;to announce in the Gazette,â&euro;? 1670s; see gazette. The three official journals
were published in Britain from c.1665, twice weekly, and contained lists of appointments,
promotions, public notices, etc. Hence, â&euro;&oelig;to be gazetted;â&euro;? to be named to a
command, etc.


gazetteer

1610s, â&euro;&oelig;journalist,â&euro;? from gazette (n.) + -eer. Meaning
â&euro;&oelig;geographical dictionaryâ&euro;? is from 1704, from Laurence Eachard's 1693
geographical handbook for journalists, The Gazetteer's, or Newsman's, Interpreter, second edition
simply titled The Gazetteer.


gazillion

by 1984, with made-up prefix and ending from billion, trillion, etc.


gear (n.)

c.1200, fighting equipment, probably from Old Norse gervi apparel, related to gerr ready, and gerva
make ready, from Proto-Germanic *garwian- to make, prepare, equip (cognates: Old English gearwe
clothing, equipment, ornament; Dutch gaar done, dressed; Old High German garo ready, prepared,
complete, garawi clothing, dress, garawen to make ready; German gerben to tan). Meaning toothed
wheel in machinery first attested 1520s. Slang for male sex organs from 1670s. British adjective
slang sense of stylish, excellent first recorded 1951, from earlier that's the gear, expression of
approval, 1925.


gear (v.)

c.1200, to equip oneself for fighting; dress, probably from gear (n.). Related: Geared; gearing.


gecko (n.)

1774, from Malay gekoq, said to be imitative of its cry. Earlier forms were chacco (1711), jackoa
(1727).


gee (interj.)

exclamation of surprise, 1895, probably euphemistic for Jesus. Form gee whiz is attested from 1871;
gee whillikens (1851) seems to be the oldest form.


geek (n.)

sideshow freak, 1916, U.S. carnival and circus slang, perhaps a variant of geck a fool, dupe,
simpleton (1510s), apparently from Low German geck, from an imitative verb found in North Sea
Germanic and Scandinavian meaning to croak, cackle, and also to mock, cheat. The modern form and the
popular use with reference to circus sideshow wild men is from 1946, in William Lindsay Gresham's
novel Nightmare Alley (made into a film in 1947 starring Tyrone Power).    An ordinary geek doesn't
actually eat snakes, just bites off chunks of 'em, chicken heads and rats. [Arthur H. Lewis,
Carnival, 1970]    By c.1983, used in teenager slang in reference to peers who lacked social graces
but were obsessed with new technology and computers (such as the Anthony Michael Hall character in
1984's Sixteen Candles).   <b>geek out</b> vi. To temporarily enter techno-nerd mode while in a non-
hackish context, for example at parties held near computer equipment. [Eric S. Raymond, The New
Hacker's Dictionary, 1996]


geeky (adj.)

by 1985, from geek (n.) in teen slang sense + -y (2).


geese (n.)

plural of goose (n.).


geezer (n.)

1885, variant of obsolete Cockney guiser mummer (late 15c.; see guise).


gefilte fish (n.)

1892, gef&uuml;llte Fisch, not a species but a loaf made from various kinds of ground fish and other
ingredients; the first word is from Yiddish, from German gef&uuml;llte stuffed.


gehenna (n.)

hell, 1620s, from Church Latin, from Greek geenna, from post-biblical Hebrew gehinnom, Hell, place
of fiery torment for the dead, figurative use of the place name Ge Hinnom the Valley of Hinnom,
southwest of Jerusalem, where, according to Jer. xix.5, children were sacrificed to Moloch.


Geiger counter

1924, for German physicist Hans Geiger (1882-1945), who invented it with W. M&uuml;ller. The surname
is literally fiddler.


geisha (n.)

1887, Japanese girl whose profession is to sing and dance to entertain men; hence, loosely,
prostitute, from Japanese, literally person accomplished in the social arts, from gei art,
performance + sha person. Compare almah, and Athenian auletrides flute-girls, female musicians who
entertained guests at a symposium with music at the start of the party and sex at the end of it.


geist (n.)

spirit of a place or time; spirituality, intellectuality, 1871, from German Geist (see ghost).


gel (n.)

1899, as a chemical term, short for gelatin and perhaps influenced by jell. The invention of this
word is credited to Scottish chemist Thomas Graham (1805-1869). Hair-styling sense is from 1958. The
verb meaning to become a gel is attested by 1902; figurative sense is from 1958. Related: Gelled;
gelling.


gelatin (n.)

see gelatine.


gelatine (n.)

1713, from French g&eacute;latine (17c.) clear jelly-like substance, fish broth, from Italian
gelatina, from gelata jelly, from gelare to jell, from Latin gelare to freeze (see cold (adj.)), +
chemical suffix -ine (2). Spelling without the final -e is from 1800. The form without final -e is
in scientific (or pseudo-scientific) use only ... [Fowler].


gelatinous (adj.)

1724, from gelatin + -ous; probably modeled on French g&eacute;latineux. Related: Gelatinously;
gelatinousness.


gelato (n.)

by 1970, from Italian gelato, literally frozen, past participle of gelare to freeze (see cold
(adj.)).


geld (n.)

royal tax in medieval England, Old English gield payment, tribute, from Proto-Germanic *geldam
payment (cognates: Middle High German gelt payment, contribution, German geld money, Old Norse gjald
payment, Gothic gild tribute, tax), from PIE root of yield (v.).


geld (v.)

to castrate, c.1300, from Old Norse gelda castrate from geldr barren, from Proto-Germanic *galdu-,
from PIE *ghel- (3) to cut. Related: Gelded. Compare Old Norse geldr yielding no milk, dry, Old High
German galt barren, said of a cow.


gelding (n.)

late 13c. (as a surname), from Old Norse geldingr, from gelda castrate (see geld (v.)).


gelid (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin gelidus icy cold, from gelum frost, intense cold (see cold (adj.)).


geloscopy (n.)

divination of a person's qualities or character by laughter, 1730s, from Greek gelos laughter +
-oscopy (see -scope).


gelt (n.)

money, 1520s, from German, Dutch gelt gold, money (see geld (n.)). In some later uses, from Yiddish.


gelt (adj.)

past participle of geld (v.); hence, as an adjective, castrated (mid-15c.).


gem (n.)

Old English gimm precious stone, gem, jewel, also eye, from Latin gemma precious stone, jewel,
originally bud, perhaps from the root *gen- to produce, or from PIE *gembh- tooth, nail. Of persons,
from late 13c. Forms in -i-, -y- were lost early 14c., and the modern form of the word probably
representing a Middle English borrowing from Old French gemme (12c.). As a verb, from c.1600, to
adorn with gems; mid-12c. as to bud.


gematria (n.)

1680s, from Hebrew gematriya, from Greek geometria (see geometry). [E]xplanation of the sense of a
word by substituting for it another word, so that the numerical value of the letters constituting
either word is identical [Klein].


gemeinschaft (n.)

1887, from German gemeinschaft social relationship based on affection or kinship (contrasted with
gesellschaft), from gemein common, general + -schaft -ship.


geminate (adj.)

duplicated, found in pairs, 1590s, from Latin geminatus twinned, equal, past participle of geminare
to double, repeat, related to geminus twin, perhaps from PIE *yem- to pair. As a verb, from 1630s.
Related: Geminated; geminating.


gemination (n.)

1590s, from Latin geminationem (nominative geminatio) a doubling, from past participle stem of
geminare (see geminate).


Gemini

constellation, late Old English, from Latin gemini (plural of adjective geminus) twins (see
geminate). The twins are Castor and Pollux. Meaning a person born under the sign of Gemini is
recorded from 1894. As an oath, from 1660s (also found in Dutch and German), perhaps a corruption of
Jesu (compare jiminy).


gemmologist (n.)

1931, from gemmology (1811), from Latin gemma (see gem) + -ology.


gemstone (n.)

Old English gimstan; see gem + stone (n.).


gendarme (n.)

1540s, mounted trooper, from French contraction (14c.) of gens d'armes men at arms, later applied to
military police (1796 in English). Gens is plural of gent nation, people, from Latin gentem
(nominative gens) race, nation, people (see genus). Related: Gendarmerie. French also had gens de
(la) robe lawyers, sometimes borrowed in English.


gender (n.)

c.1300, kind, sort, class, from Old French gendre (12c., Modern French genre), from stem of Latin
genus (genitive generis) race, stock, family; kind, rank, order; species, also (male or female) sex
(see genus) and used to translate Aristotle's Greek grammatical term genos.    The grammatical sense
is attested in English from late 14c.; the male-or-female sense from early 15c. As sex took on
erotic qualities in 20c., gender came to be the common word used for sex of a human being, often in
feminist writing with reference to social attributes as much as biological qualities; this sense
first attested 1963. Gender-bender is first attested 1980, with reference to pop star David Bowie.


gender (v.)

to bring forth, late 14c., from Old French gendrer, from Latin generare to engender (see
generation). Related: Gendered; gendering.


gene (n.)

1911, from German Gen, coined 1905 by Danish scientist Wilhelm Ludvig Johannsen (1857-1927), from
Greek genea generation, race (see genus). De Vries had earlier called them pangenes. Gene pool is
attested from 1950.


genealogical (adj.)

1570s, from French g&eacute;n&eacute;alogique (see genealogy) + -al (1). Earlier in the same sense
was genealogial (mid-15c.). Related: Genealogically.


genealogist (n.)

c.1600, from genealogy + -ist.


genealogy (n.)

early 14c., line of descent, pedigree, descent, from Old French genealogie (12c.), from Late Latin
genealogia tracing of a family, from Greek genealogia, from genea generation, descent (see genus) +
-logia (see -logy). An Old English word for it was folctalu, literally folk tale. Meaning study of
family trees is from 1768.


genera (n.)

plural of genus.


generable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin generabilis, from generare (see generation).


general (adj.)

c.1200, comprehensive, inclusive, full, from Latin generalis relating to all, of a whole class
(contrasted with specialis), from genus (genitive generis) stock, kind (see genus). General store
attested by 1810, American English; a general hospital (1737) is one not restricted to one class of
persons or type of disease.


general (n.)

late 14c., whole class of things or persons, from general (adj.). Meaning commander of an army is
1570s, shortening of captain general, from Middle French capitaine g&eacute;n&eacute;ral. The
English adjective was affixed to civic officer designations by late 14c. to indicate superior rank
and extended jurisdiction.


generalisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of generalization. For spelling, see -ize.


generalissimo (n.)

1620s, from Italian generalissimo, superlative of generale, from a sense development similar to
French general (see general (n.)).


generalist (n.)

1610s, from general (adj.) + -ist.


generality (n.)

c.1400, from Old French generalit&eacute;, from Latin generalitatem (nominative generalitas)
generality, from generalis (see general (adj.)). Related: Generalities. Form generalty is attested
from late 14c.


generalization (n.)

1761, act of generalizing, from generalize + -ation. Meaning a general inference is from 1794.


generalize (v.)

1751, probably a new formation from general (adj.) + -ize. Middle English had generalisen (early
15c.). Related: Generalizable; generalized; generalizing.


generally (adv.)

including everyone; in a general way, without reference to particulars, mid-14c., from general
(adj.) + -ly (2).


generate (v.)

c.1500, to beget (offspring), a back-formation from generation or else from Latin generatus, past
participle of generare to beget, produce (see generation); originally to beget; in reference to
natural forces, conditions, substances, etc., attested from 1560s. Related: Generated; generating.


generation (n.)

early 14c., body of individuals born about the same period (usually 30 years), from Old French
generacion (12c.) and directly from Latin generationem (nominative generatio) generating,
generation, noun of action from past participle stem of generare bring forth (see genus). Meanings
act or process of procreation, process of being formed, offspring of the same parent are late 14c.
Generation gap first recorded 1967; generation x is 1991, from Douglas Coupland book of that name;
generation y attested by 1994. Related: Generational. Adjectival phrase first-generation, second-
generation, etc. with reference to U.S. immigrants is from 1896.


generative (adj.)

early 15c., from generate + -ive. Use in linguistics is attested by 1959. Related: Generativity.


generator (n.)

1640s, person or thing that generates, from Latin generator a begetter, producer, agent noun from
past participle stem of generare (see generation). Meaning machine that generates power first
recorded 1794; in sense of machine that generates electric energy, 1879. Fem. generatrix attested
from 1650s.


generic (adj.)

1670s, belonging to a large group of objects, formed in English from Latin gener-, stem of genus
kind (see genus) + -ic. Sense of not special, not brand-name; in plain, cheap packaging, of
groceries, etc., is from 1977.


generosity (n.)

early 15c., nobility, goodness of race, from Latin generositatem (nominative generositas) nobility,
excellence, magnanimity, from generosus (see generous). Meaning munificence is recorded from 1670s.


generous (adj.)

1580s, of noble birth, from Middle French g&eacute;n&eacute;reux, from Latin generosus of noble
birth, figuratively magnanimous, generous, from genus (genitive generis) race, stock (see genus).
Secondary senses of unselfish (1690s) and plentiful (1610s) were present in French and in Latin.
Related: Generously; generousness.


genesis (n.)

Old English Genesis, first book of the Pentateuch, from Latin genesis, adopted as title of first
book of Old Testament in Vulgate, from Greek genesis origin, creation, generation, from gignesthai
to be born, related to genos race, birth, descent (see genus). As such, it translated Hebrew
bereshith, literally in the beginning, which was the first word of the text, taken as its title.
Extended sense of origin, creation first recorded in English c.1600.


genet (n.)

small civet, late 15c., from Old French genete (Modern French genette), from Spanish gineta, from
Arabic jarnait.


genetic (adj.)

pertaining to origins, coined 1831 by Carlyle from Greek genetikos genitive, from genesis origin
(see genus). Biological sense first recorded in Darwin, 1859. Related: Genetically. Genetical is
attested from 1650s.


geneticist (adj.)

1913, from genetic + -ist.


genetics (n.)

1872, laws of origination; see genetic + -ics. A coinage of English biologist William Bateson
(1861-1926). Meaning study of heredity is from 1891.


Geneva

city in Switzerland, from Latin Genava, perhaps from a PIE root meaning estuary or one meaning bend;
in either case a reference to its situation. The city was the headquarters of the League of Nations
from 1920.   The original Geneva Convention to introduce humanitarian conduct in modern warfare
dates from 1864; the most recent update was in 1949. The Geneva Protocol is a League of Nations
document meant to settle international disputes; it dates from 1924. Earlier the city was associated
with Calvinism. Meaning gin is from 1706 (see gin (n.1)).


Genevieve

fem. proper name, from French Genevi&egrave;ve, from Late Latin Genovefa, probably of Celtic origin.


genial (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to marriage, from Latin genialis pleasant, festive, literally pertaining to
marriage rites, from genius guardian spirit (see genius). Originally used in the Latin literal
sense; meaning cheerful, friendly first recorded 1746. Related: Genially.


geniality (n.)

c.1600, festivity; 1650s, cheerfulness, from Late Latin genialitas festivity, pleasantness, from
Latin genialis (see genial).


geniculate (adj.)

having knots or joints, 1660s, from Latin geniculatus, from geniculum little knee, knot on the stalk
of a plant, diminutive of genu knee (see knee (n.)).


genie (n.)

1650s, tutelary spirit, from French g&eacute;nie, from Latin genius (see genius); used in French
translation of Arabian Nights to render Arabic jinni, singular of jinn, which it accidentally
resembled, and attested in English with this sense from 1748.


genii (n.)

Latinate plural of genius.


genital (adj.)

late 14c., in membres genytal the genitals, from Latin genitalis pertaining to generation or birth
(also a by-name of the goddess Diana), from genitus, past participle of gignere to beget (see
genus). As a noun meaning sex organ from mid-15c.


genitalia (n.)

1876, Modern Latin, from Latin genitalia (membra), neuter plural of genitalis (see genital).


genitals (n.)

reproductive organs, late 14c., from genital (adj.).


genitival (adj.)

1818, from genitive + -al (1). Related: Genitivally.


genitive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French genitif or directly from Latin (casus) genitivus case expressing
possession, source, origin, from genitus (past participle of gignere; see genital); misused by Latin
grammarians to render Greek genike (ptosis) generic (case), expressing race or kind (see genus). The
noun meaning the genitive case in grammar is from 1610s.


genius (n.)

late 14c., tutelary god (classical or pagan), from Latin genius guardian deity or spirit which
watches over each person from birth; spirit, incarnation, wit, talent; also prophetic skill,
originally generative power, from root of gignere beget, produce (see kin), from PIE root *gen-
produce. Sense of characteristic disposition is from 1580s. Meaning person of natural intelligence
or talent and that of natural ability are first recorded 1640s.


Genoa

city in Italy, Italian Genova, from Latin Genua, perhaps from a PIE root meaning curve, bend, which
means it could be a cognate of Geneva. Other theories hold it to be perhaps from janua gate, or in
reference to the Italic god Janus. Adjective forms in English included Middle English Genoway (also
in plural, Janeways), c.1400, from Old French Genoveis, from Italian Genovese. In later English,
Genoese is from 1550s; Genovese from c.1600.


genocidal (adj.)

1948, from genocide + -al (1). Related: Genocidally.


genocide (n.)

1944, apparently coined by Polish-born U.S. jurist Raphael Lemkin (1900-1959) in his work Axis Rule
in Occupied Europe [p.19], in reference to Nazi extermination of Jews, literally killing a tribe,
from Greek genos race, kind (see genus) + -cide. The proper formation would be *genticide.
Generally speaking, genocide does not necessarily mean the immediate destruction of a nation, except
when accomplished by mass killings of all members of a nation. It is intended rather to signify a
coordinated plan of different actions aimed at the destruction of essential foundations of the life
of national groups, with the aim of annihilating the groups themselves. [Lemkin]    Earlier in a
similar sense was populicide (1799), from French populicide, by 1792, a word from the Revolution.
This was taken into German, as in V&#246;lkermeuchelnden genocidal (Heine), which was Englished 1893
as folk-murdering.


genome (n.)

sum total of genes in a set, 1930, modeled on German genom, coined 1920 by German botanist Hans
Winkler, from gen gene + (chromos)om chromosome.


genotype (n.)

genetic constitution of an individual, 1910, from German Genotypus (Wilhelm Johannsen, 1909); see
gene + type. Earlier the same word was used with a sense of type species of a genus (1897); in this
case, the first element is from genus.


genre (n.)

1770, as a French word in English (nativized from c.1840), from French genre kind, sort, style (see
gender). Used especially in French for independent style. Of painting, depicting scenes of ordinary
life (as compared to landscape, historical, etc.) from 1849.


Genro

elder statesman of Japan, 1876, from Japanese, literally first elders.


gens (n.)

1847, in reference to ancient Rome, tribe, clan, house (of families having a name and certain
religious rites in common and a presumed common origin), from Latin gens (genitive gentis) race,
clan, nation (see genus).


gent (n.)

short for gentleman, by 17c. (in early uses it is difficult to distinguish the shortening from the
common abbreviation gent.). Early in the nineteenth century the word was colloquial and slightly
jocular; about 1840 its use came to be regarded as a mark of low breeding [OED].


genteel (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French gentil stylish, fashionable, elegant; nice, graceful, pleasing, from Old
French gentil high-born, noble (11c.); a reborrowing of the French word that had early come into
English as gentle (q.v.), with French pronunciation and stress preserved to emphasize the
distinction. See also jaunty; gentile. OED 2nd ed. reports genteel is now used, except by the
ignorant, only in mockery (a development it dates from the 1840s).


gentian (n.)

late 14c., genciane, from Old French genciane and directly from Latin gentiana, said by Pliny to be
named for Gentius, king of ancient Illyria who discovered its properties. This likely is a folk-
etymology, but the word may be Illyrian nonetheless, because the suffix -an frequently occurs in
Illyrian words.


gentile (adj.)

mid-13c., noble, kind, gracious (mid-12c. as a surname); late 14c., of noble rank or birth,
belonging to the gentry, from Late Latin gentilis foreign, heathen, pagan, from Latin gentilis
person belonging to the same family, fellow countryman, from gentilis (adj.) of the same family or
clan, from gens (genitive gentis) race, clan (see gentle).


gentile (n.)

late 14c., chivalrous person; member of the nobility; see gentile (adj.). Also used during 14c. to
mean both one who is not a Christian and one who is not a Jew. The Latin word was used in Vulgate to
translate Greek ethnikos, from ta ethne the nations, which translated Hebrew ha goyim the (non-
Jewish) nations.


gentility (n.)

mid-14c., gentle birth, from Old French gentilit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Latin gentilitatem
(nominative gentilitas) relationship in the same family or clan, from gentilis (see gentle). Meaning
state of being gentile is from 1520s.


gentle (adj.)

early 13c., well-born, from Old French gentil high-born, noble, of good family (11c., in Modern
French nice, graceful, pleasing; fine pretty), from Latin gentilis of the same family or clan, from
gens (genitive gentis) race, clan, from root of gignere beget, from PIE root *gen- produce (see
genus). Sense of gracious, kind (now obsolete) first recorded late 13c.; that of mild, tender is
1550s. Older sense remains in gentleman.


gentleman (n.)

well-born man, early 13c., from gentle + man.    The Gentleman is always truthful and sincere; will
not agree for the sake of complaisance or out of weakness ; will not pass over that of which he
disapproves. He has a clear soul, and a fearless, straightforward tongue. On the other hand he is
not blunt and rude. His truth is courteous; his courtesy, truthful; never a humbug, yet, where he
truthfully can, he prefers to say pleasant things. [J.R. Vernon, Contemporary Review, 1869]
Related: Gentlemen. Gentleman's agreement is first attested 1929. Gentleman farmer recorded from
1749.


gentlemanly (adj.)

mid-15c., from gentleman + -ly (1).


gentleness (n.)

c.1300, inherited nature, from gentle + -ness. Meaning freedom from harshness and violence is from
1610s.


gentlewoman (n.)

early 13c., from gentle + woman.


gently (adv.)

early 14c., befitting one of gentle rank, from gentle + -ly (2). Meaning quietly, softly is from
1550s.


gentrification (n.)

by 1977, noun of action from gentrify.


gentrify (v.)

renovate inner-city housing to middle-class standards, by 1972, from gentry + -fy. Related:
Gentrified, which was used from early 19c. of persons.


gentry (n.)

c.1300, nobility of rank or birth, from Old French genterise, variant of gentilise noble birth,
gentleness, from gentil (see gentle). Meaning noble persons is from 1520s. Earlier in both senses
was gentrice (c.1200 as nobility of character, late 14c. as noble persons). In Anglo-Irish, gentry
was a name for the fairies (1880), and gentle could mean enchanted (1823).


genuflect (v.)

1620s, back-formation from genuflection. Related: Genuflected; genuflecting.


genuflection (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French g&eacute;nuflexion and directly from Late Latin genuflectionem
(nominative genuflexio) bending of the knee, noun of action from past participle stem of
genuflectere genuflect, from Latin genu knee (see knee (n.)) + flectere to bend (see flexible).


genuine (adj.)

1590s, natural, not acquired, from Latin genuinus native, natural, from root of gignere beget (see
genus), perhaps influenced in form by contrasting adulterinus spurious. [Alternative etymology is
from Latin genu knee, from a supposed ancient custom of a father acknowledging paternity of a
newborn by placing it on his knee.] Meaning really proceeding from its reputed source is from 1660s.
Related: Genuinely; genuineness.


genus (n.)

(plural genera), 1550s as a term of logic, kind or class of things (biological sense dates from
c.1600), from Latin genus (genitive generis) race, stock, kind; family, birth, descent, origin,
cognate with Greek genos race, kind, and gonos birth, offspring, stock, from PIE root *gene-
produce, give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to family and tribal groups (cognates:
Sanskrit janati begets, bears, janah race, janman- birth, origin, jatah born; Avestan zizanenti they
bear; Greek gignesthai to become, happen; Latin gignere to beget, gnasci to be born, genius
procreative divinity, inborn tutelary spirit, innate quality, ingenium inborn character, germen
shoot, bud, embryo, germ; Lithuanian gentis kinsmen; Gothic kuni race; Old English cennan beget,
create; Old High German kind child; Old Irish ro-genar I was born; Welsh geni to be born; Armenian
chanim I bear, I am born).


geo-

word-forming element meaning earth, ultimately from Greek geo-, comb. form of ge earth (see Gaia).


geocentric (adj.)

1680s, from geo- + -centric. Related: Geocentrism (1882).


geochronology (n.)

1893, from geo- + chronology.


geode (n.)

rounded stone with a hollow center lined with crystals, 1670s, from French g&eacute;ode, from Latin
geodes, from Greek geodes earthy, earth-like, from ge earth (Homeric gaia; see Gaia) + -oides,
adjective suffix, characterized by. Perhaps so called in reference to the earthy minerals inside.


geodesic (adj.)

1821, from geodesy surveying + -ic. Alternative adjective form geodetic is from 1834; geodetical is
from c.1600. Geodesic dome attested from 1953.


geodesy (n.)

1560s, surveying, from Modern Latin geodaesia, from Greek geodaisia division of the earth;
ultimately from ge earth (see Gaia) + stem of daiein divide.


geoduck (n.)

edible Pacific clam, 1883, perhaps from some American Indian word.


Geoffrey

masc. personal name, attested in England by late 11c., from Old French Geuffroi, from Medieval Latin
Gaufridus, from Old High German gewi district (German Gau) + fridu peace (see free).


geographer (n.)

1540s, from Medieval Latin geographus (see geography) + agent noun ending -er (1).


geographic (adj.)

1620s, shortened form of geographical; in some cases probably from Middle French
g&eacute;ographique.


geographical (adj.)

1550s, from Late Latin geographicus (from Greek geographikos, from geographia; see geography) + -al
(1). Related: Geographically.


geography (n.)

1540s, from Middle French g&eacute;ographie (15c.), from Latin geographia, from Greek geographia
description of the earth's surface, from geo- earth + -graphia description (see -graphy).


geologic (adj.)

1799, from geology + -ic. Geologic time is recorded from 1861.


geological (adj.)

1795, from geology + -ical. Related: Geologically.


geologist (n.)

1795, from geology + -ist.


geology (n.)

1735, from Modern Latin geologia the study of the earth, from geo- earth + logia (see -logy). In
Medieval Latin, geologia (14c.) meant study of earthly things, i.e. law, as distinguished from arts
and sciences, which concern the works of God. Darwin used geologize as a verb.


geomancer (n.)

c.1400, agent noun from geomancy.


geomancy (n.)

art of divination by means of signs derived from the earth, late 14c., from Old French
g&eacute;omancie, from Medieval Latin geomantia, from late Greek *geomanteia, from geo-, comb. form
of ge earth + manteia divination (see -mancy).


geometer (n.)

late 15c., from Latin geometres, from Greek geometres land-measurer (see geometry).


geometric (adj.)

1620s, shortened form of geometrical. As a style of ancient Greek pottery and associated culture,
1902.


geometrical (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin geometricus of geometry, from geometria (see geometry) + -al. Opposed to
arithmetical in ratio, proportion, etc., reflecting the fact that problems of multiplication
formerly were dealt with by geometry, not arithmetic. Related: Geometrically.


geometry (n.)

early 14c., from Old French g&eacute;om&eacute;trie (12c.), from Latin geometria, from Greek
geometria measurement of earth or land; geometry, from comb. form of ge earth, land (see Gaia) +
-metria (see -metry).


geomorphology (n.)

1893, from geo- + morphology. Form geomorphy is from 1889. Related: Geomorphological;
geomorphologically; geomorphologist.


geophagy (n.)

dirt-eating, 1850, from Greek *geophagia (according to OED the actual Greek is geotragia), from
geo-, comb. form of ge earth (see Gaia) + phagein to eat.A diseased appetite ... prevails in several
parts of Alabama, where they eat clay. I heard various speculations on the origin of this singular
propensity, called 'geophagy' in some medical books. [Lyell, Second Visit to U.S., 1850]  See also
pica (n.2).


geophysical (adj.)

1888, from geo- earth + physical (adj.).


geophysics (n.)

1889, from geo- + physics.


geopolitical (adj.)

1902, translating Swedish geopolitisk, used in 1900 by Swedish political scientist Rudolf
Kjell&eacute;n (1864-1922); from geo- + politisk political. Related: Geopolitics (1903).


Geordie

Scottish and northern dialectal diminutive of masc. proper name George.


George

masc. personal name, from Late Latin Georgius, from Greek Georgos husbandman, farmer, from ge earth
+ ergon work (see organ).    The name introduced in England by the Crusaders (a vision of St. George
played a key role in the First Crusade), but not common until after the Hanoverian succession
(18c.). St. George began to be recognized as patron of England in time of Edward III, perhaps
because of his association with the Order of the Garter (see garter). His feast day, April 23, was
made a holiday in 1222. The legend of his combat with the dragon is first found in Legenda Aurea
(13c.). The exclamation by (St.) George! is recorded from 1590s.


Georgia

the U.S. state was named for King George II of Great Britain. The Caucasian nation is so-called for
St. George, who is its patron saint (his cult there may continue that of a pre-Christian deity with
whom he was later identified), but the name also is said to derive from Arabic or Persian Kurj, or
Gurz (the form in the earliest sources), said to be a name of the native people, of unknown origin.
In modern Georgia, the name of the country is Sakartvelo and the people's name is Kartveli.


Georgian (adj.)

1855, in reference to the reigns of the first four king Georges of England (1714-1830). C.1600 as
pertaining to Georgia in the Caucasus; 1762 as pertaining to Georgia in North America; the noun in
this sense is c.1400 (Caucasus), 1741 (North America).


georgic

1510s, Georgics, title of Virgil's poems on rural life, from Latin georgica, from georgicus (adj.),
from Greek georgikos of a husbandman, agricultural, from ge earth + ergon work (see organ). As an
adjective meaning related to agriculture from 1711.


geosphere (n.)

1898, from geo- + sphere.


geosyncline (n.)

1895, back-formation from geosynclinal (1873); see geo- + synclinal.


geothermal (adj.)

1875, from geo- + thermal.


geotropism (n.)

1874, from German Geotropismus, from geo- + Greek trope (see trope). Coined in 1868 by German
botanist Albert Bernhard Frank (1839-1900). Related: Geotropic.


Gerald

masc. proper name, introduced by the Normans, from Old French Giralt, from Old High German Gerwald,
spear-wielder, from Proto-Germanic *girald, from *ger spear + base of waltan to rule (cognate with
Old English wealdan). The name often was confused with Gerard.


Geraldine

fem. proper name, fem. form of Gerald.


geranium (n.)

1540s, from Latin geranium, from Greek geranion, the plant name, diminutive of geranos crane
(cognate with Latin grus, English crane (n.)), from supposed resemblance of seed pods to cranes'
bills; the native name was also cranebill. As a color name from 1842.


Gerard

masc. proper name, from Old French Gerart (Modern French G&eacute;rard), of Germanic origin; compare
Old High German Gerhard, literally strong with the spear, from ger spear + hart hard.


geratology (n.)

study of decadence, 1884, from Greek geras (genitive geratos) old age (see geriatric) + -logy.


gerbera

1880, from Modern Latin (1737), named for German naturalist Traugott Gerber (1710-1743).


gerbil (n.)

1849, from French gerbille, from Modern Latin Gerbillus, the genus name, from gerbo, from Arabic
yarbu. Earlier English form, jarbuah (1660s), was directly from Arabic.


geriatric (adj.)

1909, formed in English from Greek geras, geros old age (from PIE root *gere- to grow old (see
gerontology) + iatrikos of a physician, from iatros (see -iatric).


geriatrics (n.)

coined 1909 by Austrian-born doctor Ignatz L. Nascher (1863-1944) in New York Medical Journal on the
model of pediatrics (also see -ics), from the same elements found in geriatric (q.v.). The correct
formation would be gerontiatrics.


germ (n.)

mid-15c., bud, sprout; 1640s, rudiment of a new organism in an existing one, from Middle French
germe germ (of egg); bud, seed, fruit; offering, from Latin germen (genitive germinis) sprout, bud,
perhaps from PIE root *gen- to beget, bear (see genus). The older sense is preserved in wheat germ
and germ of an idea; sense of seed of a disease first recorded 1796 in English; that of harmful
microorganism dates from 1871. Germ warfare recorded from 1920.


german (adj.)

of the same parents or grandparents, c.1300, from Old French germain closely related (12c.), from
Latin germanus full, own (of brothers and sisters); one's own brother; genuine, real, related to
germen (genitive germinis) sprout, bud, dissimilated from PIE *gen(e)-men-, from root *gene- to give
birth, beget (see genus). Your cousin-german (also first cousin) is the son or daughter of an uncle
or aunt; your children and your first cousin's are second cousins to one another; to you, your first
cousin's children are first cousin once removed.


German (n.)

Teuton, member of the Germanic tribes, 1520s (plural Germayns attested from late 14c.), from Latin
Germanus, first attested in writings of Julius Caesar, who used Germani to designate a group of
tribes in northeastern Gaul, origin unknown, probably the name of an individual tribe. It is perhaps
of Gaulish (Celtic) origin, perhaps originally meaning noisy (compare Old Irish garim to shout) or
neighbor (compare Old Irish gair neighbor). The earlier English word was Almain (early 14c.) or
Dutch.  In Finnish, Germany is Saksa Land of the Saxons.    &THORN;e empere passede from &thorn;e
Grees to &thorn;e Frenschemen and to &thorn;e Germans, &thorn;at bee&thorn; Almayns. [John of
Trevisa, translation of Higdon's Polychronicon, 1387]    Their name for themselves was the root word
of modern German Deutsch (see Dutch). Roman writers also used Teutoni as a German tribal name, and
Latin writers after about 875 commonly refer to the German language as teutonicus. See also Alemanni
and Teutonic. As an adjective, from 1550s. The German shepherd (dog) (1922) translates German
deutscher Sch&auml;ferhund. German Ocean as an old name for the North Sea translates Ptolemy. German
measles attested by 1856.


germane (adj.)

mid-14c., having the same parents, derived from german (adj.); compare human/humane, urban/urbane.
Main modern sense of closely connected, relevant (c.1600) derives from use in Hamlet Act V, Scene
ii: The phrase would bee more Germaine to the matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides, which
is a figurative use of the word in the now-obsolete sense of closely related, akin (late 15c.) in
reference to things, not persons.


Germanic (adj.)

1630s, of Germany or Germans, from German (n.) + -ic. As the name of a language family, 1892,
replacing earlier Teutonic. Germanical is attested from 1550s.


Germany (n.)

c.1300, from Latin Germania, a Roman designation (see German (n.)). In Middle English the place also
was called Almaine (early 14c.; see Alemanni).


germicide (n.)

1880, from germ + -cide.


germinal (adj.)

1808, from Modern Latin germinalis in the germ, from Latin germen (genitive germinis) sprout, bud,
sprig, offshoot (see germ) + -al (1).


germinate (v.)

c.1600, probably a back-formation from germination. Earlier germynen (mid-15c.) was from Latin
germinare. Figurative use from 1640s. Related: Germinated; germinating.


germination (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin germinationem (nominative germinatio) sprouting forth, budding, noun of action
from past participle stem of germinare to sprout, put forth shoots, from germen (genitive germinis)
a sprout or bud (see germ).


germy (adj.)

1912, from germ + -y (2).


Geronimo

cry made in jumping, apparently from the story of the Apache leader Geronimo making a daring leap to
escape U.S. cavalry pursuers at Medicine Bluffs, Oklahoma (and supposedly shouting his name in
defiance as he did). Adopted as battle cry by 82nd Airborne U.S. paratroopers in World War II, who
perhaps had seen it in the 1939 Paramount Studios movie Geronimo. The name is the Italian and
Spanish form of Jerome, from Greek Hieronomos, literally sacred name.


gerontocracy (n.)

rule by old men, 1830, from Greek geront-, from geron old man (see gerontology) + kratia rule (see
-cracy). Related: Gerontocratic.


gerontologist (n.)

1941, from gerontology + -ist.


gerontology (n.)

1903, coined in English from Greek geron (genitive gerontos) old man, from PIE root *gere- to become
ripe, grow old (cognates: Sanskrit jara old age, jarati makes frail, causes to age; Avestan zaurvan
old age; Ossetic zarond old man; Armenian cer old, old man).


gerrymander

1812 as both a noun and verb, American English, from Elbridge Gerry + (sala)mander. Gerry, governor
of Massachusetts, was lampooned when his party redistricted the state in a blatant bid to preserve
an Antifederalist majority. One Essex County district resembled a salamander, and a newspaper editor
dubbed it Gerrymander. Related: Gerrymandered; gerrymandering.


Gertrude

fem. proper name, from French, from Old High German Geretrudis, from ger spear + trut beloved, dear.


gerund (n.)

1510s, from Late Latin gerundium, from Old Latin gerundum to be carried out, gerundive of gerere to
bear, carry (see gest). In Latin, a verbal noun used for all cases of the infinitive but the
nominative; applied in English to verbal nouns in -ing.


gerundive (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin gerundivus (modus), from gerundium (see gerund).


Gervais

masc. proper name, French Gervais, from Old High German Gervas, literally serving with one's spear,
from ger spear + Celtic base *vas- servant.


gesellschaft (n.)

1887, social relationship based on duty to society or an organization, from German Gesellschaft,
from geselle companion + -schaft -ship.


gesso

plaster of Paris, 1590s, from Italian gesso, from Latin gypsum (see gypsum).


gest (n.)

famous deed, exploit; story, romance, c.1300, from Old French geste action, exploit, romance,
history (of celebrated people or actions), from Latin gesta actions, exploits, deeds, achievements,
neuter plural of gestus, past participle of gerere to carry on, wage, perform, of unknown origin.
See jest.


Gestalt

1922, from German Gestaltqualit&auml;t (1890, introduced by German philosopher Christian von
Ehrenfels, 1859-1932), from German gestalt shape, form, figure, configuration, appearance,
abstracted from ungestalt deformity, noun use of adj. ungestalt misshapen, from gestalt, obsolete
past participle of stellen to place, arrange (see stall (n.1)). As a school of psychology, it was
founded c.1912 by M Wertheimer, K. Koffka, W. K&ouml;hler.


Gestapo

Nazi secret state police, 1934, from German Gestapo, contracted from Geheime Staats-polizei,
literally secret state police, set up by Hermann G&ouml;ring in Prussia in 1933, extended to all
Germany in January 1934.


gestate (v.)

1866, back-formation from gestation. Related: Gestated; gestating.


gestation (n.)

1530s, riding on horseback, etc., as a form of exercise, from Latin gestationem (nominative
gestatio) a carrying, noun of action from gestare bear, carry, gestate, frequentative of gerere
(past participle gestus) to bear, carry, bring forth (see gest). Meaning action or process of
carrying young in the womb is from 1610s.


gestational (adj.)

1970, from gestation + -al (1). Related: Gestationally.


gesticulate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin gesticulatus, past participle of gesticulari to gesture, mimic, from gesticulus a
mimicking gesture, diminutive of gestus gesture, carriage, posture (see gest). Related:
Gesticulated; gesticulating.


gesticulation (n.)

early 15c., from Latin gesticulationem (nominative gesticulatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of gesticulari to gesture, mimic, from gesticulus a mimicking gesture, diminutive of
gestus (see gest).


gesticulator (n.)

1690s, agent noun in Latin form from gesticulate.


gestural (adj.)

1610s, from gesture + -al (1). Related: Gesturally.


gesture (n.)

early 15c., manner of carrying the body, from Medieval Latin gestura bearing, behavior, from Latin
gestus gesture, carriage, posture (see gest). Restricted sense of a movement of the body or a part
of it is from 1550s; figurative sense of action undertaken in good will to express feeling is from
1916.


gesture (v.)

1540s, from gesture (n.). Related: Gestured; gesturing.


gesundheit

1914, from German Gesundheit, literally health! Also in toast auf ihre Gesundheit to your health
(see sound (adj.)). Lithuanian aciu, echoic of the sound of a sneeze, has come to mean good luck,
God bless you. See also God.


get (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse geta to obtain, reach; to beget; to guess right (past tense gatum, past
participle getenn), from Proto-Germanic *getan (cognates: Old Swedish gissa to guess, literally to
try to get), from PIE root *ghend- seize, take (cognates: Greek khandanein to hold, contain,
Lithuanian godetis be eager, second element in Latin prehendere to grasp, seize, Welsh gannu to
hold, contain, Old Church Slavonic gadati to guess, suppose).  Meaning to seize mentally, grasp is
from 1892.    Old English, as well as Dutch and Frisian, had the root only in compounds (such as
begietan to beget, see beget; forgietan to forget, see forget). Vestiges of Old English cognate
*gietan remain obliquely in past participle gotten and original past tense gat. The word and phrases
built on it take up 29 columns in the OED 2nd edition. Related: Getting.   Get wind of become
acquainted with is from 1840, from earlier to get wind to get out, become known (1722). Get out, as
a command to go away, is from 1711. Get-rich-quick (adj.) attested from 1904, first in O. Henry. To
get out of hand originally (1765) meant to advance beyond the need for guidance; sense of to break
free, run wild is from 1892, from horses. To get on (someone's) nerves is attested by 1970.


get (n.)

early 14c., offspring, from get (v.). Meaning what is got, booty is from 14c.


get back

c.1600 (intransitive) to return; 1808 (transitive) to recover (something); meaning retaliate is
attested by 1888.


get off (v.)

escape, c.1600. Sexual sense attested by 1973.


get on

to put on, 1590s. Meaning prosper is from 1785; to advance, make progress is from 1798. That of be
friendly (with) is attested by 1816.


get over (v.)

overcome, 1680s; recover from, 1712; have done with, 1813.


get together (v.)

c.1400, collect, gather; meaning to meet, to assemble is from 1690s; to organize (oneself), 1962.


get up

rise, mid-14c. As a noun, equipment or costume, from 1847; also get-up, getup. Meaning initiative,
energy recorded from 1841.


get-out

to indicate a high degree of something, attested from 1838.


get-together (n.)

1911, from get + together.


getaway (n.)

escape, 1852, originally in fox hunting, from verbal phrase get away escape (c.1300); see get (v.) +
away. Of prisoners or criminals from 1893.


Gethsemane

name of a garden on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem [Matt. xxvi:36-46], from Greek Gethsemane, from
Aramaic gath shemani(m) oil-press.


Gettysburg

town in southern Pennsylvania, U.S., 1800 (earlier it was Gettys-town), founded 1780s by Gen. James
Gettys and named for him. Civil War battle there was fought July 1-3, 1863. The Gettysburg Address
was given Nov. 19, 1863, and was being called that by 1865, though before Lincolnâ&euro;&trade;s
assassination the term tended to refer to Edward Everettâ&euro;&trade;s full oration that preceded
Lincolnâ&euro;&trade;s short speech.


gewgaw (n.)

early 13c., giuegaue, contemptuous reduplication, possibly connected with Old French gogue
rejoicing, jubilation; joke, prank, mockery, game; or jou-jou toy, baby-talk word, from jouer to
play, from Latin jocare (see joke).


gey (adj.)

a Scottish variant of gay, sometimes used 18c.-19c. with a sense of considerable, pretty much,
considerably. Compare gray/grey.


geyser (n.)

1780, from Icelandic Geysir, name of a hot spring in the valley of Haukadal, literally the gusher,
from Old Norse geysa to gush, from Proto-Germanic *gausjan, from PIE *gheus-, from root *gheu- to
pour (see found (v.2)).


Ghana

since 1957, name of the former Gold Coast; from the name of a former tribal chieftain, whose name
itself is a form of a royal title, hence, king.


ghastly (adj.)

c.1300, gastlich, from gast (adj.), past participle of gasten to frighten, from Old English
g&aelig;stan to torment, frighten (see ghost) + -lich -ly. Spelling with gh- developed 16c. from
confusion with ghost. As an adverb, from 1580s. Related: Ghastliness.


ghat (n.)

also ghaut, from Hindi, pass, mountain, from Sanskrit ghattah landing place, of unknown origin.


ghawazee (n.)

Egyptian dancing-girls, 1799, from Arabic gawazi, plural of gaziya.


ghazi (n.)

Muslim warrior fighting the infidels, 1735, from Arabic ghazi, properly participle of ghaza (stem
gh-z-w) he made war.


gherkin (n.)

small cucumber used for pickling, 1660s, from early modern Dutch gurken, augurken (late 16c.) small
pickled cucumber, from East Frisian augurk cucumber, probably from a Balto-Slavic source (compare
Polish og&oacute;rek cucumber), possibly ultimately from Medieval Greek angourion a kind of
cucumber, said to be from Persian angarah [Klein, etc.], but OED seems to regard this as unlikely. A
Dutch source says the Greek is from a word for immature and that the vegetable originated in
northern India and came to Eastern Europe via the Byzantine Empire.    The Dutch suffix is perhaps
the diminutive -kin, though some regard it as a plural affix, with the Dutch word mistaken for a
singular in English. The -h- was added 1800s to preserve the hard g pronunciation.


ghetto (n.)

1610s, part of a city to which Jews were restricted, especially in Italy, from Italian ghetto part
of a city to which Jews are restricted, various theories of its origin include: Yiddish get deed of
separation; special use of Venetian getto foundry (there was one near the site of that city's ghetto
in 1516); a clipped word from Egitto Egypt, from Latin Aegyptus (presumably in memory of the exile);
or Italian borghetto small section of a town (diminutive of borgo, of Germanic origin, see borough).
Extended by 1899 to crowded urban quarters of other minority groups (especially blacks in U.S.
cities). As an adjective by 1903 (modern slang usage from 1999). Ghetto-blaster large, portable
stereo is from 1982.


Ghibelline

adherent of the emperor in medieval Italy, 1570s, from German Waiblingen, seat of the Hohenstaufens
in W&uuml;rttemberg. The name was said to have been used as a rallying cry by partisans of Conrad
III at the Battle of Weinsberg (1140). See Guelph.


ghost (n.)

Old English gast soul, spirit, life, breath; good or bad spirit, angel, demon, from Proto-Germanic
*ghoizdoz (cognates: Old Saxon gest, Old Frisian jest, Middle Dutch gheest, Dutch geest, German
Geist spirit, ghost), from PIE root *gheis- to be excited, amazed, frightened (cognates: Sanskrit
hedah wrath; Avestan zaesha- horrible, frightful; Gothic usgaisjan, Old English g&aelig;stan to
frighten). This was the usual West Germanic word for supernatural being, and the primary sense seems
to have been connected to the idea of to wound, tear, pull to pieces. The surviving Old English
senses, however, are in Christian writing, where it is used to render Latin spiritus (see spirit
(n.)), a sense preserved in Holy Ghost. Modern sense of disembodied spirit of a dead person is
attested from late 14c. and returns the word toward its ancient sense.    Most Indo-European words
for soul, spirit also double with reference to supernatural spirits. Many have a base sense of
appearance (such as Greek phantasma; French spectre; Polish widmo, from Old Church Slavonic videti
to see; Old English scin, Old High German giskin, originally appearance, apparition, related to Old
English scinan, Old High German skinan to shine). Other concepts are in French revenant, literally
returning (from the other world), Old Norse aptr-ganga, literally back-comer. Breton bugelnoz is
literally night-child. Latin manes probably is a euphemism.    The gh- spelling appeared early 15c.
in Caxton, influenced by Flemish and Middle Dutch gheest, but was rare in English before mid-16c.
Sense of slight suggestion (in ghost image, ghost of a chance, etc.) is first recorded 1610s; that
in ghost writing is from 1884, but that term is not found until 1919. Ghost town is from 1908. To
give up the ghost die was in Old English. Ghost in the machine was Gilbert Ryle's term (1949) for
the mind viewed as separate from the body.


ghostly (adj.)

Old English gastlic spiritual, holy; clerical; also ghostly, spectral, pertaining to or
characteristic of a ghost; see ghost + -ly (1). Related: Ghostliness.


ghoul (n.)

1786, in the English translation of Beckford's Vathek, from Arabic ghul, an evil spirit that robs
graves and feeds on corpses, from ghala he seized.


ghoulish (adj.)

1840, from ghoul + -ish. Related: Ghoulishly; ghoulishness.


giant (n.)

c.1300, from Old French geant, earlier jaiant (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *gagantem (nominative
gagas), from Latin gigas giant, from Greek gigas (genitive gigantos), one of a race of savage
beings, sons of Gaia and Uranus, eventually destroyed by the gods, probably from a pre-Greek
language. Replaced Old English ent, eoten, also gigant. The Greek word was used in Septuagint to
refer to men of great size and strength, hence the expanded use in modern languages. Of very tall
persons from 1550s; of persons who have any quality in extraordinary degree, from 1530s.  In
&thorn;at tyme wer here non hauntes Of no men bot of geauntes. [Wace's Chronicle, c.1330]


giantess (n.)

late 14c., from giant + -ess.


giaour (n.)

1560s, Turkish term of contempt for non-Muslims, from Persian gaur, variant of gabr fire-worshipper,
originally applied to the adherents of the Zoroastrian religion.


Gib

familiar abbreviation of Gilbert. As a typical name for a cat, from c.1400.


gib (n.)

type of iron hook, 1560s, of unknown origin. As a piece of wood or metal to hold something else in
place, from 1795.


gibber (v.)

c.1600, probably a back-formation from gibberish. Related: Gibbered; gibbering.


gibberish (n.)

1550s, imitative of the sound of chatter, probably influenced by jabber. Used early 17c. of the
language of rogues and gypsies.


gibbet (n.)

early 13c., gallows, from Old French gibet gallows; a bent stick, diminutive of gibe club, perhaps
from Frankish *gibb forked stick. The verb meaning to kill by hanging is from 1590s. Related:
Gibbeted; gibbeting. Originally synonymous with GALLOWS sb., but in later use signifying an upright
post with projecting arm from which the bodies of criminals were hung in chains or irons after
execution [OED].


gibbon (n.)

1770, from French gibbon (18c.), supposedly from a word in the French colonies of India but not
found in any language there. Brought to Europe by Marquis Joseph-Fran&ccedil;ois Dupleix
(1697-1763), French governor general in India 1742-54. The surname is Old French Giboin, from
Frankish *Geba-win gift-friend, or in some cases a diminutive of Gibb, itself a familiar form of
Gilbert.


gibbous (adj.)

c.1400, bulging, convex, from Late Latin gibbus hunchbacked, from Latin gibbus hump, hunch, of
uncertain origin. Of the moon from early 15c.; also used from 15c. of hunchbacks.


gibe (v.)

alternative spelling of jibe.


giblet (n.)

see giblets.


giblets (n.)

mid-15c. (in singular, gybelet), from Old French gibelet game stew, of uncertain origin, perhaps
from Frankish *gabaiti hunting with falcons, related to Old High German beizan to fly a falcon,
literally to cause to bite, from bizzan to bite.


Gibraltar

1590s, ancient Calpe, captured 710 C.E. by Saracen leader Tariq, renamed Jebel el Tarik the Mountain
of Tarik, hence the English name. A British possession since 1704. Figurative of impregnability by
1856.


Gibson girl

woman considered stylish late 1890s and early 1900s, 1901, named for U.S. artist and illustrator
Charles Dana Gibson (1867-1944), whose main model was his wife, Irene Langhorne (1873-1956). The
Gibson cocktail (attested by 1914) is in some stories ascribed to him, but the origin of that term
is unknown.


giclee (n.)

c.1991, from French gicl&eacute;e, from gicler to squirt, spurt, spray.


giddily (adv.)

mid-13c., from giddy + -ly (2).


giddiness (n.)

late 13c., thoughtless folly; see giddy + -ness. Meaning dizziness is late 14c.


giddy (adj.)

Old English gidig, variant of gydig insane, mad, stupid, possessed (by a spirit), probably from
Proto-Germanic *gud-iga-, from *gudam god + *-ig possessed. Meaning having a confused, swimming
sensation is from 1560s. Meaning elated is from 1540s. Related: Giddily; giddiness.


Gideon

Bible propagation society, 1906, formally Christian Commercial Young Men's Association of America,
founded 1899. It takes its name from Gideon, Israelite judge and warrior [Judg. vi:11-viii:25], from
Hebrew Gidh'on, literally feller, from stem of gadha he cut off, hewed, felled.


gif (n.)

1987, acronym from Graphics Interchange Format.


gift (n.)

mid-13c. (c.1100 in surnames), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse gift, gipt gift, good
luck, from Proto-Germanic *giftiz (cognates: Old Saxon gift, Old Frisian jefte, Middle Dutch ghifte
gift, German Mitgift dowry), from PIE root *ghabh- to give or receive (see habit).  For German Gift
poison, see poison (n.). Old English cognate gift meant bride-price, marriage gift (by the groom),
dowry (Old English noun for giving, gift was related giefu). Sense of natural talent is c.1300,
perhaps from earlier sense of inspiration (late 12c.). As a verb from 16c., especially in gifted. As
a verb, giftwrap (also gift-wrap) attested by 1936.


gifted (adj.)

talented, 1640s, past participle adjective from gift.


gig (n.1)

light carriage, small boat, 1790, perhaps, on notion of bouncing, from Middle English ghyg spinning
top (in whyrlegyg, mid-15c.), also giddy girl (early 13c., also giglet), from Old Norse geiga turn
sideways, or Danish gig spinning top.


gig (n.2)

job, first used by jazz musicians, attested from 1915 but said to have been in use c.1905; of
uncertain origin. As a verb, by 1939. Related: Gigged; gigging.


giga-

arbitrary word-forming element meaning billion in the metric system, 1947, from Greek gigas giant
(see giant).


gigabyte (n.)

1982, from giga- + byte.


gigantic (adj.)

1610s, pertaining to giants, from Latin gigant- stem of gigantem, from gigas giant (see giant) +
-ic. Replaced earlier gigantine (c.1600), gigantical (c.1600), giantlike (1570s). Of material or
immaterial things, actions, etc., by 1797.


gigantism (n.)

1854, from Latin gigant- (see gigantic) + -ism.


gigaton (n.)

by 1977, from giga- + ton.


giggle (v.)

c.1500, probably imitative. Related: Giggled; giggling; giggly. As a noun from 1570s.


giglot (n.)

lewd, wanton woman (mid-14c.); later a giddy, romping girl; of unknown origin; compare gig (n.1).


gigolo (n.)

1922, from French gigolo, formed as a masc. of gigole tall, thin woman; dancing girl; prostitute,
perhaps from verb gigoter to move the shanks, hop, from gigue shank, also fiddle, of Germanic
origin. This is perhaps the same word that was borrowed earlier as Middle English giglot (early
14c.) lewd, wanton girl, which was later applied to males (mid-15c.) with the sense villainous man.
Middle English gigletry meant lasciviousness, harlotry (late 14c.).


gila monster (n.)

Heloderma suspectum, 1877, American English, from Gila River, which runs through its habitat in
Arizona. The river name probably is from an Indian language, but it is unknown now which one, or
what the word meant in it.


Gilbert

masc. proper name, from Old French Guillebert (from Old High German Williberht, literally a bright
will) or Old French Gilebert, from Gisilbert, literally a bright pledge, from Old High German gisil
pledge, a Celtic loan-word (compare Old Irish giall pledge) + beorht bright (see Albert). It was the
common name for a male cat (especially in short form Gib) from c.1400 (see Tom). As a unit of
magneto-motive force, it honors English physicist William Gilbert (1544-1603).


gild (v.)

Old English gyldan to gild, to cover with a thin layer of gold, from Proto-Germanic *gulthian
(cognates: Old Norse gylla to gild, Old High German ubergulden to cover with gold), from *gulthan
gold (see gold). Related: Gilded; gilding. Figuratively from 1590s.


gilded (adj.)

1560s (late Old English had gegylde); in modern use the more dignified past participle of gild
(q.v.). Shakespeare's lilies were never gilded; the quote (King John, iv.2) is, To gild refined
gold, to paint the lily.


Gilded Age (n.)

in reference to an era in U.S. history, from the novel The Gilded Age by Mark Twain and C.D. Warner,
published 1873.


gilding (n.)

action of gilding, mid-15c.; golden surface produced by gilding, 1630s; verbal noun from gild (v.).


Gilead

Biblical site (Gen. xxxi:21, etc.), traditionally from the name of a grandson of Manasseh, perhaps
from Aramaic gal heap of stones.


Giles

masc. proper name, from Old French Gilles, from Latin Aegidius, from aegis (see aegis). Often used
as a typical name of a simple-minded farmer.


gill (n.1)

organ of breathing in fishes, early 14c., of unknown origin, perhaps from a Scandinavian source,
such as Old Norse giolnar which perhaps means gills; Old Danish -g&aelig;ln (in fiske-g&aelig;ln
fish gill). Related: Gills.


gill (n.2)

liquid measure (commonly a half-pint), late 13c., from Old French gille, a wine measure, and
directly from Medieval Latin gillo earthenware jar, of uncertain origin.


Gill

fem. proper name, see Jill.


Gillian

fem. proper name, from French Juliane, from Latin Juliana (a saint's name), fem. of Julianus,
literally of Julius.


gillyflower (n.)

1550s, folk etymology spelling (by association of flower) of gilofre, originally clove, c.1300, from
Old French girofle clove, ultimately from Greek karyophyllon clove, nut leaf, dried flower bud of
clove tree, from karyon nut (see karyo-) + phyllon leaf (see folio). The flower so named for its
scent, so called from late 14c.


gilt (adj.)

c.1400, past participle of Middle English gilden, from Old English gyldan (see gild). Also used as a
noun with a sense of gilding (early 15c.).


gimbal (n.)

1570s, joints, connecting links; alteration of gemel twins (late 14c.), from Old French jumel
(Modern  French jumeau) a twin, from Latin gemellus, diminutive of geminus (see geminate). Related:
Gimbals.


gimcrack (n.)

1610s, showy person; sense of trifle first recorded 1839; of uncertain origin, perhaps alteration of
gibecrake, a kind of ornament on wooden furniture (mid-14c.), perhaps from Old French giber to
rattle, shake + Middle English crak sharp noise, crack. In 18c.-19c. it also meant a person who has
a turn for mechanical contrivances.


gimlet (n.)

boring-tool, mid-14c., gymbelette, from Anglo-French guimbelet (French gibelet), perhaps from Middle
Dutch wimmelkijn (with substitute of French diminutive suffix), diminutive of wimmel auger, drill.
The meaning cocktail made with gin or vodka and lime juice is first attested 1928, presumably from
its penetrating effects on the drinker.


gimme

by 1828, colloquial contraction of give me. Gimme cap attested by 1978.    TOMMY -- Gimme a cake.
MAMMA -- If what? -- If you please .  TOMMY -- O, let up on that Pinafore business; gimme a cake!
[Puck, July 2, 1878]


gimmick (n.)

1926 (in Maine &amp; Grant's Wise-Crack Dictionary, which defines it as a device used for making a
fair game crooked), American English, perhaps an alteration of gimcrack, or an anagram of magic.


gimmickry (n.)

1952, from gimmick + -ry.


gimmicky (adj.)

1948, from gimmick + -y (2).


gimp (n.1)

1925, a crippled leg, also a crippled person, perhaps by association with limp, or a corruption of
gammy (see game (adj.)).


gimp (n.2)

also gymp, ornamental material for trimming dresses, furniture, etc., 1660s, from French guimpe, Old
French guimple wimple, headdress, veil, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German wimpal).


gimpy

1925 (n.); 1931 (adj.); hobo slang, from gimp + -y (3) and (2).


gin (n.1)

type of distilled drinking alcohol, 1714, shortening of geneva, altered (by influence of the
similarity of the name of the Swiss city, with which it has no other connection) from Dutch genever
juniper (because the alcohol was flavored with its berries), from Old French genevre, from Vulgar
Latin *jeniperus, from Latin juniperus juniper (see juniper). Gin and tonic attested by 1873; gin-
sling by 1790. Card game gin rummy first attested 1941 (described in Life that year as the latest
Hollywood fad).


gin (n.2)

machine for separating cotton from seeds, 1796, American English, used earlier of various other
machineries, from Middle English gin ingenious device, contrivance (c.1200), from Old French gin
machine, device, scheme, shortened form of engin, from Latin ingenium (see engine). The verb in this
sense is recorded from 1789.


gin (v.1)

in slang phrase gin up enliven, make more exciting, 1887, probably from earlier ginger up in same
sense (1849), from ginger in sense of spice, pizzazz; specifically in reference to the treatment
described in the 1811 slang dictionary under the entry for feague:    ... to put ginger up a horse's
fundament, and formerly, as it is said, a live eel, to make him lively and carry his tail well; it
is said, a forfeit is incurred by any horse-dealer's servant, who shall shew a horse without first
feaguing him. Feague is used, figuratively, for encouraging or spiriting one up.


gin (v.2)

to begin, c.1200, ginnen, shortened form of beginnen (see begin).


ginger (n.)

mid-14c., from Old English gingifer, from Medieval Latin gingiber, from Latin zingiberi, from Greek
zingiberis, from Prakrit (Middle Indic) singabera, from Sanskrit srngaveram, from srngam horn +
vera- body, so called from the shape of its root. But this may be Sanskrit folk etymology, and the
word may be from an ancient Dravidian name that also produced the Malayalam name for the spice,
inchi-ver, from inchi root. See gin (v.). The word apparently was readopted in Middle English from
Old French gingibre (Modern French gingembre). Meaning spirit, spunk, temper is from 1843, American
English. Ginger-ale recorded by 1822; ginger-snap as a type of cookie is from 1855, American
English.


gingerbread (n.)

late 13c., gingerbrar, from Old French ginginbrat ginger preserve, from Medieval Latin gingimbratus
gingered, from gingiber (see ginger). The ending changed by folk etymology to -brede bread, a
formation attested by mid-14c. Originally preserved ginger, the meaning a kind of spiced cake is
from 15c. Figurative use, showy, insubstantial is from c.1600. Sense of fussy decoration on a house
is first recorded 1757; gingerbread-work (1748) was a sailor's term for carved decoration on a ship.


gingerly (adv.)

1510s, elegantly, daintily, perhaps from Old French gensor, comp. of gent dainty, delicate, from
Latin gentius (well)-born (see gentle). Meaning extremely cautiously is from c.1600.


gingham (n.)

1610s, from Dutch gingang, traders' rendering of a Malay word said to be ginggang striped, used as a
noun with the sense of striped cotton. Also from the same source, French guingan, Spanish guinga,
Italian gingano, German gingang.


gingival (adj.)

1660s, from Latin gingiva gums (of unknown origin) + -al (1).


gingivitis (n.)

1874, from Latin gingiva gums + -itis.


ginkgo (n.)

1773, from Japanese ginkyo, from Chinese yin-hing, from yin silver + hing apricot (Sino-Japanese
kyo). Introduced to New World 1784 by William Hamilton in his garden near Philadelphia.


Ginnie Mae

1970, fleshed out in the form of a fem. proper name, from GNMA, acronym of Government National
Mortgage Association.


ginormous (adj.)

by 1948, perhaps 1942, apparently originally a World War II military colloquialism, from a merger of
gigantic + enormous.


ginseng (n.)

1690s, from Chinese jen-shen. First element means man, but the meaning of the second is obscure.


Gioconda

in La Gioconda, name of the da Vinci painting also known as the Mona Lisa, from Italian gioconda,
fem. of giocondo, from Latin jocundus (see jocund).


gip

attested from 1840 as an abbreviation of gypsy (q.v.). Also see gyp. Related: Gipped; gipping.


gipsy

alternative spelling of gypsy.


giraffe (n.)

1590s, giraffa, from Italian giraffa, from Arabic zarafa, probably from an African language. Earlier
Middle English spellings varied wildly, depending on the source, including jarraf, ziraph, and
gerfauntz, some apparently directly from Arabic, the last reflecting some confusion with olifaunt
elephant.    In Arabye, &thorn;ei ben clept Gerfauntz; &thorn;at is a best pomelee or spotted .. but
a lityll more high &thorn;an is a stede, But he hath the necke a xxti cubytes long. [Mandeville's
Travels, c.1425]     The modern form of the English word is attested by c.1600 and is via French
girafe. Replaced earlier camelopard, a compound of camel (for the long neck) and pard (n.1) leopard
(for the spots).


girandole (n.)

1630s, a type of fireworks; 1825 as a type of earring or pendant, from French girandole, from
Italian girandola, diminutive of giranda a revolving jet, from Latin gyrandus, gerundive of gyrare
to turn round in a circle, revolve (see gyration).


girasole (n.)

1580s, from Italian girasole, literally turning toward the sun, from girare to rotate (see gyration)
+ sole (see Sol).


gird (v.)

Old English gyrdan put a belt or girdle around; encircle, surround; invest with attributes, from
Proto-Germanic *gurthjan (cognates: Old Norse gyr&eth;a, Old Saxon gurdian, Old Frisian gerda, Dutch
gorden, Old High German gurtan, German g&uuml;rten). Related to Old English geard hedge, enclosure
(see yard (n.1)). Related: Girded; girding.    Throughout its whole history the English word is
chiefly employed in rhetorical language, in many instances with more or less direct allusion to
biblical passages. [OED]


girder (n.)

main supporting beam that carries flooring, 1610s, agent noun from gird, on notion of something that
holds up something else. Used of iron bridge supports from 1853.


girdle (n.)

Old English gyrdel belt, sash, cord about the waist, common Germanic. (cognates: Old Norse
gyr&eth;ill, Swedish g&ouml;rdel, Old Frisian gerdel, Dutch gordel, Old High German gurtil, German
G&uuml;rtel belt), related to Old English gyrdan to gird (see gird). Modern euphemistic sense of
elastic corset first recorded 1925. The verb meaning encircle with a girdle is attested from 1580s.
Meaning to cut off a belt of bark around a trunk to kill a tree is from 1660s. Related: Girdled;
girdling.


girl (n.)

c.1300, gyrle child (of either sex), of unknown origin; current scholarship [OED says] leans toward
an unrecorded Old English *gyrele, from Proto-Germanic *gurwilon-, diminutive of *gurwjoz
(apparently also represented by Low German g&aelig;re boy, girl, Norwegian dialectal gorre, Swedish
dialectal gurre small child, though the exact relationship, if any, between all these is obscure),
from PIE *ghwrgh-, also found in Greek parthenos virgin. But this is highly conjectural. And
Liberman (2008) writes:   Girl does not go back to any Old English or Old Germanic form. It is part
of a large group of Germanic words whose root begins with a g or k and ends in r. The final
consonant in girl is a diminutive suffix. The g-r words denote young animals, children, and all
kinds of creatures considered immature, worthless, or past their prime.    Another candidate is Old
English gierela garment (for possible sense evolution in this theory, compare brat). Like boy, lass,
lad it is of obscure origin. Probably most of them arose as jocular transferred uses of words that
had originally different meaning [OED]. Specific meaning of female child is late 14c. Applied to any
young unmarried woman since mid-15c. Meaning sweetheart is from 1640s. Girl next door as a type of
unflashy attractiveness is recorded by 1953.    Doris [Day] was a big vocalist even before she hit
the movies in 1948. There, as the latest movie colony girl next door, sunny-faced Doris soon became
a leading movie attraction as well as the world's top female recording star. She's the girl next
door, all right, said one Hollywood admirer. Next door to the bank. [Life magazine, Dec. 22, 1958]
Girl Friday is from 1940, a reference to Robinson Crusoe.


girlfriend (n.)

also girl-friend, by 1863 as a woman's female friend in youth, from girl + friend (n.). As a man's
sweetheart, by 1922. She-friend was used 17c. in the same set of senses, of the mistress of a men
and of a woman who is a close friend of another.


girlie (adj.)

meant to titillate men, 1942, from girl.


girlish (adj.)

1560s, from girl + -ish. Related: Girlishly; girlishness.


girly (adj.)

girl-like, 1866, from girl + -y (2). Girly-girly (adj.) is recorded from 1883; as a noun, from 1882.


girly (n.)

little girl, 1866, (1860 as girlie), from girl + -y (3).


Girondist (n.)

1795, member of the moderate republican party of France, 1791-93, from Gironde, name of a deputy in
southwestern France; the faction so called because its leaders were deputies elected from there.


girt (v.)

c.1400 as alternative form of gird; also past tense and past participle of gird.


girth (n.)

c.1300, belt around a horse's body, from Old Norse gjor&eth; girdle, belt, hoop, from Proto-Germanic
*gertu- (cf Gothic gairda girdle), from the same source as gird. Sense of measurement around an
object first recorded 1640s.


gist (n.)

1711, the real point (of a law case, etc.), from Anglo-French legalese phrases such as cest action
gist this action lies, meaning this case is sustainable by law, from Old French gist en it consists
in, it lies in (third person singular present indicative of g&eacute;sir to lie), from Latin iacet
it lies, from iacere to lie, rest, related to iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Extended sense of
essence first recorded 1823.


git (n.)

worthless person, 1946, British slang, a southern variant of Scottish get illegitimate child, brat,
which is related to beget.


Gitano (n.)

gypsy, 1834, from Spanish Gitano, from Vulgar Latin *&AElig;gyptanus Egyptian (see Gypsy). The fem.
is gitana. The French form of the feminine, gitane, was used as the name of a brand of cigarettes
(1933) and has come to be used for French cigarettes generally.


gittern (n.)

late 14c., from Old French guiterne, from Latin cithara, from Greek kithara (see guitar).


give (v.)

Old English giefan (West Saxon) to give, bestow; allot, grant; commit, devote, entrust, class V
strong verb (past tense geaf, past participle giefen), from Proto-Germanic *geban (cognates: Old
Frisian jeva, Middle Dutch gheven, Dutch geven, Old High German geban, German geben, Gothic giban),
from PIE *ghabh- to take, hold, have, give (see habit). It became yiven in Middle English, but
changed to guttural g by influence of Old Norse gefa to give, Old Danish giv&aelig;. Meaning to
yield to pressure is from 1570s.   Give in yield is from 1610s; give out is mid-14c., publish,
announce; meaning run out, break down is from 1520s. Give up surrender is mid-12c. To give (someone)
a cold seems to reflect the old belief that one could be cured of disease by deliberately infecting
others. What gives? what is happening? is attested from 1940. Give-and-take (n.) is originally from
horse racing (1769) and refers to races in which bigger horses were given more weight to carry,
lighter ones less. General sense attested by 1778.


giveaway (n.)

also give-away, act of giving away, 1872, from phrase give away, c.1400 (of brides, from 1719); see
give (v.) + away (adv.). Meaning to betray, expose, reveal is 1878, originally U.S. slang.


given (adj.)

late 14c., allotted, predestined, past participle adjective from give (v.); also with a noun sense
of fate, reflecting an important concept in pagan Germanic ideology (Old English had giefe&eth;e in
this sense). The modern noun sense of what is given, known facts is from 1879. Given name (1827) so
called because given at baptism.


giver (n.)

mid-14c., from give + -er (1). Old English agent-noun forms were giefend, giefa.


Giza

place in Egypt, from Arabic Er-ges-her beside the high, i.e., the Great Pyramid.


gizmo (n.)

1942, Marine and Navy usage for any old thing you can't put a name to [Life magazine, July 30,
1945], of unknown origin, perhaps a made-up word.


gizzard (n.)

stomach of a bird, late 14c., from Old French gisier (Modern French g&eacute;sier) entrails, giblets
(of a bird), probably from Vulgar Latin *gicerium, dissimilated from Latin gigeria (neuter plural)
cooked entrails of a fowl, a delicacy in ancient Rome, from PIE *yekwr- liver (see hepatitis).
Parasitic -d added 1500s. Later extended to other animals, and, jocularly, to human beings.


glabella (n.)

space between the eyebrows, 1590s, Modern Latin, properly fem. of adj. glabellus without hair,
smooth, diminutive of glaber smooth, bald, from PIE *gladh- smooth (see glad).


glabrous (adj.)

1630s, from Latin glaber hairless, smooth, bald (see glad).


glace (adj.)

having a smooth, polished surface, 1847, from French glac&eacute;, past participle of glacer to ice,
give a gloss to, from Vulgar Latin *glaciare to turn or make into ice, from Latin glacies ice (see
glacial).


glacial (adj.)

1650s, cold, icy, from French glacial, from Latin glacialis icy, frozen, full of ice, from glacies
ice, probably from PIE root *gel- cold (cognates: Latin gelu frost; see cold (adj.)). Geological
sense apparently coined in 1846 by British naturalist Edward Forbes (1815-1854). Related: Glacially.


glaciate (v.)

1620s, to freeze; 1865 in reference to glaciers, from Latin glaciatus, past participle of glaciare
to turn to ice, from glacies (see glacial).


glaciation (n.)

1640s, noun of action from Latin glaciare to freeze (see glacis).


glacier (n.)

1744, from French glacier, from Savoy dialect glaci&egrave;re moving mass of ice, from Old French
glace ice, from Vulgar Latin glacia (source also of Old Proven&ccedil;al glassa, Italian ghiaccia),
from Latin glacies (see glacial).


glaciology (n.)

1856, from Latin glacies ice (see glacial) + -ology. Related: Glaciological; glaciologist.


glacis (n.)

sloping bank (especially leading up to a fortification), 1670s, from French glacir to freeze, make
slippery, from Old French glacier to slip, glide, from Vulgar Latin *glaciare to make or turn into
ice, from glacies (see glacial).


glad (adj.)

Old English gl&aelig;d bright, shining, joyous, from Proto-Germanic *glada- (cognates: Old Norse
gla&eth;r smooth, bright, glad, Danish glad glad, joyful, Old Saxon gladmod glad, Old Frisian gled
smooth, Dutch glad slippery, German glatt smooth), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives
referring to bright materials and gold (see glass). The modern sense is much weakened. Slang glad
rags one's best clothes first recorded 1902.


glad hand (n.)

1895, in verbal phrase to give the glad hand extend a welcome. As a verb, attested from 1903 (also
gladhand). Often used cynically.


gladden (v.)

c.1300, to be glad; 1550s, to make glad; see glad + -en (1). Earlier in both senses was simply glad
(v.), from Old English gladian, Mercian gleadian be glad, make glad.


glade (n.)

clear, open space in a woods, c.1400, perhaps from Middle English glode (c.1300), from Old Norse
gla&eth;r bright (see glad). Original meaning would be bright (because open) space in a wood
(compare French clairi&egrave;re glade, from clair clear, bright; German Lichtung clearing, glade,
from Licht light). American English sense of marshy grassland (as in Everglades) first recorded
c.1796.


gladiator (n.)

mid-15c., Roman swordsman, from Latin gladiator, literally swordsman, from gladius sword, probably
from Gaulish (compare Welsh cleddyf, Cornish clethe, Breton kleze sword; see claymore). Old Irish
claideb is from Welsh.    The close connection with Celtic words for 'sword', together with the
imperfect match of initial consonants, and the semantic field of weaponry, suggests that Latin
borrowed a form *gladio- or *kladio- (a hypothetical variant of attested British Celtic  *kladimo-
'sword') from [Proto-Celtic] or from a third language. [de Vaan]


gladiatorial (adj.)

1750s, from Latin gladiatorius (see gladiator) + -al (1).


gladiolus (n.)

c.1000, from Latin gladiolus wild iris, literally small sword, diminutive of gladius sword (see
gladiator); so called by Pliny in reference to the plant's sword-shaped leaves. The Old English form
of the word was gladdon. Form gladiol is attested mid-15c.; the modern use perhaps represents a
1560s reborrowing from Latin.


gladly (adv.)

Old English gl&aelig;dlice joyfully, kindly, willingly; see glad + -ly (2).


gladness (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;dnes; see glad + -ness.


gladsome (adj.)

late 14c., gladsum; see glad + -some (1).


Gladys

fem. proper name, Welsh Gwladys, probably a Brythonified form of Latin Claudia (q.v.).


Glagolitic (n.)

1861, from Serbo-Croatian glagolica Glagolitic alphabet, from Old Church Slavonic glagolu word, from
PIE *gal-gal-, reduplicated form of root *gal- (2) to call, shout (see call (v.)) + Greek suffix
-itic. The older of the two Slavic writing systems (Cyrillic is the other), it was designed by
Cyrillus c.863 C.E.


glair (n.)

white of an egg, c.1300, from Old French glaire white of egg, slime, mucus (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
*claria (ovi) white part (of an egg), from Latin clarus bright, clear (see clear (adj.)).


glaive (v.)

late 13c., used in Middle English of various weapons, from Old French glaive lance, spear, sword,
also figuratively used for violent death (12c.), from Latin gladius sword (see gladiator);
influenced by clava knotty branch, cudgel, club, related to clavus nail.


glam (adj.)

slang shortening of glamorous, first attested 1936. Glam rock attested by 1974. Glamazon glamourous,
dominant woman attested by 1985 (see amazon).


glamor

chiefly U.S. alternative spelling of glamour (q.v.). Related: Glamorous; glamorously.


glamorize (v.)

also glamourize, 1901, from glamor + -ize. Related: Glamorized; glamorizing.


glamorous (adj.)

1882, from glamor + -ous. Related: Glamorously.


glamour (n.)

1720, Scottish, magic, enchantment (especially in phrase to cast the glamor), a variant of Scottish
gramarye magic, enchantment, spell, alteration of English grammar (q.v.) with a medieval sense of
any sort of scholarship, especially occult learning, the latter sense attested from c.1500 in
English but said to have been more common in Medieval Latin. Popularized by the writings of Sir
Walter Scott (1771-1832). Sense of magical beauty, alluring charm first recorded 1840. Jamieson's
1825 supplement to his Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language has glamour-gift the power
of enchantment; metaph. applied to female fascination. Jamieson's original edition (1808) looks to
Old Norse for the source of the word. Zoega's Old Icelandic dictionary has gl&#225;m-s&#253;ni
illusion.


glamour (v.)

1814, from glamour (n.). Related: Glamoured; glamouring.


glance (n.)

c.1500, sudden movement producing a flash, from glance (v.). Meaning brief or hurried look is from
1590s.


glance (v.)

mid-15c., of weapons, from glacen to graze, strike a glancing blow (c.1300), from Old French glacier
to slip, make slippery, from glace ice (see glacial). Sense of look quickly (first recorded 1580s)
probably was influenced in form and meaning by Middle English glenten look askance (see glint).
Related: Glanced; glancing.


gland (n.)

1690s, from French glande (Old French glandre, 13c.), from Latin glandula gland of the throat,
tonsil, diminutive of glans (genitive glandis) acorn, nut; acorn-shaped ball, from PIE root *gwele-
(2) acorn (cognates: Greek balanos, Armenian kalin, Old Church Slavonic zelodi acorn; Lithuanian
gile oak). Earlier English form was glandula (c.1400).


glanders (n.)

horse disease characterized by glandular swelling, early 15c., from Old French glandres swollen
glands, plural of glandre, from Latin glandula (see gland).


glandular (adj.)

1740, from French glandulaire, from glandule small gland (16c.), from Latin glandula (see gland).


glans (n.)

1640s, from Latin glans acorn (see gland).


glare (v.)

late 13c., shine brightly, from or related to Middle Dutch, Middle Low German glaren to gleam,
related by rhoticization to glas (see glass). Sense of stare fiercely is from late 14c. The noun is
c.1400 in sense bright light; 1660s in sense of fierce look. Old English gl&aelig;r (n.) meant
amber. Related: Glared; glaring.


glaring (adj.)

late 14c., from present participle of glare. Meaning obtrusively conspicuous is from 1706.


Glasgow

from Gaelic, literally green hollow, from gael green + cau hollow.


glasnost (n.)

1972 (in reference to a letter of 1969 by Solzhenitsyn), from Russian glasnost openness to public
scrutiny, literally publicity, fact of being public, ultimately from Old Church Slavonic glasu
voice, from PIE *gal-so-, from root *gal- (2) to call, shout (see call (v.)). First used in a socio-
political sense by Lenin; popularized in English after Mikhail Gorbachev used it prominently in a
speech of March 11, 1985, accepting the post of general secretary of the CPSU.    The Soviets, it
seems, have rediscovered the value of Lenin's dictum that glasnost, the Russian word for openness or
publicity, is a desirable form of conduct. [New York Times news service article, March 1981]


glass (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;s glass, a glass vessel, from Proto-Germanic *glasam (cognates: Old Saxon glas,
Middle Dutch and Dutch glas, German Glas, Old Norse gler glass, looking glass, Danish glar), from
PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (cognates: Latin
glaber smooth, bald, Old Church Slavonic gladuku, Lithuanian glodus smooth), with derivatives
referring to colors and bright materials, a word that is the root of widespread words for gray,
blue, green, and yellow (such as Old English gl&aelig;r amber, Latin glaesum amber, Old Irish glass
green, blue, gray, Welsh glas blue; see glass). Sense of drinking glass is early 13c.    The glass
slipper in Cinderella is perhaps an error by Charles Perrault, translating in 1697, mistaking Old
French voir ermine, fur for verre glass. In other versions of the tale it is a fur slipper. The
proverb about people in glass houses throwing stones is attested by 1779, but earlier forms go back
to 17c.:    Who hath glass-windows of his own must take heed how he throws stones at his house. ...
He that hath a body made of glass must not throw stones at another. [John Ray, Handbook of Proverbs,
1670]


glass (v.)

late 14c., to fit with glass; 1570s, to cover with glass, from glass (n.). Related: Glassed;
glassing.


glasses (n.)

spectacles, 1660s, from plural of glass (n.).


glassy (adj.)

late 14c., from glass + -y (2).


Glastonbury

town in Somersetshire, famous as a prehistoric site, Old English Glestingabyrig, Glastingburi (725),
Stronghold (Old English byrig, dative of burh) of the people (Old English -inga-) living at Glaston,
a Celtic name, possibly meaning woad place.


glaucoma (n.)

1640s, from Greek glaukoma cataract, opacity of the lens (cataracts and glaucoma not distinguished
until c.1705), from -oma + glaukos, an adjective of uncertain origin (see glaucous).


glaucous (adj.)

bluish-green, gray, 1670s, from Latin glaucus bluish-green, of uncertain origin; used in Homer of
the sea as gleaming, silvery (apparently without a color connotation); used by later writers with a
sense of bluish-green, gray, of olive leaves and eyes. Homer's glauk-opis Athene probably originally
was a bright-eyed, not a gray-eyed goddess. Greek for owl was glaux from its bright, staring eyes.


glaze (v.)

mid-14c., glasen to fit with glass, from glas (see glass), probably influenced by glazier. Noun
sense of substance used to make a glossy coating is first attested 1784; in reference to ice, from
1752. Related: Glazed; glazing.


glazier (n.)

late 14c. (late 13c. as a surname; alternative glazer recorded from c.1400), from glass + -er (1),
influenced by French words in -ier.


gleam (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;m brilliant light; brightness, splendor, radiance, from Proto-Germanic *glaimiz
(cognates: Old Saxon glimo brightness; Middle High German glim spark, gleime glowworm; German
glimmen to glimmer, glow; Old Norse glija to shine, glitter), from root *glim-, from PIE *ghel- (2)
to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass).


gleam (v.)

early 13c., from gleam (n). Related: Gleamed; gleaming.


glean (v.)

early 14c., from Old French glener (Modern French glaner) to glean, from Late Latin glennare make a
collection, perhaps from Gaulish (compare Old Irish do-glinn he collects, gathers, Celt. glan clean,
pure). Figurative sense was earlier in English than the literal one of gather grain left by the
reapers (late 14c.). Related: Gleaned; gleaning.


gleaner (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from glean (v.).


glebe (n.)

c.1300, from Old French glebe, from Latin gleba, glaeba clod, lump of earth, from PIE *glebh- to
roll into a ball (cognates: Latin globus sphere; Old English clyppan to embrace; Lithuanian glebys
armful, globti to embrace, support). Earliest English sense is land forming a clergyman's benefice,
on notion of soil of the earth as source of vegetable products.


glee (n.)

Old English gliu, gliw entertainment, mirth, jest, play, sport, presumably from a Proto-Germanic
*gleujam but absent in other Germanic languages except for the rare Old Norse gly joy; probably
related to glad. A poetry word in Old English and Middle English, obsolete c.1500-c.1700, it somehow
found its way back to currency late 18c. In Old English, an entertainer was a gleuman (female
gleo-m&aelig;gden). Glee club (1814) is from the secondary sense of unaccompanied part-song (1650s)
as a form of musical entertainment.


gleeful (adj.)

1580s, from glee + -ful. Related: Gleefully. Alternative gleesome attested from c.1600.


gleek (n.)

card game, 1530s, from French glic, ghelicque (15c.), perhaps from Middle Dutch ghelic (Dutch
gelijk) like, because one of the goals of the game is collecting cards of the same rank.


gleen (n.)

gleam of sunlight, 1650s, probably from a Scandinavian dialectal word; compare Swedish dialectal
glena, Danish dialectal glene clear patch of sky.


gleet (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French glete clay, loam; slime, mud; filth (12c., Modern French glette), from
Latin glitem (nominative glis) sticky, glutinous ground, back-formation from glittus sticky.


glen (n.)

narrow valley, late 15c., from Scottish, from Gaelic gleann mountain valley (cognate with Old Irish
glenn, Welsh glyn). Common in place names such as Glenlivet (1822), a kind of whiskey, named for the
place it was first made (literally the glen of the Livet, a tributary of the Avon); and Glengarry
(1841) a kind of men's cap, of Highland origin, named for a valley in Inverness-shire.


glib (adj.)

1590s, smooth and slippery, possibly a shortening of obsolete glibbery slippery, which is perhaps
from Low German glibberig smooth, slippery, from Middle Low German glibberich, from or related to
glibber jelly. Of words, speakers, etc., from c.1600. Related: Glibly; glibness.


glide (v.)

Old English glidan move along smoothly and easily, glide, slip, slide (class I strong verb, past
tense glad, past participle gliden), from West Germanic *glidan to glide (cognates: Old Saxon
glidan, Old Frisian glida, German gleiten). Related: Glided; gliding. Strong past tense form glid
persisted into 20c. The noun is attested 1580s, from the verb.


glider (n.)

mid-15c., person or thing that glides, agent noun from glide. Meaning motorless airplane is c.1897.


glim (n.)

18c. slang, a light, candle, lantern; 19c. slang an eye, probably a back-formation from glimmer.


glimmer (v.)

early 14c., shine brightly, a frequentative from Proto-Germanic *glim-, root of Old English
gl&aelig;m brightness (see gleam (n.)). Sense shifted 15c. to shine faintly. Compare Dutch
glimmeren, German glimmeren to shine dimly. Related: Glimmered; glimmering.


glimmer (n.)

1580s, from glimmer (v.).


glimpse (v.)

c.1400, to glisten, be dazzling, probably from Old English *glimsian shine faintly, from Proto-
Germanic *glim- (see gleam). If so, the intrusive -p- would be there to ease pronunciation. Sense of
catch a quick view first recorded mid-15c.  Related: Glimpsed. The noun is recorded from mid-16c.;
earlier in verbal noun glimpsing (mid-14c.).


glint (n.)

1540s (modern use from 1826), from glint (v.).


glint (v.)

1787, from Scottish, where apparently it survived as an alteration of Middle English glenten gleam,
flash, glisten (mid-15c.), from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian gletta to look, dialectal
Swedish glinta to shine), from Proto-Germanic *glent-, from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with
derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass). Reintroduced into literary English
by Burns. Related: Glinted; glinting.


glioma (n.)

type of brain tumor, 1870, medical Latin, literally glue tumor, from Greek glia glue + -oma.


glissade

in dancing sense, 1832 (v.), 1843 (n.), from French glissade, from glisser to slip, slide (13c.),
from a Germanic source (cognate with Dutch glissen), from Proto-Germanic *glidan to glide (see
glide).


glissando (n.)

1873, Italianized form of French glissant, present participle of glisser (see glissade).


glisten (v.)

Old English glisnian to glisten, gleam, from Proto-Germanic *glis- (cognates: Old Frisian glisa to
shine, Middle High German glistern to sparkle, Old Danish glisse to shine), from PIE *ghleis-, from
root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass).
Related: Glistened; glistening.


glister (v.)

late 14c., probably from or related to Low German glisten, Middle Dutch glisteren, from PIE root
*ghel- (2) to shine, glitter (see glass). Related: Glistered; glistering. As a noun, from 1530s.


glitch (n.)

1962, American English, possibly from Yiddish glitsh a slip, from glitshn to slip, from German
glitschen, and related gleiten to glide (see glide). Perhaps directly from German; it began as
technical jargon in the argot of electronic hardware engineers, popularized and given a broader
meaning by U.S. space program.


glitter (v.)

c.1300, glideren (late 14c. as gliteren), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse glitra to
glitter, from glit brightness, from Proto-Germanic *glit- shining, bright (cognates: Old English
glitenian to glitter, shine; be distinguished, Old High German glizzan, German glitzern, Gothic
glitmunjan), from PIE *ghleid- (cognates: Greek khlidon, khlidos ornament), from root *ghel- (2) to
shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass). Related: Glittered;
glittering. The noun is c.1600, from the verb. Glitter rock is from 1972.


glitterati (n.)

1956, from glitter, with a play on literati.


glitz (n.)

1977, a back-formation from glitzy.


glitzy (adj.)

1966, from Yiddish glitz glitter, from German glitzern sparkle (see glitter).


gloam

1821 (Keats), a back-formation from gloaming.


gloaming (n.)

Old English glomung twilight, formed (probably on model of &aelig;fning evening) from glom twilight,
related to glowan to glow (hence glow of sunrise or sunset), from Proto-Germanic *glo- (see glow
(v.)). Fell from currency except in Yorkshire dialect, but preserved in Scotland and reintroduced by
Burns and other Scottish writers after 1785.


gloat (v.)

1570s, to look at furtively, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse glotta to grin, smile
scornfully, show the teeth, Swedish dialectal glotta to peep; or from Middle High German glotzen to
stare, gape. Sense of to look at with malicious satisfaction first recorded 1748. Related: Gloated;
gloating. As a noun, from 1640s with sense of side-glance; 1899 as act of gloating.


glob (n.)

1900, perhaps suggested by blob, gob, etc.


global (adj.)

1670s, spherical, from globe + -al (1). Meaning worldwide, universal is from 1892, from French.
Global village first attested 1960, popularized, if not coined, by Canadian educator Marshall
McLuhan (1911-1980).Postliterate man's electronic media contract the world to a village or tribe
where everything happens to everyone at the same time: everyone knows about, and therefore
participates in, everything that is happening the minute it happens. Television gives this quality
of simultaneity to events in the global village. [Carpenter &amp; McLuhan, Explorations in
Communication, 1960]


global warming (n.)

by 1983 as the name for a condition of overall rising temperatures and attendant consequences as a
result of human activity. Originally theoretical, popularized as a reality from 1989.


globalisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of globalization; for spelling, see -ize.


globalism (n.)

1961, from global + -ism.


globalization (n.)

1961, from globalize, which is attested at least from 1953 in various senses; the main modern one,
with reference to global economic systems, emerged 1959.


globalize (v.)

1953, see globalization. Related: Globalized; globalizing.


globally (adv.)

by 1910, from global + -ly (2).


globate (adj.)

spherical, 1847, from Latin globatus, past participle of globare make into a globe, from globus (see
globe).


globe (n.)

mid-15c., sphere, from Middle French globe (14c.) and directly from Latin globus round mass, sphere,
ball, also, of men, a throng, crowd, body, mass, related to gleba clod, soil, land (see glebe).
Sense of planet earth, or a three-dimensional map of it first attested 1550s.


globetrotter (n.)

world traveller, 1871, from globe + agent noun from trot (v.). As a verb, globetrot is recorded from
1883.


globose (adj.)

spherical, early 15c., large and formless, from Latin globosus round as a ball, from globus (see
globe).


globular (adj.)

1650s, from French globulaire, from Latin globus (see globe).


globule (n.)

1660s, from French globule, from Latin globulus, diminutive of globus globe (see globe).


glockenspiel (n.)

1825, from German Glockenspiel, literally play of bells, from Glocke bell (see clock) + Spiel a
play.


glom (v.)

1907, glahm grab, snatch, steal, American English underworld slang, from Scottish glaum (1715),
apparently from Gaelic glam to handle awkwardly, grab voraciously, devour. Sense of look at, watch
(1945) apparently is derived from the same source. Related: Glommed; glomming.


glomeration (n.)

accumulation; ball, 1620s, from Latin glomerationem (nominative glomeratio), noun of action from
past participle stem of glomerare to make into a ball, from glomus ball of yarn, from PIE root
*glem-.


gloom

c.1300 as a verb, to look sullen or displeased, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Norwegian
dialectal glome to stare somberly). Not considered to be related to Old English glom twilight, but
perhaps to Middle Low German glum turbid, Dutch gluren to leer. The noun is 1590s in Scottish,
sullen look, from the verb. Sense of darkness, obscurity is first recorded 1629 in Milton's poetry;
that of melancholy is 1744 (gloomy in this sense is attested from 1580s).


gloomy (adj.)

1580s, probably from gloom even though that word is not attested as early as this one is.
Shakespeare used it of woods, Marlowe of persons. Gloomy Gus used in a general sense of sullen
person since 1940s, from a comic strip character of that name first recorded 1904. Related:
Gloomily; gloominess.


glop (n.)

1943, imitative of the sound of something viscous and unappetizing hitting a dinner plate.


Gloria

early 13c., name of a song of praise, from Medieval Latin gloria in Gloria Patri, hymn praising god
(and similar hymns), from Latin gloria glory (see glory).


glorification (n.)

mid-15c. as a term in alchemy, action of refining; state of being refined, from Late Latin
glorificationem (nominative glorificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of glorificare
(see glorify). From c.1500 in theology; general sense by mid-19c.


glorified (adj.)

mid-14c., invested with glory, past participle adjective from  glorify. Weakened sense of
transformed into something better is from 1821.


glorify (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French glorifier, from Late Latin glorificare to glorify, from Latin gloria (see
glory) + -ficare, from facere to make, do (see factitious). Related: Glorified; glorifying.


glorious (adj.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French glorious, Old French glorieus (12c., Modern French glorieux), from
Latin gloriosus full of glory, famous, from gloria (see glory). In 14c.-17c. it also could mean
boastful, vainglorious. Related: Gloriously.


glory (n.)

c.1200, gloire the splendor of God or Christ; praise offered to God, worship, from Old French glorie
(11c., Modern French gloire), from Latin gloria fame, renown, great praise or honor, of uncertain
origin.    Greek doxa expectation (Homer), later opinion, fame, and ultimately glory, was used in
Biblical writing to translate a Hebrew word which had a sense of brightness, splendor, magnificence,
majesty, and this subsequently was translated as Latin gloria, which has colored that word's meaning
in most European tongues. Wuldor was an Old English word used in this sense. Sense of magnificence
is c.1300 in English. Meaning worldly honor, fame, renown of the kingdom of Heaven, and of one who
is a source of glory are from mid-14c. Latin also had gloriola a little fame. Glory days was in use
by 1970.


glory (v.)

mid-14c., rejoice, from Old French gloriier and directly from Latin gloriari to boast, vaunt, brag,
pride oneself, from gloria (see glory). Related: Gloried; glorying.


glory hole (n.)

a drawer or place where things are heaped together in a disorderly manner, 1825, the first element
probably a variant of Scottish glaur to make muddy (mid-15c.), perhaps from Old Norse leir mud.
Sexual (originally homosexual) sense from 1940s.


gloss (n.1)

luster, 1530s, from Scandinavian (compare Icelandic glossi flame, related to glossa to flame), or
obsolete Dutch gloos a glowing, from Middle High German glos; probably ultimately from the same
source as Old English glowan (see glow (v.)).


gloss (n.2)

word inserted as an explanation, 1540s (earlier gloze, c.1300), from Latin glossa obsolete or
foreign word, one that requires explanation; hence also explanation, note, from Greek glossa
(Ionic), glotta (Attic) obscure word, language, also mouthpiece, literally tongue, from PIE *glogh-
thorn, point, that which is projected (source also of Old Church Slavonic glogu thorn). Figurative
use from 1540s. Both glossology (1716) and glottology (1841) have been used in the sense science of
language.


gloss (v.)

1570s as insert a word as an explanation, from gloss (n.2). From 1650s as to add luster, from gloss
(n.1). Figurative sense of smooth over, hide is from 1729, mostly from gloss (n.1) but showing
influence of gloss (n.2) in the extended verbal sense of explain away (1630s), from idea of a note
inserted in the margin of a text to explain a difficult word. Related: Glossed; glossing.


glossary (n.)

late 14c., from Latin glossarium collection of glosses, from Greek glossarion, diminutive of glossa
obsolete or foreign word (see gloss (n.2)).


glossator (n.)

writer of glosses, late 14c., from Medieval Latin glossator, from Latin glossa (see gloss (n.2)).
Also in same sense were glossographer (c.1600), glossographist (1774).


glosso-

word-forming element meaning tongue, from Greek glosso-, comb. form of glossa tongue (see gloss
(n.2)).


glossolalia (n.)

speaking in tongues, 1879, from Greek glossa tongue, language (see gloss (n.2)) + lalia talk,
prattle, a speaking, from lalein to speak, prattle, of echoic origin.


glossy (adj.)

1550s, from gloss (n.1) + -y (2). Figurative use from 1690s. The noun sense of photograph with a
glossy surface is from 1931. Related: Glossiness.


glottal (adj.)

1846; see glottis + -al (1). Glossal is attested from 1860.


glottis (n.)

1570s, from Greek glottis mouth of the windpipe, from glotta, Attic dialect variant of glossa tongue
(see gloss (n.2)).


glotto-

word-forming element meaning language, from Attic Greek glotto-, from glotta tongue, language (see
gloss (n.2)).


glottochronology (n.)

1953, from glotto- + chronology.


Gloucester

English county, Old English Gleawceaster, from Latin Coloniae Glev (2c.), from Glevo, a Celtic name
meaning bright place (perhaps influenced by Old English gleaw wise, prudent) + Old English ceaster
Roman town (see Chester).


glove (n.)

Old English glof glove, covering for the hand, also palm of the hand, from Proto-Germanic *galofo
(cognates: Old Norse glofi), probably from *ga- collective prefix + *lofi hand (cognates: Old Norse
lofi, Middle English love, Gothic lofa flat of the hand), from PIE *lep- be flat; palm, sole,
shoulder blade (cognates: Russian lopata shovel; Lithuanian lopa claw, lopeta shovel, spade).
German Handschuh, the usual word for glove, literally hand-shoe (Old High German hantscuoh; also
Danish and Swedish hantsche) is represented by Old English Handscio (the name of one of Beowulf's
companions, eaten by Grendel), but this is attested only as a proper name. To fit like a glove is
first recorded 1771.


glove (v.)

to cover or fit with a glove, c.1400, from glove (n.). Related: Gloved; gloving. Glover as a surname
is from mid-13c.


glow (v.)

Old English glowan to glow, shine as if red-hot, from Proto-Germanic base *glo- (cognates: Old Saxon
gloian, Old Frisian gled glow, blaze, Old Norse gloa, Old High German gluoen, German gl&uuml;hen to
glow), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see
glass). Figuratively from late 14c. Related: Glowed; glowing.


glow (n.)

mid-15c., from glow (v).


glow-worm (n.)

early 14c., from glow (v.) + worm (n.).


glower (v.)

mid-14c., to shine; c.1500, to stare with wide eyes, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare
Norwegian dialectal glora to glow), from Proto-Germanic base *glo- (see glow (v.)), root of Old
English glowan to glow, which influenced the spelling. Or perhaps related to Middle Dutch gluren to
leer. Meaning to look angrily, scowl is first recorded 1775. Related: Glowered; glowering. As a
noun, 1715, from the verb.


glucagon (n.)

1923, from gluco- + Greek agon, present participle of agein to lead (see act (n.)).


gluco-

before vowels, gluc-, word-forming element used since c.1880s, from Greek glykys sweet (see
glucose). Now usually with reference to glucose.


glucose (n.)

1840, from French glucose (1838), said to have been coined by French professor Eug&egrave;ne
Melchior P&#233;ligot (1811-1890) from Greek gleukos must, sweet wine, related to glykys sweet,
delightful, dear, from *glku-, dissimilated in Greek from PIE *dlk-u- sweet (source also of Latin
dulcis). It first was obtained from grape sugar.


glue (n.)

early 13c., from Old French glu birdlime (12c.), from Late Latin glutem (nominative glus) glue, from
Latin gluten glue, beeswax, from PIE *gleit- to glue, paste (cognates: Lithuanian glitus sticky,
glitas mucus; Old English cli&eth;a plaster), from root *glei- to stick together (see clay). In
reference to glue from boiled animal hoofs and hides, c.1400. Glue-sniffing attested from 1963.


glue (v.)

late 14c., from Old French gluer, from glu (see glue (n.)). Related: Glued; gluing.


glue-pot (n.)

late 15c., from glue (n.) + pot (n.1).


gluey (adj.)

late 14c., from glue (n.) + -y (2).


glug

1768, imitative of the sound of swallowing a drink, etc.


glum (adj.)

1540s, sullen, frowning, from Middle English gloumen (v.) become dark (c.1300), later gloumben look
gloomy or sullen (late 14c.); see gloom. Related: Glumly; glumness.


glut (v.)

early 14c., to swallow too much; to feed to repletion, probably from Old French gloter to swallow,
gulp down, from Latin gluttire swallow, gulp down, from PIE root *gwele- (3) to swallow (cognates:
Russian glot draught, gulp). Related: Glutted; glutting.


glut (n.)

1530s, a gulp, from glut (v.). Meaning condition of being full or sated is 1570s; mercantile sense
is first recorded 1590s.


glutamate (n.)

1876, from glutamic acid (see gluten) + -ate (3).


gluteal (adj.)

by 1804, from gluteus + -al (1).


gluten (n.)

1630s, any sticky substance, from Middle French gluten (16c.) or directly from Latin gluten glue
(see glue (n.)). Used 16c.-19c. for the part of animal tissue now called fibrin; used since 1803 of
the nitrogenous part of the flour of wheat or other grain; hence glutamic acid (1871), a common
amino acid, and its salt, glutamate.


gluteus (n.)

buttocks muscle, 1680s, from Modern Latin glutaeus, from Greek gloutos the rump, in plural, the
buttocks.


glutin (n.)

1825, from French glutine, probably from Latin gluten (see gluten) + chemical suffix -ine (2). Used
in chemistry in several senses before settling on gelatin prepared from animal hides, hoofs, etc.
(1845).


glutinous (adj.)

of the nature of glue, early 15c. (implied c.1400 in glutinosity), from Latin glutinosus gluey,
viscous, tenacious, from gluten (genitive glutinis) glue (see glue (n.)).


glutton (n.)

early 13c., from Old French gluton (Modern French glouton), from Latin gluttonem (nominative glutto)
overeater, formed from gluttire to swallow, from gula throat, from PIE *gwele- (3) to swallow (see
glut (v.)).


gluttonous (adj.)

mid-14c.; see glutton + -ous. Related: Gluttonously.


gluttony (n.)

c.1200, glutunie, from Old French glutonie, from gluton glutton (see glutton). Gluttonry recorded
from late 12c.


glycemic (adj.)

1923, from glycemia (also glycaemia), 1901, from glyco- + -emia.


glyceride (n.)

compound of glycerol and organic acids; see glycerin + -ide.


glycerin (n.)

also glycerine, thick, colorless syrup, 1838, from French glyc&eacute;rine, coined by French chemist
Michel-Eug&egrave;ne Chevreul (1786-1889), from Greek glykeros sweet (see glucose) + chemical ending
-ine (2). So called for its sweet taste. Still in popular use, but in chemistry the substance now is
known as glycerol.


glycerine (n.)

see glycerin.


glycerol (n.)

1884, from glycerine + -ol, suffix denoting alcohols.


glyco-

word-forming element meaning sweet, from Latinized comb. form of Greek glykys sweet (see glucose).
Used in reference to sugars generally. OED says a regular formation would be glycy-.


glycogen (n.)

starch-like substance found in the liver and animal tissue, 1860, from French glycog&egrave;ne,
sugar-producer, from Greek glykys sweet (see glucose) + French -g&egrave;ne (see -gen). Coined in
1848 by French physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-1878).


glycogenic (adj.)

1859, from glycogen + -ic.


glycolysis (n.)

1892, from glyco- + -lysis.


glyph (n.)

1727, ornamental groove in architecture, from French glyphe (1701), from Greek glyphe a carving,
from glyphein to hollow out, cut out with a knife, engrave, carve, from PIE root *gleubh- to cut,
slice (cognates: Latin glubere to peel, shell, strip, Old English cleofan to cleave). Meaning
sculpted mark or symbol (as in hieroglyph) is from 1825.


glyptodon (n.)

extinct gigantic mammal, 1838, irregularly formed from Greek glyptos engraved (verbal adjective of
glyphein; see glyph) + odon (genitive odontos) tooth (see tooth).


gnarl (v.)

contort, twist, 1814, a back-formation from gnarled. As a noun from 1824. Earlier the verb was used
in a sense of to snarl (1590s).


gnarled (adj.)

the source of the group of words that includes gnarl (v.), gnarl (n.), gnarly is Shakespeare's use
of gnarled in 1603:    Thy sharpe and sulpherous bolt Splits the vn-wedgable and gnarled Oke.
[Measure for Measure, II.ii.116]    OED and Barnhart call it a variant of knurled, from Middle
English knar knot in wood (late 14c.), originally a rock, a stone; of uncertain origin. (Gnarled)
occurs in one passage of Shakes. (for which the sole authority is the folio of 1623), whence it came
into general use in the nineteenth century [OED].


gnarly (adj.)

1829, knotted and rugged, from gnarl (see gnarled) + -y (2). Picked up 1970s as surfer slang to
describe a dangerous wave; it had spread in teen slang by 1982, where it meant both excellent and
disgusting.


gnash (v.)

early 15c., variant of Middle English gnasten to gnash the teeth (c.1300), perhaps from Old Norse
gnastan a gnashing, of unknown origin, probably imitative. Compare German knistern to crackle.
Related: Gnashed; gnashing.


gnat (n.)

Old English gn&aelig;tt gnat, midge, mosquito, earlier gneat, used of various small, flying insects,
from Proto-Germanic *gnattaz (cognates: Low German gnatte, German Gnitze); perhaps literally biting
insect and related to gnaw.    The gnatte is a litil fflye, and hatte culex..he souke&thorn; blood
and ha&thorn; in his mou&thorn; a pipe, as hit were a pricke..And is a-countid a-mong volatiles..and
greue&thorn; slepinge men wi&thorn; noyse &amp; wi&thorn; bytinge and wake&thorn; hem of here reste.
[John of Trevisa, transl. of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


gnathic (adj.)

pertaining to the jaw, 1882, from Greek gnathos jaw, cheek, properly the lower jaw, cognate with
Lithuanian &#382;andas jaw.


gnaw (v.)

Old English gnagan (past tense *gnog, past participle gnagan) to gnaw, a common Germanic word
(cognate with Old Saxon gnagan, Old Norse, Swedish gnaga, Middle Dutch, Dutch knagen, Old High
German gnagan, German nagen to gnaw), probably imitative of gnawing. Related: Gnawed; gnawing.


gneiss (n.)

1757, from German Gneiss type of metamorphic rock, probably from Middle High German gneist spark (so
called because the rock glitters), from Old High German gneisto spark (compare Old English gnast
spark, Old Norse gneisti).


gnocchi (n.)

1891, from Italian gnocchi, plural of gnocco, from nocchio a knot in wood, perhaps from a Germanic
source akin to knuckle. So called for their shape.


gnome (n.)

dwarf-like earth-dwelling spirit, 1712, from French gnome, from Modern Latin gnomus, used 16c. in a
treatise by Paracelsus, who gave the name pigmaei or gnomi to elemental earth beings, possibly from
Greek *genomos earth-dweller (compare thalassonomos inhabitant of the sea). A less-likely suggestion
is that Paracelsus based it on the homonym that means intelligence (preserved in gnomic). Popular in
children's literature 19c. as a name for red-capped German and Swiss folklore dwarfs. Garden
figurines first imported to England late 1860s from Germany.


gnomic (adj.)

full of instructive sayings, 1815, from French gnomique (18c.) and directly from Late Latin gnomicus
concerned with maxims, didactic, from Greek gnomikos, from gnome thought, opinion, maxim,
intelligence, from root of gignoskein to come to know (see gnostic). English gnome meant short,
pithy statement of general truth (1570s). Gnomical is attested from 1610s.


gnomish (adj.)

1822, from gnome + -ish. Related: Gnomishly; gnomishness.


gnomist (n.)

see gnomic + -ist.


gnomon (n.)

vertical shaft that tells time by the shadow it casts (especially the triangular plate on a
sundial), 1540s, from Latin gnomon, from Greek gnomon indicator, literally one who discerns, from
gignoskein to come to know (see gnostic (adj.)).


gnosis (n.)

special knowledge of spiritual mysteries, 1703, from Greek gnosis investigation, knowledge, in
Christian writers, higher knowledge of spiritual things (see gnostic (adj.)).


Gnostic (n.)

1580s, believer in a mystical religious doctrine of spiritual knowledge, from Late Latin Gnosticus,
from Late Greek Gnostikos, noun use of adj. gnostikos knowing, able to discern, from gnostos
knowable, from gignoskein to learn, to come to know (see know). Applied to various early Christian
sects that claimed direct personal knowledge beyond the Gospel or the Church hierarchy.


gnostic (adj.)

relating to knowledge, 1650s, from Greek gnostikos knowing, able to discern, from gnostos known,
perceived, understood, from gignoskein to learn, to come to know (see know).


Gnosticism (n.)

1660s, from Gnostic + -ism.


GNP (n.)

abbreviation of gross national product, attested by 1953.


gnu (n.)

1777, gnoo, from Dutch gnoe, used by German traveler Georg Forster (1754-1794) to render Hottentot
i-ngu wildebeest, from Southern Bushman !nu: (in which ! and : represent clicks).


go (v.)

Old English gan to go, advance, depart; happen; conquer; observe, from West Germanic
*gai-/*g&aelig;- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian gan, Middle Dutch gaen, Dutch gaan, Old High
German gan, German gehen), from PIE *ghe- to release, let go (cognates: Sanskrit jihite goes away,
Greek kikhano I reach, meet with), but there is not general agreement on cognates.    The Old
English past tense was eode, of uncertain origin but evidently once a different word (perhaps
connected to Gothic iddja); it was replaced 1400s by went, formerly past tense of wenden to direct
one's way (see wend). In northern England and Scotland, however, eode tended to be replaced by gaed,
a construction based on go. In modern English, only be and go take their past tenses from entirely
different verbs.    The word in its various forms and combinations takes up 45 columns of close
print in the OED. Verbal meaning say emerged 1960s in teen slang. Colloquial meaning urinate or
defecate attested by 1926. Go for broke is from 1951, American English colloquial; go down on
perform oral sex on is from 1916. That goes without saying (1878) translates French cela va sans
dire. As an adjective, in order, from 1951, originally in aerospace jargon.


go (n.)

1727, action of going, from go (v.). The sense of a try or turn at something is from 1825; meaning
something that goes, a success is from 1876. Phrase on the go in constant motion is from 1843.


go ahead

as a command to proceed, 1831. As an adjective phrase, by 1840.


go off (v.)

of firearms, etc., 1570s; meaning depart is c.1600; that of reprimand is from 1941 (originally with
at, since c.2000 more often with on).


go over (v.)

to review point by point, 1580s.


go south (v.)

vanish, abscond, 1920s, American English, probably from mid-19c. notion of disappearing south to
Mexico or Texas to escape pursuit or responsibility, reinforced by Native American belief (attested
in colonial writing mid-18c.) that the soul journeys south after death.


go through (v.)

to execute, carry to completion (a plan, etc., often with with), 1560s. Meaning to examine is 1660s;
to endure is by 1712; to wear out by 1959.


go together (v.)

be courting, by 1899.


go west (v.)

19c. British idiom for die, be killed (popularized during World War I), probably from thieves'
slang, wherein to go west meant to go to Tyburn, hence to be hanged, though the phrase has
indubitably been influenced by the setting of the sun in the west. [Partridge]


go-between (n.)

1590s, from go (v.) + between. Verbal phrase meaning act as a mediator is recorded from 1540s.


go-cart (n.)

also gocart, 1670s, originally a litter, sedan chair; also an infant's walker (1680s), from go +
cart (n.). The modern form go-kart (1959) was coined in reference to a kind of miniature racing car
with a frame body and a two-stroke engine.


go-getter (n.)

1910, American English, from go + agent noun from get (v.). Goer, with essentially the same meaning,
is attested from late 14c.


go-go (adj.)

1964, fashionable, from slang the go the rage (1962); see go. First appearance of go-go dancer is
from 1965.


go-it-alone

adjective phrase, attested by 1953 (in reference to U.S. foreign policy proposals), from American
English verbal phrase attested by 1842.


go-round (n.)

act of going around, originally especially a merry-go-round, 1886, from go (v.) + round (adv.).
Figurative sense of argument, bout, fight, etc. is from 1891.


go-to-meeting (adj.)

suitable for use in a church or on Sundays, 1790, especially of clothes but the earliest recorded
reference is to music.


Goa

former Portuguese colony in India, from local goe mat fertile land.


goad (n.)

Old English gad point, spearhead, arrowhead, from Proto-Germanic *gaido (cognates: Lombardic gaida
spear), from PIE root *ghei- (1) to propel, prick (cognates: Sanskrit hetih missile, projectile,
himsati he injures; Avestan zaena- weapon; Greek khaios shepherd's staff; Old English gar spear; Old
Irish gae spear). Figurative use is since 16c., probably from the Bible.


goad (v.)

1570s, from goad (n.); earliest use is figurative. Related: Goaded; goading.


goal (n.)

1530s, end point of a race, of uncertain origin. The noun gol appears once before this, in a poem
from early 14c. and with an apparent sense of boundary, limit. Perhaps from Old English *gal
obstacle, barrier, a word implied by g&aelig;lan to hinder and also found in compounds (singal,
widgal); and compare Old Norse geil a narrow glen, a passage. Or from Old French gaule a pole, from
Germanic; or a figurative use of Middle English gale a way, course (mid-14c.) Sports sense of place
where the ball is put to score is attested from 1540s. Figurative sense of object of an effort is
from 1540s.


goalie (n.)

1921, from goal + -ie. Probably a shortening of goal-tender (1909), which tends to be the term used
in ice hockey, as opposed to goal-keeper (1650s).


goalless (adj.)

1835, of journeys, etc., from goal + -less. By 1903 of sports matches where nobody scores. Related:
Goallessly; goallessness.


goat (n.)

Old English gat she-goat, from Proto-Germanic *gaitaz (cognates: Old Saxon get, Old Norse geit,
Danish gjed, Middle Dutch gheet, Dutch geit, Old High German geiz, German Gei&szlig;, Gothic gaits
goat), from PIE *ghaid-o- young goat, also forming words for to play (cognates: Latin h&aelig;dus
kid).    The word for male goat in Old English was bucca (see buck (n.)) until late 1300s shift to
he-goat, she-goat (Nanny goat is 18c., billy goat 19c.). Meaning licentious man is attested from
1670s. To get (someone's) goat is from 1910, perhaps with notion of to steal a goat mascot from a
racehorse, or from French prendre sa ch&egrave;vre take one's source of milk.


goatee (n.)

1844 (as goaty), from goaty (adj.). So called from its resemblance to a male goat's chin hairs.


goatherd (n.)

early 13c. (as a surname), from goat + herd (n.).


goatish (adj.)

1520s, from goat + -ish. Related: Goatishly; goatishness.


goatskin (n.)

late 14c., from goat + skin (n.).


goaty (adj.)

goat-like, c.1600, from goat + -y (2).


gob (n.)

a mouthful, lump, late 14c., probably from Old French gobe mouthful, lump, related to gober gulp,
swallow down, probably from Gaulish *gobbo- (compare Irish gob mouth, Gaelic gob beak). This Celtic
source also seems to be root of gob mouth (mid-16c.), which is the first element in gob-stopper a
kind of large hard candy (1928).


gobbet (n.)

late 13c., a fragment, from Old French gobet piece, mouthful, diminutive of gobe (see gob).


gobble (v.1)

eat greedily, c.1600, probably partly echoic, partly frequentative of gob, via gobben drink
something greedily. Related: Gobbled; gobbling.


gobble (v.2)

make a turkey noise, 1670s, probably imitative, perhaps influenced by gobble (1) or gargle. As a
noun from 1781.


gobbledygook (n.)

also gobbledegook, the overinvolved, pompous talk of officialdom [Klein], 1944, American English,
first used by U.S. Rep. Maury Maverick, D.-Texas, (1895-1954), a grandson of the original maverick
and chairman of U.S. Smaller War Plants Corporation during World War II. First used in a memo dated
March 30, 1944, banning gobbledygook language and mock-threateaning, anyone using the words
activation or implementation will be shot. Maverick said he made up the word in imitation of turkey
noise. Another word for it, coined about the same time, was bafflegab (1952).


gobbler (n.)

1737, turkey cock, agent noun from gobble (v.2). As one who eats greedily 1755, from gobble (v.1).


Gobi

desert in central Asia, from Mongolian gobi desert. Gobi Desert is thus a pleonasm (see Sahara).


goblet (n.)

late 14c., from Old French gobelet goblet, cup, diminutive of gobel cup, probably related to gobe
gulp down (see gob).


goblin (n.)

early 14c., a devil, incubus, fairy, from Old French gobelin (12c., as Medieval Latin Gobelinus, the
name of a spirit haunting the region of Evreux, in chronicle of Ordericus Vitalis), of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to German kobold (see cobalt), or from Medieval Latin cabalus, from Greek
kobalos rogue, knave, kobaloi wicked spirits invoked by rogues, of unknown origin. Another
suggestion is that it is a diminutive of the proper name Gobel.    Though French gobelin was not
recorded until almost 250 years after appearance of the English term, it is mentioned in the
Medieval Latin text of the 1100's, and few people who believed in folk magic used Medieval Latin.
[Barnhart]


gobo

1930, American English, Hollywood movie set slang, of unknown origin, perhaps somehow from go-
between.


gobsmacked (adj.)

by 1990, U.K. slang, from gob mouth + past participle of smack.


goby (n.)

kind of fish, 1769, from Latin gobius, from Greek gobios, name of a type of small fish, of unknown
origin.


god (n.)

Old English god supreme being, deity; the Christian God; image of a god; godlike person, from Proto-
Germanic *guthan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch god, Old High German got, German Gott, Old
Norse gu&eth;, Gothic gu&thorn;), from PIE *ghut- that which is invoked (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic zovo to call, Sanskrit huta- invoked, an epithet of Indra), from root *gheu(e)- to call,
invoke.    But some trace it to PIE *ghu-to- poured, from root *gheu- to pour, pour a libation
(source of Greek khein to pour, also in the phrase khute gaia poured earth, referring to a burial
mound; see found (v.2)). Given the Greek facts, the Germanic form may have referred in the first
instance to the spirit immanent in a burial mound [Watkins]. See also Zeus.    Not related to good.
Originally a neuter noun in Germanic, the gender shifted to masculine after the coming of
Christianity. Old English god probably was closer in sense to Latin numen. A better word to
translate deus might have been Proto-Germanic *ansuz, but this was used only of the highest deities
in the Germanic religion, and not of foreign gods, and it was never used of the Christian God. It
survives in English mainly in the personal names beginning in Os-.  I want my lawyer, my tailor, my
servants, even my wife to believe in God, because it means that I shall be cheated and robbed and
cuckolded less often. ... If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him. [Voltaire]
God bless you after someone sneezes is credited to St. Gregory the Great, but the pagan Romans
(Absit omen) and Greeks had similar customs.


god-fearing (adj.)

1759, from God + fearing (see fear).


godawful (adj.)

terrible, 1878, from God + awful. The God might be an intensifier or the whole might be from the
frequent God's awful (vengeance, judgment, etc.) in religious literature.


godchild (n.)

child one sponsors at baptism, c.1200, from God + child.


goddamn

late 14c., from god + damn.   Mais, fussent-ils [les anglais] cent mille Goddem de plus qu'a
present, ils n'auront pas ce royaume. [Joan of Arc, 1431, quoted in Prosper de Barante's Histoire
des ducs de Bourgogne]   Goddammes was the nickname given by Puritans to Cavaliers, in consequence
of the latter's supposed frequent employment of that oath.


goddaughter (n.)

girl one sponsors at her baptism, mid-13c., from god + daughter.


goddess (n.)

mid-14c., from god + fem. suffix -esse (see -ess). Of mortal women, by 1570s.


godfather (n.)

man who sponsors one at baptism, late 12c., from god + father (n.). In the Mafia sense, from 1963.
Popularized by Mario Puzo's novel (1969) and the movie based on it (1972).


godforsaken (adj.)

1816, from God + forsaken.


Godfrey

masc. proper name, from Old French Godefrei (Modern French Godefroi), from Old High German Godafrid
(German Gottfried), literally the peace of God, from Old High German got God (see god) + fridu peace
(see free). In early 20c., the name sometimes was used as a slang euphemism for God.


godhead (n.)

c.1200, from god + Middle English -hede, cognate with -hood and German -heit. Along with maidenhead,
this is the sole survival of this form of the suffix. Old English had godhad divine nature.


Godiva

died 1067, Lady of Coventry and wife of Leofric, Earl of Mercia. Her legend is first recorded 100
years after her death, by Roger of Wendover. Peeping Tom aspect added by 1659. The name is a typical
Anglo-Saxon compound, apparently *God-gifu good gift.


godless (adj.)

1520s, from god + -less. Related: Godlessness. Phrase godless communism attested by 1851.


godlike (adj.)

1510s, from god + -like (adj.).


godliness (n.)

1530s, from godly + -ness.


godly (adj.)

late 14c., from god + -ly (1).


godmother (n.)

woman who sponsors one at baptism, late 13c., from god + mother (n.1); modifying or replacing Old
English godmodor.


godsend (n.)

1814, a shipwreck (from the perspective of people living along the coast), from Middle English Godes
sonde (c.1200) God's messenger; what God sends, gift from God, happening caused by God, from god +
Middle English sonde that which is sent, message, from Old English sand, from sendan (see send
(v.)). Sense of happy chance is from 1831.


godson (n.)

male child one sponsors at baptism, c.1200, from God + son.


godspeed

also God speed, early 14c., quickly, speedily (late 13c. as a surname), from god + speed (v.). As a
parting salutation, from mid-15c.


goer (n.)

late 14c., one who goes on foot, a walker, agent noun of go. From mid-13c. as a surname. Of a horse,
especially of one that goes fast (1690s); hence transferred use, of persons, one who lives loosely
(c.1810).


goes

third person singular of go, Old English ga&aelig;s (Northumbrian), displacing alternative goeth
(Old English gae&thorn;) except in archaic and liturgical use.


gofer (n.)

errand-runner, 1956, American English coinage from go for (coffee, spare parts, etc.), with a pun on
gopher.


goggle (v.)

1530s, from Middle English gogelen to roll (the eyes) about (late 14c.), influenced by Middle
English gogel-eyed squint-eyed, one-eyed (late 14c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps somehow
imitative. As a surname (Robert le Gogel) attested from c.1300. Related: Goggled; goggling. As a
noun, 1650s, goggling look; earlier person who goggles (1610s).


goggle-eyed (adj.)

late 14c.; see goggle (v.).


goggles (n.)

spectacles, protective eyeglasses, 1715; see goggle.


Goidelic (adj.)

pertaining to the branch of Celtic languages that includes Irish, Gaelic, and Manx, 1882, coined by
Sir John Rhys (and first used in his Celtic Britain), from Old Irish Goidel Gael (see Gael).


going (n.)

verbal noun from go (v.), c.1300. Going to be about to is from late 15c. To go while the going is
good is from 1916. Goings-on attested from 1775; going over is 1872 as scolding, 1919 as inspection.


goiter (n.)

1620s, from French go&icirc;tre (16c.), from Rh&ocirc;ne dialect, from Old Proven&ccedil;al goitron
throat, gullet, from Vulgar Latin *gutturiosum or *gutturionem, from Latin guttur throat (see
guttural).


goitre (n.)

alternative spelling of goiter.


gold (n.)

Old English gold, from Proto-Germanic *gulth- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German
gold, German Gold, Middle Dutch gout, Dutch goud, Old Norse gull, Danish guld, Gothic gul&thorn;),
from PIE root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (compare
Old Church Slavonic zlato, Russian zoloto, Sanskrit hiranyam, Old Persian daraniya-, Avestan
zaranya- gold; see glass).    As an adjective from c.1200. In reference to the color of the metal,
it is recorded from c.1400. Gold rush is attested from 1859, originally in an Australian context.
Gold medal as first prize in a contest is from 1908.


gold digger (n.)

also gold-digger, woman who pursues men for their money, first recorded 1915. Literal sense attested
from 1830.


gold-mine (n.)

late 15c., from gold + mine (n.). Figurative use by 1882.


goldbrick (n.)

shirker, 1914, World War I armed forces slang, from earlier verb meaning to swindle, cheat (1902)
from the old con game of selling spurious gold bricks (attested by 1882).


golden (adj.)

c.1300, made of gold, from gold + -en (2); replacing Middle English gilden, from Old English gyldan.
Gold is one of the few Modern English nouns that form adjectives meaning made of ______ by adding
-en (as in wooden, leaden, waxen, olden); Old English also had silfren made of silver, st&aelig;nen
made of stone.    As a color from late 14c. Figurative sense of excellent, precious, best is from
late 14c. Golden mean avoidance of excess translates Latin aurea mediocritas (Horace). Golden age,
period of past perfection, is from 1550s, from a concept found in Greek and Latin writers; in sense
of old age it is from 1961. The moralistic golden rule earlier was the golden law, so called from
1670s.  Do not do unto others as you would that they should do unto you. Their tastes may not be the
same. [George Bernard Shaw, 1898]


goldenrod (n.)

1560s, from golden + rod.


goldfinch (n.)

from Old English goldfinc; see gold + finch.


goldfish (n.)

1690s, from gold + fish (n.); introduced into England from China, where they are native. A goldfish
bowl, figurative of a situation of no privacy, was in use by 1935.


Goldilocks

name for a person with bright yellow hair, 1540s, from adj. form of gold + lock in the hair sense.
The story of the Three Bears first was printed in Robert Southey's miscellany The Doctor (1837), but
the central figure there was a bad-tempered old woman. Southey did not claim to have invented the
story, and older versions have been traced, either involving an old woman or a silver-haired girl
(though in at least one version it is a fox who enters the house). The identification of the girl as
Goldilocks is attested only from c.1875.


goldsmith (n.)

Old English gold-smith, from gold + smith.


Goldwynism (n.)

1937, in reference to the many malaprop remarks credited to U.S. film producer Samuel G. Goldwyn
(1882-1974); the best-known, arguably, being include me out.


golem (n.)

artificial man, automaton, 1897, from Hebrew golem [Psalm cxxxix:16] shapeless mass, embryo, from
galam he wrapped up, folded.


golf (n.)

mid-15c., Scottish gouf, usually taken as an alteration of Middle Dutch colf, colve stick, club,
bat, from Proto-Germanic *kulth- (cognates: Old Norse kolfr clapper of a bell, German Kolben mace,
club). The game is from 14c., the word is first mentioned (along with fut-bol) in a 1457 Scottish
statute on forbidden games. Golf ball attested from 1540s. <b>Despite what you read on the Internet,
golf is not an acronym</b>. Golf widow is from 1890.    Oh! who a golfer's bride would be,  Fast
mated with a laddie  Who every day goes out to tee And with him takes the caddie.  [The Golf Widow's
Lament, in Golf, Oct. 31, 1890]


golf (v.)

c.1800, golf (n.). Related: Golfed; golfing.


golfer (n.)

early 15c., agent noun from golf.


Golgotha

hill near Jerusalem, via Latin and Greek, from Aramaic gulgulta, literally (place of the) skull,
cognate with Hebrew gulgoleth skull. So called in reference to its shape (see Calvary).


Goliath

Late Latin Goliath, from Hebrew Golyath, name of the Philistine giant slain by David [I Sam. xvii].


golliwog (n.)

grotesque blackface doll, 1895, coined by English children's book author and illustrator Florence K.
Upton (1873-1922), perhaps from golly + polliwog.


golly

euphemism for God, first recorded 1775, in a source that refers to it as a sort of jolly kind of
oath, or asseveration much in use among our carters, &amp; the lowest people.


Gomorrah

Biblical site, from Hebrew 'omer sheaf (of corn, etc.), probably a reference to the fertility of the
region.


gonad (n.)

1880, from Modern Latin gonas (plural gonades), coined from Greek gone, gonos seed, act of
generation, race, family, from gignesthai be born, related to genos race, birth, descent (see
genus). Related: gonads.


gondola (n.)

1540s, from Italian (Venetian) gondola, earlier in English as goundel, from Old Italian gondula, of
unknown origin; according to Barnhart, perhaps a diminutive of gonda, name of a kind of boat.
Meaning cabin of an airship is 1896, though it was used hypothetically in 1881 in a prediction piece
titled 300 Years Hence:You step into an aerial gondola ... and are at once borne upwards.


gondolier (n.)

c.1600, from French gondolier and directly from Italian gondoliere, from gondola (see gondola).


Gondwana

name of a region in north central India, from Sanskrit gondavana, from vana forest + Gonda, name of
a Dravidian people, literally fleshy navel, outie belly-button. The name was extended by geologists
to a series of sedimentary rocks found there (1873), then to identical rocks in other places; the
fossils found in this series were used by geologists to reconstruct the ancient southern
supercontinent, which therefore was called Gondwanaland (1896), from German, where it was coined by
German geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914) in 1885.


gone

past participle of go.


goner (n.)

something dead or about to die, 1850, from gone + -er (1). From earlier expressions such as gone
goose (1830), gone coon, etc.


gonfalon

1590s, variant of Middle English gonfanon (c.1300), from Old French gonfanon knight's pennon (12c.),
from Old High German guntfano battle flag, from Proto-Germanic *gunthja- war, from PIE *gwhen- to
strike, kill (see bane) + *fano banner (compare Gothic fana cloth). Cognate with Old English
gu&thorn;fana, Old Norse gunnfani. Change of -n- to -l- by dissimilation.


gong (n.)

c.1600, from Malay gong, probably imitative of its sound when struck. As a verb from 1903.


gonna

attempt to represent the casual pronunciation of going to. In Scottish dialect, ganna, gaunna
recorded from 1806.


gonorrhea (n.)

also gonorrhoea, 1520s, from Late Latin gonorrhoia, from gonos seed (see gonad) + rhoe flow, from
rhein to flow (see rheum). Mucus discharge was mistaken for semen. In early records often Gomoria,
etc., from folk etymology association with biblical Gomorrah.


gonzo (adj.)

1971, American English, in Hunter S. Thompson's phrase gonzo journalism. Thompson in 1972 said he
got it from editor Bill Cardosa and explained it as some Boston word for weird, bizarre. Probably
from Italian gonzo rude, sottish, perhaps from Spanish ganso and ultimately from the Germanic word
for goose.


goo (n.)

1903, American English, of obscure origin, probably a back-formation from gooey.


goo-goo (adj.)

amorous, 1900, perhaps connected with goggle, because the earliest reference is in goo-goo eyes. The
sense of baby-talk is from 1863. Use in reference to politics began 1890s, and seems to be a
shortening of Good Government as a movement to clean up municipal corruption in Boston, New York,
etc. It soon was extended to mean naive political reformer.


goober (n.)

peanut, 1833, American English, of African origin, perhaps Bantu (compare Kikongo and Kimbundu nguba
peanut).


good (adj.)

Old English god (with a long o) virtuous; desirable; valid; considerable, probably originally having
the right or desirable quality, from Proto-Germanic *gothaz (cognates: Old Norse go&eth;r, Dutch
goed, Old High German guot, German gut, Gothic go&thorn;s), originally fit, adequate, belonging
together, from PIE root *ghedh- to unite, be associated, suitable (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
godu pleasing time, Russian godnyi fit, suitable, Old English g&aelig;drian to gather, to take up
together). As an expression of satisfaction, from early 15c.; of children, well-behaved, by 1690s.
Irregular comparatives (better, best) reflect a widespread pattern, as in Latin bonus, melior,
optimus. Good-for-nothing is from 1711. Good looking is attested from 1780 (good looks by c.1800).
Good sport, of persons, is from 1906; good to go is attested from 1989. The good book the Bible
attested from 1801, originally in missionary literature describing the language of conversion
efforts in American Indian tribes.    Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing. [As You
Like It]    Phrase for good finally, permanently attested from 1711, a shortening of for good and
all (16c.). Middle English had for good ne ylle (early 15c.) for good nor ill, thus under any
circumstance.


good (n.)

Old English g&#333;d that which is good, goodness; advantage, benefit; gift; virtue; property; from
good (adj.).


good day

salutation, late 14c., short for have a good day (c.1200). Good morning is c.1400, gode morwene.
Good night, also goodnight, is late 14c.; as an exclamation of surprise, from 1893.


Good Friday

late 13c., from good in Middle English sense of holy, also especially of holy days or seasons
observed by the church (early 15c.); the word also was applied to Christmas and Shrove Tuesday.


good will

Old English godes willan virtuous, pious, upright, also state of wishing well to another. One-word
form goodwill (18c.) is used especially in commercial senses.


good-bye

also goodbye, good bye, good-by, 1590s, from godbwye (1570s), itself a contraction of God be with ye
(late 14c.), influenced by good day, good evening, etc.


good-natured (adj.)

1570s, from good (adj.) + nature. Good nature pleasing or kind disposition is from mid-15c. Related:
Good-naturedly.


good-neighbor (adj.)

also (chiefly British English) good-neighbour, adjectival phrase, in reference to U.S. foreign
policy, especially in Latin America, 1928, originally in Herbert Hoover. The good neighbours is
Scottish euphemism for the fairies (1580s).


good-time (adj.)

1928, from good (adj.) + time. Expression to have a good time enjoy oneself attested from 1822;
earlier have a good time of it (1771). To make good time go fast is from 1838.


goodly

Old English godlic goodly, excellent; comely fair; see good (adj.) + -ly (1).


goodness (n.)

Old English godnes goodness, virtue, kindliness; see good (adj.) + -ness. In exclamations from
1610s, first recorded being for goodnesse sake, i.e. as you trust in the goodness of God.


goods (n.)

property, late 13c., from plural of good (n.), which had the same sense in Old English. Meaning
saleable commodities is mid-15c.; colloquial sense of stolen articles is from 1900; hence figurative
use, evidence of guilt.


goody (n.)

also goodie, something tasty, 1745, from good (adj.) + -y (2); adj. use for sentimentally proper is
1830 (especially in reduplicated form goody-goody, 1871). As an exclamation of pleasure, by 1796.
Goody also used since 1550s as a shortened form of goodwife, a term of civility applied to a married
woman in humble life; hence Goody Two-shoes, name of heroine in 1760s children's story who exulted
upon acquiring a second shoe.


gooey (adj.)

1893, American English slang, from goo + -y (2). The first element perhaps somehow imitative, or
shortened from burgoo (1787) thick porridge.


goof (n.)

1916, American English, stupid person, perhaps a variant of English dialect goff foolish clown
(1869), from 16c. goffe, probably from Middle French goffe awkward, stupid, of uncertain origin. Or
English goffe may be from Middle English goffen speak in a frivolous manner, possibly from Old
English gegaf buffoonery, and gaffetung scolding. Sense of a blunder is c.1954, probably influenced
by gaffe.


goof (v.)

waste time, 1932; make a mistake, 1941, from goof (n.). Goof off loaf is also from 1941. Related:
Goofed; goofing.


goofball (n.)

narcotic, 1938, from goof + ball (n.1); as an intensive of goof (n.), it dates from 1959.


goofiness (n.)

1929, from goofy + -ness.


goofy (adj.)

1921, from goof + -y (2). The Disney character of that name began life c.1929 as Dippy Dawg.


google (v.)

to search (something) on the Google search engine, 2000 (do a google on was used by 1999). The
domain google.com was registered in 1997. A verb google was an early 20c. cricket term in reference
to a type of breaking ball.


googly

as a noun, a cricket term, 1903, of unknown origin. As an adjective, of eyes, 1901.


googol (n.)

1940, in Mathematics and the Imagination, a layman's book on mathematics written by U.S.
mathematicians Edward Kasner (1878-1955) and James R. Newman, the word supposedly coined a year or
two before by Kasner's 9- (or 8-) year-old nephew (unnamed in the book's account of the event), when
asked for a name for an enormous number. Perhaps influenced by comic strip character Barney Google.
Googolplex coined at the same time, in the same way.


gook (n.)

1899, U.S. military slang for Filipino during the insurrection there, probably from a native word,
or imitative of the babbling sound of their language to American ears (compare barbarian). The term
goo-goo eyes soft, seductive eyes was in vogue c.1900 and may have contributed to this somehow.
Extended over time to Nicaraguan (U.S. intervention there early 20c.), any Pacific Islander (World
War II), Korean (1950s), Vietnamese and any Asian (1960s).


goombah (n.)

by 1984, from dialectal pronunciation of Italian compare companion, godfather (compare compadre).


goon (n.)

1921, stupid person, from gony simpleton (1580s), of unknown origin, but applied by sailors to the
albatross and similar big, clumsy birds (1839); sense of hired thug first recorded 1938 (in
reference to union beef squads used to cow strikers in the Pacific northwest), probably from Alice
the Goon, slow-witted and muscular (but gentle-natured) character in Thimble Theater comic strip
(starring Popeye) by E.C. Segar (1894-1938). She also was the inspiration for British comedian Spike
Milligan's The Goon Show. What are now juvenile delinquents were in the 1940s sometimes called
goonlets.


goose (n.)

a large waterfowl proverbially noted, I know not why, for foolishness [Johnson], Old English gos,
from Proto-Germanic *gans- goose (cognates: Old Frisian gos, Old Norse gas, Old High German gans,
German Gans goose), from PIE *ghans- (cognates: Sanskrit hamsah (masc.), hansi (fem.), goose, swan;
Greek khen; Latin anser; Polish g&#281;&#347; goose; Lithuanian zasis goose; Old Irish geiss swan),
probably imitative of its honking.    Spanish ganso goose is from a Germanic source. Loss of n sound
is normal before s. Plural form geese is an example of i-mutation.    Meaning simpleton is from
1540s. To cook one's goose first attested 1845, of unknown origin; attempts to connect it to Swedish
history and Greek fables have been unconvincing. Goose egg zero first attested 1866 in baseball
slang. The goose that laid the golden egg is from Aesop.


goose (v.)

jab in the rear, c.1880, from goose (n.), possibly from resemblance of the upturned thumb to a
goose's beak. Related: Goosed; goosing. In 19c. theatrical slang, to be goosed meant to be hissed
(by 1818).


goose step (n.)

1806, originally was a military drill to teach balance; to stand on each leg alternately and swing
the other back and forth (which, presumably, reminded someone of a goose's way of walking); in
reference to marching without bending the knees (as in Nazi military reviews) it apparently is first
recorded 1916. As a verb by 1854.


gooseberry (n.)

1530s, perhaps from German Krausebeere or Kr&auml;uselbeere, related to Middle Dutch croesel
gooseberry, and to German kraus crispy, curly [Klein, etc.]. Under this theory, gooseberry would be
folk etymology. But OED editors find no reason to prefer this to a literal reading, because the
grounds on which plants and fruits have received names associating them with animals are so commonly
inexplicable, that the want of appropriateness in the meaning affords no sufficient ground for
assuming that the word is an etymological corruption.


goosebumps (n.)

also goose bumps, 1919, from goose (n.) + bump (n.). Earlier in the same sense was goose flesh
(c.1810) and goose skin (1785).


GOP

U.S. Republican Party, 1884, an abbreviation of Grand Old Party. The Republicans were so called from
1876; the Democratic Party also was referred to occasionally as grand old party, with lower-case
letters, in 1870s-80s and had a greater claim to the title.


gopher (n.)

1812, American English, perhaps an Englishing of Louisiana French gaufre honeycomb, waffle, said to
have been used by French settlers in reference to small mammals on analogy of the structure of their
burrows, from Old French gaufre, of Frankish origin. The rodent was the nickname of people from
Arkansas (1845) and later Minnesota (1872). The gopherwood tree of the Bible (used by Noah to make
the ark, Gen. vi:14) is unrelated; it is from Hebrew gofer, perhaps meaning the cypress.


Gordian knot

1560s, tied by Gordius, king of Phrygia in Asia Minor, who predicted the one to loosen it would rule
Asia. Instead, Alexander the Great cut the Gordian knot with his sword; hence the extended sense
(1570s in English) solve a difficult problem in a quick, dramatic way.


gore (n.2)

triangular piece of ground, Old English gara, related to gar spear (see gar), on the notion of
triangularity. Hence also meanings front of a skirt (mid-13c.), and triangular piece of cloth (early
14c.).


gore (n.1)

Old English gor dirt, dung, filth, shit, a Germanic word (cognates: Middle Dutch goor filth, mud;
Old Norse gor cud; Old High German gor animal dung), of uncertain origin. Sense of clotted blood
(especially shed in battle) developed by 1560s.


gore (v.)

c.1400, from Scottish gorren to pierce, stab, origin unknown, perhaps related to Old English gar
spear (see gar, also gore (n.2) triangular piece of ground). Related: Gored; goring.


gorge (n.)

mid-14c., throat, from Old French gorge throat, bosom, from Late Latin gurges gullet, throat, jaws,
of uncertain origin, probably related to Latin gurgulio gullet, windpipe, from PIE *gwere- (4) to
swallow (see voracity). Transferred sense of deep, narrow valley was in Old French.


gorge (v.)

eat greedily, c.1300, from Old French gorger, from gorge (see gorge (n.)). Related: Gorged; gorging.


gorgeous (adj.)

late 15c., splendid, showy (of clothing), from Middle French gorgias elegant, fashionable, of
unknown origin; perhaps literally necklace (and thus fond of jewelry), from Old French gorge bosom,
throat, also something adorning the throat. A connection to the Greek proper name Gorgias
(supposedly in reference to a notorious sophist) also has been proposed. Related: Gorgeousness.


gorgeously (adv.)

1530s, from gorgeous + -ly (2).


gorget (n.)

armor for the throat, late 15c., from Old French gorgete, diminutive of gorge throat (see gorge
(n.)).


Gorgon

late 14c., any of the three hideous sisters in Greek legend, whose look turned beholders to stone
(Madusa was one of them), from Greek Gorgo (plural Gorgones), from gorgos terrible, of unknown
origin. Transferred sense of terrifyingly ugly person is from 1520s.


gorgonzola

type of blue cheese, 1878, named for Gorgonzola, village near Milan where it first was made.


gorilla (n.)

1847, applied to the apes (Troglodytes gorills) by U.S. missionary Thomas Savage, from Greek
gorillai, plural of name given to wild, hairy people in a Greek translation of Carthaginian
navigator Hanno's account of his voyage along the N.W. coast of Africa, c.500 B.C.E. Allegedly an
African word.    In its inmost recess was an island similar to that formerly described, which
contained in like manner a lake with another island, inhabited by a rude description of people. The
females were much more numerous than the males, and had rough skins: our interpreters called them
Gorillae. We pursued but could take none of the males; they all escaped to the top of precipices,
which they mounted with ease, and threw down stones; we took three of the females, but they made
such violent struggles, biting and tearing their captors, that we killed them, and stripped off the
skins, which we carried to Carthage: being out of provisions we could go no further. [Hanno,
Periplus]    Of persons perceived as being gorilla-like, from 1884.


gorm (n.)

fool, 1912, perhaps from gormless.


gormandize (v.)

1540s, from gourmand + -ize.


gormless (adj.)

c.1746, wanting sense, a British dialectal word, from gome notice, understanding (c.1200), from Old
Norse gaumr care, heed, of unknown origin; + -less.


gorse (n.)

Old English gors gorse, furze, from Proto-Germanic *gorst- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
gersta, Middle Dutch gherste, Dutch gerst, German gerste barley), from PIE *ghers- to bristle
(source also of Latin hordeum barley; see horror).


gory (adj.)

blood-soaked, late 15c., from gore (n.) + -y (2).


gosh

1757, altered pronunciation of God. Probably from by gosse (mid-16c.).


goshawk (n.)

Old English goshafoc, literally goose-hawk, from gos goose (see goose (n.)) + hafoc hawk (see hawk
(n.)). Compare Old Norse gashaukr.


Goshen

from the Bible, fertile land settled by the Israelites in Egypt; light shone there during the plague
of darkness [Gen. xxxxv:10]. The name is of unknown origin.


gosling (n.)

mid-14c. (late 13c. as a surname), from Old Norse g&aelig;slingr, from gos goose (see goose (n.)) +
diminutive suffix. replaced Old English gesling. The modern word may be a Middle English formation
from Middle English gos goose.


gospel (n.)

Old English godspel gospel, glad tidings announced by Jesus; one of the four gospels, from god good
(see good) + spel story, message (see spell (n.1)); translation of Latin bona adnuntiatio, itself a
translation of Greek euangelion reward for bringing good news.    The first element of the Old
English word had a long o, but it shifted under mistaken association with God. The word passed early
from English to continental Germanic languages in forms that clearly indicate the first element had
shifted to God, such as Old Saxon godspell, Old High German gotspell, Old Norse go&eth;spiall. Used
of anything as true as the Gospel from mid-13c. Gospel-gossip was Addison's word (Spectator, 1711)
for one who is always talking of sermons, texts, etc.


gospelize (v.)

to preach the gospel, 1640s, from gospel + -ize. Old English had godspellian in the same sense.


gospeller (n.)

evangelist, Old English godspellere; agent noun from gospel.


gossamer (n.)

c.1300, spider threads spun in fields of stubble in late fall, apparently from gos goose + sumer
summer (compare Swedish sommertrad summer thread). The reference might be to a fancied resemblance
of the silk to goose down, or because geese are in season then. The German equivalent
m&auml;dchensommer (literally girls' summer) also has a sense of Indian summer, and the English word
originally may have referred to a warm spell in autumn before being transferred to a phenomenon
especially noticable then. Compare obsolete Scottish go-summer period of summer-like weather in late
autumn. Meaning anything light or flimsy is from c.1400. The adjective sense filmy is attested from
1802.


gossip (n.)

Old English godsibb sponsor, godparent, from God + sibb relative (see sibling). Extended in Middle
English to any familiar acquaintance (mid-14c.), especially to woman friends invited to attend a
birth, later to anyone engaging in familiar or idle talk (1560s). Sense extended 1811 to trifling
talk, groundless rumor. Similar formations in Old Norse gu&eth;sifja, Old Saxon gu&thorn;ziff.


gossip (v.)

to talk idly about the affairs of others, 1620s, from gossip (n.). Related: Gossiped; gossiping.


gossipy (adj.)

1818, from gossip (n.) + -y (2).


got

past tense of get.


gotcha

by 1913, colloquial pronunciation of (I have) got you.


Goth (n.)

Old English Gota (plural Gotan) a Goth (see Gothic). In 19c., in reference to living persons, it
meant a Gothicist (1812), an admirer of the Gothic style, especially in architecture. Modern use as
an adjective in reference to a subculture style is from 1986, short for Gothic.    By 1982, when the
legendary Batcave club opened in London, the music press had begun to use the term gothic rock to
describe the music and fandom around which a new postpunk subculture was forming. [Lauren M.E.
Goodlad &amp; Michael Bibby, Goth: Undead Subculture, 2007]


Gotham

New York City, first used by Washington Irving, 1807, based on Merrie Tales of the Mad Men of Gotham
(1460), a collection of legendary stories of English villagers alternately wise and foolish. There
is a village of this name in Nottinghamshire, originally Gatham (1086), in Old English, Enclosure
(literally 'homestead') where goats are kept. It is unknown if this was the place intended.


Gothic (adj.)

of the Goths, Germanic people who lived in Eastern Europe c.100 C.E., pertaining to the Goths or
their language, 1610s, from Late Latin Gothicus, from Gothi, Greek Gothoi, all from Gothic
gut&thorn;iuda Gothic people, the first element cognate with Old Norse gotar men. The sense 'men' is
usually taken to be the secondary one, but as the etymology of the word is unknown, this is
uncertain [Gordon]. The unhistorical -th- in English is from Late Latin.  Used in sense of savage
despoiler (1660s) in reference to their fifth-century sacking of Roman cities (compare vandal, and
French gothique, still with a sense of barbarous, rude, cruel). Gothic also was used by scholars to
mean Germanic, Teutonic (1640s), hence its evolution as a 17c. term for the art style that emerged
in northern Europe in the Middle Ages, and the early 19c. literary style that used northern European
medieval settings to suggest horror and mystery. The word was revived 1983 as the name for a style
of music and the associated youth culture; abbreviated form goth is attested from 1986. Gothic
revival in reference to architecture and decorating first recorded 1869 in writing of C.L. Eastlake.


gotta

attempt to represent the casual pronunciation of got to, attested from 1885.


gotten

past participle of get, showing vestiges of the Old English form of the verb.


Gotterdammerung

from German G&ouml;tterd&auml;mmerung, literally twilight of the gods, used by Wagner as the title
of the last opera in the Ring cycle; used in English from 1909 in the figurative sense of complete
overthrow of something.


gouache

1882, from French gouache, from Italian guazzo water color, originally spray, pool, from Latin
aquatio watering, watering place, from aquatus, past participle of aquari to bring water for
drinking, from aqua (see aqua-).


Gouda

type of cheese, 1885, named for a town in Holland.


Goudy

typeface family, 1917, from name of U.S. typographer Frederic W. Goudy (1865-1947).


gouge (n.)

mid-14c., chisel with a concave blade, from Old French gouge, from Late Latin gubia, alteration of
gulbia hollow beveled chisel, probably from Gaulish (compare Old Irish gulban prick, prickle, Welsh
gylfin beak).


gouge (v.)

1560s, to cut with a gouge, from gouge (n.). Meaning to force out with a gouge (especially of the
eyes, in fighting) attested by 1800. Meaning swindle is American English colloquial from 1826
(implied in plural noun gougers). Related: Gouged; gouging.


goulash (n.)

1866, from Hungarian guly&aacute;sh&uacute;s, from guly&aacute;s herdsman + h&uacute;s meat. In
Hungarian, beef or lamb soup made by herdsmen while pasturing.


gourami (n.)

type of freshwater fish, 1878, from Malay gurami.


gourd (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French gourde, from Old French coorde, ultimately from Latin cucurbita gourd, of
uncertain origin, perhaps related to cucumis cucumber.


gourmand (n.)

late 15c., glutton, from Middle French gourmant glutton, originally an adj., gluttonous, of
uncertain origin. Not connected with gourmet. Meaning one fond of good eating is from 1758.    The
gourmand is one whose chief pleasure is eating; but a gourmet is a connoisseur of food and wines. In
England the difference is this: a gourmand regards quantity more than quality, a gourmet quality
more than quantity. [Brewer, Dictionary of Phrase and Fable, Philadelphia, 1898]


gourmet (n.)

connoisseur in eating and drinking, 1820, from French gourmet, altered (by influence of Middle
French gourmant glutton) from Old French groume, originally wine-taster, wine merchant's servant (in
13c. a lad generally), of uncertain origin. As an adjective from 1900. See gourmand.


gout (n.)

c.1200, from Old French gote (10c., Modern French goutte) gout; drop, from Latin gutta a drop, in
Medieval Latin gout, of unknown origin. The disease was thought to be caused by drops of viscous
humors seeping from the blood into the joints, which turned out to be close to the modern scientific
view.


gouty (adj.)

late 14c., from gout + -y (2).


govern (v.)

late 13c., from Old French governer (11c., Modern French gouverner) govern, from Latin gubernare to
direct, rule, guide, govern (source also of Spanish gobernar, Italian governare), originally to
steer, a nautical borrowing from Greek kybernan to steer or pilot a ship, direct (the root of
cybernetics). The -k- to -g- sound shift is perhaps via the medium of Etruscan. Related: Governed;
governing.


governable (adj.)

1640s, from govern + -able.


governance (n.)

late 14c., act or manner of governing, from Old French gouvernance government, rule, administration;
(rule of) conduct, from governer (see govern). Fowler writes that the word has now the dignity of
incipient archaism, but it might continue useful in its original sense as government comes primarily
to mean the governing power in a state.


governess (n.)

mid-15c., female ruler, shortening of governouresse a woman who rules (late 14c.), from Old French
governeresse female ruler or administrator (see governor + -ess); in the sense of a female teacher
in a private home it is attested from 1712.


government (n.)

late 14c., act of governing or ruling; 1550s, system by which a thing is governed (especially a
state), from Old French governement (Modern French gouvernement), from governer (see govern).
Replaced Middle English governance. Meaning governing power in a given place is from 1702.


governmental (adj.)

1774, from government + -al (1). Related: Governmentally. A Middle English word in the same sense
was gubernatif (late 14c.).


governmentalism (n.)

disposition to enlarge the power and scope of the government, 1841, from governmental + -ism;
originally in reference to France and perhaps from French.    Besides this, it is a well known fact,
one made sufficiently clear by the history of the United States, that the less governmentalism there
is in a country, the better it is for the citizens as to their material interests. A very
complicated governmental apparatus, when, especially, it is useless, is and can be only hurtful to
the interests of the mass of the people. [Amedee H. Simonin, Resumption of Specie Payments, 1868]
Related: Governmentalist.


governor (n.)

c.1300, gouernour, personal keeper, protector, guide, from Old French governeor (11c., Modern French
gouverneur) and directly from Latin gubernatorem (nominative gubernator) director, ruler, governor,
originally steersman, pilot (see govern). Meaning subordinate ruler; head of a province, etc. is
from late 14c. The adjective gubernatorial remembers the Latin form.


gow (n.)

1915, opium, from Cantonese yao-kao opium, literally drug-sap; used as such by Raymond Chandler,
etc.; by 1950s meaning had expanded to pictures of nude or scantily clad women, hence gow job flashy
girl, which in teenager slang came to also mean hot rod.


gowk (n.)

cuckoo, early 14c., from Old Norse gaukr, from Proto-Germanic *gaukoz (cognates: Old English geac,
Old High German gouh). Meaning fool attested from c.1600.


gown (n.)

c.1300, from Old French goune robe, coat, habit, gown, from Late Latin gunna leather garment, skin,
hide, of unknown origin. Used by St. Boniface (8c.) for a fur garment permitted for old or infirm
monks. Klein writes it is probably a word adopted from a language of the Apennine or the Balkan
Peninsula. OED points to Byzantine Greek gouna, a word for a coarse garment sometimes made of skins,
but also notes some scholars regard [Late Latin gunna] as of Celtic origin.    In 18c., gown was the
common word for what is now usually styled a dress. It was maintained more in the U.S. than in
Britain, but was somewhat revived 20c. in fashion senses and in comb. forms (such as bridal gown,
nightgown). Meaning flowing robe worn as a badge of office or authority is from late 14c., on image
of the Roman toga. As collective singular for residents of a university (1650s) it usually now is
opposed to town.


goy (n.)

gentile, non-Jew (plural goyim), 1835, from Hebrew goy people, nation; in Mishnaic and Modern
Hebrew, also gentile.


goyim

plural of goy (q.v.).


grab (v.)

1580s, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German grabben to grab, from Proto-Germanic *grab (cognates:
Old English gr&aelig;ppian to seize, Old Saxon garva, Old High German garba sheaf, literally that
which is gathered up together), from PIE *ghrebh- to seize, reach (cognates: Sanskrit grbhnati
seizes, Old Persian grab- seize as possession or prisoner, Old Church Slavonic grabiti to seize,
rob, Lithuanian grebiu to rake). Sense of to get by unscrupulous methods reinforced by grab game, a
kind of swindle, attested from 1846. Related: Grabbed; grabbing.


grab (n.)

1777, thing grabbed; 1824, act of grabbing, from grab (v.). Up for grabs attested from 1945 in jive
talk.


grab-bag (n.)

miscellaneous mixture, 1854, originally a carnival game; from grab + bag (n.).


grabby (adj.)

1910, from grab (v.) + -y (2). Related: Grabbiness.


Grace

fem. proper name, literally favor, grace; see grace (n.).


grace (n.)

late 12c., God's favor or help, from Old French grace pardon, divine grace, mercy; favor, thanks;
elegance, virtue (12c.), from Latin gratia favor, esteem, regard; pleasing quality, good will,
gratitude (source of Italian grazia, Spanish gracia), from gratus pleasing, agreeable, from PIE root
*gwere- (3) to favor (cognates: Sanskrit grnati sings, praises, announces, Lithuanian giriu to
praise, celebrate, Avestan gar- to praise).    Sense of virtue is early 14c., that of beauty of form
or movement, pleasing quality is mid-14c. In classical sense, one of the three sister goddesses
(Latin Grati&aelig;, Greek Kharites), bestowers of beauty and charm, it is first recorded in English
1579 in Spenser. The short prayer that is said before or after a meal (early 13c.; until 16c.
usually graces) has a sense of gratitude.


grace (v.)

c.1200, to thank, from Old French gracier, from grace (see grace (n.)). Meaning to show favor (mid-
15c.) led to that of to lend or add grace to something (1580s, as in grace us with your presence),
which is the root of the musical sense in grace notes (1650s). Related: Graced; gracing.


graceful (adj.)

mid-15c., full of grace, also pleasant, sweet, from grace (n.) + -ful. Meaning with pleasing or
attractive qualities is from 1580s. Related: Gracefully; gracefulness.


graceless (adj.)

late 14c., not in a state of grace, from grace (n.) + -less. Meaning wanting charm or elegance is
from 1630s. Related: Gracelessly; gracelessness.


gracile (adj.)

1620s, from Latin gracilis slender, thin, fine; plain, simple. Not etymologically connected to grace
but often regarded as if it is. Perhaps a dissimilated form related to Latin cracens slender; if so,
perhaps cognate with Sanskrit krsah thin, weak, Avestan keresa- lean, meager, Lithuanian kar&#353;tu
to be very old, to age.


gracious (adj.)

c.1300, filled with God's grace, from Old French gracios courteous, pleasing, kind, friendly (12c.,
Modern French gracieux), from Latin gratiosus enjoying favor, agreeable, obliging; popular,
acceptable, from gratia (see grace). Meaning merciful, benevolent is from late 14c. As an
exclamation, elliptically for gracious God, attested from 1713.


graciously (adv.)

c.1300, by God's grace, from gracious + -ly (2). Meaning favorably, with good will is late 14c.


graciousness (n.)

early 15c., from gracious + -ness.


grackle (n.)

1772, gracule, from genus name Gracula, Modern Latin fem. from Latin graculus jackdaw, European
crow, perhaps of imitative origin. The anglicized form of the word is attested from 1782.


grad (n.)

abbreviation of graduate (n.), attested from 1871.


gradate (v.)

1753, back-formation from gradation. Related: Gradated; gradating.


gradation (n.)

1530s, climax, from Middle French gradation (16c.) and directly from Latin gradationem (nominative
gradatio) ascent by steps, a climax, noun of action from gradus step, degree (see grade (n.)).
Meaning gradual change is from 1540s. Related: Gradational.


grade (n.)

1510s, degree of measurement, from French grade grade, degree (16c.), from Latin gradus step, pace,
gait, walk; figuratively a step, stage, degree, related to gradi to walk, step, go, from PIE
*ghredh- (cognates: Lithuanian gridiju to go, wander, Old Church Slavonic gredo to come, Old Irish
in-greinn he pursues, and second element in congress, progress, etc.).  Replaced Middle English gree
step, degree in a series, from Old French grei step, from Latin gradus. Railway sense is from 1811.
Meaning class of things having the same quality or value is from 1807; meaning division of a school
curriculum equivalent to one year is from 1835; that of letter-mark indicating assessment of a
student's work is from 1886 (earlier used of numerical grades). Grade A top quality, fit for human
consumption (originally of milk) is from a U.S. system instituted in 1912.


grade (v.)

1650s, to arrange in grades, from grade (n.). Related: Graded; grading.


grader (n.)

1868, of machines; 1870, of persons, agent noun from grade (v.).


gradient (n.)

steep slope of a road or railroad, 1835, principally in American English, from grade (n.) by analogy
of quotient, etc. It was used 17c. as an adjective, of animals, characterized by walking; in that
case probably from Latin gradientem, present participle of gradi to walk.


gradual (adj.)

early 15c., having steps or ridges, from Medieval Latin gradualis, from Latin gradus step (see grade
(n.)). Meaning arranged by degrees is from 1540s; that of taking place by degrees is from 1690s.


gradualism (n.)

1832, in abolitionist literature, as a disparaging term (opposed to immediatism), from gradual +
-ism. Related: Gradualist.


gradually (adv.)

1640s, from gradual + -ly (2).


graduand (n.)

1882, from Medieval Latin graduandus, gerundive of graduari (see graduate).


graduate (n.)

early 15c., one who holds a degree (with man; as a stand-alone noun from mid-15c.), from Medieval
Latin graduatus, past participle of graduari to take a degree, from Latin gradus step, grade (see
grade (n.)). As an adjective, from late 15c.


graduate (v.)

early 15c., to confer a university degree upon, from Medieval Latin graduatus (see graduate (n.)).
Intransitive sense from 1807. Related: Graduated; graduating.


graduation (n.)

early 15c., in alchemy, tempering, refining of something to a certain degree; measurement according
to the four degrees of a quality, from graduate (n.). General sense of dividing into degrees is from
1590s; meaning action of receiving or giving an academic degree is from early 15c.; in reference to
the ceremony where a degree is given, from 1818.


Gradus ad Parnassum

Latin, literally A Step to Parnassus, mountain sacred to Apollo and the Muses, title of a dictionary
of prosody used in English public schools for centuries as a guide to Roman poetry. The book dates
from the 1680s.


Grady

surname and masc. proper name, from Irish Grada noble.


Graeco-

also Greco-, modern word-forming element, from Latin Graecus Greek (see Greek).


graffiti (n.)

1851, for ancient wall inscriptions found in the ruins of Pompeii, from Italian graffiti, plural of
graffito a scribbling, a diminutive formation from graffio a scratch or scribble, from graffiare to
scribble, ultimately from Greek graphein to scratch, draw, write (see -graphy). Sense extended 1877
to recently made crude drawings and scribbling.


graffito (n.)

singular of graffiti (q.v.).


graft (n.1)

shoot inserted into another plant, late 15c. alteration of Middle English graff (late 14c.), from
Old French graife grafting knife, carving tool, stylus, from Latin graphium stylus, from Greek
grapheion stylus, from graphein to write (see -graphy). So called probably on resemblance of a
stylus to the pencil-shaped shoots used in grafting. The terminal -t- in the English word is not
explained. Surgical sense is from 1871.


graft (n.2)

corruption, 1865, perhaps 1859, American English, perhaps from graft (1) via British slang sense of
one's occupation (1853), which seems to be from the word's original sense of digging (see graft
(n.1)).


graft (v.)

late 15c., from graft (n.1). Related: Grafted; grafting.


Graham

in reference to crackers, etc., from unsifted whole-wheat flour, 1834, American English, from
Sylvester Graham (1794-1851), U.S. dietetic reformer and temperance advocate. The family name is
attested from early 12c., an Anglo-French form of the place name Grantham (Lincolnshire).


grail (n.)

c.1300, the Holy Grail, from Old French graal Holy Grail, cup, earlier large shallow dish, from
Medieval Latin gradalis a flat dish or shallow vessel, perhaps ultimately from Latin crater bowl,
from Greek krater bowl, especially for mixing wine with water.   Holy Grail is anglicized from
Middle English Sangreal (Saint graal), grafted awkwardly onto the Celtic Arthurian legends 12c. by
Church scribes probably in place of some pagan otherworldly object. It was said to be the cup into
which Joseph of Arimathea received the last drops of blood of Christ (according to the writers who
picked up the thread of Chr&eacute;tien de Troyes' Perceval) or the dish from which Christ ate the
Last Supper (Robert de Boron), and ultimately was identified as both (&thorn;e dische wi&thorn;
&thorn;e blode, 14c.).


grain (n.)

early 13c., scarlet dye made from insects (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French grain (12c.)
seed, grain, particle, berry, scarlet dye (see kermes for last sense), from Latin granum seed, a
grain, small kernel (see corn (n.1)).    As a collective singular meaning seed of wheat and allied
grasses used as food, it is attested from early 14c. Extended from c.1300 to other objects (such as
salt, sand). As a unit of weight, from 1540s. Used of wood (1560s), from the arrangement of fibers,
which resemble seeds. Hence, against the grain (1650), a metaphor from carpentry: cutting across the
fibers of the wood is more difficult than cutting along them.


grainy (adj.)

1610s, from grain + -y (2). In Middle English, grain also was used as an adjective, like grain,
lumpy, spotted (early 15c.).


Grallatores

wading birds, Modern Latin, from Latin grallotores stilt-walkers, plural of grallator, from grallae
stilts, ultimately from stem of gradi to walk, go (see grade (n.)). Related: Grallatorial (1835).


gram (n.)

metric unit of weight, 1797, from French gramme (18c.), from Late Latin gramma small weight, from
Greek gramma small weight, originally letter of the alphabet, from stem of graphein to draw, write
(see -graphy). Adopted into English about two years before it was established in France as a unit in
the metric system by law of 19 frimaire, year VIII (1799).


gramercy

exclamation of thanks or surprise, c.1300, from Old French grant-merci great thanks.


gramineous (adj.)

1650s, from Latin gramineus (adj.) of grass, grassy, from gramen grass (see graminivorous).


graminivorous (adj.)

feeding on grass, 1739, from gramini-, comb. form of Latin gramen (genitive graminis) grass, fodder,
which perhaps ultimately is cognate with English grass, + -vorous.


grammar (n.)

early 14c., gramarye (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French gramaire learning, especially Latin
and philology, grammar, (magic) incantation, spells, mumbo-jumbo, irregular semi-popular adoption
[OED] of Latin grammatica, from Greek grammatike tekhne art of letters, with a sense of both
philology and literature in the broadest sense, fem. adjective from gramma letter, from stem of
graphein to draw or write (see -graphy). An Old English word for it was st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft (see
staff (n.)).    Form grammar is from late 14c. Restriction to rules of language is a post-classical
development, but as this type of study was until 16c. limited to Latin, Middle English gramarye also
came to mean learning in general, knowledge peculiar to the learned classes (early 14c.), which
included astrology and magic; hence the secondary meaning of occult knowledge (late 15c.), which
evolved in Scottish into glamor (q.v.).    A grammar school (late 14c.) originally was a school in
which the learned languages are grammatically taught [Johnson, who also has grammaticaster a mean
verbal pedant]. In U.S. (1842) the term was put to use in the graded system for a school between
primary and secondary where English grammar is taught.


grammarian (n.)

student of or writer on (Latin) grammar; philologist, etymologist; in general use, learned man, late
14c., from Old French gramairien (Modern French grammairien) grammarian, wise man, person who knows
Latin; magician, agent noun from grammaire (see grammar).


grammatical (adj.)

1520s, from Middle French grammatical and directly from Late Latin grammaticalis of a scholar, from
grammaticus pertaining to grammar (see grammar). Related: Grammatically (c.1400).


grammatist (n.)

1580s, from French grammatiste, from Medieval Latin grammatista, from Greek grammatistes, from
gramma (see grammar).


Grammy (n.)

statuette awarded by the American National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, 1959, from the
gram- in gramophone, on the model of Emmy.


gramophile (n.)

fan of Gramophone records, 1922, from Gramophone + -phile.


Gramophone (n.)

1887, trademark by German-born U.S. inventor Emil Berliner (1851-1929), an inversion of phonogram
(1884) the tracing made by a phonograph needle, coined from Greek phone voice, sound (see fame (n.))
+ gramma something written (see grammar).    Berliner's machine used a flat disc and succeeded with
the public. Edison's phonograph used a cylinder and did not. Despised by linguistic purists (Weekley
calls gramophone An atrocity formed by reversing phonogram) who tried to at least amend it to
grammophone, it was replaced by record player after mid-1950s.


gramp

1898, colloquial or dialectal shortening of grandpa.


grampus (n.)

1590s, earlier graundepose (1520s), altered (by influence of grand) from Middle English graspeys
(late 13c.), from Anglo-French grampais, from Old French graspois, craspois whale, (salted) whale
meat; blubber; seal, from Medieval Latin craspicis, literally fat fish, from Latin crassus thick +
piscis fish. For specifics of usage in English, see OED.


gran (1)

childish abbreviation of grandmother or granny, 1863.


gran (2)

Italian, the form of grand before nouns.


granary (n.)

1560s, from Latin granaria granary, store house for corn, from granum grain (see corn (n.1)).


grand (adj.)

late 14c., grant large, big (early 12c. in surnames), from Anglo-French graunt and directly from Old
French grant, grand (10c.) large, tall; grown-up; great, powerful, important; strict, severe;
extensive; numerous, from Latin grandis big, great; full, abundant, also full-grown; figuratively
strong, powerful, weighty, severe (perhaps cognate with Greek brenthyomai to swagger, be haughty).
It supplanted magnus in Romanic languages; in English with a special sense of imposing. The
connotations of noble, sublime, lofty, dignified, etc., were in Latin. As a general term of
admiration, magnificent, splendid, from 1816. Related: Grander; grandest.    The use of grand- in
compounds, with the sense of a generation older than, or younger than, is first attested c.1200, in
Anglo-French graund dame grandmother. Latin and Greek had similar usages.   Grand jury is late 15c.
Grand piano from 1797. The grand tour of the principal sites of continental Europe, as part of a
gentleman's education, is attested by that name from 1660s. The Grand Canyon was so called 1871 by
Maj. John Wesley Powell, scientific adventurer, who explored it; earlier it had been known as Big
Canyon.


grand (n.)

thousand dollars, 1915, American English underworld slang, from grand (adj.).


grand mal

convulsive epilepsy (with loss of consciousness), 1842, from French grand mal, literally great
sickness (see grand (adj.)). Opposed to petit mal absence seizure.


Grand Marnier

French cognac-based liqueur, 1901, from French grand great (see grand (adj.)) + Marnier-Lapostolle,
name of the manufacturer.


Grand Old Party

see GOP.


grand prix

1863, French, literally great prize, originally in English in reference to the Grand Prix de Paris,
international horse race for three-year-olds, run every June at Longchamps beginning in 1863.


grandad (n.)

also granddad, 1819, from grand (adj.) + dad. Grandaddy is attested from 1769; figuratively (in
grandaddy of all _____) from 1956. Grand dada attested from 1690s.


grandame (n.)

c.1200, a grandmother; an old woman, from grand (adj.) + dame. Compare Anglo-French graund dame.
Contracted form grannam attested from 1590s.


grandchild (n.)

1580s, graundchilde, from grand (adj.) + child. Related: Grandchildren.


granddaughter (n.)

also grand daughter, 1610s, from grand (adj.) + daughter.


grandee (n.)

1590s, from Spanish grande nobleman of the first rank, originally an adjective, great, from Latin
grandis big, great (see grand (adj.)).


grandeur (n.)

c.1500, loftiness, height, from Middle French grandeur grandness, greatness, Old French grandor
(12c.), from grand great (see grand (adj.)). Extended sense of majesty, stateliness is first
recorded 1660s.


grandfather (n.)

early 15c., from grand (adj.) + father (n.), probably on analogy of French grand-p&egrave;re.
Replaced grandsire and Old English ealdef&aelig;der. Grandfather clause originally (1900) referred
to exemptions from post-Reconstruction voting restrictions in the U.S. South for men whose forebears
had voted before the Civil War. Grandfather clock is c.1880, from the popular song; they were
previously known as tall case clocks or eight-day clocks.


grandfatherly (adj.)

1824, from grandfather + -ly (1).


grandiloquence (n.)

1580s, from Latin grandiloquentia, from grandiloquus using lofty speech, bombastic, from grandis big
(see grand (adj.)) + -loquus speaking, from loqui to speak (see locution).


grandiloquent (adj.)

1590s, probably a back-formation from grandiloquence. Related: Grandiloquently.


grandiose (adj.)

1828 (earlier as a French word in English), from French grandiose impressive (18c.), from Italian
grandioso, from Latin grandis big (see grand (adj.)). Related: Grandiosely.


grandiosity (n.)

1814, from French grandiose (see grandiose) + -ity.    The author now and then makes a word for his
own use, as complicate, for complicated; and, still less fortunately 'grandiosity' (p. 343). [review
of Joseph Forsyth's Remarks on Italy, Edinburgh Review, January 1814]


grandly (adv.)

1650s, from grand (adj.) + -ly (2).


grandma (n.)

1793, childish or familiar form of grandmother (see ma). Grandmama is recorded from 1749.


grandmaster (n.)

as a chess title, 1927, from grand (adj.) + master (n.). Earlier as a title in Freemasonry (1724)
and in military orders of knighthood (1550s).


grandmother (n.)

early 15c., from grand (adj.) + mother (n.1), probably on analogy of French grand-m&egrave;re.
Replaced earlier grandame (c.1200) and Old English ealdemodor.


grandmotherly (adj.)

1842, from grandmother + -ly (1).


grandness (n.)

1722, from grand (adj.) + -ness.


grandpa (n.)

1814, childish or familiar form of grandfather (see pa). Grandpappa is recorded from 1753, grandpop
from 1860, grandpappy from 1853.


grandparent (n.)

1802, from grand (adj.) + parent (n.). Related: Grandparents.


grandsire (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French graunt sire; see grand (adj.) + sire (n.).


grandson (n.)

1580s, from grand + son.


grandstand (n.)

main seating for spectators at an outdoor event, 1834, from grand (adj.)+ stand. The verb meaning to
show off is student slang from 1895, from grandstand player, attested in baseball slang from
1888.It's little things of this sort which makes the 'grand stand player.' They make impossible
catches, and when they get the ball they roll all over the field. [M.J. Kelly, Play Ball, 1888]
Compare British gallery hit (1882) showy play by a batsman in cricket, 'intended to gain applause
from uncritical spectators' [OED]. Related: grandstanding.


grange (n.)

small farm, mid-15c.; mid-13c. in place names (and compare granger), from Anglo-French graunge, Old
French grange barn, granary; farmstead, farm house (12c.), from Medieval Latin or Vulgar Latin
granica barn or shed for keeping grain, from Latin granum grain (see corn (n.1)). Sense evolved to
outlying farm (late 14c.), then country house (1550s). Meaning local lodge of the Patrons of
Husbandry (a U.S. agricultural interest promotion organization) is from 1867.


granger (n.)

farm steward, man in charge of a grange, late 12c., also as a surname, from Old French grangier,
from grange (see grange).


granite (n.)

1640s, from French granit(e) (17c.) or directly from Italian granito granite, originally grained,
past participle of granire granulate, make grainy, from grano grain, from Latin granum grain (see
corn (n.1)). In reference to the appearance of the rock. Used figuratively for hardness (of the
heart, head, etc.) from 1839. New Hampshire, U.S., has been the Granite State since at least 1825.


granitic (adj.)

1794, from granite + -ic.


granny (n.)

1660s, according to OED, most likely a diminutive and contraction of grannam, shortened form of
grandame, rather than from grandmother. The sailor's granny knot (by 1803, originally granny's knot,
so called because it is the natural knot tied by women or landsmen [Smyth, Sailor's Word-Book,
1867]. Granny Smith apples (1895) named for Maria Ann Smith (d.1870) of Australia, who originated
them.


granola (n.)

1970, American English, probably from Italian grano grain, or from granular, with commercial suffix
-ola. Earlier, with a capital G-, it was a proprietary name (reg. 1886 by W.K. Kellogg, in use into
early 20c.) for a kind of breakfast cereal.


grant (n.)

c.1200, allowance, consent, permission, from Anglo-French graunter, from Old French granter,
collateral variant of creanter to promise, guarantee, confirm, authorize, from Latin credentem
(nominative credens), present participle of credere to believe, to trust (see credo).


grant (v.)

early 13c., to allow, consent, permit, from Old French granter (see grant (n.)). Meaning admit,
acknowledge is from c.1300; hence to take (something) for granted (1610s). Related: Granted;
granting.


grantee (n.)

late 15c., from grant (n.) + -ee.


grantor (n.)

1620s, from Anglo-French grantor, agent noun from granter (see grant). Native form granter (n.) is
attested from c.1400.


granular (adj.)

1794, from Late Latin granulum granule, diminutive of Latin granum grain, seed (see corn (n.1)) +
-ar. Replaced granulous (late 14c.). Related: Granularity.


granulate (v.)

1660s, back-formation from granulation. Related: Granulated; granulating.


granulation (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin granulum (see granular) + -ation.


granule (n.)

1650s, from French granule or directly from Late Latin granulum small grain, diminutive of Latin
granum grain (see corn (n.1)).


granuloma (n.)

from Latin granulum (see granular) + -oma, on model of glaucoma, etc.


granulose (n.)

part of starch convertible into sugar, 1875, from Late Latin granulum small grain, diminutive of
granum grain (see grain) + chemical suffix -ose.


grape (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French grape bunch of grapes, grape (12c.), probably a back-formation from graper
steal; grasp; catch with a hook; pick (grapes), from a Frankish or other Germanic word, from Proto-
Germanic *krappon hook (cognates: Middle Dutch crappe, Old High German krapfo hook; also see cramp
(n.2)). The original notion perhaps was vine hook for grape-picking. The vine is not native to
England. The word replaced Old English winberige wine berry. Spanish grapa, Italian grappa also are
Germanic loan-words.


grapefruit (n.)

1814, from grape + fruit. So called because it grows in clusters.  The fruit itself was known since
1693 (in Hans Sloane's catalogue of Jamaican plants); presumably it originated there from chance
hybrids between other cultivated citrus. It was known by various names before the current one
emerged. An ornamental plant chiefly at first, not much eaten until late 19c.


grapeshot (n.)

also grape-shot, 1747, from grape + shot (n.). So called for its appearance. Originally simply
grape, as a collective singular (1680s).


grapeshot (n.)

also grape-shot, 1747, from grape + shot (n.). So called for its appearance. The whiff of grapeshot
popularized in English from 1837, from Carlyle's history of the French Revolution (in which it was a
chapter title).


grapevine (n.)

1736, from grape + vine. Meaning rumor source is 1862, U.S. Civil War slang for telegraph wires.


graph (n.)

1878, shortening of graphic formula (see graphic). The verb meaning charted on a graph is from 1889.
Related: Graphed; graphing.


grapheme (n.)

1937, American English, from graph letter, symbol (see -graphy) + -eme unit of language structure.


graphic (adj.)

vivid, 1570s (implied in graphically), from Latin graphicus picturesque, from Greek graphikos of or
for writing, belonging to drawing, picturesque, from graphe writing, drawing, from graphein to write
(see -graphy). Meaning of or pertaining to drawing is from 1756. Related: Graphically. Graphic
design is attested by 1956. Graphic equalizer is from 1969.


graphics (n.)

1889, in reference to the use of diagrams, from graphic; also see -ics. Layout and typography sense
attested from 1960; of computers by 1966.


graphite (n.)

1796, from German Graphit black lead, coined 1789 by German mineralogist Abraham Gottlob Werner
(1750-1817) from Greek graphein write (see -graphy) + mineral suffix -ite. So called because it was
used in pencils. Related: Graphitic.


graphology (n.)

study of handwriting, 1882, from French graphologie, coined 1868 by Abb&eacute; Jean-Hippolyte
Michon (1806-1881) from comb. form of Greek graphein to write (see -graphy) + logos a speaking, a
dealing with (see logos). Especially, character study based on handwriting (1886).


graphomania (n.)

morbid desire for writing, 1840; see -graphy + mania. Related: Graphomaniac (1827).


grapnel (n.)

small hook, late 14c., Anglo-French diminutive of grapon, from Old French grapil, grapin hook,
diminutive of grape hook (see grape). Earlier form was grapel (see grapple).


grappa (n.)

brandy distilled from the residue of wine-making, 1893, from Italian grappa, literally grapes (see
grape).


grapple (n.)

late 13c., from Old French grapil hook (see grapnel). The verb is 1520s, seize and hold fast, from
the noun. Sense of battle, struggle (with) is from 1590s. Related: Grappled; grappling.


grappler (n.)

1620s, agent noun from grapple (v.).


graptolite (n.)

1838, from Modern Latin graptolithus, literally written-stone, from Greek graptos engraved, written,
painted (verbal adjective of graphein; see -graphy) + lithos stone (see litho-). So called because
the fossils resemble writing.


grasp (v.)

mid-14c., to reach for, feel around, possibly a metathesis of grapsen, from Old English
*gr&aelig;psan to touch, feel, from Proto-Germanic *grap-, *grab- (cognates: East Frisian grapsen to
grasp, Middle Dutch grapen to seize, grasp, Old English grapian to touch, feel, grope), from PIE
root *ghrebh- (1) to seize, reach (see grab (v.)). Sense of seize first recorded mid-16c. Figurative
use from c.1600; of intellectual matters from 1680s. Related: Grasped; grasping. The noun is from
1560s.


grasping (adj.)

greedy, acquisitive, late 14c., present participle adjective from grasp (v.).


grass (n.)

Old English gr&aelig;s, g&aelig;rs herb, plant, grass, from Proto-Germanic grasan (cognates: Old
Norse, Old Saxon, Dutch, Old High German, German, Gothic gras, Swedish gr&auml;s), from PIE *ghros-
young shoot, sprout, from root *ghre- to grow, become green (related to grow and green).    As a
color name (especially grass-green, Old English gr&aelig;sgrene) by c.1300. Sense of marijuana is
first recorded 1938, American English. Hawaiian grass skirt attested from 1937; keep off the grass
by 1850.


grass roots (n.)

1766, literally; figurative use from 1901 in sense fundamental level; U.S. political sense of the
rank and file of the electorate is attested from 1912; also grassroots.


grass widow (n.)

1520s, originally discarded mistress (compare German Strohwitwe, literally straw-widow), probably in
reference to casual bedding. Sense of married woman whose husband is absent is from 1846.[G]rasse
wydowes ... be yet as seuerall as a barbours chayre and neuer take but one at onys. [More, 1528]


grasshopper (n.)

mid-14c. (late 13c. as a surname), earlier greshoppe (c.1200), from Old English g&aelig;rshoppa; see
grass + hop. Similar formation in Middle Swedish gr&auml;shoppare, German Grash&uuml;pfer. As a term
of reproach, from Eccl. xii:5. Also recorded c.1300 as a name for the hare.


grassland (n.)

1680s, from grass + land (n.).


grassy (adj.)

mid-15c., from grass + -y (2).


grate (n.)

late 14c., grill for cooking; early 15c., iron bars or cagework across a door or windows, from
Anglo-Latin (mid-14c.), from Old French grate or directly from Medieval Latin grata lattice, from
Latin cratis wickerwork, hurdle (see hurdle). As a verb meaning to fit with a grate, from mid-15c.
Related: Grated; grating.


grate (v.)

to scrape, rub, late 14c. (implied in grated), from Old French grater to scrape (Modern French
gratter), from Frankish *kratton, from Proto-Germanic *krattojan (cognates: Old High German krazzon
to scratch, scrape, German kratzen to scratch, Swedish kratta, Danish kratte to rake), probably of
imitative origin. Senses of sound harshly, and annoy are mid-16c. Italian grattare also is from
Germanic. Related: Grated; grating.


grateful (adj.)

1550s, pleasing to the mind, also full of gratitude, from obsolete adj. grate agreeable, thankful,
from Latin gratus pleasing (see grace (n.)). A most unusual formation [Weekley]. Hard to think of
another case where English uses -ful to make an adjective from an adjective. Related: Gratefully;
gratefulness.


Grateful Dead

San Francisco rock band, 1965, the name taken, according to founder Jerry Garcia, from a dictionary
entry he saw about the folk tale motif of a wanderer who gives his last penny to pay for a corpse's
burial, then is magically aided by the spirit of the dead person. A different version of the concept
is found in the Egyptian Book of the Dead.


grater (n.)

instrument for scraping (bread, ginger, etc.), late 14c., from Old French grateor, agent noun from
grater (see grate (v.)).


gratification (n.)

1590s, from Middle French gratification or directly from Latin gratificationem (nominative
gratificatio) obligingness, complaisance, noun of action from past participle stem of gratificari
(see gratify).


gratify (v.)

c.1400, to bestow grace upon; 1530s, to show gratitude to, from French gratifier (16c.) or directly
from Latin gratificari to do favor to, oblige, gratify, from gratus pleasing (see grace (n.)) + root
of facere make, do, perform (see factitious). Meaning to give pleasure to is from 1560s. Related:
Gratified; gratifying.


gratin (n.)

light crust over a dish, 1806 (in au gratin), from French gratin crust (16c.), from gratter to
scrape, scratch (see grate (v.)).


grating (adj.)

annoying, irritating, 1560s, figurative use of present participle adjective from grate (v.).


gratis

mid-15c., for nothing, freely, from Latin gratis, contraction of gratiis for thanks, hence, without
recompense, ablative of gratiae thanks, plural of gratia favor (see grace). Meaning free of charge
is 1540s.


gratitude (n.)

mid-15c., good will, from Middle French gratitude (15c.) or directly from Medieval Latin
gratitudinem (nominative gratitudo) thankfulness, from Latin gratus thankful, pleasing (see grace
(n.)). Meaning thankfulness is from 1560s.


gratuitous (adj.)

1650s, freely bestowed, from Latin gratuitus done without pay, spontaneous, voluntary, from gratus
pleasing, agreeable, from gratia favor (see grace (n.)). Sense of uncalled for, done without good
reason is first recorded 1690s.


gratuitously (adv.)

1690s, from gratuitous + -ly (2).


gratuity (n.)

1520s, graciousness, from French gratuit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin gratuitatem
(nominative gratuitas) free gift, probably from Latin gratuitus free, freely given (see gratuitous).
Meaning money given for favor or services is first attested 1530s.


gratulate (v.)

archaic, 1550s, from Latin gratulatus, past participle of gratulari (see gratulation).


gratulation (n.)

late 15c., gratulacyon expression of thanks, from Latin gratulationem (nominative gratulatio) a
manifestation of joy, wishing joy, rejoicing, from past participle stem of gratulari give thanks,
show joy, from gratus agreeable (see grace (n.)).


gravamen (n.)

grievance, 1640s, from Late Latin gravamen trouble, physical inconvenience (in Medieval Latin, a
grievance), from gravare to burden, aggravate, from gravis heavy (see grave (adj.)).


grave (n.)

Old English gr&aelig;f grave, ditch, cave, from Proto-Germanic *graban (cognates: Old Saxon graf,
Old Frisian gref, Old High German grab grave, tomb; Old Norse gr&ouml;f cave, Gothic graba ditch),
from PIE root *ghrebh- (2) to dig, to scratch, to scrape (source also of Old Church Slavonic grobu
grave, tomb); related to Old English grafan to dig (see grave (v.)).    The normal mod.
representation of OE. gr&aelig;f would be graff; the ME. disyllable grave, from which the standard
mod. form descends, was prob. due to the especially frequent occurrence of the word in the dat.
(locative) case. [OED]    From Middle Ages to 17c., they were temporary, crudely marked repositories
from which the bones were removed to ossuaries after some years and the grave used for a fresh
burial. Perpetual graves became common from c.1650. To make (someone) turn in his grave behave in
some way that would have offended the dead person is first recorded 1888.


grave (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French grave (14c.), from Latin gravis weighty, serious, heavy, grievous,
oppressive, from PIE root *gwere- (2) heavy (cognates: Sanskrit guruh heavy, weighty, venerable;
Greek baros weight, barys heavy in weight, often with the notion of strength, force; Old English
cweorn quern; Gothic kaurus heavy; Lettish gruts heavy). Greek barys (opposed to kouphos) also was
used figuratively, of suffering, sorrow, sobbing, and could mean oppressive, burdensome, grave,
dignified, impressive. The noun meaning accent mark over a vowel is c.1600, from French.


grave (v.)

to engrave, Old English grafan (medial -f- pronounced as v in Old English; past tense grof, past
participle grafen) to dig, carve, dig up, from Proto-Germanic *grabanan (cognates: Old Norse grafa,
Old Frisian greva, Dutch graven, Old High German graban, German graben, Gothic graban to dig,
carve), from the same source as grave (n.). Its Middle English strong past participle, graven, is
the only part still active, the rest of the word supplanted by its derivative, engrave.


gravedigger (n.)

also grave-digger, 1590s, from grave (n.) + agent noun from dig (v.).


gravel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French gravele sand, gravel, diminutive of grave sand, seashore (Modern French
gr&egrave;ve), possibly from Celtic *gravo- (compare Welsh gro coarse gravel, Breton grouan, Cornish
grow gravel), perhaps ultimately from PIE *ghreu- to rub, grind.


gravelly (adj.)

late 14c., covered with gravel or sand, from gravel + -y (2). Of voices, by 1944.


gravely (adv.)

1550s, solemnly, from grave (adj.) + -ly (2).


graven (adj.)

past participle adjective, late 14c., from grave (v.) + -en (1).


Gravenstein

apple variety, 1821, from Gravenstein, German form of the name of a village (Danish Graasten) in
Schleswig-Holstein.


Graves&#039; disease

1868, named for Irish physician Robert James Graves (1796-1853), who first recognized the disease in
1835.


gravestone (n.)

late 14c., stone over a grave; c.1200, stone coffin, from grave (n.) + stone (n.).


graveyard (n.)

1773, from grave (n.) + yard (n.1). Graveyard shift late-night work is c.1907, from earlier nautical
term, in reference to the loneliness of after-hours work.


gravid (adj.)

pregnant, 1590s, from Latin gravidus loaded; pregnant, from gravis burdened, heavy (see grave
(adj.)). Gravidation pregnancy is attested from mid-15c.


gravitas (n.)

1924, from Latin gravitas weight, heaviness; figuratively, of persons, dignity, presence, influence
(see gravity). A word that became useful when gravity acquired a primarily scientific meaning.


gravitate (v.)

1640s, exert weight, move downward, from Modern Latin gravitatus, past participle of gravitare
gravitate, from Latin gravitas heaviness, weight (see gravity). Meaning To be affected by gravity is
from 1690s. Figurative use from 1670s. Related: Gravitated; gravitating. The classical Latin verb
was gravare to make heavy, burden, oppress, aggravate.


gravitation (n.)

1640s in physics sense, also figurative, from Modern Latin gravitationem (nominative gravitatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of gravitare (see gravitate). Related: Gravitational.


gravity (n.)

c.1500, weight, dignity, seriousness, from Middle French gravit&eacute; seriousness, thoughtfulness,
and directly from Latin gravitatem (nominative gravitas) weight, heaviness, pressure, from gravis
heavy (see grave (adj.)). The scientific sense of force that gives weight to objects first recorded
1640s.


gravure

1893, short for photogravure, from gravure, from grave (v.) + -ure.


gravy (n.)

late 14c. (early 14c. in Anglo-French), from Old French gran&eacute; (with -n- misread for -u- --
the character used for -v- in medial positions in words in medieval manuscripts) sauce, stew,
probably originally properly grained, seasoned, from Latin granum grain, seed (see corn (n.1)). See
discussion in OED. Meaning money easily acquired first attested 1910; gravy train (1927) was
originally railroad slang for a short haul that paid well.


gray (adj.)

Old English gr&aelig;g (Mercian grei), from Proto-Germanic *grewa- gray (cognates: Old Norse grar,
Old Frisian gre, Middle Dutch gra, Dutch graw, Old High German grao, German grau), with no certain
cognates outside Germanic. French gris, Spanish gris, Italian grigio, Medieval Latin griseus are
Germanic loan-words.    The distinction between British grey and U.S. gray developed 20c. The noun
is c.1200, from the adjective. Gray as figurative for Southern troops in the U.S. Civil War is first
recorded 1863, in reference to their uniform color. Expression the gray mare is the better horse in
reference to households ruled by wives is recorded from 1540s. The verb is 1610s (with an isolated
instance from late 14c.). Related: Grayed; graying.


grayling (n.)

trout-like freshwater fish, early 14c., from gray + diminutive suffix -ling.


graze (v.1)

to feed, Old English grasian to feed on grass, from gr&aelig;s grass (see grass). Compare Middle
Dutch, Middle High German grasen, Dutch grazen, German grasen. Figurative use by 1570s. Related:
Grazed; grazing.


graze (v.2)

to touch, c.1600, perhaps a transferred sense from graze (v.1) via a notion of cropping grass right
down to the ground (compare German grasen to feed on grass, used in military sense in reference to
cannonballs that rebound off the ground). Related: Grazed; grazing. As a noun from 1690s.


grazier (n.)

late 13c. as a surname, agent noun from graze (v.1).


grease (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French grece, from Old French gresse, craisse grease, fat (Modern French
graisse), from Vulgar Latin *crassia (melted) animal fat, grease, from Latin crassus thick, solid,
fat (source also of Spanish grasa, Italian grassa). Grease paint, used by actors, attested from
1888. Grease monkey mechanic is from 1928.


grease (v.)

c.1300, from grease (n.). Sense of ply with bribe or protection money is 1520s, from notion of
grease the wheels make things run smoothly (mid-15c.). To grease (someone's) palm is from 1580s.
Expression greased lightning, representing something that goes very fast, is American English, by
1832.


greaser (n.)

early 14c. (as a surname), one who smears salve on a sheep, agent noun from grease (v.). As
derogatory American English slang for native Mexican or Latin American, first attested 1849, so
called from appearance. Greaseball in same sense from 1934.


greasy (adj.)

1510s, from grease + -y (2). Related: Greasily; greasiness. Greasy spoon small cheap restaurant is
from 1925.


great (adj.)

Old English great big, tall, thick, stout; coarse, from West Germanic *grautaz coarse, thick
(cognates: Old Saxon grot, Old Frisian grat, Dutch groot, German gro&szlig; great).    Said to have
meant originally big in size, coarse, and, if so, perhaps from PIE root *ghreu- to rub, grind. It
took over much of the sense of Middle English mickle, and is now largely superseded by big and large
except for non-material things.    As a prefix to terms denoting kinship one degree further removed
(early 15c., earliest attested use is in great uncle) it is from the similar use of French grand,
itself used as the equivalent of Latin magnus. An Old English way of saying great-grandfather was
&thorn;ridda f&aelig;der, literally third father.    In the sense of excellent, wonderful great is
attested from 1848. Great White Way Broadway in New York City is from 1901. Great Spirit high deity
of the North American Indians, 1703, originally translates Ojibwa kitchi manitou. The Great War
originally (1887) referred to the Napoleonic Wars, later (1914) to what we now call World War I (see
world).The Great War -- as, until the fall of France, the British continued to call the First World
War in order to avoid admitting to themselves that they were now again engaged in a war of the same
magnitude. [Arnold Toynbee, Experiences, 1969]  Also formerly with a verb form, Old English
greatian, Middle English greaten to become larger, increase, grow; become visibly pregnant, which
became archaic after 17c.


Great Britain

c.1400, Grete Britaigne. As opposed to Brittany.


great-grandfather (n.)

1510s, from great + grandfather.


great-grandmother (n.)

1520s, from great + grandmother.


great-hearted (adj.)

late 14c., from great + hearted.


greatcoat (n.)

large, heavy overcoat, 1660s, from great + coat (n.).


greater

Old English gryttra, Anglian *gretra; comparative of great.


greatest (adj.)

early 13c., superlative of great.


greatly (adv.)

c.1200, from great + -ly (2). Similar formation in Middle Dutch grotelike, Dutch grootelijks.


greatness (n.)

late Old English gretnys thickness, coarseness, stoutness; see great + -ness. Meaning eminence is
early 14c.


greave (n.)

leg armor, c.1300, from Old French greve shin, armor for the leg (12c.), of unknown origin. [Klein
suggests it ultimately is from Egyptian Arabic gaurab stocking, apparel for the leg.]


greaves (n.)

mid-14c., plural of greave.


grebe (n.)

diving bird, 1766, from French gr&egrave;be, of unknown origin, possibly from Breton krib a comb,
since some species are crested.


Grecian (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin Graecia â&euro;&oelig;Greeceâ&euro;? (see Greek) + people ending -ian. The noun
meaning a Greek is from early 15c.


Greco-

see Graeco-.


Greece

c.1300, from Latin Graecia; named for its inhabitants; see Greek. Earlier in English was Greklond
(c.1200). The Turkish name for the country, via Persian, is Yunanistan, literally Land of the
Ionians. Ionia also yielded the name for the country in Arabic and Hindi (Yunan).


greed (n.)

c.1600, a back-formation from greedy.


greedily (adv.)

Old English gr&aelig;diglice; see greedy + -ly (2).


greediness (n.)

Old English gr&aelig;dignes; see greedy + -ness.


greedy (adj.)

Old English gr&aelig;dig (West Saxon), gredig (Anglian) voracious, also covetous, from Proto-
Germanic *gr&aelig;dagaz (cognates: Old Saxon gradag greedy, Old Norse gra&eth;r greed, hunger,
Danish graadig, Dutch gretig, Old High German gratag greedy, Gothic gredags hungry), from
*gr&aelig;duz (cognates: Gothic gredus hunger, Old English gr&aelig;dum eagerly), possibly from PIE
root *gher- to like, want (source of Sanskrit grdh to be greedy).    In Greek, the word was
philargyros, literally money-loving. A German word for it is habs&uuml;chtig, from haben to have +
sucht sickness, disease, with sense tending toward passion for.


Greek (n.)

Old English Grecas, Crecas (plural), early Germanic borrowing from Latin Graeci the Hellenes, from
Greek Grakoi. Aristotle, who was the first to use Graikhos as equivalent to Hellenes (Meteorologica
I.xiv), wrote that it was the name originally used by Illyrians for the Dorians in Epirus, from
Graii, native name of the people of Epirus.    But a modern theory (put forth by German classical
historian Georg Busolt, 1850-1920), derives it from Graikhos inhabitant of Graia (literally gray), a
town on the coast of Boeotia, which was the name given by the Romans to all Greeks, originally to
the Greek colonists from Graia who helped found Cumae (9c. B.C.E.), the important city in southern
Italy where the Latins first encountered Greeks. Under this theory, it was reborrowed in this
general sense by the Greeks.    The Germanic languages originally borrowed the word with an initial
-k- sound (compare Old High German Chrech, Gothic Kreks), which probably was their initial sound
closest to the Latin -g- at the time; the word was later refashioned.  It was subtle of God to learn
Greek when he wished to become an author -- and not to learn it better. [Nietzsche, Beyond Good and
Evil, 1886]  Meaning the Greek language is from late 14c.; meaning unintelligible speech, gibberish
is from c.1600. Meaning Greek letter fraternity member is student slang, 1900.


Greek (adj.)

late 14c., from Greek (n.). Earlier Gregeis (c.1300), from Old French Gregois; also Greekish (Old
English Grecisc). In venery, anal, by 1970. Greek gift is from &AElig;neid, II.49: timeo Danaos et
dona ferentes.


green (n., adj.)

Old English grene green, young, immature, raw, earlier groeni, from Proto-Germanic *gronja-
(cognates: Old Saxon grani, Old Frisian grene, Old Norse gr&aelig;nn, Danish gr&oslash;n, Dutch
groen, Old High German gruoni, German gr&uuml;n), from PIE root *ghre- grow (see grass), through
sense of color of living plants.    Meaning a field, grassy place was in Old English. Sense of of
tender age, youthful is from early 15c.; hence gullible (c.1600). The color of jealousy at least
since Shakespeare (1596); Greensleeves, ballad of an inconstant lady-love, is from 1570s. Green
light in figurative sense of permission is from 1937. Green and red as signals on railways first
attested 1883, as nighttime substitutes for semaphore flags. Green beret originally British commando
is from 1949. Green room room for actors when not on stage is from 1701; presumably a well-known one
was painted green.


green (v.)

Old English grenian (see green (n.,adj.)). Related: Greened; greening.


greenback (n.)

U.S. dollar bill, 1862, so called from the time of their introduction, from green (adj.) + back
(n.); bank paper money printed in green ink had been called this since 1778 (as opposed to redbacks,
etc.).


greenery (n.)

1797, from green + -ery.


greengage

from green + name of English botanist Sir William Gage (1657-1727) who first cultivated it in
England c.1725.


greengrocer (n.)

1723, from green vegetables + grocer.


greenhead (n.)

1580s, young, untrained intellect, from green (adj.) + head (n.). As a type of biting fly, by 1837.


greenhorn (n.)

mid-15c., young horned animal, from green (adj.) in sense of new, fresh, recent + horn (n.). Applied
to new soldiers from c.1650; extended to any inexperienced person by 1680s.


greenhouse (n.)

1660s, from green + house (n.). Greenhouse effect attested from 1937.


greenish (adj.)

late 14c., from green + -ish.


Greenland

Old Norse Groenland, so named by its discoverer (986 C.E.) because it would induce settlers to go
there, if the land had a good name:   Hann gaf nafn landinu ok kalla&eth;i Groenland, ok kva&eth;
menn &thorn;at myndu fysa &thorn;angat farar, at landit &aelig;tti nafn gott. [Islendingabok,
1122-1133]


greenness (n.)

Old English grennes; see green + -ness. Meaning immaturity is from early 15c. Walpole coined greenth
(1753) in the same sense.


greens (n.)

freshly cut branches used for decoration, 1690s; vegetables, 1725, from green. Greens ecology
political party, first recorded 1978, from German die Gr&uuml;nen (West Germany), an outgrowth of
Gr&uuml;ne Aktion Zukunft Green Campaign for the Future, a mainly anti-nuclear power movement,
and/or gr&uuml;ne Listen green lists (of environmental candidates). Green (adj.) in the sense of
environmental is attested from 1972; Greenpeace, the international conservation and environmental
protection group, is from 1971.


Greenwich

town on the south bank of the Thames adjoining London, Old English Grenewic (964), literally Green
Harbor. The Royal Observatory there founded June 22, 1675, by King Charles II specifically to solve
the problem of finding longitude while at sea.    In October 1884, at the behest of the President of
the U.S.A., 41 delegates from 25 nations met in Washington, D.C., for the International Meridian
Conference. They decided to adopt a single world meridian, passing through the principal Transit
Instrument at the observatory at Greenwich, as the basis of calculation for all longitude and a
worldwide 24-hour clock. The Greenwich motion passed 22-1; San Domingo voted against it; France and
Brazil abstained. Greenwich Village quarter of New York City has been symbolic of American bohemia
at least since 1903.


greet (v.)

Old English gretan to come in contact with (in sense of attack, accost as well as salute, welcome,
and touch, take hold of, handle), from West Germanic *grotjan (cognates: Old Saxon grotian, Old
Frisian greta, Dutch groeten, Old High German gruozen, German gr&uuml;&szlig;en to salute, greet),
perhaps originally to resound (via notion of cause to speak), causative of Proto-Germanic
*gr&aelig;tanan, root of Old English gr&aelig;tan (Anglian gretan) weep, bewail, from PIE *gher- (2)
to call out. Greet still can mean cry, weep in Scottish &amp; northern England dialect, though this
might be from a different root. Gr&aelig;tan is probably also the source of the second element in
regret. Related: Greeted; greeting.


greeter (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from greet.


greeting (n.)

Old English greting salutation, verbal noun from gretan (see greet). Related: Greetings. First
record of greeting card is from 1876.


gregarious (adj.)

1660s, living in flocks (of animals), from Latin gregarius pertaining to a flock; of the herd, of
the common sort, common, from grex (genitive gregis) flock, herd, reduplication of PIE root *ger- to
gather together, assemble (cognates: Sanskrit gramah heap, troop; Greek ageirein to assemble, agora
assembly; Latin gremium bosom, lap; Old Church Slavonic grusti handful, gramota heap; Lithuanian
gurgulys chaos, confusion, gurguole crowd, mass). Sense of sociable first recorded 1789. Related:
Gregariously;  gregariousness.


Gregorian (adj.)

literally pertaining to Gregory, from Late Latin Gregorianus, from Gregorius (see Gregory). From
c.1600 in reference to church music, from Gregory I (pope from 590-600), who traditionally codified
it; 1640s in reference to new calendar (introduced 1582) from Pope Gregory XIII.


Gregory

masc. proper name, common in England and Scotland by mid-12c. (Pope Gregory I sent the men who
converted the English to Christianity), from Late Latin Gregorius, from Greek gregorios, a
derivative of gregoros to be watchful, from PIE root *ger- to be awake (cognates: Sanskrit jagarti
he is awake, Avestan agarayeiti wakes up, rouses). At times confused with Latin gregarius (see
gregarious).


gremlin (n.)

small imaginary creature blamed for mechanical failures, oral use in R.A.F. aviators' slang from
Malta, Middle East and India said to date to 1923. First printed use perhaps in poem in journal
Aeroplane April 10, 1929; certainly in use by 1941, and popularized in World War II and picked up by
Americans (for example New York Times Magazine April 11, 1943). Of unknown origin. Speculations in
Barnhart are a possible dialectal survival of Old English gremman to anger, vex + the -lin of
goblin; or Irish gruaimin bad-tempered little fellow. Surfer slang for young surfer, beach trouble-
maker is from 1961 (short form gremmie by 1962).


Grenada

W. Indies island, discovered by Columbus Aug, 15, 1498, and named by him Concepci&oacute;n, the
place later was renamed for the old Spanish kingdom or city of Granada, which is said to be from
Latin granatum pomegranate, either from fruit grown in the region or from some fancied resemblance.
Others connect the name to Moorish karnattah. The Roman name, Illiberis, is said to be Iberian and
represent cognates of Basque hiri town + berri new, and survive in the name of the surrounding
Sierra Elvira.


grenade (n.)

small explosive shell, 1590s, earlier pomegranate (1520s), from Middle French grenade pomegranate
(16c.), earlier grenate (12c.), from Old French pomegrenate (influenced by Spanish granada); so
called because the many-seeded fruit suggested the powder-filled, fragmenting bomb, or from
similarities of shape. See pomegranate.


grenadier (n.)

1670s, originally a word for soldiers who were dexterous in flinging hand-granados [Evelyn], from
French grenadier (15c.), from Middle French grenade grenade (see grenade); later the tallest and
finest men in the regiment [OED].


grenadine (n.)

1896, from French sirop de grenadin syrup made from pomegranates, from Middle French grenade
pomegranate (see pomegranate).


Gretchen

fem. proper name, German diminutive of Greta, a German and Swedish pet form of Margaret. Somestimes
used as a typical German female name, also sometimes in reference to the name of the simple girl
seduced by Faust.


Gretna Green

town in Scotland just across the border, proverbial from late 18c. as the customery place for
English couples to run off and be married without parental consent.


grew

past tense of grow, from Old English greow, past tense of growan.


grey

see gray.


greyhound (n.)

Old English grighund, from grig- bitch + hund dog (see hound (n.)). The name usually is said to have
nothing to do with color, and most are not gray. The Old Norse form of the word is preserved in
Hjalti's couplet that almost sparked war between pagans and Christians in early Iceland:Vilkat
go&eth; geyjagrey &thorn;ykkjumk FreyjaI will not blaspheme the gods,but I think Freyja is a bitch


grid (n.)

1839, shortening of gridiron. City planning sense is from 1954 (hence gridlock). Meaning network of
transmission lines first recorded 1926.


griddle (n.)

shallow frying pan, early 13c., apparently from Anglo-French gridil, Old North French gredil,
altered from Old French graille, from Latin craticula (see grill).


gridiron (n.)

cooking utensil, early 14c., griderne, alteration (by association with iron) of gridire (late 13c.),
a variant of gridil (see griddle). Confusion of l and r was common in Norman dialect. Also a
medieval instrument of torture by fire. As the word for a U.S. football field, by 1896, for its
lines.


gridlock

1980 (n.); 1987 (v.); from grid + lock. Related: Gridlocked; gridlocking.


grief (n.)

early 13c., hardship, suffering, pain, bodily affliction, from Old French grief wrong, grievance,
injustice, misfortune, calamity (13c.), from grever afflict, burden, oppress, from Latin gravare to
cause grief, make heavy, from gravis weighty (see grave (adj.)). Meaning mental pain, sorrow is from
c.1300.


grievance (n.)

c.1300, state of being aggrieved, from Old French grevance harm, injury, misfortune, trouble,
suffering, from grever to harm, to burden (see grieve). In reference to a cause of such a condition,
from late 15c.


grieve (v.)

early 13c., cause pain, from tonic stem of Old French grever to burden, oppress, aggravate (see
grief). Meaning be very sad, lament is from c.1300. Related: Grieved; grieving.


griever (n.)

one who causes grief, 1590s, agent noun from grieve. Meaning one who feels grief is from 1819.


grieving (adj.)

mid-15c., causing pain, present participle adjective from grieve. Meaning feeling pain is from 1807.


grievous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French grevous (Old French grevos) heavy, hard, toilsome, from grief (see grief).
Legal term grievous bodily harm attested from 1803.


grievously (adv.)

mid-14c., from grievous + -ly (2).


grievousness (n.)

c.1300, from grievous + -ness.


griffin (n.)

c.1200 (as a surname), from Old French grifon a bird of prey, also fabulous bird of Greek mythology
(with head and wings of an eagle, body and hind quarters of a lion, believed to inhabit Scythia and
guard its gold), from Late Latin gryphus, misspelling of grypus, variant of gryps (genitive grypos),
from Greek gryps (genitive grypos) curved, hook-nosed, in reference to its beak.    Klein suggests a
Semitic source, through the medium of the Hittites, and cites Hebrew kerubh a winged angel, Akkad.
karibu, epithet of the bull-colossus (see cherub). The same or an identical word was used, with
uncertain connections, in mid-19c. Louisiana to mean mulatto (especially one one-quarter or two-
fifths white) and in India from late 18c. to mean newly arrived European.


Griffith

masc. proper name, from Welsh Gruffydd, probably from Latin Rufus, from rufus red.


griffon

see griffin.


grift

1906 (n.); 1915 (v.), U.S. underworld slang, perhaps a corruption of graft (2).


grifter (n.)

confidence trickster, 1906, carnival and circus slang, probably an alteration of grafter (see graft
(n.2); also compare grift). Gradually extended to any non-violent criminal.


grill (n.)

gridiron, 1680s, from French gril, from Old French greil, alteration of graille grill, frating,
railings, fencing, from Latin craticula gridiron, small griddle, diminutive of cratis wickerwork,
perhaps from PIE *kert- to turn, entwine. In many instances, Modern English grill is a shortened
form of grille, such as chrome front of an automobile.


grill (v.)

to broil on a grill, 1660s, from grill (n.); figurative sense from 1842, and the specific
(transitive) sense of to subject to intense questioning is first attested 1894. Related: Grilled;
grilling.


grille (n.)

ornamental grating, 1660s, from French grille (fem.) grating, from Old French greille gridiron, from
Latin craticula gridiron (see grill). The distinction in French between grille and grill ... appears
to date from about the 16th c. [OED].


grim (adj.)

Old English grimm fierce, cruel, savage, dire, painful, from Proto-Germanic *grimmaz (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German, German grimm, Old Norse grimmr, Swedish grym fierce, furious),
from PIE *ghrem- angry, perhaps imitative of the sound of rumbling thunder (compare Greek khremizein
to neigh, Old Church Slavonic vuzgrimeti to thunder, Russian gremet' thunder).    A weaker word now
than once it was; sense of dreary, gloomy first recorded late 12c. It also had a verb form in Old
English, grimman (class III strong verb; past tense gramm, p.p. grummen). Old English also had a
noun, grima goblin, specter, perhaps also a proper name or attribute-name of a god, hence its
appearance as an element in place names.   Grim reaper as a figurative way to say death is attested
by 1847 (the association of grim and death goes back at least to 17c.). A Middle English expression
for have recourse to harsh measures was to wend the grim tooth (early 13c.).


grim (n.)

spectre, bogey, haunting spirit, 1620s, from grim (adj.).


grimace (n.)

1650s, from French grimace, from Middle French grimache, from Old French grimuce grotesque face,
ugly mug, possibly from Frankish (compare Old Saxon grima face mask, Old English grima mask,
helmet), from same Germanic root as grim (adj.). With pejorative suffix -azo (from Latin -aceus).


grimace (v.)

1762, from French grimacer, from grimace (see grimace (n.)). Related: Grimaced; grimacing.


grimalkin (n.)

1620s, name given to a cat (as in, or from, Shakespeare's Gray-Malkin, in Macbeth, 1605), hence any
cat, especially an old she-cat; from gray + Malkin, diminutive of fem. proper name Matilda or Maud.


grime (n.)

1580s, of uncertain origin, probably alteration of Middle English grim dirt, filth (early 14c.),
from Middle Low German greme dirt, from Proto-Germanic *grim- to smear (cognates: Flemish grijm,
Middle Dutch grime soot, mask), from PIE root *ghrei- to rub. The verb was Middle English grymen
(mid-15c.) but was replaced early 16c. by begrime.


grimly

Old English grimlic (adj.) fierce, bloodthirsty, cruel, grimlice (adv.); see grim + -ly. Similar
formation in Middle Dutch grimmelijc, Old Norse grimmligr.


grimness (n.)

Old English grimnesse; see grim + -ness.


grimoire (n.)

magician's manual for invoking demons, 1849, from French grimoire, altered from grammaire grammar
(see grammar). See glamor.


grimy (adj.)

1610s, from grime + -y (2). App[arently] not in literary use during the 18th c. [OED]. Related:
Griminess.


grin (n.)

1630s, from grin (v.).


grin (v.)

Old English grennian show the teeth (in pain or anger), common Germanic (cognates: Old Norse grenja
to howl, grina to grin; Dutch grienen to whine; German greinen to cry), from PIE root *ghrei- be
open. Sense of bare the teeth in a broad smile is late 15c., perhaps via the notion of forced or
unnatural smile. Related: Grinned; grinning.


Grinch (n.)

spoilsport; all usages trace to Dr. Seuss' 1957 book How the Grinch Stole Christmas.


grind (v.)

Old English grindan to rub together, grate, scrape, forgrindan destroy by crushing (class III strong
verb; past tense grand, past participle grunden), from Proto-Germanic *grindanan (cognates: Dutch
grenden), related to ground, from PIE *ghrendh- to grind (cognates: Latin frendere to gnash the
teeth, Greek khondros corn, grain, Lithuanian grendu to scrape, scratch). Meaning to make smooth or
sharp by friction is from c.1300. Most other Germanic languages use a verb cognate with Latin molere
(compare Dutch malen, Old Norse mala, German mahlen).


grind (n.)

late 12c., gnashing the teeth, from grind (v.). The sense steady, hard work first recorded 1851 in
college student slang (but compare gerund-grinder, 1710); the meaning hard-working student is
American English slang from 1864.


grinder (n.)

Old English grindere one who grinds (grain); agent noun from grind (v.). Meaning molar tooth is late
14c. (Old English had grindeto&eth;). Meaning machine for milling is from 1660s; of persons, from
late 15c. Large sandwich sense is from 1954, though the exact signification is uncertain (perhaps
from the amount of chewing required to eat one).


grinding (adj.)

past participle adjective from grind (v.). Meaning oppressive is from 1580s. The verbal noun is from
mid-14c.


grindstone (n.)

early 13c. millstone, from grind (v.) in sense of sharpen + stone (n.); meaning   revolving stone
disc used for sharpening, etc. is from c.1400. Phrase nose to the grindstone in use by 1530s;
originally to get control of another and treat him harshly:This Text holdeth their noses so hard to
the grindstone, that it clean disfigureth their Faces. [John Frith, Mirror to know Thyself, 1532]The
main modern (reflexive) sense of work hard is from 1828.


gringo (n.)

1849, from Mexican Spanish gringo, contemptuous word for foreigner, from Spanish gringo foreign,
unintelligible talk, gibberish, perhaps ultimately from griego Greek. The Diccionario Castellano
(1787) says gringo was used in Malaga for anyone who spoke Spanish badly, and in Madrid for the
Irish.


griot

1820, from French griot (17c.), of unknown origin.


grip (v.)

Old English grippan to grip, seize, obtain (class I strong verb; past tense grap, past participle
gripen), from West Germanic *gripjan (cognates: Old High German gripfen to rob, Old English gripan
to seize; see gripe). Related: Gripped; gripping. French gripper to seize, griffe claw are Germanic
loan-words.


grip (n.)

fusion of Old English gripe grasp, clutch and gripa handful, sheaf (see grip (v.)). Meaning stage
hand is from 1888, from their work shifting scenery.


gripe (v.)

Old English gripan grasp at, lay hold, attack, take, seek to get hold of, from Proto-Germanic
*gripan (cognates: Old Saxon gripan, Old Norse gripa, Dutch grijpen, Gothic greipan, Old High German
grifan, German greifen to seize), from PIE root *ghreib- to grip (cognates: Lithuanian griebiu to
seize). Figurative sense of complain, grouse is first attested 1932, probably from earlier meaning
gripping pain in the bowels (c.1600; compare bellyache). Related: Griped; griping.


gripe (n.)

late 14c., from gripe (v.). Figurative sense by 1934.


grippe (n.)

1776, probably from French grippe influenza, originally seizure, verbal noun from gripper to grasp,
hook, of Frankish origin, from Proto-Germanic *gripanan (see grip (v.), gripe). Supposedly in
reference to constriction of the throat felt by sufferers; the word spread through European
languages after the influenza epidemic during the Russian occupation of Prussia in the Seven Years'
War (c.1760), and Russian chirpu, said to be imitative of the sound of the cough, is sometimes said
to be the origin or inspiration for the word.


gripping (adj.)

grasping the emotions, 1896, figurative use of present participle adjective from grip (v.).


grisaille (n.)

painting technique, 1848, from French grisaille (17c.), from gris gray (12c.), from a Germanic
source (see ambergris).


Griselda

fem. proper name, from Italian, from German Grishilda, from Old High German grisja hilda, literally
gray battle-maid. The English form, Grisilde, provided Chaucer's Grizel, the name of the meek,
patient wife in the Clerk's Tale, the story and the name both from Boccaccio.


grisly (adj.)

Old English grislic horrible, dreadful, from root of grisan to shudder, fear, with cognates in Old
Frisian grislik horrible, Middle Dutch grisen to shudder, Dutch griezelen, German grausen to
shudder, fear, Old High German grisenlik horrible; of unknown origin; Watkins connects it with the
PIE root *ghrei- to rub, on notion of to grate on the mind. See also gruesome, to which it probably
is connected in some way.


grist (n.)

Old English grist action of grinding, grain to be ground, perhaps related to grindan to grind (see
grind), though OED calls the connection difficult. Meaning wheat which is to be ground is early
15c.; the figurative extension from this sense is from the same date.


gristle (n.)

Old English gristle cartilage, related to grost gristle, from a common West Germanic word (cognates:
Old Frisian and Middle Low German gristel, Old High German crostila, Middle High German gruschel) of
obscure origin.


gristmill (n.)

c.1600, from grist (n.) + mill (n.).


grit (n.)

Old English greot sand, dust, earth, gravel, from Proto-Germanic *greutan tiny particles of crushed
rock (cognates: Old Saxon griot, Old Frisian gret, Old Norse grjot rock, stone, German Grie&szlig;
grit, sand), from PIE *ghreu- rub, grind (cognates: Lithuanian grudas corn, kernel, Old Church
Slavonic gruda clod). Sense of pluck, spirit first recorded American English, 1808.


grit (v.)

make a grating sound, 1762, probably from grit (n.). Related: Gritted; gritting.


grits (n.)

plural of grit coarsely ground grain, Old English grytt (plural grytta) coarse meal, groats, grits,
from Proto-Germanic *grutja-, from the same root as grit, the two words having influenced one
another in sound development.    In American English, corn-based grits and hominy (q.v.) were used
interchangeably in Colonial times. Later, hominy meant whole kernels that had been skinned but not
ground, but in the U.S. South, hominy meant skinned kernels that could be ground coarsely to make
grits. In New Orleans, whole kernels are big hominy and ground kernels little hominy.


gritty (adj.)

1590s, from grit + -y (2). In sense of unpleasant (of literature, etc.), from 1882, in reference to
the sensation of eating gritty bread. Related: Grittily; grittiness.


grizzle (adj.)

gray-colored, early 15c., from Old French grisel (see grizzled) which also meant gray-haired old man
(a noun sense recorded in Middle English from mid-14c.). The verb, â&euro;&oelig;to make
gray,â&euro;? is attested from 1740.


grizzled (adj.)

gray in color, early 14c. (in surname Grissel), a past participle adjective from grizzle, or from
Old French grisel gray, diminutive of gris gray, from a Frankish or other Germanic source (such as
Old High German gris gray; see gray, also see ambergris). The -zz- spelling is early 15c.


grizzly (adj.)

1590s, from grizzle gray (see grizzled) + -y (2). Grizzly bear (ursus horribilis) is first recorded
1807 but belongs rather to grisly.


groan (v.)

Old English granian to groan, murmur, lament, from Proto-Germanic *grain- (cognates: Old Norse
grenja to howl), of imitative origin, or related to grin. Meaning complain is from early 13c.,
especially in Middle English phrase grutchen and gronen. Related: Groaned; groaning.


groan (n.)

late 14c., from groan (v); earlier grane (early 14c.).


groaner (n.)

one who complains, early 15c., agent noun from groan (v).


groaning (n.)

Old English granung, verbal noun from groan (v.). From 16c.-19c., and in dialect, also a woman's
lying in.


groat (n.)

medieval European coin, late 14c., probably from Middle Dutch groot, elliptical use of adj. meaning
great, big (in sense of thick); see great. Recognized from 13c. in various nations, in 14c. it was
roughly one-eighth an ounce of silver; the English groat coined 1351-2 was worth four pence. Also
see groschen.


groats (n.)

hulled grain coarsely ground or crushed; oatmeal, early 14c., from grot piece, fragment, from Old
English grot particle, from same root as grit. The word also meant excrement in pellets (mid-15c.).


grocer (n.)

early 15c. (mid-13c. as a surname), one who buys and sells in gross, from Anglo-French grosser, Old
French grossier, from Medieval Latin grossarius wholesaler, literally dealer in quantity, from Late
Latin grossus coarse (of food), great, gross (see gross). Sense of a merchant selling individual
items of food is 16c.


groceries (n.)

see grocery.


grocery (n.)

mid-15c., goods sold by a grocer (now groceries, 1630s), earlier the name of the Grocer's Hall in
London (early 15c.), from Old French grosserie, from grossier (see grocer). Meaning a grocer's shop
is 1828, American English.    GROCERY. A grocer's shop. This word is not in the English dictionaries
except in the sense of grocer's ware, such as tea, sugar, spice, etc.; in which sense we also use it
in the plural. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1859]    Self-service groceries were a novelty
in 1913 when a Montana, U.S., firm copyrighted the word groceteria (with the ending from cafeteria
used in an un-etymological sense) to name them. The term existed through the 1920s.


grody (adj.)

variant of grotty.


grog (n.)

alcoholic drink diluted with water, 1749, supposedly a reference to Old Grog, nickname of Edward
Vernon (1684-1757), British admiral who wore a grogram (q.v.) cloak and who in August 1740 ordered
his sailors' rum to be diluted. George Washington's older half-brother Lawrence served under Vernon
in the Carribean and renamed the family's Hunting Creek Plantation in Virginia for him in 1740,
calling it Mount Vernon.


groggy (adj.)

1770, drunk, from grog + -y (2). Non-alcoholic meaning shaky, tottering is from 1832, originally
from the fight ring. Related: Groggily; grogginess.


grogram (n.)

1560s, from Middle French gros grain coarse grain or texture; see gross + grain (n.).


groin (n.)

1590s, earlier grine (1530s), from Middle English grynde groin (c.1400), originally depression in
the ground, from Old English grynde abyss, perhaps also depression, hollow, from Proto-Germanic
*grundus (see ground). Altered 16c. by influence of loin or obsolete groin snout. The architectural
groin edge formed by the intersection of two vaults is from 1725.


grok (v.)

to understand empathically, 1961, arbitrary formation by U.S. science fiction writer Robert A.
Heinlein (1907-1988) in his book Stranger in a Strange Land. In popular use 1960s; perhaps obsolete
now except in internet technology circles.


grommet (n.)

1620s, ring or wreath of rope, from obsolete French gromette curb of a bridle (Modern French
gourmette), from gourmer to curb, of uncertain origin. Extended sense of metal eyelet first recorded
1769.


groom (n.1)

c.1200, grome male child, boy; c.1300 as youth, young man. No known cognates in other Germanic
languages. Perhaps from Old English *groma, related to growan grow; or from Old French grommet
servant (compare Middle English gromet ship's boy, early 13c.). Meaning male servant who attends to
horses is from 1660s.


groom (n.2)

husband-to-be at a wedding, c.1600, short for bridegroom, in which the second element is Old English
guma man.


groom (v.)

1809, from groom (n.1) in its secondary sense of male servant who attends to horses. Transferred
sense of to tidy (oneself) up is from 1843; figurative sense of to prepare a candidate is from 1887,
originally in U.S. politics. Related: Groomed; grooming.


groomsman (n.)

attendant on a bridegroom at a wedding, 1690s, from groom (n.1) + man (n.).


groove (n.)

c.1400, cave, mine, pit (late 13c. in place names), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
grod pit, or from Middle Dutch groeve furrow, ditch, both from Proto-Germanic *grobo (cognates: Old
Norse grof brook, river bed, Old High German gruoba ditch, Gothic groba pit, cave, Old English
gr&aelig;f ditch), related to grave (n.). Sense of long, narrow channel or furrow is 1650s. Meaning
spiral cut in a phonograph record is from 1902. Figurative sense of routine is from 1842, often
deprecatory at first, a rut.


groove (v.)

1680s, make a groove, from groove (n.). Slang sense is from late 1930s. Related: Grooved; grooving.


groovy (adj.)

1853 in literal sense of pertaining to a groove, from groove (n.) + -y (2). Slang sense of first-
rate, excellent is 1937, American English, from jazz slang phrase in the groove (1932) performing
well (without grandstanding). As teen slang for wonderful, it dates from c.1941; popularized 1960s,
out of currency by 1980. Related: Grooviness.


grope (v.)

Old English grapian to feel about (as one blind or in darkness), originally lay hold of, seize,
touch, attain, related to gripan grasp at (see gripe). Figurative sense is from early 14c. Indecent
sense (marked as obsolete in OED) is from c.1200. Related: Groped; groping. The noun is Old English
grap.


grosbeak (n.)

1670s, partial translation of French grosbec; see gross + beak.


groschen (n.)

1610s, small silver coin formerly used in Germany and Austria, from German groschen, altered from
Czech gro&#353;, name of a coin (about one-thirtieth of a thaler), from Medieval Latin (denarius)
grossus, literally a thick coin, from Latin grossus thick (see gross, and compare groat).


gross (adj.)

mid-14c., large; early 15c., coarse, plain, simple, from Old French gros big, thick, fat, tall,
pregnant; coarse, rude, awkward; ominous, important; arrogant (11c.), from Late Latin grossus thick,
coarse (of food or mind), of obscure origin, not in classical Latin. Said to be unrelated to Latin
crassus, which meant the same thing, or to German gross large, but said by Klein to be cognate with
Old Irish bres, Middle Irish bras big. Its meaning forked in English to glaring, flagrant, monstrous
(1580s) on the one hand and entire, total, whole (early 15c.) on the other. Meaning disgusting is
first recorded 1958 in U.S. student slang, from earlier use as an intensifier of unpleasant things
(gross stupidity, etc.). Earlier coarse in behavior or manners (1530s) and, of things, inferior,
common (late 15c.). Gross national product first recorded 1947.


gross (n.)

a dozen dozen, early 15c., from Old French grosse douzaine large dozen; see gross (adj.). Earlier as
the name of a measure of weight equal to one-eighth of a dram (early 15c.). Sense of total profit
(opposed to net) is from 1520s.


gross (v.)

to earn a total of, 1884, from gross (n.). Related: Grossed; grossing.


grossly (adv.)

1520s, from gross + -ly (2).


grossness (n.)

size, early 15c., from gross + -ness.


grot (n.)

short for grotto, c.1500; perhaps from or influenced by French grotte.


grotesque (adj.)

c.1600s, originally a noun (1560s), from Middle French crotesque (16c., Modern French grotesque),
from Italian grottesco, literally of a cave, from grotta (see grotto). The usual explanation is that
the word first was used of paintings found on the walls of basements of Roman ruins (Italian pittura
grottesca), which OED finds intrinsically plausible. Originally fanciful, fantastic, sense became
pejorative after mid-18c. Related: Grotesquely; grotesqueness.


grotto (n.)

1610s, from Italian grotta, ultimately from Latin crypta vault, cavern, from Greek krypte hidden
place (see crypt). Terminal -o may be from its being spelled that way in many translations of
Dante's Divine Comedy.


grotty (n.)

slang shortening of grotesque, it had a brief vogue 1964 as part of the argot popularized by The
Beatles in A Hard Day's Night. It unconsciously echoes Middle English groti muddy, slimy, from Old
English grotig earthy, from grot particle.


grouch (n.)

ill-tempered person, 1896, earlier state of irritable glumness (1890, in expressions such as to have
a grouch on), U.S. college student slang, of uncertain origin, possibly from grutching complaint,
grumbling (see grutch).     The Grouch, on the other Hand, gave a correct Imitation of a Bear with a
Sore Toe. His Conversation was largely made up of Grunts. He carried a Facial Expression that
frightened little Children in Street Cars and took all the Starch out of sentimental Young Ladies.
He seemed perpetually to carry the Hoof-Marks of a horrible Nightmare. [George Ade, People You Know,
1902]    The verb is 1916, from the noun. Related: Grouched; grouching. Grouch bag purse for
carrying hidden money (1908) is the source of the nickname of U.S. comedian Julius Groucho Marx
(1890-1977), who supposedly carried his money in one to poker games.


grouchy (adj.)

1895, U.S. college student slang, from grouch + -y (2). Related: Grouchily; grouchiness.


ground (v.)

mid-13c., to put on the ground, to strike down to the ground, from ground (n.). Of ships, to run
into the ground, from mid-15c. Meaning to base (an argument, sermon, etc.) is late 14c. Meaning deny
privileges is 1940s, originally a punishment meted out to pilots (in which sense it is attested from
1930). Related: Grounded; grounding.


ground (n.)

Old English grund bottom, foundation, ground, surface of the earth, especially bottom of the sea (a
sense preserved in run aground), from Proto-Germanic *grundus, which seems to have meant deep place
(cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish grund, Dutch grond, Old High German grunt, German
Grund ground, soil, bottom; Old Norse grunn a shallow place, grund field, plain, grunnr bottom). No
known cognates outside Germanic. Sense of reason, motive first attested c.1200; electrical sense is
from 1870.


ground (adj.)

reduced to fine particles by grinding, 1765, past participle adjective from grind.


ground floor (n.)

also ground-floor, c.1600, from ground (n.) + floor (n.); figurative use is from 1864.


ground zero (n.)

1946, originally with reference to atomic blasts. In reference to the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist
attack on New York, it was in use by Sept. 13.


groundbreaking (adj.)

1907 as a figurative adjective, from expression to break ground, either for planting or for
building; see ground (n.) + break (v.).


grounded (adj.)

learned, late 14c.; firmly fixed or established, 1540s, past participle adjective from ground (v.).
Electrical sense is from 1889. Meaning having been denied privileges is from 1940s. Dickens had
room-ridden confined to one's room.


grounder (n.)

one who establishes, c.1400, agent noun from ground (v.). Baseball sense attested by 1867; earlier
in cricket.


groundhog (n.)

1784, from ground (n.) + hog (n.). Also known colloquially as a whistlepig, and compare aardvark.
Ground Hog Day first recorded 1871, American English.


groundless (adj.)

Old English grundleas bottomless, unfathomable, vast; see ground (n.) + -less. Figurative sense of
unfathomable is from early 14c. Related: Groundlessly; groundlessness.


groundling (n.)

theater patron in the pit, c.1600, from ground (n.) in an Elizabethan sense of pit of a theater +
-ling. From the beginning emblematic of bad or unsophisticated taste. Old English grundling was a
type of fish.


grounds (n.)

residue at the bottom of a liquid, mid-14c., perhaps from past tense of grind (v.); for other
senses, see ground (n.).


groundswell (n.)

1818, from ground (n.) + swell (n.). Figurative sense is attested from 1817.


groundwater (n.)

water in the ground, also ground water, 1890, from ground (n.) + water (n.1). Attested from mid-15c.
in sense water at the bottom of a stream.


groundwork (n.)

mid-15c., from ground (n.) + work (n.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch grontwerck, Dutch
grondwerk, German grundwerk. Originally the solid base on which a structure is built; figurative
sense is from 1550s.


group (n.)

1690s, originally an art criticism term, assemblage of figures or objects in a painting or design,
from French groupe cluster, group (17c.), from Italian gruppo group, knot, perhaps ultimately from
Proto-Germanic *kruppaz round mass, lump, and related to crop. Extended to any assemblage by 1736.
Meaning pop music combo is from 1958.


group (v.)

1718 (transitive), 1801 (intransitive), from group (n.). Related: Grouped; grouping.


grouper (n.)

type of fish, 1690s, from Portuguese garupa, of unknown origin, probably of South American Indian
origin, perhaps from a word in Tupi.


groupie (n.)

girl who follows pop groups, 1967, from group (n.) in the pop music sense + -ie.


groupthink (n.)

1959, from group (n.) + think.


grouse (n.)

type of game bird, 1530s, grows (plural, used collectively), of unknown origin, possibly from Latin
or Welsh.


grouse (v.)

complain, 1885 (implied in grouser), British Army slang, of uncertain origin but perhaps from Norman
French dialectal groucer, from Old French groucier to murmur, grumble, of imitative origin (compare
Greek gru a grunt, gruzein to grumble). Related: Groused; grousing. As a noun from 1918, from the
verb.


grout (n.)

1580s, thin, fluid mortar, originally coarse porridge, perhaps from Old English gruta (plural)
coarse meal, related to Old English grytta (see grits). As a verb from 1838. Related: grouted;
grouting.


grove (n.)

Old English graf grove, copse (akin to gr&aelig;afa thicket), from Proto-Germanic *graibo-, but not
certainly found in other Germanic languages and with no known cognates anywhere else.


grovel (v.)

1590s, Shakespearian back-formation of groveling (Middle English), regarded as a present participle
but really an adverb, from Old Norse grufe prone + obsolete adverbial suffix -ling (which survives
also as the -long in headlong, sidelong); first element from Old Norse a grufu on proneness. Perhaps
related to creep. Related: Groveled; grovelled; groveling; grovelling.


grow (v.)

Old English growan (of plants) to grow, flourish, increase, develop, get bigger (class VII strong
verb; past tense greow, past participle growen), from Proto-Germanic *gro- (cognates: Old Norse
groa, Old Frisian groia, Dutch groeien, Old High German gruoen), from PIE root *ghre- (see grass).
Applied in Middle English to human beings (c.1300) and animals (early 15c.) and their parts,
supplanting Old English weaxan (see wax (v.)).  Have you ever heard anything about God, Topsy? ...
Do you know who made you? Nobody, as I knows on, said the child. ... I spect I grow'd. Don't think
nobody never made me. [Harriet B. Stowe, Uncle Tom's Cabin, 1851]


grow up (v.)

advance toward maturity, 1530s, from grow (v.) + up (adv.). As a command to be sensible, from 1951.
Grown-up (adj.) mature is from late 14c.; the noun meaning adult person is from 1813.


grower (n.)

one who produces, mid-15c., agent noun from grow.


growing (adj.)

Old English, present participle adjective from grow (v.). Growing season is attested from 1729;
growing pains by 1752.


growing (n.)

late 14c., verbal noun from grow (v.).


growl (v.)

1660s, from Middle English grollen to rumble, growl (early 15c.), from Old French grouler to rumble,
said to be from Frankish; probably ultimately of imitative origin. Related: Growled; growling. The
noun is 1727, from the verb.


growler (n.)

pitcher or other vessel for beer, 1885, American English, of uncertain origin; apparently an agent
noun from growl (v.). It owes its popularity to laws prohibiting sale of liquor on Sundays and thus
the tippler's need to stock up. Also in early use in the expression work the growler go on a spree.
Also late 19c. slang for a four-wheeled cab.


grown (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from grow (v.).


growse

obsolete spelling of grouse.


growth (n.)

1550s, from grow + -th (2), on model of health, stealth, etc. Compare Old Norse gro&eth;i, from groa
to grow. In this sense, Old English used grownes.


groyne (n.)

strong, low sea wall, 1580s, perhaps from obsolete groin pig's snout (c.1300; the wall so called
because it was thought to look like one), from Old French groin, from Latin grunnire grunt.


grub (v.)

c.1300, from hypothetical Old English *grubbian, from West Germanic *grubbjan (cognates: Middle
Dutch grobben, Old High German grubilon to dig, search, German gr&uuml;beln to meditate, ponder),
from Proto-Germanic *grub- to dig, base of Old English grafan (see grave (v.)).


grub (n.)

larva, early 15c., perhaps from grub (v.) on the notion of digging insect, or from the possibly
unrelated Middle English grub dwarfish fellow (c.1400). Meaning dull drudge is 1650s. The slang
sense of food is first recorded 1650s, said to be from birds eating grubs, but also often linked
with bub drink.


grubber (n.)

digger, late 13c. as a surname, agent noun from grub (v.). Meaning one who gets wealth contemptibly
is from 1570s.


grubby (adj.)

dirty, by 1845, from grub (n.) in a sense of dirty child (who presumably got that way from digging
in earth) + -y (2). Earlier it was used in a sense of stunted, dwarfish (1610s) and infested with
grubs (1725). Related: Grubbily; grubbiness.


grubelsucht (n.)

1876, from German Gr&uuml;belsucht, psychiatric term for a form of obsession in which even the
simplest facts are compulsively queried, from gr&uuml;beln to brood (see grub (v.)) + sucht mania.


grubstake (n.)

material, provisions, etc. supplied to an enterprise (originally a prospector) in return for a share
in the profits, by 1876, American English, from grub + stake (v.).


grubstreet

1620s, originally the name of a street in Moorfields in London, much inhabited by writers of small
histories, dictionaries, and temporary poems; whence any mean production is called grubstreet
[Johnson]. Name changed 1830 to Milton Street (after a local developer) then erased entirely 1970s
by the Barbicon complex.


grudge (v.)

mid-15c., to murmur, complain, variant of grutch. Meaning to begrudge is c.1500. Related: Grudged;
grudges; grudging; grudgingly. The noun is mid-15c., from the verb.


gruel (n.)

late 12c., meal or flour made of beans, lentils, etc., from Old French gruel fine meal, from
Frankish *grut (cognate with Middle Dutch grute coarse meal, malt; Middle High German gruz grain),
from PIE *ghreu- to rub, grind (see grit). Meaning thin porridge or soup is late 14c.


gruelling (adj.)

also grueling, exhausting, punishing, 1891, from late 18c. slang get one's gruel receive one's
punishment, from gruel.


gruesome (adj.)

1560s, with -some (1) + Middle English gruen feel horror, shudder (c.1300); not recorded in Old
English or Norse, possibly from Middle Dutch gruwen or Middle Low German gruwen shudder with fear
(compare German grausam cruel), or from a Scandinavian source (such as Danish grusom cruel, grue to
dread, though others hold that these are Low German loan-words). One of the many Scottish words
popularized in England by Scott's novels.


gruff (adj.)

1530s, coarse, coarse-grained, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German grof coarse (in quality),
thick, large, of uncertain origin, regarded by some as related to Old English hreof, Old Norse
hrjufr rough, scabby, with Germanic completive prefix ga-. Sense of rough, surly recorded by 1690s.
Related: Gruffness.


gruffly (adv.)

1700, from gruff + -ly (2).


grumble (v.)

1580s, from Middle French grommeler mutter between the teeth or directly from Middle Dutch grommelen
murmur, mutter, grunt, from grommen to rumble, growl. Imitative, or perhaps akin to grim. Related:
Grumbled; grumbling.


grumble (n.)

1620s, from grumble (v.).


grump (n.)

ill-humor, 1727, in humps and grumps surly remarks, later the grumps a fit of ill-humor (1844), then
a person in ill humor (1900); perhaps an extended sense of grum morose, surly, which probably is
related to Danish grum cruel; or perhaps suggested by grumble, grunt, etc.


grumpy (adj.)

1778, from grump + -y (2). Related: Grumpily; grumpiness.


grundel (n.)

type of fish, c.1500 (early 13c. as a surname), from grund ground  (see ground (n.)) + -el. Compare
Old English gryndle herring.


grundyism (n.)

1836, from Mrs. Grundy, prudish character in Thomas Morton's 1798 play Speed the Plow, play and
playwright otherwise now forgotten, but the line What would Mrs. Grundy say? became proverbial.


grunge (n.)

sloppiness, also untidy person, 1965, American English teen slang, probably a back-formation from
grungy. The music and fashion style that originated in Seattle is attested from the early 1990s.


grungy (adj.)

sloppy, shabby, 1965, American English slang, perhaps a blend of grubby and dingy.


grunion (n.)

1917, from American Spanish gru&ntilde;on grunting fish, from grunir to grunt, from Latin grunnire,
from Greek gryzein to grunt, from gry a grunt. The unrelated American fish called the grunt is so
called from the noise they make when taken.


grunt (v.)

Old English grunnettan to grunt, frequentative of grunian to grunt, probably imitative (compare
Danish grynte, Old High German grunnizon, German grunzen to grunt, Latin grunnire to grunt).
Related: Grunted; grunting.


grunt (n.)

1550s, from grunt (v.); as a type of fish, from 1713; meaning infantry soldier emerged in U.S.
military slang during Vietnam War (first recorded in print 1969); used since 1900 of various low-
level workers. Grunt work first recorded 1977.


gruntle (v.)

1938, in gruntled pleased, satisfied, a back-formation from disgruntled. The original verb (early
15c.) meant to utter a little or low grunt.


grutch (v.)

c.1200, grucchen, to murmur, complain, from Old French grouchier to murmur, to grumble, of unknown
origin, probably ultimately imitative. Meaning to begrudge is c.1400. Compare gruccild (early 13c.)
woman who complains, from grutch + suffix of unknown origin. Related: Grutched; grutching. As a noun
from c.1400.


Gruyere

1802, from Gruy&egrave;re, the name of the Swiss town and surrounding district where the cheese is
made. The place name is said to be ultimately from Latin grus crane.


gryphon (n.)

alternative spelling of griffin.


gu-

because g- followed by some vowels in English usually has a soft pronunciation, a silent -u-
sometimes was inserted between the g- and the vowel in Middle English to signal hardness, especially
in words from French; but this was not done with many Scandinavian words where hard g precedes a
vowel (gear (n.), get (v.), give, etc.). Germanic -w- generally became -gu- in words borrowed into
Romance languages, but Old North French preserved the Frankish -w-, and English sometimes borrowed
both forms, hence guarantee/warranty, guard/ward, etc.


guacamole (n.)

1920, from American Spanish guacamole, originally Mexican, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) ahuaca-molli, from
ahuacatl avocado + molli sauce.


Guadalcanal

largest of the Solomon Islands, discovered 1568 by Spanish explorer &Aacute;lvaro de Menda&ntilde;a
de Neira and named for his hometown in Spain. The place name contains the Spanish form of Arabic
wadi river which occurs in other Spanish place names (such as Guadalajara, from Arabic Wadi Al-
Bajara River of the Stones, either a parallel formation to or ultimately a translation of the
ancient Iberian name for the river that gave the place its earlier name, based on caruca stony;
Guadalquivir, from Arabic Al-Wadi Al-Kabir Big River; and Guadalupe, from the Arabic river word and
the Roman name of the river, Lupus, literally wolf).


Guam

from Chamorro Guahan, said to mean literally what we have.


guanine (n.)

1850, from guano, from which the chemical first was isolated, + chemical suffix -ine (2).


guano (n.)

c.1600, from Spanish guano dung, especially of sea-birds on islands off Peru, from Quechua huanu
dung.


guarantee (n.)

1670s, alterted (perhaps via Spanish garante), from earlier garrant warrant that the title to a
property is true, early 15c., from Old French garant defender, protector, from Germanic (see warrant
(n.)). For form evolution, see gu-. Originally person giving something as security; sense of the
pledge itself (which is properly a guaranty) developed 17c.


guarantee (v.)

1791, from guarantee (n.). Garanten in this sense is from early 15c. Related: Guaranteed;
guaranteeing.


guarantor (n.)

1853, from guarantee with Latinate agent noun suffix -or substituted for -ee.


guaranty (n.)

act or fact of guaranteeing, 1520s, garrantye, from earlier garant (see guarantee) with influence
from Old French garantie protection, defense, originally past participle of garantir to protect,
from the same source. The sense of pledge given as security that developed 17c. in guarantee might
reasonably have left the sense act of guaranteeing to this form of the word, but the forms remain
confused.


guard (n.)

early 15c., one who keeps watch, from Middle French garde guardian, warden, keeper; watching,
keeping, custody, from Old French garder to keep, maintain, preserve, protect (corresponding to Old
North French warder, see gu-), from Frankish *wardon, from Proto-Germanic *wardo- to guard (see ward
(v.)). Abstract or collective sense of a keeping, a custody (as in bodyguard) also is from early
15c. Sword-play and fisticuffs sense is from 1590s. Guard-rail attested from 1860.


guard (v.)

mid-15c., from guard (n.) or from Old French garder to keep watch over, guard, protect. Related:
Guarded; guarding.


guarded (adj.)

c.1500, past participle adjective from guard (v.). Meaning reserved and cautious in speech,
behavior, etc. is from 1728. Related: Guardedly; guardedness.


guardian (n.)

early 14c., garden; early 15c., gardein, from Anglo-French gardein (late 13c.), from Old French
gardien keeper, custodian, earlier guarden, from Frankish *warding- (see guard (n.)). Guardian angel
is from 1630s.


guardianship (n.)

1550s, from guardian + -ship.


Guatemala

from words in a native language, variously identified as Quauhtemellan land of the eagle or
Uhatzmalha mountain where water gushes.


guava (n.)

1550s, from Spanish guaya, variant of guayaba, from Arawakan (W. Indies) guayabo guava tree or Tupi
guajava.


gubber-tushed (adj.)

Gubber Tushed is when teeth stand out, and not in order. [R. Holme, Armoury, 1688].Every Lover
admires his Mistress, though she have ... a nose like a promontory, gubber-tushed, rotten teeth,
(etc.). [Robert Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy, 1621]


gubernatorial (adj.)

1734, formed in American English from Latin gubernator (see govern) + -al (1). As an English word,
gubernator was in use from 1520s but is rare.


gudgeon (n.1)

small freshwater fish, early 15c., from Middle French goujon, from Old French gojon (14c.), from
Latin gobionem (nominative gobio), alteration of gobius, from Greek kobios, a kind of fish, of
unknown origin. The figurative sense of a credulous person (one who will bite at bait) is from
1580s.


gudgeon (n.2)

pivot on the end of a beam, c.1400, from Old French gojon pin, peg, spike (13c.), perhaps somehow an
altered sense of gudgeon (n.1).


Guelph

one of the two great parties in medieval Italian politics, characterized by support of the popes
against the emperors (opposed to the Ghibellines), 1570s, from Italian Guelfo, from Old High German
Welf, name of a princely family that became the ducal house of Brunswick, literally whelp,
originally the name of the founder. The family are the ancestors of the present dynasty of Great
Britain. The name is said to have been used as a war-cry at the Battle of Weinsberg (1140) by
partisans of Henry the Lion, duke of Bavaria, who was of the family, against Emperor Conrad III;
hence it was adopted in Italy as the name of the anti-imperial party.


guerdon (n.)

reward, recompense (now only poetic), late 14c., from Old French guerdon, guerredon reward,
recompense, payment, from Medieval Latin widerdonum, from Old High German widarlon recompense;
compare Old English wi&eth;erlean requital, compensation, from wi&eth;er again (see with) + lean
payment. Form influenced in Medieval Latin by Latin donum gift. Compare Spanish galardon, Italian
guiderone.


guerilla (n.)

variant of guerrilla (q.v.); compare French gu&eacute;rilla.


Guernsey

breed of cattle, 1834, from the Channel Island where it was bred; the island name is Viking. Like
neighboring Jersey, it was also taken as the name for a coarse, close-fitting vest of wool (1839),
and in Australia the word supplies many of the usages of jersey in U.S. The second element of the
name is Old Norse ey island; the first element uncertain, traditionally meaning green, but perhaps
rather representing a Viking personal name, such as Grani.


guerrilla (n.)

fighter in an irregular, independent armed force, 1809, from Spanish guerrilla body of skirmishers,
skirmishing warfare, literally little war, diminutive of guerra war, from a Germanic source (cognate
with Old High German werra strife, conflict, war; see war (n.)). Figurative use by 1861. As an
adjective from 1811. Acquired by English during the Peninsular War (1808-1814); purists failed in
their attempt to keep this word restricted to irregular warfare and prevent it taking on the sense
properly belonging to guerrillero guerrilla fighter.


guess (v.)

c.1300, gessen to estimate, appraise, originally take aim, probably from Scandinavian (compare
Middle Danish gitse, getze to guess, Old Norse geta guess, get), possibly influenced by Middle Dutch
gessen, Middle Low German gissen to guess, all from Proto-Germanic *getiskanan to get (see get).
Sense evolution is from to get, to to take aim at, to to estimate. Meaning to hit upon the right
answer is from 1540s. U.S. sense of calculate, recon is true to the oldest English meaning. Spelling
with gu- is late 16c., sometimes attributed to Caxton and his early experience as a printer in
Bruges. Related: Guessed; guessing. Guessing game attested from 1650s.


guess (n.)

c.1300, from guess (v.). Verbal shrug phrase your guess is as good as mine attested from 1902.


guesstimate (v.)

1902, a blending of guess (v.) and estimate. Related: Guesstimated; guesstimating. As a noun, from
1906.


guesswork (n.)

also guess-work, 1725, from guess + work (n.).


guest (n.)

Old English g&aelig;st, giest (Anglian gest) guest; enemy; stranger, the common notion being
stranger, from Proto-Germanic *gastiz (cognates: Old Frisian jest, Dutch gast, German Gast, Gothic
gasts guest, originally stranger), from PIE root *ghos-ti- stranger, guest; host (cognates: Latin
hostis enemy, hospes host -- from *hosti-potis host, guest, originally lord of strangers -- Greek
xenos guest, host, stranger; Old Church Slavonic gosti guest, friend, gospodi lord, master); the
root sense, according to Watkins, probably is someone with whom one has reciprocal duties of
hospitality, representing a mutual exchange relationship highly important to ancient Indo-European
society. But as strangers are potential enemies as well as guests, the word has a forked path.
Spelling evolution influenced by Old Norse cognate gestr (the usual sound changes from the Old
English word would have yielded Modern English *yest). Phrase be my guest in the sense of go right
ahead first recorded 1955.


guest star (n.)

1914 in the entertainment sense; earlier the phrase was used literally, of novae. As a verb, by
1942.


guestroom (n.)

also guest-room, 1630s, from guest (n.) + room (n.). Guest chamber is recorded from 1520s.


guff (n.)

empty talk, nonsense, 1888, from earlier sense of puff of air (1825), of imitative origin.


guffaw (n.)

1720, Scottish, probably imitative of the sound of coarse laughter. Compare gawf (early 16c.) loud,
noisy laugh. The verb is from 1721. Related: Guffawed; guffawing.


Guggenheim

grant for advanced study, in reference to the John Simon Guggenheim Foundation, established 1925 by
U.S. Sen. Simon Guggenheim (1867-1941) in memory of his son, who died young. The senator's brother
was an arts patron who founded the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation in 1937, which grew into the
Guggenheim Museum of modern art.


guidance (n.)

1530s, the process of directing conduct, hybrid from guide + -ance; replacing 15c. guying. In
reference to direction in school, career, marriage, etc., from 1927.


guide (v.)

late 14c., to lead, direct, conduct, from Old French guider to guide, lead, conduct (14c.), earlier
guier, from Frankish *witan show the way or a similar Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *wit- to
know (cognates: German weisen to show, point out, Old English witan to see), from PIE *weid- to see
(see vision). The form of the French word influenced by Old Proven&ccedil;al guidar (n.) guide,
leader, or Italian guidare, both from the same source. Related: Guided; guiding.


guide (n.)

mid-14c., one who shows the way, from Old French guide, 14c. (alteration of earlier guie), verbal
noun from guider (see guide (v.)). In book titles from 1610s; meaning book of information on local
sites is from 1759. In 18c. France, a for Dummies or Idiot's Guide to book would have been a guid'
&acirc;ne, literally guide-ass.


guideline (n.)

1785, line marked on a surface before cutting, from guide + line (n.). Meaning rope for steering a
hot-air balloon is from 1846. In figurative use by 1948. Related: Guidelines.


guidepost (n.)

also guide-post, 1761, from guide (v.) + post (n.1).


Guido

masc. proper name, Italian, literally leader, of Germanic origin (see guide (v.)). As a type of
gaudy machoism often associated with Italian-Americans, 1980s, teen slang, from the name of
character in Hollywood film Risky Business (1983).


guidon (n.)

small flag, 1540s, from Middle French guidon (16c.), from Italian guidone battle standard, from
guidare to direct, guide, from Old Proven&ccedil;al guidar (see guide (v.)).


guild (n.)

early 13c., yilde (spelling later influenced by Old Norse gildi guild, brotherhood), a semantic
fusion of Old English gegyld guild and gild, gyld payment, tribute, compensation, from Proto-
Germanic *gelth- pay (cognates: Old Frisian geld money, Old Saxon geld payment, sacrifice, reward,
Old High German gelt payment, tribute; see yield (v.)).    The connecting sense is of a tribute or
payment to join a protective or trade society. But some see the root in its alternative sense of
sacrifice, as if in worship, and see the word as meaning a combination for religious purposes,
either Christian or pagan. The Anglo-Saxon guilds had a strong religious component; they were burial
societies that paid for masses for the souls of deceased members as well as paying fines in cases of
justified crime. The continental custom of guilds of merchants arrived after the Conquest, with
incorporated societies of merchants in each town or city holding exclusive rights of doing business
there. In many cases they became the governing body of a town (compare Guildhall, which came to be
the London city hall). Trade guilds arose 14c., as craftsmen united to protect their common
interest.


guilder (n.)

Dutch coin, late 15c., probably from a mispronunciation of Middle Dutch gulden, literally golden, in
gulden (florijn) or some similar name for a golden coin (see golden).


guile (n.)

mid-12c., from Old French guile deceit, wile, fraud, ruse, trickery, from Frankish *wigila trick,
ruse or a related Germanic source (cognates: Old Frisian wigila sorcery, witchcraft, Old English wil
trick; see wile).


guileful (adj.)

c.1300, from guile + -ful. Nowadays only in poems and dictionaries. Related: Guilefully;
guilefulness.


guileless (adj.)

1727, from guile + -less. Related: Guilelessly; guilelessness.


guillotine (n.)

The name of the machine in which the axe descends in grooves from a considerable height so that the
stroke is certain and the head instantly severed from the body. [Universal Magazine of Knowledge and
Pleasure, January 1793], 1791, from French guillotine, named in recognition of French physician
Joseph Guillotin (1738-1814), who as deputy to the National Assembly (1789) proposed, for
humanitarian and efficiency reasons, that capital punishment be carried out by beheading quickly and
cleanly on a machine, which was built in 1791 and first used the next year. The verb is first
attested 1794. Related: Guillotined; guillotining.


guilt (n.)

Old English gylt crime, sin, fault, fine, of unknown origin, though some suspect a connection to Old
English gieldan to pay for, debt, but OED editors find this inadmissible phonologically. The
mistaken use for sense of guilt is first recorded 1680s. Guilt by association recorded by 1919.


guilt (v.)

to influence someone by appealing to his sense of guiltiness, by 1995, from guilt (n.). Related:
Guilted; guilting. Old English also had a verbal form, gyltan to commit an offense.


guiltiness (n.)

late 14c., from guilty + -ness.


guiltless (adj.)

late Old English gyltleas; see guilt (n.) + -less. Related: Guiltlessly; guiltlessness.


guilty (adj.)

Old English gyltig, from gylt (see guilt (n.)). Of conscience, feelings, etc., 1590s. Meaning person
who is guilty is from 1540s. To plead not guilty is from 15c.; to plead guilty is 19c., though, as
OED notes, Guilty is technically not a plea, but a confession.


guinea (n.)

former British coin, 1660s, from Guinea, region along the west coast of Africa, presumably from an
African word (perhaps Tuareg aginaw black people); the 20-shilling coins so called because they were
first minted for British trade with Guinea (but soon in domestic use) and with gold from Africa. The
original guinea (in use from 1663 to 1813) was based on the value of gold and by 1695 it was worth
30 shillings. William III then fixed its value at 21 shillings, 6 pence in 1698. The extra 6 pence
were lopped off in December 1717.    The Guinea hen (1570s) is a domestic fowl imported from there.
Guinea derogatory term for Italian (1896) was originally Guinea Negro (1740s) and meant black
person, person of mixed ancestry. It was applied to Italians c.1890 probably because of their dark
complexions relative to northern Europeans, and after 1911 was occasionally applied to Hispanics and
Pacific Islanders as well. New Guinea was so named 1546 by Spanish explorer Inigo Ortiz de Retes in
reference to the natives' dark skin and tightly curled hair.


guinea pig

1660s, native to South America and perhaps so called either because it was first brought back to
Britain aboard Guinea-men, ships that plied the triangle trade between England, Guinea, and South
America [Barnhart, Klein]; or from confusion of Guinea (q.v.) with the South American region of
Guyana (but OED is against this). In the extended sense of one subjected to an experiment it is
first recorded 1920, because they were commonly used in vivisection experiments.


Guinevere

fem. proper name, from Welsh Gwenhwyvar, literally white-cheeked.


Guinness

Irish brewery, founded 1759 by Arthur Guinness (1725-1803) in Dublin.


guise (n.)

late 13c., style or fashion of attire, from Old French guise manner, fashion, way, from Frankish
*wisa or some similar Germanic source (cognate with Old High German wisa manner, wise; see wise
(n.)). Sense of assumed appearance is from 1660s, from earlier meaning mask, disguise (c.1500).


guiser (n.)

masquerader, mummer, late 15c., agent noun from guise.


guitar (n.)

1620s, ultimately from Greek kithara cithara, a stringed musical instrument related to the lyre,
perhaps from Persian sihtar (see sitar); the name reached English several times, including early
14c. giterne, from Old French, in reference to various stringed, guitar-like instruments; the modern
word is directly from Spanish guittara (14c.), which ultimately is from the Greek. The Arabic word
is perhaps from Spanish or Greek, though often the relationship is said to be the reverse.


guitarist (n.)

1770, from guitar + -ist.


gulag (n.)

system of prisons and labor camps, especially for political detainees, in the former Soviet Union;
rough acronym from Russian Glavnoe upravlenie ispravitel'no-trudovykh lagerei Chief Administration
of Corrective Labor Camps, set up in 1931.


gulch (n.)

deep ravine, 1832, American English, perhaps from obsolete or dialectal verb gulsh sink in (of
land), gush out (of water), from Middle English gulchen to gush forth; to drink greedily (c.1200).
Compare gulche-cuppe a greedy drinker (mid-13c.).


gules

red, in heraldic descriptions, c.1300, from Old French goules neckpiece of (red) fur, plural of
gole, guele throat, from Latin gula throat (see gullet).


gulf (n.)

late 14c., profound depth; geographic sense is c.1400; from Old French golf a gulf, whirlpool, from
Italian golfo a gulf, a bay, from Late Latin colfos, from Greek kolpos bay, gulf, earlier trough
between waves, fold of a garment, originally bosom, the common notion being curved shape, from PIE
*kwelp- to arch, to vault (compare Old English hwealf, a-hwielfan to overwhelm). Latin sinus
underwent the same development, being used first for bosom, later for gulf. Replaced Old English
s&aelig;-earm. Figurative sense of a wide interval is from 1550s. The Gulf Stream (1775) takes its
name from the Gulf of Mexico.


gull (n.1)

shore bird, early 15c. (in a cook book), probably from Brythonic Celtic, compare Welsh gwylan gull,
Cornish guilan, Breton goelann; all from Old Celtic *voilenno-. Replaced Old English m&aelig;w (see
mew (n.1)).


gull (n.2)

cant term for dupe, sucker, credulous person, 1590s, of uncertain origin. Perhaps from verb meaning
to dupe, cheat (1540s), earlier to swallow (1520s), ultimately from gull throat, gullet (early
15c.); see gullet. Or it is perhaps from (or influenced by) the bird (see gull (n.1)); in either
case with a sense of someone who will swallow anything thrown at him. Another possibility is Middle
English dialectal gull newly hatched bird (late 14c.), which is perhaps from Old Norse golr yellow,
from the hue of its down.


Gullah

of or pertaining to blacks on the sea-islands of Georgia and South Carolina, 1739 (first attested as
a male slave's proper name), of uncertain origin. Early 19c. folk etymology made it a shortening of
Angola (homeland of many slaves) or traced it to a W. African tribal group called the Golas.


gullet (n.)

c.1300 (as a surname), from Old French golet neck (of a bottle); gutter; bay, creek, diminutive of
gole throat, neck (Modern French guele), from Latin gula throat, also appetite, from PIE root
*gwele- (3) to swallow (cognates: Latin gluttire to gulp down, devour, Old English ceole throat, Old
Church Slavonic glutu gullet, Old Irish gelim I devour).


gullibility (n.)

1793, earlier cullibility (1728), probably from gull (n.2) dupe, sucker + -ability.


gullible (adj.)

1825, apparently a back-formation from gullibility. Gullable is attested from 1818.


Gulliver

male proper name, from Old French goulafre glutton, a very common name, found as a surname in
Domesday Book (William Gulafra).


gully (n.)

channel made by running water, 1650s, possibly a variant of Middle English golet water channel (see
gullet). Gully-washer, American English colloquial for heavy rainstorm, attested by 1887.


gulp (v.)

late 14c., a native coinage or else from Flemish gulpe or Dutch gulpen to gush, pour forth, guzzle,
swallow, in any case possibly of imitative origin (compare Swedish dialectal glapa to gulp down).
Related: Gulped; gulping.


gulp (n.)

1560s, from gulp (v.), or else from Flemish gulpe, Dutch gulp stream of water, large draught.


gum (n.1)

resin, c.1300, from Old French gome (medicinal) gum, resin, from Late Latin gumma, from Latin gummi,
from Greek kommi gum, from Egyptian kemai. As a shortened form of chewing gum, first attested 1842
in American English. The gum tree (1670s) was so called for the resin it exudes.


gum (n.2)

membranes of the mouth, Old English goma palate, side of the mouth (single or plural), from a
Germanic source represented by Old Norse gomi palate, Old High German goumo; related to Lithuanian
gomurys palate, and perhaps from PIE *gheu- to yawn (source also of Greek khaos; see chaos).


gum (v.)

early 14c., gommen, treat with (medicinal or aromatic) gums, from gum (n.1). In the transferred or
figurative sense of spoil, ruin (usually with up), it is first recorded 1901, probably from the
notion of machinery becoming clogged. Of infants, etc., to chew or gnaw (something) with the gums,
by 1907, from gum (n.2). Related: Gummed; gumming.


gumbo

1805, from Louisiana French, probably ultimately from Central Bantu dialect (compare Mbundu ngombo
okra).


gummy

late 14c., from gum (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Gumminess.


gump (n.)

dolt, numskull, 1825; meaning chicken is from 1914, U.S. thieves' slang.


gumption (n.)

1719, originally Scottish, common sense, shrewdness, also drive, initiative, possibly connected with
Middle English gome attention, heed, from Old Norse gaumr heed, attention. Sense of initiative is
first recorded 1812.


gumshoe (n.)

plainclothes detective, 1906, from the rubber-soled shoes they wore (which were so called from
1863); from gum (n.1) + shoe (n.).


gun (n.)

mid-14c., gunne an engine of war that throws rocks, arrows or other missiles, probably a shortening
of woman's name Gunilda, found in Middle English gonnilde cannon and in an Anglo-Latin reference to
a specific gun from a 1330 munitions inventory of Windsor Castle (...una magna balista de cornu quae
Domina Gunilda ...), from Old Norse Gunnhildr, woman's name, from gunnr + hildr, both meaning war,
battle. First element from PIE *gwhen- to strike, kill (see bane); for second, see Hilda.    The
identification of women with powerful weapons is common historically (such as Big Bertha, Brown
Bess, Mons Meg, etc.); meaning shifted with technology, from cannons to firearms as they developed
15c. Great guns (cannon, etc.) distinguished from small guns (such as muskets) from c.1400. Applied
to pistols and revolvers after 1744. Meaning thief, rascal is from 1858. For son of a gun, see son.
To jump the gun (1912, American English) is from track and field. Guns a woman's breasts (especially
if prominent) attested by 2006.


gun (v.)

to shoot with a gun, 1620s, from gun (n.); the sense of to accelerate an engine is from 1930, from
earlier phrase to give (something) the gun. Related: Gunned; gunning.


gun moll

1908, female criminal, second element from nickname of Mary, used of disreputable females since
early 1600s; first element from slang gonif thief (1885), from Yiddish, from Hebrew gannabh thief.


gun-metal

commonly an alloy of copper and zinc; used attributively of a dull blue-gray color since 1905.


gun-shy (adj.)

1884, originally of sporting dogs, from gun (n.) + shy (adj.).


gunboat

1793, from gun + boat. Gunboat diplomacy is from 1916, originally with reference to Western policies
in China.


gung ho

also gung-ho, gungho, 1942, slang motto of Carlson's Raiders (2nd Marine Raider Battalion, under Lt.
Col. Evans Carlson, 1896-1947), U.S. guerrilla unit operating in the Pacific in World War II, from
Chinese kung ho work together, cooperate. Widely adopted in American English c.1959.Borrowing an
idea from China, Carlson frequently has what he calls 'kung-hou' meetings .... Problems are threshed
out and orders explained. [New York Times Magazine, Nov. 8, 1942]


gunk (n.)

1949, viscous substance, American English, apparently from Gunk, trademark for a thick liquid soap
patented 1932 by A.F. Curran Co. of Malden, Mass.


gunman (n.)

1620s, from gun (n.) + man (n.). In early American English use, especially of Indian warriors.


gunnel (n.)

small marine fish, 1680s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Cornish.


gunner (n.)

mid-14c., gonner one who works a cannon, agent noun from gun.


gunnery (n.)

c.1600, from gun + -ery.


gunny (n.)

1711, Anglo-Indian goney coarse fabric, from Hindi goni, from Sanskrit goni sack. Gunny sack
attested by 1862.


gunplay (n.)

also gun-play, 1891, from gun (n.) + play (n.).


gunpowder (n.)

early 15c., from gun (n.) + powder (n.). The Gunpowder Plot was the conspiracy to blow up the Houses
of Parliament on Nov. 5, 1605, while the King, Lords and Commons were assembled there.


gunsel (n.)

1914, American English, from hobo slang, a catamite; specifically a young male kept as a sexual
companion, especially by an older tramp, from Yiddish genzel, from German G&auml;nslein gosling,
young goose. The secondary, non-sexual meaning young hoodlum seems to be entirely traceable to
Dashiell Hammett, who sneaked it into The Maltese Falcon (1929) while warring with his editor over
the book's racy language.    Another thing, Spade repeated, glaring at the boy: Keep that gunsel
away from me while you're making up your mind. I'll kill him.    The context implies some connection
with gun and a sense of gunman, and evidently the editor bought it. The word was retained in the
script of the 1941 movie made from the book, so evidently the Motion Picture Production Code censors
didn't know it either.    The relationship between Kasper Gutman (Sidney Greenstreet) and his young
hit-man companion, Wilmer Cook (Elisha Cook, Jr.), is made fairly clear in the movie, but the overt
mention of sexual perversion would have been deleted if the censors hadn't made the same mistaken
assumption as Hammett's editor. [Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989, p.184]


gunshot (n.)

early 15c., shot fired from a gun, from gun (n.) + shot (n.). Meaning range of a gun or cannon is
from 1530s.


gunsmith (n.)

1580s, from gun (n.) + smith.


Gunther

also Gunter, masc. proper name, Old High German Gundhard, literally bold in war, from gund war (see
gun) + hart hard, strong, bold (see hard).


gunwale (n.)

mid-15c., gonne walle, from gun (n.) + wale plank (see wale). Originally a platform on the deck of a
ship to support the mounted guns.


guppy (n.)

1925, named for R.J.L. Guppy, Trinidad clergyman who supplied the first specimen (1866) to the
British Museum. The family name is from a place in Dorset. The class of streamlined U.S. submarines
(1948) is an acronym from greater underwater propulsion power + -y.


Gupta

4c.-6c. North Indian dynasty, from Chandragupta, name of the founder.


gurges (n.)

1660s, from Latin gurges, literally whirlpool, from PIE *gwrg-, reduplicated form of root *gwere-
(4) to swallow (see voracity).


gurgitation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin gurgulationem (nominative gurgulatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of gurgitare to engulf, from gurges whirlpool, gorge (see gurges).


gurgle (v.)

early 15c., medical term for gurgling heard in the abdomen, a native, echoic formation, or
ultimately from Latin gurguliare, perhaps via Dutch, German gurgeln. Extended (non-anatomical) use,
in reference to water over stones, etc., is first recorded 1713. This phenomenon of long specialized
use before becoming a part of the general vocabulary is often found in English [Barnhart]. Related:
Gurgled; gurgling. As a noun from early 15c.


Gurkha

1811, member of a dominant race of Nepal, of Hindu descent, famous as warriors. Said to be
ultimately from Sanskrit gauh cow + raksati he protects.


gurnard (n.)

small marine fish, early 14c., from Old French gournart (13c.), formed by metathesis of gronir, from
Latin grunire to grunt. The fish so called for the sound it makes when pulled from the water.


gurney (n.)

by 1921, of unknown origin. It also is a surname.


guru (n.)

1800, gooroo, from Hindi guru teacher, priest, from Sanskrit guru-s one to be honored, teacher,
literally heavy, weighty, from PIE root *gru- (see grave (adj.)). Generalized sense of mentor is
from 1940; sense of expert in something first recorded c.1966 in Canadian English in reference to
Marshall McLuhan.


gush (v.)

12c., gosshien make noises in the stomach, later (c.1400) rush out suddenly, pour out, probably
formed imitativeally in English under influence of Old Norse gusa to gush, spurt, related to geyser.
Metaphoric sense of speak in an effusive manner first recorded 1873. Related: Gushed; gushing. The
noun is 1680s, from the verb.


gusher (n.)

oil well that flows without pumping, 1886, agent noun from gush. Earlier in a sense of overly
effusive person (1864).


gushy (adj.)

1845, from gush in the metaphoric sense + -y (2). Related: Gushily; gushiness.


gusset (n.)

early 14c., from Old French gosset armpit; piece of armor for the armpit (13c.), apparently from
gousse shell of a nut, of unknown origin. Originally an armorer's term; of clothing from 1560s.


gussy (v.)

to dress up or decorate in a showy way, 1952, American English slang, apparently from Gussy (1940),
schoolyard slang name for an overly dressed person, perhaps related to gussie (1901) effeminate man,
and somehow connected to the nickname for Augusta and Augustus.


gust (n.)

1580s, possibly a dialectal survival from Old Norse gustr a cold blast of wind (related to gusa to
gush, spurt) or Old High German gussa flood, both from Proto-Germanic *gustiz, from PIE *gheus-,
from root *gheu- to pour (see found (2)). Probably originally in English as a nautical term. As a
verb, from 1813. Related: Gusted; gusting.


gustation (n.)

act of tasting, 1590s, from Latin gustationem (nominative gustatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of gustare to taste (see gusto).


gustatory (adj.)

1680s, from Latin gustatus sense of taste; a taste, noun use of past participle of gustare to taste
(see gusto) + -ory.


Gustavus

masc. proper name, Latinized form of Swedish Gustaf; first element of unknown origin, second element
literally staff.


gusto (n.)

1620s, from Italian gusto taste, from Latin gustus a tasting, related to gustare to taste, take a
little of, from PIE root *geus- to taste, choose (cognates: Sanskrit jus- enjoy, be pleased, Avestan
zaosa- pleasure, Old Persian dau&#353;- enjoy), a root that forms words for taste in Greek and
Latin, but mostly meaning try or choose in Germanic and Celtic (such as Old English cosan, cesan to
choose, Gothic kausjan to test, to taste of, Old High German koston try, German kosten taste of).
The semantic development could have been in either direction. In English, guste organ of taste,
sense of taste, is mid-15c., from French.


gusty (adj.)

c.1600, from gust + -y (2). Related: Gustily; gustiness.


gut (n.)

Old English guttas (plural) bowels, entrails, related to geotan to pour, from PIE *gheu- pour (see
found (v.2)). Related to Middle Dutch gote, Dutch goot, German Gosse gutter, drain, Middle English
gote channel, stream. Meaning abdomen, belly is from c.1400. Meaning easy college course is student
slang from 1916, probably from obsolete slang sense of feast (the connecting notion is something
that one can eat up). Sense of inside contents of anything (usually plural) is from 1570s. To hate
(someone's) guts is first attested 1918. The notion of the intestines as a seat of emotions is
ancient (see bowel) and probably explains expressions such as gut reaction (1963), gut feeling (by
1970), and compare guts. Gut check attested by 1976.


gut (v.)

to remove the guts of (fish, etc.), late 14c., from gut (n.); figurative use by 1680s. Related:
Gutted; gutting.


gut-bucket (adj.)

in reference to jazz, earthy, by 1929, supposedly originally a reference to the buckets which caught
the drippings, or gutterings, from barrels. Which would connect it to gutter (v.).


gutless (adj.)

cowardly, 1900, from gut (n.) in the figurative spirit sense (see guts) + -less. Literal sense is
from c.1600. Related: Gutlessly.


guts (n.)

spirit, courage, 1893, figurative plural of gut (n.). The idea of the bowels as the seat of the
spirit goes back to at least mid-14c.


gutsy (adj.)

tough, plucky, 1936, from guts + -y (2). Earlier it meant greedy (1803).


gutta-percha (n.)

1845, from Malay getah percha, literally the gum of percha, the name of the tree; the form of the
word influenced by Latin gutta drop. As the name of the tree itself, from 1860.


gutter (n.)

late 13c., watercourse, water drainage channel along the side of a street, from Anglo-French gotere,
Old French guitere, goutiere (13c., Modern French goutti&egrave;re) gutter, spout (of water), from
goute a drop, from Latin gutta a drop. Meaning furrow made by running water is from 1580s. Meaning
trough under the eaves of a roof to carry off rainwater is from mid-14c. Figurative sense of low,
profane is from 1818. In printers' slang, from 1841.


gutter (v.)

late 14c., to make or run in channels, from gutter (n.). In reference to candles (1706) it is from
the channel that forms on the side as the molten wax flows off. Related: Guttered; guttering.


guttersnipe (n.)

also gutter-snipe, 1857, from gutter (n.) + snipe (n.); originally Wall Street slang for
streetcorner broker, attested later (1869) as street urchin, also one who gathers rags and paper
from gutters. As a name for the common snipe, it dates from 1874 but is perhaps earlier.


guttural (adj.)

pertaining to the throat, 1590s, from Middle French guttural, from Latin guttur throat, gullet (see
bowel). The noun, in linguistics, is from 1690s.


guv

1890, shortening of guvner, casual British pronunciation of governor as a title of respect.


guy (n.1)

rope, chain, wire, mid-14c., leader, from Old French guie a guide, from guier (see guide (v.)); or
from a similar word in North Sea Germanic. The rope sense is nautical, first recorded 1620s.


guy (n.2)

fellow, 1847, originally American English; earlier (1836) grotesquely or poorly dressed person,
originally (1806) effigy of Guy Fawkes, leader of the Gunpowder Plot to blow up British king and
Parliament (Nov. 5, 1605), paraded through the streets by children on the anniversary of the
conspiracy. The male proper name is from French, related to Italian Guido.


Guyana

from a native word perhaps meaning respectable.


guyot (n.)

flat-topped submarine mountain, 1946, named for Swiss geographer/geologist Arnold Guyot (1807-1884).


guzzle (v.)

1570s, probably related to Old French gosillier to go down the gullet; to vomit, chatter, talk, from
gosier (13c.) jaws, throat, gullet. Or imitative of the sound of drinking greedily. Related:
Guzzled; guzzling. As a noun from 1590s.


guzzler (n.)

1704, agent noun from guzzle (v.).


Gwen

fem. proper name, typically short for Gwendolyn.


Gwendolyn

fem. proper name; the first element is Breton gwenn white (cognates: Welsh gwyn, Old Irish find,
Gaelic fionn, Gaulish vindo- white, shining, literally visible), from nasalized form of PIE root
*weid- to see, know (see vision).


gybe

alternative spelling of jibe.


gym (n.)

short for gymnasium, attested from 1871, U.S. student slang.


gymkhana

1861, Anglo-Indian, said to be from Hindustani gend-khana, literally ball house; altered in English
by influence of gymnasium.


gymnasium (n.)

1590s, place of exercise, from Latin gymnasium school for gymnastics, from Greek gymnasion public
place where athletic exercises are practiced; gymnastics school, in plural, bodily exercises, from
gymnazein to exercise or train, literally or figuratively, literally to train naked, from gymnos
naked (see naked). Introduced to German 15c. as a name for high school (more or less paralleling a
sense in Latin); in English it has remained purely athletic.


gymnast (n.)

1590s in the modern sense, a back-formation from gymnastic. Greek gymnastes was a trainer of
professional athletes.


gymnastic (adj.)

1570s, from Latin gymnasticus, from Greek gynmastikos fond of or skilled in bodily exercise, from
gymnazein to exercise or train (see gymnasium).


gymnastics (n.)

1650s, from gymnastic; also see -ics.


gymno-

word-forming element meaning naked, stripped, bare, from comb. form of Greek gymnos naked, unclad;
bare, mere (see naked).


gymnosophist (n.)

c.1400, from Greek gymnosophistai the naked philosophers, from gymnos naked (see naked) + sophistes
sophist (see sophist). Ancient Hindu holy men whose self-denial extended to clothes; they were known
to the Greeks through the reports of Alexander the Great's soldiers.


gymnosperm (n.)

1830, from French gymnosperme and Modern Latin gymnospermus (17c.), literally naked seed (i.e., not
enclosed in an ovary), from gymno- + sperma seed (see sprout).


gynarchy (n.)

government by women or a woman, 1570s, from Greek gyne (see queen) + -arkhe (see archon).
Gynaecocracy and gyneocracy attested from 1610s.


gyneco-

also gynaeco-, before a vowel gynec-, word-forming element from Greek gynaiko-, comb. form of gyne
woman, female (see queen).


gynecological (adj.)

also gynaecological, 1876, from gynecology + -ical.


gynecologist (n.)

also gynaecologist, 1872, from gynecology + -ist.


gynecology (n.)

also gynaecology, 1847, from French gyn&eacute;cologie, from Greek gynaik-, comb. form of gyne
woman, female, from PIE *gwen- woman (see queen). Second element is from French -logie study of,
from Greek (see -logy). Another word for it was gyniatrics.


gynecomastia (n.)

1881, from Greek gyne (see queen) + mazos breast, variant of mastos (see masto-).


gyno-

word-forming element equivalent to gyneco-.


gyp (v.)

to cheat, swindle, 1889, American English, probably derived from the colloquial shortening of Gypsy
(compare gip). Related: Gypped. As a noun, fraudulent action, a cheat, by 1914.


Gypsophila (n.)

genus of the pink family, 1771, Modern Latin, from Greek gypsos chalk, gypsum (see gypsum) + philein
to love (see philo-).


gypsum (n.)

substance (hydrated calcium sulphate) used in making plaster, late 14c., from Latin gypsum, from
Greek gypsos chalk, according to Klein, perhaps of Semitic origin (compare Arabic jibs, Hebrew
gephes plaster).


Gypsy

also gipsy, c.1600, alteration of gypcian, a worn-down Middle English dialectal form of egypcien
Egyptian, from the supposed origin of these people. As an adjective, from 1620s.    Cognate with
Spanish Gitano and close in sense to Turkish and Arabic Kipti gypsy, literally Coptic; but in Middle
French they were Boh&eacute;mien (see bohemian), and in Spanish also Flamenco from Flanders. The
gipsies seem doomed to be associated with countries with which they have nothing to do [Weekley].
Zingari, the Italian and German name, is of unknown origin. Romany is from the people's own
language, a plural adjective form of rom man. Gipsy is the prefered spelling in England.


gyrate (v.)

1822 (implied in gyrated), back-formation from gyration. Related: Gyrated; gyrating.


gyration (n.)

1610s, noun of action from Late Latin gyratum, past participle of gyrare, from Latin gyrus circle
(see gyre).


gyre (n.)

1560s, a circular motion; as a verb, to turn round, early 15c.; from Latin gyrus circle, circular
course, round, ring, and its derived verb gyrare, from Greek gyros circle, ring, related to
gyr&oacute;s rounded, perhaps from PIE root *geu- to bend, curve (cognates: Armenian kor crooked,
Lithuanian gurnas hip, ankle, bone, Norwegian kaure a curly lock of hair).


gyrfalcon (n.)

also gerfalcon, c.1200, from Old French girfauc large northern falcon, probably from Frankish, from
Proto-Germanic *ger (source of Old High German gir vulture) + Latin falco hawk (see falcon). Folk
etymology connects it with Latin gyrus (see gyre) in reference to circling in the air.


gyro (n.)

sandwich made from roasted lamb, late 20c., originally the meat itself, as roasted on a rotating
spit, from Modern Greek gyros a circle (see gyre); mistaken in English for a plural and shorn of its
-s.


gyro-

word-forming element meaning gyrating or gyroscope, from comb. form of Greek gyros ring, circle (see
gyre).


gyromancy (n.)

1550s, method of divination by walking in a circle till the person falls down from dizziness, the
inference being drawn from the place in the circle at which he fell, from Medieval Latin gyromantia,
from Greek gyyros circle (see gyre) + manteia divination, oracle (see -mancy).


gyroscope (n.)

heavy rotating wheel with an axis free to turn in any direction, 1856, invented and named in French
1852 by Foucault, from Greek gyros circle (see gyre) + skopos watcher (see scope (n.1)), because the
device demonstrates that the earth rotates.


gyroscopic (adj.)

1871, from gyroscope + -ic. Related: Gyroscopically.


gyrostat (n.)

1879, from gyro- + -stat.


gyrostatics (n.)

branch of dynamics dealing with rotating bodies, 1883, from gyrostatic (1879); see gyrostat + -ics.


gyrus (n.)

convolution between grooves, 1842, from Latin gyrus circle, circuit, career, from Greek gyros ring,
circle (see gyre).


