-hood

word-forming element meaning state or condition of being, from Old English -had condition, position,
cognate with German -heit, Dutch -heid, all from Proto-Germanic *haidus manner, quality, literally
bright appearance, from PIE (s)kai- (1) bright, shining. Originally a free-standing word (see hade);
in Modern English it survives only in this suffix.


H

the pronunciation aitch was in Old French (ache name of the letter H), and is from a presumed Late
Latin *accha (compare Italian effe, elle, emme), with the central sound approximating the value of
the letter when it passed from Roman to Germanic, where it at first represented a strong, distinctly
aspirated -kh- sound close to that in Scottish loch. In earlier Latin the letter was called ha.
In Romanic languages, the sound became silent in Late Latin and was omitted in Old French and
Italian, but it was restored in Middle English spelling in words borrowed from French, and often
later in pronunciation, too. Thus Modern English has words ultimately from Latin with missing -h-
(as in able, from Latin habile); with a silent -h- (as in heir,  hour); with a formerly silent -h-
now often vocalized (as in humble, humor, herb); and even a few with an excrescent -h- fitted in
confusion to words that never had one (as in hostage, hermit).    Relics of the formerly unvoiced
-h- persist in pedantic insistence on an historical (object) and in obsolete mine host. The use in
digraphs (as in -sh-, -th-) goes back to the ancient Greek alphabet, which used it in -ph-, -th-,
-kh- until -H- took on the value of a long e and the digraphs acquired their own characters. The
letter passed into Roman use before this evolution, and thus retained there more of its original
Semitic value.


ha

c.1300, natural expression of surprise, distress, etc.; found in most European languages; in Old
English, Greek, Latin, Old French as ha ha. A ha-ha (1712), from French, was an obstacle
interrupting one's way sharply and disagreeably; so called because it surprizes ... and makes one
cry Ah! Ah! [Alexander Le Blond, The Theory and Practice of Gardening, 1712].


ha-ha

also haha, used of laughter since ancient times; compare Old English ha ha, Greek ha ha, Latin
hahae. A different attempt at representation is in py-hy (1580s).


Habanera (n.)

type of Cuban dance, 1878, literally of Havana; see Havana.


habeas corpus (n.)

writ requiring a person to be brought before a court, mid-15c., Latin, literally (you should) have
the person, in phrase habeas corpus ad subjiciendum produce or have the person to be subjected to
(examination), opening words of writs in 14c. Anglo-French documents to require a person to be
brought before a court or judge, especially to determine if that person is being legally detained.
From habeas, second person singular present subjunctive of habere to have, to hold (see habit (n.))
+ corpus person, literally body (see corporeal). In reference to more than one person, habeas
corpora.


haberdasher (n.)

early 14c., seller of various small articles of trade (late 13c. as a surname), agent noun from
Anglo-French hapertas small wares, also a kind of fabric, of unknown origin. Sense of dealer in
men's wares is 1887 in American English, via intermediate sense of seller of caps.


haberdashery (n.)

early 15c., Anglo-French, goods sold by a haberdasher, from haberdasher + -y (2). Meaning a
haberdasher's shop is recorded from 1813, with meaning shading to -ery.


habiliment (n.)

often habiliments, early 15c., munitions, weapons, from Middle French habillement, from abiller
prepare or fit out, probably from habile fit, suitable (see able). Alternative etymology [Barnhart,
Klein] makes the French verb originally mean reduce a tree by stripping off the branches, from a- to
+ bille stick of wood. Sense of clothing, dress developed late 15c., by association with habit (n.).


habit (n.)

early 13c., characteristic attire of a religious or clerical order, from Old French habit, abit
(12c.) clothing, (ecclesiastical) habit; conduct, from Latin habitus condition, demeanor,
appearance, dress, originally past participle of habere to have, hold, possess; consider, think,
reason; manage, keep, from PIE root *ghabh- to seize, take, hold, have, give, receive (cognates:
Sanskrit gabhasti- hand, forearm; Old Irish gaibim I take, hold, I have, gabal act of taking;
Lithuanian gabana armful, gabenti to remove; Gothic gabei riches; Old English giefan, Old Norse gefa
to give).    Base sense probably to hold, which can be either in offering or in taking. Applied in
Latin to both inner and outer states of being, and taken over in both sense by English, though
meaning of dress is now restricted to monks and nuns. Meaning customary practice is early 14c. Drug
sense is from 1887.


habit (v.)

mid-14c., to dwell, from Old French habiter to dwell, inhabit; have dealings with, from Latin
habitare to live, dwell, frequentative of habere to have, to hold, possess (see habit (n.)). Meaning
to dress is from 1580s; to habituate from 1610s; to make a habit of from 1660s. Related: Habited;
habiting.


habitable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French habitable suitable for human dwelling (14c.), from Latin habitabilis that
is fit to live in, from habitare to inhabit, dwell (see habitat). Related: Habitably; habitability.


habitant (n.)

late 15c., from Old French habitant, abitant inhabitant, from Latin habitantis inhabitants, genitive
plural of habitans, present participle of habitare to inhabit, dwell (see habitat). Meaning a
Canadian of French descent attested by 1789; the usual word for planters in 18c. Quebec.


habitat (n.)

1762, as a technical term in Latin texts on English flora and fauna, literally it inhabits, third
person singular present indicative of habitare to live, dwell, frequentative of habere to have, to
hold, possess (see habit (n.)). General sense of dwelling place is first attested 1854.


habitation (n.)

late 14c., act or fact of dwelling; also place of lodging, abode, from Old French habitacion,
abitacion act of dwelling (12c.) or directly from Latin habitationem (nominative habitatio) act of
dwelling, noun of action from past participle stem of habitare to inhabit, dwell (see habitat).


habitual (adj.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin habitualis pertaining to habit or dress, from Latin habitus condition,
appearance, dress (see habit (n.)).


habitually (adv.)

mid-15c., from habitual + -ly (2).


habituate (v.)

1520s, from Latin habituatus, past participle of habituare to bring into a condition or habit of the
body, from habitus condition, appearance, dress (see habit (n.)). Related: Habituated; habituating.


habituation (n.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin habituationem (nominative habituatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of habituare to inhabit, dwell (see habituate (v.)).


habitude (n.)

custom, habit, c.1400, from Old French habitude (14c.), from Latin habitudinem (nominative habitudo)
condition, appearance, habit, from past participle stem of habere have, hold; manage, keep (see
habit (n.)). Related: Habitudinal (late 14c.).


habitue (n.)

1818, from French habitu&eacute;, noun use of past participle of habituer accustom, from Late Latin
habituari (see habituate).


hacienda (n.)

1760, from Spanish hacienda landed estate, plantation, earlier facienda, from Latin facienda things
to be done, from facere to do (see factitious). For noun use of a Latin gerundive, see agenda. The
owner of one is a hacendado.    The change of Latin f- to Spanish h- is characteristic; compare
hablar from fabulari, hacer from facere, hecho from factum, hermoso from formosum. Confusion of
initial h- and f- was common in 16c. Spanish; the conquistador is known in contemporary records as
both Hernando and Fernando Cort&eacute;s.


hack (v.1)

to cut roughly, cut with chopping blows, c.1200, from verb found in stem of Old English tohaccian
hack to pieces, from West Germanic *hakkon (cognates: Old Frisian hackia to chop or hack, Dutch
hakken, Old High German hacchon, German hacken), from PIE *keg- hook, tooth. Perhaps influenced by
Old Norse h&ouml;ggva to hack, hew (cognates: hacksaw). Slang sense of cope with (such as in can't
hack it) is first recorded in American English 1955, with a sense of get through by some effort, as
a jungle (cognates: phrase hack after keep working away at attested from late 14c.). Related:
Hacked; hacking.


hack (n.2)

person hired to do routine work, c.1700, ultimately short for hackney an ordinary horse (c.1300),
probably from place name Hackney, Middlesex (q.v.). Apparently nags were raised on the pastureland
there in early medieval times. Extended sense of horse for hire (late 14c.) led naturally to broken-
down nag, and also prostitute (1570s) and drudge (1540s).  Sense of carriage for hire (1704) led to
modern slang for taxicab. As an adjective, 1734, from the noun. Hack writer is first recorded 1826,
though hackney writer is at least 50 years earlier. Hack-work is recorded from 1851.


hack (v.2)

illegally enter a computer system, by 1984; apparently a back-formation from hacker. Related:
Hacked; hacking. Earlier verb senses were to make commonplace (1745), make common by everyday use
(1590s), use (a horse) for ordinary riding (1560s), all from hack (n.2).


hack (n.1)

tool for chopping, early 14c., from hack (v.1); cognates: Danish hakke mattock, German Hacke pickax,
hatchet, hoe. Meaning an act of cutting is from 1836; figurative sense of a try, an attempt is first
attested 1898.


hack (v.3)

to cough with a short, dry cough, 1802, perhaps from hack (v.1) on the notion of being done with
difficulty, or else imitative.


hackamore (n.)

halter for breaking horses, 1850, American English, of uncertain origin. OED and Klein suggests a
corruption of Spanish jaquima (earlier xaquima) halter, headstall of a horse, which Klein suggests
is from Arabic shakimah bit of a bridle, curb, restraint.


hacker (n.)

a chopper, cutter, perhaps also one who makes hacking tools, early 13c. (as a surname), agent noun
from hack (v.1). Meaning one who gains unauthorized access to computer records is attested by 1983,
agent noun from hack (v.2). Said to be from slightly earlier tech slang sense of one who works like
a hack at writing and experimenting with software, one who enjoys computer programming for its own
sake, 1976, reputedly a usage that evolved at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (however an MIT
student from the late 1960s recalls hack (n.) being used then and there in the general sense of
creative prank, which clouds its sense connection with the writing for hire word, and there may be a
source or an influence here in hack (v.1)).


hackle (n.)

Old English hacele cloak, mantle (cognate with Old High German hachul, Gothic hakuls cloak; Old
Norse hekla hooded frock), of uncertain origin. Sense of bird plumage is first recorded early 15c.,
though this might be from unrelated Middle English hackle flax comb (see heckle (n.)) on supposed
resemblance of comb to ruffled feathers. Metaphoric extension found in raise one's hackles (as a
cock does when angry) is first recorded 1881.


Hackney

late 12c., from Old English Hacan ieg Haca's Isle (or possibly Hook Island), the isle element here
meaning dry land in a marsh. Now well within London, it once was pastoral and horses apparently were
kept there. Hence hackney small saddle horse let out for hire (c.1300), with subsequent
deterioration of sense (see hack (n.2)). And compare French haquen&eacute;e ambling nag, an English
loan-word.


hackneyed (adj.)

1769, kept for hire, past participle adjective from hackney. The figurative sense of trite, so
overused as to have become uninteresting is older, 1749, from hack (n.2) in special sense of one who
writes anything for hire.


hacksaw (n.)

first element from Old Norse h&ouml;ggva to cut, from PIE *kau- to hew, strike (see hew) + saw (n.).


had (v.)

past tense and past participle of have (q.v.). You never had it so good (1946) was said to be the
stock answer to any complaints about U.S. Army life.


haddock (n.)

late 13c., of unknown origin. Old French hadot and Gaelic adag, sometimes cited as sources, were
apparently borrowed from English. OED regards the suffix as perhaps a diminutive.


hade (n.)

Old English had person, individual, character, individuality; condition, state, nature; sex, race,
family, tribe; see -hood. Obsolete after 14c. Cognate with Old Saxon hed condition, rank, Old Norse
hei&eth;r honor, dignity, Old High German heit, Gothic haidus way, manner.


Hades

1590s, from Greek Haides, in Homer the name of the god of the underworld, of unknown origin. Perhaps
literally the invisible [Watkins]. The name of the god transferred in later Greek writing to his
kingdom. Related: Hadal (adj.), 1964; Hadean.


hadith (n.)

collected Islamic tradition, 1817, from Arabic, literally tradition, related to hadith new, young,
hadatha it happened, occurred, and Hebrew hadash new.


hadn&#039;t

by 1705, contraction of had not.


hadron (n.)

1962, from Greek hadros thick, bulky, the primary sense, also strong, great; large, well-grown,
ripe, from PIE root *sa- to satisfy (see sad). With elementary particle suffix -on. Coined in
Russian as adron.


hadrosaur (n.)

1877, from Modern Latin hadrosaurus, from Greek hadros thick, stout (see hadron) + -saurus.


hae (v.)

an attempt to represent the Scottish pronunciation of have.


haematite (n.)

see hematite.


haemoglobin (n.)

see hemoglobin; also see &aelig;.


haemorrhage

see hemorrhage; also see &aelig;.


haff (n.)

also haaf, Baltic lagoon, separated from open sea by a sandbar, German, from Middle Low German haf
sea, related to Old Norse, Swedish haf the sea, especially the high sea, Danish hav, Old Frisian
hef, Old English h&aelig;f sea, perhaps literally the rising one, and related to the root of heave.


hafnium (n.)

rare element, 1923, Modern Latin, from Hafnia, Medieval Latin form of Danish Havn harbor, the usual
pre-1400 name of Copenhagen, Denmark, where it was discovered by physicist Dirk Coster (1889-1950)
and chemist George de Hevesy (1885-1966).


haft (n.)

Old English h&aelig;ft handle, related to h&aelig;ft fetter, from Proto-Germanic *haftjom (cognates:
Old Saxon haft captured; Dutch hecht, Old High German hefti, German Heft handle; German Haft
arrest), from PIE *kap- to grasp (see capable). To haven other haeftes in hand have other hafts in
hand was a 14c.-15c. way of saying have other business to attend to.


hag (n.)

early 13c., ugly old woman, probably a shortening of Old English h&aelig;gtesse witch, fury (on
assumption that -tesse was a suffix), from Proto-Germanic *hagatusjon-, of unknown origin. Similar
shortening produced Dutch heks, German Hexe witch from cognate Middle Dutch haghetisse, Old High
German hagzusa.    First element is probably cognate with Old English haga enclosure, portion of
woodland marked off for cutting (see hedge). Old Norse had tunri&eth;a and Old High German zunritha,
both literally hedge-rider, used of witches and ghosts. Second element may be connected with
Norwegian tysja fairy; crippled woman, Gaulish dusius demon, Lithuanian dvasia spirit, from PIE
*dhewes- to fly about, smoke, be scattered, vanish.    One of the magic words for which there is no
male form, suggesting its original meaning was close to diviner, soothsayer, which were always
female in northern European paganism, and h&aelig;gtesse seem at one time to have meant woman of
prophetic and oracular powers (&AElig;lfric uses it to render the Greek pythoness, the voice of the
Delphic oracle), a figure greatly feared and respected. Later, the word was used of village wise
women.   Haga is also the haw- in hawthorn, which is an important tree in northern European pagan
religion. There may be several layers of folk etymology here. Confusion or blending with heathenish
is suggested by Middle English h&aelig;htis, h&aelig;gtis hag, witch, fury, etc., and haetnesse
goddess, used of Minerva and Diana.    If the h&aelig;gtesse was once a powerful supernatural woman
(in Norse it is an alternative word for Norn, any of the three weird sisters, the equivalent of the
Fates), it might originally have carried the hawthorn sense. Later, when the pagan magic was reduced
to local scatterings, it might have had the sense of hedge-rider, or she who straddles the hedge,
because the hedge was the boundary between the civilized world of the village and the wild world
beyond. The h&aelig;gtesse would have a foot in each reality. Even later, when it meant the local
healer and root collector, living in the open and moving from village to village, it may have had
the mildly pejorative sense of hedge- in Middle English (hedge-priest, etc.), suggesting an
itinerant sleeping under bushes, perhaps. The same word could have contained all three senses before
being reduced to its modern one.


hag-ridden (n.)

1680s, afflicted by nightmares, from hag (n.) + ridden. An old term for sleep paralysis, the
sensation of being held immobile in bed, often by a heavy weight, and accompanied by a sense of
alien presence. A holed stone hung over the bed was said to prevent it. Hag-ride as a verb is
attested from 1660s.


haggadah (n.)

1856, from Rabbinical Hebrew haggadhah, literally tale, verbal noun from higgidh to make clear,
narrate, expound.


haggaday (n.)

mid-14c., a kind of door latch, and said to be still the name for rings for raising thumb-latches in
the north of England, appears to be what it looks like: what you say when you open the door (have
good day, as in the 1414 record of them as hafgooddays).


haggard (adj.)

1560s, wild, unruly (originally in reference to hawks), from Middle French haggard, probably from
Old French faulcon hagard wild falcon, literally falcon of the woods, from Middle High German hag
hedge, copse, wood, from Proto-Germanic *hagon-, from PIE root *kagh- to catch, seize; also
wickerwork, fence (see hedge). OED, however, finds this whole derivation very doubtful. Sense
perhaps reinforced by Low German hager gaunt, haggard. Sense of with a haunted expression first
recorded 1690s, that of careworn first recorded 1853. Sense influenced by association with hag.
Related: Haggardly; haggardness.


hagged (adj.)

c.1700, from hag, by influence of haggard. Originally bewitched, also lean, gaunt, as bewitched
persons and animals were believed to become.


haggis (n.)

dish of chopped entrails, c.1400, now chiefly Scottish, but it was common throughout Middle English,
perhaps from Old French agace magpie, on analogy of the odds and ends the bird collects. The other
theory [Klein, Watkins] traces it to Old English haggen to chop (see hack (v.1)).


haggle (v.)

1570s, to cut unevenly (implied in haggler), frequentative of haggen to chop (see hack (v.1)). Sense
of argue about price first recorded c.1600, probably from notion of chopping away. Related: Haggled;
haggling.


hagiarchy (n.)

government by persons in holy orders, 1826; see hagiology + -archy. Not to be confused with
hagiocracy government by persons considered holy (1846); -cracy.


hagiography (n.)

writing of saints' lives, 1821, from Greek hagios holy (see hagiology) + -graphy. Related:
Hagiographic (1819); hagiographical (1580s); hagiographer (1650s).


hagiolatry (n.)

worship of saints, from hagio- (see hagiology) + -latry.


hagiology (n.)

study of saints' lives, 1807, from Greek hagios holy, devoted to the gods + -ology. First element
perhaps from PIE *yag- to worship, reverence, and cognate with Greek agnos chaste, Sanskrit yajati
reveres (a god) with sacrifices, worships, Old Persian ayadana temple. Related: Hagiologist (1805).


Hague

city in Netherlands, from Dutch Den Haag, short for 's Gravenhage, literally the count's hedge (i.e.
the hedge-enclosed hunting grounds of the counts of Holland); see haw. In French, it is La Haye.


hah

variant of ha.


haiku (n.)

1899, from Japanese, where it is singular of haikai, in haikai no renga jesting linked-verse;
originally a succession of haiku linked together into one poem. The form developed mid-16c.
Traditionally, there is mention of a season of the year somewhere in a haiku, as a means of
establishing the poem's tone, though this may be only the slightest suggestion. [Miller Williams,
Patterns of Poetry, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1986].


hail (interj.)

greetings! c.1200, from Old Norse heill health, prosperity, good luck, or a similar Scandinavian
source, and in part from Old English hals, shortening of w&aelig;s h&aelig;il be healthy (see health
and also wassail).


hail (n.)

frozen rain, Old English h&aelig;gl, hagol (Mercian hegel) hail, hailstorm, also the name of the
rune for H, from Proto-Germanic *haglaz (cognates: Old Frisian heil, Old Saxon, Old High German
hagal, Old Norse hagl, German Hagel hail), probably from PIE *kaghlo- pebble (cognates: Greek
kakhlex round pebble).


hail (v.1)

to call from a distance, 1560s, originally nautical, from hail (interj.). Related: Hailed; hailing.
Hail fellow well met is 1580s, from a familiar greeting. Hail Mary (c.1300) is the angelic
salutation (Latin ave Maria) in Luke i:58, used as a devotional recitation. As a desperation play in
U.S. football, attested by 1940. To hail from is 1841, originally nautical. Hail, Columbia, the
popular patriotic song, was a euphemism for hell in American English slang from c.1850-1910.


hail (v.2)

Old English hagolian, from root of hail (n.). Related: Hailed; hailing. Figurative use from mid-15c.


hailstone (n.)

Old English hagolstan; see hail (n.) + stone (n.).


hailstorm (n.)

1690s, from hail (n.) + storm (n.).


hair (n.)

Old English h&aelig;r hair, a hair, from Proto-Germanic *kh&aelig;ran (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Norse, Old High German har, Old Frisian her, Dutch and German haar hair), perhaps from PIE *ghers-
to stand out, to bristle, rise to a point (cognates: Lithuanian serys bristle; see horror).
Spelling influenced by Old Norse har and Old English haire haircloth, from Old French haire, from
Frankish *harja or some other Germanic source (see above). To let one's hair down become familiar is
first recorded 1850. Phrase hair of the dog that bit you (1540s), homeopathic remedy, is in Pliny.


hair-raising (adj.)

exciting, 1837, from hair + raise (v.). In 19c. works, sometimes as jocular mock-classical
tricopherous.


hair-shirt (n.)

garment of ascetics and penitents, 1680s, from hair + shirt. Figurative use by 1884. Earlier, such a
garment was called simply a hair.


hair-splitting (n.)

making over-nice distinctions, by 1739, from hair + verbal noun from split (v.). To split hairs make
over-fine distinctions is first recorded 1650s, as to cut the hair. Hair also being 18c. slang for
female pudendum, hair-splitter was noted in 1811 as slang for penis.


hair-trigger (n.)

1830, originally a secondary trigger in a firearm which sprung free a mechanism (hair) which, when
set, allowed the main trigger (n.) to be released by very slight force. Figurative use by 1841.


hairball (n.)

1712, from hair + ball (n.1).


hairbreadth (n.)

also hairsbreadth, hairs-breadth, hair's breadth, mid-15c., said to have been formerly a formal unit
of measure equal to one-forty-eighth of an inch. From hair + breadth.


hairbrush (n.)

1590s, from hair + brush (n.1).


haircloth (n.)

c.1500, from hair + cloth.


haircut (n.)

also hair-cut, 1887, act of cutting the hair, from hair (n.) + cut (n.). As style of wearing the
hair, by 1890.    The Romans began to cut the hair about A.U.C. 454, when Ticinius Maenas introduced
Barbers from Sicily. Then they began to cut, curl, and perfume it. The glass was consulted as now
upon rising from the barber's chair. [Rev. Thomas Dudley Fosbroke, Encyclop&aelig;dia of
Antiquities, London, 1825]     Related: Haircutter; haircutting.


hairdo (n.)

also hair-do, 1932, from hair + do (v.). Phrase do (one's) hair attested from 1875.


hairdresser (n.)

1770, from hair + dresser. Related: Hairdressing (1771).


hairless (adj.)

1550s, from hair + -less. Related: Hairlessness.


hairline (n.)

cord made of hair, 1731, from hair + line. Meaning a very fine line is from 1846. As the outline of
the hair on top of the head, by 1903. As an adjective, of cracks, etc., by 1923.


hairpin (n.)

also hair-pin, 1788 (two words), from hair + pin (n.). A hairpin turn, etc., is from 1906. Hairpin
(or clothespin) was American English slang for person c.1880-1910, especially in the expression
That's the kind of hairpin I am.


hairstyle (n.)

also hair-style, way of wearing the hair, 1913, from hair + style.


hairy (adj.)

early 14c., from hair + -y (2). From 1848 in slang sense of difficult. Farmer calls this Oxford
slang. Perhaps from the notion of rugged, rough. Related: Hairiness.


Haiti

from Arawak haiti land of mountains, and probably originally the name of the whole island.


hajj (n.)

pilgrimage to Mecca, from Arabic hajj pilgrimage, from hajja he went on a pilgrimage. Related to
Hebrew haghagh he made a pilgrimage, celebrated a feast, hagh a gathering. One who has made it is a
hajji.


hake (n.)

type of sea fish, c.1300, probably from Old English haca a hook, door-fastening (related to hacod
pike the fish), or from cognate Old Norse haki hook; in either case the fish so called from the
shape of its jaw; both from Proto-Germanic *hakan- (cognate with Dutch hake hook), from PIE root
*keg- hook, tooth (see hook (n.)).


hakeem

1580s, physician in Arab countries, from Arabic hakim wise, from stem of hakuma he was wise; whence
also hakam judge, hikmah wisdom, science.


Hakenkreuz (n.)

1931, proper German name for the Nazi swastika (q.v.), literally hook-cross, from Old High German
hako hook, from Proto-Germanic *hoka-, from PIE *keg- hook, tooth (see hook (n.)).


halal (adj.)

1855, Arabic, literally lawful. Halal food has been prepared in a manner prescribed by Islamic law.


halberd (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French hallebarde (earlier alabarde, 15c.), from Middle High German halmbarte
broad-axe with handle, from halm handle (see helm) + barte hatchet, possibly from Proto-Germanic
*bardoz beard, also hatchet, broadax. Alternative etymology [Kluge, Darmesteter] traces first
element to helm helmet, making the weapon an axe for smashing helmets.


halcyon (adj.)

1540s, in halcyon dayes (Latin alcyonei dies, Greek alkyonides hemerai), 14 days of calm weather at
the winter solstice, when a mythical bird (identified with the kingfisher) was said to breed in a
nest floating on calm seas. From halcyon (n.), late 14c., from Latin halcyon, from Greek halkyon,
variant (perhaps a misspelling) of alkyon kingfisher, from hals sea, salt (see halo-) + kyon
conceiving, present participle of kyein to conceive, literally to swell, from PIE root *keue- to
swell. Identified in mythology with Halcyone, daughter of Aeolus, who when widowed threw herself
into the sea and became a kingfisher.


hale (adj.)

healthy, Old English hal healthy, entire, uninjured (see health). The Scottish and northern English
form of whole; it was given a literary sense of free from infirmity (1734). Related: Haleness.


hale (v.)

c.1200, drag; summon, in Middle English used of arrows, bowstrings, reins, anchors, from Old French
haler to pull, haul (12c.), from a Germanic source, perhaps Frankish *halon or Old Dutch halen;
probably also from Old English geholian obtain (see haul). Figurative sense of to draw (someone)
from one condition to another is late 14c. Related: Haled; haling.


half

Old English half, halb (Mercian), healf (W. Saxon) side, part, not necessarily of equal division
(original sense preserved in behalf), noun, adjective, and adverb all in Old English, from Proto-
Germanic *halbas something divided (cognates: Old Saxon halba, Old Norse halfr, Old Frisian, Middle
Dutch half, German halb, Gothic halbs half), perhaps from PIE (s)kel- (1) to cut.    Used also in
Old English phrases, as in modern German, to mean one half unit less than, for example &thorn;ridda
healf two and a half, literally half third. The construction in two and a half, etc., is first
recorded c.1200. Of time, in half past ten, etc., first attested 1750; in Scottish, the half often
is prefixed to the following hour (as in German, halb elf = ten thirty). To go off half-cocked speak
or act too hastily (1833) is in allusion to firearms going off prematurely.


half seas over

slang for drunk, 1736, sometimes said to be from notion of a ship heavy-laden and so low in the
water that small waves (half seas) wash over the deck. This suits the sense, but the phrase is not
recorded in this alleged literal sense. Half seas over halfway across the sea is recorded from
1550s, however, and it was given a figurative extension to halfway through a matter by 1690s. What
drunkenness is halfway to is not clear.


half-

sharing one parent, from half. Half-brother is attested from early 14c.; half-sister from c.1200.


half-and-half (n.)

1756 as ale and porter; as a mixture of milk and cream, by 1946.


half-assed (adj.)

ineffectual, 1932, perhaps a humorous mispronunciation of haphazard.


half-baked (adj.)

1620s as underdone; 1855 in sense of silly; see half + bake (v.).


half-breed (n.)

person of mixed race, 1760; as an adjective by 1762. Half-blooded in this sense is from c.1600.


half-hearted (adj.)

also halfhearted, early 15c.; see half + hearted. Related: halfheartedly; halfheartedness. English
in 17c. also had half-headed stupid.


half-hour

early 15c., from half + hour. Related: Half-hourly.


half-life (n.)

also halflife, half life, 1864, with meaning unsatisfactory way of living; the sense in physics,
amount of time it takes half a given amount of radioactivity to decay is first attested 1907.


half-mast

1620s, from half + mast (n.1).


half-time (n.)

also halftime, half time, indicating half of the time, 1640s, from half + time. Tempo sense is by
1880. In football, from 1867.


half-track (n.)

also halftrack, type of military vehicle, 1927, from half + track (n.).


half-truth (n.)

1650s, from half + truth.


half-wit (n.)

1670s, originally a would-be wit whose abilities are mediocre; sense of simpleton (one lacking all
his wits) is first attested 1755.Half-wits are fleas; so little and so light,We scarce could know
they live, but that they bite.[Dryden, All for Love]  Phrase out of half wit half out of one's mind
was in Middle English (late 14c.). Half-witted lacking common sense is from 1640s.


halfling (n.)

one not fully grown, 1794, from half + -ling.


halfpenny (n.)

mid-13c. (though implied in Old English healfpenigwur&eth; halfpenny-worth); see half + penny.


halfway

also half-way, Old English healfweg; see half + way (n.). Halfway house originally was a common name
for inns midway between cities or stages.


hali-

word-forming element meaning salt, sea, from Greek hali-, comb. form of hals (genitive halos) a lump
of salt, salt generally, in Homer, the sea, from PIE *sal- salt (see salt (n.)).


halibut (n.)

large flatfish, early 15c., perhaps from hali holy (see holy) + butte flatfish; supposedly so called
from its being eaten on holy days (compare cognate Dutch heilbot, Low German heilbutt, Swedish
helgeflundra, Danish helleflynder). For second element see butt (n.4).


halide (n.)

a compound of a halogen and a metal radical, 1876, from halo- + chemical suffix -ide.


halieutic (adj.)

pertaining to fishing, from Latin halieuticus, from Greek halieutikos pertaining to fishing, from
halieuein to fish, from hals the sea, literally salt (see hali-).


Halifax

place in West Yorkshire, from Old English halh secluded spot + feax rough grass, literally hair. In
popular expressions coupled with Hull and Hell since at least 1620s.


halite (n.)

rock-salt, 1868, coined as Modern Latin halites (Glocker, 1847), from Greek hals salt (see halo-) +
chemical noun suffix -ite (2).


halitosis (n.)

bad breath, 1874, coined from Latin halitus breath, related to halare to breathe + Greek-based noun
suffix -osis.


hall (n.)

Old English heall place covered by a roof, spacious roofed residence, temple, law-court, from Proto-
Germanic *hallo covered place, hall (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German halla, German halle, Dutch
hal, Old Norse h&ouml;ll hall; Old English hell, Gothic halja hell), from PIE root *kel- (2) to
hide, conceal (see cell). Sense of entry, vestibule evolved 17c., at a time when the doors opened
onto the main room of a house. Older sense preserved in town hall, music hall, etc., and in
university dormitory names. Hall of fame attested by 1786 as an abstract concept; in sporting sense
first attested 1901, in reference to Columbia College.


hallelujah

also halleluiah, 1530s, from Hebrew hallalu-yah praise ye Jehovah, from hallalu, plural imperative
of hallel to praise also song of praise, from hillel he praised, of imitative origin, with primary
sense being to trill. Second element is yah, shortened form of Yahweh, name of God. Replaced variant
formation alleluia (12c.).


hallmark (n.)

1721, official stamp of purity in gold and silver articles, from Goldsmiths' Hall in London, site of
the assay office; see hall + mark (n.1). General sense of mark of quality first recorded 1864. As a
verb from 1773.


hallo

shout to call attention, 1781, earlier hollo, holla (see hello). Halow as a shipman's cry to incite
effort is from mid-15c.; Halloo as a verb, to pursue with shouts, to shout in the chase, from late
14c. Compare also harou, cry of distress, late 13c., from French.


hallow (v.)

Old English halgian to make holy, to honor as holy, consecrate, ordain, related to halig holy, from
Proto-Germanic *haila-ga- (cognates: Old Saxon helagon, Middle Dutch heligen, Old Norse helga), from
PIE root *kailo- whole, uninjured, of good omen (see health). Used in Christian translations to
render Latin sanctificare. Also used since Old English as a noun meaning holy person, saint.
Related: Hallowed; hallowing.


Halloween

c.1745, Scottish shortening of Allhallow-even Eve of All Saints, last night of October (1550s), the
last night of the year in the old Celtic calendar, where it was Old Year's Night, a night for
witches. A pagan holiday given a cursory baptism and sent on its way. See hallow; also see hallows.


hallows

in All-Hallows, a survival of hallow in the noun sense of holy personage, saint, attested from Old
English haligra but little used after c.1500. Hallowmas All-saints is first attested late 14c.


Hallstatt

1866, Iron Age civilization of Europe, from the name of a village in Upper Austria, where implements
from this period were found. The Germanic name is literally place of salt, in reference to ancient
salt mines there, which preserved the bodies of the original miners.


hallucinate (v.)

c.1600, deceive, from Latin alucinatus, later hallucinatus, past participle of alucinari wander (in
the mind), dream; talk unreasonably, ramble in thought, probably from Greek alyein, Attic halyein be
distraught, probably related to alaomai wander about [Barnhart, Klein]. The Latin ending probably
was influenced by vaticinari to prophecy, also to rave. Sense of to have illusions is from 1650s.
Occasionally used 19c. in transitive senses, to cause hallucination. Related: Hallucinated;
hallucinating.


hallucination (n.)

in the pathological/psychological sense of seeing or hearing something which is not there, 1640s,
from Latin hallucinationem (nominative hallucinatio), from past participle stem of hallucinari (see
hallucinate). Hallucination is distinct from illusion in not necessarily involving a false belief.
Related: Hallucinations.


hallucinatory (adj.)

1830, from hallucinat-, past participle stem of Latin hallucinari (see hallucinate) + -ory.


hallucinogen (n.)

drug which induces hallucinations, 1954, from stem of hallucination + -gen.


hallucinogenic (adj.)

1952, from hallucinogen + -ic.


hallux (n.)

1831, from Modern Latin hallux, corruption of allex great toe.


hallway (n.)

1877, American English, from hall + way (n.).


halo (n.)

1560s, from Latin halo (nominative halos), from Greek halos disk of the sun or moon, ring of light
around the sun or moon (also threshing floor and disk of a shield), of unknown origin. Sense of
light around the head of a holy person or deity first recorded 1640s. As a verb from 1801.


halo-

before vowels hal-, word-forming element meaning salt, sea, from Greek hals (genitive halos) a lump
of salt, salt generally, in Homer, the sea, from PIE *sal- salt (see salt (n.)).


halogen (n.)

general name for elements of the chlorine family, 1842, from Swedish, coined by Swedish chemist
Baron J&ouml;ns Jakob Berzelius (1779-1848), literally salt-producer, from Greek hals salt (see
halo-) + -gen giving birth to (see -gen); so called because a salt is formed in reactions involving
these four elements.


halt (n.)

a stop, a halting, 1590s, from French halte (16c.) or Italian alto, ultimately from German Halt,
imperative from Old High German halten to hold (see hold (v.)). A German military command borrowed
into the Romanic languages 16c. The verb in this sense is from 1650s, from the noun. Related:
Halted; halting.


halt (adj.)

lame, in Old English lemphalt limping, from Proto-Germanic *haltaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian
halt, Old Norse haltr, Old High German halz, Gothic halts lame), from PIE *keld-, from root *kel- to
strike, cut, with derivatives meaning something broken or cut off (cognates: Russian koldyka lame,
Greek kolobos broken, curtailed). The noun meaning one who limps; the lame collectively is from
c.1200.


halt (v.)

to walk unsteadily, early 14c., from Old English haltian to be lame, from the same source as halt
(adj.). The meaning make a halt is 1650s, from halt (n.). As a command word, attested from 1796.
Related: Halted; halting.


halter (n.)

Old English h&aelig;lftre rope for leading a horse, from West Germanic *halftra- that by which
something is held (cognates: Old Saxon haliftra halter, Old High German halftra, Middle Dutch
halfter; see helve). In women's clothing sense, originally strap attached to the top of a backless
bodice and looped around the neck, 1935, later extended to the tops themselves.


halting (n.)

act of limping or walking lamely, early 14c., verbal noun from halt (v.). Related: Haltingly.


halve (v.)

c.1200, halfen to divide in halves; see half. Meaning to reduce by half is from c.1400. Related:
Halved; halving.


halyard (n.)

rope for hoisting sails, 1610s, from Middle English halier a halyard (late 14c.), also a carrier,
porter (late 13c. in surnames), from halen to haul (see hale (v.)). Spelling influenced by yard long
beam that supports a sail (see yard (n.2)).


ham (n.1)

meat of a hog's hind leg used for food, 1630s, from Old English hamm hollow or bend of the knee,
from Proto-Germanic *hamma- (cognates: Old Norse h&ouml;m, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch hamme,
Old High German hamma), from PIE *konemo- shin bone (cognates: Greek kneme calf of the leg, Old
Irish cnaim bone). Ham-fisted (1928) was originally in reference to pilots who were heavy on the
controls, as was ham-handed (by 1918). With hammen ifalden with folded hams was a Middle English way
of saying kneeling.


ham (n.2)

overacting inferior performer, 1882, American English, apparently a shortening of hamfatter (1880)
actor of low grade, said since at least 1889 to be from an old minstrel show song, The Ham-fat Man
(1863). The song, a black-face number, has nothing to do with acting, so the connection must be with
the quality of acting in minstrel shows, where the song was popular. Ham also had a sports slang
sense of incompetent pugilist circa 1888, perhaps from ham-fisted. The notion of amateurish led to
the sense of amateur radio operator (1919). The verb in the performance sense is first recorded
1933. As an adjective in this sense by 1935.


hamadryad (n.)

late 14c., from Greek hamadryas (plural hamadryades) wood-nymph, fabled to die with her tree, from
hama together (see same) + drus (genitive dryos) tree.


hamartia (n.)

Greek, literally fault, failure, guilt, from hamartanein to fail of one's purpose; to err, sin,
originally to miss the mark.


hamartiology (n.)

that part of theology which deals with sin, 1875, from Greek hamartia sin (see hamartia) + -ology.


hambone (n.)

1855, bone of a ham, from ham (n.1) + bone (n.). Meaning inferior actor or performer is from 1893,
an elaboration of ham (n.2).


Hamburg

German city, the -burg is German Burg fort, in reference to the moated castle built there c.825; the
first element is perhaps Old High German hamma ham, back of the knee in a transferred sense of bend,
angle, with reference to its position on a river bend promontory, or Middle High German hamme
enclosed area of pastureland.


hamburger (n.)

1610s, native of Hamburg; the meat product so called from 1884, hamburg steak, named for the German
city of Hamburg, though no certain connection has ever been put forth, and there may not be one
unless it be that Hamburg was a major port of departure for German immigrants to United States.
Meaning a sandwich consisting of a bun and a patty of grilled hamburger meat attested by 1912.
Shortened form burger attested from 1939; beefburger was attempted 1940, in an attempt to make the
main ingredient more explicit, after the -burger had taken on a life of its own as a suffix (compare
cheeseburger, first attested 1938).


Hamiltonian

1797, follower of, or characteristic of, U.S. politician Alexander Hamilton (d.1804).


Hamite

1640s, from Ham (see Hamitic) + -ite (1).


Hamitic

language group that included ancient Egyptian, Berber, Galla, etc.; 1842, from Ham, second son of
Noah (Gen. ix:18-19).


hamlet (n.)

early 14c., from Old French hamelet, diminutive of hamel village, itself a diminutive of ham
village, from Frankish *haim (see home). Especially a village without a church.


hammer (n.)

Old English hamor hammer, from Proto-Germanic *hamaraz (cognates: Old Saxon hamur, Middle Dutch,
Dutch hamer, Old High German hamar, German Hammer. The Old Norse cognate hamarr meant stone, crag
(it's common in English place names), and suggests an original sense of tool with a stone head, from
PIE *akmen stone, sharp stone used as a tool (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kamy, Russian kameni
stone), from root *ak- sharp (see acme). Hammer and sickle as an emblem of Soviet communism attested
from 1921, symbolizing industrial and agricultural labor.


hammer (v.)

late 14c., from hammer (n.). Meaning to work (something) out laboriously recorded from 1580s.
Meaning to defeat heavily is from 1948. Related: Hammered; hammering. Hammered as a slang synonym
for drunk attested by 1986.


hammerhead (adj.)

also hammer-head, 1796 in reference to a kind of shark (hammer-headed is from 1773), from hammer
(n.) + head (n.). So called for its broad, transverse head.


hammock (n.)

1650s, alteration of hamaca (1550s), from Spanish hamaca, from Arawakan (Haiti) word apparently
meaning fish nets (compare Yukuna hamaca, Taino amaca).


Hammond

type of electric organ favored by 1960s rock bands, trademark name (1935), invented 1929 by U.S.
inventor and clockmaker Laurens Hammond (1895-1973).


hamper (v.)

late 14c., hampren to surround, imprison, confine, also to pack in a container, of unknown origin,
possibly from hamper (n.1), or somehow connected to Middle English hamelian to maim. Related:
Hampered; hampering.


hamper (n.1)

large basket, early 14c., contraction of Anglo-French hanaper (Anglo-Latin hanepario), from Old
French hanepier case for holding a large goblet or cup; in medical use skull, also helmet; armored
leather cap, from hanap goblet, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (cognates: Old Saxon
hnapp cup, bowl; Old High German hnapf, German Napf, Old English hn&aelig;pp). The word also meant
(15c.) the department of Chancery into which fees were paid for sealing and enrolling charters, etc.
The first -a- may be a French attempt to render Germanic hn- into an acceptable Romanic form.


hamper (n.2)

1835, things important for a ship but in the way at certain times (Klein's definition), from French
hamper to impede. Hence top hamper, originally upper masts, spars, rigging, etc. of a sailing ship.


Hampshire

reduced from Old English Hamtunscir; named for the city of Southampton, which originally was simply
Hamtun. Norman scribes mangled the county name to Hauntunescire, later Hantescire, hence the abbrev.
Hants.


hamster (n.)

c.1600, from German Hamster, from Middle High German hamastra hamster, probably from Old Church
Slavonic chomestoru hamster (the animal is native to southeastern Europe), perhaps a blend of
Russian chomiak and Lithuanian staras, both meaning hamster. The older English name for it was
German rat.


hamstring (v.)

1640s, to disable, render useless, a figurative verbal extension from the noun hamstring tendon at
the back of the knee (1560s), from ham bend of the knee (see ham (n.1)) + string (n.). Cutting this
would render a person or animal lame. Related: Hamstrung.    [I]n hamstring, -string is not the verb
string; we do not string the ham, but do something to the tendon called the hamstring; the verb,
that is, is made not from the two words ham &amp; string, but from the noun hamstring. It must
therefore make hamstringed. [Fowler]


Han

Chinese dynasty, 206 B.C.E.-220 C.E., its rule marked by prosperity, military success, and the
introduction of Buddhism.


hand (n.)

Old English hond, hand hand; side; power, control, possession, from Proto-Germanic *handuz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch, German hand, Old Norse h&ouml;nd, Gothic handus), of
uncertain origin. The original Old English plural handa was superseded in Middle English by handen,
later hands.    Meaning person who does something with his hands is from 1580s, hence hired workman
(1630s) and sailor in a ship's crew (1660s). Clock and watch sense is from 1570s. Meaning round of
applause is from 1838. The linear measure of 4 inches (originally 3) is from 1560s, now used only in
giving the height of horses. The meaning playing cards held in one player's hand is from 1620s; that
of a round at a card game is from 1620s.  First hand, second hand, etc. (mid-15c.) are from the
notion of something being passed down from hand to hand. Out of hand (1590s) is opposite of in hand
under control (c.1200). Hand over fist (1825) is suggestive of sailors and fishermen hauling in
nets. Hand jive is from 1958. To win something hands down (1855) is from horse racing, from a
jockey's gesture of letting the reins go loose in an easy victory.    The Two Thousand Guinea Stakes
was not the best contested one that it has been our fortune to assist at. ... [T]hey were won by
Meteor, with Scott for his rider; who went by the post with his hands down, the easiest of all easy
half-lengths. Wiseacre certainly did the best in his power to spoil his position, and Misdeal was at
one time a little vexatious. [The Sportsman, report from April 26, 1840]    To hand it to (someone)
acknowledge someone's ability is slang from c.1906. Phrase on the one hand ... on the other hand is
recorded from 1630s, a figurative use of the physical sense of hand in reference to position on one
side or the other side of the body (as in the lefthand side), which goes back to Old English Hands
up! as a command from a policeman, robber, etc., is from 1873. Hand-to-mouth is from c.1500. Hand-
in-hand attested from c.1500 as with hands clasped; figurative sense of concurrently recorded from
1570s.


hand (v.)

c.1400, take charge of, seize, from hand (n.). Meaning to pass (something to someone) is from 1640s.
Related: Handed; handing.


hand job (n.)

1940s, from hand (n.) + job.


hand of glory (n.)

1707, originally a piece of mandrake root, translation of French maindeglorie, from a corruption of
Latin mandragora mandrake (see mandrake). The dead man's hand charm is described from mid-15c., but
not by this name.


hand-basket (n.)

late 15c., from hand (n.) + basket.


hand-car (n.)

1846 in railroading sense, from hand (n.) + car.


hand-grenade (n.)

1660s, from hand (n.) + grenade, which at that time referred to any explosive missile.


hand-made (adj.)

also handmade, 1610s, from hand (n.) + made.


hand-me-down (adj.)

as a modifier, attested by 1826.


hand-out (n.)

also handout, hand out, alms or food given to a beggar, 1882, hobo slang, from hand (v.) + out.
Meaning distributed printed informational matter is from 1927.


hand-spike (n.)

also handspike, 1610s, from hand (n.) + spike (n.).


hand-written (adj.)

also handwritten, 1745, from hand (n.) + written. As a verb, hand-write is recorded from 1878,
probably a back-formation.


handbag (n.)

also hand-bag, 1854, from hand (n.) + bag (n.).


handball (n.)

also hand-ball, 1630s as a type of ball; 1885 as a game, from hand (n.) + ball (n.1).


handbell (n.)

Old English handbelle; see hand (n.) + bell (n.).


handbill (n.)

1753, from hand (n.) + bill (n.1).


handbook (n.)

Old English handboc; see hand (n.) + book (N.). It translates Latin manualis, and was displaced in
Middle English by manual (from French), and later in part by enchiridion (from Greek). Reintroduced
1814, but execrated through much of 19c. as that very ugly and very unnecessary word [Trench].


handcraft (n.)

Old English handcr&aelig;ft manual skill, power of the hand; handicraft; see handicraft.


handcuff (n.)

1640s as a decorative addition to a sleeve; 1690s as a type of restraining device, from hand (n.) +
cuff (n.). Old English had hondcops a pair of hand cuffs, but the modern word is a re-invention. The
verb is first attested 1720. Related: Handcuffed; handcuffing.


handed (adj.)

in compounds, having hands (of a certain type), mid-14c., from hand (n.).


handfast (v.)

betroth, bind in wedlock, mid-12c., from Old English handf&aelig;sten, from hand (n.) + fast (see
fasten). Related: Handfasted; handfasting.


handful (n.)

Old English handful; see hand (n.) + -ful. Originally the quality that can be held in a hand; also a
medieval linear measurement of four inches. Meaning a small portion or part is from c.1400.
Figurative meaning as much as one can manage is from 1755.


handgrip (n.)

Old English handgripe; see hand (n.) + grip (n.).


handgun (n.)

1680s, from hand (n.) + gun (n.).


handhold (n.)

1640s, from hand (n.) + hold (n.1).


handicap (n.)

1650s, from hand in cap, a game whereby two bettors would engage a neutral umpire to determine the
odds in an unequal contest. The bettors would put their hands holding forfeit money into a hat or
cap. The umpire would announce the odds and the bettors would withdraw their hands -- hands full
meaning that they accepted the odds and the bet was on, hands empty meaning they did not accept the
bet and were willing to forfeit the money. If one forfeited, then the money went to the other. If
both agreed either on forfeiting or going ahead with the wager, then the umpire kept the money as
payment. The custom, though not the name, is attested from 14c. (Piers Plowman).  Reference to horse
racing is 1754 (Handy-Cap Match), where the umpire decrees the superior horse should carry extra
weight as a handicap; this led to sense of encumbrance, disability first recorded 1890. The main
modern sense, disability, is the last to develop, early 20c.


handicap (v.)

equalize chances of competitors, 1852, but implied in the horse-race sense from mid-18c., from
handicap (n.). Meaning put at a disadvantage is from 1864. Earliest verbal sense, now obsolete, was
to gain as in a wagering game (1640s). Related: Handicapped; handicapping.


handicapped (adj.)

disabled, 1915, past participle adjective from handicap (v.). Originally especially of children.
Meaning handicapped persons generally is attested by 1958.


handicraft (n.)

Old English handcr&aelig;ft skill of the hand, from hand (n.) + craft (n.). Later h&aelig;ndecraft
(c.1200), perhaps from influence of handiwork.


handily (adv.)

easily, 1610s, from handy + -ly (2). Earlier it meant done by hand (late 14c.).


handiwork (n.)

late 12c., from Old English handgeweorc, from hand (n.) + geweorc, collective form of weorc work
(see work (n.)). Old English ge- regularly reduces to i- in Middle English, and the word probably
came to be felt as handy + work.


handkerchief (n.)

1520s, from hand + kerchief cloth for covering the head. Thus it is a one-word contradiction in
terms. By-form handkercher was in use 16c.-19c. A dropped handkerchief as a token of flirtation or
courtship is attested by mid-18c.


handle (n.)

Old English handle, formed from hand (n.) with instrumental suffix -le indicating a tool in the way
thimble was formed from thumb, spindle from spin, treadle from tread, etc. The slang sense of
nickname is first recorded 1870, originally U.S., from earlier expressions about adding a handle to
(one's) name, i.e. a title such as Mister or Sir, attested from 1833. To fly off the handle (1833)
is a figurative reference to an ax head (to be off the handle be excited is recorded from 1825,
American English). To get a handle on get control of is recorded by 1919.


handle (v.)

Old English handlian to touch or move with the hands, also deal with, discuss; see handle (n.). Akin
to Old Norse h&ouml;ndla to seize, capture, Danish handle to trade, deal, German handeln to bargain,
trade. Related: Handled; handling. Meaning to act towards (someone) in a certain manner (usually
with hostility or roughness) is from c.1200. The commercial sense was weaker in English than in some
other Germanic languages, but it emerged in American English (1888) from the notion of something
passing through one's hands, and see handler.


handlebar (n.)

also handle-bar, 1867 in reference to bicycles, from handle (n.) + bar (n.1). Of mustaches, first
recorded 1933.


handler (n.)

late 14c., one who handles anything, agent noun from handle (v.). Specific sense of one engaged in
trade is from 1690s; that of prizefighter's assistant (1916) was earlier used in reference to
dogfights and cockfights (1825).


handling (n.)

Old English handlung action of touching or feeling, from handlian (see handle (v.)). Meaning way in
which something handles (especially a motor vehicle) is from 1962.


handmaid (n.)

late 14c., from hand (n.) in the sense in close at hand + maid. Compare Old English hand&thorn;egn
personal attendant.


hands-off

also hands off, as an adjective, by 1895. As a command to desist, by 1810.


hands-on

also hands on, as an adjective, by 1969.


handshake (n.)

1801, from hand (n.) + shake (n.). Hand-shaking is attested from 1805.


handsome (adj.)

c.1400, handsom easy to handle, ready at hand, from hand (n.) + -some (1). Sense extended to fair
size, considerable (1570s), then having fine form, good-looking (1580s). Meaning generous (in
handsome reward, etc.) first recorded 1680s.    [Americans] use the word handsome much more
extensively than we do: saying that Webster made a handsome speech in the Senate: that a lady talks
handsomely, (eloquently:) that a book sells handsomely. A gentleman asked me on the Catskill
Mountain, whether I thought the sun handsomer there than at New York. [Harriet Martineau, Society in
America, 1837]    Related: Handsomeness.


handsomely (adv.)

1540s, conveniently, from handsome + -ly (2). Meaning attractively is from 1610s; liberally from
1735.


handwriting (n.)

c.1500, from hand (n.) + writing, translating Latin manuscriptum. Hand in the sense of handwriting,
style of writing is from late 14c.    An ordinary note in his [Horace Greeley's] handwriting is said
to have been used for a long time as a railroad pass, then as a servant's recommendation, and
finally taken to a drug-store as a doctor's prescription. [Frank Leslie's Magazine, August 1884]


handy (adj.)

c.1300, skilled with the hands (implied in surnames), from hand (n.) + -y (2). Meaning conveniently
accessible is from 1640s.


handyman (n.)

1872, from handy + man (n.).


hang (n.)

late 15c., a sling, from hang (v.). Meaning a curtain is from c.1500; that of the way cloth hangs is
from 1797. To get the hang of (something) become capable is from 1834, American English. Perhaps
originally in reference to a certain tool or feat, but, if so, its origin has been forgotten. It
doesn't seem to have been originally associated with drapery or any other special use of hang.
'To get the hang of a thing,' is to get the knack, or habitual facility of doing it well. A low
expression frequently heard among us. In the Craven Dialect of England is the word hank, a habit;
from which this word hang may perhaps be derived. [John Russell Bartlett, Dictionary of
Americanisms, New York, 1848]


hang (v.)

a fusion of Old English hon suspend (transitive, class VII strong verb; past tense heng, past
participle hangen), and Old English hangian (weak, intransitive, past tense hangode) be suspended;
also probably influenced by Old Norse hengja suspend, and hanga be suspended. All from Proto-
Germanic *hangen (intransitive) to hang (cognates: Old Frisian hangia, Dutch hangen, German
h&auml;ngen), from PIE *konk- to hang (cognates: Gothic hahan, Hittite gang- to hang, Sanskrit
sankate wavers, Latin cunctari to delay; see also second element in Stonehenge). As a method of
execution, in late Old English (but originally specifically of crucifixion).   Hung emerged as past
participle 16c. in northern England dialect, and hanged endured only in legal language (which tends
to be conservative) and metaphors extended from it (I'll be hanged). Teen slang sense of spend time
first recorded 1951; hang around idle, loiter is from 1830, and hang out (v.) is from 1811. Hang
fire (1781) was originally used of guns that were slow in communicating the fire through the vent to
the charge. To let it all hang out be relaxed and uninhibited is from 1967.


hang in (v.)

persist in spite of adversity, 1969, see hang (v.) + in.


hang on (v.)

to remain clinging, 1860; as a command to be patient, wait a minute, from 1936, originally in
telephone conversations.


hang out (v.)

c.1400, in literal use; see hang (v.) + out (adv.). Colloquial meaning to be found is recorded from
1811. As a noun (often hangout) residence, lodging attested from 1893.


hang up (v.)

c.1300; hang (v.) + up (adv.); telephone sense by 1911. Noun hang-up psychological fixation is first
attested 1959, from notion of being suspended in one place.


hang-dog (adj.)

also hangdog, 1670s, befitting a hang-dog, a despicable, degraded fellow, so called either from
notion of being fit only to hang a dog (see cutthroat) or of being a low person (i.e. dog) fit only
for hanging. As a noun from 1680s.


hang-glider (n.)

a type of popular flying device, 1971; see hang (v.) + glide (v.). The activity of hang-gliding is
from the same time.


hangar (n.)

1852, shed for carriages, from French hangar shed, probably from Middle French hanghart (14c.),
perhaps an alteration of Middle Dutch *ham-gaerd enclosure near a house [Barnhart], or from Medieval
Latin angarium shed in which horses are shod [Gamillscheg, Klein]. Sense of covered shed for
airplanes first recorded in English 1902, from French use in that sense.


hanged (adj.)

put to death by hanging, late 15c., past participle of hang (v.). As an expletive, from 1887.


hanger (n.)

early 15c., one who hangs (something), especially hangman; agent noun of hang (v.). Meaning
something that is suspended is late 15c. Meaning thing from which something is hung is from 1690s.
Specifically of coat or dress hangers from 1873. Hanger-on is from 1540s.


hanging (n.)

act of putting to death on the gallows, c.1300 (see hang (v.)). Hanging judge first recorded 1848.
Meaning piece of drapery on the wall of a room is late 15c. Hangings curtains, tapestry is from
1640s.


hangman (n.)

public executioner, mid-14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), from hang (v.) + man (n.). As the name of a
spelling game, by 1951. Hangestere female executioner is found mid-15c.


hangnail (n.)

also hang-nail, 1670s, apparently from hang (v.) + (finger) nail, but probably folk etymology from
Old English agnail a corn on the foot, painful spike (in the flesh) from Proto-Germanic *ang-
compressed, hard, painful (from PIE *angh- tight, painfully constricted, painful; see anger) + Old
English n&aelig;gl spike (see nail (n.)).


hangover (n.)

also hang-over, 1894, a survival, a thing left over from before, from hang (v.) + over. Meaning
after-effect of drinking too much is first attested 1904, on notion of something left over from the
night before.


hank (n.)

late 13c., probably from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse honk, hank clasp, hank, related to
hang (v.).


hanker (v.)

c.1600, of unknown origin, probably from Flemish hankeren, related to Dutch hunkeren to hanker, of
unknown origin; perhaps an intensive of Middle Dutch hangen to hang (see hang (v.)). If so, the
notion is of lingering about with longing or craving. Related: Hankered; hankering.


hankering (n.)

mental craving, 1660s, see hanker.


hanky-panky (n.)

also hanky panky, 1841, trickery, British slang, possibly a variant of hoky-poky deception, fraud,
altered from hocus-pocus.


Hannah

fem. proper name, biblical mother of the prophet Samuel, from Hebrew, literally graciousness, from
stem of hanan he was gracious, showed favor.


Hannibal

masc. proper name, name of the Carthaginian general who hounded Rome in the 2nd Punic War, Punic
Hannibha'al, literally my favor is with Baal; first element related to Hebrew hanan he was gracious,
showed favor (see Hannah); for second element see Baal.


Hanoi

city in northern Vietnam, from Vietnamese H&agrave; N&ocirc;i, literally River Inside, from
h&agrave; river + n&ocirc;i inside. So called in reference to its situation in a bend of the Red
River. Known 18c. as Dong Kinh Eastern Capital, which was corrupted by Europeans into Tonkin,
Tonquin, and that name was used in the French colonial period to refer to the entire region and
extended to the gulf to the east.


Hans

masc. proper name, a familiar shortening of German and Dutch Johannes (see John). Used figuratively
for a German or a Dutchman from 1560s.


Hansa

also Hanse, medieval European merchants' guild; see Hanseatic. A member was a Hansard (early 13c. as
a surname).


Hanseatic

1610s, from Hanseatic League, medieval confederation of North German towns, from Medieval Latin
Hanseaticus, from Middle Low German hanse fellowship, merchants' guild, from Old High German hansa
military troop, band, company. Related to Gothic hansa troop, company, multitude, Old English hos
attendants, retinue. Middle English borrowed hanse from Old French hanse and Medieval Latin hansa
(both from Old High German) in sense of a company of merchants (late 12c.). Compare hanshus guild
hall (12c.).


hansom (n.)

two-wheeled, two-person cab, 1847, from James A. Hansom (1803-1882), English architect who designed
such a vehicle c.1834.


Hanukkah

see Chanukah.


hap (n.)

c.1200, chance, a person's luck, fortune, fate; also unforeseen occurrence, from Old Norse happ
chance, good luck, from Proto-Germanic *hap- (source of Old English geh&aelig;p convenient, fit),
from PIE *kob- to suit, fit, succeed (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kobu fate, foreboding, omen, Old
Irish cob victory). Meaning good fortune is from early 13c.


hap (v.)

to happen, mid-14c., from hap (n.) chance.


hapax legomenon (n.)

(plural legomena), word occurring only once, Greek, literally once said, from hapax once +
legomenon, neuter passive present participle of legein to say.


haphazard (adj.)

1570s, from hap chance, luck (see hap) + hazard risk, danger, peril. Related: Haphazardly.


hapless (adj.)

unfortunate, c.1400, from hap (n.) in the sense good luck + -less. Related: Haplessly; haplessness.


haplo-

word-forming element meaning simple, single; simply, once, from comb. form of Greek haplos single,
simple.


haplography (n.)

scribal error of writing only once a letter that should have been written twice; see haplo- +
-graphy.


haploid (adj.)

1908, from German haploid (1905), from Greek haplos single.


haplology (n.)

1895; see haplo- + -logy.


haply (adv.)

late 14c., hapliche, from hap + -ly (2).


happen (v.)

c.1300, to come to pass, occur, originally occur by hap, to have the (good or bad) fortune (to do,
be, etc.); see hap (n.). Replaced Old English gelimpan, gesceon, and Middle English befall. In
Middle English fel it hap meant it happened. Related: Happened; happening.


happening (n.)

mid-15c., chance, luck, from present participle of happen; meaning occurrence is 1550s. Sense of
spontaneous event or display is from 1959 in the argot of artists. Happenings events was noted by
Fowler as a vogue word from c.1905.


happenstance (n.)

1897, from happening + ending from circumstance.


happify (v.)

1610s, from happy + -ify. Related: Happified.


happily (adv.)

mid-14c., by chance or accident, from happy + -ly (2). Meaning fortunate, lucky is late 14c.; that
of appropriately is from 1570s. Happily ever after recorded by 1853.


happiness (n.)

1520s, good fortune, from happy + -ness. Meaning pleasant and contented mental state is from 1590s.
Phrase greatest happiness for the greatest number was in Hutcheson (1725).


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


happy hour

early evening period of discount drinks and free hors-d'oeuvres at a bar, first recorded 1961.


happy-go-lucky

also happy go lucky, 1670s as an adverb, haphazard; the adjective, of persons, recorded from 1856.


Hapsburg

European dynasty, from German Habsburg, from the name of a castle on the Aar in Switzerland,
originally Habichtsburg, literally Hawk's Castle.


haptic (adj.)

pertaining to the sense of touch, 1890, from Greek haptikos able to come into contact with, from
haptein to fasten (see apse).


haptics (n.)

1895, from haptic; see -ics.


hara-kiri (n.)

suicide by disembowelment, 1856, from Japanese, literally belly-cutting, the colloquial word for
what is formally called seppuku cut open the stomach; from hara belly + kiri to cut.


haram

see harem.


harangue (n.)

mid-15c., arang, Scottish (in English from c.1600), from Middle French harangue (14c.), from Italian
aringo public square, platform, from a Germanic source ultimately from or including Proto-Germanic
*ring circular gathering (see ring (n.1)). Perhaps it is ultimately from Gothic *hriggs (pronounced
hrings), with the first -a- inserted to ease Romanic pronunciation of Germanic hr- (see hamper
(n.)). But Barnhart suggests a Germanic compound, hari-hring circular gathering, literally army-
ring.


harangue (v.)

1650s, from French haranguer, from Middle French harangue (see harangue (n.)). Related: Harangued;
haranguing.


harass (v.)

1610s, from French harasser tire out, vex, possibly from Old French harer set a dog on, and perhaps
blended with Old French harier to harry, draw, drag [Barnhart]. Originally to lay waste, devastate,
sense of distress is from 1650s. Related: Harassed; harassing.


harassment (n.)

1753, from harass + -ment.


harbinger (n.)

late 15c., herbengar one sent ahead to arrange lodgings (for a monarch, an army, etc.), alteration
of Middle English herberger provider of shelter, innkeeper (late 12c.), from Old French herbergeor,
from herbergier provide lodging, from herber lodging, shelter, from Frankish *heriberga lodging,
inn, from Germanic compound *harja-bergaz, literally army hill  (cognate with Old Saxon, Old High
German heriberga army shelter) from *heri army (see harry (v.)) + berga shelter (see barrow (n.2)).
Compare harbor (n.). Sense of forerunner is mid-16c. Intrusive -n- is 15c. (see messenger). As a
verb, from 1640s (harbinge to lodge is late 15c.).


harbor (n.)

lodging for ships, early 12c., probably from Old English herebeorg lodgings, quarters, from here
army, host (see harry) + beorg refuge, shelter (related to beorgan save, preserve; see bury);
perhaps modeled on Old Norse herbergi room, lodgings, quarters. Sense shifted in Middle English to
refuge, lodgings, then to place of shelter for ships.


harbor (v.)

Old English hereborgian, cognate with Old Norse herbergja, Old High German heribergon, Middle Dutch
herbergen; see harbor (n.). Figuratively, of thoughts, etc., from late 14c. Related: Harbored;
harboring.


harbour

chiefly British English spelling of harbor (n. and v.); for spelling, see -or.


hard (adj.)

Old English heard solid, firm, not soft, also severe, rigorous, cruel, from Proto-Germanic *hardu-
(cognates: Old Saxon and Dutch hard, Old Norse har&eth;r hard, Old High German harto extremely,
very, German hart, Gothic hardus hard), from PIE *kortu- (cognates: Greek kratos strength, kratys
strong), from root *kar-/*ker- hard. Meaning difficult to do is from c.1200. The adverb sense was
also present in Old English.  Hard of hearing preserves obsolete Middle English sense of having
difficulty in doing something. Hard liquor is 1879, American English (hard drink is from 1810; hard
cider is from 1789), and this probably led to hard drugs (1955). Hard facts is from 1887; hard news
is from 1938. Hard copy (as opposed to computer record) is from 1964; hard disk is from 1978. Hard
up (1610s) is originally nautical, of steering (slang sense of short of money is from 1821), as is
hard and fast (1680s), of a ship on shore. Hard times period of poverty is from 1705.   Hard money
(1706) is specie, as opposed to paper. Hence 19c. U.S. hard (n.) one who advocates the use of
metallic money as the national currency (1844). To play hard to get is from 1945. Hard rock as a pop
music style recorded from 1967.


hard hat

also hardhat, hard-hat, late 14c., helmet; 1935, derby hat; meaning safety helmet is from 1953; used
figuratively for construction worker from 1970.


hard on (n.)

penile erection, 1893, from hard + on.


hard-bitten (adj.)

tough, tough in a fight, literally given to hard biting, 1715, originally of dogs, from hard +
bitten, with the past participle used actively (as in ill-spoken).


hard-boiled (adj.)

also hardboiled, 1723 in reference to eggs, from hard + boiled. In transferred sense severe, tough,
from 1886.


hard-headed (adj.)

also hardheaded, 1580s, stubborn, from hardhead dull person (1510s), from hard + head (n.). Meaning
practical is attested from 1779.


hard-hearted (adj.)

also hardhearted, obdurate, unfeeling, late 12c. (implied in heard-heortnesse hard-heartedness);
from hard + hearted. Sometimes in Middle English also meaning bold, courageous (15c.). Related:
Hard-heartedly; hard-heartedness. Hard-heart hard-hearted person was in late Old English.


hard-line (adj.)

1958, originally in reference to Soviet communist policies, from hard + line (n.) in the political
sense. Related: Hard-liner (1963).


hard-nosed (adj.)

stubborn, 1927, from hard + nose (n.). Earlier of bullets or shells with hard tips, and of dogs that
had difficulty following a scent. Not in common use before 1950s, when it begins to be used of tough
or relentless characters generally (Damon Runyon characters, U.S. Marines, Princeton professors,
etc.). Soft-nosed seems to have been used only of bullets.


hard-wired (adj.)

also hardwired, 1969, in computing; transferred to human brains from 1971; from hard + wired.


hard-working (adj.)

also hardworking, 1774, from hard + working (see work (v.)).


hardback (n.)

type of book bound in stiff boards, 1954, from hard + back (n.).


hardball (n.)

1883 as the name of a game, from hard + ball (n.1). The figurative sense of tough, uncompromising
behavior is from 1973.


hardcore

also hard-core; 1936 (n.); 1951 (adj.); from hard + core. Original use seems to be among economists
and sociologists. Extension to pornography is attested by 1966. Also the name of a surfacing
material.


harden (n.)

c.1200 (replacing Old English heardian) to make (something) hard, from hard + -en (1). Meaning to
become hard is late 14c. Related: Hardened (figurative sense of unfeeling is from late 14c.);
hardening.


hardener (n.)

1610s, from harden + -er (1).


hardly (adv.)

c.1200, in a hard manner, with great exertion or effort, from Old English heardlic stern, severe,
harsh; bold, warlike (see hard + -ly (2)). Hence assuredly, certainly (early 14c.). Main modern
sense of barely, just (1540s) reverses this, via the intermediate meaning not easily, with trouble
(early 15c.). Formerly with superficial negative (not hardly).


hardness (n.)

Old English heardnysse; see hard + -ness. Meaning difficulty of action or accomplishment is late
14c.


hardscrabble (adj.)

1804, U.S. colloquial, the name of an imaginary barren place where a livelihood may be obtained only
under great hardship and difficulty; from hard + scrabble. First recorded in journals of Lewis and
Clark. Perhaps the original notion is vigorous effort made under great stress, though this sense is
recorded slightly later (1812).


hardship (n.)

c.1200, quality of being hard, from hard + -ship. Meaning disadvantage, suffering, privation is
c.1400.


hardtack (n.)

1836, ship's biscuit, from hard (adj.) + tack (n.3); soft-tack was soft wheaten bread.


hardware (n.)

mid-15c., small metal goods, from hard + ware (n.). In the sense of physical components of a
computer it dates from 1947. Hardware store attested by 1789.


hardwood (n.)

1560s, from hard + wood. From deciduous trees, distinguished from that of pines and firs.


hardy (adj.)

c.1200, bold, daring, fearless, from Old French hardi, from past participle of hardir to harden, be
or make bold, from Frankish *hardjan to make hard (cognates: Old Frisian herda, Old High German
herten, Old Norse her&eth;a, Gothic gahardjan make hard), from Proto-Germanic *hardu- (see hard).
Sense influenced by English hard. Related: Hardily; hardiness. Hardhede physical hardiness is
attested from early 15c.


hare (n.)

Old English hara hare, from West Germanic *hasan- (cognates: Old Frisian hasa, Middle Dutch haese,
Dutch haas, Old High German haso, German Hase), possibly with a sense of gray (compare Old English
hasu, Old High German hasan gray), from PIE *kas- gray (cognates: Latin canus white, gray, gray-
haired). Perhaps cognate with Sanskrit sasah, Afghan soe, Welsh ceinach hare. Rabbits burrow in the
ground; hares do not. Hare-lip is from 1560s.&thorn;ou hast a crokyd tunge heldyng wyth hownd and
wyth hare. [Jacob's Well, c.1440]


hare (v.)

to harry, harass, 1520s; meaning to frighten is 1650s; of uncertain origin; connections have been
suggested to harry (v.) and to hare (n.). Related: Hared; haring.


Hare Krishna

1968, title of a Hindu chant or mantra, from Hindi hare O God! + Krishna, name of an incarnation of
the god Vishnu.


hare-brained (adj.)

also harebrained, 1550s, from hare-brain giddy or reckless person (1540s), probably from hare, on
notion of flighty, skittish.


harem (n.)

1630s, from Turkish harem, from Arabic haram wives and concubines, originally women's quarters,
literally something forbidden or kept safe, from root of harama he guarded, forbade.


hark (v.)

late 12c., from Old English *heorcian, perhaps an intensive form from base of hieran (see hear).
Compare talk/tale. Cognate with Old Frisian harkia listen, Middle Dutch horken, Old High German
horechon, German horchen. To hark back (1829) originally referred to hounds returning along a track
when the scent has been lost, till they find it again. Related: Harked; harking.


harken

variant of hearken.


Harleian

1744, from Latinized form of surname of Robert Harley, Earl of Oxford (1661-1724) and his son
Edward, in reference to the library of books and MSS they collected and sold in 1753 to the British
Museum.


Harlem

Manhattan district, used figuratively for African-American culture from 1934. The N.Y. community was
founded 1658 and originally named Nieuw Haarlem for Haarlem in Netherlands, which probably is from
Dutch haar height + lem silt, in reference to its position on a slight elevation on the banks of the
Spaarne River.


Harlemite

1890, from Harlem + -ite (1).


harlequin (n.)

1580s, from Middle French harlequin, from Old French Herlequin, Hellequin, etc., leader of la
maisnie Hellequin, a troop of demons who rode the night air on horses. He corresponds to Old English
Herla cyning King Herla, mythical character sometimes identified as Woden; possibly also the same as
the German Erlk&ouml;nig Elf King of the Goethe poem. Sometimes also associated with Herrequin, 9c.
count of Boulogne, who was proverbially wicked. In English pantomime, a mute character who carries a
magic wand. His Italian form, arlecchino, is one of the stock characters of commedia del'arte. From
his ludicrous dress comes the English adjective meaning particolored (1779).


Harley

type of motorcycle, by 1968, short for Harley-Davidson motorcycle manufacturer founded in Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, U.S., 1905 by engine designer William S. Harley (1880-1943) and Arthur Davidson. The
surname Harley is attested from mid-12c., literally dweller at the hares' wood. Harley Street in
London from the 1830s was associated with eminent physicians and used metonymically for medical
specialists collectively.


harlot (n.)

c.1200 (late 12c. in surnames), vagabond, man of no fixed occupation, idle rogue, from Old French
herlot, arlot vagabond, tramp (usually male in Middle English and Old French), with forms in Old
Proven&ccedil;al (arlot), Old Spanish (arlote), and Italian (arlotto); of unknown origin. Used in
both positive and pejorative senses by Chaucer; applied in Middle English to jesters, buffoons,
jugglers, later to actors. Sense of prostitute, unchaste woman probably had developed by 14c.,
certainly by early 15c., but this was reinforced by use as euphemism for strumpet, whore in 16c.
translations of the Bible. The word may be Germanic, with an original sense of camp follower, if the
first element is hari army, as some suspect.


harlotry (n.)

late 14c., loose, crude, or obscene behavior; sexual immorality; ribald talk or jesting, from harlot
+ -ry.


harm (n.)

Old English hearm hurt, evil, grief, pain, insult, from Proto-Germanic *harmaz (cognates: Old Saxon
harm, Old Norse harmr, Old Frisian herm insult; pain, Old High German harm, German Harm grief,
sorrow, harm), from PIE *kormo- pain.


harm (v.)

Old English hearmian to hurt (see harm (n.)). It has ousted Old English ske&thorn;&thorn;an scathe
in all but a few senses. Related: Harmed; harming.


harmful (adj.)

mid-14c., from harm (n.) + -ful. Related: Harmfully.


harmless (adj.)

c.1300, uninjured, from harm (n.) + -less. Meaning undamaged is from late 14c. Related: Harmlessly;
harmlessness.


harmonic (adj.)

1560s, relating to music; earlier (c.1500) armonical tuneful, harmonious, from Latin harmonicus,
from Greek harmonikos harmonic, musical, skilled in music, from harmonia (see harmony). Meaning
relating to harmony is from 1660s. The noun, short for harmionic tone, is recorded from 1777.


harmonica (n.)

1762, coined by Ben Franklin as the name for a glass harmonica, from Latin fem. of harmonicus (see
harmonic); modern sense of mouth organ is 1873, American English, earlier harmonicon (1825).


harmonics (n.)

1709, from harmonic; also see -ics.


harmonious (adj.)

1540s, in music, from French harmonieux (14c.), from harmonie (see harmony). In nonmusical use from
1630s. Related: Harmoniously; harmoniousness.


harmonium (n.)

keyboard instrument, 1847, from French harmonium, from Greek harmonia (see harmony). Invented
c.1840.


harmonization (n.)

1772, from harmonize + -ation.


harmonize (v.)

late 15c., play or sing in harmony, from French harmoniser (15c.), from Old French harmonie (see
harmony). Meaning be in harmony is from 1620s; that of bring into agreement is from 1727. Related:
Harmonized; harmonizing.


harmony (n.)

late 14c., from Old French armonie harmony, also the name of a musical instrument (12c.), from Latin
harmonia, from Greek harmonia agreement, concord of sounds, also as a proper name, the
personification of music, literally means of joining, used of ship-planks, etc., also settled
government, order, related to harmos fastenings of a door; shoulder, from PIE *ar-ti-, from *ar- to
fit together (see arm (n.1)). Musical sense is oldest in English; that of agreement of feeling,
concord is from late 14c.


harness (n.)

c.1300, personal fighting equipment, body armor, also armor or trappings of a war-horse, from Old
French harnois arms, equipment; harness; male genitalia; tackle; household equipment, of uncertain
origin, perhaps from Old Norse *hernest provisions for an army, from herr army (see harry) + nest
provisions (see nostalgia). Non-military sense of fittings for a beast of burden is from early 14c.
German Harnisch harness, armor is the French word, borrowed into Middle High German. The Celtic
words also are believed to be from French, as are Spanish arnes, Portuguese arnez, Italian arnese.
Prive harness (late 14c.) was a Middle English term for sex organs.


harness (v.)

to put a harness on a draught animal, c.1300, from Old French harneschier, from harnois (see harness
(n.)); figurative sense is from 1690s. Related: Harnessed; harnessing.


Harold

masc. proper name, Old Norse Haraldr, Old Danish, Old Swedish Harald, from Proto-Germanic *harja-
waldaz army commander. For first element, see harry; second element is related to Proto-Germanic
*waldan, source of Old English wealdan (see wield). It shares an etymology with herald.


harp (n.)

Old English hearpe, from Proto-Germanic *harpon- (cognates: Old Saxon harpa instrument of torture;
Old Norse harpa, Dutch harp, Old High German harpfa, German Harfe harp) of uncertain origin. Late
Latin harpa, source of words in some Romanic languages, is a borrowing from Germanic. Meaning
harmonica is from 1887, short for mouth-harp. The harp seal (1784) is so called for the harp-shaped
markings on its back.


harp (v.)

Old English hearpian; see harp (n.). Cognate with Middle Dutch, Dutch harpen, Middle High German
harpfen, German harfen. Figurative sense of talk overmuch (about something) first recorded mid-15c.,
originally to harp upon one string. Related: Harped; harping.


harper (n.)

Old English hearpere, agent noun from harp (v.). As a surname, from late 12c.


harpist (n.)

1610s, a hybrid from harp (n.) + -ist.


harpoon (v.)

1774, from harpoon (n.). Related: Harpooned; harpooning. For agent-noun forms, harpooner is from
1726; harpooneer from 1610s.


harpoon (n.)

1610s, from French harpon, from Old French harpon cramp iron, clamp, clasp (described as a mason's
tool for fastening stones together), from harper to grapple, grasp, possibly of Germanic origin; or
from Latin harpa- hook (related to harpagonem grappling hook), from Greek harpe sickle, from PIE
root *serp- (1) sickle, hook. Earlier harping-iron (mid-15c.). Sense and spelling perhaps influenced
by Dutch (Middle Dutch harpoen) or Basque, the language of the first whaling peoples, who often
accompanied English sailors on their early expeditions. Also see -oon.


harpsichord (n.)

1610s, from French harpechorde harp string, from Modern Latin harpichordium (source also of Italian
arpicordo), from harpa (see harp (n.)) + chorda string (see cord). The -s- is unexplained, but it is
attested in the earliest English forms.


harpy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French harpie (14c.), from Greek Harpyia (plural), literally snatchers, probably
related to harpazein to snatch (see rapid). Metaphoric extension to greedy person is c.1400.    In
Homer they are merely personified storm winds, who were believed to have carried off any person that
had suddenly disappeared. In Hesiod they are fair-haired and winged maidens who surpass the winds in
swiftness, and are called Aello and Ocypete; but in later writers they are represented as disgusting
monsters, with heads like maidens, faces pale with hunger, and claws like those of birds. The
harpies ministered to the gods as the executors of vengeance. [American Cyclop&aelig;dia, 1874]


harridan (n.)

1700, one that is half Whore, half Bawd [Dictionary of the Canting Crew]; a decayed strumpet
[Johnson], probably from French haridelle a poore tit, or leane ill-favored jade, [Cotgrave, 1611],
in French from 16c., of unknown origin.


harrier (n.)

1540s, from Middle English hayrer small hunting dog (c.1400), possibly from Middle French errier
wanderer [Barnhart], or associated with hare, which they would have hunted. The hawk genus (1550s)
is from harry (v.), which also is a candidate for the source of the dog name.


Harriet

fem. proper name, the English equivalent of French Henriette, fem. diminutive of Harry.    We think
that gentlemen lose a particle of their respect for young ladies who allow their names to be
abbreviated into such cognomens as Kate, Madge, Bess, Nell, &amp;c.; Surely it is more lady-like to
be called Catharine, Margaret, Eliza, or Ellen. We have heard the beautiful name Virginia degraded
into Jinny; and Harriet called Hatty, or even Hadge. [Eliza Leslie, Miss Leslie's Behaviour Book,
Philadelphia, 1839]


Harris

popular surname, attested from c.1400, from Harry, popular medieval pronunciation of Henry. As a
type of tweed (1892), it is from the name of the southern section of the island of Lewis with Harris
in the Outer Hebrides; originally it referred to fabric produced by the inhabitants there, later a
proprietary name. That place name represents Gaelic na-h-earaidh that which is higher, in comparison
to the lower Lewis. Harrisburg, capital of Pennsylvania, is named for ferryman John Harris
(1727-1791), son of the original European settler.


harrow (n.)

agricultural implement, heavy wooden rake, c.1300, haru, from Old English *hearwa, apparently
related to Old Norse harfr harrow, and perhaps connected with Old English h&aelig;rfest harvest (see
harvest). Or possibly from hergian (see harry).


harrow (v.)

to drag a harrow over, especially in harrowing of Hell in Christian theology, early 14c., from
hergian (see harry). In the figurative sense of to wound the feelings, distress greatly it is first
attested c.1600 in Shakespeare. Related: Harrowed; harrowing.


harrowing (adj.)

extremely distressing, painful, 1799 (implied in harrowingly), from present participle of harrow
(v.).


harrumph

representing the sound of clearing the throat or a disapproving noise, 1918, imitative. Related:
Harrumphed; harrumphing.


harry (v.)

Old English hergian make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder, the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (cognates: Old Frisian urheria lay
waste, ravage, plunder, Old Norse herja to make a raid, to plunder, Old Saxon and Old High German
herion, German verheeren to destroy, lay waste, devastate), from *harjaz an armed force (cognates:
Old English here, Old Norse herr crowd, great number; army, troop, Old Saxon and Old Frisian heri,
Dutch heir, Old High German har, German Heer host, army, Gothic harjis), from PIE root *koro- war
also war-band, hose, army (cognates: Lithuanian karas war, quarrel, karias host, army; Old Church
Slavonic kara strife; Middle Irish cuire troop; Old Persian kara host, people, army; Greek koiranos
ruler, leader, commander). Weakened sense of worry, goad, harass is from c.1400. Related: Harried;
harrying.


Harry

masc. proper name, a familiar form of Henry. Weekley takes the overwhelming number of Harris and
Harrison surnames as evidence that Harry, not Henry, was the Middle English pronunciation of Henry.
Compare Harriet, English equivalent of French Henriette, fem. diminutive of Henri. Nautical slang
Harriet Lane preserved meat (1896) refers to a famous murder victim whose killer allegedly chopped
up her body.


harsh (adj.)

originally of texture, hairy, 1530s, probably from harske rough, coarse, sour (c.1300), a northern
word of Scandinavian origin (compare Danish and Norwegian harsk rancid, rank), related to Middle Low
German harsch rough, raw, German harst a rake; perhaps from PIE root *kars- to scrape, scratch, rub,
card (cognates: Lithuanian karsiu to comb, Old Church Slavonic krasta, Russian korosta to itch,
Latin carduus thistle, Sanskrit kasati rubs, scratches). Meaning offensive to feelings is from
1570s; disagreeable, rude from 1610s.


harshly (adv.)

late 14c., from harsh + -ly (2).


harshness (n.)

late 14c., from harsh + -ness.


hart (n.)

Old English heorot hart, stag, male deer, from Proto-Germanic *herutaz (cognates: Old Saxon hirot,
Old Frisian and Dutch hert stag, deer, Old High German hiruz, Old Norse hj&ouml;rtr, German Hirsch
deer, stag, hart), perhaps from PIE *keru-, extended form of root *ker- (1) horn (see horn (n.)).
Now, a male deer after its fifth year.


hartebeest (n.)

1786, from Afrikaans, from Dutch hertebeest antelope, from hert hart (see hart) + beest beast, ox
(in S.African Dutch steer, cattle), from Middle Dutch beeste, from Old French beste beast (see
beast).


hartshorn (n.)

ammonium carbonate, Old English heortes hornes, from hart + horn (n.). So called because a main
early source of ammonia was the antlers of harts.


harum-scarum

1670s (adv.), probably a compound of obsolete hare (v.) harry + scare (v.), with 'um as a reduced
form of them. As an adjective from 1751; as a noun from 1784.


haruspex (n.)

1580s, from Latin haruspex (plural haruspices) soothsayer by means of entrails, first element from
PIE *ghere- gut, entrail (see yarn); second element from Latin spic- beholding, inspecting, from PIE
*speks he who sees, from root *spek- to observe (see scope (n.1)). The practice is Etruscan.
Related: Haruspical; haruspication.


Harvard

U.S. college named for John Harvard (1607-1638), Puritan immigrant minister who bequeathed half his
estate and 260 books to the yet-unorganized college that had been ordered by the Massachusetts
colonial government. The surname is cognate with Hereward, Old English hereweard, literally army
guard.


harvest (n.)

Old English h&aelig;rfest autumn, period between August and November, from Proto-Germanic *harbitas
(cognates: Old Saxon hervist, Old Frisian and Dutch herfst, German Herbst autumn, Old Norse haust
harvest), from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (cognates: Sanskrit krpana- sword, krpani
shears; Greek karpos fruit, karpizomai make harvest of; Latin carpere to cut, divide, pluck;
Lithuanian kerpu cut; Middle Irish cerbaim cut).    The borrowing of autumn and the use of fall in a
seasonal sense gradually focused the meaning of harvest to the time of gathering crops (mid-13c.),
then to the action itself and the product of the action (after c.1300). Figurative use by 1530s.
Harvest home (1590s) is the occasion of bringing home the last of the harvest; harvest moon (1706)
is that which is full within a fortnight of the autumnal equinox.


harvest (v.)

c.1400, from harvest (n.). Of wild animals, from 1947; of cells, from 1946. Related: Harvested;
harvesting.


harvester (n.)

a reaper, 1590s; agent noun from harvest (v.). Meaning machine for reaping and binding is from 1847.


Harvey

masc. proper name introduced in England by Bretons at the Conquest; from Old French Herv&eacute;,
Old Breton Aeruiu, H&aelig;rviu, literally battle-worthy.


has (v.)

third person singular present indicative of have. Has-been one who has outlived his fame first
recorded c.1600 (as hes-beene).


hasenpfeffer (n.)

1892, from German hasenpfeffer, from Hase hare (see hare) + pfeffer pepper (see pepper).


hash (v.)

1650s, to hack, chop into small pieces, from French hacher chop up, from Old French hache ax (see
hatchet). Hash browns is short for hash browned potatoes (1917), with the -ed omitted, as in mash
potatoes. The hash marks on a football field were so called 1960s, from similarity to hash marks,
armed forces slang for service stripes on the sleeve of a military uniform (1909), which supposedly
were called that because they mark the number of years one has had free food (hash (n.1)) from the
Army; but perhaps there is a connection with the noun form of hatch (v.2).


hash (n.2)

short for hashish, 1959.


hash (n.1)

a stew, 1660s, from hash (v.). Meaning a mix, a mess is from 1735.


hashish (n.)

1590s, from Arabic hashish powdered hemp, literally dry herb, from hashsha it became dry, it dried
up.


Hasidic (adj.)

also Chasidic, 1927, from Hasidim + -ic.


Hasidim

also Chasidim, 1812, adherents of a conservative Jewish religious movement founded 1750 by Rabbi
Israel ben Eliezer Baal Shem Tobh, from Hebrew hasidhim, literally pious ones, plural of hasidh
kind, pious. Earlier used in Hebrew of adherents of an anti-Hellenistic faction during the time of
the Maccabean Wars.


hasp (n.)

Old English h&aelig;pse fastening, clip, with later Old English metathesis of -p- and -s-. Related
to Old Norse hespa hasp, fastening, Middle Dutch, German haspe clamp, hinge, hook, of uncertain
origin.


hassle (n.)

1945, American English, perhaps from U.S. Southern dialectal hassle to pant, breathe noisily (1928),
of unknown origin; or perhaps from hatchel to harass (1800), which may be a variant of hazel, the
name of the plant that furnished switches for whippings. Noted in 1946 as a show biz vogue word.


hassle (v.)

1951, from hassle (n.). Related: Hassled; hassling.


hassock (n.)

Old English hassuc clump of grass, coarse grass, of unknown origin. Sense of thick cushion is first
recorded 1510s, with the likely connection being the perceived similarity of a kneeling cushion and
a tuft of grass.


hast (v.)

archaic second person singular present indicative of have.


hasta la vista

Spanish, literally until the meeting (again), salutation in parting.


hasta luego

Spanish, literally until soon; salutation in parting.


haste (n.)

early 13c., from Old French haste haste, urgency, hastiness (12c., Modern French h&acirc;te), from
Frankish *haifst violence, from Proto-Germanic *haifstiz (cognates: Gothic haifsts strife, Old
English h&aelig;ste violent, vehement, impetuous). To make haste is recorded by 1530s.


haste (v.)

late 13c., from Old French haster (Modern French h&acirc;ter), from haste (see haste). Now largely
superseded by hasten (1560s).


hasten (v.)

1560s, extended form of haste (v.) with -en (1). Related: Hastened; hastening.


hastily (adv.)

c.1300, quickly, from hasty + -ly (2). Meaning without due consideration is 1580s.


Hastings

Old English H&aelig;stingas The Hastings; settlement of the family or followers of a man called
*H&aelig;sta; literally H&aelig;sta's People.    The H&aelig;stingas were an important tribal group
referred to in an 8th cent. Northumbrian chronicle as the gens Hestingorum which seems to have kept
a separate identity as late as the early 11th cent. [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]


hasty (adj.)

mid-14c., speedy, quick, by 1500s replacing or nativizing earlier hastif (c.1300) eager, impetuous,
from Old French hastif speedy, rapid; forward, advanced; rash, impetuous (12c., Modern French
h&acirc;tif), from haste (see haste). Meaning requiring haste is late 14c. (the sense in hasty
pudding, 1590s, so called because it was made quickly); that of rash is from early 15c. Related:
Hastiness. Old French also had a form hasti (for loss of terminal -f, compare joli/jolif, etc.),
which may have influenced the form of the English word.    The termination was doubtless from the
first identified with native -i, -y, from OE -ig; and it is noticeable that the other Teutonic
langs. have formed corresponding adjs. of that type: Du. haastig, Ger., Da., Sw. hastig. [OED]


hat (n.)

Old English h&aelig;t hat, head covering, from Proto-Germanic *hattuz hood, cowl (cognates: Frisian
hat, Old Norse hattr), from PIE root *kadh- cover, protect (cognates: Lithuanian kudas tuft or crest
of a bird, Latin cassis helmet). Now, head covering with a more or less horizontal brim. To throw
one's hat in the ring was originally (1847) to take up a challenge in prize-fighting. To eat one's
hat is said to have been originally To eat Old Rowley's [Charles II's] hat.


hat trick (n.)

1879, originally from cricket, taking three wickets on three consecutive deliveries; extended to
other sports c.1909, especially ice hockey (In an earlier contest we had handed Army a 6-2 defeat at
West Point as Billy Sloane performed hockey's spectacular 'hat trick' by scoring three goals
[Princeton Alumni Weekly, Feb. 10, 1941]). Allegedly because it entitled the bowler to receive a hat
from his club commemorating the feat (or entitled him to pass the hat for a cash collection), but
also influenced by the image of a conjurer pulling things from his hat (an act attested by 1876).
The term was used earlier for a different sort of magic trick:    Place a glass of liquor on the
table, put a hat over it, and say, I will engage to drink every drop of that liquor, and yet I'll
not touch the hat. You then get under the table; and after giving three knocks, you make a noise
with your mouth, as if you were swallowing the liquor. Then, getting from under the table, say Now,
gentlemen, be pleased to look. Some one, eager to see if you have drunk the liquor, will raise the
hat; when you instantly take the glass and swallow the contents, saying, Gentlemen I have fulfilled
my promise: you are all witnesses that I did not touch the hat. [Wit and Wisdom, London, 1860]


hatch (v.1)

to produce young from eggs by incubation, from Middle English hachen (early 13c.), probably from an
unrecorded Old English *h&aelig;ccan, of unknown origin, related to Middle High German, German
hecken to mate (used of birds). Meaning to come forth from an egg is late 14c. Figurative use (of
plots, etc.) is from early 14c. Related: Hatched; hatching.


hatch (n.)

opening, Old English h&aelig;c (genitive h&aelig;cce) fence, grating, gate, from Proto-Germanic
*hak- (cognates: Middle High German heck, Dutch hek fence, gate). This apparently is the source of
many of the Hatcher surnames; one who lives near a gate. Sense of plank opening in ship's deck is
first recorded mid-13c. Drinking phrase down the hatch first recorded 1931.


hatch (v.2)

engrave, draw fine parallel lines, late 14c., from Old French hachier chop up, hack (14c.), from
hache ax (see hatchet). Related: Hatched; hatching. The noun meaning an engraved line or stroke is
from 1650s.


hatchback

type of rear door of an automobile, 1970, from hatch (n.) + back (n.).


hatchery (n.)

1880, from hatch (v.1) + -ery.


hatchet (n.)

c.1300 small ax (mid-12c. in surnames), from Old French hachete, diminutive of hache ax, battle-axe,
pickaxe, possibly from Frankish *happja or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *hapjo-
(cognates: Old High German happa sickle, scythe), from PIE root *kop- to beat, strike (cognates:
Greek kopis knife; Lithuanian kaplys hatchet, kapoti cut small; Old Church Slavonic skopiti
castrate).    In Middle English, hatch itself was used in a sense battle-axe. In 14c., hang up
(one's) hatchet meant stop what one is doing. Phrase bury the hatchet (1794) is from a supposed
Native American peacemaking custom. Hatchet-man was originally California slang for hired Chinese
assassin (1880), later extended figuratively to journalists who attacked the reputation of a public
figure (1944).


hatchling (n.)

1854, from hatch (v.1) + diminutive suffix -ling.


hatchway (n.)

1620s, originally nautical, from hatch (n.) + way (n.).


hate (v.)

Old English hatian to hate, from Proto-Germanic *haton (cognates: Old Saxon haton, Old Norse hata,
German hassen, Gothic hatan to hate), from PIE root *kad- sorrow, hatred (cognates: Avestan sadra-
grief, sorrow, calamity, Greek kedos care, trouble, sorrow, Welsh cas pain, anger). Related: Hated;
hating. French haine (n.), hair (v.) are Germanic. Hate crime attested from 1988.


hate (n.)

Old English hete hatred, spite, from Proto-Germanic *hatis- (cognates: Old Norse hattr, Old Frisian
hat, Dutch haat, Old High German has, German Hass, Gothic hatis; see hate (v.)). Altered in Middle
English to conform with the verb. Hate mail is first attested 1967.


hateful (adj.)

mid-14c., full of hate; late 14c., exciting hate; from hate + -ful. Related: Hatefully; hatefulness.


hater (n.)

late 14c., one who hates, an enemy, agent noun from hate (v.).


hath (v.)

archaic third person singular present indicative of have.


Hathor

goddess of love and joy in ancient Egypt, from Greek Hathor, from Egyptian Het-Hert, literally the
house above, or possibly Het-Heru house of Horus.


hatless (adj.)

mid-15c., from hat + -less.


hatred (n.)

early 13c., from hate + rare suffix -red, from Old English r&aelig;den state, condition, related to
verb r&aelig;dan to advise, discuss, rule, read, guess. See read (v.) and see second element of
kindred and proper names &AElig;&thorn;elr&aelig;d and Alfred.


hatter (n.)

late 14c., from hat + -er (1).


hauberk (n.)

c.1300, from Old French hauberc coat of mail, earlier holberc, from a Germanic source, perhaps
Frankish *halsberg, literally neck-cover (cognates: Old English halsbearh, Old High German
halsberc), from *hals neck (see collar (n.)) + *bergan to cover, protect (see bury).


haught (adj.)

c.1400, haute, high in one's own estimation, haughty, from Old French haut (11c.) main, principal;
proud, noble, dignified; eminent; loud; grand, literally high, from Latin altus high (see old); with
initial h- by influence of Frankish hoh high. Spelling altered 16c. by influence of caught, naught,
etc.


haughtiness (n.)

1550s, from haughty + -ness. Earlier was haughtness (late 15c.).


haughty (adj.)

1520s, an extension of haught (q.v.) high in one's own estimation by addition of -y (2) on model of
might/mighty, naught/naughty, etc. Middle English also had hautif in this sense (mid-15c., from Old
French hautif). Related: Haughtily.


haul (v.)

1580s, hall, variant spelling of Middle English halen (see hale (v.)), representing a change in
pronunciation after c.1200. Spelling with -au- or -aw- is from early 17c. Related: Hauled; hauling.
To haul off pull back a little before striking or otherwise acting is American English, 1802.


haul (n.)

1660s, act of hauling, from haul (v.). Meaning something gained is from 1776, perhaps on notion of
drawing a profit, or of the catch from hauling fishing nets. Meaning distance over which something
must be hauled (usually with long or short) is attested from 1873.


haulage (n.)

1826, from haul + -age.


hauler (n.)

1670s, from haul (v.) + -er (1).


haunch (n.)

early 13c., from Old French hanche (12c.) hip, thigh; haunch, from a Germanic source, perhaps
Frankish *hanka (cognates: Old High German hinkan to limp, ancha leg, literally joint; Middle Dutch
hanke haunch). It is only since the 18th c. that the spelling haunch has displaced hanch [OED].
Related: Haunches.


haunch-bone (n.)

late 14c., from haunch + bone (n.).


haunt (v.)

early 13c., to practice habitually, busy oneself with, take part in, from Old French hanter to
frequent, resort to, be familiar with (12c.), probably from Old Norse heimta bring home, from Proto-
Germanic *haimat-janan, from *haimaz- (see home). Meaning to frequent (a place) is c.1300 in
English. Use in reference to a spirit returning to the house where it had lived perhaps was in
Proto-Germanic, but it was reinforced by Shakespeare's plays, and it is first recorded 1590 in A
Midsummer Night's Dream. Related: Haunted; haunting. Middle English hauntingly meant frequently;
sense of so as to haunt one's thoughts or memory is from 1859.


haunt (n.)

place frequently visited, c.1300, also in Middle English, habit, custom (early 14c.), from haunt
(v.). The meaning spirit that haunts a place, ghost is first recorded 1843, originally in
stereotypical U.S. black speech.


haunts (n.)

place or places one frequents, early 14c.; see haunt (n.).


haut cuisine (n.)

1926, French, literally high(-class) cooking; see haught + cuisine. Usually in italics until 1960s.


hautboy (n.)

1570s, from French hautbois high wood (15c.; see oboe). The high is haut in its secondary sense of
high-pitched. Frequently nativized as hoboy.This Pageaunt waz clozd vp with a delectable harmony of
Hautboiz, Shalmz, Coronets, and such oother looud muzik. [Robert Laneham, 1575]


haute (adj.)

French, literally high, fem. of haut (see haught). Haute bourgeoisie the (French) upper-middle class
is from 1888.


hauteur (n.)

1620s, from French hauteur haughtiness, arrogance, literally height, from Old French hauture (12c.)
height, loftiness; grandeur, majesty, from haut (see haught).


Havana

Cuban capital city, founded 1514 by Diego Vel&aacute;zquez as San Crist&oacute;bal de la Habana St.
Christopher of the Habana, apparently the name of a local native people. The Spanish adjective form
is Habanero. Meaning cigar made in Havana is by 1802.


have (v.)

Old English habban to own, possess; be subject to, experience, from Proto-Germanic *haben-
(cognates: Old Norse hafa, Old Saxon hebbjan, Old Frisian habba, German haben, Gothic haban to
have), from PIE *kap- to grasp (see capable). Not related to Latin habere, despite similarity in
form and sense; the Latin cognate is capere seize. Old English second person singular present
h&aelig;fst, third person singular present h&aelig;f&eth; became Middle English hast, hath, while
Old English -bb- became -v- in have. The past participle had developed from Old English
geh&aelig;fd.    Sense of possess, have at one's disposal (I have a book) is a shift from older
languages, where the thing possessed was made the subject and the possessor took the dative case (as
in Latin est mihi liber I have a book, literally there is to me a book). Used as an auxiliary in Old
English, too (especially to form present perfect tense); the word has taken on more functions over
time; Modern English he had better would have been Old English him (dative) w&aelig;re betere. To
have to for must (1570s) is from sense of possess as a duty or thing to be done (Old English).
Phrase have a nice day as a salutation after a commercial transaction attested by 1970, American
English. Phrase have (noun), will (verb) is from 1954, originally from comedian Bob Hope, in the
form Have tux, will travel; Hope described this as typical of vaudevillians' ads in Variety,
indicating a willingness to perform anywhere, any time.


have-not (n.)

poor person, 1742, from have + not. Have in the sense of one who 'has,' one of the wealthier class
of persons is from the same source. Earliest in translation of Don Quixote:    'A fig for Basilius's
abilities! for, you are worth just as much as you have, and you have just as much as you are worth.
There are but two families in the world, as my grandmother used to say; the Have's and the Have-
not's, and she stuck to the former; and now-a-days, master Don Quixote, people are more inclined to
feel the pulse of Have than of Know.' [Don Quixote de la Mancha, transl. Charles Jarvis, London,
1742]


haven (n.)

Old English h&aelig;fen haven, port, from Old Norse h&ouml;fn haven, harbor or directly from Proto-
Germanic *hafno- (cognates: Danish havn, Middle Low German havene, German Hafen), perhaps from PIE
*kap- to seize, hold contain (see have) on notion of place that holds ships, but compare Old Norse
haf, Old English h&aelig;f sea (see haff). Figurative sense of refuge, now practically the only
sense, is c.1200.


haver (n.1)

oats, Northern English, late 13c., probably from Old Norse hafre, from Proto-Germanic *habron-
(cognates: Old Norse hafri, Old Saxon havoro, Dutch haver, Old High German habaro, German Haber,
Hafer). Buck suggests it is perhaps literally goat-food and compares Old Norse hafr he-goat. Haver
is a common word in the northern countries for oats. [Johnson]


haver (n.2)

owner, possessor, late 14c., agent noun from have.


haversack (n.)

1749, from French havresac (1670s), from Low German hafersach cavalry trooper's bag for horse
provender, literally oat sack, from the common Germanic word for oat (see haver (n.1)) + sack
(n.1)).


havoc (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French havok in phrase crier havok cry havoc (late 14c.), a signal to
soldiers to seize plunder, from Old French havot pillaging, looting, related to haver to seize,
grasp, hef hook, probably from a Germanic source (see hawk (n.)), or from Latin habere to have,
possess. General sense of devastation first recorded late 15c.


haw (n.)

enclosure, Old English haga enclosure, hedge, from Proto-Germanic *hag- (cognates: Old Norse hagi,
Old Saxon hago, German Hag hedge; Middle Dutch hage, Dutch haag, as in the city name The Hague). See
hag and hedge. Meaning fruit of the hawthorn bush (Old English) is perhaps short for
*h&aelig;gberie.


haw (v.)

hesitate in speech, 1580s, imitative. Related: Hawed; hawing. The noun in this sense is from c.1600.
Haw-haw style of affected enunciation is from 1841, imitative.


Hawaii

from Hawaiian Hawai'i, from Proto-Polynesian *hawaiki. Said to mean Place of the Gods and be a
reference to Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa. See also sandwich. Related: Hawaiian (1825). First record of
Hawaiian shirt is from 1955.


hawk (n.)

c.1300, hauk, earlier havek (c.1200), from Old English hafoc (W. Saxon), heafuc (Mercian), heafoc,
from Proto-Germanic *habukaz (cognates: Old Norse haukr, Old Saxon habuc, Middle Dutch havik, Old
High German habuh, German Habicht hawk), from a root meaning to seize, from PIE *kap- to grasp
(cognates: Russian kobec a kind of falcon; see capable). Transferred sense of militarist attested
from 1962.


hawk (v.1)

to sell in the open, peddle, late 15c., back-formation from hawker itinerant vendor (c.1400), from
Middle Low German h&ouml;ken to peddle, carry on the back, squat, from Proto-Germanic *huk-.
Related: Hawked; hawking. Despite the etymological connection with stooping under a burden on one's
back, a hawker is technically distinguished from a peddler by use of a horse and cart or a van.


hawk (v.2)

to hunt with a hawk, mid-14c., from hawk (n.).


hawk (v.3)

to clear one's throat, 1580s, imitative.


hawker (n.)

one who hunts with a hawk, Old English hafocere; see hawk (n.) + -er (1). For sense one who sells or
peddles, see hawk (v.1).


hawkish (adj.)

hawk-like, by 1703, from hawk (n.) + -ish. Sense of militaristic is from 1965, from hawk in the
transferred sense.


hawkshaw (n.)

detective, U.S. slang, from name of the detective in The Ticket-of-Leave Man, 1863 play by English
dramatist Tom Taylor (1817-1880); it also was used in the comic strip Hawkshaw the Detective
(1913-1947) by U.S. cartoonist Gus Mager (1878-1956). The surname is attested from late 13c., from a
place name in Lancashire.


hawse (n.)

part of a ship's bow (containing the hawse-holes), late 15c., from Old English or Old Norse hals
part of a ship's prow, literally neck (see collar). Respelled with -aw- late 1500s.


hawser (n.)

large rope used for mooring, towing, etc., late 13c., from Anglo-French haucer, from Old French
halcier, haucier, literally hoister, from Vulgar Latin *altiare, alteration of Late Latin altare
make high, from altus high (see old). Altered in English on mistaken association with hawse and
perhaps haul.


hawthorn (n.)

Old English haga&thorn;orn, earlier h&aelig;gu&thorn;orn hawthorn, white thorn, from obsolete haw
hedge or encompassing fence (see haw) + thorn. A common Germanic compound: Middle Dutch and German
hagedorn, Swedish hagtorn, Old Norse hag&thorn;orn.


hay (n.)

grass mown, Old English heg (Anglian), hieg, hig (West Saxon) grass cut or mown for fodder, from
Proto-Germanic *haujam (cognates: Old Norse hey, Old Frisian ha, Middle Dutch hoy, German Heu,
Gothic hawi hay), literally that which is cut, or that which can be mowed, from PIE *kau- to hew,
strike (cognates: Old English heawan to cut; see hew). Slang phrase hit the hay (pre-1880) was
originally to sleep in a barn; hay in the general figurative sense of bedding (as in roll in the
hay) is from 1903.


hay fever (n.)

also hay-fever, 1829, from hay + fever; earlier it was called summer catarrh.


hayloft (n.)

1570s, from hay + loft (n.).


haymaker (n.)

mid-15c. as the name of an agricultural occupation (hay-making is attested from c.1400); 1910 in the
sense of very strong blow with the fist, from hay + agent noun of make; the punch probably so called
for resemblance to the wide swinging stroke of a scythe. Haymaker punch attested from 1907.


hayrick (n.)

c.1300, from hay + rick.


hayseed (n.)

1570s in the literal sense of grass seed shaken out of hay, from hay + seed (n.). In U.S. slang
sense of comical rustic it dates from 1875. To have hayseed in (one's) hair was a common mid-19c.
way in U.S. to indicate a country person.    The opinion of the court was delivered by Justice Hunt;
the chief justice, in whose hair the Ohio hayseed still lingers, delivering a dissenting opinion
(etc.) [The Chronicle, New York, Nov. 12, 1874]


haystack (n.)

mid-15c., from hay + stack (n.).


Hayward

proper name, from Old English hege-weard guardian of the fence/hedge. His original duties seem to
have been protecting the fences around the Lammas lands, when enclosed, to prevent cattle from
breaking in while the crops grew.


haywire (n.)

soft wire for binding bales of hay, by 1891, from hay + wire (n.). Adjective meaning poorly
equipped, makeshift is 1905, American English, from the sense of something only held together with
haywire, particularly said to be from use of the stuff in New England lumber camps for jury-rigging
and makeshift purposes, so that hay wire outfit became the contemptuous term for loggers with poor
logging equipment [Bryant, Logging, 1913]. Its springy, uncontrollable quality led to the sense in
go haywire (by 1915).


hazard (n.)

c.1300, from Old French hasard, hasart (12c.) game of chance played with dice, possibly from Spanish
azar an unfortunate card or throw at dice, which is said to be from Arabic az-zahr (for al-zahr) the
die. But this is doubtful because of the absence of zahr in classical Arabic dictionaries. Klein
suggests Arabic yasara he played at dice; Arabic -s- regularly becomes Spanish -z-. The -d was added
in French in confusion with the native suffix -ard. Sense evolved in French to chances in gambling,
then chances in life. In English, sense of chance of loss or harm, risk first recorded 1540s.


hazard (v.)

put something at stake in a game of chance, 1520s, from Middle French hasarder to play at gambling
(15c.), from hasard (see hazard (n.)). Related: Hazarded; hazarding.


hazardous (adj.)

1580s, venturesome; 1610s, perilous, from hazard (n.) + -ous or from Middle French hasardeux (16c.).


haze (v.)

subject to cruel horseplay, 1850, American English student slang, from earlier nautical sense of
punish by keeping at unpleasant and unnecessary hard work (1840), perhaps from hawze terrify,
frighten, confound (1670s), from Middle French haser irritate, annoy (mid-15c.), of unknown origin.
Related: Hazed; hazing.    All hands were called to come up and see it rain, and kept on deck hour
after hour in a drenching rain, standing round the deck so far apart as to prevent our talking with
one another, with our tarpaulins and oil-cloth jackets on, picking old rope to pieces or laying up
gaskets and robands. This was often done, too, when we were lying in port with two anchors down, and
no necessity for more than one man on deck as a look-out. This is what is called hazing a crew, and
working their old iron up. [Dana, Two Years before the Mast, 1842]


haze (n.)

1706, probably a back-formation of hazy. Sense of confusion, vagueness is 1797. The English
differentiation of haze, mist, fog (and other dialectal words) is unmatched in other tongues, where
the same word generally covers all three and often cloud as well, and this may be seen as an effect
of the English climate on the language.


hazel (n.)

Old English h&aelig;sl, h&aelig;sel, from Proto-Germanic *hasalaz (cognates: Old Norse hasl, Middle
Dutch hasel, German hasel), from PIE *koselo- hazel (cognates: Latin corulus, Old Irish coll hazel).
Shakespeare (Romeo and Juliet, 1592) was first to use it (in print) in the sense of reddish-brown
color of eyes (in reference to the color of ripe hazel-nuts), when Mercutio accuses Benvolio of
being testy with:Thou wilt quarrell with a man for cracking Nuts, hauing no reason, but because thou
hast hasell eyes.


hazelnut (n.)

Old English h&aelig;selhnutu; see hazel + nut. Similar formation in Dutch hazelnoot, Old High German
hasalnuz, German hasselnusz.


hazing (n.)

brutal initiation of college freshmen, 1848, said to be a Harvard word (This word is used at Harvard
College, to express the treatment which Freshmen sometimes receive from the higher classes, and
especially from the Sophomores -- Collection of College Words and Customs, Boston, 1851); see haze
(v.).


hazmat

also HAZMAT, 1977, condensed from hazardous material(s).


hazy (adj.)

1620s, hawsey, nautical, of unknown origin. Some connect it with German hase hare, an animal which
plays an important part in Germanic folklore, with many supernatural and unlucky aspects in medieval
times (among the superstitions: a dead hare should not be brought aboard a fishing ship, and the
word hare should not be spoken at sea). Another suggestion is Old English hasu, haswe gray. Related:
Hazily; haziness.


he (pron.)

Old English he (see paradigm of Old English third person pronoun below), from Proto-Germanic *hi-
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch he, hi, Dutch hy, Old High German he), from PIE
*ki-, variant of *ko-, the this, here (as opposed to that, there) root (cognates: Hittite ki this,
Greek ekeinos that person, Old Church Slavonic si, Lithuanian &#353;is this), and thus the source of
the third person pronouns in Old English. The feminine, hio, was replaced in early Middle English by
forms from other stems (see she), while the h- wore off Old English neuter hit to make modern it.
The Proto-Germanic root also is the source of the first element in German heute today, literally the
day (compare Old English heod&aelig;g).   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF cellspacing=1
cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><strong>case</strong></td> <td><strong>SINGULAR</strong></td>
<td>-</td> <td>-</td> <td><strong>PLURAL</strong></td> </tr> <tr> <td>-</td>
<td><strong>masc.</strong></td> <td><strong>neut.</strong></td> <td><strong>fem.</strong></td>
<td><strong>(all genders)</strong></td> </tr> <tr> <td><strong>nom.</strong></td> <td>he</td>
<td>hit</td> <td>heo, hio</td> <td>hie, hi</td> </tr> <tr> <td><strong>acc.</strong></td>
<td>hine</td> <td>hit</td> <td>hie, hi</td> <td>hie, hi</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><strong>gen.</strong></td> <td>his</td> <td>his</td> <td>hire</td> <td>hira, heora</td> </tr>
<tr> <td><strong>dat.</strong></td> <td>him</td> <td>him</td> <td>hire</td> <td>him, heom</td> </tr>
</table>   Pleonastic use with the noun (Mistah Kurtz, he dead) is attested from late Old English.
With animal words, meaning male (he-goat, etc.) from c.1300.


he-he

imitative of laughter, Old English.Ha ha and he he getacnia&eth; hlehter on leden and on englisc.
[&AElig;lfric, Grammar, c.1000]


he-man (n.)

especially masculine fellow, 1832, originally among U.S. pioneers, from he + man (n.).


head (n.)

Old English heafod top of the body, also upper end of a slope, also chief person, leader, ruler;
capital city, from Proto-Germanic *haubudam (cognates: Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofu&eth;, Old
Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Haupt, Gothic
haubi&thorn; head), from PIE *kaput- head (cognates: Sanskrit kaput-, Latin caput head).    Modern
spelling is early 15c., representing what was then a long vowel (as in heat) and remained after
pronunciation shifted. Of rounded tops of plants from late 14c. Meaning origin of a river is mid-
14c. Meaning obverse of a coin (the side with the portrait) is from 1680s; meaning foam on a mug of
beer is first attested 1540s; meaning toilet is from 1748, based on location of crew toilet in the
bow (or head) of a ship. Synechdochic use for person (as in head count) is first attested late 13c.;
of cattle, etc., in this sense from 1510s. As a height measure of persons, from c.1300. Meaning drug
addict (usually in a compound with the preferred drug as the first element) is from 1911.    To give
head perform fellatio is from 1950s. Phrase heads will roll people will be punished (1930)
translates Adolf Hitler. Head case eccentric or insane person is from 1979. Head game mental
manipulation attested by 1972. To have (one's) head up (one's) ass is attested by 1978.


head (v.)

to be at the head or in the lead, c.1200, from head (n.). Meaning to direct the head (toward) is
from c.1600. Related: headed, heading. The earliest use of the word as a verb meant behead (Old
English heafdian). Verbal phrase head up supervise, direct is attested by 1930.


head (adj.)

most important, principal, leading, c.1200, from head (n.). Old English heafod was used in this
sense in compounds.


head over heels (adv.)

1771, a curious perversion [Weekley] of Middle English heels over head. Head (n.) and heels have
been paired in alliterative phrases since at least c.1400, and the whole image also was in classical
Latin (per caput pedesque ire).


head shop (n.)

emporium for stoner gear, by 1969 (noted in 1966 as the name of a specific shop in New York City
selling psychedelic stuff), from head (n.) in the drug sense.


head-hunter (n.)

1853, from head (n.) + hunter. Employment sense attested from 1961.


head-on (adv.)

1840, from head (n.) + on.


head-shrinker (n.)

also head-shrinker, 1926 in literal sense, from head (n.) + agent noun from shrink (v.); as U.S.
slang for psychologist, by 1950.


headache (n.)

Old English heafodece; see head (n.) + ache (n.). Colloquial sense of troublesome problem is first
recorded 1934.


headband (n.)

1530s, from head (n.) + band (n.1).


headbanger (n.)

devotee of heavy metal music, 1984, from head (n.) + agent noun from bang (v.).


headbutt

also head-butt, by 1946 (v.), from head (n.) + butt (v.). As a noun, recorded by 1967.


headdress (n.)

also head-dress, 1703, from head (n.) + dress (n.) in the older, more general, sense.


header (n.)

head-first dive or plunge, 1849, from head (n.); as a type of pass or shot with the head in soccer,
by 1906.


heading (n.)

c.1300, a beheading, from present participle of head (v.). Meaning advancing in a certain direction
is from c.1600. Meaning title at the head of a portion of text is from 1849.


headland (n.)

Old English heafod lond strip of land left unplowed at the edge of a field to leave room for the
plow to turn, naturally identified with boundaries; see head (n.) + land (n.). Meaning high cape,
promontory is from 1520s.


headless (adj.)

late Old English, heafedleas; see head (n.) + -less. Late 14c. as rulerless, lacking a leader.
Related: Headlessly; headlessness.


headlight (n.)

1861, originally of ships and locomotives, from head (n.) + light (n.). Related: Headlights, which,
as slang for a woman's breasts, is from 1940s.


headline (n.)

1670s, from head (n.) in sense heading of a book or chapter (c.1200) + line (n.). Originally a
printers' term for the line at the top of a page containing the title and page number; used of
newspapers from 1890, and transferred unthinkingly to broadcast media. Headlinese language peculiar
to headlines is from 1927. Headlines important news is from 1908.


headliner (n.)

1891, one who writes newspaper headlines; 1896 as one who stars in a performance; from headline +
-er (1).


headlong (adv.)

late 14c., in phrase by headlong, from hed head (see head (n.)) + adverbial suffix -ling. Altered by
folk etymology on pattern of sidelong, etc.


headman (n.)

chief man, leader, Old English heafodman; see head (adj.) + man (n.). Cognate with German Hauptmann
captain.


headmaster (n.)

1570s, from head (adj.) + master (n.).


headphone (n.)

1914, from head (n.) +  second element extracted from telephone.


headquarters (n.)

1640s, from head (adj.) + quarters. Headquarter as a verb is recorded from 1903.


headroom (n.)

space above the head, 1851, from head (n.) + room (n.).


heads-up

clever, alert, 1952, from warning cry heads up! (i.e. look up!), attested by 1939.


headsman (n.)

executioner, c.1600, from genitive of head (n.) + man (n.). Used earlier in sense chief, leader
(c.1400).


headstone (n.)

c.1400, cornerstone, from head (adj.) + stone (n.). Meaning upright stone at the head of a grave is
1775, from head (n.).


headstrong (adj.)

determined to have one's way, late 14c., from head (n.) + strong. Compare Old English heafodbald
impudent, literally head-bold. Strongheaded is attested from c.1600.


headwaters (n.)

1530s; see head (n.) + water (n.1).


headway (n.)

c.1300, main road, highway, from Old English heafodweg; see head (adj.) + way (n.). Sense of motion
forward first attested 1748, short for ahead-way; ultimately nautical (see leeway).


heady (adj.)

late 14c., headstrong, hasty, impetuous, from head (n.) + adj. suffix -y (2). First recorded 1570s
in sense of apt to go to the head.


heal (v.)

Old English h&aelig;lan cure; save; make whole, sound and well, from Proto-Germanic *hailjan
(cognates: Old Saxon helian, Old Norse heila, Old Frisian hela, Dutch helen,  German heilen, Gothic
ga-hailjan to heal, cure), literally to make whole (see health). Related: Healed; healing.


heal-all (n.)

native word for panacea, 1570s, from heal + all; applied to various plants since 1853.


healer (n.)

late Old English, one who heals, especially savior, Jesus, agent noun from heal (v.). As a curative
medicine from late 14c.


healing (n.)

restoration to health, Old English h&aelig;ling; see heal. Figurative sense of restoration of
wholeness is from early 13c.; meaning touch that cures is from 1670s.


health (n.)

Old English h&aelig;l&thorn; wholeness, a being whole, sound or well, from Proto-Germanic *hailitho,
from PIE *kailo- whole, uninjured, of good omen (cognates: Old English hal hale, whole; Old Norse
heill healthy; Old English halig,  Old Norse helge holy, sacred; Old English h&aelig;lan to heal).
With Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)). Of physical health in Middle English,
but also prosperity, happiness, welfare; preservation, safety.


healthcare (n.)

also health care, 1940, U.S. government-ese, from health + care (n.).


healthful (adj.)

late 14c., wholesome, curative, saving, from health + -ful. Related: Healthfully; healthfulness.


healthily (adv.)

1630s, from healthy + -ly (2).


healthy (adj.)

1550s, from health + -y (2). Slightly earlier in the same sense was healthsome (1530s). Related:
Healthiness.    It is wrong to say that certain articles of food are healthy or unhealthy. Wholesome
and unwholesome are the right words. A pig may be healthy or unhealthy while alive; but after he is
killed and becomes pork, he can enjoy no health, and suffer no sickness. [Eliza Leslie, Miss
Leslie's Behaviour Book, Philadelphia, 1839]


heap (n.)

Old English heap pile, great number, multitude (of things or persons), from West Germanic *haupaz
(cognates: Old Saxon hop, Old Frisian hap, Middle Low German hupe, Dutch hoop, German Haufe heap),
perhaps related to Old English heah high. Slang meaning old car is attested from 1924. As a
characteristic word in American Indian English speech, a lot, a great deal, by 1832.


heap (v.)

Old English heapian collect, heap up, bring together; from heap (n.). Related: Heaped; heaping.
Compare Old High German houfon to heap.


hear (v.)

Old English heran (Anglian), (ge)hieran, hyran (West Saxon) to hear, listen (to), obey, follow;
accede to, grant; judge, from Proto-Germanic *hauzjan (cognates: Old Norse heyra, Old Frisian hora,
Dutch horen, German h&ouml;ren, Gothic hausjan), perhaps from PIE *kous- to hear (see acoustic). The
shift from *-z- to -r- is a regular feature in some Germanic languages.    For spelling, see head
(n.); spelling distinction between hear and here developed 1200-1550. Old English also had the
excellent adjective hiersum ready to hear, obedient, literally hear-some with suffix from handsome,
etc. Hear, hear! (1680s) was originally imperative, used as an exclamation to call attention to a
speaker's words; now a general cheer of approval. Originally it was hear him!


heard

past tense and past participle of hear, Old English herde.


hearer (n.)

mid-14c., agent noun from hear.


hearing (n.)

perception by ear, early 13c., from present participle of hear. Meaning a listening to evidence in a
court of law is from 1570s.


hearken (v.)

Old English heorcnian, a suffixed form of *heorcian, root of hark; from Proto-Germanic *hausjan (see
hear). Harken is the usual spelling in U.S. and probably is better justified by etymology; hearken
likely is from influence of hear.


hearkening (n.)

Old English heorcnunge harkening, listening, power of hearing (see hearken).


hearsay (n.)

1530s, perhaps mid-15c., from phrase to hear say.


hearse (n.)

c.1300 (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin), flat framework for candles, hung over a coffin, from Old French
herse, formerly herce large rake for breaking up soil, harrow; portcullis, also large chandelier in
a church, from Medieval Latin hercia, from Latin hirpicem (nominative hirpex) harrow, from Oscan
hirpus wolf, supposedly in allusion to its teeth. Or the Oscan word may be related to Latin hirsutus
shaggy, bristly. The funeral display so called because it resembled a harrow; hearse in its sense of
portcullis is not attested in English before 15c. For spelling, see head. Sense extended to other
temporary frameworks built over dead people, then to vehicle for carrying a body, a sense first
recorded 1640s.


heart (n.)

Old English heorte heart; breast, soul, spirit, will, desire; courage; mind, intellect, from Proto-
Germanic *herton- (cognates: Old Saxon herta, Old Frisian herte, Old Norse hjarta, Dutch hart, Old
High German herza, German Herz, Gothic hairto), from PIE *kerd- heart (cognates: Greek kardia, Latin
cor, Old Irish cride, Welsh craidd, Hittite kir, Lithuanian &#353;irdis, Russian serdce heart,
Breton kreiz middle, Old Church Slavonic sreda middle).    Spelling with -ea- is c.1500, reflecting
what then was a long vowel, and remained when pronunciation shifted. Most of the figurative senses
were present in Old English, including intellect, memory, now only in by heart. Heart attack
attested from 1875; heart disease is from 1864. The card game hearts is so called from 1886.


heart-rending (adj.)

also  heartrending, heart rending, 1680s, from heart + present participle of rend. Related: Heart-
rendingly.


heart-throb (n.)

also heartthrob, 1839, from heart (n.) + throb (n.). Of persons who inspire romantic feelings, from
1928.


heartache (n.)

Old English heortece, in the sense of a physical pain; c.1600 in sense of anguish of mind; from
heart + ache. Old English did, however, have heartsarnes grief, literally heart-soreness.


heartbeat (n.)

1850, from heart + beat (n.). From the beginning used as a figure for a very brief time.


heartbreak (n.)

1570s, from heart + break (n.). Related: Heartbreaking.


heartbreaker (n.)

1660s, originally a fetching lock of hair; of persons, from 1863; agent noun from heartbreak.


heartbroken (adj.)

1580s, present participle of heartbreak.


heartburn (n.)

mid-13c., herte-brine lust, later heartburn, indigestion (mid-15c.); also herte-brenning anger,
bitterness (c.1400), also heartburn (mid-15c.). See heart + burn (n.). Also see cardiac for
confusion of heart and stomach.


hearted (adj.)

now used only in combinations, meaning at heart, since c.1200, first attested in hard-hearted; see
heart. Related: heartedly.


hearten (v.)

c.1200, to encourage, from heart + -en (1). A verb formed from figurative sense of heart. Related:
Heartened; heartening.


heartfelt (adj.)

also heart-felt, 1734, from heart + past tense of feel (v.).


heartful (adj.)

devout, earnest, mid-14c., from heart + -ful. Related: Heartfully.


hearth (n.)

Old English heor&eth; hearth, fire, in transferred use house, home, from West Germanic *hertho
burning place (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian herth, Middle Dutch hert, Dutch haard, German
Herd floor, ground, fireplace), from PIE *kerta-, from root *ker- heat, fire (see carbon).


heartily (adv.)

c.1300, from hearty + -ly (2).


heartland (n.)

1904, first recorded in geo-political writings of English geographer H.J. MacKinder (1861-1947),
from heart in figurative sense center, core + land (n.).


heartless (adj.)

Old English heortleas dispirited, dejected; see heart + -less. In Middle English with expanded
senses lacking in courage; foolish; listless; half-hearted; sluggish. Sense of callous, cruel is not
certainly attested before Shelley used it in 1816. Literal meaning lacking a heart, lifeless (mid-
15c.) is rare. Related: Heartlessly; heartlessness.


heartsick (adj.)

despondent, late 14c., from heart + sick. Old English heortseoc meant ill from heart disease.


heartstrings (n.)

late 15c., originally literal, in old anatomy theory the tendons and nerves that brace the heart;
from heart + string (n.). Transferred and figurative sense from 1590s.


heartwarming (adj.)

1899, from heart + present participle of warm (v.).


hearty (adj.)

late 14c., courageous; spirited, zealous; also loyal, faithful; sagacious, wise, from heart + -y
(2). Related: Heartiness.


heat (n.)

Old English h&aelig;tu, h&aelig;to heat, warmth; fervor ardor, from Proto-Germanic *haita- heat
(cognates: Old Saxon hittia, Old Norse hiti, Old Frisian hete, German hitze heat, Gothic heito
fever), from PIE *kaid-, from root *kai- heat. The same root is the source of Old English hat hot
and h&aelig;&eth;a hot weather (see hot).    Meaning a single course in a race, especially a horse
race, is from 1660s, perhaps from earlier figurative sense of violent action; a single intense
effort (late 14c.), or meaning run given to a horse to prepare for a race (1570s). This later
expanded to division of a race or contest when there are too many contestants to run at once, the
winners of each heat then competing in a final race. Meaning sexual excitement in animals is from
1768. Meaning trouble with the police attested by 1920. Heat wave period of excessive hot weather
first attested 1890; earlier in reference to solar cycles.


heat (v.)

Old English h&aelig;tan to heat; to become hot, from Proto-Germanic *haita- (see heat (n.)).
Related: Heated (with many variants in Middle English); heating. Compare Middle Dutch heeten, Dutch
heten, German heizen to heat.


heated (adj.)

in figurative sense agitated, inflamed, 1590s, past participle adjective from heat (v.). Related:
Heatedly.


heater (n.)

c.1500, of persons, agent noun from heat. Of devices, from 1660s. Baseball slang meaning fastball is
attested by 1985.


heath (n.)

Old English h&aelig;&eth; untilled land, tract of wasteland, earlier heather, influenced by Old
Norse hei&eth;r field, from Proto-Germanic *haithiz (cognates: Old Saxon hetha, Old High German
heida heather, Dutch heide heath, Gothic hai&thorn;i field), from PIE *kaito forest, uncultivated
land (cognates: Old Irish ciad, Welsh coed, Breton coet wood, forest).


heathen (n.)

Old English h&aelig;&eth;en not Christian or Jewish, also as a noun, heathen man (especially of the
Danes), merged with Old Norse hei&eth;inn (adj.) heathen, pagan; perhaps literally pertaining to one
inhabiting uncultivated land; see heath + -en (2).    But historically assumed to be from Gothic
hai&thorn;no gentile, heathen woman, used by Ulfilas in the first translation of the Bible into a
Germanic language (as in in Mark vii:26, for Greek); if so it could be a derivative of Gothic
hai&thorn;i dwelling on the heath, but this sense is not recorded. It may have been chosen on model
of Latin paganus, with its root sense of rural (see pagan), or for resemblance to Greek ethne (see
gentile), or it may be a literal borrowing of that Greek word, perhaps via Armenian hethanos [Sophus
Bugge]. Like other basic words for exclusively Christian ideas (such as church) it likely would have
come first into Gothic and then spread to other Germanic languages.


heathenish (adj.)

Old English h&aelig;&eth;enisc; see heathen + -ish.


heathenism (n.)

c.1600, from heathen + -ism. An Old English word for it was h&aelig;&eth;ennes, and a later one was
heathenry (1560s).


heather (n.)

early 14c., hathir, from Old English *h&aelig;ddre, Scottish or northern England dialect name for
Calluna vulgaris, probably altered by heath, but real connection to that word is unlikely [Liberman,
OED]. Perhaps originally Celtic. As a fem. proper name little used in U.S. before 1935, but a top-15
name for girls born there 1971-1989.


heave (v.)

Old English hebban to lift, raise; lift up, exalt (class VI strong verb; past tense hof, past
participle hafen), from Proto-Germanic *hafjan (cognates: Old Norse hefja, Dutch heffen, German
heben, Gothic hafjan to lift, raise), from PIE *kap-yo-, from root *kap- to grasp (see capable).
Related to Old English habban to hold, possess. Intransitive use by c.1200. Meaning to throw is from
1590s. Sense of retch, make an effort to vomit is first attested c.1600. Related: Heaved; heaving.
Nautical heave-ho was a chant in lifting (c.1300, hevelow).


heave (n.)

1570s, from heave (v.).


heaven (n.)

Old English heofon home of God, earlier sky, firmament, probably from Proto-Germanic *hibin-,
dissimilated from *himin- (cognates Low German heben, Old Norse himinn, Gothic himins, Old Frisian
himul, Dutch hemel, German Himmel heaven, sky), perhaps from a PIE root *kem- to cover (also
proposed as the source of chemise). [Watkins derives it elaborately from PIE *ak- sharp via *akman-
stone, sharp stone, then stony vault of heaven].    Plural use in sense of sky is probably from
Ptolemaic theory of space composed of many spheres, but it also formerly was used in the same sense
as the singular in Biblical language, as a translation of Hebrew plural shamayim. Heaven-sent (adj.)
attested from 1640s.


heavenly (adj.)

Old English heofonlic celestial; chaste; see heaven + -ly (1). Meaning beautiful, divinely lovely is
late 14c., often (though not originally) with reference to the celestial music of the spheres;
weakened sense of excellent, enjoyable is first recorded 1874. The heavenly bodies (stars, planets,
etc.) attested from late 14c. Related: Heavenliness.


heavens (n.)

realm of the heavenly bodies, 1670s, from heaven.


heavily (adv.)

Old English hefiglice violently, intensely; sorrowfully; sluggishly, from hefig (see heavy) + -ly
(2).


heaviness (n.)

Old English hefigness heaviness, weight; burden, affliction; dullness, torpor; see heavy + -ness.


heavy (adj.)

Old English hefig heavy, having much weight; important, grave; oppressive; slow, dull, from Proto-
Germanic *hafiga containing something; having weight (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German hebig,
Old Norse hofugr, Middle Dutch hevich, Dutch hevig), from PIE *kap- to grasp (see capable). Jazz
slang sense of profound, serious is from 1937 but would have been comprehensible to an Anglo-Saxon.
Heavy industry recorded from 1932. Heavy metal attested by 1839 in chemistry; in nautical jargon
from at least 1744 in sense large-caliber guns on a ship.    While we undervalue the nicely-balanced
weight of broadsides which have lately been brought forward with all the grave precision of Cocker,
we are well aware of the decided advantages of heavy metal. [United Services Journal, London, 1830]
As a type of rock music, from 1972.


heavy (n.)

mid-13c., something heavy; heaviness, from heavy (adj.). Theatrical sense of villain is 1880.


heavy-duty (adj.)

durable, strong, 1914; see heavy + duty.


heavy-handed (adj.)

also heavyhanded, 1630s, originally weary or clumsy; from heavy (adj.) + handed. Sense of
overbearing is first recorded 1883.


heavyweight

noun and adj., 1857 of horses; 1877 of fighters; from heavy + weight. Figuratively, of importance,
from 1928.


hebdomadally (adv.)

weekly, 1816, pedantic humor, from Latin hebdomas, from Greek hebdomas the number seven; a period of
seven (days), from hepta seven (from PIE *septm; see seven) + -mos, suffix used to form ordinal
numbers, cognate with Latin -mus.


hebdomal (adj.)

1610s, from Latin hebdomalis, from hebdomas (see hebdomally).


Hebe (1)

c.1600, Greek goddess of youth, daughter of Zeus and Hera, wife of Hercules, from Greek hebe youth,
youthful prime, strength of youth (legally, the time before manhood, in Athens 16, in Sparta 18),
from PIE *yeg-wa- power, youth, strength.


Hebe (2)

derogatory word for a Jew, 1932, shortened from Hebrew


hebephrenia (n.)

adolescent insanity, 1886, coined in Modern Latin by German psychiatrist Ewald Escker in 1871, from
Greek hebe youth (see Hebe (1)) + phrene mind (see phreno-).


hebetude (n.)

1620s, from Latin hebetudo, noun of quality from hebes blunt, dull, of unknown origin. Related:
Hebetate (v.); hebetation; hebetudinous.


Hebraic (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French hebraique and directly from Late Latin Hebraicus, from Greek Hebraikos,
from Hebraios (see Hebrew).


Hebraism (n.)

1560s, phrase or construction characteristic of the Hebrew language; see Hebraic + -ism. Meaning a
quality or characteristic of the (biblical) Hebrew people is from 1847.


Hebrew (adj.)

late Old English, from Old French Ebreu, from Latin Hebraeus, from Greek Hebraios, from Aramaic
'ebhrai, corresponding to Hebrew 'ibhri an Israelite, literally one from the other side, in
reference to the River Euphrates, or perhaps simply signifying immigrant; from 'ebher region on the
other or opposite side. The noun is c.1200, the Hebrew language; late 14c. of persons, originally a
biblical Jew, Israelite.


Hebrides

originally Ebudae, Haebudes, of uncertain origin. Apparently a scribal error turned -u- into -ri-.
The Norse name, Su&eth;regar, Southern Islands, is relative to the Orkneys. Related: Hebridean.


Hecate

early 15c., Greek deity, daughter of Perseus and Asteria (said to be originally Thracian), later
identified as an aspect of Artemis, fem. of hekatos far-shooting. Associated since Shakespeare (I
Henry VI, III.ii.64) with witches and sorcery.


hecatomb (n.)

1590s, from Greek hekatombe offering of 100 oxen, but generally a great public sacrifice, from
hekaton one hundred (perhaps from hen, neuter of eis one + *katon hundred) + bous ox. The first
month of the Attic calendar (corresponding to July-August) was Hekatombaion, in which sacrifices
were made.


heck (interj.)

euphemistic alteration of hell, first recorded 1865.


heckle (v.)

early 14c., to comb (flax or hemp) with a heckle; from heckle (n.) or from related Middle Dutch
hekelen. Figurative meaning to question severely in a bid to uncover weakness is from late 18c. Long
applied in Scotland to the public questioning of parliamentary candidates [OED]. Related: Heckled;
heckling.


heckle (n.)

flax comb, c.1300, hechel, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English *hecel or a cognate Germanic word
(such as Middle High German hechel, Middle Dutch hekel), from Proto-Germanic *hakila-, from PIE
*keg- hook, tooth (see hook (n.)).


heckler (n.)

agent noun from heckle (v.); mid-15c., from late 13c., as a surname (Will. le Hekelere). Modern
sense of one from the audience who taunts a public speaker is from 1885. Fem. form hekelstere is
attested from c.1500.


hectare (n.)

1810, from French hectare a hundred ares, formed from Greek hekaton hundred (see hecatomb) + Latin
area vacant piece of ground (see area). A superficial measure containing 100 ares, coined by decree
of the French National Convention in 1795.


hectic (adj.)

late 14c., etik (in fever etik), from Old French etique consumptive, from Late Latin hecticus, from
Greek hektikos continuous, habitual, consumptive (of a disease, because of the constant fever), from
hexis a habit (of mind or body), from ekhein have, hold, continue (see scheme).    The Latin -h- was
restored in English 16c. Sense of feverishly exciting, full of disorganized activity first recorded
1904, but hectic also was used in Middle English as a noun meaning feverish desire, consuming
passion (early 15c.). Hectic fevers are characterized by rapid pulse, among other symptoms. Related:
Hecticness.


hector (n.)

late 14c., a valiant warrior, 1650s as slang for a blustering, turbulent, pervicacious, noisy fellow
[Johnson], Heck for short, both in reference to the provocative character of Hektor, Trojan hero,
oldest son of Priam and Hecuba, in the Iliad. It represents Greek hektor, literally holder, stayer;
an agent noun from ekhein to have, hold, possess (see scheme). The word was used mid-1600s in
reference to London street gangs. As a proper name it is rare in England but used in Scotland to
render Gaelic Eachdonn.


hector (v.)

1650s, from Hector (n.), in reference to his encouragement of his fellow Trojans to keep up the
fight. Related: Hectored; hectoring.


Hecuba

principal wife of Priam in the Iliad, from Greek Hekabe, perhaps a variant of Hecate.


hedge (n.)

Old English hecg, originally any fence, living or artificial, from West Germanic *khagja (cognates:
Middle Dutch hegge, Dutch heg, Old High German hegga, German Hecke hedge), from PIE *kagh- to catch,
seize; wickerwork, fence (cognates: Latin caulae a sheepfold, enclosure, Gaulish caio
circumvallation, Welsh cae fence, hedge). Related to Old English haga enclosure, hedge (see haw).
Figurative sense of boundary, barrier is from mid-14c. Prefixed to any word, it notes something
mean, vile, of the lowest class [Johnson], from contemptuous attributive sense of plying one's trade
under a hedge (hedge-priest, hedge-lawyer, hedge-wench, etc.), a usage attested from 1530s.


hedge (v.)

late 14c., make a hedge, also surround with a barricade or palisade; from hedge (n.). The sense of
dodge, evade is first recorded 1590s. That of insure oneself against loss, as in a bet, by playing
something on the other side is from 1670s, originally with in; probably from an earlier use of hedge
in meaning secure (a debt) by including it in a larger one which has better security (1610s).
Related: Hedged; hedging. The noun in the wagering sense is from 1736.


hedgehog (n.)

mid-15c. (replacing Old English igl), from hedge (n.) + hog (n.); the second element a reference to
its pig-like snout.


hedgerow (n.)

Old English heger&aelig;w; see hedge (n.) + row (n.).


hedonism (n.)

1856, from Greek hedone (see hedonist) + -ism.


hedonist (n.)

1822, in reference to the Cyrenaic school of philosophy that deals with the ethics of pleasure, from
Greek hedonikos pleasurable, from hedone pleasure, related to hedys sweet, cognate with Latin suavis
(see sweet). A hedonist is properly the follower of any ethical system in which some sort of
pleasure ranks as the highest good. The Epicurian identifies this pleasure with the practice of
virtue.


hedonistic (adj.)

1866, from hedonist + -ic. The earlier adjectival form was hedonic (1650s), of or having to do with
the Cyrenaic school of philosophy; by 1901 in psychology.


Hedwig

fem. proper name, German, from Old High German Haduwig, a compound of two words both of which mean
strife, struggle.


hee-haw

also heehaw, first recorded 1815 (as Hiu Haw), probably imitative of sound of donkey's bray (compare
French hinham). As a loud laugh from 1843.


heebie-jeebies (n.)

1923, said to have been coined by U.S. cartoonist Billy De Beck (1890-1942), creator of Barney
Google.


heed (v.)

Old English hedan to heed, observe; to take care, attend, from West Germanic *hodjan (cognates: Old
Saxon hodian, Old Frisian hoda, Middle Dutch and Dutch hoeden, Old High German huotan, German
h&uuml;ten to guard, watch), from PIE *kadh- to shelter, cover (see hat). Related: Heeded; heeding.


heed (n.)

attention, notice, regard, early 14c., apparently from heed (v.). Survives only in literal use and
as the object of verbs (take heed, etc.).


heedful (adj.)

1540s, from heed + -ful.


heedless (adj.)

without regard, 1570s, from heed + -less. Related: Heedlessly; heedlessness.


heel (n.1)

back of the foot, Old English hela, from Proto-Germanic *hanhilon (cognates: Old Norse h&aelig;ll,
Old Frisian hel, Dutch hiel), from PIE *kenk- (3) heel, bend of the knee (source also of Old English
hoh hock).    Meaning back of a shoe or boot is c.1400. Down at heels (1732) refers to heels of
boots or shoes worn down and the owner too poor to replace them. For Achilles' heel only vulnerable
spot see Achilles. To fight with (one's) heels (fighten with heles) in Middle English meant to run
away.


heel (v.2)

to lean to one side, in reference to a ship, Old English hieldan incline, lean, slope, from Proto-
Germanic *helthijan (cognates: Middle Dutch helden to lean, Dutch hellen, Old Norse hallr inclined,
Old High German halda, German halde slope, declivity). Re-spelled 16c. from Middle English hield,
probably by misinterpretation of -d as a past tense suffix.


heel (n.2)

contemptible person, 1914 in U.S. underworld slang, originally incompetent or worthless criminal,
perhaps from a sense of person in the lowest position and thus from heel (n.1).


heel (v.1)

of a dog, to follow or stop at a person's heels, 1810, from heel (n.1). Also see heeled.


heel-tap (n.)

also heeltap, 1680s, one of the bits of leather that are stacked up to make a shoe heel (see heel
(n.1)); meaning bit of liquor left in a glass or bottle first recorded 1780s; the exact connection
is uncertain unless it be the last or final part.


heeled (adj.)

provided with money, 1880, American English Western slang, from earlier sense furnished with a gun,
armed (1866), perhaps from still earlier sense furnish (a gamecock) with a heel-like spur (1560s),
which was still in use 19c.; see heel (n.1).


heeler (n.)

1660s, one who puts heels on shoes and boots, agent noun from heel (n.1). Meaning unscrupulous
political lackey, U.S. slang, 1877, from the notion of one who follows at the heels of a political
boss, no doubt coined with the image of a dog in mind. See heel (v.1).


heft (v.)

to lift, 1660s, from heft (n.). Related: Hefted; hefting.


heft (n.)

mid-15c., weight, heaviness, quality of weight, from heave on analogy of thieve/theft, weave/weft,
etc.; also influenced by heft, obsolete past participle of heave.


hefty (adj.)

1867, from heft + -y (2). Related: Heftiness.


Hegelian (adj.)

1838, pertaining to German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770-1831). As a noun from
1843.


hegemon (n.)

1904, originally with reference to the United States, from Greek hegemon leader (see hegemony).


hegemonic (adj.)

1650s, from Greek hegemonikos related to a leader, capable of command, from hegemon (see hegemony).
Earlier in same sense was hegemonical (1610s).


hegemonism (n.)

1965, in reference to a policy of political domination, on model of imperialism; see hegemony +
-ism.


hegemonist (n.)

one who advocates a political policy of hegemony, 1898, from hegemony + -ist.


hegemony (n.)

1560s, from Greek hegemonia leadership, a leading the way, a going first; also the authority or
sovereignty of one city-state over a number of others, as Athens in Attica, Thebes in Boeotia; from
hegemon leader, from hegeisthai to lead, perhaps originally to track down, from PIE *sag-eyo-, from
root *sag- to seek out, track down, trace (see seek). Originally of predominance of one city state
or another in Greek history; in reference to modern situations from 1860, at first of Prussia in
relation to other German states.


hegira (n.)

1580s, the flight of Muhammad from Mecca to Medina (July 16, 622 C.E.), from which event the Islamic
calendar reckons, from Medieval Latin hegira, from Arabic hijrah departure, from hajara to depart.


heh

mid-15c., originally an exclamation of emotions such as sorrow or surprise. As the sound of a light
laugh, by 1808.


heifer (n.)

Old English heahfore, West Saxon; Northumbrian hehfaro, heffera (plural), of unknown origin, not
found outside English. The first element seems to be heah high, common in Old English compounds with
a sense of great in size. The second element may be related to Old English fearr bull, or to Old
English faran to go (giving the whole a sense of high-stepper); but there are serious sense
difficulties with both conjectures. Liberman offers this alternative:    Old English seems to have
had the word *h&aelig;gfore 'heifer.' The first element (*h&aelig;g-) presumably meant 'enclosure'
(as do haw and hedge), whereas -fore was a suffix meaning 'dweller, occupant' ....    In modern use,
a female that has not yet calved, as opposed to a cow, which has calved, and a calf, which is an
animal of either sex not more than a year old. As derisive slang for a woman, girl it dates from
1835.


heigh-ho

1550s, exclamation to express yawning, sighing, etc.


height (n.)

Old English hieh&thorn;u, Anglian heh&thorn;o highest part or point, summit; the heavens, heaven,
from root of heah high (see high) + -itha, Germanic abstract noun suffix. Compare Old Norse
h&aelig;&eth;, Middle Dutch hoochte, Old High German hohida, Gothic hauhi&thorn;a height. Meaning
distance from bottom to top is from late 13c. Meaning excellence, high degree of a quality is late
14c. The modern pronunciation with -t emerged 13c., but wasn't established till 19c., and heighth is
still colloquial.


heighten (v.)

mid-15c., heightenen to exalt, to honor or raise to high position, from height + -en (1). Related:
Heightened; heightening.


heighth

see height.


Heimlich maneuver (n.)

1975, named for U.S. physician Henry Jay Heimlich  (b. 1920).


Heinie (n.)

also Heine, as a typical name of a German man, 1904, North American slang, from pet form of common
German masc. proper name Heinrich (see Henry). Brought to Europe in World War I by Canadian soldiers
(British soldiers called the adversary Fritz).


heinie (n.)

slang for the buttocks, by 1930s, probably a contraction of hind end.


heinous (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French hainos inconvenient, awkward; hateful, unpleasant; odious (Modern French
haineux), from haine hatred, from hair to hate, from Frankish, from Proto-Germanic *hatjan, related
to *haton (see hate (v.)). Related: Heinously; heinousness.


heir (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French heir, Old French oir heir, successor, from Latin heredem (nominative
heres) heir, heiress (see heredity). Heir apparent (late 14c.) has the French order of noun-
adjective, though it was not originally so written in English. It is the heir of one still alive
whose right is clear. After death the heir apparent becomes the heir-at-law.


heiress (n.)

1650s, from heir + -ess.


heirless (adj.)

c.1400, from heir + -less.


heirloom (n.)

early 15c., ayre lome, a hybrid from heir + loom in its original but now otherwise obsolete sense of
implement, tool. Technically, some piece of property that by will or custom passes down with the
real estate.


Heisenberg

in reference to German physicist Werner Heisenberg (1901-1976), pioneer of quantum mechanics. His
uncertainty principle (deduced in 1927) is that an electron may have a determinate position, or a
determinate velocity, but not both.


heist (v.)

1927 (in heister shoplifter, thief), American English slang, probably a dialectal alteration of
hoist lift, in sense of shoplift, also in older British slang to lift another on one's shoulders to
help him break in. As a noun, from 1936.


held

Old English heold, past tense and p.p. of hold.


Helen

fem. proper name, from French H&eacute;l&egrave;ne, from Latin Helena, from Greek Helene, fem.
proper name, probably fem. of helenos the bright one. Among the top 10 popular names for girl babies
in the U.S. born between 1890 and 1934.


Helena

fem. proper name, Latin form of Helen.


heliacal (adj.)

pertaining to the sun, c.1600, with -al (1) and Greek heliakos of the sun, from helios sun (see
sol). The heliacal year is reckoned from the heliacal rising of Sirius; thus it also is known as the
canicular year.


helical (adj.)

spiral-shaped, 1590s, from Latin helicem (see helix) + -al (1).


Helicon

1520s, from Greek Helikon, mountain in Boeotia, sacred to the Muses, in which arose the fountains of
Aganippe and Hippocrene. Literally the tortuous mountain, from helix (genitive helikos) spiral (see
helix).


helicopter (n.)

1861, from French h&eacute;licopt&egrave;re device for enabling airplanes to rise perpendicularly,
thus flying machine propelled by screws. The idea was to gain lift from spiral aerofoils, and it
didn't work. Used by Jules Verne and the Wright Brothers, the word transferred to helicopters in the
modern sense when those were developed in the 1920s. From Greek helix (genitive helikos) spiral (see
helix) + pteron wing (see pterodactyl). Nativized in Flemish as wentelwiek with rotary vanes.


helio-

word-forming element meaning sun, from Greek helio-, comb. form of helios sun (see sol).


heliocentric (adj.)

1680s, from helio- + -centric.


heliograph (n.)

product of a certain type of engraving process, 1853, from helio- + -graph something written.
Earlier, a description of the sun (1706, implied in heliographic). Heliography (1845 in the
engraving sense) also (1840) was an early term for what came to be called photography.


heliotrope (n.)

plant which turns its flowers and leaves to the sun, 1620s, from French h&eacute;liotrope (14c.) and
directly from Latin heliotropium, from Greek heliotropion, from helios sun (see sol) + tropos turn
(see trope). The word was applied c.1000-1600 in Latin form to sunflowers and marigolds. Related:
Heliotropic.


heliotropism (n.)

1854, from heliotrope + -ism.


heliport (n.)

1948, from helicopter + second element abstracted from airport.


helium (n.)

1868, coined from Greek helios sun (see sol), because the element was detected in the solar spectrum
during the eclipse of Aug. 18, 1868, by English astronomer Sir Joseph N. Lockyer (1836-1920) and
English chemist Sir Edward Frankland (1825-1899). It was not actually obtained until 1895; it was
assumed before that to be an alkali metal, hence the ending in -ium.


helix (n.)

a spiral thing, 1560s, from Latin helix spiral, from Greek helix (genitive helikos), related to
eilein to turn, twist, roll, from PIE *wel-ik-, from root *wel- (3) to turn, revolve (see volvox).


hell (n.)

Old English hel, helle, nether world, abode of the dead, infernal regions, from Proto-Germanic
*haljo the underworld (cognates: f. Old Frisian helle, Dutch hel, Old Norse hel, German H&ouml;lle,
Gothic halja hell) the underworld, literally concealed place (compare Old Norse hellir cave,
cavern), from PIE *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    The English word may be in part from
Old Norse Hel (from Proto-Germanic *halija one who covers up or hides something), in Norse mythology
the name of Loki's daughter, who rules over the evil dead in Niflheim, the lowest of all worlds
(nifl mist). Transfer of a pagan concept and word to a Christian idiom. In Middle English, also of
the Limbus Patrum, place where the Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. awaited the Atonement. Used in the KJV
for Old Testament Hebrew Sheol and New Testament Greek Hades, Gehenna. Used figuratively for state
of misery, any bad experience since at least late 14c. As an expression of disgust, etc., first
recorded 1670s.    Expression Hell in a handbasket is attested by 1867, in a context implying use
from a few years before, and the notion of going to Heaven in a handbasket is from 1853, with a
sense of easy passage to the destination. Hell or high water (1874) apparently is a variation of
between the devil and the deep blue sea. To wish someone would go to hell is in Shakespeare
(Merchant of Venice). Snowball's chance in hell no chance is from 1931; till hell freezes over never
is from 1832. To ride hell for leather is from 1889, originally with reference to riding on
horseback. Hell on wheels is said to be from 1843 in DAS; popularity dates from 1869 in reference to
the temporary workers' towns along the U.S. transcontinental railroad and their vices.


Hell&#039;s Angels

motorcycle club, first attested 1957. They were called Black Rebels in the 1954 film The Wild One.
Earlier the phrase had been used as the title of a film about World War I air combat (1930).


Hell&#039;s Kitchen

disreputable, impoverished New York City neighborhood, the name attested from 1879. The phrase was
used from at least 1866 as an intensive form of Hell.   <b>Hell's kitchen</b> (American), a horrible
slum. Hell's Kitchen, Murderer's Row, and the Burnt Rag are names of localities which form
collectively the worst place in New York. [Albert Barr&egrave;re and Charles G. Leland, A Dictionary
of Slang, Jargon &amp; Cant, 1889]


hell-fired (adj.)

a euphemism for damned attested from 1756. See hellfire.


hell-raiser (n.)

1914 (to raise hell is from 1896), from hell + agent noun from raise (v.).


hellacious (adj.)

1930s, college slang, from hell + fanciful ending (see bodacious).


hellbender (n.)

large salamander of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers, 1812, supposedly so called for its ugliness.


hellbent (adj.)

also hell-bent, 1835, U.S., originally slang, from hell + bent (1).


hellcat (n.)

also hell-cat, volatile woman, c.1600, from hell + cat.


hellebore (n.)

late 14c., from Old French ellebore, from Latin elleborus, from Greek helleboros, perhaps meaning
plant eaten by fawns, from Greek ellos/hellos fawn + bora food of beasts, from bibroskein to eat,
from PIE root *gwere- (4) to swallow (see voracity). Among the ancients, the name given to various
plants of both poisonous and medicinal qualities, reputed to cure madness.


Hellenic (adj.)

pertaining to Greece, 1640s, from Greek Hellenikos, from Hellen a Greek, of unknown origin. Earliest
surviving use is by Homer in reference to a Thessalian tribe.


Hellenism (n.)

c.1600, idiom or expression peculiar to Greek; see Hellenic + -ism. In sense culture and ideals of
ancient Greece, 1865.


Hellenistic (adj.)

1706, of or pertaining to Greece and its culture, from Hellen (see Hellenic) + -istic. Since late
19c., specifically of Greek culture in the few centuries after Alexander.


heller (n.)

former small coin of Austria and Germany, 1570s, from German Heller, from Middle High German haller,
short for haller pfennic penny coined in Hall in Swabia (see dollar).


hellfire (n.)

also hell fire, from Old English hellefyr, in which helle is the genitive case of hell. It
translates Greek gehenna tou pyros, literally fiery hell. Also used in Middle English for erysipelas
(mid-15c.).


hellhole (n.)

the pit of Hell, late 14c., from hell + hole (n.). Meaning unpleasant place is from 1866.


hellhound (n.)

also hell-hound, wicked person; also Cerberus, Old English hellehund; see hell + hound.


hellion (n.)

1846, American English, altered (by association with Hell) from Scottish/northern England dialectal
hallion worthless fellow, scamp (1786), of unknown origin.


hellish (adj.)

1520s, from hell + -ish. Related: Hellishly; hellishness. Earlier in same sense were helli helly
(late 12c.); hellen hellish, infernal (c.1200), with -en (2); and Old English hellic.


hello

1883, alteration of hallo, itself an alteration of holla, hollo, a shout to attract attention, which
seems to go back to at least c.1400. Perhaps from holla! stop, cease. OED cites Old High German
hala, hola, emphatic imperative of halon, holon to fetch, used especially in hailing a ferryman.
Fowler lists halloo, hallo, halloa, halloo, hello, hillo, hilloa, holla, holler, hollo, holloa,
hollow, hullo, and writes, The multiplicity of forms is bewildering .... Popularity as a greeting
coincides with use of the telephone, where it won out over Alexander Graham Bell's suggestion, ahoy.
Central telephone exchange operators were known as hello-girls (1889).Hello, formerly an
Americanism, is now nearly as common as hullo in Britain (Say who you are; do not just say 'hello'
is the warning given in our telephone directories) and the Englishman cannot be expected to give up
the right to say hello if he likes it better than his native hullo. [H.W. Fowler, A Dictionary of
Modern English Usage, 1926]


helluva (adj.)

1910, attempt to represent the casual pronunciation of expression hell of a _____, which is attested
from 1776 (see hell).


helm (n.1)

handle of a tiller, late 13c., from Old English helma rudder; position of guidance, control, from
Proto-Germanic *halbma- (cognates: Old Norse hjalm, Old High German helmo, German Helm handle), from
PIE *kelp- to hold, grasp (see helve).


helm (n.2)

a helmet, c.1200, from Old English helm protection, covering; crown, helmet, and perhaps also from
cognate Old Norse hjalmr, from Proto-Germanic *helmaz protective covering, from PIE *kel- (2) to
cover, to hide (see cell). Italian elmo, Spanish yelmo are from Germanic.


helmet (n.)

mid-15c., perhaps a diminutive of Old English helm protection, covering; crown, helmet (see helm
(n.2)). But Barnhart says from Middle French helmet (Modern French heaume), diminutive of helme
helmet, from the same Germanic source as helm (n.2). Middle English Dictionary points to both
without making a choice. Old English helm never became an active term in the standard vocabulary of
English. [Barnhart]


helmsman (n.)

1620s, from helm (n.1) + man (n.).


helot (n.)

1570s (with a capital -h-) Spartan serf, from Greek Heilotes, plural of Heilos, popularly associated
with Helos, Laconian town reduced to serfdom by Sparta, but perhaps related to Greek halonai be
captured. In extended use by 1820s.


help (v.)

Old English helpan (class III strong verb; past tense healp, past participle holpen) help, support,
succor; benefit, do good to; cure, amend, from Proto-Germanic *helpan (cognates: Old Norse hjalpa,
Old Frisian helpa, Middle Dutch and Dutch helpen, Old High German helfan, German helfen), from PIE
root *kelb- to help (cognates: Lithuanian selpiu to support, help).    Recorded as a cry of distress
from late 14c. Sense of serve someone with food at table (1680s) is translated from French servir to
help, stead, avail, and led to helping portion of food. Related: Helped (c.1300). The Middle English
past participle holpen survives in biblical and U.S. dialectal use.


help (n.)

Old English help (m.), helpe (f.) assistance, succor; see help (v.). Most Germanic languages also
have the noun form, such as Old Norse hjalp, Swedish hj&auml;lp, Old Frisian helpe, Dutch hulp, Old
High German helfa, German Hilfe. Use of help as euphemism for servant is American English, 1640s,
tied up in notions of class and race.A domestic servant of American birth, and without negro blood
in his or her veins ... is not a servant, but a 'help.' 'Help wanted,' is the common heading of
advertisements in the North, when servants are required. [Chas. Mackay, Life and Liberty in America,
1859].  Though help also meant assistant, helper, supporter in Middle English (c.1200).


helper (n.)

mid-14c., agent noun from help (v.). Helpestre a female helper is recorded from c.1400. The Old
English agent noun was helpend.


helpful (adj.)

late 14c., from help (n.) + -ful. Related: Helpfully; helpfulness.


helping (n.)

aid, assistance, late 13c., from present participle of help (v.). Meaning â&euro;&oelig;serving
foodâ&euro;? is from 1824; that of â&euro;&oelig;a portion of foodâ&euro;? is from 1883.


helpless (adj.)

unable to act for oneself, c.1200, from help (n.) + -less. Related: Helplessly; helplessness. In
Middle English and later sometimes also unable to give help, affording no help (late 14c.), but this
was never common.


helpmate (n.)

companion, 1715, altered from helpmeet, a ghost word, from the Biblical translation of Latin
adjutorium simile sibi [Gen. ii:18] as an help meet (i.e. fit) for him (Hebrew 'ezer keneghdo),
which already by 1673 was being printed as help-meet and mistaken for one word.


helpmeet (n.)

as two words in the 1611 Bible, a noun-adjective phrase; hyphenated and mistaken as a modified noun
by 1670s; see helpmate.


helter-skelter (adv.)

also helter skelter, 1590s, perhaps from skelte to hasten, scatter hurriedly, with the first element
there merely for the sake of rhyme. As an adjective from 1785.


helve (n.)

Old English helfe, hielfe handle of an axe or other tool or weapon, from Proto-Germanic *halb-
(cognates: Old Saxon helvi, Middle Dutch helf, Old High German halb handle of an axe, Old High
German helmo tiller); related to halter and helm (1), from PIE *kelp- to hold, grasp. In Middle
English, to holden the axe bi the helve (c.1200) meant to take something by the right end.


Helvetian (adj.)

Swiss, 1550s, from Helvetia terra, Medieval Latin name of Switzerland, from Latin Helvetius
pertaining to the Helvetii, a Celtic people of ancient Gallia Lugdunensis.


hem (n.)

Old English hem a border, especially of cloth or a garment, from Proto-Germanic *hamjam (cognates:
Old Norse hemja to bridle, curb, Swedish h&auml;mma to stop, restrain, Old Frisian hemma to hinder,
Middle Dutch, German hemmen to hem in, stop, hinder), from PIE *kem- to compress. Apparently the
same root yielded Old English hamm, common in place names (where it means enclosure, land hemmed in
by water or high ground, land in a river bend). In Middle English, hem also was a symbol of pride or
ostentation.    If &thorn;ei wer &thorn;e first &thorn;at schuld puplysch &thorn;ese grete myracles
of her mayster, men myth sey of hem, as Crist ded of &thorn;e Pharisees, &thorn;at &thorn;ei
magnified her owne hemmys. [John Capgrave, Life of Saint Gilbert of Sempringham, 1451]


hem (interj.)

late 15c., probably imitative of the sound of clearing the throat. Hem and haw first recorded 1786,
from haw hesitation (1630s; see haw (v.)); hem and hawk attested from 1570s.


hem (v.)

late 14c., to provide (something) with a border or fringe (surname Hemmer attested from c.1300),
from hem (n.). Related: Hemmed; hemming. The phrase hem in shut in, confine, first recorded 1530s.


hematite (n.)

1540s, haematites, from Middle French hematite (16c.), from Latin haematites, from Greek haimatites
lithos bloodlike stone, from haima (genitive haimatos) blood (see -emia). Earlier as emachite (late
14c.).


hemato-

also haemato-, word-forming element meaning blood, from Greek haimato-, comb. form of haima
(genitive haimatos) blood (see -emia).


hematoma (n.)

1826, from hemato- + -oma.


hemi-

word-forming element meaning half, from Greek hemi- half, from PIE root *semi-, which is the source
of Sanskrit sami, Latin semi- (see semi-), Old High German sami- half, and Old English sam-,
denoting a partial or imperfect condition (see sandblind).


hemidemisemiquaver (n.)

1848, from hemi- + demi- + semi- + quaver (n.).


hemisphere (n.)

late 14c., hemysperie, in reference to the celestial sphere, from Latin hemisphaerium, from Greek
hemisphairion, from hemi- half (see hemi-) + sphaira sphere (see sphere). Spelling reformed 16c. Of
the Earth, from 1550s; of the brain, 1804.


hemispheric (adj.)

1580s, from hemisphere + -ic.


hemistich (n.)

half a poetic line, 1570s, from Middle French h&eacute;mistiche, from Latin hemistichium, from Greek
hemistikhion half-line, half-verse, from hemi- half (see hemi-) + stikhos row, line of verse (see
stair).


hemline (n.)

1899, from hem (n.) + line (n.).


hemlock (n.)

a poisonous plant, Old English (Kentish) hemlic, earlier hymlice, hymblice; of unknown origin.
Liberman suggests from root hem- poison, perhaps with the plant name suffix -ling or -ig. As the
name of the poison derived from the plant, c.1600. The North American tree so called from 1776, from
resemblance of its leaves to those of the plant.


hemo-

word-forming element meaning blood, perhaps via Old French hemo-, Latin haemo-, from Greek haimo-,
from haima blood (see -emia).


hemoglobin (n.)

coloring matter in red blood stones, 1862, shortening of h&aelig;matoglobin (1845), from Greek
haimato-, comb. form of haima (genitive haimatos) blood (see -emia) + globulin, a type of simple
protein, from globule, formerly a word for corpuscle of blood.


hemophilia (n.)

1854 (in anglicized form h&aelig;mophily), from German h&auml;mophile, coined 1828 by German
physician Johann Lucas Sch&ouml;nlein (1793-1864), from Greek haima blood (see -emia) + philia to
love (see -philia), here with a sense of tendency to.


hemophiliac

1896 (adj.); 1897 (n.)., from hemophilia. Perhaps modeled on French h&eacute;mophilique (1880).


hemophobia (n.)

1886, from hemo- blood + -phobia fear.


hemorrhage (n.)

c.1400, emorosogie (modern form by 17c.), from Latin haemorrhagia, from Greek haimorrhagia, from
haimorrhages bleeding violently, from haima blood (see -emia) + rhage a breaking, from rhegnynai to
break, burst. Related: Hemorrhagic.


hemorrhage (v.)

by 1882, from hemorrhage (n.). Related: Hemorrhaged; hemorrhaging.    Slang in Reports: B.I.D. for
Brought in Dead and Dotty are, [Mr. Sidney Holland of London Hospital] considers, permissible
expressions, but he draws the line at fitting and h&aelig;morrhaging. Only such terms, he says,
should be used as outside doctors will understand. We would say that on a point of such odiously bad
taste he might have been much more severe. [Lavinia L. Dock, The American Journal of Nursing, 1906]


hemorrhoids (n.)

plural of hemorrhoid; late 14c., emeroudis, from Old French emorroides (13c.), from Latin
h&aelig;morrhoidae, from Greek haimorrhoides (phlebes) (veins) liable to discharge blood, plural of
haimorrhois, from haima blood (see -emia) + rhoos a stream, a flowing, from rhein to flow (see
rheum). Related: Hemmorhoidal.


hemp (n.)

Old English h&aelig;nep hemp, cannabis sativa, from Proto-Germanic *hanapiz (cognates: Old Saxon
hanap, Old Norse hampr, Old High German hanaf, German Hanf), probably a very early Germanic
borrowing of the same Scythian word that became Greek kannabis (see cannabis). As the name of the
fiber made from the plant, by c.1300. Slang sense of marijuana dates from 1940s; though scientific
use for the narcotic derived from hemp dates to 1870.


hempen (adj.)

made of hemp, late 14c., from hemp + -en (2). In many figurative expressions 15c.-19c. it is in
reference to the hangman's noose.


hemstitch (n.)

also hem-stitch, 1821, from hem + stitch. As a verb by 1839. Related: Hemstitched; hemstitching.


hen (n.)

Old English henn, from West Germanic *hannjo (cognates: Old Frisian henn, Middle Dutch henne, Old
High German henna), fem. of *han(e)ni male fowl, cock (source of Old English hana cock), literally
bird who sings (for sunrise), from PIE root *kan- to sing (see chant).    The original masculine
word survives in German (Hahn cock), Swedish, Danish, etc. German also has a generic form, Huhn, for
either gender of the bird. Extension to female of any bird species is early 14c. in English. Hen as
slang for woman dates from 1620s; hence hen party gathering of women, first recorded 1887. To be mad
as a wet hen is from 1823, but the figure was used to indicate other states:    Some, on the
contrary, are viciously opposite to these, who act so tamely and so coldly, that when they ought to
be angry, to thunder and lighten, as one may say, they are no fuller of Heat, than a wet Hen, as the
Saying is; .... [Life of Mr. Thomas Betterton, London, 1710]   <hr />   Orth. Out upon you for a
dastardly Fellow; you han't the Courage of a wet Hen. [A Sermon Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, March
27, 1704]   As wanton as a wet hen is in Scots Proverbs (1813). Among Middle English proverbial
expressions was nice as a nonne hen over-refined, fastidiously wanton (c.1500); to singen so hen in
snowe sing miserably, literally sing like a hen in snow (c.1200). Hen's teeth as a figure of
scarceness is attested by 1838.


hen-house (n.)

1510s, from hen + house (n.). As a place cheifly inhabited by or ruled by women, from 1785.


hence (adv.)

late 13c., hennes, from Old English heonan away, hence, from West Germanic *hin- (see Old Saxon
hinan, Old High German hinnan, German hinnen); related to Old English her here (see here). With
adverbial genitive -s. The modern spelling (mid-15c.) is phonetic, to retain the breathy -s- (see
twice, pence). Original sense is away from here; of time, from late 14c.; meaning from this (fact or
circumstance) first recorded 1580s. Wyclif (1382) uses hennys &amp; &#254;ennys for from here and
there, on both sides.


henceforth (adv.)

late 14c., earlier henne forth (late Old English); see hence + forth.


henceforward (adv.)

late 14c., from hence + forward (adv.).


henchman (n.)

mid-14c., hengestman, later henshman (mid-15c.) high-ranking servant (usually of gentle birth),
attendant upon a king, nobleman, etc., originally groom, probably from man (n.) + Old English
hengest horse, stallion, gelding, from Proto-Germanic *hangistas (cognates: Old Frisian hengst,
Dutch hengest, German Hengst stallion), perhaps literally best at springing, from PIE *kenku-
(cognates: Greek kekiein to gush forth; Lithuanian sokti to jump, dance; Breton kazek a mare,
literally that which belongs to a stallion).    Perhaps modeled on Old Norse compound hesta-ma&eth;r
horse-boy, groom. The word became obsolete in England but was retained in Scottish as personal
attendant of a Highland chief, in which sense Scott revived it in literary English from 1810. Sense
of obedient or unscrupulous follower is first recorded 1839, probably based on a misunderstanding of
the word as used by Scott.


hendeca-

word-forming element meaning eleven, from Latinized form of Greek hendeka eleven, from hen, neuter
of eis one + deka ten (see ten).


hendiadys (n.)

1580s, figure of speech in which two nouns joined by and are used in place of a noun and an
adjective; from Medieval Latin alteration of Greek hen dia duoin one (thing) by means of two. If
this term was used by Greek grammarians it is no longer found in their writings, but it is frequent
among Latin writers.


henge (n.)

1740, noted as a Yorkshire word for structures such as Stonehenge.


Henley

town on the Thames in Oxfordshire, site of annual regatta since 1839. The name is Old English hean-
leage (settlement) at or by the high wood.


henna (n.)

c.1600, dye or cosmetic from the henna plant, from Arabic hinna, name for the small thorny tree
(Egyptian Privet, Lawsonia inermis), the leaves of which are used to make the reddish dye; said to
be of Persian origin. Related: Hennaed (1860).


Hennessey

Irish surname, from O'(h)Aonghusa descendant of Aonghus (one-choice).


henotheism (n.)

1860, from Greek henos, neuter of eis one (from PIE *sem- one, as one) + theism. Devotion to a
single god without asserting that he is the only god. Coined by (Friedrich) Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900), professor of comparative philology at Oxford. Related: Henotheist.


henpecked (adj.)

1670s, an image from hen + peck (v.).  The henpect Man rides behind his Wife, and lets her wear the
Spurs and govern the Reins. [Samuel Butler]  The verb henpeck (1680s) apparently is a back-
formation.


Henrietta

fem. proper name, from French Henriette, fem. diminutive of Henri (see Henry). In late 19c. a type
of light dress fabric.


Henry

masc. proper name, from French Henri, from Late Latin Henricus, from German Heinrich, from Old High
German Heimerich, literally the ruler of the house, from heim home + rihhi ruler. One of the most
popular Norman names after the Conquest.


heortology (n.)

study of religious feasts and calendars, 1900, from Greek heorte feast + -ology. The immediate
source of the English word is in French or German.


hep (1)

aware, up-to-date, first recorded 1908 in Saturday Evening Post, but said to be underworld slang, of
unknown origin. Variously said to have been the name of a fabulous detective who operated in
Cincinnati [Louis E. Jackson and C.R. Hellyer, A Vocabulary of Criminal Slang, 1914] or a
saloonkeeper in Chicago who never quite understood what was going on ... (but) thought he did
[American Speech, XVI, 154/1]. Taken up by jazz musicians by 1915; hepcat addict of swing music is
from 1938. With the rise of hip (adj.) by the 1950s, the use of hep ironically became a clue that
the speaker was unaware and not up-to-date.


hep (2)

cry of those leading pogroms or attacks on Jews in Europe, 1819 in reference to Jewish explusions by
mobs in various German cities in that year (later called the hep-hep riots); perhaps originally the
cry of a goatherd, or of a hunter urging on dogs, but popularly said at the time to be acronym of
Latin Hierosolyma Est Perdita Jerusalem is destroyed, which, as H.E.P., supposedly was emblazoned on
the banners of medieval recruiters for the Crusades who drew mobs that subsequently turned on local
Jewish populations. That such things happened is true enough, but in the absence of evidence the
story about the supposed acronym looks like folk etymology.


hepar (n.)

metallic sulfide, 1690s, from Medieval Latin, from Greek hepar liver (see hepatitis); so called for
its color.


heparin (n.)

substance found in the liver, lungs and other tissues, 1918, from Greek hepar liver (see hepatitis)
+ -in (2).


hepatic (adj.)

late 14c., epatike, from Old French hepatique or directly from Latin hepaticus pertaining to the
liver, from Greek hepatikos, from hepar (genitive hepatos) liver (see hepatitis). As a noun,
medicine for the liver, from late 15c.


hepatitis (n.)

1727, coined from Greek hepatos, genitive of hepar liver, from PIE root *yekwr- (cognates: Sanskrit
yakrt, Avestan yakar, Persian jigar, Latin jecur, Old Lithuanian jeknos liver) + -itis inflammation.


Hephaestus

Greek god of fire and metal-working, Roman spelling of Greek Hephaistos, a pre-Hellenic word of
unknown origin.


Hephzibah

fem. proper name, biblical, from Hebrew Hephtzibah, literally my delight is in her, from hephtzi my
delight (from haphetz to delight, to desire) + bah in her.


Hepplewhite

as a modifier, by 1878, in reference to style of furniture introduced in England by cabinetmaker
George Hepplewhite (d.1786). The proper name is from Heblethwaite, near Sedbergh in the West Riding
of Yorkshire.


hepta-

before vowels hept-, word-forming element meaning seven, from Greek hepta seven (see seven).


heptagon (n.)

1560s, from Middle French heptagon, from Greek heptagonon, from hepta seven (cognate with Latin
septem, Gothic sibun, Old English seofon; see seven) + gonia angle (see knee (n.)). Related:
Heptagonal.


her (objective case)

Old English hire, third person singular feminine dative pronoun, which beginning in 10c. replaced
accusative hie (see he). Cognate with Old Frisian hiri, Middle Dutch hore, Dutch haar, Old High
German iru, German ihr.


her (possessive case)

Old English hire, third person singular feminine genitive form of heo she (see she).


Hera

sister and wife of Zeus, from Greek Hera, literally protectress, related to heros hero, originally
defender, protector.


Heracles

also Herakles, alternate (more classically correct) forms of Hercules.


herald (n.)

late 13c. (in Anglo-Latin); c.1200 as a surname, messenger, envoy, from Anglo-French heraud, Old
French heraut, hiraut (12c.), perhaps from Frankish *hariwald commander of an army, from Proto-
Germanic *harja army (from PIE root *koro- war; see harry) + *waldaz to command, rule (see wield).
The form fits, but the sense evolution is difficult to explain, unless in reference to the chief
officer of a tournament, who introduced knights and made decisions on rules (which was one of the
early senses, often as heraud of armes, though not the earliest in English).


herald (v.)

late 14c., to sound the praises of, from herald (n.). Related: Heralded; heralding.


heraldic (adj.)

1772, on model of French h&eacute;raldique (15c.), from Medieval Latin heraldus (see herald).


heraldry (n.)

art of arms and armorial bearings, late 14c., heraldy, from Old French hiraudie heralds
collectively, from hiraut (see herald (n.)). The spelling with -r- is attested from 1570s (see
poetry, pedantry).


herb (n.)

c.1300, erbe non-woody plant, from Old French erbe grass, herb, plant (12c.), from Latin herba
grass, an herb, herbage, turf. Refashioned after Latin since 15c., but the h- was mute until 19c.
Slang meaning marijuana is attested from 1960s.


herbaceous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin herbaceus, from herba (see herb).


herbage (n.)

late 14c., non-woody plants collectively, from Old French erbage or directly from Medieval Latin
herbagium; see herb + -age.


herbal (adj.)

1610s, from Latin herbalis, from herba (see herb).


herbalist (n.)

1590s; see herbal + -ist. Earlier such a person might have been called herber (early 13c. as a
surname).


Herbert

masc. proper name, introduced in England by the Normans, from Old French Herbert, Latinized from
Frankish *Hari-berct, *Her(e)-bert, literally army-bright; see harry (v.) + bright (adj.).


herbicide (n.)

1888, originally a trademark name, from herb + -cide.


herbivore (n.)

1851, from Modern Latin herbivora (1830) or French herbivore (1748), from Latin herbivorus, from
herba a herb + vorare devour, swallow (see voracity).


herbivorous (adj.)

plant-eating, 1660s, from Modern Latin herbivorus, from Latin herba a herb + vorare devour, swallow
(see voracity).


Herculean (adj.)

1590s, from Hercules + -an.


Hercules

hero, son of Zeus and Alcmene, c.1200 (originally in reference to the Pillars of Hercules), also
Ercules, from Latin Hercles, from Greek Herakles, literally Glory of Hera; from Hera (q.v.) + kleos
glory, renown (see Clio). Used figuratively of strength since late 14c. Vocative form Hercule was a
common Roman interjection (especially me Hercule!) assuredly, certainly.


Hercynian (adj.)

1580s, designating the forest-covered mountains of ancient Germany, from Latin Hercynia (silva)
Hercynian (forest), related to Greek Orkynios drymos, probably from Old Celtic *Perkunya, from PIE
*perq(o)- oak, oak forest, wooded mountain (see fir).


herd (n.)

Old English heord herd, flock, from Proto-Germanic *herdo- (cognates: Old Norse hjor&eth;, Old High
German herta, German Herde, Gothic hairda herd), from PIE *kerdh- a row, group, herd (cognates:
Sanskrit &#347;&#225;rdhah herd, troop, Old Church Slavonic &#269;reda herd, Greek korthys heap,
Lithuanian kerd&#382;ius shepherd). Herd instinct in psychology is first recorded 1908.


herd (v.)

mid-13c., â&euro;&oelig;to watch over or herd (livestock);â&euro;? of animals, â&euro;&oelig;to
gather in a herd, to form a flock,â&euro;? late 14c., from herd (n.). Related: Herded; herding.


herdsman (n.)

Old English heordman, but the word was not common until herd (Old English hierde) in sense  keeper
of domestic animals which go in herds fell from use (see shepherd). See herd (n.) + man (n.).
Intrusive -s- appeared early 15c., on model of craftsman, etc.


here

Old English her in this place, where one puts himself, from Proto-Germanic pronomial stem *hi- (from
PIE *ki- this; see he) + adverbial suffix -r. Cognate with Old Saxon her, Old Norse, Gothic her,
Swedish h&auml;r, Middle Dutch, Dutch hier, Old High German hiar, German hier.    Phrase here today
and gone tomorrow first recorded 1680s in writings of Aphra Behn. Here's to _____ as a toast is from
1590s, probably short for here's health to _____. In vulgar speech, this here as an adjective is
attested from 1762. To be neither here nor there of no consequence attested from 1580s. Here we go
again as a sort of verbal roll of the eyes is attested from 1950. Noun phrase here and now this
present life is from 1829.


hereabout

about this, with regard to this matter, c.1200, from here + about. Meaning in the vicinity, near
here is from early 13c. Hereabouts is from 1590s.


hereafter

Old English her&aelig;fter (adv.) in the future; later on; see here + after. Meaning after death is
mid-14c. As a noun, time in the future, from 1540s. Meaning a future world, the world to come is
from 1702.


hereby

mid-13c., from here + by. Compare Dutch hierbij, German hierbei.


hereditable (adj.)

mid-15c.; see heredity + -able. Related: Hereditability.


hereditament

inherited property, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin hereditamentum, from Latin hereditatem (see
heredity).


hereditary (adj.)

early 15c., hereditarie, from Latin hereditarius, from hereditas (see heredity).


hereditism (n.)

1874; see heredity + -ism.


heredity (n.)

1530s, from Middle French h&eacute;r&eacute;dit&eacute; (12c.), from Latin hereditatem (nominative
hereditas) heirship, inheritance, condition of being an heir, from heres (genitive heredis) heir,
heiress, from PIE root *ghe- to be empty, left behind (source also of Greek khera widow). Legal
sense of inheritable quality or character first recorded 1784; the modern biological sense seems to
be found first in 1863, introduced by Herbert Spencer.


Herefordshire

Old English Herefordscir, from Hereford (958), literally ford suitable for the passage of an army.
Probably so-called in reference to the Roman road passing over the Wye River. Herford in Germany has
the same etymology. As the name for a type of cattle, first bred there, it is attested from 1789.


herein

late Old English herinne; see here + in.


hereof

late Old English; see here + of. Compare Danish hereaf, Swedish h&auml;raf.


hereon

Old English heron; see here + on.


heresiarch (n.)

1620s, from Church Latin haeresiarcha, from Late Greek hairesiarkhes (see heresy + arch-).


heresy (n.)

an opinion of private men different from that of the catholick and orthodox church [Johnson],
c.1200, from Old French heresie (12c.), from Latin h&aelig;resis, school of thought, philosophical
sect, used by Christian writers for unorthodox sect or doctrine, from Greek hairesis a taking or
choosing, a choice, from haireisthai take, seize, middle voice of hairein to choose, of unknown
origin, perhaps from PIE *ser- (5) to seize (cognates: Hittite &#353;aru booty, Welsh herw booty).
The Greek word was used in the New Testament in reference to the Sadducees, Pharisees, and even the
Christians, as sects of Judaism, but in English bibles it usually is translated sect. Meaning
religious belief opposed to the orthodox doctrines of the Church evolved in Late Latin. Transferred
(non-religious) use from late 14c.


heretic (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French eretique (14c., Modern French h&eacute;r&eacute;tique), from Church Latin
haereticus, from Greek hairetikos able to choose, the verbal adjective of hairein (see heresy).


heretical (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French eretical and directly from Medieval Latin haereticalis, from
haereticus (see heretic).


hereto

late 12c., from here + to.


heretofore

c.1200, from here + obsolete Old English toforan.


hereunder

early 15c., from here + under.


hereunto

c.1500, from here + unto.


hereupon

late Old English, from here + upon.


herewith

late Old English herwith; see here + with.


heriot (n.)

Old English here-geatwe (plural) military equipment, army-gear, from here army (see harry). An
Anglo-Saxon service of weapons, loaned by the lord to his retainer and repayable to him upon the
retainer's death; transferred by 13c. to a feudal due upon the death of a tenant, payable to his
lord in beasts.


heritable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French h&eacute;ritable (c.1200), from h&eacute;riter (see heritage). Related:
Heritability.


heritage (n.)

c.1200, that which may be inherited, from Old French iritage, eritage, heritage, from heriter
inherit, from Late Latin hereditare, ultimately from Latin heres (genitive heredis) heir (see
heredity).


Herman

masc. proper name, from German Hermann, from Old High German Hariman, literally man of war, warrior,
from hari host, army (see harry (v.)) + man man (see man (n.)).


hermaphrodism (n.)

1808, from French hermaphrodisme, from hermaphrodite (see hermaphrodite).


hermaphrodite (n.)

late 14c. (harmofroditus), from Latin hermaphroditus, from Greek Hermaphroditos (Latin
Hermaphroditus), son of Hermes and Aphrodite, who, in Ovid, was loved by the nymph Salmacis so
ardently that she prayed for complete union with him and as a result they were united bodily,
combining male and female characteristics. Also used figuratively in Middle English of one who
improperly occupies two offices. As a name for the condition, Middle English had hermofrodito (late
14c.), hermofrodisia (early 15c.). As an adjective, from c.1600.


hermaphroditic (adj.)

1620s, from hermaphrodite + -ic. Earlier form was hermaphroditical (c.1600).


hermeneutic (adj.)

interpretive, 1670s, from Greek hermeneutikos interpreting, from hermeneutes interpreter, from
hermeneuein to interpret, of unknown origin (formerly considered ultimately a derivative of Hermes,
as the tutelary divinity of speech, writing, and eloquence).


hermeneutical (adj.)

1798, from hermeneutic + -al (1). Related: Hermeneutically.


hermeneutics (n.)

1737, from hermeneutic; also see -ics.


Hermes

Olympian messenger and god of commerce, son of Zeus and Maia, identified by the Romans with their
Mercury, from Greek Hermes, of unknown origin.


hermetic (adj.)

c.1600 (implied in hermetically), completely sealed, also (1630s) dealing with occult science or
alchemy, from Latin hermeticus, from Greek Hermes, god of science and art, among other things,
identified by Neoplatonists, mystics, and alchemists with the Egyptian god Thoth as Hermes
Trismegistos Thrice-Great Hermes, who supposedly invented the process of making a glass tube
airtight (a process in alchemy) using a secret seal.


hermetically (adv.)

c.1600; see hermetic.


Hermione

fem. proper name, from Greek Hermione, derived from Hermes (genitive Hermeio).


hermit (n.)

early 12c., religious recluse, from Old French (h)eremite, from Late Latin ermita, from Greek
eremites, literally person of the desert, from eremia desert, solitude, from eremos uninhabited,
empty, desolate, bereft, from PIE *ere- (2) to separate (cognates: Latin rete net, Lithuanian retis
sieve). Transferred sense of person living in solitude is from 1799. The hermit crab (1735) was so
called for its solitary habits.


hermitage (n.)

late 13c., dwelling place of a hermit, from Old French hermitage, from Latin heremite (see hermit).
Earlier in the same sense was hermitorie (c.1200), from Medieval Latin hermitorium. Transferred
sense of solitary or secluded dwelling place is from 1640s.


hernia (n.)

late 14c., hirnia, from Latin hernia a rupture, related to hira intestine, PIE *ghere- gut, entrail
(see yarn). The re-Latinized spelling is from 17c. Related: Herniated (1879).


hernial (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin hernialis, from hernia (see hernia).


herniation (n.)

1875, from hernia + -ation.


hero (n.1)

late 14c., man of superhuman strength or physical courage, from Latin heros hero, from Greek heros
demi-god (a variant singular of which was heroe), perhaps originally defender, protector, and from
PIE root *ser- (1) to watch over, protect (see observe). Meaning man who exhibits great bravery in
any course of action is from 1660s. Sense of chief male character in a play, story, etc. first
recorded 1690s. First record of hero-worship is from 1774.


hero (n.2)

1955, the New York term for a sandwich elsewhere called submarine, grinder, poor boy (New Orleans),
or hoagie (Philadelphia); origin unknown, perhaps so called for its great size, or a folk etymology
alteration of Greek gyro as a type of sandwich.


heroic (adj.)

1540s, shortened from heroical (early 15c.), also heroycus noble, magnanimous, from Latin heroicus
of a hero, heroic, mythical, from Greek heroikos pertaining to heroes, from heros (see hero (n.1)).
Earlier was heroical (early 15c.). The Heroic Age in Greece was the time before the return of the
armies from the fall of Troy. Related: Heroically. Heroic verse (1610s), decasyllabic iambic, is
from Italian.


heroics (n.)

1590s, heroic verse (see heroic). Meaning deeds worthy of a hero attested by 1831.


heroin (n.)

1898, from German Heroin, coined 1898 as trademark registered by Friedrich Bayer &amp; Co. for their
morphine substitute, traditionally from Greek heros (see hero (n.1)) because of the euphoric feeling
the drug provides, but no evidence for this seems to have been found so far.    A new hypnotic, to
which the name of heroin has been given, has been tried in the medical clinic of Professor Gerhardt
in Berlin. [The Lancet, Dec. 3, 1898]


heroine (n.)

1650s, from Latin heroine, heroina (plural heroinae) a female hero, a demigoddess (such as Medea),
from Greek heroine, fem. of heros (see hero (n.1)). As principal female character in a drama or
poem, from 1715.


heroism (n.)

1717, from French h&eacute;roisme, from heros (see hero (n.1)).


heron (n.)

c.1300, from Old French hairon (12c.), earlier hairo (11c., Modern French h&eacute;ron), from
Frankish *haigiro or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *hraigran (cognates: Old High
German heigaro heron, German Reiher, Dutch reiger, Old Norse hegri), from PIE *qriq-, perhaps
imitative of its cry (compare Old Church Slavonic kriku cry, scream, Lithuanian kryksti to shriek).
Old English cognate hraga did not survive into Middle English.


herpes (n.)

late 14c., inflammatory, spreading skin condition (used of shingles, gangrene, etc.), from Latin
herpes a spreading skin eruption, from Greek herpes, the name for the disease shingles, literally
creeping, from herpein to creep (cognate with Latin serpere to creep; see serpent). The condition
was not distinguished into specific diseases until early 19c.


herpetic (adj.)

pertaining to herpes, 1783, from Greek herpes (genitive herpetos); see herpes + -ic.


herpetology (n.)

study of reptiles, 1816, from French herp&eacute;tologie (18c.), coined from Greek herpeton reptile,
literally creeping thing, from herpein to creep (see serpent) + logia (see -logy). Related:
Herpetologist.


Herr

German equivalent of Mr., 1650s, originally nobler, superior, from Middle High German herre, from
Old High German herro, comparative of her noble, worthy, exalted, from PIE *kei-, a color adjective,
in suffixed form *koi-ro- here meaning gray, hoary, hence gray-haired, venerable. Cognate with Old
Frisian hera, Dutch heer; perhaps in this usage a loan-translation of Latin senior. Hence also
Herrenvolk master race, in Nazi ideology, the concept of the German people.


herring (n.)

Old English hering (Anglian), h&aelig;ring (West Saxon), from West Germanic *heringgaz (cognates:
Old Frisian hereng, Middle Dutch herinc, German Hering), of unknown origin, perhaps related to or
influenced in form by Old English har gray, hoar, from the color, or to Old High German heri host,
multitude from its large schools.    French hareng, Italian aringa are from Germanic. The Battle of
the Herrings (French bataille des harengs) is the popular name for the battle at Rouvrai, Feb. 12,
1492, fought in defense of a convoy of provisions, mostly herrings and other lenten stuffe.


herringbone

also herring-bone, 1650s in literal sense and also as a type of stitch, from herring + bone (n.).
From 1905 as a type of cirrocumulus cloud.


hers

c.1300, hires, from her; a double possessive. Possessive pronouns in Modern English consist of the
predicative (mine, thine, his, ours, yours, theirs) that come after the subject, and the attributive
(my, thy, his, her, our, your, their) that come before it. In Old English and early Middle English,
they were identical. To keep speech fluid, speakers began to affix an -n to the end of my and thy
before words that began with vowels. This began late 13c. in the north of England, and by 1500 was
standard.    Then the predicative and attributive pronouns split, and the pronouns in that class
usually took up -s, the regular affix of possession. But the non-standard speech of the Midlands and
south of England extended -n throughout (hisn, hern, yourn), a habit attested from 14c. and more
regular than the standard speech, which mixes -s and -n.


herself

Old English hire self; see her (objective case) + self. Originally dative, but since 14c. often
treated as genitive, hence her own sweet self, etc. Also see himself.


Hertfordshire

Old English Heortfordscir, from Herutford (731), literally ford frequented by harts.


Hertz

unit of frequency equal to one cycle per second, 1928, named in reference to German physicist
Heinrich Hertz (1857-1894).


Herzegovina

former Austrian duchy in the Balkans, from Old Serbian herceg duke (related to Modern German Herzog)
+ possessive ending -ov + -ina country.


hesitance (n.)

c.1600, from Latin haesitantia (see hesitancy).


hesitancy (n.)

1610s, from Latin haesitantia action of stammering, from haesitantem (nominative haesitans)
stammering, present participle of haesitare (see hesitation).


hesitant (adj.)

1640s, probably a back-formation from hesitancy, or else from Latin haesitantem. Related:
Hesitantly.


hesitate (v.)

1620s, from Latin haesitatum, past participle of haesitare (see hesitation). Related: Hesitated;
hesitating.


hesitation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French hesitacion or directly from Latin haesitationem (nominative haesitatio) a
hesitation, stammering, figuratively irresolution, uncertainty, noun of action from past participle
stem of haesitare stick fast, remain fixed; stammer in speech, figuratively hesitate, be irresolute,
be at a loss, be undecided, frequentative of haerere stick, cling, from PIE *ghais-e (source also of
Lithuanian gaistu to delay, tarry), from root *ghais- to adhere; hesitate.


hesitative (adj.)

1795, from hesitate + -ive. Related: Hesitatively.


Hesperus

late 14c., poetic for the evening star, from Latin Hesperus, from Greek hesperos (aster) western
(star), from PIE *wes-pero- evening, night (see vesper). Hence also Hesperides (1590s), from Greek,
daughters of the West, the nymphs (variously numbered but originally three) who tended the garden
with the golden apples. Their name has been mistakenly transferred to the garden itself.    The
Hesperides were daughters of Atlas, an enormous giant, who, as the ancients believed, stood upon the
western confines of the earth, and supported the heavens on his shoulders. Their mother was
Hesperis, a personification of the region of the West, where the sun continued to shine after he had
set on Greece, and where, as travellers told, was an abundance of choice delicious fruits, which
could only have been produced by a special divine influence. The Gardens of the Hesperides with the
golden apples were believed to exist in some island in the ocean, or, as it was sometimes thought,
in the islands on the north or west coast of Africa. They were far-famed in antiquity; for it was
there that springs of nectar flowed by the couch of Zeus, and there that the earth displayed the
rarest blessings of the gods; it was another Eden. As knowledge increased with regard to western
lands, it became necessary to move this paradise farther and farther out into the Western Ocean.
[Alexander Murray, Manual of Mythology, 1888]


Hessian (n.)

resident of the former Landgraviate of Hessen-Kassel, western Germany; its soldiers being hired out
by the ruler to fight for other countries, especially the British during the American Revolution,
the name Hessians (unjustly) became synonymous with mercenaries. Hessian fly (Cecidomyia destructor)
was a destructive parasite the ravaged U.S. crops late 18c., so named 1787 in erroneous belief that
it was carried into America by the Hessians.


hessonite (n.)

1820, from French essonit (1817), from Greek heson less + -ite (2). So called because it is lighter
than similar minerals.


hest (n.)

bidding, command, Old English h&aelig;s bidding, behest, command, from Proto-Germanic *hait-ti-,
from *haitan to call, name (see hight (v.)). With -t added in Middle English on model of other
pairings (compare wist/wesan).


Hestia

goddess of the hearth, from Greek hestia hearth, house, home, family (see vestal).


het (adj.)

heated, archaic, late 14c., from variant past participle of heat (compare lead (v.)/led, etc.).


hetaera (n.)

1820, mistress, from Medieval Latin hetaera, from Greek hetaira female companion, in Athens opposed
to lawful wife, and thus embracing everything from concubine to courtesan; fem. of hetairos comrade,
companion, from PIE *swet-aro-, suffixed form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom).


hetero-

word-forming element meaning other, different, from comb. form of Greek heteros the other (of two),
another, different; first element meaning one, at one, together, from PIE *sem- one; the second
cognate with the second element in Latin al-ter, Gothic an-&thorn;ar, Old English o-&eth;er other.


heterodox (adj.)

1630s, from Greek heterodoxos, from heteros the other (see hetero-) + doxa opinion, from dokein to
appear, seem, think (see decent).


heterodoxy (n.)

1650s, from Greek heterodoxia error of opinion, from heterodoxos (see heterodox).


heterogeneity (n.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin heterogeneitas, from heterogeneus, from Greek heterogenes (see
heterogeneous).


heterogeneous (adj.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin heterogeneus, from Greek heterogenes, from heteros different (see
hetero-) + genos kind, gender, race stock (see genus). Earlier in same sense was heterogeneal
(c.1600).


heterogenous (adj.)

1690s, less-correct form of heterogeneous. Related: Heterogeneity.


heterography (n.)

incorrect spelling, 1783; see hetero- + -graphy. Also inconsistent but current spellings within a
language (as English, in all ages), 1847.


heteromorphic (adj.)

having different or dissimilar forms, 1864; from hetero- + Greek morphe form (see Morpheus).


heteronomy (n.)

1798, subjection to the rule of another power, from hetero- + Greek nomos law (see numismatics).
Related: Heteronomic; heteronomous.


heteronym (n.)

word having the same spelling as another but with a different sound and meaning, 1880s, also a
thing's name in one language that is an exact translation of its name in another; from hetero- +
-onym name (see name (n.)). Related: Heteronymic; heteronymous.


heterophemy (n.)

the (unintentional) use of some other word or phrase in place of the one that was meant, 1875, from
hetero- + Greek pheme utterance (see fame (n.)).


heterosexist (adj.)

characteristic of discrimination against homosexuals, 1979; see hetero- + sexist. Related:
Heterosexism (1979).


heterosexual (adj.)

1892, in C.G. Craddock's translation of Krafft-Ebbing's Psychopathia Sexualis, a hybrid; see hetero-
+ sexual. The noun is recorded from 1920, but not in common use until 1960s. Colloquial shortening
hetero is attested from 1933.


heterosexuality (n.)

1900; see heterosexual + -ity.


heterotroph (n.)

1900, from hetero- + Greek trophos feeder (see -trophy). Related: Heterotrophic (1893).


heterozygous (adj.)

1889, from heterozygote, from hetero- + zygote.


hetman (n.)

Cossack commander, 1710, from Polish hetman, apparently from an early form of German Hauptmann
captain, literally headman, from Haupt head (see head (n.)) + Mann (see man (n.)).


heuristic (adj.)

serving to discover or find out, 1821, irregular formation from Greek heuretikos inventive, related
to heuriskein to find (from PIE *were- (2) to find; cognate with Old Irish fuar I have found) +
-istic. As a noun, from 1860.


heuristics (n.)

study of heuristic methods, 1897, from heuristic (n.); also see -ics.


hew (v.)

Old English heawan to chop, hack, gash (class VII strong verb; past tense heow, past participle
heawen), earlier geheawan, from Proto-Germanic *hawwan (cognates: Old Norse hoggva, Old Frisian
hawa, Old Saxon hauwan, Middle Dutch hauwen, Dutch houwen, Old High German houwan, German hauen to
cut, strike, hew), from PIE root *kau- to hew, strike (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kovo,
Lithuanian kauju to beat, forge; Latin cudere to strike, beat; Middle Irish cuad beat, fight).
Weak past participle hewede appeared 14c., but hasn't displaced hewn. Seemingly contradictory sense
of hold fast, stick to (in phrase hew to) developed from hew to the line stick to a course,
literally cut evenly with an axe or saw, first recorded 1891. Related: Hewed; hewing.


hewer (n.)

cutter (of stone or wood), mid-12c. as a surname, agent noun from hew (v.). Hwers of wood and
drawers of water as the lowliest sort of physical laborers is from Joshua ix:12.


hewn

strong past participle of hew.


hex (v.)

1830, American English, from Pennsylvania German hexe to practice witchcraft, from German hexen to
hex, related to Hexe witch, from Middle High German hecse, hexse, from Old High German hagazussa
(see hag). Noun meaning magic spell is first recorded 1909; earlier it meant a witch (1856).


hexa-

before vowels, hex-, word-forming element meaning six, from Greek hexa-, comb. form of hex six (see
six).


hexadecimal

1954 (adj.); 1970 (n.); from hexa- + decimal.


hexagon (n.)

1560s, from Latin hexagonum, from Greek hexagonon, from hex six (see hexa-) + gonia angle (see knee
(n.)).


hexagonal (adj.)

1570s, from hexagon + -al (1). Related: Hexagonally.


hexagram (n.)

1863 as a type of geometric figure, from hexa- + -gram. I Ching sense attested from 1882.


hexameter (adj.)

1540s, from Latin hexameter, from Greek hexametros, from hex six (see hexa-) + metron meter (see
meter (n.2)). As a noun from 1570s. Related: Hexametric.


hexane (n.)

paraffin hydrocarbon, 1872, from Greek hex six (see six) + chemical suffix -ane. So called for its
six carbon atoms.


hexapod (n.)

1660s, from Greek hex six (see six) + pod, from Greek pod-, stem of pous foot (see foot (n.)). As an
adjective from 1856.


hey

c.1200, variously, in Middle English, hei, hai, ai, he, heh, expressing challenge, rebuttal, anger,
derision, sorrow, or concern; also a shout of encouragement to hunting dogs. Possibly a natural
expression (compare Roman eho, Greek eia, German hei).    &THORN;a onswerede &thorn;e an swi&eth;e
prudeliche, `Hei! hwuch wis read of se icudd keiser!' [St. Katherine of Alexandria, c.1200]    In
Latin, hei was a cry of grief or fear; but heia, eia was an interjection denoting joy.


heyday (n.)

late 16c., alteration of heyda (1520s), exclamation of playfulness or surprise, something like
Modern English hurrah, apparently an extended form of Middle English interjection hey or hei (see
hey). Modern sense of stage of greatest vigor first recorded 1751, which altered the spelling on
model of day, with which this word apparently has no etymological connection.


Hezbollah (n.)

extremist Shiite group active in Lebanon, founded c.1982, from Persian hezbollah, Arabic hizbullah,
literally Party of God, from hezb/hizb party + allah God. An adherent is a Hezbollahi. The name of
various Islamic groups in modern times, the name itself is attested in English by 1960 in referense
to an Indonesian guerilla battalion of 1945 that grew out of a similarly named organization formed
by the Japanese to give training in military drill to young Moslems.    In Modjokuto (like Masjumi
itself, Hizbullah was Indonesia-wide but, also like Masjumi, it had little effective central
organization) this group was led by the present head of Muhammadijah -- the same man who a year or
so before was going to Djakarta for propaganda training and studying to be a kamikaze. [Clifford
Geertz, The Religion of Java, Chicago, 1960]


Hezekiah

masc. proper name, biblical, from Hebrew Hizqiyya, literally the Lord has strengthened, from hazaq
he was strong, he strengthened + jah, short for yahweh.


hi

greeting, 1862, American English (first recorded reference is to speech of a Kansas Indian),
originally to attract attention (15c.), probably a variant of Middle English hy, hey (late 15c.)
also an exclamation to call attention. Extended form hiya attested from 1940.


hi-de-hi

call-and-response exclamation in singing, by 1933, associated with U.S. bandleader Cabell Cab
Calloway (1907-1994) and especially his signature song Minnie the Moocher, which dates from 1931.
Calloway recalled in his autobiography that the song came first and the chorus was later improvised
when he forgot the lyrics during a radio broadcast. [Harlem Renaissance Lives, Oxford, 2009]


hi-fi (adj.)

1947, abbreviation of high fidelity (1934), of radio recievers, in reference to their quality of
sound reproduction. Hi as an advertiser's phonetic shortening of high is attested by 1914.


hiatal (adj.)

1906, from stem of hiatus + -al (1).


hiatus (n.)

1560s, break or opening in a material object, from Latin hiatus opening, aperture, rupture, gap,
from past participle stem of hiare to gape, stand open (see yawn (v.)). Sense of gap or interruption
in events, etc. is first recorded 1610s.


hibachi (n.)

1863, from Japanese hibachi firepot, from hi fire + bachi, hachi bowl, pot, which Watkins derives
ultimately from Sanskrit patram cup, bowl.


hibernacle (n.)

winter residence, 1708, from Latin hibernaculum winter residence, winter quarters, related to
hibernare to winter (see hibernation) with instrumentive suffix -culum. Related: Hibernacular.


hibernal (adj.)

1620s, from Latin hibernalis wintry, from hibernus of winter, from hiems winter (see hibernation).


hibernate (v.)

1802, probably a back-formation from hibernation. Related: Hibernated; hibernating.


hibernation (n.)

1660s, from Latin hibernationem (nominative hibernatio) the action of passing the winter, noun of
action from past participle stem of hibernare to winter, pass the winter, occupy winter quarters;
related to hiems winter, from PIE *gheim- snow, winter (cognates: Sanskrit heman in winter, Hittite
gimmanza, Greek kheima, Old Church Slavonic zima, Lithuanian &#382;iema winter).


Hibernia

Roman name for Ireland, from Old Celtic *Iveriu Ireland (see Irish). Form altered in Latin as though
it meant land of winter (see hibernation).


Hibernian

1630s (adj.), 1709 (n.); see Hibernia + -ian. Related: Hibernianism.


hibiscus (n.)

1706, from Latin hibiscum, later hibiscus, marshmallow plant, of unknown origin, perhaps from
Gaulish.


hic

imitation of the sound of hiccuping, attested by 1883 (see hiccup).


hic et nunc

Latin, literally here and now, from demonstrative pronomial adjective of place hic here + nunc (see
now).


hic jacet

Latin, hic iacet, here lies, commonly the first words of Latin epitaphs; from demonstrative
pronomial adjective of place hic here + iacet it lies, from iacere to lie, rest, related to iacere
to throw (see jet (v.)).


hiccough

1620s, variant of hiccup (q.v.) by mistaken association with cough.


hiccup (n.)

1570s, hickop, earlier hicket, hyckock, a word meant to imitate the sound produced by the convulsion
of the diaphragm [Abram Smythe Farmer, Folk-Etymology, London, 1882]. Compare French hoquet, Danish
hikke, etc. Modern spelling first recorded 1788; An Old English word for it was &aelig;lfsogo&eth;a,
so called because hiccups were thought to be caused by elves.


hiccup (v.)

1580s; see hiccup (n.).


hiccups (n.)

a bout of hiccupping, by 1723; see hiccup (n.). This often also was called hiccup or the hiccup. An
earlier word for it (noun and verb) was yex, imitative, from Old English gesca, geosca.


hick (n.)

late 14c. as a pet form of masc. proper name Richard. Meaning awkward provincial person was
established by 1700 (see rube); earlier it was the characteristic name of a hosteler, hackneyman,
etc. (late 14c.), perhaps via alliteration. The adjective is recorded by 1914.A hick town is one
where there is no place to go where you shouldn't be. [attributed to U.S. humorist Robert Quillen
(1887-1948)]


hickey (n.)

see hickie.


hickie (n.)

love bite; mark on skin made by biting or sucking during foreplay or sex, 1934; earlier pimple, skin
lesion (c.1915); perhaps a sense extension and spelling variation from earlier word meaning small
gadget, device; any unspecified object (1909, see doohickey, still used in this sense).


hickory (n.)

1670s, American English, from Algonquian (perhaps Powhatan), shortening of pockerchicory or a
similar name for this species of walnut. Old Hickory as the nickname of U.S. politician Andrew
Jackson is first recorded 1827.


hickscorner (n.)

libertine scoffer at religion and the religious, c.1530, from the name of the character in a work of
that name printed c.1512 by Wynkyn de Worde; from Hick, the common masc. nickname, + scorner.


Hicksite

1828, noun and adjective, in reference to a seceding group of American Quakers, from the name of
their spiritual leader, Elias Hicks. The remainder were known as Orthodox Friends.


hid (v.)

past tense and alternative past participle of hide (v.1).    How to entangle, trammel up and snare
Your soul in mine, and labyrinth you there  Like the hid scent in an unbudded rose?  Aye, a sweet
kiss -- you see your mighty woes.  [Keats, Lamia]


hidage (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-Latin hidagium, from hida (see hide (n.2)); also see -age.


hidalgo (n.)

Spanish nobleman of secondary rank, 1590s, from Spanish hidalgo, from Old Spanish fidalgo, shortened
from filho de algo son (Latin filus) of someone (Latin aliquis), perhaps an imitation of Arabic ibn-
nas son of people, a complimentary title. For alteration of f- and h- in Spanish, see hacienda.


hidden (adj.)

past participle of hide (v.1); a Middle English formation (Old English had gehydd hidden) on the
model of ride/ridden, etc. Hidden persuaders (1957) was Vance Packard's term for ad men.


hiddenness (n.)

late 14c., from hidden + -ness.


hide (v.1)

Old English hydan to hide, conceal; preserve; hide oneself; bury a corpse, from West Germanic
*hudjan (cognates: Middle Dutch, Middle Low German huden), from PIE *keudh- (source also of Greek
keuthein to hide, conceal), from root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see hide (n.1)). Hide and seek (by
1670s), children's game, replaced earlier all hid (1580s).


hide (n.1)

skin of a large animal, Old English hyd hide, skin, from Proto-Germanic *hudiz (cognates: Old Norse
hu&eth;, Old Frisian hed, Middle Dutch huut, Dutch huid, Old High German hut, German Haut skin),
related to Old English verb hydan to hide, the common notion being of covering.    All of this is
from PIE root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (cognates: Sanskrit kostha enclosing wall, skunati covers;
Armenian ciw roof; Latin cutis skin, scutum shield, ob-scurus dark; Greek kytos a hollow, vessel,
keutho to cover, to hide, skynia eyebrows; Russian kishka gut, literally sheath; Lithuanian kiautas
husk, kutis stall; Old Norse sky cloud; Old English sceo cloud; Middle High German hode scrotum; Old
High German scura, German Scheuer barn; Welsh cuddio to hide).    The alliterative pairing of hide
and hair (often negative, hide nor hair) was in Middle English (early 15c.), but earlier and more
common was hide ne hewe, literally skin and complexion ('hue') (c.1200).


hide (n.2)

measure of land (obsolete), Old English hid hide of land, earlier higid, from hiw- family (related
to hiwan household, hiwo a husband, master of a household), from Proto-Germanic *hiwido-, from PIE
*keiwo- (source also of Latin civis citizen), from root *kei- to lie; bed, couch; beloved, dear (see
cemetery, and compare city).    The notion was of amount of land needed to feed one free family and
dependents, usually 100 or 120 acres, but the amount could be as little as 60, depending on the
quality of the land. Often also defined as as much land as could be tilled by one plow in a year.
Translated in Latin as familia.


hideaway (n.)

small, secluded restaurant, etc., 1929, from hide (v.1) + away. Earlier it meant a fugitive person
(1871).


hidebound (adj.)

1550s, from hide (n.1) + past tense of bind (v.). Original reference is to emaciated cattle with
skin sticking closely to backbones and ribs; metaphoric sense of restricted by narrow attitudes is
first recorded c.1600.


hideosity (n.)

a very ugly thing, 1807, from hideous on model of monstrosity, etc.


hideous (adj.)

c.1300, terrifying, horrible, dreadful, from Anglo-French hidous, Old French hideus, earlier hisdos
hideous, horrible, awful, frightening (11c.; Modern French hideux), from hisda horror, fear, perhaps
of Germanic origin; or else from Vulgar Latin *hispidosus, from Latin hispidus shaggy, bristly,
[b]ut this presents numerous difficulties [OED]. Meaning repulsive is late 14c.


hideously (adv.)

mid-14c., from hideous + -ly (2).


hideousness (n.)

late 14c., from hideous + -ness.


hideout (n.)

also hide-out, a hiding place, 1885, American English, from hide (v.) + out. The phrase hide out
conceal (oneself) from the authorities is attested from 1870, American English (in reference to
Northern draft dodgers in the Civil War).


hiding (n.1)

concealment, early 13c., verbal noun from hide (v.1). Hiding place is from mid-15c.; an Old English
word for this was hydels.


hiding (n.2)

a flogging, 1809, from hide (n.1), perhaps in reference to a whip or thong made of animal hide. Old
English had hyde &eth;olian to undergo a flogging, and hydgild fine paid to save one's skin (from a
punishment by flogging). The English expression a hiding to nothing (by 1905) referred to a
situation where there was disgrace in defeat and no honor in victory.


hidy-hole (n.)

1817, altered from hiding-hole; from hiding (n.1) + hole (n.).


hie (v.)

Old English higian strive, hasten, originally to be intent on, from Proto-Germanic *hig- (cognates:
Middle Dutch higen to pant, Middle Low German hichen, German heichen). Related: Hied; hies; hieing.


hiemal (adj.)

pertaining to winter, 1550s, from Latin hiems winter (see hibernation).


hierarch (n.)

1570s, from Medieval Latin hierarcha, from Greek hierarkhes leader of sacred rites, high priest (see
hierarchy).


hierarchal (adj.)

1640s, from hierarch + -al (1).


hierarchic (adj.)

1680s, from Medieval Latin hierarchicus, from hierarchia (see hierarchy). Hierarchical is from
1580s.


hierarchical (adj.)

1560s, from hierarchic + -al (1). Related: Hierarchically.


hierarchy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French ierarchie, from Medieval Latin hierarchia ranked division of angels (in
the system of Dionysius the Areopagite), from Greek hierarkhia rule of a high priest, from
hierarkhes high priest, leader of sacred rites, from ta hiera the sacred rites (neuter plural of
hieros sacred; see ire) + arkhein to lead, rule (see archon). Sense of ranked organization of
persons or things first recorded 1610s, initially of clergy, sense probably influenced by higher.
Related: Hierarchal; hierarchical.


hieratic (adj.)

pertaining to sacred things, 1650s (implied in hieratical), from Latin hieraticus, from Greek
hieratikos pertaining to a priest or his office, priestly, from hierateia priesthood, from hiereus
priest, from hieros sacred, holy, hallowed; superhuman, mighty; divine (see ire).


hierocracy (n.)

rule or government by priests, 1794; see hierarchy + -cracy. Related: Hierocratic.


hieroglyph (n.)

1590s, shortening of hieroglyphic (n.), 1590s; see hieroglyphic.


hieroglyphic

1580s (adj. and n.), from Late Latin hieroglyphicus, from Greek hieroglyphikos hieroglyphic; of
Egyptian writing, from hieros sacred (see ire) + glyphe carving, from glyphein to carve (see glyph).
Plutarch began the custom of using the adjective (ta hieroglyphika) as a noun.


hieroglyphics (n.)

1580s, from Greek ta hieroglyphika; see hieroglyphic + -ics.


hierophant (n.)

expounder of sacred mysteries, 1670s, from Late Latin hierophantes, from Greek hierophantes one who
teaches the rites of sacrifice and worship, literally one who shows sacred things, from hieros
sacred (see ire) + phainein to reveal, bring to light (see phantasm). In modern use, expounder of
esoteric doctrines, from 1822.


hierophantic (adj.)

1775, from Greek herophantikos, from hierophantes (see hierophant).


higgledy-piggledy

confusedly, hurriedly, 1590s, a vocal gesture [OED] probably formed from pig and the animal's
suggestions of mess and disorder. Reduplications in the h-/p- pattern are common (as in hanky-panky,
hocus-pocus, hinch(y)-pinch(y), an obsolete children's game, attested from c.1600).    Edward Moor,
Suffolk Words and Phrases (London, 1823), quotes a list of reduplications from Ray's Collection of
English Words (1768), all said to signify any confusion or mixture; the list has higgledy-piggledy,
hurly-burly, hodge-podge, mingle-mangle, arsy-versy, kim-kam, hub-bub, crawly-mauly, and hab-nab. To
which he might have added, Moor writes, crincum-crankum, crinkle-crankle, flim-flam, fiddle-faddle,
gibble-gabble, harum-scarum, helter-skelter, hiccup-suickup, hocus-pocus, hotch-potch, hugger-
mugger, hum-drum, hum-strum, hurry-scurry, jibber-jabber, prittle-prattle, shilly-shally, tittle-
tattle, and topsy-turvy. Many of them seem to date to the 16th century.


high (adj.)

Old English heh (Anglian), heah (West Saxon) of great height, lofty, tall, exalted, high-class, from
Proto-Germanic *haukhaz (cognates: Old Saxon hoh, Old Norse har, Danish h&oslash;i, Swedish
h&ouml;g, Old Frisian hach, Dutch hoog, Old High German hoh, German hoch, Gothic hauhs high; also
German H&uuml;gel hill, Old Norse haugr mound), perhaps related to Lithuanian kaukara hill. Spelling
with -gh represents a final guttural sound in the original word, lost since 14c.    Of sound pitch,
late 14c. Of roads, most frequented or important, c.1200. Meaning euphoric or exhilarated from
alcohol is first attested 1620s, of drugs, 1932. Sense of proud, haughty, arrogant, supercilious
(c.1200) is reflected in high hand (late 14c.) and high horse. High seas first attested late 14c.,
with sense (also found in the Latin cognate) of deep as well as tall (cognates: Old English heahflod
deep water, also Old Persian bar&#353;an height, depth). Of an evil or a punishment, grave, serious,
severe (as in high treason), c.1200 (Old English had heahsynn deadly sin, crime).   High pressure
(adj.) is from 1824, of engines, 1891, of weather systems, 1933, of sales pitches. A child's high
chair is from 1848. High school school for advanced studies attested from late 15c. in Scotland; by
1824 in U.S. High time fully time, the fullness of time, is from late 14c. High noon is from early
14c.; the sense is full, total, complete. High and mighty is c.1200 (heh i mahhte). High finance
(1905) is that concerned with large sums. High and dry of beached things (especially ships) is from
1783. High-water mark is what is left by a flood or highest tide (1550s); figurative use by 1814.


high (n.1)

early 14c., high point, top, from high (adj.). As area of high barometric pressure, from 1878. As
highest recorded temperature from 1926. Meaning state of euphoria is from 1953.


high (n.2)

thought, understanding, obsolete from 13c. in English and also lost in Modern German, but once an
important Germanic word, Old English hyge, cognate with Old Saxon hugi, Old High German hugi, Old
Norse hygr, Swedish h&#246;g, Danish hu.


high hat (n.)

1889, tall hat; also used synechdochically for men who wear such hats; figurative meaning swelled
head is from 1923. Drum set sense is from 1934.


high horse (n.)

originally (late 14c.) fine, tall horse; war horse, charger (high steed is from c.1300), also, like
high hall, status symbol; figurative sense of airs, easily wounded dignity in mount (one's) high
horse affect airs of superiority is from 1782 (Addison has to ride the great horse in the same
sense, 1716). Compare French monter sur ses grands chevaux; The simile is common to most languages
[Farmer].


high-class (adj.)

1864, from high (adj.) + class (n.).


high-falutin&#039;

also highfalutin, 1848, U.S. slang, possibly from high-flying, or flown, or even flute.


high-five

originally U.S. basketball slang, 1980 as a noun, 1981 as a verb, though the greeting itself seems
to be older (Dick Shawn in The Producers, 1968). In reference to the five fingers of the hand.


high-minded (adj.)

c.1500, arrogant; 1550s, morally lofty, from high (adj.) + minded. Related: High-mindedness.


high-powered (adj.)

1903, originally of automobiles, from high (adj.) + power (v.).


high-roller (n.)

extravagant spender, by 1873, American English, probably originally a reference to a gambler
throwing dice.


high-strung (adj.)

also high strung, 1848 in the figurative sense, from high (adj.) + strung. Originally a musical
term, with reference to stringed instruments, where it is attested from 1748.


high-tail (v.)

also hightail move quickly, attested by 1890, U.S. slang from cattle ranches (animals fleeing with
elevated tails); from high (adj.) + tail (n.). Related: Hightailed; hightailing.


high-toned (adj.)

1779 of musical pitch, 1807 of morality, from high (adj.) + tone.


highball (n.)

type of alcoholic drink, 1898, probably from ball drink of whiskey; high because it is served in a
tall glass.


highborn (adj.)

also high-born, of noble birth, c.1300, from high (adj.) + born.


highboy (n.)

tall chest of drawers, 1891, American English (see tallboy); a hybrid, the second element is from
French bois wood (see bush).


highbrow (n.)

person of superior intellect and taste, 1902, back-formation from high-browed (adj.), which is
attested from 1891, from high (adj.) + brow (see also lowbrow).


higher

comparative of high (adj.), Old English. Higher education is attested by 1839.    The French
distinguish l'instruction secondaire, which includes what we term a liberal education, from
l'instruction sup&eacute;rieure, which denotes professional education; but I do not think the
corresponding English phrases are used with this distinction. [William Whewell, Of a Liberal
Education in General, 1850]   Higher-up (n.) one in a superior post is from 1905, American English.


highest

superl. of high (adj.), Old English. Biblical in the highest translates Latin in excelsis, Greek en
hypsostois.


highland (n.)

Old English heohlond; see high (adj.) + land (n.). Highlands mountainous district of Scotland first
recorded early 15c.


Highlander (n.)

1630s, from Highland + -er (1).


highlight (n.)

1650s, originally of paintings, the brightest part of a subject, from high (adj.) + light (n.). The
figurative sense of outstanding feature or characteristic is from 1855. The verb is from 1861.
Hairdressing sense is 1941 (n.), 1942 (v.). Related: Highlighted; highlighting.


highly (adv.)

Old English healice nobly, gloriously, honorably; see high (adj.) + -ly (1). Meaning very, very
much, fully is mid-14c.


highness (n.)

Old English heanes; see high (adj.) + -ness. Meaning royalty, excellence, nobility is early 13c.;
Your Highness as a form of address to English royalty is attested from c.1400.


hight (v.)

named, called (archaic), from levelled past participle of Middle English highte, from Old English
hatte I am called (passive of hatan to call, name, command) merged with heht called, active past
tense of the same verb. Hatte was the only survival in Old English of the old Germanic synthetic
passive tense. The word is related to Old Norse heita, Dutch heten, German hei&szlig;en, Gothic
haitan to call, be called, command (see cite).


highway (n.)

Old English heahweg main road from one town to another; see high (adj.) in sense of main + way (n.).
High street (Old English heahstr&aelig;te) was the word before 17c. applied to highways and main
roads, whether in the country or town, especially one of the Roman roads. In more recent usage, it
generally is the proper name of the street of a town which is built upon a highway and was the
principal street of the place.


highwayman (n.)

one who travels the highways with intent to rob people (often on horseback and thus contrasted to a
footpad), 1640s, from highway + man.


hijack (v.)

1922, American English, perhaps from high(way) + jacker one who holds up. Originally to rob (a
bootlegger, smuggler, etc.) in transit; sense of seizing an aircraft in flight is 1968 (also in 1961
variant skyjack), extended 1970s to any form of public transportation. Related: Hijacked; hijacking.


hijinks (n.)

also hi-jinks, high jinks, boisterous capers, lively or boisterous sport, 1842, from name of games
played at drinking parties (1690s). See jink.


hijra (n.)

also hijrah, the more correct form of hegira.


hike (v.)

1809, hyke to walk vigorously, an English dialectal word of unknown origin. A yike from 1736 answers
to the sense.    HIKE, v. to go away. It is generally used in a contemptuous sense. Ex. Come, hike,
i.e. take yourself off; begone. [Rev. Robert Forby, The Vocabulary of East Anglia, London, 1830]
Sense of pull up (as pants) first recorded 1873 in American English, and may be a variant of hitch;
extended sense of raise (as wages) is 1867. Related: Hiked; hiking. The noun is from 1865.


hiker (n.)

1913, agent noun from hike (v.). Earlier as a type of boat:    The hiker or tuck-up as it is more
generally termed, is a craft peculiar to the Delaware River, and is to the youth residing along the
banks of that stream what the racing shell is to the Torontonian .... The origin of the name hiker
is veiled in mystery. No member of the clubs engaged in sailing these boats can give anything like a
satisfactory derivation of the word. The most common explanation is that it is corrupted from the
local verb to hike, which means to run or fly swiftly. [Harper's Young People, 1885]


hilarious (adj.)

1823, cheerful, from Latin hilaris cheerful, of good cheer (see hilarity) + -ous. Meaning
boisterously joyful is from 1830s. Related: Hilariously.


hilarity (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin hilaritatem (nominative hilaritas) cheerfulness, gaiety, merriment, from
hilaris cheerful, gay, from Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous, related to hilaos graceful,
kindly. In ancient Rome, Hilaria (neuter plural of hilaris) were a class of holidays, times of pomp
and rejoicing; there were public ones in honor of Cybele at the spring equinoxes as well as private
ones on the day of a marriage or a son's birth.


Hilary

masc. proper name, from Late Latin Hilarius, literally cheerful, from Latin hilaris (see hilarity).
The name was more popular in France than in England. The woman's name (Middle English Hillaria)
seems to be merged with this from Eulalia, name of the patron saint of Barcelona, a Latinization of
Greek eulalos sweetly speaking. The Hilary sessions of British High Court and universities (1577)
are from St. Hilarius, Bishop of Poitiers, obit. C.E. 368, whose feast day is Jan. 13.


Hilda

fem. proper name, German, literally battle-maid, from fem. of Old High German hild war, battle, from
Proto-Germanic *hildiz battle, from PIE *keldh-, from root *kel- (1) to strike, cut (see holt).


Hildebrand

masc. proper name, Old High German Hildibrand, literally battle-sword; for first element see Hilda;
for second element see brand.


Hildegard

fem. proper name, Old High German Hildegard, literally protecting battle-maid; for first element see
Hilda; for second element see yard (n.1).


hill (n.)

Old English hyll hill, from Proto-Germanic *hulni- (cognates: Middle Dutch hille, Low German hull
hill, Old Norse hallr stone, Gothic hallus rock, Old Norse holmr islet in a bay, Old English holm
rising land, island), from PIE root *kel- (4) to rise, be elevated, be prominent; hill (cognates:
Sanskrit kutam top, skull; Latin collis hill, columna projecting object, culmen top, summit, cellere
raise, celsus high; Greek kolonos hill, kolophon summit; Lithuanian kalnas mountain, kalnelis hill,
kelti raise). Formerly including mountains, now usually confined to heights under 2,000 feet. In
Great Britain heights under 2,000 feet are generally called hills; 'mountain' being confined to the
greater elevations of the Lake District, of North Wales, and of the Scottish Highlands; but, in
India, ranges of 5,000 and even 10,000 feet are commonly called 'hills,' in contrast with the
Himalaya Mountains, many peaks of which rise beyond 20,000 feet. [OED]   <hr />   The term mountain
is very loosely used. It commonly means any unusual elevation. In New England and central New York,
elevations of from one to two thousand feet are called hills, but on the plains of Texas, a hill of
a few hundred feet is called a mountain. [Ralph S. Tarr, Elementary Geology, Macmillan, 1903]   <hr
/>   Despite the differences in defining mountain systems, Penck (1896), Supan (1911) and Obst
(1914) agreed that the distinction between hills, mountains, and mountain systems according to areal
extent or height is not a suitable classification. [Geographic Information Science and Mountain
Geomorphology, 2004]    Phrase over the hill past one's prime is first recorded 1950.


hillbilly (n.)

southern Appalachian U.S. resident, by 1892, from hill + masc. proper name Billy/Billie.    Then
again, I do not think It will do so well. I would hate to see some old railroad man come here and
take my job, and then, I don t think It is right to hire some Hill Billy and give him the same right
as I just because he was hired the same time I was. [The Railroad Trainmen's Journal, vol. IX, July
1892]   <hr />   In short, a Hill-Billie is a free and untrammelled white citizen of Alabama, who
lives in the hills, has no means to speak of, dresses as he can, talks as he pleases, drinks whiskey
when he gets it, and fires of his revolver as the fancy takes him. [New York Journal, April 23,
1900]  In reference to a type of folk music, first attested 1924.


Hillel

masc. proper name, from Hebrew, literally he praised.


hillock (n.)

late 14c., hilloc small hill (c.1200 as a surname), from hill + Middle English diminutive suffix
-oc.


hillside (n.)

late 14c., from hill + side (n.).


hilltop (n.)

c.1400, from hill + top (n.).


hilly (adj.)

late 14c., from hill + -y (2).


hilt (n.)

Old English hilt hilt, handle of a sword or dagger, from Proto-Germanic *helt (cognates: Old Norse
hjalt, Old High German helza hilt, Old Saxon helta oar handle), perhaps from PIE *kel- (1) to
strike. Formerly also used in plural in same sense as singular.


hilum (n.)

Latin, literally little thing, shred, trifle. Related: Hilar.


him (pron.)

Old English him, originally dative masculine and neuter of he; beginning 10c. it replaced hine as
masculine accusative, a regional process completed by 15c. The dative roots of the -m ending are
retained in German (ihm) and Dutch (hem). Hine persists, barely, as the southern England dialectal
'un, 'n for him.


Himalaya

from Sanskrit himalayah, literally abode of snow, from hima snow (see hibernation) + alaya abode.
Related: Himalayas; Himalayan.


himself (pron.)

Old English him selfum, from him, dative/accusative personal pronoun, + self, here used as an
inflected adjective.


hin (pron.)

Old English hine, accusative of he; replaced by dative him in early Middle English; cognate with
German ihn. Surviving somewhat in s.w. English and Kentish dialect.


hincty (adj.)

conceited, by 1924 in U.S. black slang. Compare obsolete Scottish hichty (c.1500), considered an
alteration of height-y.


hind (adj.)

c.1300, rear, back, perhaps a back-formation from Old English behindan back, behind, used as adverb
and preposition, or from or influenced by Old English hindan (adv.) from behind, from Proto-Germanic
*hind- behind (cognate with Gothic hindan (prep.) on that side of, beyond, behind; German hinten
behind), of unknown origin. Possibly influenced by Middle English hiner (adv.) back, rear.


hind (n.)

female deer, Old English hind, from Proto-Germanic *hinthjo- (cognates: Old Norse hind, Dutch hinde,
Old High German hinta, German Hinde hind) perhaps from PIE *kemti-, from root *kem- hornless
(cognates: Greek kemas, Lithuanian smulas young deer, gazelle).


hinder (v.)

Old English hindrian to harm, injure, impair, check, repress, from Proto-Germanic *hinderojan
(cognates: Old Norse hindra, Dutch hinderen, Old High German hintaron, German hindern to keep back),
from a root meaning on that side of, behind (see hind (adj.)); thus the ground sense is to put or
keep back, though this sense in English is recorded only from late 14c. Related: Hindered;
hindering.


hinder (adj,)

situated in the rear, toward the back, late 14c., probably from Old English hinder (adv.) behind,
back, afterward, but treated as a comparative of hind (adj.). Related to Old High German hintar,
German hinter, Gothic hindar behind. Middle English had hinderhede, literally hinder-hood; posterity
in time, inferiority in rank; and hinderling person fallen from moral or social respectability,
wretch.


hinderance (n.)

early form of hindrance.


hindermost

late 14c., hyndermest; see hinder (adj.) + -most.


Hindi

1825 as an adjective; 1880 as a language name, from Hind India (see Hindu) + -i, suffix expressing
relationship.


hindmost (adj.)

late 14c., from hind (adj.) + -most.   Thra. What, if a toy take 'em i' the heels now, and they run
all away, and cry, 'The devil take the hindmost'?  Dion. Then the same devil take the foremost too,
and souse him for his breakfast! [Beaumont &amp; Fletcher, Philaster, Act V, Sc. 2, 1611]


Hindoo

old anglicized form of Hindu (q.v.).


hindrance (n.)

mid-15c., a hybrid from hindren, from same root as hinder (v.), on model of French-derived words in
-ance.


hindsight (n.)

by 1841, backsight of a firearm, from hind (adj.) + sight. Meaning seeing what has happened is
attested by 1862, American English, (in proverbial If our foresight was as good as our hindsight, it
would be an easy matter to get rich), probably a formation on the model of foresight.


Hindu

1660s, from Persian Hindu (adjective and noun) Indian, from Hind India, from Sanskrit sindhu river,
specifically the Indus; hence region of the Indus, gradually extended across northern India. The
Hindu Kush mountain range is said to mean literally Indian killer, and was said to have been the
name given by the Persians to a pass where their Indian slaves had perished in winter, but this is
likely folk etymology.


Hinduism (n.)

blanket term for polytheism of India, 1829, from Hindu + -ism.


Hindustan

1610s, from Persian, literally country of the Hindus; see Hindu + -stan.


hine

see hin.


hinge (n.)

c.1300, the axis of the earth; late 14c. as movable joint of a gate or door, not found in Old
English, cognate with Middle Dutch henghe hook, handle, Middle Low German henge hinge, from Proto-
Germanic *hanhan (transitive), *hangen (intransitive), from PIE *konk- to hang (see hang (v.)). The
notion is the thing from which a door hangs.


hinge (v.)

c.1600, to bend, from hinge (n.). Meaning turn on, depend is from 1719. Related: Hinged; hinging.


hinny (n.)

offspring of a stallion and a she-ass, 1680s, from Latin hinnus, from Greek innos, ginnos, of
unknown origin.


hinny (v.)

to neigh, c.1400, of imitative origin.


hint (n.)

c.1600, apparently from obsolete hent, from Middle English hinten to tell, inform (c.1400), from Old
English hentan to seize, from Proto-Germanic *hantijan (cognates: Gothic hin&thorn;an to seize),
related to hunt (v.). Modern sense and spelling first attested in Shakespeare.


hint (v.)

1640s, from hint (n.). Related: Hinted; hinting.


hinterland (n.)

1890, from German Hinterland, from hinter behind (see hinder (adj.)) + Land land (see land (n.)).


hip (n.1)

part of the body where pelvis and thigh join, Old English hype hip, from Proto-Germanic *hupiz
(cognates: Dutch heup, German H&uuml;fte, Gothic hups hip), from PIE *qeub- to bend. Hip of a roof
is from late 17c.


hip (n.2)

seed pod (especially of wild rose), Old English heope, hiope seed vessel of the wild rose, from
Proto-Germanic *hiup- (cognates: dialectal Norwegian hjupa, Old Saxon hiopo, Dutch joop, Old High
German hiafo, dialectal German Hiefe, Old English hiopa briar, bramble).


hip (adj.)

informed, 1904, apparently originally in black slang, probably a variant of hep (1), with which it
is identical in sense, though it is recorded four years earlier.


hip (interj.)

exclamation used to introduce a united cheer (compare hip-hip-hurrah), 1827, earlier hep; compare
German hepp, to animals a cry to attack game, to mobs a cry to attack Jews (see hep (2)); perhaps a
natural sound (such as Latin eho, heus).


hip hop

also hip-hop, music style, first recorded 1982. Reduplication with vowel variation (as in tip-top,
sing-song); OED reports use of hip hop with a sense of successive hopping motion dating back to
1670s. The term in its modern sense comes from its use in the early rap lyrics of the genre, notably
Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five and The Sugarhill Gang in Rapper's Delight.


hiphuggers (n.)

also hip-huggers, low-rise pants or skirt, 1966, from hip + agent noun from hug. So called because
they are slung from the hips, not the waist. Earlier as the name of a cut of women's swimsuit
(1963).


hipped (adj.)

having hips, c.1500, past participle adjective; see hip (n.1)). In architecture from 1823.


hippie (n.)

c.1965, American English (Haight-Ashbury slang); earlier hippie, 1953, was a usually disparaging
variant of hipster (1941) person who is keenly aware of the new and stylish, from hip up-to-date
(see hip (adj.)).


hippish (adj.)

somewhat depressed, 1706, from hip (n.) melancholy, variant of hyp, short for hypochondria.


hippo (n.)

short for hippopotamus, attested from 1872.


hippo-

before vowels, hipp-, word-forming element meaning horse, from Greek hippo-, from hippos horse, from
PIE *ekwo- (see equine).


hippocampus (n.)

c.1600, a kind of sea monster, part horse and part dolphin or fish (they are often pictured pulling
Neptune's chariot), from Late Latin hippocampus, from Greek hippokampos, from hippos horse + kampos
a sea monster, perhaps related to kampe caterpillar. Used from 1570s as a name of a type of fish; of
a part of the brain from 1706, on supposed resemblance to the fish.


Hippocratic (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin Hippocraticus, pertaining to Hippocrates (c.460-377 B.C.E.), the famous
ancient Greek physician. Hippocratic Oath is attested from 1747; it is in the spirit of Hippocrates
but was not written by him. The name is literally one superior in horses.


Hippocrene

fount on Mount Helicon, sacred to the Muses, from Greek Hippokrene, literally horse's fountain, from
hippos horse + krene fountain.


hippodrome (n.)

1580s, from French hippodrome, from Latin hippodromos race course, from Greek hippodromos chariot
road, race course for chariots, from hippos horse (see equine) + dromos course (see dromedary). In
modern use for circus performance place, and thus extended to large theater for stage shows.


hippogriff (n.)

also hippogryph, 1650s, from French hippogriffe (16c.), from Italian ippogrifo, from Greek hippos
horse (see equine) + Italian grifo, from Late Latin gryphus griffin (see griffin). A creature part
griffin, but with body and hind parts in the form of a horse.


Hippolyte

Amazon in Greek mythology, daughter of Ares, from Greek Hippolyte, fem. of Hippolytos (see
Hippolytus).


Hippolytus

masc. proper name, son of Theseus in Greek mythology, from Greek Hippolytos, literally letting
horses loose, from hippos horse (see equine) + stem of lyein (see lose).


hippophagy (n.)

1828, from hippo- + -phagy (see -phagous). Related: Hippophagous.


hippopotamus (n.)

1560s, from Late Latin hippopotamus, from Greek hippopotamus riverhorse (earlier ho hippos ho
potamios the horse of the river), from hippos horse (see equine) + potamos river, rushing water (see
potamo-). Replaced Middle English ypotame (c.1300), which is from the same source but via Old
French. Glossed in Old English as s&aelig;hengest.Ypotamos comen flyngynge. ... Grete bestes and
griselich [Kyng Alisaunder, c.1300]


hippy (adj.)

having prominent hips, 1919, from hip (n.1) + -y (2).


hipster (n.)

1941, one who is hip; from hip (adj.) + -ster. Meaning low-rise in reference to pants or skirt is
from 1962; so called because they ride on the hips rather than the waist (see hiphuggers). Related:
Hipsters.


hir (pron.)

Middle English obsolete form of her.


hiragana (n.)

from Japanese hiragana, from hira plain + kana borrowed letter(s).


Hiram

masc. proper name, from Phoenician/Hebrew Hiram, perhaps short for Ahiram, literally brother of the
lofty.


hircine (adj.)

goat-like, 1650s, from Latin hircinus pertaining to a goat, from hircus he-goat, buck, probably
related to hirsutus shaggy (see hirsute).


hire (v.)

Old English hyrian pay for service, employ for wages, engage, from Proto-Germanic *hurjan (cognates:
Danish hyre, Old Frisian hera, Dutch huren, German heuern to hire, rent). Reflexively, to agree to
work for wages from mid-13c. Related: Hired; hiring.


hire (n.)

payment for work, use, or services; wages, from Old English hyr wages; interest, usury, from Proto-
Germanic *hurja- (see hire (v.)).


hiree (n.)

1811, from hire (v.) + -ee.


hireling (n.)

one who works for hire, Old English hyrling; see hire + -ling. As an adjective by 1580s.


Hiroshima

city in Japan, literally broad island, from Japanese hiro broad + shima island. So called in
reference to its situation on the delta of the Ota River.


hirsute (adj.)

hairy, 1620s, from Latin hirsutus rough, shaggy, bristly, figuratively rude, unpolished, related to
hirtus shaggy, and possibly to horrere to bristle with fear, from PIE *ghers-tu-, from root *ghers-
to bristle (see horror).


hirsutism (n.)

1927, from hirsute + -ism.


his (pron.)

Old English his (genitive of he), from Proto-Germanic *hisa (cognates: Gothic is, German es).
Originally also the neuter possessive pronoun, but replaced in that sense c.1600 by its. In Middle
English, hisis was tried for the absolute pronoun (compare her/hers), but it failed to stick. For
dialectal his'n, see her.


Hispania

Latin name for the Iberian peninsula, literally country of the Spaniards; see Hispanic.


Hispanic (adj.)

pertaining to Spain (especially ancient Spain) 1580s, from Latin Hispanicus, from Hispania Iberian
Peninsula, from Hispanus Spaniard (see Spaniard). Specific application to Spanish-speaking parts of
the New World is 1889, American English; especially applied since c.1972 to Spanish-speaking persons
of Latin American descent living in U.S.


Hispaniola

West Indian island, from Spanish la isla espa&ntilde;ola the Spanish island (not little Spain); name
said to have been given by Columbus in 1492.


hiss (v.)

late 14c., of imitative origin. Johnson wrote, it is remarkable, that this word cannot be pronounced
without making the noise which it signifies. Related: Hissed; hissing.


hiss (n.)

1510s, from hiss (v.).


hisself (pron.)

see himself. The shift in felt meaning  of the first element of this compound from dative to
gentitive created this new word c.1400, whereas the same process did not change herself.


hissing (n.)

late 14c., hissyng, of imitative origin (see hiss (v.)), but originally also whistling. In both
senses expressing opprobrium.


hissy (adj.)

1905, from hiss + -y (2). Hissy fit is attested by 1983.


hist

exclamation commanding silence, attested from 1610s; probably so chosen because the sound is both
easy to hear and suddenly silent.


histamine (n.)

1913, amine produced by the decomposition of histidine.


histidine (n.)

complex amino acid, 1896, from German histidin; see histo- + chemical suffix -idine.


histo-

medical word-forming element, from Greek histos warp, web, literally anything set upright, from
histasthai to stand, from PIE *sta- to stand (see stet). Taken by 19c. medical writers as the best
Greek root from which to form terminology for tissue.


histogram (n.)

1891, from histo- + -gram.


histology (n.)

study of organic tissues, 1847, from histo- + -ology.


histone (n.)

1885, from German histon (1884); see histo- + -one.


historian (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French historien (14c.), from Latin historia (see history). As writer of
history in the higher sense (distinguished from a mere annalist or chronicler), from 1530s. The Old
English word was &thorn;eod-wita.    [T]he historian's fallacy is the error of assuming that a man
who has a given historical experience knows it, when he has had it, to be all that a historian would
know it to be, with the advantage of historical perspective. [David Hackett Fischer, Historians'
Fallacies, 1970]


historiaster (n.)

petty or contemptible historian, 1887, from historian with ending altered to -aster.


historic (adj.)

1660s, probably a back-formation from historical, perhaps influenced by French historique. What is
historic is noted or celebrated in history; what is historical deals with history.


historical (adj.)

early 15c. (earlier in same sense was historial, late 14c.), from Latin historicus (from Greek
historikos historical, of or for inquiry, from historia; see history) + -al (1). Related:
Historically.


historicism (n.)

1895, translating German historismus, from historic + -ism. Given various senses 20c. in theology,
philosophy, architecture, etc.


historicity (n.)

1880, from Latin historicus (see historical) + -ity.


historico-

word-forming element meaning historical, from Latinized comb. form of Greek historikos (see
historical).


historify (v.)

1580s, from history + -ify. Related: Historified; historifying.


historiography (n.)

1560s; see from history + -graphy. Related: Historiographer.


history (n.)

late 14c., relation of incidents (true or false), from Old French estoire, estorie chronicle,
history, story (12c., Modern French histoire), from Latin historia narrative of past events,
account, tale, story, from Greek historia a learning or knowing by inquiry; an account of one's
inquiries, history, record, narrative, from historein inquire, from histor wise man, judge, from PIE
*wid-tor-, from root *weid- to know, literally to see (see vision).    Related to Greek idein to
see, and to eidenai to know. In Middle English, not differentiated from story; sense of record of
past events probably first attested late 15c. As a branch of knowledge, from 1842. Sense of
systematic account (without reference to time) of a set of natural phenomena (1560s) is now obsolete
except in natural history.    One difference between history and imaginative literature ... is that
history neither anticipates nor satisfies our curiosity, whereas literature does. [Guy Davenport,
Wheel Ruts, 1996]


histrionic (adj.)

theatrical (figuratively, hypocritical), 1640s, from Latin histrionicus pertaining to an actor, from
histrio (genitive histrionis) actor, said to be of Etruscan origin. The literal sense in English is
from 1759.


histrionics (n.)

theatrics, pretense, 1864, from histrionic; also see -ics.


hit (v.)

late Old English hyttan, hittan come upon, meet with, fall in with, 'hit' upon, from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse hitta to light upon, meet with, also to hit, strike; Swedish hitta to find,
Danish and Norwegian hitte to hit, find, from Proto-Germanic *hitjan, of uncertain origin. Related:
Hitting. Meaning shifted in late Old English period to strike, via to reach with a blow or missile,
and replaced Old English slean in this sense. Original sense survives in phrases such as hit it off
(1780, earlier in same sense hit it, 1630s) and is revived in hit on (1970s).    Underworld slang
meaning to kill by plan is 1955 (as a noun in this sense from 1970). To hit the bottle drink alcohol
is from 1889. To hit the nail on the head (1570s) is from archery. Hit the road leave is from 1873;
to hit (someone) up request something is from 1917. Hit and run is 1899 as a baseball play, 1924 as
a driver failing to stop at a crash he caused. To not know what hit (one) is from 1923.


hit (n.)

late 15c., a rebuke; 1590s as a blow, from hit (v.). Meaning successful play, song, person, etc.,
1811, is from the verbal sense of to hit the mark, succeed (c.1400). Underworld slang meaning a
killing is from 1970. Meaning dose of narcotic is 1951, from phrases such as hit the bottle.


hitch (v.)

mid-15c., probably from Middle English icchen to move as with a jerk, to stir (c.1200). It lacks
cognates in other languages. The connection with icchen may be in notion of hitching up pants or
boots with a jerking motion. Sense of become fastened, especially by a hook, first recorded 1570s,
originally nautical. Meaning to marry is from 1844 (to hitch horses together get along well,
especially of married couples, is from 1837, American English). Short for hitchhike (v.) by 1931.
Related: Hitched; hitching.


hitch (n.)

1660s, a limp or hobble; 1670s, an abrupt movement, from hitch (v.). Meaning a means by which a rope
is made fast is from 1769, nautical. The sense of obstruction is first recorded 1748; military sense
of enlistment is from 1835.


hitcher (n.)

1620s, a hook, boat-hook, agent noun from hitch (v.). Meaning hitchhiker is from 1960.


hitchhike

1921 (n.), 1923 (v.), from hitch, from the notion of hitching a sled to a moving vehicle (a sense
first recorded 1880) + hike. Related: Hitchhiked; hitchhiking. Hitchhiker attested from 1927.


hithe (n.)

landing place (archaic, but still found in place names), from Old English hy&eth; landing place,
especially one on a river or creek, cognate with Old Saxon huth.


hither (adv.)

Old English hider, from Proto-Germanic *hideran (cognates: Old Norse he&eth;ra here, Gothic hidre
hither), from Germanic demonstrative base *hi- (compare he, here). Spelling change from -d- to -th-
is the same evolution seen in father, etc. Relation to here is the same as that of thither to there.


hitherto (adv.)

c.1200, from hither + to.


Hitler

used figuratively for a dictator from 1934.


hitman (n.)

hired assassin, 1970, from hit (n.) in the underworld sense + man (n.).


Hittite

c.1600, of or pertaining to an Indo-European people whose empire (c.1900-700 B.C.E.) covered much of
modern Turkey and Syria, from Hebrew Hitti Hittite (plural Hittim), from Hittite Hatti. The biblical
use (Gen. xv:20, etc.) refers to Canaanite or Syrian tribes that probably were genuine scions of the
Hittites. They were called khita or kheta in Egyptian.


HIV (n.)

1986, initialism (acronym) from human immunodeficiency virus, name for either of the two viruses
that cause AIDS.


hive (n.)

Old English hyf beehive, from Proto-Germanic *hufiz (cognates: Old Norse hufr hull of a ship), from
PIE *keup- round container, bowl (cognates: Sanskrit kupah hollow, pit, cave, Greek kypellon cup,
Latin cupa tub, cask, vat). Figurative sense of swarming, busy place is from 1630s. As a verb, of
bees, etc., to form themselves into a hive, c.1400; to put bees in a hive, mid-15c.


hives (n.)

c.1500 hyvis itchy condition of the skin, origin unknown. Some writers connect it with heave because
hives erupt out from the skin, but the phonetics of that are difficult to explain.


hmm

representative of a sound made during contemplation or showing mild disapproval, attested from 1868,
but this is probably a variation of the hum attested in similar senses from 1590s.


ho (interj.)

exclamation of surprise, etc., c.1300; as an exclamation calling attention or demanding silence,
late 14c. Used after the name of a place to which attention is called (as in Westward-Ho) it dates
from 1590s, originally a cry of boatmen, etc., announcing departures for a particular destination.
Ho-ho-ho expressing laughter is recorded from mid-12c.


ho (n.)

by 1993, American English slang, representing a ghetto pronunciation of whore.


ho-de-ho

1932, defined in the Oxford English Dictionary as, An exclamation, used as the appropriate response
to HI-DE-HI.


ho-hum

expression of boredom, by 1906. As an adjective, by 1956.


hoagie (n.)

American English (originally Philadelphia) word for hero, large sandwich made from a long, split
roll; originally hoggie (c.1936), traditionally said to be named for Big Band songwriter Hoagland
Howard Hoagy Carmichael (1899-1981), but the use of the word pre-dates his celebrity and the
original spelling seems to suggest another source (perhaps hog). Modern spelling is c.1945, and may
have been altered by influence of Carmichael's nickname.


hoar (adj.)

Old English har hoary, gray, venerable, old, the connecting notion being gray hair, from Proto-
Germanic *haira (cognates: Old Norse harr gray-haired, old, Old Saxon, Old High German her
distinguished, noble, glorious, German hehr), from PIE *kei-, source of color adjectives (see hue
(n.1)). German also uses the word as a title of respect, in Herr. Of frost, it is recorded in Old
English, perhaps expressing the resemblance of the white feathers of frost to an old man's beard.
Used as an attribute of boundary stones in Anglo-Saxon, perhaps in reference to being gray with
lichens, hence its appearance in place-names.


hoard (n.)

Old English hord treasure, valuable stock or store, from Proto-Germanic *huzdam (cognates: Old Saxon
hord treasure, hidden or inmost place, Old Norse hodd, German Hort, Gothic huzd treasure, literally
hidden treasure), from PIE root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see hide (n.1)).


hoard (v.)

Old English hordian, cognate with Old High German gihurten, German gehorden, Gothic huzdjan, from
the root of hoard (n.). Related: Hoarded; hoarding.


hoarder (n.)

Old English hordere treasurer, from hoard (n.). As one who hoards, c.1500, from hoard (v.).


hoarfrost (n.)

c.1300, hore-forst; see hoar + frost (n.).


hoarse (adj.)

late 14c., hors, earlier hos, from Old English has hoarse, from Proto-Germanic *haisa- (cognates:
Old Saxon hes, Old Norse hass, Dutch hees, Old High German heisi, German heiser hoarse), perhaps
originally meaning dried out, rough. The -r- is difficult to explain; it is first attested c.1400,
but it may indicate an unrecorded Old English variant *hars. Related: Hoarsely; hoarseness.


hoary (adj.)

1510s, gray or white with age (of hair); c.1600 as venerable, ancient; from hoar + -y (2). Related:
Hoariness.


hoax

1796 (v.), 1808 (n.), probably an alteration of hocus conjurer, juggler (1630s), or directly from
hocus-pocus. Related: Hoaxed; hoaxing.


hob (n.)

side of fireplace, 1670s, alteration of hubbe (1510s), of unknown origin, perhaps somehow related to
the first element in hobnail.


Hob (n.)

clown, prankster, short for hobgoblin (q.v.). Hence, to play (the) hob make mischief (by 1834).


Hobbit (n.)

1937, coined in the fantasy tales of J.R.R. Tolkien (1892-1973).    On a blank leaf I scrawled: 'In
a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.' I did not and do not know why.  [Tolkien, letter to W.H.
Auden, dated 1955]    The word also turns up in a very long list of folkloric supernatural creatures
in the writings of Michael Aislabie Denham (d.1859), printed in volume 2 of The Denham Tracts [ed.
James Hardy, London: Folklore Society, 1895], a compilation of Denham's scattered publications.
Denham was an early folklorist who concentrated on Northumberland, Durham, Westmoreland, Cumberland,
the Isle of Man, and Scotland.    What a happiness this must have been seventy or eighty years ago
and upwards, to those chosen few who had the good luck to be born on the eve of this festival of all
festivals; when the whole earth was so overrun with ghosts, boggles, bloody-bones, spirits, demons,
ignis fatui, brownies, bugbears, black dogs, specters, shellycoats, scarecrows, witches, wizards,
barguests, Robin-Goodfellows, hags, night-bats, scrags, breaknecks, fantasms, hobgoblins,
hobhoulards, boggy-boes, dobbies, hob-thrusts, fetches, kelpies, warlocks, mock-beggars, mum-pokers,
Jemmy-burties, urchins, satyrs, pans, fauns, sirens, tritons, centaurs, calcars, nymphs, imps,
incubuses, spoorns, men-in-the-oak, hell-wains, fire-drakes, kit-a-can-sticks, Tom-tumblers, melch-
dicks, larrs, kitty-witches, hobby-lanthorns, Dick-a-Tuesdays, Elf-fires, Gyl-burnt-tales, knockers,
elves, rawheads, Meg-with-the-wads, old-shocks, ouphs, pad-foots, pixies, pictrees, giants, dwarfs,
Tom-pokers, tutgots, snapdragons, sprets, spunks, conjurers, thurses, spurns, tantarrabobs,
swaithes, tints, tod-lowries, Jack-in-the-Wads, mormos, changelings, redcaps, yeth-hounds, colt-
pixies, Tom-thumbs, black-bugs, boggarts, scar-bugs, shag-foals, hodge-pochers, hob-thrushes, bugs,
bull-beggars, bygorns, bolls, caddies, bomen, brags, wraiths, waffs, flay-boggarts, fiends,
gallytrots, imps, gytrashes, patches, hob-and-lanthorns, gringes, boguests, bonelesses, Peg-powlers,
pucks, fays, kidnappers, gallybeggars, hudskins, nickers, madcaps, trolls, robinets, friars'
lanthorns, silkies, cauld-lads, death-hearses, goblins, hob-headlesses, bugaboos, kows, or cowes,
nickies, nacks necks, waiths, miffies, buckies, ghouls, sylphs, guests, swarths, freiths, freits,
gy-carlins Gyre-carling, pigmies, chittifaces, nixies, Jinny-burnt-tails, dudmen, hell-hounds,
dopple-gangers, boggleboes, bogies, redmen, portunes, grants, <b>hobbits</b>, hobgoblins, brown-men,
cowies, dunnies, wirrikows, alholdes, mannikins, follets, korreds, lubberkins, cluricauns, kobolds,
leprechauns, kors, mares, korreds, puckles korigans, sylvans, succubuses, blackmen, shadows,
banshees, lian-hanshees, clabbernappers, Gabriel-hounds, mawkins, doubles, corpse lights or candles,
scrats, mahounds, trows, gnomes, sprites, fates, fiends, sibyls, nicknevins, whitewomen, fairies,
thrummy-caps, cutties, and nisses, and apparitions of every shape, make, form, fashion, kind and
description, that there was not a village in England that had not its own peculiar ghost. Nay, every
lone tenement, castle, or mansion-house, which could boast of any antiquity had its bogle, its
specter, or its knocker. The churches, churchyards, and crossroads were all haunted. Every green
lane had its boulder-stone on which an apparition kept watch at night. Every common had its circle
of fairies belonging to it. And there was scarcely a shepherd to be met with who had not seen a
spirit!    [Emphasis added] It is curious that the name occurs nowhere else in folklore, and there
is no evidence that Tolkien ever saw this. The word also was recorded from 1835 as a term generally
used in Wales to express a quantity made up of four Welsh pecks. Hobbitry attested from 1947.


hobble (v.)

c.1300, hoblen to rock back and forth, toss up and down, probably related to its Dutch cognate
hobbelen (which, however, is not recorded before late 15c.).    Meaning to walk lamely is from
c.1400. Transitive sense of tie the legs (of an animal) first recorded 1831, probably an alteration
of 16c. hopple, cognate with Flemish hoppelen to rock, jump, which also is related to Dutch
hobbelen. Sense of hamper, hinder is c.1870. Related: Hobbled; hobbling. The noun is 1727, from the
verb.


hobbledehoy (n.)

clumsy or awkward youth, 1530s, of uncertain origin and the subject of much discussion. First
element is probably hob in its sense of clown, prankster (see hobgoblin), the second element perhaps
is Middle French de haye worthless, untamed, wild, literally of the hedge.


hobby (n.)

late 13c., hobyn, small horse, pony, later mock horse used in the morris dance, and c.1550 child's
toy riding horse, which led to hobby-horse in a transferred sense of favorite pastime or avocation,
first recorded 1670s, shortened to hobby by 1816. The connecting notion being activity that doesn't
go anywhere. Probably originally a proper name for a horse (see dobbin), a diminutive of Robert or
Robin. The original hobbyhorse was a Tourney Horse, a wooden or basketwork frame worn around the
waist and held on with shoulder straps, with a fake tail and horse head attached, so the wearer
appears to be riding a horse. These were part of church and civic celebrations at Midsummer and New
Year's throughout England.


hobbyist (n.)

1830, from hobby + -ist. Hobbyism is recorded from 1846.


hobgoblin (n.)

1520s, from hob elf, from Hobbe, a variant of Rob (compare Hick for Richard, Hodge for Rodger,
etc.), short for Robin Goodfellow, elf character in German folklore, + goblin.


hobnail (n.)

1590s, the first element probably identical with hob rounded peg or pin used as a mark or target in
games (1580s), of unknown origin. See hob. Because they were used to make rough shoes, the word was
used figuratively for rustic person 17c. and after. Related: Hobnailed.


hobnob (v.)

1763, to drink to each other, from hob and nob (1756) to toast each other by turns, to buy alternate
rounds of drinks, from c.1550 hab nab to have or have not, hit or miss, probably ultimately from Old
English habban, nabban have, not have, with the negative particle ne- attached, as was customary.
Modern sense of socialize is 1866. Related: Hobnobbed; hobnobbing.


hobo (n.)

1889, Western U.S., of unknown origin. Barnhart compares early 19c. English dialectal hawbuck lout,
clumsy fellow, country bumpkin. Or possibly from ho, boy, a workers' call on late 19c. western U.S.
railroads. Facetious formation hobohemia, community or life of hobos, is from 1923 (see bohemian).


Hoboken

city in New Jersey, U.S., birthplace of Frank Sinatra, named by 17c. Dutch settlers for a village in
modern Belgium that is now a suburb of Antwerp.


Hobson&#039;s choice (n.)

English university slang term, supposedly a reference to Thomas Hobson (c.1544-1631), Cambridge
stable manager who let horses and gave customers a choice of the horse next in line or none at all.
Phrase popularized c.1660 by Milton, who was at Cambridge from 1625-29.


Hobson-Jobson

1690s, hossen gossen, said to have been British soldiers' mangled Englishing of the Arabic cry they
heard at Muharram processions in India, Ya Hasan! Ya Husayn! (O Hassan! O Husain!), mourning two
grandsons of the Prophet who died fighting for the faith. Title of Yule &amp; Burnell's 1886
glossary of Anglo-Indian words, and taken by linguists in naming the law of Hobson-Jobson,
describing the effort to bring a new and strange word into harmony with the language.


hoc

Latin, literally this.


hock (n.1)

joint in the hind leg of a horse, mid-15c., earlier hockshin (late 14c.), from Old English hohsinu
sinew of the heel, Achilles' tendon, literally heel sinew, from hoh heel, from Proto-Germanic
*hanhaz (cognates: German Hachse hock, Old English h&aelig;la heel), from PIE *kenk- (3) heel, bend
of the knee.


hock (n.2)

Rhenish wine, 1620s, shortening of Hockamore, from German Hochheimer, (wine) of Hochheim, town on
the Main where wine was made; sense extended to German white wines in general.


hock (n.3)

pawn, debt, 1859, American English, in hock, which meant both in debt and in prison, from Dutch hok
jail, pen, doghouse, hutch, hovel. The verb is 1878, from the noun.When one gambler is caught by
another, smarter than himself, and is beat, then he is in hock. Men are only caught, or put in hock,
on the race-tracks, or on the steamboats down South. ... Among thieves a man is in hock when he is
in prison. [G.W. Matsell, Vocabulum, 1859]


hockey (n.)

after an isolated reference from Ireland dated 1527 (The horlinge of the litill balle with hockie
stickes or staves ...), the word is next recorded 1838 from W. Sussex; of unknown origin, perhaps
related to Middle French hoquet shepherd's staff, crook, diminutive of Old French hoc hook. The
hooked clubs with which the game is played resemble shepherds' staves. In North America, ice hockey
is distinguished from field hockey.


hocus-pocus

1620s, Hocas Pocas, common name of a magician or juggler, a sham-Latin invocation used in tricks,
probably based on a perversion of the sacramental blessing from the Mass, Hoc est corpus meum This
is my body. The first to make this speculation on its origin apparently was English prelate John
Tillotson (1630-1694).I will speak of one man ... that went about in King James his time ... who
called himself, the Kings Majesties most excellent Hocus Pocus, and so was called, because that at
the playing of every Trick, he used to say, Hocus pocus, tontus tabantus, vade celeriter jubeo, a
dark composure of words, to blinde the eyes of the beholders, to make his Trick pass the more
currantly without discovery. [Thomas Ady, A Candle in the Dark, 1655]


hod (n.)

1570s, alteration of Middle English hott pannier (c.1300), from Old French hotte basket to carry on
the back, apparently from Frankish *hotta or some other Germanic source (compare Middle High German
hotze cradle). Altered by influence of cognate Middle Dutch hodde basket.


hodge-podge

see hodgepodge.


hodgepodge (n.)

also hodge podge, hodge-podge, early 15c., hogpoch, alteration of hotchpotch (late 14c.) a kind of
stew, especially one made with goose, herbs, spices, wine, and other ingredients, earlier an Anglo-
French legal term (late 13c.) meaning collection of property in a common 'pot' before dividing it
equally, from Old French hochepot stew, soup, first element from hocher to shake, from a Germanic
source (such as Middle High German hotzen shake).


Hodgkin&#039;s disease

1877, named for Dr. Thomas Hodgkin (1798-1866) who first described it.


hoe (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French houe (12c.), from Frankish *hauwa, from Proto-Germanic *hawwan (cognates:
Old High German houwa hoe, mattock, pick-axe, German Haue), from PIE *kau- to hew, strike (see hew).
The verb is first recorded early 15c. Related: Hoed; hoeing.


hoe-cake (n.)

1745, American English, said to be so called because it originally was baked on the broad thin blade
of a cotton-field hoe (n.).


hoedown (n.)

noisy dance, 1841, apparently originally the name of a specific dance, perhaps from perceived
parallel of dance motions to those of farm chores, hence from hoe (n.).    The step of every negro
dance that was ever known, was called into requisition and admirably executed. They performed the
double shuffle, the Virginny break-down, the Kentucky heeltap, the pigeon wing, the back balance
lick, the Arkansas hoe down, with unbounded applause and irresistible effect. [Scouting Expeditions
of McCulloch's Texas Rangers, 1848]    Hoe corn, hill tobacco is noted as a line in the chorus of a
slave song in 1838, and Washington Irving writes of a dance called hoe corn and dig potatoes in
1807.    The same precedence is repeated until all the merchandise is disposed of, the table is then
banished the room, and the whole party hoe it down in straight fours and set dances, till the hour
when ghosts wandering here and there, troop home to church-yards. This is what we kintra folk call a
strauss. [Der Teufelskerl. A Tale of German Pennsylvania, in Burton's Gentleman's Magazine, January
1840]


hoer (n.)

1740s, agent noun from hoe (v.).


hog (n.)

late 12c. (implied in hogaster), swine reared for slaughter (usually about a year old), also used by
stockmen for young sheep (mid-14c.) and for horse older than one year, suggesting the original sense
had something to do with an age, not a type of animal. Not evidenced in Old English, but it may have
existed. Possibility of British Celtic origin [Watkins, etc.] is regarded by OED as improbable.
Figurative sense of gluttonous person is first recorded early 15c. Meaning Harley-Davidson
motorcycle is attested from 1967.    To go hog wild is from 1904. Hog in armor awkward or clumsy
person in ill-fitting attire is from 1650s. Phrase to go the whole hog (1828) is sometimes said to
be from the butcher shop option of buying the whole slaughtered animal (at a discount) rather than
just the choice bits. But it is perhaps rather from the story (recorded in English from 1779) of
Muslim sophists, forbidden by the Quran from eating a certain unnamed part of the hog, who debated
which part was intended and managed to exempt the whole of it from the prohibition. Road hog is
attested from 1886.


hog (v.)

to appropriate greedily, U.S. slang, 1884 (first attested in Huck Finn), from hog (n.). Related:
Hogged; hogging.


hog-tie (v.)

also hogtie, bind hands and feet, 1887, from hog (n.) + tie (v.). Related: Hog-tied.


hogan (n.)

Navaho Indian dwelling, 1871, American English, from Athapaskan (Navaho) hoghan dwelling, house.


hogger (n.)

swineherd, herdsman, early 14c., from hog (n.).


hoggish (adj.)

gluttonous, late 15c., from hog (n.) + -ish. Related: Hoggishly; hoggishness.


hogshead (n.)

large cask or barrel, late 14c., presumably on some perceived resemblance. The original liquid
measure was 63 old wine gallons (by a statute of 1423); later anywhere from 100 to 140 gallons.
Borrowed into other Germanic languages, oddly, as ox-head (Dutch okshoofd, German oxhoft, Swedish
oxhufvud).


hogwash (n.)

mid-15c., slops fed to pigs, from hog (n.) + wash (n.). Extended to cheap liquor (1712) then to
inferior writing (1773).


hogweed (n.)

1707, from hog (n.) + weed; used in different places of various plants eaten by hogs or deemed fit
only for them.


hoi polloi

1837, from Greek hoi polloi (plural) the people, literally the many (plural of polys; see poly-).
Used in Greek by Dryden (1668) and Byron (1822), in both cases preceded by the, even though Greek
hoi means the, a mistake repeated often by subsequent writers, who at least have the excuse of
ignorance of Greek.


hoist (v.)

1540s, to raise, earlier hoise (c.1500), probably originally past tense of Middle English hysse
(late 15c.), which is probably from Middle Dutch hyssen (Dutch hijsen) to hoist, related to Low
German hissen and Old Norse hissa upp raise. A nautical word found in most European languages
(French hisser, Italian issare, Spanish izar), but it is uncertain which had it first. Related:
Hoisted; hoisting. In phrase hoist with one's own petard, it is the past participle.    For 'tis the
sport, to have the engineer  Hoist with his own petar: and it shall go hard  But I will delve one
yard below their mines,  And blow them at the moon: O 'tis most sweet,  When in one line two crafts
directly meet.  [Hamlet, Act III, Scene iv]    Meaning to lift and remove was prevalent c.1550-1750.
As a noun, 1650s, from the verb.


hoity-toity

also hoity toity, 1660s, riotous behavior, from earlier highty tighty frolicsome, flighty, perhaps
an alteration and reduplication of dialectal hoyting acting the hoyden, romping (1590s), see hoyden.
Sense of haughty first recorded late 1800s, probably on similarity of sound.


hoke

often hoke up, 1935, theatrical slang, probably shortened from hokum.


hokey (adj.)

1927, from hoke + -y (2). Related: Hokiness.


hokey-pokey

1847, false cheap material, perhaps an alteration of hocus-pocus, or from the nonsense chorus and
title of a comic song (Hokey Pokey Whankey Fong) that was popular c.1830. Applied especially to
cheap ice cream sold by street vendors (1884), in Philadelphia, and perhaps other places, it meant
shaved ice with artificial flavoring. The words also were the title of a Weber-Fields musical revue
from 1912. The modern dance song of that name hit the U.S. in 1950 (Life described it Nov. 27, 1950,
as a tuneless stomp that is now sweeping the U.C.L.A. campus), but it is said to have originated in
Britain in World War II, perhaps from a Canadian source.


hokum (n.)

1917, theater slang, melodramatic, exaggerated acting, probably formed on model of bunkum (see bunk
(n.2)), and perhaps influenced by or based on hocus-pocus.


hold (v.)

Old English haldan (Anglian), healdan (West Saxon), to contain, grasp; retain; foster, cherish,
class VII strong verb (past tense heold, past participle healden), from Proto-Germanic *haldan
(cognates: Old Saxon haldan, Old Frisian halda, Old Norse halda, Dutch houden, German halten to
hold, Gothic haldan to tend), originally to keep, tend, watch over (as cattle), later to have.
Ancestral sense is preserved in behold. The original past participle holden was replaced by held
beginning 16c., but survives in some legal jargon and in beholden.   Hold back is 1530s, transitive;
1570s, intransitive; hold off is early 15c., transitive; c.1600, intransitive; hold out is 1520s as
to stretch forth, 1580s as to resist pressure. Hold on is early 13c. as to maintain one's course,
1830 as to keep one's grip on something, 1846 as an order to wait or stop. To hold (one's) tongue be
silent is from c.1300. To hold (one's) own is from early 14c. To hold (someone's) hand give moral
support is from 1935. Phrase hold your horses be patient is from 1844. To have and to hold have been
paired alliteratively since at least c.1200, originally of marriage but also of real estate.


hold (n.2)

space in a ship below the lower deck, in which cargo is stowed, 15c. corruption in the direction of
hold (v.) of Old English hol hole (see hole), influenced by Middle Dutch hol hold of a ship, and
Middle English hul, which originally meant both the hold and the hull of a ship (see hull). Or
possibly from Old English holu husk, pod. All from PIE *kel- to cover, conceal.


hold (n.1)

act of holding, c.1100; grasp, grip, c.1200, from Old English geheald (Anglian gehald) keeping,
custody, guard; watch, protector, guardian, from hold (v.). Meaning place of refuge is from c.1200;
fortified place is from c.1300; place of imprisonment is from late 14c. Wrestling sense is from
1713. No holds barred with all restrictions removed is first recorded 1942 in theater jargon but is
ultimately from wrestling. Telephoning sense is from c.1964, from expression hold the line, warning
that one is away from the receiver, 1912.


hold up (v.)

also holdup, hold-up, late 13c., to keep erect; 1837 as to delay. The verb meaning to stop by force
and rob is from 1887, from the robber's command to raise hands. The noun in this sense is from 1851.


hold-out (n.)

one who abstains or refrains when others do not, by 1911, from verbal expression hold out; see hold
(v.) + out. Earlier as the name of a card-sharper's device (1893).


holder (n.)

c.1400, tenant, occupier, agent noun from hold (v.). Meaning device for holding something is
attested from 1833.


holding (n.)

early 13c., verbal noun of hold. As a football (soccer) penalty, from 1866. Meaning property held,
especially stock shares, is from 1570s.


hole (n.)

Old English hol orifice, hollow place, cave, perforation, from Proto-Germanic *hul (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German hol, Middle Dutch hool, Old Norse holr, German hohl hollow,
Gothic us-hulon to hollow out), from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    As a
contemptuous word for small dingy lodging or abode it is attested from 1610s. Meaning a fix, scrape,
mess is from 1760. Obscene slang use for vulva is implied from mid-14c. Hole in the wall small and
unpretentious place is from 1822; to hole up first recorded 1875. To need (something) like a hole in
the head, applied to something useless or detrimental, first recorded 1944 in entertainment
publications, probably a translation of a Yiddish expression such as ich darf es vi a loch in kop.


hole (v.)

to make a hole, Old English holian to hollow out, scoop out (see hole (n.)). Related: Holed; holing.


holey (adj.)

late 14c., from hole + -y (2). The -e- retained so the eye may distinguish it from holy.


holiday (n.)

1500s, earlier haliday (c.1200), from Old English haligd&aelig;g holy day; Sabbath, from halig holy
(see holy) + d&aelig;g day (see day); in 14c. meaning both religious festival and day of recreation,
but pronunciation and sense diverged 16c. As a verb meaning to pass the holidays by 1869. Happy
holidays is from mid-19c., in British English, with reference to summer vacation from school. As a
Christmastime greeting, by 1937, American English, in Camel cigarette ads.


holier-than-thou

as an adjectival phrase in reference to supercilious sanctimony attested by 1888, American English.
The text is in Isaiah lxv:5.


holiness (n.)

Old English halignis holiness, sanctity, religion; holy thing; see holy + -ness. Compare Old High
German heilagnissa. As title of the Pope, it translates Latin sanctitas (until c.600 also applied to
bishops).


holism (n.)

1926, apparently by South African Gen. J.C. Smuts (1870-1950) in his book Holism and Evolution which
treats of evolution as a process of unification of separate parts; from Greek holos whole (see safe
(adj.)) + -ism.    This character of wholeness meets us everywhere and points to something
fundamental in the universe. Holism (from [holos] = whole) is the term here coined for this
fundamental factor operative towards the creation of wholes in the universe. [Smuts, Holism and
Evolution, p.86]


holistic (adj.)

1939, from holism + -istic. Holistic medicine is first attested 1960. Related: Holistically.


holla

as a command to stop, cease, 1520s, from French hol&agrave; (15c.). As a command to get attention,
from 1580s. As an urban slang form of holler (v.) and meaning greet, shout out to, it was in use by
2003.


Holland

the Netherlands, early 14c., from Dutch Holland, probably Old Dutch holt lant wood land, describing
the district around Dordrecht, the nucleus of Holland. Technically, just one province of the
Netherlands, but in English use extended to the whole nation.


hollandaise

1841, from French sauce hollandaise Dutch sauce, from fem. of hollandais Dutch, from Hollande
Holland.


Hollander

native or inhabitant of Holland, mid-15c., from Holland + -er (1).


holler (v.)

1690s, American English, variant of hollo (1540s) to shout, especially to call to the hounds in
hunting, related to hello. Compare colloquial yeller for yellow, etc. As a style of singing
(originally Southern U.S.), first recorded 1936. Related: Hollered; hollering. As a noun, from 1896,
earlier hollar (1825).


hollow (adj.)

c.1200, from Old English holh (n.) hollow place, hole, from Proto-Germanic *hul-, from PIE *kel- (2)
to cover, conceal (see cell). The figurative sense of insincere is attested from 1520s. Related:
Hollowly; hollowness. To carry it hollow take it completely is first recorded 1660s, of unknown
origin or connection.


hollow (v.)

late 14c., holowen, from hollow (adj.). Related: Hollowed; hollowing.


hollow (n.)

lowland, valley, basin, 1550s, probably a modern formation from hollow (adj.). Old English had holh
(n.) cave, den; internal cavity.


holly (n.)

mid-15c., earlier holin (mid-12c.), shortening of Old English holegn holly, from Proto-Germanic
*hulin- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German hulis, Old Norse hulfr, Middle Dutch huls, Dutch,
German hulst holly), cognate with Middle Irish cuilenn, Welsh celyn, Gaelic cuilionn holly, probably
all from PIE root *kel- (5) to prick (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kolja to prick, Russian kolos
ear of corn), in reference to its leaves. French houx holly is from Frankish *huls or some other
Germanic source.


hollyhock (n.)

mid-13c., holihoc, from holi holy (see holy) + hokke mallow, from Old English hocc, of unknown
origin. Another early name for the plant was caulis Sancti Cuthberti St. Cuthbert's cole.


Hollywood

region near Los Angeles, named for the ranch that once stood there, which was named by Deida Wilcox,
wife of Horace H. Wilcox, Kansas City real estate man, when they moved there in 1886. They began
selling off building lots in 1891 and the village was incorporated in 1903. Once a quiet farming
community, by 1910 barns were being converted into movie studios. The name was used generically for
American movies from 1926, three years after the giant sign was set up, originally Hollywoodland,
another real estate developer's promotion.


holm (n.)

late Old English, from Old Norse holmr small island, especially in a bay or river, also meadow by a
shore, or cognate Old Danish hulm low lying land, from Proto-Germanic *hul-maz, from PIE root *kel-
(4) to rise, be elevated, be prominent; hill (see hill). Obsolete, but preserved in place names.
Cognate Old English holm (only attested in poetic language) meant sea, ocean, wave.


holmium (n.)

rare earth element, named by French chemist Lecoq de Boisbaudran (1838-1912) in 1886, from holmia
holmium oxide, a Modern Latin word coined by the earth's discoverer, Swedish chemist Per Teodor
Cleve (1840-1905), in 1879 from Holmia, Latin name of Stockholm.


holo-

before vowels, hol-, word-forming element meaning whole, entire, complete, from Greek holo-, comb.
form of holos whole, entire, complete, also safe and sound, from PIE *sol-wo-, from root *sol- (see
safe (adj.)).


holocaust (n.)

mid-13c., sacrifice by fire, burnt offering, from Greek holokauston a thing wholly burnt, neuter of
holokaustos burned whole, from holos whole (see holo-) + kaustos, verbal adjective of kaiein to
burn. Originally a Bible word for burnt offerings, given wider sense of massacre, destruction of a
large number of persons from 1833. The Holocaust Nazi genocide of European Jews in World War II,
first recorded 1957, earlier known in Hebrew as Shoah catastrophe. The word itself was used in
English in reference to Hitler's Jewish policies from 1942, but not as a proper name for them.
Auschwitz makes all too clear the principle that the human psyche can create meaning out of
anything. [Robert Jay Lifton, The Nazi Doctors]


Holocene (adj.)

in reference to the epoch that began 10,000 years ago and continues today, 1897, from French
holoc&egrave;ne (1867), from Greek holo-, comb. form of holos whole (see safe (adj.)) + -cene.


hologram (n.)

1949, coined by Hungarian-born British scientist Dennis Gabor (G&aacute;bor D&eacute;nes), 1971
Nobel prize winner in physics for his work in holography; from Greek holos whole (in sense of three-
dimensional; see safe (adj.)) + -gram.


holograph (n.)

document written entirely by the person from whom it proceeds, 1620s, from Late Latin holographus,
from Greek holographos written entirely by the same hand, literally written in full, from holos
whole (see safe (adj.)) + graphos written, from graphein to write (see -graphy). Modern use, with
reference to holograms, is a 1960s back-formation from holography.


holographic (adj.)

early 18c., of writing, from holograph + -ic; physics sense is from 1964 (see holography).


holography (n.)

early 19c., of writing, from holograph + -y (4); physics sense, process of using holograms, is from
1964, coined by discoverer, Hungarian-born physicist G&#225;bor D&#233;nes (1900-1979), from
hologram on analogy of telegraphy/telegram.


holomorphic (adj.)

1880, from holo- + morphic (see metamorphosis).


holophrastic (adj.)

1837, from holo- + Greek phrastikos, from phrazein to indicate, tell, express (see phrase (n.)).


Holstein

breed of cattle, 1865; so called because originally raised in nearby Friesland. The place name is
literally woodland settlers, from the roots of German Holz wood (see holt) and siedeln to settle,
altered by influence of Stein stone. Since 15c. it has been united with the Duchy of Schleswig.


holster (n.)

leather case for a pistol, 1660s, probably from Old English heolster, earlier helustr concealment,
hiding place, from Proto-Germanic *hulfti- (cognates: Old High German hulft cover, case, sheath, Old
Norse hulstr case, sheath, Middle Dutch holster, German Halfter holster), from PIE *kel- (2) to
cover, to hide (see cell). Intermediate forms are wanting, and the modern word could as well be from
the Norse or Dutch cognates.


holster (v.)

by 1902, from holster (n.). Related: Holstered; holstering.


holt (n.)

Old English holt woods, common in place names, from Proto-Germanic *hultam- (cognates: Old Frisian,
Old Norse, Middle Dutch holt, Dutch hout, German Holz wood), from PIE *kldo- (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic klada beam, timber, Greek klados twig, Old Irish caill wood), from root *kel- (1) to
strike, cut.


holy (adj.)

Old English halig holy, consecrated, sacred, godly, from Proto-Germanic *hailaga- (cognates: Old
Norse heilagr, Old Frisian helich holy, Old Saxon helag, Middle Dutch helich, Old High German
heilag, German heilig, Gothic hailags holy). Adopted at conversion for Latin sanctus.    Primary
(pre-Christian) meaning is not possible to determine, but probably it was that must be preserved
whole or intact, that cannot be transgressed or violated, and connected with Old English hal (see
health) and Old High German heil health, happiness, good luck (source of the German salutation
Heil). Holy water was in Old English. Holy has been used as an intensifying word from 1837; used in
expletives since 1880s (such as holy smoke, 1883, holy mackerel, 1876, holy cow, 1914, holy moly
etc.), most of them euphemisms for holy Christ or holy Moses.


Holy Land

western Palestine, Judaea, late 13c., translating Medieval Latin terra sancta (11c.).


holystone (n.)

soft sandstone used to scrub decks of sailing ships, 1777, despite the spelling, so called perhaps
because it is full of holes. As a verb, by 1828.


homage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French homage (12c., Modern French hommage) allegiance or respect for one's
feudal lord, from homme man, from Latin homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus). Figurative
sense of reverence, honor shown is from late 14c. As a verb, from 1590s (agent noun homager is from
c.1400).


hombre (n.)

a man (especially one of Spanish descent), 1846, from Spanish, from Latin hominem, accusative of
homo man (see homunculus).


homburg (n.)

type of soft felt had with a curled brim and a dented crown, 1894, from Homburg, resort town in
Prussia, where it was first made. Introduced to England by Edward VII.


home (n.)

Old English ham dwelling, house, estate, village, from Proto-Germanic *haimaz (cognates: Old Frisian
hem home, village, Old Norse heimr residence, world, heima home, Danish hjem, Middle Dutch heem,
German heim home, Gothic haims village), from PIE root *tkei- to settle, dwell, be home (cognates:
Sanskrit kseti abides, dwells, Armenian shen inhabited, Greek kome, Lithuanian kaimas village; Old
Church Slavonic semija domestic servants).  'Home' in the full range and feeling of [Modern English]
home is a conception that belongs distinctively to the word home and some of its Gmc. cognates and
is not covered by any single word in most of the IE languages. [Buck]   Home stretch (1841) is
originally a reference from horse racing. Home base in baseball attested by 1859 (home plate by
1867; home as the goal in a sport or game is from 1778). Home economics first attested 1899. Slang
phrase make (oneself) at home become comfortable in a place one does not live dates from 1892. To
keep the home fires burning is from a song title from 1914. To be nothing to write home about
unremarkable is from 1907. Home movie is from 1919; home computer is from 1967.


home (v.)

1765, to go home, from home (n.). Meaning be guided to a destination by radio signals, etc. (of
missiles, aircraft, etc.) is from 1920; it had been used earlier in reference to pigeons (1862).
Related: Homed; homing. Old English had hamian to establish in a home.


home front (n.)

also homefront, by 1917, from home (n.) + front (n.) in the military sense. A term from World War I.


home page (n.)

also homepage, 1993, from home (n.) + page (n.).


home rule (n.)

1860, originally in reference to Ireland, from home (n.) + rule (n.).


home run (n.)

1856, from home + run (n.).


homebody (n.)

1821, from home (n.) + body.


homebound (adj.)

1882, from home (n.) + bound (adj.2).


homeboy (n.)

person from one's hometown, 1940s, American English, black slang, also originally with overtones of
simpleton. With many variants (compare homebuddy, homeslice, both 1980s, with meaning shading toward
good friend). The word had been used by Ruskin (1886) with the sense stay-at-home male, and it was
Canadian slang for boy brought up in an orphanage or other institution (1913).


homecoming (n.)

mid-13c. in literal sense of a coming home, from home (n.) + present participle of come. Compare Old
English hamcyme return. Attested from 1935 in U.S. high school dance sense. Used earlier in Britain
in reference to the annual return of natives to the Isle of Man.


homeland (n.)

1660s, from home (n.) + land (n.). Old English hamland meant enclosed pasture.


homeless (adj.)

1610s, from home (n.) + -less. Old English had hamleas, but the modern word probably is a new
formation. As a noun meaning homeless persons, by 1857.


homelessness (n.)

1814, from homeless + -ness.


homeliness (n.)

mid-14c., from homely + -ness. Originally meekness, gentleness, also familiarity, intimacy;
friendliness; sense degenerated by c.1400 to want of refinement in manners, coarseness;
presumptuousness.


homely (adj.)

late 14c., of or belonging to home or household, domestic, from Middle English hom home (see home
(n.)) + -ly (2). Sense of plain, unadorned, simple is late 14c., and extension to having a plain
appearance, ugly, crude took place c.1400, but now survives chiefly in U.S., especially in New
England, where it was the usual term for physically unattractive; ugly being typically ill-tempered.


homemade (adj.)

also home-made, 1650s, from home (n.) + made.


homemaker (n.)

also home-maker, woman considered as a domestic agent, by 1861, American English, from home (n.) +
agent noun from make (v.).


homeo-

word-forming element meaning similar to, Latinized from Greek homio-, from homoios like, resembling,
of the same kind, related to or an expanded form of homos one and the same, from PIE *sem- one, as
one (see same).


homeomorphism (n.)

1854, from homeomorphous (1832), from homeo- + morphous (see metamorphosis); originally of crystals.
Homeomorphic is from 1902.


homeopath (n.)

1830; back-formation from homeopathy. Related: Homeopathic.


homeopathy (n.)

1830, from German Hom&ouml;opathie, coined 1824 by German physician Samuel Friedrich Hahnemann
(1755-1843) from Greek homoios like, similar, of the same kind (see homeo-) + -patheia (see -pathy).


homeostasis (n.)

1926, from homeo- + Greek stasis standing still (see stasis). Related: Homeostatic.


homeowner (n.)

also home-owner, 1892, American English, from home (n.) + agent noun of own (v.).


Homer

name of the supposed author of the Iliad and the Odyssey, from Latin Homerus, from Greek Homeros.
The name first occurs in a fragment of Hesiod. It is identical to Greek homeros hostage, also blind
(connecting notion is going with a companion).


homer (n.)

short for home run, from 1884. As a verb, from 1946. Related: Homered; homering.


Homeric (adj.)

1771, from Homer + -ic. Homerical is from 1670s. Compare Latin Homericus, Greek Homerikos.


homeroom (n.)

in the U.S. schools sense, 1915, from home (n.) + room (n.).


homeschool (v.)

by 1989 (implied in homeschooling), from home (n.) + school (v.). Related: Homeschooled.


homesick (adj.)

1798, back-formation from homesickness.


homesickness (n.)

1756, translating German heimweh, from Heim home + Weh woe, pain; the compound is from Swiss
dialect, expressing the longing for the mountains. The word was introduced to other European
languages 17c. by Swiss mercenaries. Also see nostalgia.


homespun (adj.)

1580s, spun at home, from home (n.) + spun. Figurative sense of plain, homely is from c.1600. As a
noun, from c.1600.


homestead (n.)

Old English hamstede home, town, village, from home (n.) + stead (q.v.). In U.S. usage, a lot of
land adequate for the maintenance of a family (1690s), defined by the Homestead Act of 1862 as 160
acres. Hence, the verb, first recorded 1872. Homesteader also is from 1872.


hometown (n.)

1879, from home (n.) + town.


homeward (adv.)

mid-13c., homward, from Old English ham weard; see home (n.) + -ward. Also Homewards, with adverbial
genitive -s (Old English hamweardes).


homework (n.)

1680s, work done at home, as opposed to work done in the shop or factory, from home (n.) + work
(n.). In sense of lessons studied at home, it is attested from 1889.


homey (adj.)

home-like, by 1898, from home + -y (2).


homicidal (adj.)

1725, from homicide + -al (1). Related: Homicidally.


homicide (n.)

the killing of another person, early 13c., from Old French homicide, from Latin homicidium
manslaughter, from homo man (see homunculus) + -cidium act of killing (see -cide). The meaning
person who kills another (late 14c.) also is from French, from Latin homicida a murderer, from -cida
killer.


homie (n.)

also homey, by 1970s, slang, short for homeboy (q.v.). The identical word is recorded from the 1920s
in New Zealand slang in the sense recently arrived British immigrant.


homiletic (adj.)

1640s, of or having to do with sermons, from Late Latin homileticus, from Greek homiletikos of
conversation, affable, from homelein associate with, from homilos (see homily).


homiletics (n.)

1830, from homiletic; also see -ics.


homilist (n.)

1610s, from homily + -ist.


homily (n.)

late 14c., omelye, from Old French omelie (12c., Modern French hom&eacute;lie), from Church Latin
homilia a homily, sermon, from Greek homilia conversation, discourse, used in New Testament Greek
for sermon, from homilos an assembled crowd, from homou together (from PIE *somo-, from root *sem-
(1) one, as one, together with; see same) + ile troop (cognate with Sanskrit melah assembly, Latin
miles soldier). Latinate form restored in English 16c.


homing (n.)

action of going home, 1765, in reference to pigeons, from present participle of home (v.). Homing
pigeon attested by 1868.


hominid (n.)

1889, family of mammals represented by man, from Modern Latin Hominid&aelig; the biological family
name, coined 1825 from Latin homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus). As an adjective from
1915.


hominoid (adj.)

man-like, 1927, from Latin homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus) + -oid.


hominy (n.)

1629, first recorded by Capt. John Smith, probably from Powhatan (Algonquian) appuminneonash parched
corn, probably literally that which is ground or beaten. See grits.


homo (n.)

short for homosexual (n.), attested by 1929; usually contemptuous.


Homo sapiens (n.)

1802, in William Turton's translation of Linn&aelig;us, coined in Modern Latin from Latin homo man
(technically male human, but in logical and scholastic writing human being; see homunculus) +
sapiens, present participle of sapere be wise (see sapient). Used since in various Latin or pseudo-
Latin combinations intended to emphasize some aspect of humanity, as in Henri Bergson's Homo faber
man the tool-maker, in L'Evolution Cr&eacute;atrice (1907). Homo as a genus of the order Primates is
first recorded 1797.


homo- (1)

word-forming element meaning same, the same, equal, like, before vowels hom-, from Greek homos one
and the same, also belonging to two or more jointly, from PIE *somos (cognates: Sanskrit samah even,
the same, Lithuanian similis like, Gothic sama the same, samana together; see same).


homo- (2)

word-forming element meaning homosexual, abstracted since early 20c. from homosexual, and ultimately
identical to homo- (1).


homoerotic (adj.)

also homo-erotic, 1916, from homo- (2) homosexual + erotic.


homogamous (adj.)

1811, from homogamy + -ous.


homogamy (n.)

1805, condition of bearing flowers that do not differ sexually, from homo- (1) same + -gamy.


homogeneity (n.)

1620s, from homogene (see homogeneous) + -ity.


homogeneous (adj.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin homogeneus, from Greek homogenes of the same kind, from homos same (see
homo- (1)) + genos kind, gender, race, stock (see genus). Earlier in this sense was homogeneal
(c.1600).


homogenise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of homogenize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Homogenised;
homogenising.


homogenization (n.)

1803 (from 1905 specifically of milk); see homogenize + -ation.


homogenize (v.)

make similar, 1742, from homogenous + -ize. Sense of render milk uniform in consistency is from
1901. Related: Homogenized; homogenizing.


homogenous (adj.)

erroneous for homogeneous.


homogeny (n.)

1620s, uniformity of nature; by 1856 in biological sense, from Greek homogeneia community of origin,
from homogene of the same race or kind (see homogeneous).


homograph (n.)

1810, a method of signaling, from homo- (1) same + -graph something written. Meaning a word of
identical spelling with another, but of different origin and meaning, is from 1873. Related:
Homographic; homography.


homoiousian (n.)

1680s, from Greek homoiousios of the same essence, from homos one and the same (see homo- (1)) +
ousia essence (see Parousia).


homologize (v.)

1733, to be homologous; 1811, to make homologous; see homologous + -ize. Related: Homologized;
homologizing.


homologous (adj.)

1650s, from Greek homologos agreeing, of one mind, from homos same (see homo- (1)) + logos relation,
reasoning, computation, related to legein reckon, select, speak (see lecture (n.)).


homonym (n.)

a word spelled and pronounced the same as another but different in meaning, 1807, from French
homonyme and directly from Latin homonymum (Quintilian), from Greek homonymon, neuter of homonymos,
from homos same (see homo- (1)) + onyma, dialectal form of onoma name (see name (n.)).


homonymous (adj.)

1620s, from Latin homonymus, from Greek homonymos having the same name (see homonym). Homonymy
quality of being homonymous is from 1590s.


homophile (n.)

1960, from homo- (2) homosexual + -phile. An attempt to coin a word for a homosexual person as part
of a social group, rather than a sexual deviant.


homophobic (adj.)

by 1971, from homo- (2) homosexual + -phobia + -ic. Related: Homophobe; homophobia (which word is
said to date from 1969).


homophone (n.)

a word pronounced the same as another (whether spelled the same or not) but different in meaning,
1843, from the adjective homophone (1620s), from Greek homos same (see homo- (1)) + phone sound (see
fame (n.)). Related: Homophonic.


homophony (n.)

1776, from French homophonie, from Greek homophonia (see homophone).


homosexual (adj.)

1892, in C.G. Chaddock's translation of Krafft-Ebing's Psychopathia Sexualis, from German
homosexual, homosexuale (by 1880, in Gustav J&auml;ger), from homo-, comb. form of Greek homos same
(see homo- (1)) + Latin-based sexual.Homosexual is a barbarously hybrid word, and I claim no
responsibility for it. It is, however, convenient, and now widely used. Homogenic has been suggested
as a substitute. [H. Havelock Ellis, Studies in Psychology, 1897] Sexual inversion (1883) was an
earlier clinical term for it in English. The noun is recorded by 1895. In technical use, either male
or female; but in non-technical use almost always male. Slang shortened form homo first attested
1929. See also uranian.


homosexuality (n.)

1892; see homosexual + -ity.


homozygous (adj.)

1902, from homo- (1) same + zygote + -ous. Related: homozygote.


homuncular (adj.)

1822, from homunculus + -ar.


homunculus (n.)

1650s, from Latin homunculus, literally little person, from homo (genitive hominis) man, human
being, the Latin word that means man, person, a human being (technically male human, but in logical
and scholastic writing human being), also the human race, mankind, perhaps from PIE *(dh)ghomon-,
literally earthling, from *dhghem- earth (see chthonic; also compare human). With -culus, Latin
diminutive suffix. Other Latin diminutives from homo included homullus, homuncio.


homy (adj.)

home-like, 1856, from home + -y (2). Related: Hominess.


hon

1721 as short for honorable; 1906 as short for honey in the affectionate sense.


honcho (n.)

1947, American English, officer in charge, from Japanese hancho group leader, from han corps, squad
+ cho head, chief. Picked up by U.S. servicemen in Japan and Korea, 1947-1953.


Honduras

Spanish, literally the depths, probably in reference to coastal waters on the east side. Said to
have been called that by Columbus in 1524. Related: Honduran.


hone (n.)

whetstone, Old English han stone, rock, (boundary) stone, in Middle English whetstone (early 14c.),
from Proto-Germanic *haino (source also of Old Norse hein hone). The verb is 1788, from the noun.
Related: Honed; honing.


honer (n.)

1826, agent noun from hone (v.); early 14c. as a surname.


honest (adj.)

c.1300, respectable, decent, of neat appearance, also free from fraud, from Old French honeste
(12c.; Modern French honn&ecirc;te), from Latin honestus honorable, respected, regarded with honor,
figuratively deserving honor, honorable, respectable, from honos (see honor (n.)). Main modern sense
of dealing fairly, truthful is c.1400, as is sense of virtuous. Phrase to make an honest woman of
marry a woman after seduction is from 1620s.


honestly (adv.)

mid-14c., from honest + -ly (2). As an intensifier or exclamation, from 1898.


honesty (n.)

early 14c., splendor, honor; elegance, later honorable position; propriety of behavior, good
manners; virginity, chastity (late 14c.), from Old French honest&eacute; (Modern French
honn&ecirc;tet&eacute;), from Latin honestatem (nominative honestas) honor received from others;
reputation, character; figuratively uprightness, probity, integrity, virtue, from honestus (see
honest). Meaning moral purity, uprightness, virtue, justness is from c.1400; in English, the word
originally had more to do with honor than honest.


honey (n.)

Old English hunig, from Proto-Germanic *hunagam- (cognates: Old Norse hunang, Swedish honung, Old
Saxon huneg, Old Frisian hunig, Middle Dutch honich, Dutch honig, Old High German honang, German
Honig honey); perhaps from PIE *k(e)neko- yellow, golden (cognates: Sanskrit kancanum, Welsh canecon
gold). The more common Indo-European word is represented by Gothic mili&thorn; (from PIE *melith
honey; see Melissa). A term of endearment from at least mid-14c. Meaning anything good of its kind
is 1888, American English.


honey (v.)

mid-14c., from honey (n.). Related: Honeyed; honeying.


honey-bee (n.)

also honeybee, 1560s, from honey (n.) + bee.


honeycomb (n.)

Old English hunigcamb; see honey (n.) + comb (n). Probably the image is from wool combing.
Transferred use, of structures of similar appearance, from 1520s. As a verb, from 1620s (implied in
honeycombed).


honeydew (n.)

sticky sweet substance found on trees and plants, 1570s, from honey (n.) + dew (n.); honeydew melon
first recorded 1916, a cross between cantaloupe and a South African melon.


honeymoon (n.)

1540s, hony moone, but probably much older, indefinite period of tenderness and pleasure experienced
by a newly wed couple, from honey (n.) in reference to the new marriage's sweetness, and moon (n.)
in reference to how long it would probably last, or from the changing aspect of the moon: no sooner
full than it begins to wane. French has cognate lune de miel, but German version is flitterwochen
(plural), from flitter tinsel + wochen week. In figurative use from 1570s. Specific sense of post-
wedding holiday attested from c.1800; as a verb in this sense from 1821. Related: Honeymooned;
honeymooning.


honeysuckle (n.)

mid-13c., from Old English hunigsuge, meaning perhaps honeysuckle, clover, or privet, literally
honey-suck, + diminutive suffix -le. So called because honey can be sucked from it. In Middle
English sometimes a confused rendering of Latin locusta, taken as the name of a plant.


Hong Kong

from Cantonese pronunciation of Chinese Xianggang, literally fragrant port. Perhaps so called from
the scent of incense factories or opium cargoes, or from the semi-fresh waters of the bay. The word
hong was the general English term for foreign trading establishments in China.


honi soit qui mal y pense

Middle French, shame on him who thinks evil of it; proverbial expression recorded from c.1300, used
as motto of the Order of the Garter.


honk (n.)

cry of a goose, 1814, American English, imitative. As a verb by 1854, of geese; the sense of sound a
horn, especially on an automobile, first recorded 1895 in American English. Related: Honked;
honking.


honky (n.)

also honkey, derogatory slang word for white person, by 1967, black slang, of unknown origin,
perhaps from late 19c. hunky East-Central European immigrant, a colloquial shortening of Hungarian.
Honky in the sense of factory hand is attested from 1946.


honky-tonk (n.)

cheap night club, by 1898, Southern U.S., of unknown origin. As a type of music played in that sort
of low saloon, it is attested from 1921.


Honolulu

chief city of Hawaii, from Hawaiian hono port + lulu calm.


honor (n.)

c.1200, glory, renown, fame earned, from Anglo-French honour, Old French honor (Modern French
honneur), from Latin honorem (nominative honos, later honor) honor, dignity, office, reputation, of
unknown origin. Till 17c., honour and honor were equally frequent; the former now preferred in
England, the latter in U.S. by influence of Noah Webster's spelling reforms. Meaning a woman's
chastity first attested late 14c. Honors distinction in scholarship attested by 1782. Honor roll in
the scholastic sense attested by 1872. To do the honors (1650s) originally meant the customary
civilities and courtesies at a public entertainment, etc.


honor (v.)

mid-13c., honuren, to do honor to, from Old French honorer, from Latin honorare, from honor (see
honor (n.)). In the commercial sense of accept a bill due, etc., it is recorded from 1706. Related:
Honored; honoring.   A custom more honoured in the breach than the observance. Whoever will look up
the passage (Hamlet I. iv. 16) will see that it means, beyond a doubt, a custom that one deserves
more honour for breaking than for keeping: but it is often quoted in the wrong &amp; very different
sense of a dead letter or rule more often broken than kept. [Fowler]


honorable (adj.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), from Old French honorable, from Latin honorabilis that procures
honor, estimable, honorable, from honorare to honor (see honor (n.)). Related: Honorably.    Now,
George, you must divide the cake honorably with your brother Charlie.--George: What is 'honorably,'
mother? It means that you must give him the largest piece.--George: Then, mother, I should rather
Charlie would cut it. [Smart Sayings of Bright Children, collected by Howard Paul, 1886]


honoraria (n.)

Latin plural of honorarium.


honorarium (n.)

honorary reward, 1650s, from Latin honorarium (donum), literally honorary (gift), but in Latin
meaning bribe paid to get appointed to an honorary post, neuter of adjective honorarius for the sake
of honor, from honos (see honor (n.)).


honorary (adj.)

early 17c., from honor + -ary; possibly influenced by French honoraire, Latin honorarius pertaining
to honor, honorary.


honoree (n.)

by 1958, from honor + -ee. Alternative honorand, from Latin honorandus, is from 1950.


Honoria

fem. proper name, from Latin Honoria, fem. of Honorius man of reputation, from honos (see honor
(n.)).


honorific (adj.)

1640s, from Latin honorificus that which does honor, from honorem (see honor (n.)) + -ficus making,
from stem of facere make, do (see factitious). As a noun, by 1867.


honour

chiefly British English spelling of honor; also see  -or. Related: Honoured; honouring; honours.


honourable (adj.)

chiefly British English spelling of honorable; also see -or. Related: Honourably.


hooch (n.)

also hootch, cheap whiskey, 1897, shortened form of Hoochinoo (1877) liquor made by Alaskan Indians,
from the name of a native tribe in Alaska whose distilled liquor was a favorite with miners in 1898
Klondike gold rush; the tribe's name is said by OED to be from Tlingit Hutsnuwu, literally grizzly
bear fort.    As the supply of whisky was very limited, and the throats down which it was poured
were innumerable, it was found necessary to create some sort of a supply to meet the demand. This
concoction was known as hooch; and disgusting as it is, it is doubtful if it is much more poisonous
than the whisky itself. [M.H.E. Hayne, The Pioneers of the Klondyke, London, 1897]


hoochy koochy (n.)

also hoochie-coochie, hootchy kootchy, erotic suggestive women's dance (involving a lot of hip-
grinding), 1898, of obscure origin, usually associated, without evidence, with the Chicago world's
fair of 1893 and belly-dancer Little Egypt (who might not even have been there), but the word itself
is attested from 1890, as the stage name of minstrel singer Hoochy-Coochy Rice, though its meaning
there is unclear, perhaps a nonsense word.    To-day, however, in place of the danse du ventre or
the coochie-coochie we have the loop-the-loop or the razzle-dazzle, which latter, while not exactly
edifying at least do not serve to deprave public taste. [The Redemption of 'Old Coney,' in Broadway
Magazine, April 1904]


hood (n.1)

covering, Old English hod hood, from Proto-Germanic *hodaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian hod
hood, Middle Dutch hoet, Dutch hoed hat, Old High German huot helmet, hat, German Hut hat, Old
Frisian hode guard, protection), from PIE *kadh- cover (see hat).    Modern spelling is early 1400s
to indicate a long vowel, which is no longer pronounced as such. Meaning removable cover for an
automobile engine attested by 1905. Little Red Riding Hood (1729) translates Charles Perrault's
Petit Chaperon Rouge (Contes du Temps Pass&eacute; 1697).


hood (n.2)

gangster, 1930, American English, shortened form of hoodlum.


hood (v.)

to put a hood on, c.1200, from hood (n.1). Related: Hooded; hooding.


hood (n.3)

shortened form of neighborhood, by 1987, U.S. black slang.


hoodie (n.)

also hoody, slang shortening of hooded sweatshirt, attested by 1991. Earlier it was a familiar term
for the hooded crow (1789).


hoodlum (n.)

popularized 1871, American English, (identified throughout the 1870s as a California word) young
street rowdy, loafer, especially one involved in violence against Chinese immigrants, young
criminal, gangster; it appears to have been in use locally from a slightly earlier date and may have
begun as a specific name of a gang:    The police have recently been investigating the proceedings
of a gang of thieving boys who denominate themselves and are known to the world as the Hoodlum Gang.
[San Francisco Golden Era newspaper, Feb. 16, 1868, p.4]    Of unknown origin, though newspapers of
the day printed myriad fanciful stories concocted to account for it. A guess perhaps better than
average is that it is from German dialectal (Bavarian) Huddellump ragamuffin [Barnhart].    What the
derivation of the word hoodlum is we could never satisfactorily ascertain, though several
derivations have been proposed; and it would appear that the word has not been very many years in
use. But, however obscure the word may be, there is nothing mysterious about the thing; .... [Walter
M. Fisher, The Californians, London, 1876]


hoodoo (n.)

one who practices voodoo, 1870, American English, probably an alteration of voodoo. Meaning
something that causes or brings bad luck is attested from 1880.


hoodwink (v.)

1560s, to blindfold, from hood (n.1) + wink; figurative sense of mislead, deceive is c.1600.
Related: Hoodwinked; hoodwinking.


hooey (n.)

nonsense, foolishness, 1922, American English slang, of unknown origin.


hoof (n.)

Old English hof hoof, from Proto-Germanic *hofaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian hof, Old Norse
hofr, Danish hov, Dutch hoef, German Huf hof), from PIE *kop- to beat, strike (cognates: Sanskrit
saphah hoof). For spelling, see hood (n.1).


hoof (v.)

to walk (hoof it), first attested 1640s, from hoof (n.); slang meaning to dance is 1920, American
English (implied in hoofer). Related: Hoofed; hoofing.


hoofbeat (n.)

also hoof-beat, 1821, from hoof (n.) + beat (n.).


hook (n.)

Old English hoc hook, angle, perhaps related to Old English haca bolt, from Proto-Germanic
*hokaz/*hakan- (cognates: Old Frisian hok, Middle Dutch hoek, Dutch haak, German Haken hook), from
PIE *keg- hook, tooth (cognates: Russian kogot claw). For spelling, see hood (n.1).    Boxing sense
of short, swinging blow with the elbow bent is from 1898. Figurative sense was in Middle English
(see hooker). By hook or by crook (late 14c.) probably alludes to tools of professional thieves.
Hook, line, and sinker completely is 1838, a metaphor from angling.


hook (v.)

to bend like a hook, c.1200; see hook (n.). Meaning to catch (a fish) with a hook is from c.1300.
Related: Hooked; hooking.


hookah (n.)

also hooka, 1763, from Arabic huqqah small box, vessel (through which the smoke is drawn), extended
in Urdu to the whole apparatus.


hooked (adj.)

Old English hoced, shaped like a hook, crooked, curved; past participle adj. from hook (v.). From
mid-14c. as having hooks; 1610s as caught on a hook; 1925 as addicted, originally in reference to
narcotics. hooked rug is recorded from 1880.


hooker (n.)

prostitute, often traced to the disreputable morals of the Army of the Potomac (American Civil War)
under the tenure of Gen. Fighting Joe Hooker (early 1863), and the word might have been popularized
by this association at that time (though evidence is wanting). But it is reported to have been in
use in North Carolina c.1845 ([I]f he comes by way of Norfolk he will find any number of pretty
Hookers in the Brick row not far from French's hotel. Take my advice and touch nothing in the shape
of a prostitute when you come through Raleigh, for in honest truth the clap is there of luxuriant
growth. letter quoted in Norman E. Eliason, Tarheel Talk, 1956).    One early theory traces it to
Corlear's Hook, a section of New York City.    HOOKER. A resident of the Hook, i.e. a strumpet, a
sailor's trull. So called from the number of houses of ill-fame frequented by sailors at the Hook
(i.e. Corlear's Hook) in the city of New York. [John Russell Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms,
1859]    Perhaps related to hooker thief, pickpocket (1560s), but most likely a reference to
prostitutes hooking or snaring clients. Hook in the figurative sense of that by which anyone is
attracted or caught is recorded from early 15c.; and hook (v.) in the figurative sense of catch hold
of and draw in is attested from 1570s; in reference to fishing for a husband or a wife, it was in
common use from c.1800. All of which makes the modern sense seem a natural step.  Compare French
accrocheuse, raccrocheuse, common slang term for street-walker, prostitute, literally hooker of men.
The family name Hooker (attested from c.975 C.E.) would mean maker of hooks, or else refer to an
agricultural laborer who used a hook (compare Old English weodhoc weed-hook).


hookup (n.)

also hook up, connection, 1903; modern slang verbal sense of to meet for sex is attested by 2003.


hooky (n.)

also hookey, in the truant sense, 1848, American English (New York City), from Dutch hoekje hide and
seek; or else from hook it, attested since 14c. as make off, run away, originally depart, proceed.


hooligan (n.)

1890s, of unknown origin, first found in British newspaper police-court reports in the summer of
1898, almost certainly from the variant form of the Irish surname Houlihan, which figured as a
characteristic comic Irish name in music hall songs and newspapers of the 1880s and '90s.    As an
inventor and adapter to general purposes of the tools used by navvies and hodmen, Hooligan is an
Irish character who occupies week by week the front of a comic literary journal called Nuggets, one
of the series of papers published by Mr. James Henderson at Red Lion House. Previous to publication
in London, Hooligan appears, I believe, in New York in a comic weekly, and in London he is set off
against Schneider, a German, whose contrainventions and adaptations appear in the Garland (a very
similar paper to Nuggets), which also comes from Mr. Henderson's office. Hooligan and Schneider have
been running, I should think, for four or five years. [Notes and Queries, Oct. 15, 1898]
Internationalized 20c. in communist rhetoric as Russian khuligan, opprobrium for scofflaws,
political dissenters, etc.


hooliganism (n.)

1898, from hooligan + -ism.


hoop (n.)

late 12c., probably from an unrecorded Old English *hop, from Proto-Germanic *hopa-, a Low German-
Frisian word (cognates: Old Frisian hop, Middle Dutch and Dutch hoep hoop, Old Norse hop a small
bay). As something someone jumps through (on horseback) as a circus trick, by 1793. Figurative use
of jump through hoops by 1917. The verb is from mid-15c. Hoop-petticoat is attested from 1711. As a
surname, Hooper, literally maker of hoops is early 13c.


hoopla

1877, hoop la, American English, earlier houp-la, exclamation accompanying quick movement (1870), of
unknown origin, perhaps borrowed from French houp-l&agrave; upsy-daisy, also a cry to dogs, horses,
etc. (see whoop).


hoopoe (n.)

1660s, from Latin upupa, imitative of its cry (compare Greek epops hoopoe).If anybody smears himself
with the blood of this bird on his way to bed, he will have nightmares about suffocating devils.
[Cambridge bestiary, 12c.]


hooray

see hurrah.


hoosegow (n.)

jail, 1911, western U.S., probably from mispronunciation of Mexican Spanish juzgao tribunal, court,
from juzgar to judge, used as a noun, from Latin judicare to judge, which is related to judicem (see
judge (v.)).


Hoosier

native or resident of Indiana, by c.1830, American English, of unknown origin; fanciful explanations
were printed in 1830s newspapers. Said to have been first printed Jan. 1, 1833, in the Indianapolis
Journal, in a poem, The Hoosiers Nest, by John Finely, which poem was said to have been written in
1830 [The Word Hoosier, Indiana Historical Society Publications, vol. IV, No. 2, 1907], and to have
been in oral use from late 1820s. Seemingly it originated among Ohio River boatmen; perhaps related
to English dialectal (Cumberland) hoozer, used of anything unusually large [Barnhart]. For other
theories, see the above quoted source.


hoot (v.)

to call or shout in disapproval or scorn, c.1600, probably related to or a variant of Middle English
houten, huten to shout, call out (c.1200), probably ultimately imitative. First used of bird cries,
especially that of the owl, mid-15c. Related: Hooted; hooting. As a noun from mid-15c. Meaning a
laugh, something funny is first recorded 1942. Slang sense of smallest amount or particle (the hoot
you don't give when you don't care) is from 1891.    A dod blasted ole fool! answered the captain,
who, till now, had been merely an amused on-looker. Ye know all this rumpus wont do nobuddy a hoot
o' good--not a hoot. [Along Traverse Shores, Traverse City, Michigan, 1891]   Hooter in the same
sense is from 1839.   <b>HOOTER</b>. Probably a corruption of iota. Common in New York in such
phrases as I don't care a hooter for him. This note ain't worth a hooter. [John Russell Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1877]


hootenanny (n.)

informal session of folk musicians, 1940, American English, earlier a gadget (1927), of unknown
origin, perhaps a nonsense word.    Another device used by the professional car thief, and one
recently developed to perfection, according to a large Chicago lock-testing laboratory, is a
hootenanny, so-called by the criminals using it. [Popular Mechanics, February 1931]


hooter (n.)

by 1823, anything that hoots, especially an owl, agent noun from hoot (v.). Slang meaning nose is
from 1958. Meaning a woman's breast (usually in plural hooters)  attested by 1972. The Hooters
restaurant chain began 1983 in Clearwater, Florida, U.S.


hoove

cattle disease, 1840, from alternative past tense form of heave.


Hoover

proprietary name for a make of vacuum cleaner (patented 1927); sometimes used generally for vacuum
cleaner. As a verb, meaning to vacuum, from 1926, in the companyâ&euro;&trade;s advertising.


Hooverville

1933, American English, from U.S. president Herbert C. Hoover (1874-1964), who was in office when
the Depression began, + common place-name ending -ville. Earlier his name was the basis of Hooverize
economize on food (1917) from his role as wartime head of the U.S. Food Administration.


hooya

exclamation of triumph or approval, first attested c.1992, perhaps originally U.S. military.


hop (v.)

Old English hoppian to spring, leap, dance, from Proto-Germanic *hupnojan (cognates: Old Norse
hoppa, Dutch huppen, German h&uuml;pfen to hop). Related: Hopped; hopping.


hop (n.1)

usually hops, type of twining vine whose cones are used in brewing, etc., mid-15c., from Middle
Dutch hoppe, from Proto-Germanic *hup-nan- (cognates: Old Saxon -hoppo, German Hopfen), of unknown
origin.


hop (n.2)

opium, 1887, from Cantonese nga-pin (pronounced HAH-peen) opium, a Chinese folk etymology of the
English word opium, literally crow peelings. Re-folk-etymologized back into English by association
with hop (n.1).


hop (n.3)

a small jump, c.1500, from hop (v.). Slang sense of informal dancing party is from 1731 (defined by
Johnson as a place where meaner people dance). Meaning short flight on an aircraft is from 1909.


hope (v.)

Old English hopian wish, expect, look forward (to something), of unknown origin, a general North Sea
Germanic word (cognates: Old Frisian hopia, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Dutch hopen; Middle
High German hoffen to hope, borrowed from Low German). Some suggest a connection with hop (v.) on
the notion of leaping in expectation [Klein]. Related: Hoped; hoping.


hope (n.)

Old English hopa, from hope (v.). Compare Old Frisian and Middle Dutch hope, Dutch hoop, all from
their respective verbs.


hopeful (adj.)

c.1200, from hope + -ful. As a noun, one on whom hopes are set, from 1720. Related: Hopefulness.


hopefully (adv.)

1630s, in a hopeful manner, from hopeful + -ly (2). As a replacement for the admittedly awkward it
is to be hoped that attested from 1932 but avoided by careful writers.


hopeless (adj.)

1560s, from hope (n.) + -less. Related: Hopelessly; hopelessness.


hophead (n.)

opium addict, 1911, from hop (n.2) + head (n.) in the drug sense.


Hopi

Pueblo people of the U.S. southwest, from Pueblo hopi, literally well-mannered, civilized.


hoping (n.)

c.1300, verbal noun from hope (v.).


hoplite (n.)

heavy-armed foot soldier of ancient Greece, 1727, from Greek hoplites heavily armed soldier,
literally heavy armed, from hopla arms, armor, plural of hoplon tool, weapon, implement.


hopped (adj.)

a word that seems to merge three senses of hop; the meaning flavored with hops (hop (n.1)) is first
attested 1660s; that of under the influence of drugs (hop (n.2)) is from 1924; that of excited,
enthusiastic (perhaps from hop (v.)) is from 1923. Meaning performance-enhanced (of an engine, etc.)
is from 1945.


hopper (n.1)

person or animal that hops, mid-13c., agent noun from hop (v.). From c.1200 as a surname, and
perhaps existing in Old English (which had hoppestre female dancer).


hopper (n.2)

container with narrow opening at bottom, late 13c., perhaps an agent noun from hop (v.) via notion
of grain juggling in a mill hopper.


hopscotch

1801 (from 1789 as hop-scot), from hop (v.) + scotch (n.2) scratch, from the lines scored in the
dirt to make the squares for the game.


hoptoad (n.)

by 1827, American English, from hop (v.) + toad.


Horace

masc. proper name, from French, from Latin Horatius, name of a Roman gens. The poet was Quintus
Horatius Flaccus (65-8 B.C.E.). The form Horatio is influenced by the Italian version of the name,
Orazio.


Horatian

from Horatius (see Horace) + -an.


horde (n.)

1550s, from West Turkic (compare Tatar urda horde, Turkish ordu camp, army), to English via Polish,
French, or Spanish. The initial -h- seems to have been acquired in Polish. Transferred sense of
uncivilized gang is from 1610s. Related: Hordes.


hore (n.)

dirt, filth, also hor; from Old English horh phlegm, horu foulness, from Proto-Germanic *horwo-
(cognates: Old Frisian hore, Old High German horo, Old Norse horr), perhaps imitative.


horizon (n.)

late 14c., orisoun, from Old French orizon (14c., Modern French horizon), earlier orizonte (13c.),
from Latin horizontem (nominative horizon), from Greek horizon kyklos bounding circle, from horizein
bound, limit, divide, separate, from horos boundary. The h- was restored 17c. in imitation of Latin.


horizontal (adj.)

1550s, relating to or near the horizon, from French horizontal, from Latin horizontem (see horizon).
Meaning flat (i.e., parallel to the horizon) is from 1630s. Related: horizontally.


hormonal (adj.)

1926, from hormone + -al (1). Related: Hormonally.


hormone (n.)

1905, from Greek hormon that which sets in motion, present participle of horman impel, urge on, from
horme onset, impulse, from PIE *or-sma-, from root *er- to move, set in motion. Used by Hippocrates
to denote a vital principle; modern meaning coined by English physiologist Ernest Henry Starling
(1866-1927). Jung used horme (1915) in reference to hypothetical mental energy that drives
unconscious activities and instincts. Related: Hormones.


horn (n.)

Old English horn horn of an animal, also wind instrument (originally made from animal horns), from
Proto-Germanic *hurnaz (cognates: German Horn, Dutch horen, Gothic haurn), from PIE *ker- (1) horn;
head, uppermost part of the body, with derivatives refering to horned animals, horn-shaped objects
and projecting parts (cognates: Greek karnon horn, Latin cornu horn, Sanskrit srngam horn, Persian
sar head, Avestan sarah- head, Greek koryphe head, Latin cervus deer, Welsh carw deer). Reference to
car horns is first recorded 1901. Figurative senses of Latin cornu included salient point, chief
argument; wing, flank; power, courage, strength. Jazz slang sense of trumpet is by 1921. Meaning
telephone is by 1945.


horn (v.)

1690s, to furnish with horns, from horn (n.). Earlier in figurative sense of to cuckold (1540s).
Meaning to push with the horns (of cattle, buffalo, etc.) is from 1851, American English; phrase
horn in intrude is by 1880, American English, originally cowboy slang.


hornbeam (n.)

1570s, from horn (n.) + beam (n.), preserving the original sense of the latter word; so called in
reference to its hard wood.


hornbill (n.)

1773, from horn (n.) + bill (n.2).


hornblende (n.)

1796, from German Hornblende, from horn (see horn (n.)) + blende (see blende).    The term
Hornblende is an old German name for any dark, prismatic crystal found with metallic ores but
containing no valuable metal (the word Blende indicates a deceiver) [Herbert Bucksch, Dictionary
Geotechnical Engineering, 1995]


horndog (n.)

by 1995, from horn (n.) in the sexual sense (see horny) + dog.


hornet (n.)

Old English hyrnet, hurnitu large wasp, beetle, probably from Proto-Germanic *hurz-nut- (cognates:
Old Saxon hornut, Middle Dutch huersel, Dutch horzel, Old High German hornaz, German Hornisse
hornet), from PIE imitative (buzzing) root *krs-, as preserved in Old Church Slavonic srusa,
Lithuanian szirszu wasp. On this theory, the English word (as well as German Hornisse) was altered
by influence of horn, to suggest either horner (from the sting) or horn-blower (from the buzz).
Compare also Old Saxon hornobero hornet, literally trumpeter.


hornpipe (n.)

c.1400, hornepype, musical instrument with bell and mouthpiece made of horn, from horn (n.) + pipe
(n.1). Later (late 15c.) dance associated with sailors (originally performed to music from such an
instrument).


hornswoggle (v.)

to cheat, 1829, probably a fanciful formation. Related: Hornswoggled; hornswoggling.


horny (adj.)

lustful, sexually aroused, definitely in use 1889, perhaps attested as early as 1863; from late 18c.
slang  expression to have the horn, suggestive of male sexual excitement (but eventually applied to
women as well); see horn (n.).


horology (n.)

science of time, 1819, probably from Greek hora hour (see hour) + -logy. Earlier it meant clock,
clock dial (c.1500), from Latin horologium. Related: Horologist.


horometry (n.)

measurement of time, 1560s, from Greek hora (see hour) + -metry. Related: Horometrical.


horoscope (n.)

c.1050, horoscopus, from Latin horoscopus; the modern form is considered to be a mid-16c.
reborrowing via Middle French horoscope. Ultimately from Greek horoskopos nativity, horoscope, also
one who casts a horoscope, from hora hour (see year) + skopos watcher; what is watched (see scope
(n.1)), in reference to the hour of one's birth.


horrendous (adj.)

1650s, from Latin horrendus dreadful, fearful, terrible, literally to be shuddered at, gerundive of
horrere to bristle with fear, shudder (see horror). Earlier form in English was horrend (mid-15c.).


horrible (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French horrible, orrible (12c.) horrible, repugnant, terrifying, from Latin
horribilis terrible, fearful, dreadful, from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder (see horror).
Used as a mere intensifier from mid-15c.


horribly (adv.)

mid-14c., from horrible + -ly (2).


horrid (adj.)

early 15c., hairy, shaggy, bristling, from Latin horridus bristly, prickly, rough, horrid,
frightful, from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder (see horror). Meaning horrible, causing horror
is from c.1600. Sense weakened 17c. to unpleasant, offensive.    [W]hile both [horrible and horrid]
are much used in the trivial sense of disagreeable, horrible is still quite common in the graver
sense inspiring horror, which horrid tends to lose .... [Fowler]    Related: Horridly.


horrific (adj.)

causing horror, 1650s, from French horrifique or directly from Latin horrificus dreadful, exciting
terror, literally making the hair stand on end, from horrere to bristle, to stand on end (see
horror) + -ficus, from stem of facere to make, do (see factitious). Related: Horrifically.


horrify (v.)

1791 (implied in horrifying), from horror + -fy. Related: Horrified; horrifying.


horripilation (n.)

from Late Latin horripilationem (nominative horripilatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of horripilare, from stem of horrere to bristle (see horror) + pilus hair (see pile (n.3)).


horror (n.)

early 14c., from Old French horror (12c., Modern French horreur) and directly from Latin horror
dread, veneration, religious awe, a figurative use, literally a shaking, trembling, shudder, chill,
from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder, from PIE root *ghers- to bristle (cognates: Sanskrit
harsate bristles, Avestan zarshayamna- ruffling one's feathers, Latin eris (genitive) hedgehog,
Welsh garw rough). As a genre in film, 1934. Chamber of horrors originally (1849) was a gallery of
notorious criminals in Madame Tussaud's wax exhibition.


hors d&#039;oeuvre

1714, as an adverb, out of the ordinary, from French hors d'oeuvre, outside the ordinary courses (of
a meal), literally apart from the main work, from hors, variant of fors outside (from Latin foris;
see foreign) + de from + oeuvre work, from Latin opera (see opus). Meaning extra dish set out before
a meal or between courses attested in English from 1742.


hors de combat

1757, French, literally out of combat.


horse (n.)

Old English hors, from Proto-Germanic *hursa- (cognates: Old Norse hross, Old Frisian hors, Middle
Dutch ors, Dutch ros, Old High German hros, German Ro&szlig; horse), of unknown origin, connected by
some with PIE root *kurs-, source of Latin currere to run (see current (adj.)).    The usual Indo-
European word is represented by Old English eoh, from PIE *ekwo- horse (see equine). In many other
languages, as in English, this root has been lost in favor of synonyms, probably via superstitious
taboo on uttering the name of an animal so important in Indo-European religion.    Used since at
least late 14c. of various devices or appliances which suggest a horse (as in sawhorse). To ride a
horse that was foaled of an acorn (1670s) was through early 19c. a way to say be hanged from the
gallows. Slang for heroin is first attested 1950. Horse latitudes first attested 1777, the name of
unknown origin, despite much speculation. Dead horse as a figure for something that has ceased to be
useful is attested from 1630s.    HORSEGODMOTHER, a large masculine wench; one whom it is difficult
to rank among the purest and gentlest portion of the community. [John Trotter Brockett, A Glossary
of North Country Words, 1829]   The horse's mouth as a source of reliable information is from 1921,
perhaps originally of racetrack tips, from the fact that a horse's age can be determined accurately
by looking at its teeth. To swap horses while crossing the river (a bad idea) is from the American
Civil War and appears to have been originally one of Abe Lincoln's stories. Horse and buggy meaning
old-fashioned is recorded from 1926 slang, originally in reference to a young lady out of date, with
long hair. The proverbial gift horse was earlier given horse:    No man ought to looke a geuen hors
in the mouth. [Heywood, 1546]    The modern form perhaps traces to Butler's Hudibras (1663), where
the tight iambic tetrameter required a shorter phrase:    He ne'er consider'd it, as loth  To look a
Gift-horse in the mouth.


horse (v.)

Old English horsian to provide with a horse or horses, from horse (n.). Related: Horsed; horsing.
Sense of to play excessive jokes on is by 1893, mostly in formation horse around (1928), perhaps
from horseplay.    [A] favorite pastime for many men is to horse or guy a friend who has shown
himself susceptible to ridicule or fun making. Horsing is extremely wholesome mental discipline for
over sensitive or super-conceited young men. Horsing always implies a joke at another's expense. As
to how it came into use there is no satisfactory theory to offer. [Yale Literary Magazine, December
1893]


horse sense (n.)

1832, American English colloquial, from horse (n.), perhaps in referfence to the animal's qualities,
or the abilites of hostlers and coachmen with the animals, perhaps from the same association of
strong, large, coarse found in horseradish.


horse-chestnut (n.)

1590s, from horse + chestnut. A tree probably native to Asia, introduced in England c.1550; the name
also was extended to similar North American species such as the buckeye. Said to have been so called
because it was food for horses. The nut resembles that of the edible chestnut but is bitter to the
taste.


horse-race (n.)

also horserace, 1580s, from horse (n.) + race (n.1).


horse-whip (n.)

1690s, from horse (n.) + whip (n.). As a verb from 1768. Related: Horserwhipped; horsewhipping.


horseback

late 14c., from horse (n.) + back (n.).


horsefeathers (n.)

nonsense, 1928, said to have been coined by U.S. cartoonist Billy De Beck; perhaps a variant of
horseshit nonsense, though the latter is attested only from 1940s.


horsefly (n.)

late 14c., from horse (n.) + fly (n.).


horsehair (n.)

late 14c., from horse (n.) + hair.


horsehide

early 14c., from horse (n.) + hide (n.).


horseman (n.)

c.1200, from horse (n.) + man (n.).


horsemanship (n.)

1560s, from horseman + -ship.


horseplay (n.)

rough, excessive play, 1580s, from horse (n.) with its associations of strong, coarse + play (n.).


horsepower (n.)

1806, from horse (n.) + power (n.); established by Watt as the power needed to lift 33,000 pounds
one foot in one minute, which is actually about 1.5 times the power of a strong horse.


horseradish (n.)

1590s, Cochlearia armoricia; the common name preserves the once-common figurative sense of horse as
strong, large, coarse (as in in obsolete horse mushroom, horse parsley, Old English horsminte horse
mint, etc.); also see radish.


horseshoe (n.)

late 14c. (early 13c. as a proper name), from horse (n.) + shoe (n.). Horseshoes as another name for
the game of quoits, attested by 1822.    HORSE-SHOES, the game of coits, or quoits--because
sometimes actually played with horse-shoes. [John Trotter Brockett, A Glossary of North Country
Words, 1829]    The belief that finding a horseshoe by chance is lucky is attested from late 14c.,
and the practice of nailing one above a doorway to prevent a witch entering therein was common in
London down to c.1800. Of a type of bend in a river, 1770, American English. As a type of crab, from
1775.


horsetail (n.)

c.1400, from horse (n.) + tail (n.). As a kind of plant, from 1530s.


horsewoman (n.)

1560s, from horse (n.) + woman. See horseman.


horsy (adj.)

1590s, from horse (n.) + -y (2). Related: Horsiness.


hortative (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin hortativus, from past participle stem of hortari â&euro;&oelig;to
exhortâ&euro;? (see hortatory).


hortatory (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French hortatoire and directly from Late Latin hortatorius encouraging, cheering,
from hortatus, past participle of hortari exhort, encourage, urge, incite, instigate, intensive of
horiri urge, incite, encourage, from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (cognates: Old English
giernan to strive, desire, yearn; Gothic gairnei desire; Greek khresthai to lack, want; use, make
use of, kharis grace, favor, khairein to rejoice, delight in; Sanskrit haryati finds pleasure,
likes, harsate is aroused; Avestan zara effort, aim; Russian zhariti awake desire, charm).


Hortense

fem. proper name, from Latin Hortensia, fem. of Hortensius, a Roman gens name, related to hortus
garden (see yard (n.1)).


horticultural (adj.)

1778, from horticulture + -al (1).


horticulture (n.)

1670s, cultivation of a garden, fabricated from Latin hortus garden (see yard (n.1)) + cultura (see
culture); probably on model of agriculture. Famously punned upon by Dorothy Parker.


horticulturist (n.)

1818, from horticulture + -ist. Earlier was horticultist (1754).


Horus

1851, Egyptian hawk-headed god, from Latin Horus, from Egyptian Hor, literally the high-flying one.


hosanna

Old English osanna, via Latin and Greek from Hebrew hosha'na, probably a shortening of hoshi'ah-nna
save, we pray (see Psalms cxviii:25), from imperative of y-sh- (compare yeshua salvation,
deliverance, welfare) + emphatic particle -na. Originally an appeal for deliverance; used in
Christian Church as an ascription of praise, because when Jesus entered Jerusalem this was shouted
by Galilean pilgrims in recognition of his messiahhood (Matt. xxi:9, 15, etc.).


hose (v.)

c.1300, to furnish with stockings, from hose (n.). Meaning to water down with a hose is from 1889.
Related: Hosed; hosing.


hose (n.)

late Old English, hosa covering for the leg, from Proto-Germanic *husan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Norse hosa, Middle High German hose covering for the leg, German Hose trousers), literally covering,
from PIE *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see hide (n.1)). Old French hose, Old Spanish huesa are of
Germanic origin. Sense of flexible rubber tube for liquid is first attested late 15c.


Hosea

masc. proper name, from Hebrew Hoshea, literally salvation, from stem y-sh- to save.


hoser (n.)

contemptible person, also hose-head, by 1982, a term popularized by the Canadian parody comic sketch
Great White North with the fictional McKenzie Brothers on SCTV.


hosier (n.)

late 14c., hosyere hose-maker (attested as a surname from late 12c.), from hose (n.) + -ier, French-
influenced agent noun suffix.


hosiery (n.)

stocking collectively, 1775, from hosier + -y (1). As factory where hose is made, from 1803.


hospice (n.)

1818, rest house for travelers, from French hospice (13c.), from Latin hospitium guest house,
hospitality, from hospes (genitive hospitis) guest, host (see host (n.1)). Sense of home for the
aged and terminally ill  is from 1893; hospice movement first attested 1979.


hospitable (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French hospitable, from Latin hospitari be a guest, from hospes (genitive
hospitis) guest (see host (n.1)). Related: Hospitably.


hospital (n.)

mid-13c., shelter for the needy, from Old French hospital, ospital hostel (Modern French
h&ocirc;pital), from Late Latin hospitale guest-house, inn, neuter of Latin adjective hospitalis of
a guest or host, from hospes (genitive hospitis); see host (n.1). Later charitable institution to
house and maintain the needy (early 15c.); sense of institution for sick people is first recorded
1540s.


hospitality (n.)

late 14c., act of being hospitable, from Old French hospitalit&eacute;, from Latin hospitalitem
(nominative hospitalitas) friendliness to guests, from hospes (genitive hospitis) guest (see host
(n.1)).


hospitalization (n.)

1873, noun of action from hospitalize.


hospitalize (v.)

1873, from hospital + -ize. Freq[uently] commented on as an unhappy formation [OED]. Related:
hospitalized; hospitalizing.


hoss (n.)

1815, representing U.S. dialectal variant pronunciation of horse, especially as applied to (large or
coarse) persons.


host (n.1)

person who receives guests, late 13c., from Old French hoste guest, host, hostess, landlord (12c.,
Modern French h&ocirc;te), from Latin hospitem (nominative hospes) guest, host, literally lord of
strangers, from PIE *ghostis- stranger (cognates: Old Church Slavonic  gosti guest, friend, gospodi
lord, master; see guest). The biological sense of animal or plant having a parasite is from 1857.


host (n.2)

multitude mid-13c., from Old French host army (10c.), from Medieval Latin hostis army, war-like
expedition, from Latin hostis enemy, foreigner, stranger, from the same root as host (n.1). Replaced
Old English here, and in turn has been largely superseded by army. The generalized meaning of large
number is first attested 1610s.


host (n.3)

body of Christ, consecrated bread, c.1300, from Latin hostia sacrifice, also the animal sacrificed,
applied in Church Latin to Christ; probably ultimately related to host (n.1) in its root sense of
stranger, enemy.


host (v.)

to serve as a host, early 15c., from host (n.1). Related: Hosted; hosting.


hosta (n.)

1828, plant genus of the lily family, coined 1812 in Modern Latin for Austrian physician and
botanist Nicolaus Thomas Host (1761-1834).


hostage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French hostage person given as security or hostage (12c., Modern French
&ocirc;tage), either from hoste guest (see host (n.1)) via notion of a lodger held by a landlord as
security, or from Late Latin obsidanus condition of being held as security, from obses hostage, from
ob- before + base of sedere to sit [OED]. Modern political/terrorism sense is from 1970.


hostel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French hostel inn, lodgings, shelter (11c., Modern French h&ocirc;tel), from
Medieval Latin hospitale inn, large house (see hospital). Obsolete after 16c., revived 1808, along
with hostelry (Middle English hostelrie) by Sir Walter Scott. The sense in youth hostel is recorded
by 1931.


hostelry (n.)

late 14c. (as a surname from early 14c.), from Old French hostelerie house, guest-house; kitchen;
hospice, almshouse (12c., Modern French h&ocirc;tellerie), from hostel (see host). Lost, then
revived 19c.


hostess (n.)

late 13c., woman who keeps an inn or public hotel, from host (n.1) + -ess, or from Old French
hostesse (Modern French h&ocirc;tesse). Meaning woman who presides at a dinner party, etc. recorded
by 1822. Also used mid-20c. in sense female who entertains customers in nightclubs, with overtones
of prostitution.


hostile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French hostile of or belonging to an enemy or directly from Latin hostilis of
an enemy, from hostis enemy (see guest). The noun meaning hostile person is recorded from 1838,
American English, a word from the Indian wars.


hostility (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French hostilit&eacute; enmity (15c.), or directly from Late Latin
hostilitatem (nominative hostilitas) enmity, from Latin hostilis, from hostis enemy (see guest).
Hostilities in the sense of warfare attested from 1610s.


hostler (n.)

late 14c., one who tends to horses at an inn, also, occasionally, innkeeper, from Anglo-French
hostiler, Old French hostelier innkeeper, steward (12c., Modern French h&ocirc;telier), from
Medieval Latin hostilarius the monk who entertains guests at a monastery, from hospitale inn (see
hospital). See also ostler.


hot (adj.)

Old English hat hot, flaming, opposite of cold, also fervent, fierce, intense, excited, from Proto-
Germanic *haita- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian het, Old Norse heitr, Middle Dutch and Dutch
heet, German hei&szlig; hot, Gothic heito heat of a fever), from PIE root *kai- heat (cognates:
Lithuanian kaistu to grow hot).    The association of hot with sexuality dates back to c.1500. Taste
sense of pungent, acrid, biting is from 1540s. Sense of exciting, remarkable, very good is 1895;
that of stolen is first recorded 1925 (originally with overtones of easily identified and difficult
to dispose of); that of radioactive is from 1942.   Hot flashes in the menopausal sense attested
from 1887. Hot air unsubstantiated statements, boastful talk is from 1900. Hot stuff for anything
good or excellent is by 1889. Hot potato in figurative sense is from 1846. The hot and cold in hide-
and-seek or guessing games are from hunting (1640s), with notion of tracking a scent.


hot dog

also hotdog, sausage on a split roll, c.1890, popularized by cartoonist T.A. Dorgan. It is said to
echo a 19c. suspicion (occasionally justified) that sausages contained dog meat. Meaning someone
particularly skilled or excellent (with overtones of showing off) is from 1896. Connection between
the two senses, if any, is unclear. Hot dog! as an exclamation of approval was in use by 1906.


hot pants (n.)

short-shorts, 1970, from hot (adj.) + pants (n.). Probably influenced by earlier sense of sexual
arousal (1927).


hot spot (n.)

also hotspot, 1888 as a skin irritation; 1931 as nightclub; 1938 in the firefighting sense; 1941 as
place of international conflict. See hot (adj.) + spot (n.).


hot water (n.)

c.1400, literal; 1530s in figurative sense of trouble.


hot-blooded (adj.)

passionate, 1590s; a relic of medieval physiology theory.


hot-foot

c.1300 (adv.) hastily, from hot + foot (n.). As a verb, from 1896. As the name of a prank played
with matches, by 1934.


hot-rod (n.)

also hot rod, 1945, American English, from hot + rod, apparently in a sense of hunk of metal (the
cars also were called hot iron).


hotbed (n.)

1620s, from hot + bed (n.); originally bed of earth heated by fermenting manure for forcing growing
plants; generalized sense of place that fosters rapid growth is from 1768.


Hotchkiss

1878, type of gun named for its inventor, Benjamin B. Hotchkiss (1826-1885). In Japanese, the word
for stapler is hotchikisu after the E. H. Hotchkiss Company of Norwalk, Connecticut, U.S., early and
prominent manufacturer of staplers (incorporated 1895, name from 1897), which apparently was run by
relatives of the gun inventor. The surname (attested from late 15c. as Hochekys) is a variant of
Hodgkin.


hotel (n.)

1640s, public official residence, from French h&ocirc;tel, Old French hostel a lodging (11c.), from
Medieval Latin hospitale inn (see hostel). Modern sense of an inn of the better sort is first
recorded 1765.


hotelier (n.)

1905, from French h&ocirc;telier hotelkeeper, Old French hostelier, from hostel (see hostel).


hothead (n.)

short-tempered person, 1650s, from hot in the figurative sense + head (n.); Johnson's dictionary
also lists hotmouthed headstrong, ungovernable; Elizabethan English had hot-brain hothead (c.1600);
and Old English had hatheort anger, rage, literally hot heart.


hothouse (n.)

mid-15c., bath house, from hot + house (n.). In 17c. a euphemism for brothel (similar to massage
parlor); the meaning glass-roofed structure for raising plants is from 1749. Figurative use by 1802.


hotly (adv.)

1520s, from hot + -ly (2). Compare Old English hatlice ardently.


hotshot (n.)

important person, 1933; see hot + shot (n.). It earlier meant fast train (1925), and reckless person
(c.1600).


Hottentot

1670s, from S.African Dutch, said to mean stammerer, it is from hot en tot hot and tot, nonsense
words imitative of the clicking, jerking Khoisan speech.


hottie (n.)

also hotty, attractive person, teen slang by 1995, from hot + -ie. The same word was used from 1947
with sense hot water bottle.


Houdini (n.)

escape artist or other ingenious person, 1923, from Harry Houdini, professional name of U.S.
escapist Erich Weiss (1874-1926).


hound (n.)

Old English hund dog, from Proto-Germanic *hundas (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian hund, Old
High German hunt, German Hund, Old Norse hundr, Gothic hunds), from PIE *kuntos, dental enlargement
of root *kwon- dog (see canine). Meaning narrowed 12c. to dog used for hunting.


hound (v.)

hunt with hounds, 1520s, from hound (v.). Sense of pursue relentlessly is first recorded c.1600.
Related: Hounded; hounding.


houndstooth

also hound's tooth, as a design pattern, 1936, so called for resemblance.


hour (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French hore one-twelfth of a day (sunrise to sunset), from Latin hora hour, time,
season, from Greek hora any limited time, from PIE *yor-a-, from root *yer- year, season (see year).
Greek hora was a season; 'the season;' in classical times, sometimes, a part of the day, such as
morning, evening, noon, night.    The Greek astronomers apparently borrowed the notion of dividing
the day into twelve parts (mentioned in Herodotus) from the Babylonians (night continued to be
divided into four watches), but as the amount of daylight changed throughout the year, the hours
were not fixed or of equal length. Equinoctal hours did not become established in Europe until the
4c., and as late as 16c. distinction sometimes was made between temporary (unequal) hours and
sidereal (equal) ones. The h- has persisted in this word despite not being pronounced since Roman
times. Replaced Old English tid, literally time (see tide (n.)) and stund period of time, point of
time, hour (compare German Stunde hour), As a measure of distance (the distance that can be covered
in an hour) it is recorded from 1785.


hourglass (n.)

1510s, from hour + glass. Used 19c. in a variety of technical and scientific senses to describe the
shape; reference to women's bodies is attested by 1897.    Men condemn corsets in the abstract, and
are sometimes brave enough to insist that the women of their households shall be emancipated from
them; and yet their eyes have been so generally educated to the approval of the small waist, and the
hourglass figure, that they often hinder women who seek a hygienic style of dress. [Mary Ashton Rice
Livermore, The Story of My Life, 1898]


houri (n.)

nymph of Muslim paradise, 1737, from French houri (1650s), from Persian huri nymph in Paradise, from
Arabic haura to be beautifully dark-eyed, like a gazelle + -i, Persian formative element denoting
the singular.


hourly

late 15c. (adv.); 1510s (adj.), from hour + -ly (2).


house (n.)

Old English hus dwelling, shelter, house, from Proto-Germanic *husan (cognates: Old Norse, Old
Frisian hus, Dutch huis, German Haus), of unknown origin, perhaps connected to the root of hide (v.)
[OED]. In Gothic only in gudhus temple, literally god-house; the usual word for house in Gothic
being razn.    Meaning family, including ancestors and descendants, especially if noble is from
c.1000. The legislative sense (1540s) is transferred from the building in which the body meets.
Meaning audience in a theater is from 1660s (transferred from the theater itself, playhouse); as a
dance club DJ music style, probably from the Warehouse, a Chicago nightclub where the style is said
to have originated. Zodiac sense is first attested late 14c. To play house is from 1871; as
suggestive of have sex, shack up, 1968. House arrest first attested 1936. On the house free is from
1889.And the Prophet Isaiah the sonne of Amos came to him, and saide vnto him, Thus saith the Lord,
Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not liue. [2 Kings xx:1, version of 1611]


house (v.)

give shelter to, Old English husian to take into a house (cognate with German hausen, Dutch huizen);
see house (n.). Related: Housed; housing.


houseboat (n.)

1790, from house (n.) + boat (n.).


housebreak (v.)

1820, to break into a house criminally; see house (n.) + break (v.). Perhaps a back-formation from
housebreaker, attested from mid-14c. Sense of to train a domestic animal to be clean in the house is
from 1881. Related: Housebreaking; housebroken.


housefly (n.)

early 15c., from house (n.) + fly (n.).


houseful

c.1300, from house (n.) + -ful.


household (n.)

late 14c., members of a family collectively (including servants), also furniture and articles
belonging to a house, from house (n.) + hold (n.1). Related: Householder.


housekeeper (n.)

mid-15c., householder, from house (n.) + agent noun of keep (v.). Sense of female head domestic
servant of a house is from c.1600.


housekeeping (n.)

1540s, from house (n.) + present participle of keep (v.).


housewarming (n.)

celebration of a new home, 1570s, from house (n.) + present participle of warm.


housewife (n.)

early 13c., husewif, woman, usually married, in charge of a family or household (compare husebonde;
see husband), from huse house (see house (n.)) + wif woman (see wife). Also see hussy. Related:
Housewifely.


housing (n.1)

buildings, lodgings, early 14c., husing, from the root of house (n.).


housing (n.2)

ornamental covering, c.1300, houce covering for the back and flanks of a horse, from Old French
houce mantle, horse-blanket (Modern French housse), from Medieval Latin hultia protective covering,
from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *hulfti (cognates: Middle Dutch hulfte pocket for bow
and arrow, Middle High German hulft covering), from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).
Sense of case or enclosure for machine or part is first recorded 1882.


Houston

city in Texas, U.S., founded 1836 and named for first president of Texas, Sam Houston. The family
name is from the barony of Houston in Lanark.


Houyhnhnm

1727, in Gulliver's Travels, coined by Swift to suggest whinnying.


hove (v.1)

wait, linger, hover, mid-13c., of unknown origin. Chiefly nautical at first, of ships standing off a
coast, also of birds in the air. Common 13c.-16c., then superseded by its derivative, hover.


hove (v.2)

to rise up, to swell, 1590s, from heave, perhaps pulled from a past tense form.


hovel (n.)

mid-14c., roofed passage, vent for smoke, later shed for animals (mid-15c.), of unknown origin.
Meaning shed for human habitation; rude or miserable cabin is from 1620s. It also sometimes meant
canopied niche for a statue or image (mid-15c.).


hover (v.)

c.1400, hoveren, frequentative of hoven hover, tarry, linger; see hove (1). Related: Hovered;
hovering. As a noun from 1510s.


hovercraft

1959, from hover + craft. A proprietary name after 1961.


how (adv.)

Old English hu, from Proto-Germanic *hwo- (cognates: Old Saxon hwo, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch hu.
Dutch hoe, German wie, Gothic hvaiwa how), from common PIE interrogative pronomial stem *kwo- (see
who). How come? for why? is recorded from 1848. And how! emphatic, first recorded 1865. The
formulation was common in book and article titles by then (such as The National Debt, and How to Pay
It), but Pennsylvania writer Bayard Taylor, in whom it is first recorded, seems to regard it as a
German or German-American expression.


how (interj.)

Native American greeting, Siouxan (Dakota hao, Omaha hau); first recorded 1817 in English, but noted
early 17c. by French missionary Jean de Brebeuf among Hurons as an expression of approval (1636).


Howard

proper name, from Old French Huard, from a Germanic source similar to Old High German *Hugihard
heart-brave, or *Hoh-weard, literally high defender; chief guardian. Also probably in some cases a
confusion with cognate Old Norse Haward, and as a surname also with unrelated Hayward. In some rare
cases from Old English eowu hierde ewe herd.


howbeit

late 14c., contraction of how be it.


howdah

1774, from Persian and Urdu haudah, from Arabic haudaj litter carried by a camel (or elephant).


howdy

1837, earlier how de (1828), first recorded in Southern U.S. dialect, contraction of how do you do
(1630s), phrase inquiring after someone's health; earlier how do ye (1560s).


however

late 14c., from how + ever.


howitzer (n.)

1680s, via Dutch houwitser (1660s), German Haubitze from Bohemian houfnice a catapult, from houf
heap, crowd, a loan-word from Middle High German hufe heap. Introduced to German during the Hussite
wars, 14c.


howl (v.)

early 13c., houlen, probably ultimately of imitative origin; similar formations are found in other
Germanic languages. Related: Howled; howling. As a noun from 1590s.


howler

1832, animal that howls, agent noun from howl (v.). Meaning glaring blunder, ridiculous mistake is
first recorded 1890.


hoyden (n.)

1590s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Dutch heiden rustic, uncivilized man, from Middle Dutch
heiden heathen (see heathen). Originally in English rude, boorish fellow; sense of ill-bred,
boisterous female first recorded 1670s.


Hoyle

cited as a typical authority on card or board games, in reference to Edmond Hoyle (1672-1769),
author of several works on card-playing. The surname, according to Bardsley, represents a Northern
English dialectal pronunciation of hole. In Yorks and Lancashire hole is still dialectically hoyle.
Any one who lived in a round hollow or pit would be Thomas or Ralph in the Hoyle. [Dictionary of
English and Welsh Surnames, London, 1901]


HTML

1992, standing for Hypertext Markup Language.


http

abbreviation of hypertext transfer protocol, by 1990.


HUAC (n.)

1950, American English, approximate acronym for House Committee to Investigate un-American
Activities (1938-1975).


hub (n.)

solid center of a wheel, 1640s, perhaps from hubbe, originally lump, the source of hob of a
fireplace and hobnail, as in boots. A wheelwright's word, not generally known or used until c.1828;
it reached wider currency in connection with bicycles. Meaning center of interest or activity or
importance first recorded 1858 in writings of Oliver W. Holmes, and originally especially of
Boston.Boston State-House is the hub of the solar system. [O.W. Holmes, Autocrat of the Breakfast
Table]   <hr />   [E]verybody knows that Boston used to be called the Hub, meaning the hub of the
universe. It may still be the hub, because the center of a wheel moves slowly. [J.P. Marquand, Life,
March 24, 1941]


hub-bub (n.)

see hubbub.


hubba-hubba

U.S. slang cry of excitement or enthusiasm, first recorded 1944.


Hubble (n.)

space telescope placed in orbit 1990, named for U.S. astronomer Edwin P. Hubble (1889-1953).


hubbub (n.)

1550s, whobub confused noise, generally believed to be of Irish origin, perhaps from Gaelic ub!,
expression of aversion or contempt, or Old Irish battle cry abu, from buide victory.


hubby (n.)

colloquial shortening of husband, attested from 1680s, with -y (3).


hubcap (n.)

also hub cap, 1896, from hub + cap (n.).


Hubert

masc. proper name, from French, from Old High German Hugubert, literally bright-minded, from hugu
mind (see Hugh) + beraht bright (see Albert).


hubris (n.)

also hybris, 1884, a back-formation from hubristic or else from Greek hybris wanton violence,
insolence, outrage, originally presumption toward the gods; the first element probably PIE *ud- up,
out, but the meaning of the second is  debated.


hubristic (adj.)

also hybristic, 1831, from Greek hybristikos given to wantonness, insolent, from hybrizein, related
to hybris (see hubris).


huckleberry (n.)

1660s, American English, probably an alteration of Middle English hurtilbery whortleberry (15c.),
from Old English horte whortleberry. Technically the fruit and plant of Gaylussacia, but also widely
colloquially applied to the closely related blueberry (Vaccinium). Slang meaning person of little
consequence is attested from 1835.


huckster (n.)

c.1200, petty merchant, peddler (often contemptuous), from Middle Dutch hokester peddler, from hoken
to peddle (see hawk (v.1)) + agent suffix -ster (which was typically feminine in English, but not in
Low German). Specific sense of advertising salesman is from 1946 novel by Frederick Wakeman. As a
verb, from 1590s. Related: Huckstered; huckstering.


hud (n.)

husk of a seed, late 14c., of uncertain origin; perhaps related to hood (n.1).


huddle (v.)

1570s, to heap or crowd together, probably from Low German hudern to cover, to shelter, from Middle
Low German huden to cover up, from Proto-Germanic *hud- (see hide (v.)). Compare also Middle English
hoderen heap together, huddle (c.1300). Related: Huddled; huddling. The noun is from 1580s. U.S.
football sense is from 1928.


hue (n.1)

color, Old English hiw color, form, appearance, beauty, earlier heow, hiow, from Proto-Germanic
*hiwam (cognates: Old Norse hy bird's down, Swedish hy skin, complexion, Gothic hiwi form,
appearance), from PIE *kei-, a color adjective of broad application (cognates: Sanskrit chawi hide,
skin, complexion, color, beauty, splendor, Lithuanian &#353;yvas white). A common word in Old
English, squeezed into obscurity after c.1600 by color, but revived 1850s in chemistry and
chromatography.


hue (n.2)

a shouting, mid-13c., from Old French hue outcry, noise, war or hunting cry, probably of imitative
origin. Hue and cry is late 13c. as an Anglo-French legal term meaning outcry calling for pursuit of
a felon. Extended sense of cry of alarm is 1580s.


hueless (adj.)

Old English hiwlease colorless; see hue (n.1) + -less. In Old English and Middle English it also
meant formless, shapeless.


huff (v.)

mid-15c., apparently imitative of exhaling. Extended sense of bluster with indignation is attested
from 1590s. Related: Huffed; huffing. As a slang term for a type of narcotics abuse, by 1996. As a
noun from 1590s; to leave in a huff is recorded from 1778. Popular terms for strong beer or ale
noted from 1577 include huff cap as well as mad dog and dragon's milk.


huffy (adj.)

ready to take offense, 1670s, from huff + -y (2). Related: Huffily; huffiness.


hug (v.)

1560s, hugge to embrace, of unknown origin; perhaps from Old Norse hugga to comfort, from hugr
courage, mood, from Proto-Germanic *hugjan, related to Old English hycgan to think, consider, Gothic
hugs mind, soul, thought. Other have noted the similarity in some senses to German hegen to foster,
cherish, originally to enclose with a hedge. Related: Hugged; hugging. The noun was originally
(1610s) a hold in wrestling. Meaning affectionate embrace is from 1650s.


huge (adj.)

mid-12c., apparently a shortening of Old French ahuge, ahoge extremely large, enormous; mighty,
powerful, itself of uncertain origin. Expanded form hugeous is attested from early 15c. Related:
Hugeness.


hugely (adv.)

mid-14c., from huge + -ly (2).


huggable (adj.)

1863, from hug (v.) + -able.


hugger-mugger

also huggermugger, secretly, 1520s, one of a number of similar-sounding reduplicated words in use
around this time and meaning much the same thing, including hucker-mucker, which may be the original
of the bunch if the root is, as some think, Middle English mukre to hoard up, conceal. Also compare
Middle English hukmuck, late 15c., name of some sort of device for cleansing.


Hugh

masc. proper name, from Old North French Hugues, Old French Hue, from a Frankish name meaning heart,
mind, cognate with Old High German Hugi, related to hugu mind, soul, thought. Very popular after the
Conquest (often in Latin form Hugo); the common form was Howe, the nickname form Hudd. Its
popularity is attested by the more than 90 surnames formed from it, including Hughes, Howe, Hudson,
Hewitt, Hutchins.


Huguenot

1562, from Middle French Huguenot, according to French sources originally political, not religious.
The name was applied in 1520s to Genevan partisans opposed to the Duke of Savoy (who joined Geneva
to the Swiss Confederation), and it is probably an alteration of Swiss German Eidgenoss confederate,
from Middle High German eitgenoze, from eit oath + genoze comrade (related to Old English geneat
comrade, companion). The form of the French word probably altered by association with Hugues
Besan&ccedil;on, leader of the Genevan partisans. In France, applied generally to French Protestants
because Geneva was a Calvinist center.


huh

as a representation of a grunting exclamation, attested from c.1600.


hula (n.)

traditional dance of Hawaii, 1825, from Hawaiian. As a verb from 1952. Hula hoop first recorded in
fall of 1958, when it was a craze; so called from resemblance of motions of one using it to the
dancers' hip circles.


hulk (n.)

Old English hulc light, fast ship (but in Middle English a heavy, unwieldy one), probably from Old
Dutch hulke and Medieval Latin hulcus, perhaps ultimately from Greek holkas merchant ship, literally
ship that is towed, from helkein to pull (from PIE root *selk- to pull, draw). Meaning body of an
old, worn-out ship is first recorded 1670s. The Hulks (Great Expectations) were old ships used as
prisons. Sense of big, clumsy person is first recorded c.1400 (early 14c. as a surname: Stephen le
Hulke).


hulk (v.)

to be clumsy, unwieldy, lazy, 1789, from hulk (n.). Related: Hulked; hulking.


hulking (adj.)

big, clumsy, 1690s (through 18c. usually with fellow), from hulk (n.).


hull (n.1)

seed covering, from Old English hulu husk, pod, from Proto-Germanic *hulus to cover (cognates: Old
High German hulla, hulsa; German H&uuml;lle, H&uuml;lse, Dutch huls). Figurative use by 1831.


hull (n.2)

body of a ship, 1550s, perhaps from hull (n.1) on fancied resemblance of ship keels to open peapods
(compare Latin carina keel of a ship, originally shell of a nut; Greek phaselus light passenger
ship, yacht, literally bean pod; French coque hull of a ship; shell of a walnut or egg). Alternative
etymology is from Middle English hoole ship's keel (mid-15c.), from the same source as hold (n.).


hull (v.)

to remove the husk of, early 15c., from hull (n.1). Related: Hulled, which can mean both having a
particular kind of hull and stripped of the hull.


hullabaloo (n.)

1762, hollo-ballo uproar, chiefly in northern England and Scottish, perhaps a rhyming reduplication
of hollo (see hello).


hullo

call to attract attention, by 1828; see hello.


hum (v.)

late 14c., hommen make a murmuring sound to cover embarrassment, later hummen to buzz, drone (early
15c.), probably of imitative origin. Sense of sing with closed lips is first attested late 15c.;
that of be busy and active is 1884, perhaps on analogy of a beehive. Related: Hummed; humming.
Humming-bird (1630s) so called from sound made by the rapid vibration of its wings.There is a
curious bird to see to, called a humming bird, no bigger then a great Beetle. [Thomas Morton, New
English Canaan, 1637]


hum (n.)

mid-15c., from hum (v.).


hum-drum (adj.)

also humdrum, routine, monotonous, 1550s, probably a reduplication of hum.


human (adj.)

mid-15c., humain, humaigne, from Old French humain, umain (adj.) of or belonging to man (12c.), from
Latin humanus of man, human, also humane, philanthropic, kind, gentle, polite; learned, refined,
civilized, probably related to homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus) and to humus earth, on
notion of earthly beings, as opposed to the gods (compare Hebrew adam man, from adamah ground).
Cognate with Old Lithuanian zmuo (accusative zmuni) man, male person.    As a noun, from 1530s. Its
Old English cognate guma (from Proto-Germanic *guman-) survives only in disguise in bridegroom.
Related: Humanness. Human rights attested by 1680s; human being by 1690s. Human relations is from
1916; human resources attested by 1907, American English, apparently originally among social
Christians and drawn from natural resources.


humane (adj.)

mid-15c., variant of human (compare german/germane, urban/urbane), used interchangeably with it
until early 18c., by which time it had become a distinct word with sense of having qualities
befitting human beings. But inhuman still can be the opposite of humane. The Royal Humane Society
(founded 1774) was originally to rescue drowning persons. Such societies had turned to animal care
by late 19c.


humanely

1590s, from humane + -ly (2).


humanism (n.)

along with humanist used in a variety of philosophical and theological senses 16c.-18c., especially
ones imitating Latin humanitas education befitting a cultivated man. See human + -ism. Main modern
sense in reference to revival of interest in the Classics traces to c.1860; as a pragmatic system of
thought, defined 1907 by co-founder F.C.S. Schiller as: The perception that the philosophical
problem concerns human beings striving to comprehend a world of human experience by the resources of
human minds.


humanist (n.)

1580s, student of the classical humanities, from Middle French humaniste (16c.), formed on model of
Italian umanista student of human affairs or human nature, coined by Italian poet Lodovicio Ariosto
(1474-1533), from Latin humanus â&euro;&oelig;humanâ&euro;? (see human; also see humanism).
Philosophical sense is from 1903.


humanistic

1845 (humanistical is from 1716), in reference to Renaissance or classical humanism; from humanist +
-ic. From 1904 in reference to a modern philosophy that concerns itself with the interests of the
human race.


humanitarian (n.)

1794 (n.) in the theological sense  one who affirms the humanity of Christ but denies his pre-
existence and divinity, from humanity + suffix from unitarian, etc.; see humanism. Meaning
philanthropist, one who advocates or practices human action to solve social problems is from 1842,
originally disparaging, with a suggestion of excess. As an adjective, by 1834.


humanitarianism (n.)

by 1794 as a Christian theological position, from humanitarian + -ism. Sense related to ethical
benevolence attested by 1838.


humanities

1702; plural of humanity, which was used in English from late 15c. in a sense class of studies
concerned with human culture (opposed variously at different times to divinity or sciences). Latin
literae humaniores, they were those branches of literature (ancient classics, rhetoric, poetry)
which tended to humanize or refine.


humanity (n.)

late 14c., kindness, graciousness, from Old French humanit&eacute;, umanit&eacute; human nature;
humankind, life on earth; pity, from Latin humanitatem (nominative humanitas) human nature;
philanthropy, kindness; good breeding, refinement; the human race, mankind, from humanus (see
human). Sense of human nature, human form is c.1400; that of human race first recorded mid-15c.


humanize (v.)

c.1600, from human + -ize. Related: Humanized; humanizing.


humankind (n.)

1640s, properly two words, from human + kind (n.).


humanly (adv.)

c.1500, from human + -ly (2).


humanoid

1912 (adj.), an anthropological hybrid from human + -oid. As a noun, from 1925. Earlier (1906) brand
name of a type of cow's milk altered to be closer to human milk intended as food for infants.


humble (adj.)

mid-13c., from Old French humble, earlier humele, from Latin humilis lowly, humble, literally on the
ground, from humus earth. Senses of not self-asserting and of low birth or rank were both in Middle
English Related: Humbly; humbleness.Don't be so humble; you're not that great. [Golda Meir]To eat
humble pie (1830) is from umble pie (1640s), pie made from umbles edible inner parts of an animal
(especially deer), considered a low-class food. The similar sense of similar-sounding words (the h
of humble was not pronounced then) converged in the pun. Umbles, meanwhile, is Middle English
numbles offal (with loss of n- through assimilation into preceding article).


humble (v.)

late 14c. in the intransitive sense of to render oneself humble; late 15c. in the transitive sense
of to lower (someone) in dignity; see humble (adj.). Related: Humbled; humbling.


humbug (n.)

1751, student slang, trick, jest, hoax, deception, also as a verb, of unknown origin. A vogue word
of the early 1750s; its origin was a subject of much whimsical speculation even then.


humdinger (n.)

1905, American English, originally used of beautiful women; probably from dinger, early 19c. slang
word for anything superlative; also see hummer.


humeral (adj.)

1610s; see humerus + -al (1).


humerus (n.)

1706, bone of the upper arm, originally (14c.) shoulder, a misspelled borrowing of Latin umerus
shoulder, from PIE *om(e)so- (cognates: Sanskrit amsah, Greek omos, Old Norse ass, Gothic ams
shoulder).


humid (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French humide or directly from Latin humidus moist, wet, variant (probably by
influence of humus earth) of umidus, from umere be moist, from PIE *wegw- wet.


humidifier (n.)

1884, agent noun from humidify.


humidify (v.)

1884; see humid + -fy. Related: Humidified; humidifying. Earlier was humify (1650s).


humidity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French humidit&eacute;, from Latin humiditatem (nominative humiditas), from
humidus (see humid).


humidor (n.)

1903, from humid on model of cuspidor.


humiliate (v.)

1530s, perhaps a back-formation from humiliation. Related: Humiliated; humiliating; humiliatingly.


humiliation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin humiliationem (nominative humiliatio) humbling, humiliation, noun of
action from past participle stem of humiliare to humble, from humilis humble (see humble).


humility (n.)

early 14c., from Old French umelite humility, modesty, sweetness, from Latin humilitatem (nominative
humilitas) lowness, insignificance, in Church Latin meekness, from humilis humble (see humble). In
the Mercian hymns, Latin humilitatem is glossed by Old English ea&eth;modnisse.


hummer (n.)

c.1600, agent noun from hum (v.). Meaning energetic person or thing is 1680s; that of excellent
person or thing is slang from 1907. As short for Humvee, attested from 1983.


hummock (n.)

knoll, hillock, 1550s, originally nautical, conical small hill on a seacoast, of obscure origin,
though second element is diminutive suffix -ock. In Florida, where the local form is hammock, it
means a clump of hardwood trees on a knoll in a swamp or on a key.


hummus (n.)

1955, from Turkish humus mashed chick peas.


humongous (adj.)

also humungous, by 1972, American English, apparently a fanciful coinage from huge and monstrous.


humor (n.)

mid-14c., fluid or juice of an animal or plant, from Old North French humour (Old French humor;
Modern French humeur), from Latin umor body fluid (also humor, by false association with humus
earth); related to umere be wet, moist, and to uvescere become wet, from PIE *wegw- wet.    In
ancient and medieval physiology, any of the four body fluids (blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy
or black bile) whose relative proportions were thought to determine state of mind. This led to a
sense of mood, temporary state of mind (first recorded 1520s); the sense of amusing quality,
funniness is first recorded 1680s, probably via sense of whim, caprice (1560s), which also produced
the verb sense of indulge, first attested 1580s. The pronunciation of the initial h is only of
recent date, and is sometimes omitted .... [OED] For types of humor, see the useful table below,
from H.W. Fowler [Modern English Usage, 1926].   <table width=90% bgcolor=#CCFFFF align=center
cellspacing=1 cellpadding=4 border=1> <tr> <td><b>device</b></td> <td>HUMOR</td> <td>WIT</td>
<td>SATIRE</td> <td>SARCASM</td> <td>INVECTIVE</td> <td>IRONY</td> <td>CYNICISM</td>
<td>SARDONIC</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>motive/aim</b></td> <td>discovery</td> <td>throwing light</td>
<td>amendment</td> <td>inflicting pain</td> <td>discredit</td> <td>exclusiveness</td> <td>self-
justification</td> <td>self-relief</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>province</b></td> <td>human nature</td>
<td>words &amp; ideas</td> <td>morals &amp; manners</td> <td>faults &amp; foibles</td>
<td>misconduct</td> <td>statement of facts</td> <td>morals</td> <td>adversity</td> </tr> <tr>
<td><b>method/means</b></td> <td>observation</td> <td>surprise</td> <td>accentuation</td>
<td>inversion</td> <td>direct statement</td> <td>mystification</td> <td>exposure of nakedness</td>
<td>pessimism</td> </tr> <tr> <td><b>audience</b></td> <td>the sympathetic</td> <td>the
intelligent</td> <td>the self-satisfied</td> <td>victim &amp; bystander</td> <td>the public</td>
<td>an inner circle</td> <td>the respectable</td> <td>the self</td> </tr> </table>


humor (v.)

1580s; see humor (n.). Related: Humored; humoring.


humoral (adj.)

pertaining to the humors of the body, 1520s, from Middle French humoral (14c.), from Latin humor
(see humor (n.)).


humorist (n.)

1590s, from humor (n.) + -ist. Perhaps on model of Middle French humoriste.


humorous (adj.)

early 15c., relating to the body humors, a native formation from humor, or else from Middle French
humoreux damp, from Old French humor (see humor (n.)). The meaning funny dates from 1705 in English.
Related: Humorously; humorousness.


humour

chiefly British English spelling of humor; see -or. Related: Humourous; humourist.


hump (n.)

1680s (in hump-backed), from Dutch homp lump, from Middle Low German hump bump, from Proto-Germanic
*hump-, from PIE *kemb- to bend, turn, change, exchange. Replaced, or perhaps influenced by, crump,
from Old English crump. A meaning attested from 1901 is mound in a railway yard over which cars must
be pushed, which may be behind the figurative sense of critical point of an undertaking (1914).
Humpback whale is from 1725.


hump (v.)

to do the sex act with, attested from 1785, but the source of this indicates it is an older word.
Meaning to raise into a hump is from 1840. Related: Humped; humping.


humph

as a grunting sound of disdain, etc., from 1815.


Humphrey

masc. proper name, from Old English Hunfri&eth;, probably from Proto-Germanic *hun strength + Old
English fri&eth; peace. To dine with Duke Humphrey (17c.) meant to go without a meal, though the
reason for the expression now is obscure.


Humpty-dumpty

from French nursery rhyme hero (the rhyme first attested in English 1810), earlier a short, clumsy
person of either sex (1785), probably a reduplication of Humpty, a pet form of Humphrey. Originally,
humpty-dumpty was a drink (1690s), ale boiled with brandy, probably from hump and dump, but the
connection is obscure and there might not be one.'It's very provoking,' Humpty Dumpty said, ... 'to
be called an egg -- very!' [Through the Looking-Glass, 1872]


humus (n.)

1796, from Latin humus earth, soil, probably from humi on the ground, from PIE *dhghem- earth
(source also of Latin humilis low; see chthonic). Related: Humous (adj.).


humvee

1983, popularized 1991 in Persian Gulf War military slang, rough acronym for high-mobility
multipurpose wheeled vehicle.


Hun

Old English, person from a tribe from central Asia that overran Europe in the 4c. and 5c., from
Medieval Latin Hunni, apparently ultimately from Turkic Hun-y&uuml;, the name of a tribe (they were
known in China as Han or Hiong-nu). Figurative sense of reckless destroyer of beauty is from 1806.
Applied to the German in World War I by their enemies because of stories of atrocities, but the
nickname originally was urged on German soldiers bound for China by Kaiser Wilhelm II in 1900, which
caused a scandal.


Hunan

Chinese province, literally south of the lake (Lake Dongting), from hu lake + nan south.


hunch

originally (c.1500) a verb, to push, thrust, of unknown origin. Meaning raise or bend into a hump is
1670s. Perhaps a variant of bunch. The noun is attested from 1620s, originally a push, thrust.
Figurative sense of hint, tip (a push toward a solution or answer), first recorded 1849, led to that
of premonition, presentiment (1904).


hunchback (n.)

â&euro;&oelig;person with a hunched back,â&euro;? 1712, back-formation from hunchbacked (1590s;
see hunch).


hundred (n.)

Old English hundred the number of 100, a counting of 100, from Proto-Germanic *hundrath (cognates:
Old Norse hundra&eth;, German hundert); first element is Proto-Germanic *hundam hundred (cognate
with Gothic hund, Old High German hunt), from PIE *km-tom hundred, reduced from *dkm-tom- (cognates:
Sanskrit satam, Avestan satem, Greek hekaton, Latin centum, Lithuanian simtas, Old Church Slavonic
suto, Old Irish cet, Breton kant hundred), from *dekm- ten (see ten).    Second element is Proto-
Germanic *rath reckoning, number (as in Gothic ra&thorn;jo a reckoning, account, number,
gara&thorn;jan to count; see read (v.)). The common word for the number in Old English was simple
hund, and Old English also used hund-teontig.    In Old Norse hundrath meant 120, that is the long
hundred of six score, and at a later date, when both the six-score hundred and the five-score
hundred were in use, the old or long hundred was styled hundrath tolf-roett ... meaning duodecimal
hundred, and the new or short hundred was called hundrath ti-r&aelig;tt, meaning decimal hundred.
The Long Hundred and its use in England was discussed by Mr W.H. Stevenson, in 1889, in the
Archc&aelig;ological Review (iv. 313-27), where he stated that amongst the Teutons, who longest
preserved their native customs unimpaired by the influence of Latin Christianity, the hundred was
generally the six-score hundred. The short hundred was introduced among the Northmen in the train of
Christianity. [Transactions of the Lancashire and Cheshire Antiquarian Society, 1907]    Meaning
division of a county or shire with its own court (still in some British place names and U.S. state
of Delaware) was in Old English and probably represents 100 hides of land. The Hundred Years War
(which ran intermittently from 1337 to 1453) was first so called in 1874. The original Hundred Days
was the period between Napoleon's restoration and his final abdication in 1815.


hundredfold

c.1200, from hundred + -fold.


hundredth

early 14c., from hundred + -th (1). Old English used hundra&#240;.


hung (adj.)

past tense and past participle of hang (v.); meaning having impressive male genitals is from 1640s;
of a jury, unable to agree, 1838, American English. Hung-over (also hungover) in the drinking sense
is from 1950 (see hangover); hung-up obsessed is from 1961.


Hungary

c.1300, from Medieval Latin Hungaria (also source of French Hongrie), probably literally meaning
land of the Huns, who ruled a vast territory from there under Attila in 5c. The people's name for
themselves we transliterate as Magyar. Middle English uses the same words for both Attila's people
and the Magyars, who appeared in Europe in 9c. From the same source as Medieval Greek Oungroi,
German Ungarn, Russian Vengriya, Ukrainian Ugorshchina. The Turkish name for the country,
Macaristan, reflects the indigenous name. Related: Hungarian.


hunger (n.)

Old English hungor unease or pain caused by lack of food, craving appetite, debility from lack of
food, from Proto-Germanic *hungruz (cognates: Old Frisian hunger, Old Saxon hungar, Old High German
hungar, Old Norse hungr, German hunger, Dutch honger, Gothic huhrus), probably from PIE root *kenk-
(2) to suffer hunger or thirst. Hunger strike attested from 1885; earliest references are to
prisoners in Russia.


hunger (v.)

Old English hyngran (cognates: Old Saxon gihungrjan, Old High German hungaran, German hungern,
Gothic huggrjan), from the source of hunger (n.). Related: Hungered; hungering.


hungry

Old English hungrig hungry, famished; see hunger + -y (2). Compare Old Frisian hungerig, Dutch
hongerig, German hungrig. Figurative use from c.1200. Related: Hungrily.


hunk (n.)

1813, large piece cut off, possibly from West Flemish hunke (used of bread and meat), which is
perhaps related to Dutch homp lump, hump. Meaning attractive, sexually appealing man is first
attested 1945 in jive talk (in Australian slang, it is recorded from 1941).


hunker (v.)

to squat, crouch, 1720, Scottish, of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian source such as
Old Norse huka to crouch, hoka, hokra to crawl. Hunker down, Southern U.S. dialectal phrase,
popularized c.1965, from northern British hunker haunch. Related: Hunkered; hunkering.


hunky-dory (adj.)

1866, American English (popularized c.1870 by a Christy Minstrel song), perhaps a reduplication of
hunkey all right, satisfactory (1861), from hunk in a safe position (1847) New York City slang, from
Dutch honk goal, home, from Middle Dutch honc place of refuge, hiding place. A theory from 1876,
however, traces it to Honcho dori, said to be a street in Yokohama, Japan, where sailors went for
diversions of the sort sailors enjoy.


hunt (v.)

Old English huntian chase game, related to hentan to seize, from Proto-Germanic *huntojan (cognates:
Gothic hin&thorn;an to seize, capture, Old High German hunda booty), from PIE *kend-.    General
sense of search diligently (for anything) is first recorded c.1200. Related: Hunted; hunting. Happy
hunting-grounds Native American afterlife paradise is from Last of the Mohicans (1826).


hunt (n.)

early 12c., from hunt (v.). Meaning body of persons associated for the purpose of hunting with a
pack of hounds is first recorded 1570s.


hunter

mid-13c. (attested in place names from late 12c.), from hunt + -er (1). The Old English word was
hunta.


hunting (n.)

Old English huntung, verbal noun from hunt (v.).


Huntingdon

Old English Huntandun (973) Hill of the Huntsman (or of a man called Hunta).


Huntington&#039;s chorea

also Huntington's disease, 1889, named for U.S. neurologist George Huntington (1851-1916), who
described it in 1872.


huntress

late 14c.; see hunter + -ess. Old English had hunticge.


hurdle (n.)

Old English hyrdel frame of intertwined twigs used as a temporary barrier, diminutive of hyrd door,
from Proto-Germanic *hurdiz wickerwork frame, hurdle (cognates: Old Saxon hurth plaiting, netting,
Dutch horde wickerwork, German H&uuml;rde hurdle, fold, pen; Old Norse hur&eth;, Gothic haurds
door), from PIE *krtis (cognates: Latin cratis hurdle, wickerwork, Greek kartalos a kind of basket,
kyrtos fishing creel), from root *kert- to weave, twist together (cognates: Sanskrit krt to spin).
Sense of barrier to jump in a race is by 1822; figurative sense of obstacle is 1924.


hurdle (v.)

1590s, to build like a hurdle, from hurdle (n.). Sense of to jump over dates from 1880 (implied in
hurdling). Related: Hurdled; hurdling. Hurdles as a type of race (originally horse race) with
hurdles as obstacles is attested by 1836 (hurdle-race is from 1822).


hurdy-gurdy

1749, perhaps imitative of its sound and influenced by c.1500 hirdy-girdy uproar, confusion.


hurl (v.)

early 13c., hurlen, to run against (each other), come into collision, later throw forcibly (c.1300);
rush violently (late 14c.); perhaps related to Low German hurreln to throw, to dash, and East
Frisian hurreln to roar, to bluster. OED suggests all are from an imitative Germanic base *hurr
expressing rapid motion; see also hurry. The noun is attested from late 14c., originally rushing
water. For difference between hurl and hurtle (which apparently were confused since early Middle
English) see hurtle.


hurling (n.)

verbal noun of hurl (q.v.); attested 1520s as a form of hockey played in Ireland; c.1600 as the name
of a game like hand-ball that once was popular in Cornwall.


hurly-burly

also hurlyburly, 1530s, apparently an alteration of phrase hurling and burling, reduplication of
14c. hurling commotion, tumult, verbal noun of hurl (q.v.). Hurling time was the name applied by
chroniclers to the period of tumult and commotion around Wat Tyler's rebellion.


Huron

the North American lake is named for the Indian people, whose name is from obsolete French huron
bristle-haired (the French word frequently was used in reference to head-dresses, and that might be
its original sense here), from Old French hur&eacute; bristly, unkempt, shaggy, of uncertain origin,
but French sources indicate it probably is from Germanic.


hurrah

1680s, alteration of huzza, similar to shouts recorded in German, Danish, Swedish. Perhaps picked up
during Thirty Years' War. Hurra was said to be the battle-cry of Prussian soldiers during the War of
Liberation (1812-13). Hooray is its popular form and is almost as old. Also hurray (1780); hurroo
(1824); hoorah (1798).


hurricane (n.)

1550s, a partially deformed adoptation from Spanish huracan (Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo y
Vald&eacute;s, Historia General y Natural de las Indias, 1547-9), furacan (in the works of Pedro
M&aacute;rtir De Anghiera, chaplain to the court of King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella and historian
of Spanish explorations), from an Arawakan (W. Indies) word. In Portuguese, it became
furac&atilde;o. For confusion of initial -f- and -h- in Spanish, see hacienda. The word is first in
English in Richard Eden's Decades of the New World:  These tempestes of the ayer (which the Grecians
caule Tiphones ...) they caule furacanes.    OED records 39 different spellings, mostly from the
late 16c., including forcane, herrycano, harrycain, hurlecane. Modern form became frequent from
1650, established after 1688. Shakespeare uses hurricano (King Lear, Troilus and Cressida), but in
reference to waterspouts.


hurried

â&euro;&oelig;done in a rush,â&euro;? 1660s, from past participle of hurry (v.). Related:
Hurriedly.


hurry (v.)

1590, first recorded in Shakespeare, who used it often; perhaps a variant of harry (v.), or perhaps
a West Midlands sense of Middle English hurren to vibrate rapidly, buzz, from Proto-Germanic *hurza
to move with haste (cognates: Middle High German hurren to whir, move fast, Old Swedish hurra to
whirl round), which also perhaps is the root of hurl. Related: hurried; hurrying.


hurry (n.)

c.1600, probably from hurry (v.).


hurry-scurry

1732, probably a reduplication of hurry formed with awareness of scurry.


hurst

hillock (especially a sandy one), also grove, wooded eminence, from Old English hyrst, from Proto-
Germanic *hurstiz (cognates: Middle Dutch horst underwood, German Horst thicket, shrubbery). Common
in place names (such as Amherst).


hurt (v.)

c.1200, to injure, wound (the body, feelings, reputation, etc.), also to stumble (into), bump into;
charge against, rush, crash into; knock (things) together, from Old French hurter to ram, strike,
collide, perhaps from Frankish *hurt ram (cognates: Middle High German hurten run at, collide, Old
Norse hrutr ram). The English usage is as old as the French, and perhaps there was a native Old
English *hyrtan, but it has not been recorded. Meaning to be a source of pain (of a body part) is
from 1850. To hurt (one's) feelings attested by 1779. Sense of knock died out 17c., but compare
hurtle. Other Germanic languages tend to use their form of English scathe in this sense (Danish
skade, Swedish skada, German schaden, Dutch schaden).


hurt (n.)

c.1200, a wound, an injury; also sorrow, lovesickness, from hurt (v.).


hurtful (adj.)

harmful, mid-15c., from hurt (n.) + -ful. Related: Hurtfully; hurtfulness.


hurting (adj.)

1680s, causing hurt, from present participle of hurt (v.). Reflexive sense of suffering, feeling
pain recorded by 1944.


hurtle (v.)

early 14c., hurteln, to crash together; to crash down, knock down, probably frequentative of hurten
(see hurt (v.)) in its original sense. Intransitive meaning to rush, dash, charge is late 14c. The
essential notion in hurtle is that of forcible collision, in hurl that of forcible projection.
Related: Hurtled; hurtling.


husband (n.)

Old English husbonda male head of a household, probably from Old Norse husbondi master of the house,
from hus house (see house (n.)) + bondi householder, dweller, freeholder, peasant, from buandi,
present participle of bua to dwell (see bower). Beginning late 13c., replaced Old English wer as
married man, companion of wif, a sad loss for English poetry. Slang shortening hubby first attested
1680s.


husband (v.)

manage thriftily, early 15c., from husband (n.) in an obsolete sense of steward (mid-15c.). Related:
Husbanded; husbanding.


husbandman

c.1300, head of a family; early 14c., tiller of the soil, from husband (n.) + man (n.).


husbandry

c.1300, management of a household; late 14c. as farm management, from husband (n.) in a now-obsolete
sense of peasant farmer (early 13c.) + -ery.


hush (v.)

1540s, variant of Middle English huisht (late 14c.), probably of imitative origin, with terminal -t
lost probably by being mistaken for a past tense suffix. Hush-hush (adj.) is 1916 reduplication.
Related: Hushed; hushing. The noun is attested from 1680s. As an interjection meaning be quiet,
attested by c.1600. To hush (one's) mouth be quiet is attested from 1878. Hush up suppress talk for
secrecy's sake is from 1630s. Hush-money is attested from 1709. Hush-puppy deep-fried ball of
cornmeal batter first attested 1899; as a type of lightweight soft shoe, it is a proprietary name,
registered 1961.


hushaby

1796, from hush + ending as in lullaby.


husk (n.)

late 14c., huske dry, outer skin of certain fruits and seeds, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle
Dutch huuskyn little house, core of fruit, case, diminutive of huus house, or from an equivalent
formation in English (see house). As a verb, attested from 1560s. Related: Husked; husking.


husker (n.)

1780, agent noun from husk (v.). Cornhuskers as a nickname for athletics squads from Nebraska is
attested by 1903.


husky (adj.)

hoarse, c.1722 in reference to a cattle disease (of persons, 1740), from husk on the notion of dry
as a husk. Earlier (1550s) having husks. Sense of tough and strong (like corn husks) is first found
1869, American English. Related: Huskily; huskiness.


husky (n.)

Eskimo dog, 1852, Canadian English, earlier (1830) hoskey an Eskimo, probably shortened variant of
Ehuskemay (1743), itself a variant of Eskimo.    The moment any vessel is noticed steering for these
islands [Whalefish Islands], the Esquimaux, or Huskies,* as the Danes customarily term them, come
off in sufficient numbers to satisfy you that you are near the haunts of uncivilized men, and will
afford sufficient information to guide any stranger to his anchorage. *Husky is their own term. I
recollect the chorus to a song at Kamtchatka was Husky, Husky. [Last of the Arctic Voyages, London,
1855]


hussar (n.)

1530s, from German Husar, from Hungarian husz&aacute;r light horseman, originally freebooter, from
Old Serbian husar, variant of kursar pirate, from Italian corsaro (see corsair). Bodies of light
horsemen organized in Hungary late 15c., widely imitated elsewhere in Europe.


Hussite

1530s, follower of John Huss, Bohemian religious reformer burnt in 1415. His name is an abbreviation
of the name of his native village, Husinec, literally goose-pen.


hussy (n.)

1520s, mistress of a household, housewife, alteration of Middle English husewif (see housewife).
Gradually broadened to mean any woman or girl, and by 1650 was being applied to a woman or girl who
shows casual or improper behavior, and a general derogatory sense had overtaken the word by late
18c. It is common to use housewife in a good, and huswife or hussy in a bad sense [Johnson].


hustings (n.)

Old English husting meeting, court, tribunal, from Old Norse hus&eth;ing council, from hus house
(see house (n.)) + &eth;ing assembly (see thing); so called because it was a meeting of the men who
formed the household of a nobleman or king. The native Anglo-Saxon word for this was folc-gemot. The
plural became the usual form c.1500; sense of temporary platform for political speeches developed by
1719, apparently from London's Court of Hustings, presided over by the Lord Mayor, which was held on
a platform in the Guildhall. This sense broadened to encompass the whole election process.


hustle (v.)

1680s, to shake to and fro (especially of money in a cap, as part of a game called hustle-cap),
metathesized from Dutch hutselen, husseln to shake, to toss, frequentative of hutsen, variant of
hotsen to shake. The stems hot-, hut- appear in a number of formations in both High and Low German
dialects, all implying a shaking movement [OED]. Related: Hustled; hustling. Meaning push roughly,
shove first recorded 1751. That of hurry, move quickly is from 1812.    The key-note and countersign
of life in these cities [of the U.S. West] is the word hustle. We have caught it in the East. but we
use it humorously, just as we once used the Southern word skedaddle, but out West the word hustle is
not only a serious term, it is the most serious in the language. [Julian Ralph, Our Great West,
N.Y., 1893]    Sense of to get in a quick, illegal manner is 1840 in American English; that of to
sell goods aggressively is 1887.


hustle (n.)

pushing activity; activity in the interest of success, 1891, American English, from hustle (v.);
earlier it meant a shaking together (1715). Sense of illegal business activity is by 1963, American
English. As a name of a popular dance, by 1975.


hustler (n.)

1825, thief (especially one who roughs up his victims), from hustle (v.) + -er (1). Sense of
energetic worker (especially, but not originally, a salesman) is from 1884; sense of prostitute
dates from 1924.


huswife (n.)

see housewife.


hut (n.)

1650s, from French hutte cottage (16c.), from Middle High German h&uuml;tte cottage, hut, probably
from Proto-Germanic *hudjon-, related to the root of Old English hydan to hide, from PIE *keudh-,
from root (s)keu- (see hide (n.1)). Apparently first in English as a military word. Old Saxon hutta,
Danish hytte, Swedish hytta, Frisian and Middle Dutch hutte, Dutch hut are from High German.


hutch (n.)

c.1200, storage chest (also applied to the biblical ark of God), from Old French huche, from
Medieval Latin hutica chest, of uncertain origin. Sense of cupboard for food or dishes first
recorded 1670s; that of box-like pen for an animal is from c.1600.


Hutterite

1640s, in reference to Moravian Anabaptist sect established by Jacob Hutter (d.1536) + -ite (1).


huzza

also huzzah, 1570s, originally a sailor's shout of exaltation, encouragement, or applause. Perhaps
originally a hoisting cry.


hyacinth (n.)

1550s, the plant hyacinth; re-Greeked from earlier jacinth (late 14c.) hyacinth; blue cornflower,
earlier a precious stone blue (rarely red) in color (c.1200), from Old French jacinte and Medieval
Latin jacintus, ultimately from Greek hyakinthos, probably ultimately from a non-Indo-European
Mediterranean language. Used in ancient Greece of a blue gem, perhaps sapphire, and of a purple or
deep red flower, but exactly which one is unknown (gladiolus, iris, and larkspur have been
suggested). Fabled to have sprouted from the blood of Hyakinthos, youth beloved by Apollo and
accidentally slain by him. The flower is said to have the letters AI or AIAI on its petals. The
modern use in reference to a particular flowering plant genus is from 1570s.


Hyades

star cluster in constellation Taurus, late 14c., from Greek Hyades, popularly explained as rain-
bringers (from hyein to rain), because wet weather supposedly began coincidentally with their
heliacal rising, but in fact probably from hys swine (the popular Latin word for them was Suculae
little pigs). Grimm (Teutonic Mythology) lists the Anglo-Saxon glosses of Hyades as Raedgastran,
Raedgasnan, Redgaesrum.


hyaline (adj.)

1660s, from Latin hyalinus, from Greek hyalinos of glass or crystal, from hyalos glass (see hyalo-).


hyalo-

word-forming element meaning of glass; glass-like, transparent, from Greek hyalos glass, clear
alabaster, apparently a non-Greek word, said to be of Egyptian origin.


hybrid (n.)

c.1600, from Latin hybrida, variant of ibrida mongrel, specifically offspring of a tame sow and a
wild boar, of unknown origin but probably from Greek and somehow related to hubris. A rare word
before c.1850. The adjective is attested from 1716.


hybridity (n.)

1837, from hybrid + -ity.


hybridization (n.)

1824, from hybridize (1802, from hybrid + -ize) + -ation.


hybris (n.)

see hubris. Related: Hybristic.


hydra (n.)

1835, genus name of a freshwater polyp, from Greek Hydra, many-headed Lernaean water serpent slain
by Hercules (this sense is attested in English from late 14c.), from hydor (genitive hydatos) water
(see water (n.1)); related to Sanskrit udrah aquatic animal and Old English ottur otter. Used
figuratively for any multiplicity of evils [Johnson]. The fabulous beast's heads were said to grown
back double when cut off, and the sea creature is said to be so called for its regenerative
capabilities.


hydrangea (n.)

1753, coined in Modern Latin by Linn&aelig;us as compound of Greek hydr-, stem of hydor water (see
water (n.1)) + angeion vessel, capsule (see angio-); so called from the shrub's cup-shaped seed
pods.


hydrant (n.)

1806, a hybrid coined in American English from Greek hydr-, stem of hydor water (see water (n.1)) +
-ant.


hydrargyrum (n.)

mercury, quicksilver, 1560s, from Latin hydrargyrus, from Greek hydrargyros, from hydr-, stem of
hydor water (see water (n.1)) + argyros silver (see argent). Hence the chemical abbreviation Hg for
the element mercury.


hydrate (n.)

1802, compound of water and another chemical, from French hydrate, coined c.1800 by French chemist
Joseph-Louis Proust (1754-1826) from Greek hydr-, stem of hydor water (see water (n.1)).


hydrate (v.)

1850, to form a hydrate; 1947 as to restore moisture; from Greek hydr-, stem of hydor water (see
water (n.1)) + -ate (2). Related: Hydrated; hydrating.


hydration (n.)

1854, noun of action from hydrate.


hydraulic (adj.)

c.1600, from Greek hydraulikos organon water organ, from hydr-, stem of hydor water (see water
(n.1)) + aulos musical instrument, hollow tube (see alveolus). Extended by the Romans to other kinds
of water engines.


hydraulics (n.)

1670s, from hydraulic; also see -ics.


hydric (adj.)

1796 as a term in chemistry, of or containing hydrogen; 1918 in ecology; see hydro- + -ic.


hydro

short for hydroelectric, from 1916.


hydro-

before vowels hydr-, word-forming element meaning water, from Greek hydro-, comb. form of hydor
water (see water (n.1)). Also sometimes a comb. form of hydrogen.


hydrocarbon (n.)

compound of hydrogen and carbon, 1826, formed in English from hydrogen + carbon.


hydrocephalus (n.)

1660s, medical Latin, from Greek hydro- water (see water (n.1)) + kephale head (see cephalo-).
Related: Hydrocephalic; hydrocephalous.


hydrochloric (adj.)

1817, in hydrochloric acid (proposed 1814 by Gay-Lussac); see hydro- + chloric (see chlorine).


hydrodynamic (adj.)

1828, from hydro- + dynamic (adj.). Related: Hydrodynamics (1779).


hydroelectric (adj.)

1827, formed in English from hydro- + electric. Related: Hydroelectricity.


hydrofoil (n.)

1959, boat that travels through water on wings, short for hydrofoil boat, originally the name of the
wings themselves (1920); formed in English from hydro- + foil (n.).


hydrogen (n.)

1791, from French hydrog&egrave;ne, coined 1787 by G. de Morveau, Lavoisier, Berthollet, and
Fourcroy from Greek hydr-, stem of hydros water (see water (n.1)) + French -g&egrave;ne producing
(see -gen). So called because it forms water when exposed to oxygen. Nativized in Russian as
vodorod; in German, it is wasserstoff, water-stuff. An earlier name for it in English was
Cavendish's inflammable air (1767). Hydrogen bomb first recorded 1947; shortened form H-bomb is from
1950.


hydrogenate (v.)

1809, from hydrogen + -ate (2). Related: Hydrogenated; hydrogenation.


hydrography (n.)

1550s, from hydro- + -graphy. Related: Hydrographic


hydrology (n.)

1762, from hydro- + -logy. Related: Hydrologist; hydrological (1660s).


hydrolysis (n.)

chemical decomposition by water, 1880, formed in English from hydro- + Greek lysis a loosening, a
dissolution, from lyein to loosen, dissolve (see lose).


hydrometer (n.)

1670s, from hydro- + meter (n.3).


hydrophobia (n.)

late 14c., idroforbia, a symptom of rabies in man (sometimes used for the disease itself), from Late
Latin hydrophobia (Celsius, 50 C.E.), from Greek hydrophobos dreading water, from hydr-, stem of
hydros water (see water (n.1)) + phobos dread, fear (see phobia). So called because human sufferers
show aversion to water and have difficulty swallowing it. In Old English as w&aelig;terfyrhtness.


hydrophobic (adj.)

1807, from hydrophobia + -ic.


hydroplane (n.)

motorboat that glides on the surface of water, 1895, coined by U.S. engineer Harvey D. Williams
[Sibley Journal of Engineering, Cornell University, vol. X, p.81]; from hydro- + plane (from
airplane).


hydroplane (v.)

by 1908, to skim the surface of water by use of hydroplanes, from hydroplane (n.). Meaning skid on a
thin layer of water (especially of automobile tires) first recorded 1962, properly aquaplane (itself
from 1961 in this sense). Related: Hydroplaned; hydroplaning.


hydroponics (n.)

1937, formed in English from hydro- + -ponics, from Greek ponein to labor, toil, from ponos labor
(see span (v.)). Related: Hydroponic (adj.).


hydropower (n.)

1933, from hydro- + power (n.).


hydrosphere (n.)

1887, from hydro- + sphere.


hydrostatic (adj.)

1670s, from Greek hydro- water (see water (n.1)) + statikos making to stand (see static).


hydrotherapy (n.)

1876, from hydro- water + therapy.


hydrothermal (adj.)

1852, from hydro- + thermal (adj.); 1855 in geology.


hydroxide (n.)

1851, from hydro- + oxide.


hyena (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French hiene, from Latin hyaena, from Greek hyaina swine (fem.), from hys pig +
fem. suffix -aina. So called for its bristles. Applied to cruel, treacherous, and greedy persons
since at least 1670s. Adjectival forms that have been attempted in English include hyenaish,
hyenaesque, hyenic, hyenine.


hygiene (n.)

1670s, from French hygi&egrave;ne, ultimately from Greek hygieine techne the healthful art, from
hygies healthy, literally living well (personified as the goddess Hygieia), from PIE *eyu-gwie-es-
having a vigorous life. The Greek adjective was used by Aristotle as a noun meaning health.


hygienic (adj.)

1833, from French hygi&eacute;nique, from hygi&egrave;ne; see hygiene. The earlier adjective was
hygienal (1660s).


hygienist (n.)

1844, an expert on cleanliness, from hygiene + -ist. Earlier was hygeist (1716). Dental sense is
recorded by 1913.


hygro-

word-forming element meaning wet, moist, moisture, from Greek hygro-, comb. form of hygros wet,
moist, fluid, from PIE root *wegw- wet.


hygrology (n.)

1790; see hygro- + -ology.


hygrometer (n.)

1660s, from French hygrom&egrave;tre, from Greek hygro- (see hygro-) + -meter. Related: Hygrometry;
hygrometric.


hygroscopic (adj.)

1775, from hygroscope (1660s), from hygro- + -scope.


Hyksos

c.1600, 15th dynasty of Egyptian kings (1650-1558 B.C.E.), called Shepherd Kings, from Greek Hyksos,
from Egyptian, either hiq shasu ruler of nomads, or heqa khoswe chief of foreign lands.


hylo-

word-forming element meaning wood, forest; matter, from Greek hylo-, from hylos wood; matter, of
unknown origin.


Hyman

masc. proper name; see Hymie.


hymen (n.)

1610s, from French hymen (16c.), from medical Latin, ultimately from Greek hymen membrane
(especially 'virginal membrane,' the membrane par excellence); thin skin, from PIE *syu-men-, from
root *syu- to bind, sew (see sew). Originally any membrane; present specific meaning begins with
Vesalius in the 1555 edition of De humani corporis fabrica. Apparently not directly connected to
Hymen, the god of marriage, but sharing the same root and supposed to be related in folk etymology.


Hymen

1580s, Greek god of marriage, represented as a youth carrying a torch and a veil, perhaps
etymologically the joiner, literally the one who sews (two together); see hymen.


hymeneal (adj.)

c.1600, of or relating to a marriage; as a noun, wedding hymn, from 1717; from Latin hymenaeus, from
Greek hymenaios belonging to wedlock, wedding, wedding song, from Hymen, Greek god of marriage.


Hymenoptera

order of insects that includes ants, wasps, and bees, 1773, coined in Modern Latin 1748 by
Linn&aelig;us from Greek hymen (genitive hymenos) membrane (see hymen) + pteron wing (see
pterodactyl). Related: Hymenopterous.


hymie (n.)

Jewish male (derogatory), by early 1980s, apparently originally among black Americans, from common
Jewish masc. proper name Hymie, a pet form of Hyman, from Hebrew, literally life (the masc.
counterpart of Eve).


hymn (n.)

c.1000, from Old French ymne and Old English ymen, both from Latin hymnus song of praise, from Greek
hymnos song or ode in praise of gods or heroes, used in Septuagint for various Hebrew words meaning
song praising God. Possibly a variant of hymenaios wedding song, from Hymen, Greek god of marriage
(see hymen), or from a PIE root *sam- to sing (cognates: Hittite i&#353;hamai he sings, Sanskrit
saman- hymn, song) [Watkins]. Evidence for the silent -n- dates from at least 1530.


hymnal (n.)

c.1500, imnale, himnale, from Medieval Latin hymnale, from ymnus, from Latin hymnus (see hymn). As
an adjective, attested from 1640s. Hymnal measure, a quatrain, usually iambic, alternately rhymed,
is so called for being the preferred verse form for English hymns (such as Amazing Grace), but it
has been popular in English secular poetry as well, though it almost always suggests the hymn,
directly or ironically [Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University, 1986].


hyoid (adj.)

1811, from French hyo&#239;de (16c.), from Modern Latin hyoides, from Greek hyoeides shaped like the
letter U, from hu letter U (in later Greek called upsilon) + -oeides like (see -oid).


hype (n.)

excessive or misleading publicity or advertising, 1967, American English (the verb is attested from
1937), probably in part a back-formation of hyperbole, but also from underworld slang sense swindle
by overcharging or short-changing (1926), a back-formation of hyper short-change con man (1914),
from prefix hyper- meaning over, to excess. Also possibly influenced by drug addicts' slang hype,
1913 shortening of hypodermic needle. Related: Hyped; hyping. In early 18c., hyp morbid depression
of the spirits was colloquial for hypochondria (usually as the hyp or the hyps).


hyper (adj.)

1942 as a colloquial shortening of hyperactive.


hyper-

word-forming element meaning over, above, beyond, exceedingly, to excess, from Greek hyper (prep.
and adv.) over, beyond, overmuch, above measure, from PIE super- over (see super-).


hyperactive (adj.)

1852, from hyper- + active.


hyperactivity (n.)

1852, from hyper- + activity.


hyperbaric (adj.)

1930, from hyper- + Greek barys heavy (see grave (adj.)).


hyperbaton (n.)

1570s, figure of speech in which the natural order of words or phrases is inverted, especially for
the sake of emphasis, from Greek hyperbaton, literally overstepping, from hyper over + bainein to
step (see come).


hyperbola (n.)

1660s, from Latinized form of Greek hyperbole extravagance, literally a throwing beyond (see
hyperbole). Perhaps so called because the inclination of the plane to the base of the cone exceeds
that of the side of the cone.


hyperbole (n.)

early 15c., from Latin hyperbole, from Greek hyperbole exaggeration, extravagance, related to
hyperballein to throw over or beyond, from hyper- beyond + bole a throwing, a casting, the stroke of
a missile, bolt, beam, from bol-, nominative stem of ballein to throw (see ballistics). Rhetorical
sense is found in Aristotle and Isocrates.


hyperbolic (adj.)

1640s (iperbolical is from early 15c.), from Greek hyperbolikos extravagant, from hyperbole
extravagance, literally a throwing beyond (see hyperbole). Geometric sense is from 1670s. Related:
Hyperbolically.


hyperborean (adj.)

1590s, from Late Latin hyperboreanus, from Latin hyperboreus, from Greek hyperboreos pertaining to
the regions of the far north, from hyper (see hyper-) + Boreas (see boreal). The Hyperboreans were
an imagined Arctic people believed by the ancients to be distinguished by piety and happiness.
Middle English had iperborie the far north of the Earth (mid-15c.).


hypercritical (adj.)

c.1600, from hyper- + critical.


hyperdrive (n.)

by 1955, an invented word of science fiction writers to describe anything that can power a space
craft faster than the speed of light. See hyper- + drive (n.).


hyperextend (v.)

1863, from hyper- + extend. Related: Hyperextended; hyperextending.


hyperglycemia (n.)

1875, Latinized form of Greek elements hyper- over (see hyper-) + glykys sweet (see glucose) + haima
blood (see -emia).


hyperinflation (n.)

1930 in the economic sense, from hyper- + inflation. Earlier as a medical term in treatment of lung
diseases.


Hyperion

a Titan, son of Uranus and Gaea, later identified with Apollo, from Greek, literally he who looks
from above.


hyperkinetic (adj.)

1880, from hyper- + kinetic. Perhaps immediately from French hyperkinetic (1874). Related:
Hyperkinesis.


hyperlink (n.)

by 1987, from hyper- + link (n.).


hyperopia (n.)

1884, Modern Latin, from hyper- + Greek ops eye (see eye).


hyperplasia (n.)

1861, from Modern Latin hyperplasia, from hyper- + -plasia.


hypersensitive (adj.)

1827, a hybrid from hyper- + sensitive. Related: Hypersensitivity.


hyperspace (n.)

space of more than three dimensions, 1867, from hyper-  + space (n.). A hybrid; correctly formed it
would be superspace.


hypertension (n.)

1863, from hyper- + tension. Originally in medical use; of emotions or nerves, from 1936.


hypertext (n.)

1969, from hyper- + text (n.).


hyperthermia (n.)

1878, medical Latin, from hyper- + Greek therme heat (see thermal).


hyperthyroidism (n.)

1895, from hyper- + thyroid + -ism.


hypertonic

1855, from hyper- + tonic. Related: Hypertonia; hypertonicity.


hypertrophy (n.)

1821, from hyper- + Greek -trophe nourishment (see -trophy). Related: Hypertrophic.


hyperventilate (v.)

breathe deeply and rapidly, 1931, from hyper- + ventilate. Related: Hyperventilated;
hyperventilating.


hyperventilation (n.)

1907, from hyper- + ventilation. Earlier as a type of treatment for lung diseases.


hypervigilance (n.)

1917, from hyper- + vigilance. Related: Hypervigilant.


hypha (n.)

1866, from Modern Latin plural hyphae (1810), from Greek hyphe (singular) web.


hyphen (n.)

1620s, from Late Latin hyphen, from Greek hyphen mark joining two syllables or words, probably
indicating how they were to be sung, noun use of an adverb meaning together, in one, literally under
one, from hypo under (see sub-) + hen, neuter of heis one.


hyphenate (v.)

1881, from hyphen + -ate (2). The earlier verb was simply hyphen (1814). Related: Hyphenated;
hyphenating. Hyphenated American is attested from 1889.


hyphenation (n.)

1881, from hyphen + -ation. Hyphenization is attested from 1851.


hypnagogic (adj.)

1868, from French hypnagogique, from Greek hypnos sleep (see somnolence) + agogos leading (see act).
Etymologically, inducing sleep, but used mostly with a sense pertaining to the state of
consciousness when falling asleep.


hypno-

word-forming element meaning sleep, from Greek hypno-, comb. form of hypnos sleep (see somnolence).


hypnopedia (n.)

also hypnopaedia, sleep-learning, 1932, from Greek hypnos sleep (see somnolence) + paideia education
(see pedo-).


hypnopompic (adj.)

pertaining to the state of consciousness when awaking from sleep, 1901, from hypno- sleep + Greek
pompe sending away, from pempein to send.


hypnosis (n.)

1869, the coming on of sleep, coined (as an alternative to hypnotism) from Greek hypnos sleep (see
somnolence) + -osis condition. Of an artificially induced condition, from 1880.


hypnotherapy (n.)

1897, from hypno- + therapy. Related: Hypnotherapist.


hypnotic (adj.)

1620s, inducing sleep, originally used of drugs, from French hypnotique (16c.) inclined to sleep,
soporific, from Late Latin hypnoticus, from Greek hypnotikos inclined to sleep, putting to sleep,
sleepy, from hypnoun put to sleep, from hypnos sleep (see somnolence). Modern sense of pertaining to
an induced trance first recorded in English 1843, along with hypnotist, hypnotize, both coined by
Dr. James Braid. Related: Hypnotical; hypnotically.


hypnotise (v.)

alternative spelling of hypnotize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Hypnotised; hypnotising.


hypnotism (n.)

1843, short for neuro-hypnotism (1842), coined by Dr. James Braid of Manchester, England, from
hypnotic + -ism. In the same work (1843) Braid coined the verb hypnotize.


hypnotist (n.)

1843; see hypnotic + -ist.


hypnotize (v.)

1843, see hypnotic + -ize. Related: Hypnotized; hypnotizing.


hypo (n.)

1711, depression, short for hypochondria; 1904 as short for hypodermic needle.


hypo-

word-forming element meaning under, beneath (in chemistry, indicating a lesser oxidation), from
hypo-, comb. form of Greek hypo (prep. and adverb) under, from PIE *upo- under, up from under, over
(see sub-).


hypoallergenic

1950, from hypo- + allergen + -ic.


hypochondria (n.)

1839, illness without a specific cause, earlier (1660s) depression or melancholy without real cause,
earlier still (late 14c.) ipocondrie upper abdomen, from Late Latin hypochondria the abdomen, from
Greek hypokhondria (neuter plural of hypokhondrios), from hypo- under (see sub-) + khondros
cartilage (of the breastbone); see grind (v.). Reflecting ancient belief that the viscera of the
hypochondria were the seat of melancholy and the source of the vapors that caused such feelings.


hypochondriac (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the hypochondria, also afflicted with melancholy, from French hypocondriaque
(16c.), from Medieval Latin hypochondriacus, from Greek hypokhondriakos pertaining to the upper
abdomen, from hypokhondria (see hypochondria). The noun is from 1630s, melancholy person; in the
modern sense from 1888.


hypochondriasis (n.)

1766, from hypochondria + an unusual use of -osis.


hypocrisy (n.)

c.1200, ipocrisie, from Old French ypocrisie, from Late Latin hypocrisis, from Greek hypokrisis
acting on the stage, pretense, from hypokrinesthai play a part, pretend, also answer, from hypo-
under (see sub-) + middle voice of krinein to sift, decide (see crisis). The sense evolution in
Attic Greek is from separate gradually to answer to answer a fellow actor on stage to play a part.
The h- was restored in English 16c.    Hypocrisy is the art of affecting qualities for the purpose
of pretending to an undeserved virtue. Because individuals and institutions and societies most often
live down to the suspicions about them, hypocrisy and its accompanying equivocations underpin the
conduct of life. Imagine how frightful truth unvarnished would be. [Benjamin F. Martin, France in
1938, 2005]


hypocrite (n.)

c.1200, ypocrite, from Old French ypocrite (12c., Modern French hypocrite), from Church Latin
hypocrita, from Greek hypokrites stage actor, pretender, dissembler, from hypokrinesthai (see
hypocrisy).


hypocritic (adj.)

1530s, from Greek hypokritikos â&euro;&oelig;acting a part, pretendingâ&euro;? (see hypocrisy).


hypocritical (adj.)

1540s (implied in hypocritically), from hypocritic, which was used in the same sense, + -al (1).
Middle English used simple hypocrite as the adjective (c.1400) as well as the noun.


hypodermic (adj.)

1830, from hypo- under + derma skin + -ic.


hypoglycemia (n.)

1893, from Latinized form of Greek elements hypo- under (see hypo-) + glykys sweet (see glucose) +
haima blood (see -emia).


hypomania (n.)

1843 (as a clinical word from 1882, from German hypomanie); see hypo- + mania. Related: Hypomaniac;
hypomanic.


hypotenuse (n.)

1570s, from Late Latin hypotenusa, from Greek hypoteinousa stretching under (the right angle), fem.
present participle of hypoteinein, from hypo- under (see sub-) + teinein to stretch (see tenet).
Formerly often erroneously hypothenuse.


hypothalamus (n.)

1896, coined 1893 in German from Greek hypo- under (see sub-) + thalamus part of the brain where a
nerve emerges.


hypothecate (v.)

1680s, from hypothecat-, past participle stem of Medieval Latin hypothecare, from Late Latin
hypotheca, from Greek hypotheke a deposit, pledge, mortgage, from hypo- down + tithenai to put,
place (see theme). Related: Hypothecated; hypothecating; hypothecation.


hypothermia (n.)

1877, Modern Latin, from hypo- under (see hypo-) + Greek therme heat (see thermal).


hypotheses (n.)

plural of hypothesis.


hypothesis (n.)

1590s, from Middle French hypothese and directly from Late Latin hypothesis, from Greek hypothesis
base, basis of an argument, supposition, literally a placing under, from hypo- under (see sub-) +
thesis a placing, proposition (see thesis). A term in logic; narrower scientific sense is from
1640s.


hypothesise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of hypothesize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Hypothesised;
hypothesising.


hypothesize (v.)

1738, from hypothesis + -ize. Related: Hypothesized; hypothesizing.


hypothetical (adj.)

1580s, from Greek hypothetikos pertaining to a hypothesis, from hypothesis (see hypothesis).
Related: Hypothetically; hypothetic.


hypotonia (n.)

1876, medical Latin, from hypo- + Greek tonos tone (see tenet).


hypotonic (adj.)

1873, from hypo- + tonic.


hypoxia (n.)

1941, from hypo- + oxygen. Related: Hypoxic.


hypsi-

word-forming element meaning on high, from Greek hypsi aloft, on high, related to hypsos height;
cognate with Sanskrit os above, over, Old Church Slavonic vysoku high.


Hyrcania

ancient region southeast of the Caspian Sea, from Greek Hyrkania, said to be from an Indo-European
*verkana country of wolves [Zonn, I., et al., The Caspian Sea Encyclopedia, 2010]


hyssop (n.)

Old English ysope, from Irish Latin hysopus, from Greek hyssopos, a plant of Palestine, used in
Jewish purification rites, from Hebrew 'ezobh (compare Syriac zupha, Arabic zufa).


hysterectomy (n.)

1886, coined in English from Greek hystera womb (see uterus) + -ectomy.


hysteresis (n.)

1805, from Greek hysteresis a coming short, a deficiency.


hysteria (n.)

1801, coined in medical Latin as an abstract noun from hysteric (see hysterical).


hysteric (adj.)

1650s, from Latin hystericus, from Greek hysterikos â&euro;&oelig;belonging to the wombâ&euro;?
(see hysterical). As a noun from 1751.


hysterical (adj.)

1610s, from Latin hystericus of the womb, from Greek hysterikos of the womb, suffering in the womb,
from hystera womb (see uterus). Originally defined as a neurotic condition peculiar to women and
thought to be caused by a dysfunction of the uterus. Meaning very funny (by 1939) is from the notion
of uncontrollable fits of laughter. Related: Hysterically.


hysterics (n.)

1727, from hysterical. Sometimes in 19c. jocularly folk-etymologized as high-strikes (1838).


hysteron proteron

1560s, from Late Latin, from Greek, literally the latter (put as) the former. A figure of speech in
which what should come last is put first, from hysteron, neuter of hysteros latter, second, after
(from PIE *ud-tero-, from root *ud- up, out; see out) + proteron, neuter of proteros before, former,
from PIE *pro-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).


