-ia

word-forming element in names of countries, diseases, flowers, from Latin and Greek -ia, which forms
abstract nouns of feminine gender. In paraphernalia, Mammalia, etc. it represents the Latin and
Greek plural suffix of nouns in -ium or -ion.    Chinese forms country names by adding guo country
to the stressed syllable of the place name, hence Meiguo America, from mei, the stressed syllable of
America (minus -r-, which does not exist in Chinese). Similarly Yingguo England, Faguo France.
Continent names are similarly formed, with zhou continent (such as Meizhou America (continent),
Feizhou Africa, Ouzhou Europe).


-ial

variant of -al (1).


-ian

variant of suffix -an used with stem endings in -i, from Latin -ianus (-anus). In Middle English,
frequently -ien, from words borrowed via French.


-iana

form of -ana with nouns whose adjectival forms end in -ian.


-iasis

medical Latin word-forming element meaning process; morbid condition, from Greek -iasis, from aorist
of verbs in -iao, which often express disease.


-iatric

word-forming element from Greek iatrikos healing, from iatros physician, healer (related to iatreun
treat medically, and iasthai heal, treat); of uncertain origin, perhaps from iaomai to cure, related
to iaino heat, warm, cheer, probably from a root meaning enliven, animate.


-iatry

word-forming element meaning medical treatment, from French -iatrie, from Greek iatreia healing,
medical treatment (see -iatric).


-ible

suffix forming adjectives from verbs, borrowed in Middle English from Old French -ible and directly
from Latin -ibilis; see -able.


-ic

adjective suffix, having to do with, having the nature of, being, made of, caused by, similar to (in
chemistry, indicating a higher valence than names in -ous), from French -ique and directly from
Latin -icus, which in many cases represents Greek -ikos in the manner of; pertaining to. From PIE
*-(i)ko, which also yielded Slavic -isku, adjectival suffix indicating origin, the source of the
-sky (Russian -skii) in many surnames.


-ical

adjectival suffix, mostly the same as -ic but sometimes with specialized sense (such as
historic/historical), Middle English, from Late Latin -icalis, from Latin -icus + -alis.


-ics

in the names of sciences or disciplines (acoustics, aerobics, economics, etc.) it represents a 16c.
revival of the classical custom of using the neuter plural of adjectives with -ikos (see -ic) to
mean matters relevant to and also as the titles of treatises about them. Subject matters that
acquired their names in English before c.1500, however, tend to remain in singular (such as
arithmetic, logic).


-id

word-forming element meaning belonging to, connected with, member of a group or class (plural
-idae), from French -ide and directly from Latin -ides, masculine patronymic, from Greek -ides. In
astronomy, of meteor showers, it represents Latin -idis, Greek -idos, the genitive of the feminine
patronymic suffix.


-idae

word-forming element used to form family names in zoology, Latin plural noun suffix, plural of -ides
(see -id).


-ide

suffix used to form names of simple compounds of an element with another element or radical;
originally abstracted from oxide, the first so classified.


-ie

alternative spelling of -y; now mostly of -y (3), but formerly of others.


-ier

word-forming element indicating occupation, from French and Old French -ier, from Latin -arius (also
see -er (1)). Nativized and used to form English words (glazier, hosier, etc.; also see -yer).


-ify

variant of suffix -fy used with stem endings in -i. In modern formations in English the -i-
sometimes is regarded erroneously as part of the affix.


-ile

suffix denoting ability, capacity, from French -il or directly from Latin -ilis.


-in (1)

suffix attached to a verb, first attested 1960 with sit-in (which probably was influenced by sit-
down strike); used first of protests, extended c.1965 to any gathering.


-in (2)

chemical suffix, usually indicating a neutral substance, antibiotic, vitamin, or hormone; see -ine
(2).


-ina

fem. suffix in titles and names, from Latin -ina.


-ine (1)

suffix used to form adjectives from nouns, from French -ine, fem. of -in, or directly from Latin
-inus of, like.


-ine (2)

chemical suffix, sometimes -in, though modern use distinguishes them; early 19c., from French -ine,
from Latin -ina, fem. form of suffix used to form adjectives from nouns (identical with -ine (1)).
In French, the suffix commonly was used to form words for derived substances, hence its extended use
in chemistry, where it was applied unsystematically at first (as in aniline), but now has more
restricted use.


-ing (1)

suffix attached to verbs to mean their action, result, product, material, etc., from Old English
-ing, -ung, from Proto-Germanic *unga (cognates: Old Norse -ing, Dutch -ing, German -ung).
Originally used to form nouns from verbs and to denote completed or habitual action. Its use has
been greatly expanded in Middle and Modern English.


-ing (2)

suffix used form the present participle of verbs, from Old English -ende (cognates: German -end,
Gothic -and, Sanskrit -ant, Greek -on, Latin -ans). It evolved into -ing in 13c.-14c.


-ion

suffix forming nouns of state, condition, or action from verbs, from Latin -ionem (nominative -io,
genitive -ionis), sometimes via French -ion.


-ise

see -ize.


-ish

adjectival suffix, from Old English -isc, common Germanic (cognates: Old Norse -iskr, German -isch,
Gothic -isks), cognate with Greek diminutive suffix -iskos. Colloquially attached to hours to denote
approximation, 1916.


-ism

suffix forming nouns of action, state, condition, doctrine, from French -isme or directly from Latin
-isma, -ismus, from Greek -isma, from stem of verbs in -izein. Used as an independent word, chiefly
disparagingly, from 1670s.


-ist

word-forming element meaning one who does or makes, also used to indicate adherence to a certain
doctrine or custom, from French -iste and directly from Latin -ista, from Greek -istes, from -is-,
ending of the stem of verbs in -izein, + agential suffix -tes. Variant -ister (as in chorister,
barister) is from Old French -istre, on false analogy of ministre. Variant -ista is from Spanish,
popularized in American English 1970s by names of Latin-American revolutionary movements.


-istic

adjectival suffix, from French -istique or directly from Latin -isticus, from Greek -istikos, which
is adjective suffix -ikos (see -ic) added to noun suffix -istes (see -ist).


-ite (1)

from French -ite and directly from Latin -ita, from Greek -ites (fem. -itis), forming adjectives and
nouns meaning connected with or belonging to. Especially used in classical times to form ethnic and
local designations (for example in Septuagint translations of Hebrew names in -i) and for names of
gems and minerals.


-ite (2)

salt suffix, from French -ite, alteration of -ate (see -ate (3)).


-itis

noun suffix denoting diseases characterized by inflammation, Modern Latin, from Greek -itis,
feminine of adjectival suffix -ites pertaining to. Feminine because it was used with feminine noun
nosos disease, especially in Greek arthritis (nosos) (disease) of the joints, which was one of the
earliest borrowings into English and from which the suffix was abstracted in other uses.


-ity

suffix forming abstract nouns from adjectives, meaning condition or quality of being ______, from
Middle English -ite, from Old French -it&eacute; and directly from Latin -itatem (nominative -itas),
suffix denoting state or condition, composed of connective -i- + -tas (see -ty (2)).    Roughly, the
word in -ity usually means the quality of being what the adjective describes, or concretely an
instance of the quality, or collectively all the instances; &amp; the word in -ism means the
disposition, or collectively all those who feel it. [Fowler]


-ive

sufix forming adjectives from verbs, meaning pertaining to, tending to, in some cases from Old
French -if, but usually directly from Latin -ivus. In some words borrowed from French at an early
date it has been reduced to -y (as in hasty, tardy).


-ization

suffix forming nouns of action, process, or state; see -ize + -ation.


-ize

word-forming element used to make verbs, Middle English -isen, from Old French -iser, from Late
Latin -izare, from Greek -izein.    English picked up the French form, but partially reverted to the
correct Greek -z- spelling from late 16c. In Britain, despite the opposition (at least formerly) of
OED, Encyclopaedia Britannica, the Times of London, and Fowler, -ise remains dominant. Fowler thinks
this is to avoid the difficulty of remembering the short list of common words not from Greek which
must be spelled with an -s- (such as advertise, devise, surprise).


I (pron.)

12c. shortening of Old English ic, first person singular nominative pronoun, from Proto-Germanic
*ekan (cognates: Old Frisian ik, Old Norse ek, Norwegian eg, Danish jeg, Old High German ih, German
ich, Gothic ik), from PIE *eg-, nominative form of the first person singular pronoun (cognates:
Sanskrit aham, Hittite uk, Latin ego (source of French Je), Greek ego, Russian ja, Lithuanian
a&#353;). Reduced to i by mid-12c. in northern England, it began to be capitalized mid-13c. to mark
it as a distinct word and avoid misreading in handwritten manuscripts.    The reason for writing
<b>I</b> is ... the orthographic habit in the middle ages of using a 'long i' (that is, j or I)
whenever the letter was isolated or formed the last letter of a group; the numeral 'one' was written
j or I (and three iij, etc.), just as much as the pronoun. [Otto Jespersen, Growth and Structure of
the English Language, p.233]    The form ich or ik, especially before vowels, lingered in northern
England until c.1400 and survived in southern dialects until 18c. The dot on the small letter -i-
began to appear in 11c. Latin manuscripts, to distinguish the letter from the stroke of another
letter (such as -m- or -n-). Originally a diacritic, it was reduced to a dot with the introduction
of Roman type fonts. The letter -y- also was written with a top dot in Old English and early Middle
English, when it tended to be written with a closed loop at the top and thus was almost
indistinguishable from the lower-case thorn (&#254;).


I Ching

1876, from Chinese, said to mean Book of Changes.


i&#039;nt

also i'n't, 18c., contraction representing a casual pronunciation of isn't it.


I&#039;se

colloquial or dialectal contraction of I shall, attested from 1796.


I&#039;ve

contraction of I have, 1742, first attested in Richardson's Pamela.


I.D.

also ID (but pronounced as separate letters), short for identification, attested from 1955.


i.e.

abbreviation of Latin id est, literally that is; used in English in the sense of that is to say.


I.H.S.

Old English, from Medieval Latin, representing Greek abbreviation of IHSOUS Jesus, in which -H- is
the capital of the Greek vowel eta. The Roman form would be I.E.S. Mistaken for a Latin contraction
in the Middle Ages, after its Greek origin was forgotten, and sometimes treated as short for Iesus
Hominum Salvator Jesus Savior of Men. Alternative version I.H.C. (terminal -s- often written in
later Greek with a character resembling -c-) is found on vestments from 950 C.E., and may be the
source of the H. in slang Jesus H. Christ.


I.O.U.

also IOU, I O U, 1610s, originally as IOV (see V); with punning reference to I Owe You.


I.Q.

1922, abbreviation of intelligence quotient, a 1921 translation of German Intelligenz-quotient,
coined 1912 by German psychologist William L. Stern (1871-1938).    Intelligence is a general
capacity of an individual consciously to adjust his thinking to new requirements: it is general
mental adaptability to new problems and conditions of life. [Stern, The Psychological Methods of
Testing Intelligence, 1914]


I.R.A. (2)

also IRA, initialism (acronym) for individual retirement account, attested from 1974.


I.R.A. (1)

also IRA, initialism (acronym) for Irish Republican Army, attested from 1919.


iamb (n.)

1842, from French iambe (16c.), from Latin iambus, from Greek iambos (see iambic). Iambus itself was
used in English in this sense in 1580s.


iambic

1570s (n.); 1580s (adj.), from Latin iambicus, from Greek iambikos, from iambos metrical foot of one
unaccented followed by one accented syllable, from iaptein to assail (in words), literally to put
forth. The meter of invective and lampoon in classical Greek from the time it was used for such by
Archilochos, 7c. B.C.E.


Ian

masc. proper name, Scottish form of John.


iatro-

word-forming element meaning physician, medicine, healing, from Greek iatro-, comb. form of iatros
healer, physician (see -iatric).


iatrogenic (adj.)

1920, from iatro- + -genic.


Iberian

c.1600 (n.); 1610s (adj.), from Latin Iberia, ancient name of the Spanish peninsula, from Greek
Iberes Celtic people of Spain; also the name given to an Asiatic people near the Caucasus. Of
unknown origin in both uses, but the word as applied in Spain is believed to be related to the River
Ebro. The earliest English reference is to the Caucasians; in reference to Spain and Portugal it
dates from 1610s.


ibex (n.)

c.1600, from Latin ibex wild goat of the Alps and Apennines, from a pre-Latin Alpine language. The
German steinbock.


ibid.

also ibid, 1660s, abbreviation of Latin ibidem in the same place, from ibi there, pronomial adverb
of place, + demonstrative suffix -dem.


ibis (n.)

stork-like bird, late 14c., from Greek ibis, from Egyptian hab, a sacred bird of Egypt.


IBM

also (in early use) I.B.M., initialism (acronym) attested by 1921 from International Business
Machines Co., name in use from 1918.


ibogaine (n.)

nerve stimulant, 1901, from French ibogaine, from iboga, Congolese name of the shrub from which the
chemical is extracted, + chemical suffix -ine (2).


Icarus

son of Daedalus in Greek mythology; he flew too high on artificial wings and so plunged to his
death. Used allusively from 1580s. The name is of unknown origin.


ICBM (n.)

1955, initialism (acronym) for Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile.


ice (n.)

Old English is ice (also the name of the rune for -i-), from Proto-Germanic *isa- (cognates: Old
Norse iss, Old Frisian is, Dutch ijs, German Eis), with no certain cognates beyond Germanic, though
possible relatives are Avestan aexa- frost, ice, isu- frosty, icy; Afghan asai frost. Slang meaning
diamonds is attested from 1906.   Ice cube attested from 1904. Ice age attested from 1832. To break
the ice to make the first opening to any attempt is from 1580s, metaphoric of making passages for
boats by breaking up river ice though in modern use usually with implications of cold reserve.


ice (v.)

c.1400, ysen, cover with ice, from ice (n.). Related: Iced; icing.


ice cream (n.)

1744, earlier iced cream (1680s), from ice (n.) + cream (n.).


Ice-Capade (n.)

1941, originally a film title, from ice (n.) + play on escapade.


ice-cold (adj.)

Old English is-calde; see ice (n.) + cold (adj.).


ice-skate (v.)

1690s, from ice (n.) + skate (n.2). The verb usually was simply skate until the advent of roller-
skating mid-18c. made distinction necessary.


ice-water (n.)

1722, from ice (n.) + water (n.1).


iceberg (n.)

1774, partial loan-translation of Dutch ijsberg, literally ice mountain, from ijs ice (see ice (n.))
+ berg mountain (see barrow (n.2)).  An earlier term was sea-hill (1690s). Phrase tip of the
iceberg, in a figurative sense, first recorded 1962. Iceberg lettuce attested from 1893.


icebox (n.)

also ice-box, 1839, from ice (n.) + box (n.).


iceman (n.)

1844, from ice (n.) + man (n.).


ichneumon (n.)

1570s, originally a weasel-like animal in Egypt, Latinized from Greek ikhneumon, literally searcher,
tracker, perhaps because it hunts crocodile eggs, from ikhneuein hunt for, track, from ikhnos a
track, footstep, trace, clue, of unknown origin. Used by Aristotle for a species of wasp that hunts
spiders (a sense in English from 1650s).


ichor (n.)

1630s, from Greek ikhor, of unknown origin, possibly from a non-Indo-European language. The fluid
that serves for blood in the veins of the gods. Related: Ichorous.


ichthyology (n.)

1640s, Modern Latin, from Greek ikhthys fish + -ology. Related: Ichthyologist.


Ichthyosaur (n.)

extinct reptile, 1830, Modern Latin, from Greek ikhthys fish + sauros lizard (see -saurus).


ichthyosis (n.)

1815, Modern Latin, from Greek ikhthys fish + -osis.


icicle (n.)

early 14c., isykle, from is ice + ikel icicle, from Old English gicel icicle, ice (rel. to cylegicel
cold ice), from Proto-Germanic *jekilaz (cognates: Old Norse jaki piece of ice, diminutive
j&ouml;kull icicle, ice, glacier; Old High German ihilla icicle), from PIE *yeg- ice. Dialectal
ickle icicle survived into 20c.


icing (n.)

1769 in the confectionary sense, verbal noun of ice (v.). Earlier in this sense was simple ice
(1723). Meaning process of becoming covered with ice is from 1881.


Icknield Way

prehistoric trackway from Norfolk to Dorset, Old English Icenhylte (903), of unknown meaning and
origin. Name transferred 12c. to the Roman road from Burton on the Water to Templeborough.


icky (adj.)

1935, American English, probably from icky-boo (c.1920) sickly, nauseated, probably baby talk
elaboration of sick. Originally a swing lover's term for more sentimental jazz music; in general use
from 1938.


icon (n.)

also ikon, 1570s, image, figure, representation, from Late Latin icon, from Greek eikon likeness,
image, portrait, related to eikenai be like, look like, of unknown origin. Eastern Church sense is
attested from 1833. Computing sense first recorded 1982.


iconic (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin iconicus, from Greek eikonikos pertaining to an image, from eikon (see icon).


iconoclasm (n.)

1797 in reference to breaking of idols; 1858 in reference to beliefs, institutions, etc.; see
iconoclast + -ism.


iconoclast (n.)

breaker or destroyer of images, 1590s, from French iconoclaste and directly from Medieval Latin
iconoclastes, from Late Greek eikonoklastes, from eikon (genitive eikonos) image + klastes breaker,
from klas- past tense stem of klan to break (see clastic). Originally those in the Eastern Church in
8c. and 9c. whose mobs of followers destroyed icons and other religious objects on the grounds that
they were idols. Applied to 16c.-17c. Protestants in Netherlands who vandalized former Catholic
churches on similar grounds. Extended sense of one who attacks orthodox beliefs or institutions is
first attested 1842.


iconoclastic (adj.)

1640s; see iconoclast + -ic.


iconography (n.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin iconographia, from Greek eikonographia sketch, description, from eikon
(see icon) + -graphia (see -graphy). Related: Iconographic.


icosahedron (n.)

1560s, from Greek eikosahedron, neuter of eikosahedros, from eikosi twenty + -hedra seat, base,
chair, face of a geometric solid, from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary). Greek eikosi is
from PIE *wikmti- twenty, from *wi- in half, hence two + (d)kmti-, from root *dekm- ten (see ten).


icteric (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin ictericus, from Greek ikterikos jaundiced, from ikteros (see icterus). Related:
Icterical.


icterus (n.)

1706, medical Latin, from Greek ikteros jaundice, also the name of a yellowish bird the sight of
which was supposed, by sympathetic magic, to cure jaundice. As a zoological genus, from 1713.


ictus (n.)

verse stress, 1752, from Latin ictus a blow, stroke, thrust, of voices a beat, impulse, stress, from
icere to strike, hit, related to iacere to throw (see jet (v.)).


icy (adj.)

Old English isig; see ice (n.) + -y (2). Modern use is said to be a late Middle English re-
formation. Figurative use from 1590s. Related: Icily; iciness.


id (n.)

1924, in Joan Riviere's translation of Freud's Das Ich und das Es (1923), from Latin id it
(translation of German es it in Freud's title), used in psychoanalytical theory to denote the
unconscious instinctual force. Latin id is from PIE pronomial stem *i- (see yon).


id est

Latin, literally that is (to say).


Ida

fem. proper name, from Medieval Latin, from Old High German Ida, perhaps related to Old Norse i&eth;
work.


Idaho

c.1860, as a place name, originally applied to part of what is now eastern Colorado (Idaho Territory
organized 1863; admitted as a state 1890); from Kiowa-Apache (Athabaskan) idaahe enemy, a name
applied by them to the Comanches.


idea (n.)

late 14c., archetype of a thing in the mind of God; Platonic `idea,' from Latin idea idea, and in
Platonic philosophy archetype, from Greek idea ideal prototype, literally the look of a thing (as
opposed to the reality); form; kind, sort, nature, from idein to see, from PIE *wid-es-ya-, suffixed
form of root *weid- to see (see vision). Sense of result of thinking first recorded 1640s.    Men of
one idea, like a hen with one chicken, and that a duckling. [Thoreau, Walden]   Id&eacute;e fixe
(1836) is from French, literally fixed idea.


ideal (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to an archetype or model,  from Late Latin idealis existing in idea, from
Latin idea in the Platonic sense (see idea). Sense of perfect first recorded 1610s.


ideal (n.)

perfect person or thing, 1796, in a translation of Kant, from ideal (adj.).


idealism (n.)

1796, in the abstract sense, originally belief that reality is made up only of ideas, from ideal
(adj.) + -ism; on model of French id&eacute;alisme. Meaning representing things in an ideal form is
from 1829.


idealist (n.)

one who represents things in an ideal form, 1829, from ideal + -ist. Earlier (1796) in a
philosophical sense one who believes reality consists only in (Platonic) ideals.    It seems even
incredible, that any Idealist in any age could forget himself so far as to run his head against a
post, merely because he found in his system, that no external world does exist, and that therefore
nothing could be without to hurt him. [F.A. Nitsch, A General and Introductory View of Professor
Kant's Principles, 1796]    Earlier still, one who holds doctrines of philosophical idealism (1701).


idealistic (adj.)

1829; see idealist + -ic.


idealization (n.)

1796; see idealize + -ation.


idealize (v.)

1786, probably formed from ideal (adj.) + -ize. Related: Idealized; idealizing.


ideally (adv.)

in the best conceivable situation, 1840, from ideal + -ly (2). Earlier in an archetype (1640s); in
idea or imagination (1590s).


ideate (v.)

c.1600, from idea + -ate (2). Related: Ideated; ideating.


ideation (n.)

1829; see idea + -ation. Related: Ideational.    As we say Sensation, we might say also, Ideation;
it would be a very useful word; and there is no objection to it, except the pedantic habit of
decrying a new term. [James Mill, Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, London, 1829]


idem

Latin, literally the same (see identical).


idempotent

1870, from Latin idem the same + potentem powerful (see potent).


identical (adj.)

1610s, as a term in logic, from Medieval Latin identicus the same, from Late Latin identitas
identity, sameness, ultimately from comb. form of Latin idem the same (from id it, that one; see id)
+ demonstrative suffix -dem. General sense of being the same or very similar is from 1630s. Replaced
Middle English idemptical (late 15c.), from Medieval Latin idemptitas identity, from Latin idem.
Related: Identically.


identifiable (adj.)

1804, from identify + -able. Related: Identifiably.


identification (n.)

1640s, treating of a thing as the same as another, from French identification, probably from
identifier (see identify). Sense of becoming or feeling oneself one with another is from 1857. Sense
of determination of identity is from 1859. Meaning object or document which marks identity is from
1947 (short for identification tag, card, etc.).


identifier (n.)

thing that identifies, 1870, agent noun from identify.


identify (v.)

1640s, regard as the same, from French identifier, from identit&eacute; (see identity). Sense of
recognize first recorded 1769. Meaning make one (with), associate (oneself) is from 1780. Sense of
serve as means of identification is attested by 1886. Related: Identified; identifying.


identity (n.)

c.1600, sameness, oneness, from Middle French identit&eacute; (14c.), from Late Latin (5c.)
identitatem (nominative identitas) sameness, from ident-, comb. form of Latin idem (neuter) the same
(see identical); abstracted from identidem over and over, from phrase idem et idem. [For discussion
of Latin formation, see entry in OED.] Earlier form of the word in English was idemptitie (1560s),
from Medieval Latin idemptitas. Term identity crisis first recorded 1954. Identity theft attested
from 1995.


ideogram (n.)

1838, from comb. form of Greek idea (see idea) + -gram.


ideograph (n.)

late 1830s, from comb. form of Greek idea (see idea) + -graph instrument for recording; something
written. Related: Ideographic (1822); ideographical.


ideological (adj.)

1797, from ideology + -ical. Related: Ideologically.


ideologue (n.)

1815, in reference to the French Revolutionaries, from French ideologue, from Greek idea (see idea)
+ -logos (see -logue). Earlier form was ideologist (1798).


ideology (n.)

1796, science of ideas, originally philosophy of the mind which derives knowledge from the senses
(as opposed to metaphysics), from French id&eacute;ologie study or science of ideas, coined by
French philosopher Destutt de Tracy (1754-1836) from id&eacute;o- of ideas, from Greek idea (see
idea) + -logy. Later used in a sense impractical theorizing (1813). Meaning systematic set of ideas,
doctrines first recorded 1909.Ideology ... is usually taken to mean, a prescriptive doctrine that is
not supported by rational argument. [D.D. Raphael, Problems of Political Philosophy, 1970]


ides (n.)

(plural) early 14c., middle day of a Roman month, from Old French Ides (12c.), from Latin idus
(plural), a word perhaps of Etruscan origin. The 15th of March, May, July, and October; the 13th of
other months. Debts and interest were often payable on the ides [Lewis].


idio-

word-forming element meaning one's own, personal, distinct, from Greek idio-, comb. form of idios
own, personal, private, one's own (see idiom).


idiocrasy (n.)

peculiarity, 1680s, from Greek idiokrasia, from idio- (see idio-) + krasis mixing, tempering (see
rare (adj.2)).


idiocy (n.)

1520s, from idiot on model of prophecy, etc. Early alternatives included idiotacy (1580s), idiotry
(1590s).


idiolect (n.)

1948, from idio- + second element abstracted from dialect.


idiom (n.)

1580s, form of speech peculiar to a people or place, from Middle French idiome (16c.) and directly
from Late Latin idioma a peculiarity in language, from Greek idioma peculiarity, peculiar
phraseology, from idioumai to appropriate to oneself, from idios personal, private, properly
particular to oneself, from PIE *swed-yo-, suffixed form of root *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third
person and reflexive (referring back to the subject of a sentence), also used in forms denoting the
speaker's social group, (we our-)selves (cognates: Sanskrit svah, Avestan hva-, Old Persian huva
one's own, khva-data lord, literally created from oneself; Greek hos he, she, it; Latin suescere to
accustom, get accustomed, sodalis companion; Old Church Slavonic svoji his, her, its, svojaku
relative, kinsman; Gothic swes one's own; Old Norse sik oneself; German Sein; Old Irish fein self,
himself). Meaning phrase or expression peculiar to a language is from 1620s.


idiomatic (adj.)

1712, from Latin idiomaticus, from Greek idiomatikos; from idios one's own (see idiom) + matos
thinking, animated (see automaton).


idiopathy (n.)

1640s, Modern Latin, from Greek idiopatheia, from comb. form of idios one's own (see idiom) +
-patheia, comb. form of pathos suffering, disease, feeling (see pathos). Related: idiopathic.


idiosyncrasy (n.)

c.1600, from French idiosyncrasie, from Greek idiosynkrasia a peculiar temperament, from idios one's
own (see idiom) + synkrasis temperament, mixture of personal characteristics, from syn together (see
syn-) + krasis mixture (see rare (adj.2)). Originally in English a medical term meaning physical
constitution of an individual. Mental sense first attested 1660s.


idiosyncratic (n.)

1779, from idiosyncrasy + -ic. Earlier in same sense was idiosyncratical (1640s). Related:
Idiosyncratically.


idiot (n.)

early 14c., person so mentally deficient as to be incapable of ordinary reasoning; also in Middle
English simple man, uneducated person, layman (late 14c.), from Old French idiote uneducated or
ignorant person (12c.), from Latin idiota ordinary person, layman; outsider, in Late Latin
uneducated or ignorant person, from Greek idiotes layman, person lacking professional skill (opposed
to writer, soldier, skilled workman), literally private person (as opposed to one taking part in
public affairs), used patronizingly for ignorant person, from idios one's own (see idiom).Reader,
suppose you were an idiot. And suppose you were a member of Congress. But I repeat myself. [Mark
Twain, c.1882]Idiot box television set is from 1959; idiot light dashboard warning signal is
attested from 1968. Idiot savant attested by 1870.


idiotic (adj.)

1713, from Late Latin idioticus uneducated, ignorant, in classical Latin, of an ordinary person,
from Greek idiotikos unprofessional, unskilled; not done by rules of art, unprofessional, from
idiotes (see idiot). Idiotical is from 1640s. Related: Idiotically.


idle (adj.)

Old English idel empty, void; vain; worthless, useless; not employed, common West Germanic
(cognates: Old Saxon idal, Old Frisian idel empty, worthless, Old Dutch idil, Old High German ital,
German eitel vain, useless, mere, pure), of unknown origin. Idle threats preserves original sense;
meaning lazy is c.1300.


idle (v.)

late 15c., make vain or worthless, from idle (adj.). Meaning spend or waste (time) is from 1650s.
Meaning cause to be idle is from 1789. Sense of running slowly and steadily without transmitting
power (as a motor) first recorded 1916. Related: Idled; idling.


idleness (n.)

Old English idelnes frivolity, vanity, emptiness; vain existence; see idle + -ness. Old English
expressed the idea we attach to in vain by in idelnisse. Spenser, Scott, and others use idlesse to
mean the same thing in a positive, pleasant sense.


idler (n.)

1530s, agent noun from idle.


idly (adv.)

Old English idellice; see idle + -ly (2).


Ido

1908, artificial language based on Esperanto, devised 1907; from Ido -ido
â&euro;&oelig;offspring,â&euro;? suffix representing Latin -ida, Greek -ides.


idol (n.)

mid-13c., image of a deity as an object of (pagan) worship, from Old French idole idol, graven
image, pagan god, from Late Latin idolum image (mental or physical), form, used in Church Latin for
false god, from Greek eidolon appearance, reflection in water or a mirror, later mental image,
apparition, phantom, also material image, statue, from eidos form (see -oid). Figurative sense of
something idolized is first recorded 1560s (in Middle English the figurative sense was someone who
is false or untrustworthy). Meaning a person so adored is from 1590s.


idolater (n.)

late 14c., ydolatrer idol-worshipper, from Old French idolatre, contracted from Late Latin
idololatres, from Ecclesiastical Greek eidololatres idol-worshipper (see idolatry).


idolatrous (adj.)

1540s, from idolater + -ous.


idolatry (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French idolatrie, from Vulgar Latin idolatria, shortened from Late Latin
idololatria (Tertullian), from Ecclesiastical Greek eidololatria worship of idols, from eidolon
image (see idol) + latreia worship, service (see -latry).


idolize (v.)

1590s, from idol + -ize. Related: Idolized; idolizing.


idyll (n.)

also idyl, c.1600, picturesque pastoral poem, from Latin idyllium, from Greek eidyllion short,
descriptive poem, usually of rustic or pastoral type, literally a little picture, diminutive of
eidos form (see -oid).


idyllic (adj.)

full of natural, simple charm, 1831, literally suitable for an idyll (late 18c. in sense pertaining
to an idyll); from idyll + -ic.


if (conj.)

Old English gif (initial g- in Old English pronounced with a sound close to Modern English -y-),
from Proto-Germanic *ja-ba (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse ef, Old Frisian gef, Old High German ibu,
German ob, Dutch of if, whether), from PIE pronomial stem *i- [Watkins]; Klein, OED suggest probably
originally from an oblique case of a noun meaning doubt (compare Old High German iba condition,
stipulation, doubt, Old Norse if doubt, hesitation, Swedish j&auml;f exception, challenge). As a
noun from 1510s.


iffy (adj.)

1937, American English, from if + -y (2). Originally associated with President Franklin D.
Roosevelt.


igloo (n.)

1824, Canadian English, from an Eskimo word for house, dwelling (compare Greenlandic igdlo house).


Ignatius

masc. proper name, from Latin Ignatius, collateral form of Egnatius.


igneous (adj.)

1660s, from Latin igneus of fire, fiery, from ignis fire, from PIE *egni- fire (cognates: Sanskrit
agnih fire, sacrificial fire, Old Church Slavonic ogni, Lithuanian ugnis fire).


ignis fatuus (n.)

will o' the wisp, jack-a-lantern, 1560s, from Medieval Latin, literally foolish fire; see igneous +
fatuous.


ignitable (adj.)

1640s; see ignite + -able.


ignite (v.)

1660s, from Latin ignitus, past participle of ignire set on fire, from ignis fire (see igneous).
Attested earlier as an adjective (1550s). Related: Ignited; igniting.


ignition (n.)

1610s, act of heating to the point of combustion, from French ignition (16c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin ignitionem (nominative ignitio), from Latin ignire set on fire, from ignis fire (see
igneous). Meaning means of sparking an internal combustion engine is from 1881.


ignivomous (adj.)

vomiting fire, c.1600, from Late Latin ignivomous, from Latin ignis fire (see igneous) + vomere to
vomit (see vomit).


ignoble (adj.)

mid-15c., of low birth, from Middle French ignoble, from Latin ignobilis unknown, undistinguished,
obscure; of base birth, not noble, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
gnobilis well-known, famous, renowned, of superior birth (see noble). Related: Ignobly.


ignominious (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French ignominieux (14c.) or directly from Latin ignominiosus disgraceful,
shameful, from ignominia loss of a (good) name, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + nomen (genitive nominis) name (see name). Influenced by Old Latin gnoscere come to know.
Related: Ignominiously; ignominiousness.


ignominy (n.)

1530s, back-formation from ignominious or else from Middle French ignominie (15c.), from Latin
ignominia disgrace, dishonor (see ignominious). Also sometimes shortened to ignomy.


ignoramus (n.)

1570s, from an Anglo-French legal term (early 15c.), from Latin ignoramus we do not know, first
person present indicative of ignorare not to know (see ignorant). The legal term was one a grand
jury could write on a bill when it considered the prosecution's evidence insufficient. Sense of
ignorant person came from the title role of George Ruggle's 1615 play satirizing the ignorance of
common lawyers.


ignorance (n.)

c.1200, from Old French ignorance (12c.), from Latin ignorantia want of knowledge (see ignorant).


ignorant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ignorant (14c.), from Latin ignorantia, from ignorantem (nominative
ignorans), present participle of ignorare not to know, to be unacquainted; mistake, misunderstand;
take no notice of, pay no attention to, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1))
+ Old Latin gnarus aware, acquainted with (cognates: Classical Latin noscere to know, notus known),
from Proto-Latin suffixed form *gno-ro-, related to gnoscere to know (see know).    Form influenced
by Latin ignotus unknown. Also see uncouth. Colloquial sense of ill-mannered first attested 1886. As
a noun meaning ignorant person from mid-15c.


ignore (v.)

1610s, not to know, to be ignorant of, from French ignorer be unaware of, from Latin ignorare not to
know, disregard (see ignorant). Sense of pay no attention to first recorded 1801 (Barnhart says
probably a dictionary word), and not common until c.1850. Related: Ignored; ignoring.


iguana (n.)

1550s, from Spanish, from Arawakan (W.Indies) iguana, iwana, the local name for the lizard.Foure
footed beastes ... named Iuannas, muche lyke vnto Crocodiles, of eyght foote length, of moste
pleasaunte taste. [Richard Eden, Decades of the New World, 1555]


Iguanodon (n.)

dinosaur name, 1825, hybrid from iguana + stem of Greek odonys tooth (on model of mastodon). So
called because the fossil teeth and bones were thought to resemble those of the lizard.


ikebana (n.)

1901, from Japanese, from ikeru to keep alive, arrange + hana flower.


il-

assimilated form of Latin prefix in- used with words beginning in l-; see in-.


ileo-

comb. form from ileum (q.v.).


ileum (n.)

lowest part of the small intestine, 1680s, medical Latin, from ileum, singular created from
classical Latin plural ilia groin, flank, in classical Latin, belly, the abdomen below the ribs,
poetically, entrails, guts. Sense restriction and form apparently from confusion with Greek eileos
(see ileus). Earlier in English ylioun (late 14c.), from Medieval Latin ileon. Related: Ileitis.


ileus (n.)

painful intestinal condition, 1706, from Latin ileus severe colic, from Greek ileos colic, from
eilein to turn, squeeze, from PIE *wel- (3) to turn, roll (see volvox).


ilex (n.)

late 14c., from Latin ilex holm-oak, perhaps from an extinct non-Indo-European language.


ilia

Latin plural of ilium (see ileum).


iliac (adj.)

1510s, pertaining to the disease ileus or colic, from French iliaque or directly from Late Latin
iliacus, from ilium flank, side, entrails (see ileum).


Iliad

from Latin Ilias (genitive Iliadis), from Greek Ilias poiesis poem of Ilion (Troy), literally city
of Ilius, the mythical founder.


ilium (n.)

pelvic bone, 1706, Modern Latin, from Latin ilia (plural) groin, flank (see ileum).


ilk (adj.)

Old English ilca same (n. and adj.), from Proto-Germanic *ij-lik, in which the first element is from
the PIE demonstrative particle *i- (see yon) and the second is that in Old English -lic form (see
like). Of similar formation are which and such. Phrase of that ilk implies coincidence of name and
estate, as in Lundie of Lundie; applied usually to families, so by c.1790 it began to be used with
meaning family, then broadening to type, sort.


ill (adj.)

c.1200, morally evil (other 13c. senses were malevolent, hurtful, unfortunate, difficult), from Old
Norse illr ill, bad, of unknown origin. Not related to evil. Main modern sense of sick, unhealthy,
unwell is first recorded mid-15c., probably related to Old Norse idiom it is bad to me. Slang
inverted sense of very good, cool is 1980s. As a noun, something evil, from mid-13c.


ill (v.)

early 13c., to do evil to, from ill (adj.). Meaing to speak disparagingly is from 1520s. Related:
Illed; illing.


ill (adv.)

c.1200, wickedly; with hostility; see ill (adj.). Meaning not well, poorly is from c.1300. It
generally has not shifted to the realm of physical sickess, as the adjective has done. Ill-fated
recorded from 1710; ill-informed from 1824; ill-tempered from c.1600; ill-starred from c.1600.
Generally contrasted with well, hence the useful, but now obsolete or obscure illcome (1570s),
illfare (c.1300), and illth.


illative (adj.)

inferential, 1610s, from Late Latin illativus, from Latin illatus brought in, used as past
participle of inferre. As a noun from 1590s.


illegal (adj.)

1620s, from French ill&eacute;gal or directly from Medieval Latin illegalis, from assimilated form
of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Latin legalis (see legal). Term illegal immigrant first
recorded 1892 in American English (illegal immigration is from 1887).


illegality (n.)

1630s, from illegal + -ity; or else from French illegalit&eacute; (14c.).


illegally (adv.)

1620s, from illegal + -ly (2).


illegible (adj.)

1630s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + legible. Related: Illegibly;
illegibility.


illegitimacy (n.)

1670s; see illegitimate + -acy.


illegitimate (adj.)

1530s, born out of wedlock, formed in English (and replacing earlier illegitime, c.1500), modeled on
Latin illegitimus not legitimate (see il- + legitimate). Sense of unauthorized, unwarranted is from
1640s. Phrase illegitimi non carborundum, usually translated as don't let the bastards grind you
down, is fake Latin (by 1965, said to date from c.1939) (Carborundum was a brand of abrasives).


illiberal (adj.)

1530s, ungentlemanly, base, mean, from Middle French illiberal (14c.), from Latin illiberalis
ungenerous, mean, sordid; unworthy of a freeman, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + liberalis (see liberal). A sense of narrow-minded politically; unconcerned with the
rights or liberties of others is attested from 1640s, and might conceivably be revived to take up
some of the burden that drags down conservative.


illicit (adj.)

c.1500, from Old French illicite (14c.) unlawful, forbidden, from Latin illicitus not allowed,
unlawful, illegal, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + licitus lawful,
past participle of licere to be allowed (see licence). Related: Illicitly.


illimitable (adj.)

1590s, from il- not + limitable.


illing (n.)

evil-doing, malevolent treatment, early 13c.; see ill (v.).


Illinois

U.S. territory created 1809; name is from a native Algonquian people who called themselves Inoca
(1725), also written Ilinouek, Old Ottawa for ordinary speaker. The modern form represents a 17c.
French spelling, pronounced ilinwe at that time. Admitted as a state 1818.


illiquid (adj.)

1690s, from il- not + liquid in the financial sense.


illiteracy (n.)

1650s, from illiterate + -cy. Earlier in this sense was illiterature (1590s).


illiterate (adj.)

early 15c., uneducated, unable to read (originally of Latin), from Latin illiteratus unlearned,
unlettered, ignorant; without culture, inelegant, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + literatus, literally furnished with letters (see literate). Rendered in Old English as
unst&aelig;fwis. As a noun meaning illiterate person from 1620s. Hence, illiterati (1788).


illness (n.)

disease, sickness, 1680s, from ill + -ness. Earlier it meant bad moral quality (c.1500).


illocution (n.)

1955, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + locution.


illocutionary (adj.)

1955, from illocution + -ary.


illogical (adj.)

1580s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + logical. Related: Illogically.


illth (n.)

1867, coined by John Ruskin from ill (adv.) on model of wealth (also see -th (2)).    [S]uch things,
and so much of them as he can use, are, indeed, well for him, or Wealth; and more of them, or any
other things, are ill for him, or Illth. [Ruskin, Munera Pulveris]


illude (v.)

early 15c., to mock, to trick, from Latin illudere to make sport of, from assimilated form of in-
in, into (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous).


illuminate (v.)

c.1500, to light up, shine on, a back-formation from illumination, or else from Latin illuminatus,
past participle of illuminare (see illumination). Earlier was enlumyen (late 14c.) decorate written
material with gold, silver, bright colors, from Old French enluminer, from Late Latin inluminare;
also illumine (late 14c.). Related: Illuminated; illuminating.


illuminati (n.)

1590s, plural of Latin illuminatus enlightened (in figurative sense), past participle of illuminare
(see illumination). Originally applied to a 16c. Spanish sect (the Alumbrados), then to other sects;
since 1797 used as a translation of German Illuminaten, name of a secret society founded 1776 in
Ingolstadt, Bavaria, and holding deistic and republican principles; hence used generally of free-
thinkers and sarcastically of those professing intellectual enlightenment (1816). Related:
Illuminatism; illuminatist.


illumination (n.)

late 14c., spiritual enlightenment, from Latin illuminationem (nominative illuminatio), from past
participle stem of illuminare to throw into light, make bright, light up; figuratively to set off,
illustrate, from assimilated form of in- in, into (see in- (2)) + lumen (genitive luminis) light,
related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Meaning action of lighting is from 1560s.


illumine (v.)

late 14c., to enlighten spiritually; mid-15c., to light up, shine light on, from Old French
illuminer, from Latin illuminare (see illumination). Related: illumined.


illusion (n.)

mid-14c., act of deception, from Old French illusion a mocking, deceit, deception (12c.), from Latin
illusionem (nominative illusio) a mocking, jesting, irony, from illudere mock at, literally to play
with, from assimilated form of in- at, upon (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Sense of
deceptive appearance developed in Church Latin and was attested in English by late 14c. Related:
Illusioned full of illusions (1920).


illusionary (adj.)

1886, from illusion + -ary.


illusionist (n.)

conjurer, magic act performer, 1840, from illusion + -ist. Earlier one suffering from illusions
(1812).


illusive (adj.)

deceptive, illusory, formed in English 1670s, from stem of illusion + -ive. Also see illusory.


illusory (adj.)

1590s, from French illusorie, from Late Latin illusorius ironical, of a mocking character, from
illus-, past participle stem of Latin illudere mock at, literally to play with, from assimilated
form of in- at, upon (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous).


illustrate (v.)

1520s, light up, shed light on; 1610s, educate by means of examples, back-formation from
illustration, and in some cases from Latin illustratus, past participle of illustrare (see
illustration). Sense of provide pictures to explain or decorate is 1630s. Related: Illustrated;
illustrating.


illustration (n.)

c.1400, a shining; early 15c., a manifestation; mid-15c., a spiritual illumination, from Old French
illustration apparition, appearance, and directly from Latin illustrationem (nominative illustratio)
vivid representation (in writing), literally an enlightening, from past participle stem of
illustrare light up, make light, illuminate; figuratively make clear, disclose, explain; adorn,
render distinguished, from assimilated form of in- in (see in- (2)) + lustrare make bright,
illuminate, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)). Mental sense of act of making clear
in the mind is from 1580s. Meaning an illustrative picture is from 1816.


illustrative (adj.)

1640s, from illustrate + -ive.


illustrator (n.)

1590s, one who enlightens, from illustrate + Latinate agent-noun suffix -or. Meaning one who draws
pictures is 1680s.


illustrious (adj.)

1560s, from Latin illustris lighted, bright, brilliant; figuratively distinguished, famous, probably
a back-formation from illustrare embellish, distinguish, make famous (see illustration). Sometimes
also illustrous. Replaced illustre in same sense (mid-15c.), from Middle French illustre.


illy (adv.)

in an ill manner, 1540s, from ill (adj.) + -ly (2).


Illyria

ancient country on the northeast shore of the Adriatic in modern Croatia; the name is of obscure
origin.


Ilocano

from Philippine Spanish Ilocos, literally river men, from Tagalog ilog river.


im-

variant of in- before -b-, -m-, -p-, in the sense of not, opposite of (immobile, impersonal) as well
as in, into (implant, impoverish). See in-. In some English words it alternates with em- (1).


image (n.)

c.1200, piece of statuary; artificial representation that looks like a person or thing, from Old
French image image, likeness; figure, drawing, portrait; reflection; statue, earlier imagene (11c.),
from Latin imaginem (nominative imago) copy, statue, picture, figuratively idea, appearance, from
stem of imitari to copy, imitate (see imitation).    Meaning reflection in a mirror is early 14c.
The mental sense was in Latin, and appears in English late 14c. Sense of public impression is
attested in isolated cases from 1908 but not in common use until its rise in the jargon of
advertising and public relations, c.1958.


image (v.)

late 14c., to form a mental picture, from Old French imagier, from image (see image (n.)). Related:
Imaged; imaging.


imagery (n.)

mid-14c., piece of sculpture, carved figures, from Old French imagerie (13c.), from imagier painter,
from image (see image (n.)). Meaning ornate description (in poetry, etc.) is from 1580s.


imaginable (adj.)

late 14c., ymaginable, from Old French imaginable and directly from Late Latin imaginabilis, from
Latin imaginari (see imagine). Related: Imaginably.


imaginary (adj.)

not real, late 14c., ymaginaire, from imagine + -ary; or else from Late Latin imaginarius seeming,
fancied, from imaginari. Imaginary friend (one who does not exist) attested by 1789.


imagination (n.)

faculty of the mind which forms and manipulates images, mid-14c., ymaginacion, from Old French
imaginacion concept, mental picture; hallucination, from Latin imaginationem (nominative imaginatio)
imagination, a fancy, noun of action from past participle stem of imaginari (see imagine).


imaginative (adj.)

late 14c., ymaginatyf, from Old French imaginatif and directly from Medieval Latin imaginativus,
from imaginat-, stem of Latin imaginari (see imagine). Related: Imaginatively; imaginativeness.


imagine (v.)

mid-14c., to form a mental image of, from Old French imaginer sculpt, carve, paint; decorate,
embellish (13c.), from Latin imaginari to form a mental picture to oneself, imagine (also, in Late
Latin imaginare to form an image of, represent), from imago (see image). Sense of suppose is first
recorded late 14c. Related: Imagined; imagining.


imagism (n.)

name of a movement in poetry that sought clarity of expression through use of precise visual images,
hard light, clear edges, coined 1912 by Ezra Pound; see image + -ism. Related: Imagist.


imago (n.)

1797, from Latin imago image (see image).


imam (n.)

1610s, from Arabic, literally leader; one who precedes, from amma to go before, precede.


imbalance (n.)

1895, from im- not + balance (n.).


imbecile (adj.)

1540s, imbecille weak, feeble (especially in reference to the body), from Middle French imbecile
(15c.), from Latin imbecillus weak, feeble (see imbecility). Sense shifted to mental weakness from
mid-18c. As a noun, feeble-minded person, it is attested from 1802. Traditionally an adult with a
mental age of roughly 6 to 9 (above an idiot but beneath a moron).


imbecilic (adj.)

1875, from imbecile + -ic.


imbecility (n.)

early 15c., physical weakness, feebleness (of a body part), impotence, from Middle French
imb&eacute;cillit&eacute; and directly from Latin imbecillitatem (nominative imbecillitas) weakness,
feebleness, from imbecillus weak, feeble, traditionally said to mean unsupported (quasi sine
baculo), from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + baculum a stick (see
bacillus). Weakness in mind (as opposed to body) was a secondary sense in Latin but was not attested
in English until 1620s.


imbibe (v.)

late 14c., from Old French imbiber, embiber to soak into, from Latin imbibere absorb, drink in,
inhale, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + bibere to drink, related to
potare to drink, from PIE *po(i)- to drink (see potion). Figurative sense of mentally drink in
(knowledge, ideas, etc.) was the main one in classical Latin, first attested in English 1550s.
Related: Imbibed; imbibing.


imbricate (v.)

1704 (implied in imbricated), from Latin imbricatus covered with tiles, past participle of imbricare
to cover with rain tiles (see imbrication). As an adjective from 1650s. Related: Imbricated;
imbricating.


imbrication (n.)

1640s, from French imbrication, from Latin imbricare to cover with tiles, from imbricem (nominative
imbrex) curved roof tile used to draw off rain, from imber (genitive imbris) rain, from PIE *ombh-
ro- rain (cognates: Sanskrit abhra cloud, thunder-cloud, rainy weather, Greek ombros rain), from
root *nebh- moist, water (see nebula).


imbroglio (n.)

1750, from Italian imbroglio, from imbrogliare confuse, tangle, from assimilated form of in- into,
in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + brogliare embroil, probably from Middle French brouiller confuse (see
broil (v.2); also see embroil).


imbrue (v.)

early 15c., to soak, steep; mid-15c., to stain, soil, from Old French embreuvere to moisten, a
metathesis of embeuvrer, from em- (see im-) + -bevrer, ultimately from Latin bibere to drink (see
imbibe). Or perhaps from Old French embroue soiled, ultimately from boue mud, dirt.


imbue (v.)

early 15c., to keep wet; to soak, saturate; also figuratively to cause to absorb (feelings,
opinions, etc.), from Latin imbuere moisten, of uncertain origin, perhaps from the same root as
imbrication. Compare also Old French embu, past participle of emboivre, from Latin imbibere drink
in, soak in (see imbibe), which might have influenced the English word. Related: Imbued; imbuing.


imburse (v.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin imbursare, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2))
+ bursa purse. Related: Imbursement.


imitable (adj.)

from French imitable (16c.), from Latin imitabilis that may be imitated, from imitari (see
imitation). Related: Imitability.


imitate (v.)

1530s, a back-formation from imitation or imitator, or else from Latin imitatus. Related: Imitated;
imitating. An Old English word for this was &aelig;fterhyrigan.


imitation (n.)

c.1400, emulation; act of copying, from Old French imitacion, from Latin imitationem (nominative
imitatio) a copying, imitation, from past participle stem of imitari to copy, portray, imitate, from
PIE *im-eto-, from root *aim- copy (cognates: Hittite himma- imitation, substitute). Meaning an
artificial likeness is from c.1600. As an adjective, from 1840.


imitative (adj.)

1580s, probably from imitate + -ive; or else from Middle French imitatif, from Late Latin
imitativus, from imitat-, stem of imitari.


imitator (n.)

1520s; see imitate + -or. Perhaps from French imitateur (14c.).


immaculacy (n.)

1799; see immaculate + -cy.


immaculate (adj.)

early 15c., free from mental or moral pollution, pure, from a figurative use of Latin immaculatus
unstained, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + maculatus spotted, defiled,
past participle of maculare to spot, from macula spot, blemish. The literal sense of spotlessly
clean or neat in English is first attested 1735. Immaculate Conception is late 15c., from Middle
French conception immacul&eacute;e (late 15c.); declared to be an article of faith in 1854.


immanence (n.)

1816; see immanent + -ence. Immanency is from 1650s.


immanent (adj.)

indwelling, inherent, 1530s, via French, from Late Latin immanens, present participle of Latin
immanere to dwell in, remain in, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
manere to dwell (see manor). Contrasted with transcendent. Related: Immanently.


Immanuel

masc. proper name; see Emmanuel.


immarcessible (adj.)

unfading, imperishable, 1540s, from Late Latin immarcessabilis from assimilated form of in- not (see
in- (1)) + marcessare to wither, pine away.


immaterial (adj.)

late 14c., spiritual, incorporeal, from Medieval Latin immaterialis not consisting of matter,
spiritual, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Late Latin materialis (see
material). Secondary sense of unimportant is first recorded 1690s from material in its 16c. sense of
important. Related: Immaterially.


immature (adj.)

1540s, untimely, premature, from Latin immaturus untimely, unripe, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + maturus (see mature (v.)). In 16c., usually in reference to early death;
modern sense of not fully developed first recorded 1640s. In reference to mentalities or behaviors
not considered age-appropriate, from 1920.


immaturity (n.)

1530s, untimeliness, from Latin immaturitatem (nominative immaturitas) unripeness, from immaturus
(see immature). Meaning lack of maturity attested from c.1600.


immeasurable (adj.)

mid-15c., from im- + measurable. It could alternate with immensurable (1530s), from French, from
Late Latin immensurabilis, from assimilated form of in- not + mensurabilis able to be measured, from
mensurare to measure. Related: Immeasurably.


immediacy (n.)

c.1600, from immediate + -cy.


immediate (adj.)

late 14c., intervening, interposed; early 15c., with nothing interposed; direct, also with reference
to time, from Old French immediat, from Late Latin immediatus without anything between, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + mediatus, past participle of mediare to
halve, later, be in the middle, from Latin medius middle (see medial (adj.)).


immediately (adv.)

without intervening time or space, early 15c., from immediate + -ly (2).


immemorable (adj.)

1550s, from Latin immemorabilis, from assimilated form of in- not (see in- (1)) + memorabilis (see
memorable).


immemorial (adj.)

c.1600, from French imm&eacute;morial (16c.) old beyond memory, from Medieval Latin immemorialis,
from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + memorialis (see memorial). Something
immemorial is ancient beyond memory; something immemorable is not memorable.


immense (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French immense (mid-14c.), from Latin immensus immeasurable, boundless, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + mensus measured, past participle of metiri
(see measure).


immensely (adv.)

1650s, from immense + -ly (2).


immensity (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French immensit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Latin immensitatem (nominative
immensitas) immeasurableness, noun of quality from immensus (see immense).


immerge (v.)

1620s, immerse, plunge (rare), from Latin immergere to dip, plunge (see immersion). Related:
Immerged; immerging.


immerse (v.)

early 15c. (implied in immersed), from Latin immersus, past participle of immergere to plunge in,
dip into (see immersion). Related: Immersed; immersing; immersive.


immersion (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin immersionem (nominative immersio), noun of action from past participle
stem of immergere, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + Latin mergere
plunge, dip (see merge). Meaning absorption in some interest or situation is from 1640s. As a method
of teaching a foreign language, it is from 1965, trademarked by the Berlitz company.


immigrant (n.)

one who immigrates, 1792, in an American context, from French immigrant, from Latin immigrantem
(nominative immigrans), present participle of immigrare (see immigrate). Emigrant is older. As an
adjective from 1805.


immigrate (v.)

1620s, from Latin immigratum, past participle of imigrare to remove, go into, move in, from
assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + migrare to move (see migration). Related:
Immigrated; immigrating.


immigration (n.)

1650s, from immigrate + -ion. As short for immigration authorities, from 1966.


imminence (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin imminentia, from Latin imminentem (see imminent).


imminent (adj.)

1520s, from Middle French imminent (14c.) and directly from Latin imminentem (nominative imminens),
present participle of imminere to overhang; impend, be near, be at hand, from assimilated form of
in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + minere jut out, related to mons hill (see mount (n.)).
Related: Imminently.


immiscible (adj.)

1670s, from im- + miscible.


immitigable (adj.)

1570s, from Latin immitigabilis, from assimilated form of in- not (see in- (1) + mitigabilis, from
past participle stem of mitigare make mild or gentle (see mitigate). Related: Immitigably.


immobile (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French immoble immovable, fixed, motionless, from Latin immobilis immovable
(also, figuratively, hard-hearted), from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
mobilis (see mobile (adj.)). Hence, immobilism policy of extreme conservatism (1949, from French
immobilisme).


immobility (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French immobilit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Latin immobilitatem
(nominative immobilitas), noun of quality from immobilis (see immobile).


immobilization (n.)

1846, noun of action from immobilize.


immobilize (v.)

1843, from immobile + -ize. Perhaps modeled on French immobiliser (1835). Related: Immobilized;
immobilizing.


immoderate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin immoderatus boundless, immeasurable, figuratively unrestrained, excessive,
from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + moderatus restrained (see moderate).
Related: Immoderately.


immoderation (n.)

early 15c., from Latin immoderationem (nominative immoderatio) want of moderation, excess, from
immoderatus (see immoderate).


immodest (adj.)

1560s, arrogant, impudent, pretentious, from Latin immodestus unrestrained, excessive, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + modestus (see modest). Meaning indecent is
from 1580s. Related: immodestly.


immodesty (n.)

1590s, from Latin immodestia intemperate conduct, from immodestus (see immodest).


immolate (v.)

1540s, to sacrifice, kill as a victim, from Latin immolatus, past participle of immolare to
sacrifice, originally to sprinkle with sacrificial meal, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on,
upon (see in- (2)) + mola (salsa) (sacrificial) meal, related to molere to grind (see mallet).
Related: Immolated; immolating.


immolation (n.)

early 15c., a sacrificing (originally especially with reference to Christ), from Middle French
immolation (13c.) or directly from Latin immolationem (nominative immolatio) a sacrificing, noun of
action from past participle stem of immolare (see immolate).


immoral (adj.)

1650s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not + moral (adj.). Related: Immorally.


immorality (n.)

1560s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + morality.


immortal (adj.)

deathless, late 14c., from Latin immortalis deathless, undying, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + mortalis mortal (see mortal (adj.)). In reference to fame, literature,
etc., attested from 1510s (a sense also found in classical Latin). As a noun, from mid-17c.


immortality (n.)

mid-14c., deathlessness, from Old French immortalit&eacute; (13c.) and directly from Latin
immortalitatem (nominative immortalitas) deathlessness, endless life, from immortalis (see
immortal). Sense of everlasting fame is from 1530s.


immortalization (n.)

c.1600, noun of action or state from immortalize.


immortalize (v.)

1560s, from immortal + -ize. Perhaps modeled on Middle French immortaliser. Related: Immortalized;
immortalizing.


immortelle (n.)

flower which preserves its shape and color after being dried, 1832, from French fem. of immortel
undying (see immortal).


immovability (n.)

late 14c.; see immovable + -ity.


immovable (adj.)

late 14c., literal and figurative, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + movable.
Related: Immovably.


immune (adj.)

mid-15c., free; exempt, back-formation from immunity. Latin immunis meant exempt from public
service, free from taxes. Specific modern medical sense of exempt from a disease (typically because
of inoculation) is from 1881. Immune system attested by 1917.


immunity (n.)

late 14c., exempt from service or obligation, from Old French immunit&eacute; and directly from
Latin immunitatem (nominative immunitas) exemption from performing public service or charge, from
immunis exempt, free, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + munis performing
services (compare municipal), from PIE *moi-n-es-, suffixed form of root *mei- (1) to change (see
mutable). Medical sense protection from disease is 1879, from French or German.


immunization (n.)

1893, from immunize + -ation.


immunize (v.)

1889, from immune + -ize. Related: Immunized; immunizing.


immunodeficiency (n.)

1969, from comb. form of immune + deficiency.


immunology (n.)

by 1906, a hybrid from comb. form of immune + -ology. Related: Immunological; immunologist.


immure (v.)

1580s, from Middle French emmurer and directly from Medieval Latin immurare, literally to shut up
within walls, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Latin murus wall (see mural).
Related: Immured; immuring.


immutability (n.)

1590s, from Latin immutabilitas, from immutabilis (see immutable).    Nought may endure but
Mutability. [Shelley]


immutable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French immutable and directly from Latin immutabilis unchangeable, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + mutabilis changeable, from mutare to change
(see mutable). Related: Immutably.


imp (n.)

Old English impe, impa young shoot, graft, from impian to graft, probably an early West Germanic
borrowing from Vulgar Latin *imptus, from Late Latin impotus implanted, from Greek emphytos, verbal
adjective formed from emphyein implant, from em- in + phyein to plant (see physic).    Sense of
child, offspring (late 14c.) came from transfer of word from plants to people, with notion of
newness preserved. Modern meaning little devil (1580s) is from common use in pejorative phrases like
imp of Satan.Suche appereth as aungelles, but in very dede they be ymps of serpentes. [The
Pilgrimage of Perfection, 1526]


impact (v.)

c.1600, press closely into something, from Latin impactus, past participle of impingere to push
into, dash against, thrust at (see impinge). Originally sense preserved in impacted teeth (1876).
Sense of strike forcefully against something first recorded 1916. Figurative sense of have a
forceful effect on is from 1935. Related: Impacting.


impact (n.)

1781, collision, from impact (v.). Figurative sense of forceful impression is from 1817 (Coleridge).


impactful (adj.)

1968, from impact + -ful. Related: Impactfully; impactfulness.


impaction (n.)

1739, from Latin impactionem (nominative impactio) a striking against, noun of action from past
participle stem of impingere (see impinge).


impair (v.)

late 14c., earlier ampayre, apeyre (c.1300), from Old French empeirier (Modern French empirer), from
Vulgar Latin *impeiorare make worse, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Late
Latin peiorare make worse (see pejorative). In reference to driving under the influence of alcohol,
first recorded 1951 in Canadian English. Related: Impaired; impairing.


impairment (n.)

mid-14c., emparement, from Old French empeirement, from empeirier (see impair). Re-Latinized
spelling is from 1610s.


impala (n.)

1875, from Zulu im-pala gazelle.


impale (v.)

1520s, to enclose with stakes, fence in, from Middle French empaler and directly from Medieval Latin
impalare to push onto a stake, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Latin palus a
stake, prop, stay; wooden post, pole, from PIE *pak-slo-, from root *pag-/*pak- to fasten (see
pact). Sense of pierce with a pointed stake (as torture or punishment) first recorded 1610s.
Related: Impaled; impaling.


impalement (n.)

1590s, from French empalement, from empaler (see impale).


impalpable (adj.)

c.1500, from French impalpable, from Medieval Latin impalpabilis, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + palpabilis (see palpable). Figurative use from 1774. Related:
Impalpably; impalpability.


impanate (adj.)

present in the (consecrated) bread, 1540s, from Church Latin impanatus, past participle of impanare
to embody in bread, from assmiliated form of in- in, into (see in- (2)) + panis bread (see food).


impart (v.)

early 15c., to give a part of (one's possessions); late 15c., to share, take part, from Old French
impartir (14c.), from Late Latin impartire (also impertire) to share in, divide with another,
communicate, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + partire to divide, part (see part
(v.)). Related: Imparted; imparting.


impartial (adj.)

formed in English 1590s from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + partial. First recorded
in Richard II.


impartiality (n.)

1610s; see impartial + -ity.


impassable (adj.)

that cannot be passed, 1560s, from im- + passable.


impasse (n.)

1851, blind alley, from French impasse impassable road, blind alley, impasse, from assimilated form
of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Middle French passe a passing, from passer to pass (see pass
(v.)). Supposedly coined by Voltaire as a euphemism for cul de sac. Figurative use also from 1851.


impassible (adj.)

incapable of feeling pain, exempt from suffering, mid-14c., from Old French impassible (13c.), from
Church Latin impassibilis incapable of passion, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + passibilis, from passio suffering (see passion). Related: Impassibility.


impassion (v.)

1590s, from Italian impassionare to fill with passion, from im- in, into (see im-) + passione
passion, from Latin passionem (see passion). Related: Impassioned.


impassionate (adj.)

free from passion, 1620s, from in- (1) not + passionate. Related: Impassionately.


impassioned (adj.)

c.1600, past participle adjective from impassion.


impassive (adj.)

1660s, not feeling pain, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + passive.
Meaning void of emotions is from 1690s. Related: Impassively; impassiveness (1640s).


impassivity (n.)

1794, from impassive + -ity.


impasto (n.)

laying on of colors thickly, 1784, from Italian impasto, noun of action from impastare to raise
paste; to put in paste, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + pasta paste (see
pasta).


impatience (n.)

c.1200, from Old French impacience (Modern French impatience) and directly from Latin impatientia,
from impatiens (see impatient).


impatient (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French impacient (Modern French impatient), from Latin impatientem (nominative
impatiens) that cannot bear, intolerant, impatient, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + patiens (see patience). Related: Impatiently.


impeach (v.)

late 14c., to impede, hinder, prevent, from Anglo-French empecher, Old French empeechier hinder
(12c., Modern French emp&ecirc;cher), from Late Latin impedicare to fetter, catch, entangle, from
assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Latin pedica shackle, from pes (genitive pedis)
foot. Sense of accuse a public officer of misconduct first recorded 1560s, perhaps via confusion
with Latin impetere attack, accuse. Related: Impeached; impeaching.


impeachable (adj.)

c.1500, from impeach + -able.  Related: impeachably; impeachability.


impeachment (n.)

late 14c., enpechement accusation, charge, from Old French empechement, from empeechier (see
impeach). As a judicial proceeding against a public official, from 1640s.


impeccable (adj.)

1530s, not capable of sin, from Middle French impeccable (15c.) or directly from Late Latin
impeccabilis not liable to sin, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + pecare
to sin, of unknown origin. Meaning faultless is from 1610s. Related: Impeccably.


impecunious (adj.)

lacking in money, 1590s, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Latin
pecuniosus rich, from pecunia money, property (see pecuniary). Related: Impecuniously;
impecuniosity.


impedance (n.)

1886, from impede + -ance.


impede (v.)

c.1600, back-formation from impediment, or else from Latin impedire impede, be in the way, hinder,
detain, literally to shackle the feet (see impediment). Related: Impeded; impedes; impeding.


impediment (n.)

c.1400, from Latin impedimentem hindrance, from impedire impede, literally to shackle the feet, from
assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)).


impedimenta (n.)

traveling equipment, c.1600, from Latin impedimenta luggage, baggage, literally that by which one is
impeded; plural of impedimentum (see impediment).


impel (v.)

early 15c., from Latin impellere to push, strike against, drive forward, urge on, from assimilated
form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pellere to push, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Related:
Impelled; impelling.


impeller (n.)

1680s, agent noun from impel (v.). As a machine part from 1890.


impend (v.)

1590s, from figurative use of Latin impendere to hang over, to be imminent, from assimilated form of
in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pendere hang (see pendant). Related: Impended; impending.


impendent

1590s, from Latin impendens impending, present participle of impendere (see impend).


impenetrable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French impenetrable, from Latin impenetrabilis that cannot be penetrated, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + penetrabilis penetrable (see penetrate).
Related: Impenetrably; impenetrability.


impenitence (n.)

1620s, from Latin impaenitentia, from impaenitens (see impenitent). Impenitency is from 1560s.


impenitent (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin impaenitentem, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
paenitens (see penitence).


imperative (adj.)

1520s, from Late Latin imperativus pertaining to a command, from imperatus commanded, past
participle of imperare to command, to requisition, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in-
(2)) + parare prepare (see pare).


imperative (n.)

mid-15c., in grammar; later something imperative (c.1600), from Old French imperatif and directly
from Late Latin imperativus (see imperative (adj.)).


imperator (n.)

commander-in-chief, Latin agent noun from stem of imperare to command (see imperative). In the Roman
republic, a commander; in the Roman Empire, the emperor.


imperceptibility (n.)

1670s, from imperceptible + -ity.


imperceptible (adj.)

early 15c., from French imperceptible (early 15c.), from Medieval Latin imperceptibilis, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + perceptibilis (see perceptible). Related:
Imperceptibly. OED marks imperceivable as Now rare.


imperfect (adj.)

mid-14c., imperfite, from Old French imparfait, from Latin imperfectus unfinished, incomplete, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + perfectus (see perfect). Replaced mid-16c.
by the Latin form. Related: Imperfectly.


imperfection (n.)

late 14c., from Old French imperfeccion (12c.) and directly from Late Latin imperfectionem
(nominative imperfectio), from imperfectus (see imperfect).


imperforate (adj.)

1670s, from im- + perforate (adj.).


imperial (adj.)

late 14c., having a commanding quality, from Old French imperial (12c.), from Latin imperialis of
the empire or emperor, from imperium (see empire). Meaning pertaining to an empire (especially the
Roman) is from late 14c. Imperial presidency in a U.S. context traces to Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s
book on the Nixon administration (1974). Related: Imperially.


imperialism (n.)

1826, advocacy of empire, originally in a Napoleonic context, also of Rome and of British foreign
policy, from imperial + -ism. At times in British usage (and briefly in U.S.) with a neutral or
positive sense relating to national interests or the spread of the benefits of Western civilization,
but from the begining usually more or less a term of reproach. General sense of one country's rule
over another, first recorded 1878. Picked up disparagingly in Communist jargon by 1918.    It is the
old story of 1798, when French republicanism sick of its own folly and misdeeds, became
metamorphosed into imperialism, and consoled itself for its incapacity to found domestic freedom by
putting an iron yoke upon Europe, and covering it with blood and battle-fields. [Francis Lloyd, St.
James's Magazine, January 1842]


imperialist (n.)

c.1600, an adherent of an emperor, such as the emperor of Germany, France, China, etc., probably
modeled on French imp&eacute;rialiste (early 16c.); from imperial + -ist. The shift in meaning to
advocate of imperialism (1893) came via the British Empire, which involved a worldwide colonial
system. See imperialism. As a term of abuse in communist circles, attested by 1918. As an adjective
by 1816.


imperialistic (adj.)

1872, from imperial + -istic. Also see imperialist.


imperil (v.)

1590s, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + peril. Related: Imperiled; imperiling.


imperious (adj.)

1540s, from Latin imperiosus commanding, mighty, powerful, from imperium empire, command (see
empire). Related: Imperiously.


imperishable (adj.)

1640s, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + perishable.


imperium (n.)

1650s, from Latin imperium command, supreme authority, power (see empire).


impermanence (n.)

1796, from impermanent + -ence. Impermanency is from 1640s.


impermanent (adj.)

1650s, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + permanent.


impermeable (adj.)

1690s, from French imperm&eacute;able, from Late Latin impermeabilis, from assimilated form of in-
not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + permeabilis (see permeable).


impermissible (adj.)

1814, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + permissible.


imperscriptable (adj.)

unrecorded, without written authority, 1832, used only with right. From assimilated form of Latin
in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + perscribere to write down.


impersonal (adj.)

mid-15c., a grammatical term, from Late Latin impersonalis, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + personalis personal (see personal). Sense of not connected with any
person is from 1620s; that of not endowed with personality is from 1842. Related: impersonally.


impersonality (n.)

1769, from impersonal + -ity.


impersonate (v.)

1620s, to invest with a personality, from assimilated form of Latin in- into, in (see in- (2)) +
persona person. Sense of to assume the person or character of is first recorded 1715. Earlier in
same sense was personate (1610s). Related: Impersonated; impersonating.


impersonation (n.)

1800, personification; 1825 as an acting of a part or character; noun of action from impersonate
(v.).


impersonator (n.)

one who assumes the person or character of another, 1853, from impersonate with Latinate agent noun
suffix.


impertinence (n.)

c.1600, from French impertinence, from Medieval Latin impertinentia, from Late Latin impertinentem
not belonging (see impertinent). Impertinency is from 1580s.


impertinent (adj.)

late 14c., unconnected, unrelated, not to the point, from Old French impertinent (14c.) or directly
from Late Latin impertinentem (nominative impertinens) not belonging, literally not to the point,
from assimilated form of Latin in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + pertinens (see pertinent). Sense
of rudely bold is 1680s, from earlier sense of not appropriate to the situation, probably modeled on
similar use in French, especially by Moli&egrave;re, from notion of meddling with what is beyond
one's proper sphere.


impertinently (adv.)

mid-15c., from impertinent + -ly (2).


imperturbable (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle French imperturbable and directly from Late Latin imperturbabilis that cannot be
disturbed (Augustine), from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + *perturbabilis,
from Latin perturbare to confuse, disturb (see perturb). Related: Imperturbably; imperturbability.


impervious (adj.)

1640s, from Latin impervius that cannot be passed through, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + pervius letting things through, from per through + via road. Related:
Imperviously; imperviousness.


impetigo (n.)

pustular disease of the skin, late 14c., from Latin impetigo skin eruption, from impetere to
attackÃ¢ (see impetus). Related: Impetiginous.


impetuosity (n.)

early 15c., violent movement, rushing, from Old French impetuosit&eacute; (13c.), from Medieval
Latin impetuositatem (nominative impetuositas), from Late Latin impetuosus (see impetuous).


impetuous (adj.)

late 14c., hot-tempered, fierce, from Old French impetuos (13c.) and directly from Late Latin
impetuosus impetuous, violent, from Latin impetus attack (see impetus). Related: Impetuously;
impetuousness.


impetus (n.)

early 15c., impetous rapid movement, rush; 1640s, with modern spelling, force with which a body
moves, driving force, from Latin impetus attack, assault, onset, impulse, violence, vigor, force,
passion, related to impetere to attack, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in-
(2)) + petere aim for, rush at (see petition (n.)).


impiety (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French impiet&eacute; (12c.), from Latin impietatem (nominative impietas)
irreverence, ungodliness; disloyalty, treason, noun of quality from impius (see impious).


impinge (v.)

1530s, fasten or fix forcibly, from Latin impingere drive into, strike against, from assimilated
form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pangere to fix, fasten (see pact). Sense of encroach,
infringe first recorded 1738. Related: Impinged; impinging.


impingement (n.)

1670s; see impinge + -ment.


impious (adj.)

1590s, from Latin impius without reverence, irreverent, wicked; undutiful, unpatriotic, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + pius (see pious). Related: Impiously;
impiousness.


impish (adj.)

1650s, from imp + -ish. Related: Impishly; impishness.


implacability (n.)

1530s, from Late Latin implacabilitas, from Latin implacabilis (see implacable).


implacable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French implacable, from Latin implacabilis unappeasable, from assimilated form
of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + placabilis easily appeased (see placate). Related:
Implacably.


implant (v.)

early 15c., from French implanter to insert, engraft, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on,
upon (see in- (2)) + planter to plant (see plant (n.)). Related: Implanted; implanting.


implant (n.)

1890 as thing implanted; 1941 as action of implanting, from implant (v.). Related: Implants, by 1981
as short for breast implants (1976).


implantation (n.)

1570s, from French implantation, noun of action from implanter (see implant (v.)).


implausibility (n.)

1630s; see implausible + -ity.


implausible (adj.)

c.1600, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + plausible. Related:
Implausibly.


implement (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin implementem a filling up (as with provisions), from Latin implere to fill,
from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + plere to fill (see pleio-). Sense of
tool is 1530s, from notion of things provided to do work, that which fills up or completes a
household (c.1500).


implement (v.)

1806, originally chiefly in Scottish, where the noun was a legal term meaning fulfillment, from
implement (n.). It led to the wretched formation implementation, first recorded 1913. Related:
Implemented.


implicate (v.)

early 15c., to convey in a fable; c.1600, intertwine, wreathe, from Latin implicatus, past
participle of implicare to involve, entwine (see implication). Meaning involve a person in a crime,
charge, etc., is from 1797. Related: Implicated; implicating.


implication (n.)

early 15c., action of entangling, from Latin implicationem (nominative implicatio) interweaving,
entanglement, from past participle stem of implicare involve, entangle, connect closely, from
assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)). Meaning
something implied (but not expressed) is from 1550s.


implications (n.)

see implication.


implicit

1590s, from Middle French implicite and directly from Latin implicitus, later variant of implicatus,
past participle of implicare (see implication).


implicitly (adv.)

c.1600, from implicit + -ly (2).


implode (v.)

1870 (implied in imploded), back-formation from implosion. Related: Imploding.


implore (v.)

c.1500, from Middle French implorer and directly from Latin implorare call for help, beseech,
originally invoke with weeping, from assimilated form of in- on, upon (see in- (2)) + plorare to
weep, cry out. Related: Implored; imploring; imploringly.


implosion (n.)

a bursting inward, 1829, modeled on explosion, with assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see
in- (2)).    And to show how entire the neglect and confusion have been, they speak in the same
breath of all these explosions, and of the explosion of a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen, the result
of which, instead of being a gas or an enlargement of bulk, a positive quantity, is a negative one.
It is a vacuum, in a popular sense, because the produce is water. The result is an implosion (to
coin a word), not an explosion .... [Gas-light, Westminster Review, October 1829]    In early use
often in reference to effect of deep sea pressures, or in phonetics. Figurative sense is by 1960.


imply (v.)

late 14c., to enfold, enwrap, entangle (the classical Latin sense), from Old French emplier, from
Latin implicare involve (see implication). Meaning to involve something unstated as a logical
consequence first recorded c.1400; that of to hint at from 1580s. Related: Implied; implying. The
distinction between imply and infer is in What do you imply by that remark? But, What am I to infer
from that remark?


impolite (adj.)

1610s, unrefined, rough, from Latin impolitus unpolished, rough, unrefined, from assimilated form of
in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + politus polished (see polite). Sense of discourteous, ill-
mannered is from 1739. Related: Impolitely; impoliteness.


impolitic (adj.)

not according to good policy, c.1600, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + politic.


imponderable (adj.)

1794, weightless, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + ponderable (see ponder).
Figurative use, unthinkable, from 1814. Related: Imponderably. As a noun, by 1842.


import (v.)

early 15c., convey information, express, make known, signify, from Latin importare bring in, convey,
from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Sense of
bring in goods from abroad first recorded c.1500. Related: Imported; importing.


import (n.)

consequence, importance, 1580s; sense of that which is imported is from 1680s; both from import
(v.).


importance (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French importance or directly from Medieval Latin importantia, from importantem
(see important).


important (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French important and directly from Medieval Latin importantem (nominative
importans), present participle of importare be significant in, from Latin importare bring in (see
import). Related: Importantly.


importation (n.)

c.1600; see import (v.) + -ation.


importunate (adj.)

1520s, from importune + -ate, or else from Medieval Latin importunatus, past participle of
importunari. Related: Importunately (mid-15c.).


importune (v.)

1520s, back-formation from importunity, or else from Middle French importuner, from Medieval Latin
importunari to make oneself troublesome, from Latin importunus unfit, troublesome, originally having
no harbor (i.e. difficult to access), from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
portus harbor (see port (n.1)). Related: Importuned; importuning. As an adjective from early 15c.


importunity (n.)

early 15c., persistence, insistence; over-eagerness, from Middle French importunit&eacute; (14c.),
from Latin importunitatem (nominative importunitas) unsuitableness; unmannerliness, incivility, from
importunus unfit, troublesome (see importune).


impose (v.)

late 14c., to lay (a crime, etc.) to the account of, from Old French imposer put, place; impute,
charge, accuse (c.1300), from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + poser put, place (see
pose (v.1)). Sense of to lay on as a burden first recorded 1580s. Related: Imposed; imposing.


imposing (adj.)

that impresses by appearance or manner, 1786, from present participle of impose (v.). Related:
Imposingly.


imposition (n.)

late 14c., the levying of taxes, a tax, duty, tribute, from Old French imposicion tax, duty; a
fixing (early 14c.), from Latin impositionem (nominative impositio) a laying on, from imponere to
place upon, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + ponere to put, place (see
position). Sense of the act of putting (something) on (something else) is from 1590s. Meaning an act
or instance of imposing (on someone) first recorded 1630s (see impose).


impossibility (n.)

late 14c., quality of being impossible, from impossible + -ity; perhaps from or modeled on French
impossibilit&eacute;. Meaning an impossible thing or occurrence is from c.1500.


impossible (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French impossible, from Latin impossibilis not possible, from assimilated form
of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + possibilis (see possible). Related: Impossibly.


impost (n.)

tax, duty, 1560s, from Middle French impost, from Medieval Latin impostum, from neuter of Latin
impostus, contracted from impositus, past participle of imponere (see impostor).


impostor (n.)

1580s, from Middle French imposteur (16c.), from Late Latin impostor, agent noun from impostus,
collateral form of impositus, past participle of imponere place upon, impose upon, deceive, from
assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + ponere to put place (see position).


imposture (n.)

act of willfully deceiving others, 1530s, from Middle French imposture, from Late Latin impostura,
from impostus (see impost).


impotence (n.)

early 15c., physical weakness, also poverty, from Middle French impotence weakness, from Latin
impotentia lack of control or power, from impotentem (nominative impotens); see impotent. In
reference to a want of (male) sexual potency, from c.1500. The figurative senses of the word in
Latin were violence, fury, unbridled passion. Related: Impotency.


impotent (adj.)

late 14c., physically weak, enfeebled, crippled, from Old French impotent powerless, weak,
incapable, from Latin imponentem (nominative impotens) lacking control, powerless, from assimilated
form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + ponentem (nominative potens) potent (see potent).
Meaning having no power to accomplish anything is from mid-15c.; that of completely lacking in
sexual power (of males) is from mid-15c. Middle English also had a native term for this: Cunt-beaten
(mid-15c.). The figurative sense in Latin was without self-control, headstrong, violent. Related:
Impotently.


impound (v.)

early 15c., to shut up in a pen or pound, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) +
pound (n.). Originally of cattle seized by law. Related: Impounded; impounding.


impoundment (n.)

1660s; see impound + -ment.


impoverish (v.)

early 15c., empoverischen, from Old French empoveriss-, stem of empoverir, from em- + povre poor
(see poor). Related: Impoverished; impoverishing.


impoverishment (n.)

1550s; see impoverish + -ment.


impracticable (adj.)

incapable of being done, 1670s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + practicable.
Earlier in a sense of impassable (1650s).


impractical (adj.)

1823, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + practical. Impracticable in the same sense
dates from 1670s.


imprecate (v.)

1610s, probably a back-formation from imprecation. Related: Imprecated; imprecating; imprecatory
(1580s).


imprecation (n.)

mid-15c., a curse, cursing, from Latin imprecationem (nominative imprecatio), from past participle
stem of imprecari invoke, pray, call down upon, from assimilated form of in- into, in, within (see
in- (2)) + precari to pray, ask, beg, request (see pray). Current limited sense is characteristic of
human nature. [Weekley]


imprecise (adj.)

1805, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + precise. Related: Imprecisely.


imprecision (n.)

1803, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + precision.


impregnable (adj.)

early 15c., imprenable impossible to capture, from Middle French imprenable invulnerable, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Old French prenable assailable, vulnerable
(see pregnable). With intrusive -g- 16c., on model of deign, reign, etc. Related: Impregnability.


impregnate (v.)

c.1600, from Late Latin impraegnatus pregnant, past participle of impraegnare to render pregnant,
from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + praegnare make pregnant (see pregnant).
Earlier in same sense was impregn (1530s).


impregnation (n.)

late 14c., making or becoming pregnant, from Old French impregnacion, from Late Latin impregnationem
(nominative impregnatio), from impraegnare (see impregnate).


impresario (n.)

1746, from Italian impresario operatic manager, literally undertaker (of a business), from impresa
undertaking, fem. of impreso, past participle of imprendere undertake, from Vulgar Latin imprendere,
from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, onto (see in- (2)) + prehendere to grasp (see
prehensile).


imprescriptible (adj.)

inalienable, not subject to prescription, 1560s, French imprescriptible (16c.) or a native formation
from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + Latin praescriptus, past participle of
praescribere to write beforehand (see prescribe). Usually with right. Alternative imprescribable is
attested from 1887.


impress (v.)

late 14c., have a strong effect on the mind or heart, from Latin impressus, past participle of
imprimere press into or upon, stamp, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
premere to press (see press (v.1)). Literal sense of  to apply with pressure, make a permanent image
in, indent, imprint is from early 15c. in English. Sense of to levy for military service is from
1590s, a meaning more from press (v.2). Related: Impressed; impressing.


impress (n.)

act of impressing, also characteristic mark, 1590s, from impress (v.).


impressed (adj.)

early 15c., pressed or forced upon (the mind), past participle adjective from impress (v.).


impression (n.)

late 14c., mark produced by pressure, also image produced in the mind or emotions, from Old French
impression print, stamp; a pressing on the mind, from Latin impressionem (nominative impressio)
onset, attack, figuratively perception, literally a pressing into, from imprimere (see impress).
Meaning act or process of indenting is early 15c.; that of printing of a number of copies is from
1570s. Meaning belief, vague notion (as in under the impression) is from 1610s.


impressionable (adj.)

1836, formed on French model, from impression + -able. Earlier was impressible (1620s).


impressionism (n.)

1839 as a term in philosophy, from impression + -ism. Specifically with reference to the French art
movement from 1882, from impressionist.


impressionist

as a style of painting aiming to represent overall impressions rather than exact details, first
attested in English 1876 (adjective and noun), coined in French 1874 by French critic Louis Leroy
(&eacute;cole impressionniste) in a disparaging reference to Monet's sunset painting Impression,
Soleil Levant. Later extended to other arts.


impressionistic (adj.)

1886; see impressionist + -ic.


impressive (adj.)

1570s, capable of being easily impressed, from impress + -ive. Meaning capable of making an
impression on the mind or senses is from 1775. Related: Impressively; impressiveness.


impressment (n.)

1796, act of impressing into service, from impress (v.) + -ment.


imprimatur (n.)

1640, Modern Latin, literally let it be printed, the formula of a book licenser, third person
singular present subjunctive passive of Latin imprimere to print (see impress). Originally of state
license to print books, later only of Roman Catholic Church.


imprint (v.)

late 14c., from Old French empreinter, from empreinte, noun use of fem. past participle of
eimpreindre to impress, imprint, from Vulgar Latin *impremere, from Latin imprimere to impress,
imprint (see impress). As a noun from mid-15c.


imprison (v.)

c.1300, from Old French emprisoner (12c.), from em- in (see in- (2)) + prison (see prison). Related:
Imprisoned; imprisoning.


imprisonment (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French emprisonement, Old French emprisonement (13c.), from emprisoner (see
imprison).


improbability (n.)

1590s, fact or quality of being improbably; see improbable + -ity. Meaning an instance of something
improbable is from 1610s.


improbable (adj.)

1590s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + probable, or else from Latin
improbabilis. Related: Improbably.


imprompt (adj.)

(obsolete) 1759, from Latin impromptus unready, hesitating, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + promptus ready (see prompt).


impromptu

1660s (adv.), 1764 (adj.), from French impromptu (1650s), from Latin in promptu in readiness, from
assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + promptu, ablative of promptus readiness,
from past participle of promere to bring out, from pro- before, forward, for + emere to obtain (see
exempt).


improper (adj.)

mid-15c., not true, from French impropre (14c.), from Latin improprius, from assimilated form of in-
not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + proprius (see proper). Meaning not suited, unfit is from 1560s;
that of not in accordance with good manners, modesty, decency is from 1739. Related: Improperly
(late 14c.).


impropriety (n.)

1610s, quality or fact of being improper, from French impropri&eacute;t&eacute; (16c.), from Latin
improprietas, from improprius (see improper). As improper thing, 1670s.


improv (n.)

1970 as colloquial shortening for improvisation. The New York City comedy club, founded in 1963,
was, in full, The Improvisation.


improve (v.)

late 15c., to use to one's profit, to increase (income), from Anglo-French emprouwer to turn to
profit (late 13c.), from Old French en-, causative prefix, + prou profit, from Latin prode
advantageous (see proud). Spelling with -v- was rare before 17c. Meaning to raise to a better
quality or condition first recorded 1610s. Phrase improve the occasion retains the etymological
sense. Meaning to turn land to profit (by clearing it, erecting buildings, etc.) was in Anglo-French
(13c.) and was retained in the American colonies.


improvement (n.)

mid-15c., enprowment management of something for profit, from Anglo-French emprowement, from
emprouwer turn to profit (see improve). Meaning betterment; amelioration is from 1640s. Meaning
buildings, etc. on a piece of property is from 1773. Related: Improvements.


improvidence (n.)

lack of foresight, rashness, mid-15c., from Latin improvidentia, from assimilated form of in- not
(see in- (1)) + providentia (see providence).


improvident (adj.)

1510s, from im- not + provident. It retains a stronger connection with the provide aspect of Latin
providere. Related: Improvidently.


improvisation (n.)

mid-15c., unforeseen happening; 1786 as act of improvising musically, from French improvisation,
from improviser compose or say extemporaneously, from Italian improvvisare, from improvviso
unforeseen, unprepared, from Latin improvisus not foreseen, unforeseen, unexpected, from assimilated
form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + provisus foreseen, also provided, past participle of
providere foresee, provide (see provide).


improvisational (adj.)

1879; see improvisation + -al (1).


improvise (v.)

1826, back-formation from improvisation, or else from French improviser (17c.), from Italian
improvisare to sing or speak extempore, from improviso, from Latin improvisus unforeseen, unexpected
(see improvisation). Or possibly a back-formation from improvisation. Related: Improvised;
improvising.


improvision (n.)

want of forethought, 1640s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + provision.


imprudence (n.)

early 15c., quality of rashness or heedlessness; imprudent act, from Latin imprudentia lack of
foresight, inconsiderateness, ignorance, inadvertence, noun of quality from imprudens (see
imprudent).


imprudent (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin imprudentem (nominative imprudens) not foreseeing, unaware, inconsiderate,
heedless, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + prudens, contraction of
providens, present participle of providere to provide, literally to see before (one) (see provide).
Related: Imprudently.


impudence (n.)

late 14c., from Latin impudentia shamelessness, noun of quality from impudens; see impudent.


impudent (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin impudentem (nominative impudens) without shame, shameless, from assimilated
form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + pudens ashamed, modest, present participle of pudere to
cause shame (see pudendum). Related: Impudently.


impugn (v.)

attack by argument, late 14c., from Old French impugner, from Latin impugnare to assault, to attack,
from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pugnare to fight (see pugnacious).
Related: Impugned; impugning.


impulse (n.)

early 15c., an act of impelling, a thrust, push, from Latin impulsus a push against, pressure,
shock, also incitement, instigation, impulse, past participle of impellere (see impel). Meaning
stimulus in the mind arising from some state or feeling first recorded 1640s.


impulsion (n.)

early 15c., driving, pushing, thrusting, from Old French impulsion (early 14c.), from Latin
impulsionem (nominative impulsio) external pressure, figuratively incitement, instigation, noun of
action from past participle stem of impellere (see impel).


impulsive (adj.)

early 15c., originally in reference to medicine that reduces swelling or humors, from Middle French
impulsif or directly from Medieval Latin impulsivus, from Latin impuls-, past participle stem of
impellere (see impel). Of persons, rash, characterized by impulses, from 1847.


impulsively (adv.)

1768; see impulsive + -ly (2).


impulsiveness (n.)

1650s; see impulsive + -ness.


impulsivity (n.)

1891; see impulsive + -ity.


impune (adj.)

unpunished (obsolete), 1610s, from Latin impunis unpunished, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + poena (see penal).


impunity (n.)

1530s, from Middle French impunit&eacute; (14c.) and directly from Latin impunitatem (nominative
impunitas) freedom from punishment, omission of punishment, also rashness, inconsideration, from
impunis unpunished, without punishment, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1))
+ poena punishment (see penal).


impure (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French impur (13c.), from Latin impurus unclean, filthy, foul, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + purus pure (see pure). As a noun from 1784.
Related: Impurely.


impurity (n.)

mid-15c., thing which makes or is impure; c.1500, fact or quality of being impure, from Middle
French impurit&eacute;, from impur (see impure). Related: Impurities.


imputable (adj.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin imputabilis, from Latin imputare (see impute).


imputation (n.)

1540s, noun of action from impute (v.) on model of Middle French imputation, or else from Late Latin
imputationem (nominative imputatio), noun of action from imputare.


impute (v.)

early 15c., from Old French imputer (14c.) and directly from Latin imputare to reckon, make account
of, charge, ascribe, from assimilated form of in- in, into (see in- (2)) + putare reckon, clear up,
trim, prune, settle (see pave). Related: Imputed; imputing.


in

Old English in (prep.) in, into, upon, on, at, among; about, during; inne (adv.) within, inside,
from Proto-Germanic *in (cognates: Old Frisian, Dutch, German, Gothic in, Old Norse i), from PIE *en
in (cognates: Greek en, Latin in in, into, Old Irish in, Welsh yn-, Old Church Slavonic on-). As an
adjective from 1590s.    The forms merged in Middle English. Modern sense distinction between in and
on is from later Middle English. Sense of holding power (the in party) first recorded c.1600; that
of exclusive (the in-crowd, an in-joke) is from 1907 (in-group); that of stylish, fashionable (the
in thing) is from 1960. The noun sense of influence, access (have an in with) first recorded 1929 in
American English. In-and-out copulation is attested from 1610s.


in absentia

Latin, literally in (his/her/their) absence (see absence).


in extremis

at the point of death, Latin, literally in the farthest reaches.


in like Flynn

1940s slang, said to have originated in the U.S. military, perhaps from alleged sexual exploits of
Hollywood actor Errol Flynn.


in loco parentis

Latin, literally in the place of a parent (see parent).


in medias res

Latin, literally in the midst of things (see medium).


in memoriam

Latin, literally in memory of (see memory).


in situ

Latin, literally in its (original) place or position (see situate (v.)).


in toto

Latin, as a whole, completely (see total).


in utero

Latin, literally in the uterus (see uterus).


in vitro

Latin; in a test tube, culture dish, etc.; literally in glass (see vitreous).


in vivo

Latin; within a living organism (see viva).


in&#039;t

archaic; 17c. as short for in it.


in&#039;t

archaic or poetic contraction of in it.


in- (1)

prefix meaning not, opposite of, without (also im-, il-, ir- by assimilation of -n- with following
consonant), from Latin in- not, cognate with Greek an-, Old English un-, from PIE *ne not (see un-
(1)).


in- (2)

element meaning into, in, on, upon (also im-, il-, ir- by assimilation of -n- with following
consonant), from Latin in- in (see in). In Old French this often became en-, which usually was
respelled in English to conform with Latin, but not always, which accounts for pairs like
enquire/inquire. There was a native form, which in West Saxon usually appeared as on- (as in Old
English onliehtan to enlighten), and some verbs survived into Middle English (such as inwrite to
inscribe), but all now seem to be extinct. Not related to in- (1) not, which also was a common
prefix in Latin: to the Romans impressus could mean pressed or unpressed.


in-fighting (n.)

1812, from pugilism, the practice of getting at close quarters with an opponent; see in + fighting.
Old English infiht (n.) meant brawl within a house or between members of a household.


in-joke (n.)

1964, from in + joke.


in-law (n.)

1894, anyone of a relationship not natural, abstracted from father-in-law, etc.The position of the
'in-laws' (a happy phrase which is attributed ... to her Majesty, than whom no one can be better
acquainted with the article) is often not very apt to promote happiness. [Blackwood's Magazine,
1894]The earliest recorded use of the phrase is in brother-in-law (13c.); the law is Canon Law,
which defines degrees of relationship within which marriage is prohibited.


in-migration (n.)

1942, in reference to movement within the same country, from in + migration.


in-store (adj.)

also instore, 1961, from in + store (n.). In Middle English, instore was a verb meaning to restore,
renew, from Latin instaurare.


in-transit (adj.)

1918, from in + transit.


inability (n.)

mid-15c., inhabilite, disqualification for office, from in- (1) + ability. Earlier was unability
incapability; incompetence (late 14c.). General sense by c.1500.


inable (v.)

see enable.


inaccessible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French inaccessible (14c.), from Late Latin inaccessibilis unapproachable,
from in- not (see in- (1)) + accessibilis (see accessible). Related: Inaccessibly; inaccessibility.
Earlier in same sense was unaccessible (c.1400).


inaccuracy (n.)

1701, quality or condition of being inaccurate, from inaccurate + -cy. As an example of this, by
1883.


inaccurate (adj.)

1738, from in- (1) not + accurate. Related: Inaccurately (1660s).


inaction (n.)

1707, from in- (1) not, opposite of + action.


inactive (adj.)

1725, from in- (1) not, opposite of + active.


inactivity (n.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + activity. Phrase masterly inactivity attested by 1791.


inadequacy (n.)

1764, from inadequate + -cy. Related: Inadequacies.


inadequate (adj.)

1670s; see in- (1) not, opposite of + adequate. Related: Inadequately.


inadmissible (adj.)

1776, from in- (1) not, opposite of + admissible. Related: Inadmissibility.


inadvertence (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French inadvertance (14c.), from Scholastic Latin inadvertentia, from in- not
(see in- (1)) + advertentia, from Latin advertere to direct one's attention to, literally to turn
toward (see advertise).


inadvertent (adj.)

1650s, back-formation from inadvertence.


inadvertently (adv.)

1670s, literally inattentively, hence unintentionally; see inadvertent + -ly (2).


inadvisability (n.)

1839, from inadvisable + -ity.


inadvisable (adj.)

1819, from in- (1) not, opposite of + advisable.


inalienable (adj.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + alienable (see alienate). Related: Inalienably;
Inalienability.


inamorata (n.)

female lover, 1650s, from Italian innamorata, fem. of innamorato, past participle of innamorare to
fall in love, from in in + amore love (see Amy).


inamorato (n.)

1892, masc. of inamorata (q.v.).


inane (adj.)

silly, empty-headed, 1819, earlier empty (1660s), a back-formation from inanity. Related: Inanely.


inanimate (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin inanimatus lifeless, from in- not (see in- (1)) + animatus (see
animation). The same word in 17c. also was a verb meaning to infuse with life, from the other in-
(see in- (2)).


inanition (n.)

c.1400, from Old French inanition, from Latin inanitionem (nominative inanitio) emptiness, noun of
action from past participle stem of inanire to empty, from inanis empty, void, worthless, useless,
of uncertain origin.


inanity (n.)

c.1600, emptiness, hollowness, literal and figurative, from French inanit&eacute; or directly from
Latin inanitas emptiness, empty space, figuratively worthlessness, noun of quality from inanis
empty, void, worthless, useless, of uncertain origin.


inapplicable (adj.)

1650s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + applicable. Related: Inapplicably; inapplicability.


inapposite (adj.)

1620s (implied in inappositely), from in- (1) not, opposite of + apposite.


inappropriate (adj.)

1804, from in- (1) not, opposite of + appropriate (adj.). Related: Inappropriately;
inappropriateness.


inapt (adj.)

1744, from in- (1) not, opposite of + apt. Related: Inaptly; inaptness.


inaptitude (n.)

1610s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + aptitude.


inarticulate (adj.)

c.1600, not clear or intelligible (of speech), from Late Latin inarticulatus inarticulate,
indistinct, from in- not (see in- (1)) + articulatus, past participle of articulare (see
articulation). Related: Inarticulately; inarticulateness.


inartistic (adj.)

1836, from in- (1) not + artistic. Inartistical is attested from 1849.


inasmuch

contraction of in as much, first attested c.1300 as in als mikel, a Northern form. First contracted
to in asmuch, then, beginning 14c. and especially since 17c., to one word.


inattention (n.)

1710, from in- (1) not, opposite of + attention.


inattentive (adj.)

1741, from in- (1) not, opposite of + attentive. Related: Inattentively; inattentiveness.


inaudible (adj.)

mid-15c., unfit to be heard; c.1600, unable to be heard, from Latin inaudibilis inaudible, from in-
â&euro;&oelig;notâ&euro;? (see in- (1)) + audibilis (see audible). Related: Inaudibly;
inaudibility.


inaugural (adj.)

1680s, from French inaugural (17c.), from inaugurer to inaugurate (see inauguration). The noun
meaning an inaugural address is recorded from 1832, American English.


inaugurate (v.)

c.1600, a back-formation from inauguration and also from Latin inauguratus, past participle of
inaugurare (see inauguration). Related: Inaugurated; inaugurating.


inauguration (n.)

1560s, from French inauguration installation, consecration, and directly from Latin inaugurationem
(nominative inauguratio) consecration, installment under good omens, noun of action from past
participle stem of inaugurare take omens from the flight of birds; consecrate or install when such
omens are favorable, from in- on, in (see in- (2)) + augurare to act as an augur, predict (see
augur).


inauspicious (adj.)

1590s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + auspicious. Related: Inauspiciously; inauspiciousness.


inauthentic (adj.)

1783, from in- (1) not, opposite of + authentic.


inbetween (n.)

1815, in-between, an interval, also a person who intervenes, from in + between.


inborn (adj.)

Old English inboren native to a place, from in within + boren brought forth (see born). Of qualities
in a person, 1510s.


inbound (adj.)

1857, homeward, from in + bound (adj.2). Originally of ships.


inbox (n.)

by 1984 in electronic mail sense, from in + mailbox (n.). Compare in-basket, in reference to office
mail systems, by 1940.


inbred (adj.)

1590s, native, also inherent by nature, from in + bred. The genetic sense is from 1892 (also see
inbreeding).


inbreeding (n.)

c.1842, from in + breeding.


Inc.

U.S. abbreviation of Incorporated in company names (equivalent of British Ltd.), first attested
1904.


Inca (n.)

1590s, from Spanish Inga (1520s), from Quechea Inca, literally lord, king. Technically, only of the
high Inca, but it was used widely for man of royal blood.


incalculable (adj.)

1795, from in- (1) not, opposite of + calculable (see calculate). Related: Incalculably;
incalculability.


incandescence (n.)

1650s, figurative, state of being 'inflamed,' from incandescent + -ence. Literal use from 1794.


incandescent (adj.)

1794, from French incandescent or directly from Latin incandescentem (nominative incandescens),
present participle of incandescere become warm, glow, kindle, from in- within (see in- (2)) +
candescere begin to glow, become white, inceptive of candere to glow, to shine (see candle).


incantation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French incantacion spell, exorcism (13c.), from Latin incantationem (nominative
incantatio) art of enchanting, noun of action from past participle stem of incantare bewitch, charm,
literally sing spells (see enchantment).


incapable (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French incapable and directly from Medieval Latin incapabilis, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + capabilis (see capable). Related: Incapably; incapability.


incapacitate (v.)

1650s, from incapacity + -ate. Related: Incapacitated; incapacitating.


incapacitation (n.)

1741, noun of action from incapacitate.


incapacity (n.)

1610s, from French incapacit&eacute; (16c.), from Medieval Latin incapacitatem (nominative
incapacitas), from Late Latin incapax (genitive incapacis) incapable, from in- not (see in- (1)) +
Latin capax capable, literally able to hold much, from capere to take (see capable). Often used 17c.
as a legal term referring to inability to take, receive, or deal with in some way.


incarcerate (v.)

1550s, a back-formation from incarceration, or else from Medieval Latin incarceratus, past
participle of incarcerare to imprison (see incarceration). Related: Incarcerated; incarcerating.


incarceration (n.)

early 15c., retention of pus, from Medieval Latin incarcerationem (nominative incarceratio), noun of
action from past participle stem of incarcerare to imprison, from in- in (see in- (2)) + carcer
prison, an enclosed space, from Proto-Italic *kar-kr(o)-, of uncertain origin.    It seems best to
connect carcer with other IE words for 'circle, round object', such as Latin. curvus, Gr.
&#954;&#953;&#961;&#954;&#959;&#962; 'ring', OIc. hringr, although not all of these have a good IE
etymology. The reduplication in Latin carcer could be iconic; thus, the original  meaning would have
been 'enclosure'. [de Vaan]


incarnadine

1590s (adj.) flesh-colored, from French incarnadine, from dialectal Italian incarnadino flesh-color,
from Late Latin incarnatio (see incarnation). The verb properly would mean to make flesh colored,
but the modern meaning make red, and the entire survival of the verb, is traceable to Macbeth II ii.
(1605). Its direct root might be the noun incarnadine blood-red; flesh-color, though this is not
attested until 1620s.


incarnate (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin incarnatus made flesh, a common word among early Christian writers, past
participle of Latin incarnare to make flesh (see incarnation).


incarnate (v.)

1530s, a back-formation from incarnation, or else from Latin incarnatus, past participle of
incarnare (see incarnation). Related: Incarnated; incarnating.


incarnation (n.)

c.1300, embodiment of God in the person of Christ, from Old French incarnacion (12c.), from Late
Latin incarnationem (nominative incarnatio), act of being made flesh (used by Church writers
especially of God in Christ), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin incarnare to make
flesh, from in- in (see in- (2)) + caro (genitive carnis) flesh (see carnage).


incautious (adj.)

1703, from in- (1) + cautious. Related: Incautiously.


incendiarism (n.)

1670s, figurative; 1837, literal; see incendiary + -ism.


incendiary

c.1400 as a noun, person who sets malicious fires; mid-15c. as an adjective, capable of being used
to set fires, from Latin incendiarius causing a fire, from incendium conflagration, from incendere
set on fire, figuratively, incite, rouse, enrage, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
*candere to set alight, cause to glow, related to candere to shine (see candle). Figurative sense of
enflaming passions (adj.) is from 1610s. Military use, of bombs, shells, etc., attested from 1871.
The obsolete verb incend is attested from c.1500.


incense (n.)

late 13c., from Old French encens sweet-smelling substance, from Late Latin incensum (nominative
incensus) burnt incense, literally something burnt, neuter past participle of Latin incendere set on
fire (see incendiary).


incense (v.1)

make angry, early 15c., from Middle French incenser, from Latin incensare, frequentative of Latin
incendere set on fire (see incendiary). A figurative use of the word used literally in incense (n.).
Related: Incensed.


incense (v.2)

to offer incense, perfume with incense, c.1300, from Old French encenser, from encens (see incense
(n.)).


incent (v.)

by 1992, U.S. government-speak, back-formation from incentive. Related: Incented; incenting.


incentive (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin incentivum, noun use of neuter of Latin adjective incentivus setting the
tune (in Late Latin inciting), from past participle stem of incinere strike up, from in- in, into
(see in- (2)) + canere sing (see chant (v.)). Sense influenced by association with incendere to
kindle. The adjective use, in reference to a system of rewards meant to encourage harder work, first
attested 1943 in jargon of the U.S. war economy; as a noun, in this sense, from 1948.


incentivize (v.)

by 1970, from incentive + -ize. Related: Incentivized; incentivizing.


incept (v.)

1560s, from Latin inceptus, past participle of incipere to begin (see inception). Related: Incepted.


inception (n.)

early 15c., beginning, starting, from Middle French incepcion and directly from Latin inceptionem
(nominative inceptio) a beginning, undertaking, noun of action from past participle stem of incipere
begin, take in hand, from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + cipere comb. form of capere take, seize (see
capable).


inceptive (adj.)

1650s, from French inceptif (16c.), from Latin incept-, past participle stem of incipere to begin
(see inception).


incertitude (n.)

mid-15c., variability, from Middle French incertitude (14c.), from Late Latin incertitudinem
(nominative incertitudo); see certitude. Incertain uncertain and incertainty uncertainty also were
living words in Middle English.


incessancy (n.)

1610s; see incessant + -cy.


incessant (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French incessant (mid-14c.), from Late Latin incessantem (nominative incessans)
unceasing, from Latin in- not (see in- (1)) + cessantem (nominative cessans), present participle of
cessare cease (see cease). Related: Incessantly (early 15c.).


incest (n.)

c.1200, the crime of sexual intercourse between near kindred, from Old French inceste and directly
from Latin incestum unchastity, impious unchastity, also specifically sex between close relatives,
noun use of neuter adjective incestus unchaste, impure, from in- not (see in- (1)) + castus pure
(see caste). In early use also in reference to sexual relations or marriage with one under a vow of
chastity (sometimes distinguished as spiritual incest). Old English had sibleger incest, literally
kin-lying.


incestuous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin incestuosus incestuous, from incestus unchaste (see incest). Figurative use is
from 1744. Related: Incestuously; incestuousness.


inch (n.1)

linear measure, one-twelfth of a foot, late Old English ynce, Middle English unche (current spelling
c.1300), from Latin uncia a twelfth part, from root of unus one (see one). An early borrowing from
Latin, not found in any other Germanic language. Transferred and figurative sense of a very small
amount is attested from mid-14c. For phrase give him an inch ... see ell.


inch (n.2)

small Scottish island, early 15c., from Gaelic innis (genitive innse) island, land by a river, from
Celtic *inissi (cognates: Old Irish inis, Welsh ynys, Breton enez).


inch (v.)

move little by little, 1590s, from inch (n.1). Related: Inched; inching.


inchoate (adj.)

1530s, from Latin inchoatus, past participle of inchoare, alteration of incohare to begin,
originally to hitch up, from in- on (see in- (2)) + cohum strap fastened to the oxen's yoke.
Related: Inchoative.


inchworm (n.)

1844, American English, from inch (v.) + worm (n.). Other old names for it included loaper
caterpiller and surveyor, all from its mode of progress.


incidence (n.)

early 15c., incidental matter, from Middle French incidence (15c.), from Late Latin incidentia (see
incident (n.)). Meaning act of coming into contact with is from 1650s; sense in physics is from
1620s.


incident (n.)

early 15c., something which occurs casually in connection with something else, from Middle French
incident and directly from Latin incidentem (nominative incidens), present participle of incidere
happen, befall, from in- on + -cidere, comb. form of cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). Sense of an
occurrence viewed as a separate circumstance is from mid-15c. Meaning event that might trigger a
crisis or political unrest first attested 1913.


incident (adj.)

conducive (to), contributing (to), early 15c., from Middle French incident (adj.) or directly from
Latin   incidens, present participle of   incidere (see incident (n.)).


incidental (adj.)

casual, occasional, 1610s, from Medieval Latin incidentalis, from incidens (see incident (n.)).
Incidentals (n.) 'occasional' expenses, etc., is attested by 1707.


incidentally (adv.)

1520s, by the way, casually; see incidental + -ly (2). Sense of as a new but related point attested
by 1925.


incinerate (v.)

1550s, from Medieval Latin incineratus reduced to ashes, pp. of incinerare, from Latin in- into (see
in- (2)) + cinis (genitive cineris) ashes, from PIE root *keni- dust, ashes (cognates: Greek konis
dust). Used earlier in English as a past participle adjective meaning reduced to ashes (early 15c.).
Related: Incinerated; incinerating.


incineration (n.)

1520s, from Middle French incin&eacute;ration (14c.), from Medieval Latin incinerationem (nominative
incineratio), noun of action from past participle stem of incinerare (see incinerate).


incinerator (n.)

1883, American English, originally in the terminology of cremation, from incinerate + Latinate agent
noun suffix -or. Meaning device for waste disposal by burning is from 1889.


incipience (n.)

1864; see incipient + -ence. Incipiency is from 1817.


incipient (adj.)

1660s, from Latin incipientem (nominative incipiens), present participle of incipere begin, take up,
from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + -cipere, comb. form of capere to take (see capable).


incipit

opening word of a Latin book or manuscript, Latin, literally (here) begins, third person singular
present indicative of incipere (see incipient).


incise (v.)

1540s, from French inciser (15c.), from Old French enciser (12c.), from Latin incisus, past
participle of incidere to cut into, cut through (see incision). Related: Incised; incising.


incision (n.)

late 14c., a cutting made in surgery, from Old French incision (13c.) and directly from Latin
incisionem (nominative incisio) a cutting into, noun of action from past participle stem of incidere
to cut in, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + -cidere, comb. form of caedere to cut (see
-cide). Meaning act of cutting into is from early 15c.


incisive (adj.)

early 15c., inscisif, slashing, cutting with a sharp edge, from Middle French incisif and directly
from Medieval Latin incisivus, from Latin incis-, past participle stem of incidere (see incision).
Originally literal; figurative sense of mentally acute first recorded 1850 as a borrowing from
French. Related: Incisively; incisiveness.


incisor (n.)

cutting tooth, 1670s, from Medieval Latin incisor a cutting tooth, literally that which cuts into,
from Latin incisus, past participle of incidere (see incision). Inscisours as the name of a cutting
tool is attested from early 15c.


incite (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French enciter (14c.), from Latin incitare to put into rapid motion,
figuratively rouse, urge, encourage, stimulate, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + citare
move, excite (see cite). Related: Incited; inciting.


incitement (n.)

1590s, from incite + -ment.


incitive (adj.)

1888; see incite + -ive.


incivility (n.)

1580s, want of civilized behavior, rudeness, from French incivilit&eacute; (early 15c.), from Late
Latin incivilitatem (nominative incivilitas), from incivilis not civil, from in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + civilis relating to a citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen;
popular, affable, courteous (see civil). Meaning an act of rudeness is from 1650s. Incivil not
conducive to common good is from mid-15c.


inclemency (n.)

1550s, from Middle French incl&eacute;mence and directly from Latin inclementia rigor, harshness,
roughness, from inclemens (see inclement).


inclement (adj.)

1660s, from French incl&eacute;ment and directly from Latin inclementem (nominative inclemens)
harsh, unmerciful, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + clementem mild, placid.
Limitation to weather is curious [Weekley].


inclinable (adj.)

amenable, disposed, mid-15c., from Old French enclinable and directly from Latin inclinabilis, from
inclinare (see incline).


inclination (n.)

condition of being mentally disposed (to do something), late 14c., from Middle French inclination
(14c.) and directly from Latin inclinationem (nominative inclinatio) a leaning, bending,
figuratively tendency, bias, favor, noun of action from past participle stem of inclinare (see
incline). Meaning action of bending toward (something) is from early 15c. That of amount of a slope
is from 1799.


incline (v.)

c.1300, to bend or bow toward, from Old French encliner, from Latin inclinare to cause to lean;
bend, incline, turn, divert, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + clinare to bend, from PIE
*klei-n-, suffixed form of *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)). Metaphoric sense of have a mental
disposition toward is early 15c. in English (but existed in classical Latin). Related: Inclined;
inclining.


incline (n.)

c.1600, mental tendency, from incline (v.). The literal meaning slant, slope is attested from 1846.


include (v.)

c.1400, from Latin includere to shut in, enclose, imprison, insert, from in- in (see in- (2)) +
claudere to shut (see close (v.)). The alleged Sam Goldwyn-ism, Include me out, is attested from
1937. Related: Included; including.


inclusion (n.)

c.1600, from Latin inclusionem (nominative inclusio) a shutting up, confinement, noun of action from
past participle stem of includere (see include).


inclusive (adj.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin inclusivus, from Latin inclus-, past participle stem of includere (see
include). Related: Inclusively; inclusiveness.


incogitable (adj.)

unthinkable, 1520s, from Late Latin incogitabilis, from in- not (see in- (1)) + cogitabilis, from
stem of cogitare (see cogitation).


incognito (adj./adv.)

1640s, from Italian incognito unknown, especially in connection with traveling, from Latin
incognitus unknown, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + cognitus, past participle of
cognoscere to get to know (see cognizance). Fem. form incognita was maintained through 19c. by those
scrupulous about Latin. Incog was a common 18c. colloquial abbreviation.


incognizant (adj.)

1837, from in- (1) not, opposite of + cognizant.


incoherence (n.)

1610s, formed from in- (1) not + coherence on model of Italian incoerenza.


incoherency (n.)

1680s, from incoherent + -cy.


incoherent (adj.)

1620s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + coherent. Related: Incoherently.


incohesive (adj.)

1826, from in- (1) not + cohesive. Related: Incohesively; incohesiveness.


incombustible (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French incombustible (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin incombustibilis; see
in- (1) + combustible.


income (n.)

c.1300, entrance, arrival, literally what enters, perhaps a noun use of the late Old English verb
incuman come in, from in (adv.) + cuman to come (see come). Meaning money made through business or
labor (i.e., that which 'comes in' as a product of work or business) first recorded c.1600. Income
tax is from 1799, first introduced in Britain as a war tax, re-introduced 1842; authorized on a
national level in U.S. in 1913.


incoming (n.)

late 14c., action of coming in, from in + coming. As a present participle adjective, from 1753. Of
game, from 1892; transferred in World War I to artillery; as a warning cry of incoming shellfire, it
seems to date to the U.S. war in Vietnam (1968).


incommensurability (n.)

1560s; see incommensurable + -ity.


incommensurable (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French incommensurable or directly from Medieval Latin incommensurabilis, from
in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + Late Latin commensurabilis, from Latin com- with +
mensurabilis measurable, from mensurare to measure (see measure (v.)). Related: Incommensurably.


incommensurate (adj.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + commensurate.


incommodious (adj.)

1550s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + commodious. Related: Incommodiously. A verb, incommode, is
attested from late 16c.


incommodity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French incommodit&eacute; (late 14c.), from Latin incommoditas, from
incommodus, from in- not (see in- (1)) + commodus suitable, convenient (see commode).


incommunicability (n.)

1630s; see incommunicable + -ity.


incommunicable (adj.)

1560s, not communicative, from in- (1) not + communicable. Sense of not able to be communicated
first recorded 1570s. Related: Incommunicably.


incommunicado (adj./adv.)

1844, American English, from Spanish incomunicado, past participle of incomunicar deprive of
communication, from in- not + comunicar communicate, from Latin communicare to share, impart (see
communication).


incomparability (n.)

c.1500, from incomparable + -ity.


incomparable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French incomparable (12c.) or directly from Latin incomparabilis, from in- not
(see in- (1)) + comparabilis comparable (see comparable).


incomparably (adv.)

early 15c., from incomparable + -ly (2).


incompatibility (n.)

1610s; see incompatible + -ity.


incompatible (adj.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin incompatibilis, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + compatibilis
(see compatible). Originally of benefices, incapable of being held together; sense of mutually
intolerant is from 1590s. Related: Incompatibly.


incompetence (n.)

1660s, inadequacy; 1716, want of skill, from French incomp&eacute;tence (mid-16c.), from in- not,
opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + comp&eacute;tence (see competence). Native formation
incompetency (from incompetent + -cy) is attested from 1610s.


incompetency (n.)

1610s; see incompetence.


incompetent (adj.)

1610s, insufficient, from French incomp&eacute;tent, from Late Latin incompetentem (nominative
incompetens) insufficient, from in- not (see in- (1)) + Latin competentem (see competent). Sense of
lacking qualification or ability first recorded 1630s. The noun meaning incompetent person is from
1866. Related: Incompetently.


incomplete (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin incompletus incomplete, from in- not (see in- (1)) + completus (see complete).


incompletely (adv.)

early 15c., from incomplete + -ly (2).


incompleteness (n.)

1640s; from incomplete + -ness.


incompletion (n.)

1804, noun of action from incomplete.


incomprehensibility (n.)

1640s, from French incompr&eacute;hensibilit&eacute; (16c.); see incomprehensible.


incomprehensible (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin incomprehensibilis, from in- not (see in- (1)) + comprehensibilis (see
comprehensible).


incomprehensibly (adv.)

early 15c., from incomprehensible + -ly (2).


incomprehension (n.)

c.1600, from in- (1) not + comprehension.


incomprehensive (adj.)

1650s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + comprehensive.


inconceivable (adj.)

1630s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + conceivable. Related: Inconcievably. An Old English word for
this was unasmeagendlic.


inconclusive (adj.)

1680s (implied in inconclusiveness), from in- (1) not, opposite of + conclusive. Related:
Inconclusively.


inconducive (adj.)

1848, from in- (1) not, opposite of + conducive.


incongruence (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin incongruentia incongruity, from incongruentem (nominative incongruens)
incongruous, inconsistent, from in- not (see in- (1)) + congruens (see congruent).


incongruency (n.)

c.1600, from incongruent + -cy.


incongruent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin incongruentem (nominative incongruens), from in- not (see in- (1)) + congruens
(see congruent). Related: Incongruently.


incongruity (n.)

1530s, from French incongruit&eacute; or directly from Medieval Latin incongruitas, from Latin in-
not (see in- (1)) + congruitas (see congruity).


incongruous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin incongruus incongruous, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) +
congruus fit, suitable (see congruent). Related: Incongruously.


inconsequence (n.)

1580s, from Latin inconsequentia, from inconsequens (see inconsequent).


inconsequent (adj.)

1570s, not following as a logical conclusion, from Latin inconsequentem (nominative inconsequens)
not logically connected, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + consequens, past
participle of consequi to follow (see consequence).


inconsequential (adj.)

characterized by inconsequence, 1620s; not worth noticing, 1782; see inconsequent + -al (1).
Related: Inconsequentially.


inconsiderable (adj.)

1590s, from French inconsid&eacute;rable (16c.), from in- not (see in- (1)) + consid&eacute;rable
(see considerable). Related: Inconsiderably.


inconsiderate (adj.)

late 15c., done thoughtlessly, literally not properly considered, from Latin inconsideratus
headstrong, unadvised, thoughtless, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + consideratus (see
consider). Related: Inconsiderately; inconsiderateness.


inconsideration (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin inconsiderationem (nominative inconsideratio) inconsiderateness, from
inconsideratus (see inconsiderate).


inconsistency (n.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + consistency. Related: Inconsistencies.


inconsistent (adj.)

1640s, not agreeing in substance or form, from in- (1) not, opposite of + consistent. Related:
Inconsistently.


inconsolable (adj.)

c.1500 (implied in inconsolably), from Latin inconsolabilis inconsolable, from in- not (see in- (1))
+ consolabilis consolable, from consolari (see console (v.)).


inconspicuous (adj.)

1620s, invisible, from Late Latin inconspicuus, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) +
Latin conspicuus (see conspicuous). Weakened sense of not readily seen or noticed first recorded
1828. Related: Inconspicuously; inconspicuousness.


inconstance (n.)

late 14c., from Old French inconstance (13c.), from Latin inconstantia, noun of quality from
inconstans (see inconstant).


inconstancy (n.)

1520s, from Latin inconstantia (see inconstance).


inconstant (adj.)

c.1400, fickle, not steadfast, from Middle French inconstant (late 14c.), from Latin inconstantem
(nominative inconstans) changeable, fickle, capricious, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in-
(1)) + constantem (see constant). Related: Inconstantly.


incontestable (adj.)

1670s, from French incontestable, from in- not (see in- (1)) + contestable (see contest (v.)).
Related: Incontestably.


incontinence (n.)

late 14c., inability to restrain sexual desire, sexual immorality, later inability to keep to a
religious rule (early 15c.), from Old French incontinence lack of abstinence, unchastity (12c.) or
directly from Latin incontinentia greediness; incontinence, noun of quality from incontinens
incontinent, immoderate, intemperate (see incontinent). Meaning inability to retain bodily functions
is from 1754.


incontinency (n.)

early 15c., unchastity; see incontinent + -cy.


incontinent (adj.)

late 14c., wanting in self restraint, from Old French incontinent, from Latin incontinentem
(nominative incontinens) incontinent, immoderate, intemperate, from in- not, opposite of (see in-
(1)) + continens (see continent). Originally chiefly of sexual appetites; sense of unable to control
bowels or bladder first attested 1828.


incontinently (adv.)

early 15c., immediately, without delay, from incontinent + -ly (2). In reference to physical
looseness, from 1550s.


incontrovertible (adj.)

1640s, from in- (1) not + controvertible (see controvert). Related: Incontrovertibly.


inconvenience (n.)

c.1400, harm, damage, danger, also a harmful incident, misfortune, affliction, from Old French
inconvenience misfortune, calamity; impropriety (Modern French inconvenance), from Late Latin
inconvenientia lack of consistency, incongruity, noun of quality from inconvenientem (see
inconvenient). Later impropriety, unfitness; an improper act or utterance (early 15c.). Meaning
quality of being inconvenient is from 1650s.


inconvenience (v.)

1650s, from inconvenience (n.). Related: Inconvenienced; inconveniencing.


inconveniency (n.)

mid-15c., mischief, injury, from Latin inconvenientia (see inconvenience (n.)). Meaning trouble,
disadvantage is from 1550s.


inconvenient (adj.)

late 14c., injurious, dangerous, from Old French inconv&eacute;nient (13c.), from Latin
inconvenientem (nominative inconveniens) unsuitable, not accordant, dissimilar, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + convenientem (see convenient). In early 15c., inappropriate, unbecoming,
unnatural; also, of an accused person, unlikely as a culprit, innocent. Sense of troublesome,
awkward first recorded 1650s.


inconveniently (adv.)

mid-15c., wrongfully, from inconvenient + -ly (2). Meaning with trouble or discomfort is from 1650s.


incorporate (v.)

late 14c., to put (something) into the body or substance of (something else), from Late Latin
incorporatus, past participle of incorporare unite into one body, from Latin in- into, in, on, upon
(see in- (2)) + corpus (genitive corporis) body (see corporeal). Meaning to legally form a body
politic is from 1460s. Related: Incorporated; incorporating.


incorporation (n.)

late 14c., incorporacioun, act or process of combining of substances; absorption of light or
moisture, from Old French incorporacion or directly from Late Latin incorporationem (nominative
incorporatio), noun of action from past participle stem of incorporare (see incorporate). Meaning
the formation of a corporate body (such as a guild) is from early 15c.   <b>Incorporation</b>, n.
The act of uniting several persons into one fiction called a corporation, in order that they may be
no longer responsible for their actions. A, B and C are a corporation. A robs, B steals and C (it is
necessary that there be one gentleman in the concern) cheats. It is a plundering, thieving,
swindling corporation. But A, B and C, who have jointly determined and severally executed every
crime of the corporation, are blameless. [Ambrose Bierce, 1885]


incorporeal (adj.)

1530s, with -al (1) and Latin incorporeus without body, from in- not (see in- (1)) + corpus
(genitive corporis) body (see corporal).


incorrect (adj.)

early 15c., uncorrected, from Latin incorrectus uncorrected, from in- not (see in- (1)) + correctus
(see correct). Sense of not in good style is from 1670s; that of factually wrong, erroneous,
inaccurate is from 1610s (implied in incorrectly).


incorrigibility (n.)

late 15c., from incorrigible + -ity.


incorrigible (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French incorrigible (mid-14c.), or directly from Latin incorrigibilis not to be
corrected, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + corrigibilis, from corrigere to correct (see
correct). Related: Incorrigibly. As a noun, from 1746.


incorruptibility (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin incorruptibilitas, from incorruptibilis (see incorruptible).


incorruptible (adj.)

mid-14c., in a physical sense, from Middle French incorruptible (14c.), or directly from Late Latin
incorruptibilis, from in- â&euro;&oelig;notâ&euro;? (see in- (1)) + corruptibilis (see
corruptible). From 1660s in a moral sense. Related: Incorruptibly.


increase (v.)

early 14c., become greater in size or number; to cause to grow, enlarge, from Anglo-French encress-,
Old French encreiss-, present participle stem of encreistre, from Latin increscere to increase, to
grow upon, grow over, swell, grow into, from in- in (see in- (2)) + crescere to grow (see crescent).
Latin spelling restored 15c. Related: Increased; increasing.


increase (n.)

late 14c., action of increasing; results of an increasing,   from increase (v.).


increasingly (adv.)

late 14c., from increasing (see increase) + -ly (2).


incredible (adj.)

early 15c., unbelievable, from Latin incredibilis not to be believed, from in- not (see in- (1)) +
credibilis worthy of belief (see credible). Used c.1400 in a now-extinct sense of unbelieving,
incredulous. Related: Incredibly.


incredulity (n.)

disbelieving frame of mind, early 15c., from Middle French incr&eacute;dulit&eacute;, from Latin
incredulitatem (nominative incredulitas), noun of quality from incredulus (see incredible).


incredulous (adj.)

unbelieving, 1570s, from Latin incredulus unbelieving, incredulous, from in- not (see in- (1)) +
credulus (see credulous). Formerly also of religious beliefs. Related: Incredulously;
incredulousness.


increment (n.)

mid-15c., act or process of increasing, from Latin incrementum growth, increase; an addition, from
stem of increscere to grow in or upon (see increase). Meaning amount of increase first attested
1630s.


incremental (adj.)

1715, from increment + -al (1). Related: Incrementally.


increpation (n.)

c.1500, from Latin increpationem (nominative increpatio), noun of action from increpare to make
noise at, scold, nag, from in- in (see in- (2)) + crepare to creak (see raven).


incriminate (v.)

1730, back-formation from incrimination or else from Medieval Latin incriminatus, past participle of
incriminare to incriminate, from in- in (see in- (2)) + criminare to accuse of a crime, from crimen
(genitive criminis) crime (see crime). Related: Incriminated; incriminating.


incrimination (n.)

1650s, noun of action from Medieval Latin incriminare (see incriminate).


incroyable

1796, from French incroyable, literally incredible (15c.), from in- not, opposite of, without (see
in- (1)) + croire to believe, from Latin credere (see credo). Name for the French fop or dandy of
the period of the Directory (1795-99). Said to be so called from their extravagant dress and from a
favorite expression among them (C'est vraiment incroyable).


incrustation (n.)

also encrustation, 1640s, from Late Latin incrustationem (nominative incrustatio) a covering with
crust, noun of action from past participle stem of incrustare.


incubate (v.)

1640s, to brood upon, watch jealously (which also was a figurative sense of Latin incubare); 1721 as
to sit on eggs to hatch them, from Latin incubatus, past participle of incubare to lie in or upon
(see incubation). Related: Incubated; incubating.


incubation (n.)

1610s, brooding, from Latin incubationem (nominative incubatio) a laying upon eggs, noun of action
from past participle stem of incubare to hatch, literally to lie on, rest on, from in- on (see in-
(2)) + cubare to lie (see cubicle). The literal sense of sitting on eggs to hatch them first
recorded in English 1640s.


incubator (n.)

apparatus for hatching eggs by artificial heat, 1845, from incubate + -or.


incubus (n.)

c.1200, from Late Latin (Augustine), from Latin incubo nightmare, one who lies down on (the
sleeper), from incubare to lie upon (see incubate). Plural is incubi. In the Middle Ages their
existence was recognized by law.


inculcate (v.)

1540s, from Latin inculcatus, past participle of inculcare force upon, stamp in, tread down, from
in- in (see in- (2)) + calcare to tread, press in, from calx (1) heel. Related: Inculcated;
inculcating.


inculcation (n.)

1550s, from Late Latin inculcationem (nominative inculcatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of inculcare (see inculcate).


inculpate (v.)

1799, to accuse, bring charges against, from Medieval Latin inculpatus, past participle of inculpare
to reproach, blame, censure, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + culpare to blame, from culpa fault.
But inculpable (late 15c.) means not culpable, free from blame, from Latin in- not (see in- (1)) +
culpare.


inculpation (n.)

1798, noun of action from inculpate.


incumbency (n.)

c.1600, from incumbent + -cy.


incumbent (n.)

early 15c., person holding a church position, from Medieval Latin incumbentem (nominative incumbens)
holder of a church position, noun use of present participle of incumbere to obtain or possess, from
Latin incumbere recline on, figuratively apply oneself to, from in- on (see in- (2)) + -cumbere lie
down, related to cubare to lie (see cubicle). Extended to holders of any office from 1670s.


incumbent (adj.)

1560s, in relation to duties or obligations, from Latin incumbentem (nominative incumbens), present
participle of incumbere (see incumbent (n.)). The literal, physical sense is rare in English and
first attested 1620s.


incumbrance (n.)

see encumbrance.


incunabula (n.)

swaddling clothes, also, figuratively, childhood, beginnings; 1824, from Latin incunabula (neuter
plural), ultimately from cunae cradle, from PIE *koi-na-, from root *kei- to lie; bed, couch.


incunabulum (n.)

1861, singular of incunabula; taken up (originally in German) as a word for any book printed late
15c., in the infancy of the printer's art.


incur (v.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French encurir, Middle French encourir, from Latin incurrere run into or
against, rush at, make an attack; figuratively, to befall, happen, occur to, from in- upon (see in-
(2)) + currere to run (see current (adj.)). Related: Incurred; incurring.


incurable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French incurable (13c.), from Late Latin incurabilis, from in- not (see in- (1))
+ curabilis curable (see curable). Related: Incurably.


incurious (adj.)

1560s, negligent, heedless, from Latin incuriosus careless, negligent, unconcerned, from in- not,
opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + curiosus (see curious). Meaning uninquisitive is from 1610s.
Objective sense of unworthy of attention is from 1747.


incursion (n.)

hostile attack, early 15c., from Middle French incursion (14c.) or directly from Latin incursionem
(nominative incursio) a running against, noun of action from past participle stem of incurrere (see
incur).


incus (n.)

ear bone, 1660s, from Latin incus anvil, from incudere to forge with a hammer. So called by Belgian
anatomist Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564).


indebted (adj.)

late 14c., endetted owing money, past participle of endetten to indebt, oblige, from Old French
endetter to involve in debt, from en- in (see in- (2)) + dette debt (see debt). Figurative sense of
under obligation for favors or services first attested 1560s. Related: indebt; indebtedness. Latin
indebitus meant not owed, not due.


indecency (n.)

1580s, from Latin indecentia unseemliness, impropriety, noun of quality from indecentem (see
indecent).


indecent (adj.)

1560s, unbecoming, in bad taste, from French ind&eacute;cent (14c.), from Latin indecentem
(nominative indecens), from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + decens (see decent). Sense
of offending against propriety is from 1610s. Indecent assault (1861) originally covered sexual
assaults other than rape or intended rape, but by 1934 it was being used as a euphemism for rape.
Related: Indecently


indecipherable (adj.)

1802, from in- (1) not + decipherable (see decipher (v.)). Related: Indecipherability.


indecision (n.)

1763, from French ind&eacute;cision (c.1600), from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) +
decision (see decision).


indecisive (adj.)

1726, from in- (1) not, opposite of + decisive. Related: Indecisively; indecisiveness.


indeclinable (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar, from French ind&eacute;clinable, from Latin indeclinabilis, from
indeclinatus unchanged, constant, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + declinatus, from
declinare (see decline (v.)). Related: Indeclinably.


indecorous (adj.)

1670s, from Latin indecorus unbecoming, unseemly, unsightly, from in- not, opposite of, without (see
in- (1)) + decorus becoming, fitting, seemly, proper (see decorous). Related: Indecorously;
indecorousness.


indeed (adv.)

early 14c., in dede in fact, in truth, from Old English d&aelig;d (see deed). Written as two words
till c.1600. As an interjection, 1590s; as an expression of surprise or disgust, 1834. Emphatic form
in yes (or no) indeedy attested from 1856, American English.


indefatigability (n.)

1630s, from indefatigable + -ity.


indefatigable (adj.)

1580s (implied in indefatigably), from French indefatigable (15c.), from Latin indefatigabilis that
cannot be wearied, from in- not (see in- (1)) + defatigare to tire out, from de- utterly, down, away
+ fatigare to weary (see fatigue).


indefeasible (adj.)

1530s (implied in indefeasibly), from in- (1) not, opposite of + defeasible (see defeasance).


indefensible (adj.)

1520s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + defensible. Related: Indefensibly.


indefinability (n.)

1814, from indefinable + -ity.


indefinable (adj.)

1810, from in- (1) not, opposite of + definable (see define). Related: Indefinably.


indefinite (adj.)

early 15c. (implied in indefinitely), from Latin indefinitus, from in- not, opposite of, without
(see in- (1)) + definitus, past participle of definire (see define).


indefinitely (adv.)

early 15c.; see indefinite + -ly (2).


indelible (adj.)

1520s, from Latin indelebilis indelible, imperishable, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in-
(1)) + delebilis able to be destroyed, from delere destroy, blot out (see delete). Vowel change from
-e- to -i- in English is late 17c. Related: Indelibly.


indelicate (adj.)

1742, offensive to propriety, from in- (1) not, opposite of + delicate. Related: Indelicately.


indemnification (n.)

1732, noun of action from indemnify.


indemnify (v.)

compensate for loss or expense, 1610s, from Latin indemnis unhurt (see indemnity) + -fy. Related:
Indemnified; indemnifying.


indemnity (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French indemnit&eacute; (14c.), from Late Latin indemnitatem (nominative
indemnitas) security for damage, from Latin indemnis unhurt, undamaged, from in- not, opposite of,
without (see in- (1)) + damnum damage (see damn).


indent (v.)

early 15c., indenten/endenten to make notches; to give (something) a toothed or jagged appearance,
also to make a legal indenture, from Old French endenter to notch or dent, give a serrated edge to,
from Medieval Latin indentare to furnish with teeth, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
Latin dens (genitive dentis) tooth (see tooth). Related: Indented; indenting.  The printing sense is
first attested 1670s. The noun is first recorded 1590s, from the verb. An earlier noun sense of a
written agreement (late 15c.) is described in Middle English Dictionary as scribal abbrev. of
endenture.


indentation (n.)

1728, of margins or edges, extended form of indent (n.). Meaning action of making a dent or
impression is from 1847.


indention (n.)

1763, formed irregularly from indent + -ation. It could be a useful word if it split with
indentation the two senses (relating to margins and to dents) of that word, but indention, too, is
used in both.


indenture (n.)

contract for services, late 14c., from Anglo-French endenture, Old French endenteure indentation,
from endenter (see indent). Such contracts (especially between master craftsmen and apprentices)
were written in full identical versions on a sheet of parchment, which was then cut apart in a
zigzag, or notched line. Each party took one, and the genuineness of a document of indenture could
be proved by juxtaposition with its counterpart. As a verb, 1650s, from the noun.


indentured (adj.)

bound by indenture, 1757, past participle adjective from indenture (v.).


independence (n.)

1630s; see independent + -ence. Earlier in same sense was independency (1610s). U.S. Independence
Day (July 4) recorded under that name by 1791. An Old English word for it was selfdom, with dom law.


independent (adj.)

1610s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + dependent. French independant is attested from c.1600;
Italian independente from 1590s. Noun meaning person not acting as part of a political party is from
1808. Related: Independently.


indescribable (adj.)

1794, from in- (1) not, opposite of + describable (see describe). Related: Indescribably;
indescribability. In same sense, Old English had unasecgendlic.


indescript (adj.)

undescribed, 1854, from in- (1) not, opposite of + Latin descriptus, past participle of describere
(see describe).


indestructibility (n.)

1670s, see indestructible + -ity.


indestructible (adj.)

early 15c., from in- (1) not, opposite of + destructible. Related: Indestructibly.


indeterminable (adj.)

late 15c., from Late Latin indeterminabilis that cannot be defined, from in- not (see in- (1)) +
determinabilis, from determinare (see determine).


indeterminacy (n.)

1640s, see indeterminate + -acy.


indeterminate (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin indeterminatus undefined, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
determinatus, past participle of determinare (see determine). Related: Indeterminately.


index (n.)

late 14c., the forefinger, from Latin index (genitive indicis) forefinger, pointer, sign, list,
literally anything which points out, from indicare point out (see indication). Meaning list of a
book's contents is first attested 1570s, from Latin phrases such as Index Nominum Index of Names,
index expurgatorius specification of passages to be deleted from works otherwise permitted.
Scientific sense (refractive index, etc.) is from 1829; economic sense (cost-of-living index, etc.)
is from 1870, from the scientific usage, from sense an indicator. The Church sense of forbidden
books is from index librorum prohibitorum, first published 1564 by authority of Pius IV.


index (v.)

compile an index, 1720, from index (n.). Related: Indexed; indexing.


indexation (n.)

1960, noun of action from index (v.).


India

Old English, from Latin India, from Greek India region of the Indus River, later used of the region
beyond it, from Indos Indus River, from Old Persian Hindu, the name for the province of Sind, from
Sanskrit sindhu river. The more common Middle English form was Ynde or Inde, From French (see
Indies). India began to prevail 16c., perhaps under Spanish or Portuguese influence.


Indian

inhabit of India or South Asia, c.1300 (noun and adjective); applied to the native inhabitants of
the Americas from at least 1553, on the mistaken notion that America was the eastern end of Asia.
Red Indian, to distinguish them from inhabitants of India, is first attested 1831 (Carlyle) but was
not commonly used in North America. More than 500 modern phrases include Indian, most of them U.S.
and most impugning honesty or intelligence, such as Indian giver, first attested 1765 in Indian
gift:An Indian gift is a proverbial expression, signifying a present for which an equivalent return
is expected. [Thomas Hutchinson, History of Massachusetts Bay, 1765]Meaning one who gives a gift and
then asks for it back first attested 1892.


Indian Ocean

first attested 1515 in Modern Latin (Oceanus Orientalis Indicus), named for India, which projects
into it; earlier it was the Eastern Ocean, as opposed to the Western Ocean (Atlantic) before the
Pacific was surmised.


Indian summer (n.)

spell of warm weather after the first frost,  first recorded 1778, American English, perhaps so
called because it was first noted in regions inhabited by Indians, or because the Indians first
described it to the Europeans. No evidence connects it with the color of fall leaves or a season of
Indian attacks on settlements. It is the American version of British All-Hallows summer, French
&eacute;t&eacute; de la Saint-Martin (feast day Nov. 11), etc. Also colloquial was St. Luke's summer
(or little summer), period of warm weather occurring about St. Luke's day (Oct. 18).


Indiana

named mid-18c. by French explorers or settlers; see Indian + Latin-derived place-name suffix -ana.
Organized as a U.S. territory 1800, admitted as a state 1816.


Indianapolis

city in Indiana, U.S., founded 1821, from Indiana + -polis.


Indic (adj.)

1877, from Latin Indicus or Greek Indikos of India; see India.


indicate (v.)

1650s, back-formation from indication, or else from Latin indicatus, past participle of indicare to
point out, show, indicate, declare (see indication). Related: Indicated; indicating.


indication (n.)

early 15c., from Latin indicationem (nominative indicatio) an indicating; valuation, noun of action
from past participle stem of indicare point out, show, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
dicare proclaim, from stem of dicere to speak, to say (see diction).


indicative (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French indicatif (14c.), from Late Latin indicativus, from indicat-, past
participle stem of Latin indicare (see indication).


indicator (n.)

1660s, from Late Latin indicator, agent noun from indicare (see indication). As a finger muscle,
from 1690s.


indices (n.)

according to OED, the plural form of index preferable in scientific and mathematical senses of that
word.


indicia (n.)

indications, Latin plural of indicium information, disclosure, discovery, from index (genitive
indicis); see index.


indict (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French enditer accuse, indict (late 13c.), Old French enditer to dictate or
inform, from Late Latin *indictare to declare, proclaim in writing, from Latin in- in (see in- (2))
+ dictare to say, compose in words (see dictate). Retained its French pronunciation even after the
spelling was re-Latinized c.1600. In classical Latin, indictus meant not said, unsaid. Related:
Indictable; indicted; indicting.


indiction (n.)

late 14c., period of fifteen years, a chronological unit of the Romans, originally for taxation
purposes, fixed by Constantine and reckoned from Sept. 1, 312; it was still in use in the Middle
Ages. From Latin indictionem (nominative indictio) declaration, appointment, noun of action from
past participle stem of indicere (see indictive).


indictive (adj.)

1650s, from Latin indictivus proclaimed, from indicere to declare, announce, from in- in (see in-
(2))  + dicere to speak (see diction).


indictment (n.)

c.1300, endytement action of accusing, from Anglo-French enditement, from enditer (see indict).
Meaning legal document containing a charge is from c.1500. Latin spelling restored 17c.


indie (n.)

independent record company, 1945, shortening of independent (among the earliest mentioned were
Continental, Majestic, and Signature); used of film production companies since 1920s, of theaters
from 1942; extended by 1984 to a type of pop music issued by such labels.


Indies

1550s, plural of Indie, Indy, from Middle English Ynde (early 13c.) India, from the Old French form
of Latin India (see India). Commonly applied to Asia and the East, later applied to the Caribbean
basin, in a time of geographical confusion, which was distinguished from Asia proper by being called
the West Indies.


indifference (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin indifferentia want of difference, similarity, noun of quality from
indifferentem (see indifferent).


indifferent (adj.)

late 14c., unbiased, from Old French indifferent impartial or directly from Latin indifferentem
(nominative indifferens) not differing, not particular, of not consequence, neither good nor evil,
from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + differens, present participle of differre set apart (see
differ). Extended sense of apathetic first recorded early 15c.; that of neither good nor bad 1530s,
on notion of neither more nor less advantageous.


indifferently (adv.)

c.1400, from indifferent + -ly (2).


indigence (n.)

late 14c., from Old French indigence indigence, need, privation (13c.), from Latin indigentia need,
want; insatiable desire, from indigentem (nominative indigens), present participle of indigere to
need, from indu in, within + egere be in need, want, from PIE *eg- to lack (cognates: Old Norse ekla
want, lack, Old High German eccherode thin, weak).


indigency (n.)

1610s, from Latin indigentia (see indigence).


indigene

1590s (adj.); 1660s (n.); from French indig&egrave;ne (16c.), from Latin indigena sprung from the
land, as a noun, a native, literally in-born (see indigenous).


indigenous (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin indigenus born in a country, native, from Latin indigena sprung from the
land, as a noun, a native, literally in-born, or born in (a place), from Old Latin indu in, within
(earlier endo) + *gene-, root of gignere (perf. genui) beget, from PIE *gen- produce (see genus).


indigent (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French indigent, from Latin indigentem (see indigence). As a noun, poor person,
from early 15c.


indigestible (adj.)

late 15c., from in- (1) not, opposite of + digestible; or else from Late Latin indigestibilis.
Related: Indigestibility.


indigestion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French indigestion (13c.), from Late Latin indigestionem (nominative
indigestio), from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + digestionem (see digestion). An Old English
word for it was unmeltung.


indignance (n.)

1580s; see indignant + -ance. Indignancy is attested from 1790.


indignant (adj.)

1580s, from Latin indignantem (nominative indignans) impatient, reluctant, indignant, present
participle of indignari to be displeased at, be indignant (see indignation). Related: Indignantly.


indignation (n.)

c.1200, from Old French indignacion or directly from Latin indignationem (nominative indignatio)
indignation, displeasure, noun of action from past participle stem of indignari regard as unworthy,
be angry or displeased at, from indignus unworthy, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + dignus
worthy (see dignity).


indignity (n.)

1580s, unworthiness, also unworthy treatment; act intended to expose someone to contempt, from Latin
indignitatem (nominative indignitas) unworthiness, meanness, baseness, also unworthy conduct, an
outrage, noun of quality from indignus unworthy (see indignation). Related: Indignities.


indigo (n.)

1550s, from Spanish indico, Portuguese endego, and Dutch (via Portuguese) indigo, all from Latin
indicum indigo, from Greek indikon blue dye from India, literally Indian (substance), neuter of
indikos Indian, from India (see India). As the color of indigo from 1620s. Replaced Middle English
ynde (late 13c., from Old French inde, from Latin indicum). Earlier name in Mediterranean languages
was annil, anil (see aniline).


indirect (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle French indirect (14c.) or directly from Late Latin indirectus, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + directus (see direct). Related: Indirectness.


indirection (n.)

c.1600, from indirect + -ion.


indirectly (adv.)

mid-15c., from indirect + -ly (2).


indiscernible (adj.)

1630s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + discernible. Related: Indiscernibly; indiscernibility.


indiscipline (n.)

1783, from in- (1) not, opposite of + discipline (n.). Indisciplined as a past participle adjective
is attested from c.1400.


indiscreet (adj.)

imprudent, not discrete (early 15c.) and  indiscrete not containing distinct parts (c.1600) are both
from Latin indiscretus unseparated; indistinguishable, not known apart, the former via an Old French
or Medieval Latin secondary sense. From in- not (see in- (1)) + discreet. Related: Indiscreetly;
indiscreetness.


indiscrete (adj.)

see indiscreet. Related: Indiscretely.


indiscretion (n.)

mid-14c., want of discretion, from Old French indiscr&eacute;cion foolishness, imprudence (12c.),
from Late Latin indiscretionem (nominative indiscretio) lack of discernment, from in- (see in- (1))
+ discretionem (see discretion). Meaning indiscreet act is from c.1600.


indiscriminate (adj.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + discriminate (adj.).


indiscriminately (adv.)

1650s, from indiscriminate + -ly (2).


indispensability (n.)

1640s, from indispensable + -ity.


indispensable (adj.)

1530s, from Medieval Latin indispensabilis, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + dispensabilis
(see dispensable). Related: Indispensably.


indisposed (adj.)

c.1400, unprepared; early 15c., not in order, from in- (1) not + disposed; or else from Late Latin
indispositus without order, confused. Mid-15c. as diseased; modern sense of not very well is from
1590s. A verb indispose is attested from 1650s but is perhaps a back-formation of this.


indisposition (n.)

early 15c., unfavorable influence (in astrology); also in Middle English, ill health, disorder of
the mind or body; unfavorable disposition, hostility; inclination to evil; wickedness; public
disorder, lawlessness, from in- (1) not, opposite of + disposition.


indisputable (adj.)

1550s, from Late Latin indisputabilis, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) +
disputabilis (see dispute). Related: Indisputably.


indissolubility (n.)

1670s, from indissoluble + -ity.


indissoluble (adj.)

mid-15c. (implied in indissolubly), from Latin indissolubilis that cannot be dissolved, from in-
not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + dissolubilis, from dis- + solubilis (see soluble).


indistinct (adj.)

c.1400 (implied in indistinctly equally, alike), from Latin indistinctus not distinct, confused,
from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + distinctus (see distinct). Related: Indistinctly;
indistinctness.


indistinguishable (adj.)

c.1600, from in- (1) not, opposite of + distinguishable. Related: Indistinguishably.


indite (v.)

late 14c., put down in writing, from Old French enditer, from Vulgar Latin *indictare, from Latin
in- in, into, on, upon (see in- (2)) + dictare â&euro;&oelig;to declareâ&euro;? (see dictate). The
same word as indict but retaining a French form. Related: Indited; inditing.


inditement (n.)

1560s, action of writing prose or verse, from indite + -ment.


individual (adj.)

early 15c., one and indivisible (with reference to the Trinity), from Medieval Latin individualis,
from Latin individuus indivisible, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + dividuus divisible,
from dividere divide (see divide). Not common before c.1600 and the 15c. usage might be isolated.
Sense of single, separate is 1610s; meaning intended for one person is from 1889.


individual (n.)

single object or thing, c.1600, from individual (adj.). Colloquial sense of person is attested from
1742. Latin individuum meant an atom, indivisible particle; in Middle English individuum was used in
sense of individual member of a species from early 15c.


individualism (n.)

self-centered feeling, 1827, from individual + -ism. As a social philosophy (opposed to communism
and socialism) first attested 1851 in writings of J.S. Mill.  A majority can never replace the
individual. ... Just as a hundred fools do not make one wise man, a heroic decision is not likely to
come from a hundred cowards. [Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, 1933]


individualist (n.)

1840, from individual + -ist. Related: Individualistic.


individuality (n.)

the aggregate of one's idiosyncrasies, 1610s, from individual + -ity. Meaning fact of existing as an
individual is from 1650s.


individualize (v.)

1650s, to point out individually; see individual + -ize. From 1837 as to make individual. Related:
Individualized; individualizing.


individually (adv.)

1590s, indivisibly, from individual + -ly (2). Meaning as individuals is from 1640s.


individuate (v.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin individuatus, past participle of individuare, from Latin individuus (see
individual). Related: Individuated; individuating.


individuation (n.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin individuationem, noun of action from individuare, from individuus (see
individual). Psychological sense is from 1909.


indivisibility (n.)

1640s, from indivisible + -ity.


indivisible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French indivisible and directly from Late Latin indivisibilis, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + divisibilis (see divisible).


Indo-European

1814, coined by physician, physicist and Egyptologist Thomas Young (1773-1829) and first used in an
article in the Quarterly Review, from Indo-, comb. form of Greek Indos India + European. Common to
India and Europe, specifically in reference to the group of related languages and to the race or
races characterized by their use. The alternative Indo-Germanic (1835) was coined in German 1823
(indogermanisch), based on the two peoples at the extremes of the geographic area covered by the
languages, before Celtic was realized also to be an Indo-European language. After this was proved,
many German scholars switched to Indo-European as more accurate, but Indo-Germanic continued in use
(popularized by the titles of major works) and the predominance of German scholarship in this field
made it the popular term in England, too, through the 19c. See also Aryan.


Indochina

1886, from Indo-, comb. form of Greek Indos India + China. Name proposed early 19c. by Scottish poet
and orientalist John Leyden, who lived and worked in India from 1803 till his death at 35 in 1811.


indoctrinate (v.)

1620s, to teach, from in- (2) in + Latin doctrina teaching (see doctrine). Meaning to imbue with an
idea or opinion first recorded 1832. Related: Indoctrinated; indoctrinating. The earlier verb was
indoctrine (c.1500).


indoctrination (n.)

1640s, noun of action from indoctrinate.


indolence (n.)

c.1600, insensitivity to pain, from French indolence (16c.), from Latin indolentia freedom from
pain, insensibility, noun of action from indolentem (nominative indolens) insensitive to pain, used
by Jerome to render Greek apelgekos in Ephesians; from Latin in- not, opposite of, without (see in-
(1)) + dolentem (nominative dolens) grieving, present participle of dolere suffer pain. Sense of
laziness (1710) is from notion of avoiding trouble (compare taking pains).


indolent (adj.)

1660s, painless, from Late Latin indolentem (see indolence). Sense of living easily is 1710, from
French indolent. Related: Indolently.


indomitable (adj.)

1630s, from Late Latin indomitabilis untameable, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) +
*domitabilis, from Latin domitare, frequentative of domare to tame (see tame). Related: Indomitably.


Indonesian

1850, from Indonesia, from Indo-, comb. form of Greek Indos India (see India) + nesos island (see
Chersonese). Formerly called Indian Archipelago or East Indies Islands (see Indies).


indoor (adj.)

1711, from within door (opposed to outdoor); the form indoors is first attested 1799 in George
Washington's writings.


indorsement (n.)

see endorsement.


indrawn (adj.)

also in-drawn, 1751, from in (adv.) + past tense of draw (v.). Middle English had indrawing action
of drawing in (late 14c.). The plain verb indraw is rare, late 19c., and might be a back-formation.


indri (n.)

1839, European name for the babakoto, a lemur-like arboreal primate of Madagascar (Indris
Lichanotus); the common story since late 19c. is that the name was given in error by French
naturalist Pierre Sonnerat (1748-1814), c.1780, from mistaken use of Malagasy indry! look! See!
Evidently this was what his native guides said when they spotted the creature and called his
attention to it.    However, as Hacking (1981) pointed out, Sonnerat was far too familiar with
indris -- he described and figured them in detail, and apparently kept at least one in captivity --
for this story to be plausible. Furthermore, endrina is actually recorded as a native name for the
indri (Cousins, 1885), and indri could easily be a variant of this name. Although the word endrina
is first recorded in Malagasy only in 1835, there is no evidence that it could be a back-formation
from the French indri (Hacking, 1981), and it seems implausible that the Malagasy would adopt an
erroneous French name for an animal they were them selves familiar with. [Dunkel, Alexander R., et
al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur names, part 1, in Lemur
News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.67]


indubitable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin indubitabilis that cannot be doubted, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
dubitabilis doubtful, from dubitare hesitate, doubt (see doubt).


indubitably (adv.)

late 15c., from indubitable + -ly (2).


induce (v.)

late 14c., to lead by persuasions or other influences, from Latin inducere lead into, bring in,
introduce, conduct, persuade, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + ducere to lead (see duke
(n.)). Meaning to bring about, of concrete situations, etc., is from early 15c.; sense of to infer
by reasoning is from 1560s. Electro-magnetic sense first recorded 1777. Related: Induced; inducing.


inducement (n.)

1590s, that which induces, from induce + -ment.


inducive (adj.)

1610s, from induce + -ive.


induct (v.)

late 14c., from Latin inductus, past participle of inducere to lead (see induce). Originally of
church offices; sense of bring into military service is 1934 in American English. Related: Inducted;
inducting.


inductance (n.)

1886, from induct + -ance.


inductee (n.)

1941, American English, from induct + -ee.


induction (n.)

late 14c., advancement toward the grace of God; also (c.1400) formal installation of a clergyman,
from Old French induction (14c.) or directly from Latin inductionem (nominative inductio) a leading
in, introduction, noun of action from past participle stem of inducere to lead (see induce).    As a
term in logic (early 15c.) it is from Cicero's use of inductio to translate Greek epagoge leading to
in Aristotle. Induction starts with known instances and arrives at generalizations; deduction starts
from the general principle and arrives at some individual fact. As a term of science, c.1800;
military service sense is from 1934, American English.


inductive (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French inductif or directly from Late Latin inductivus, from induct-, past
participle stem of inducere (see induce). As a term in logic, from 1764.


inductor (n.)

1650s, from Latin inductor, agent noun from past participle stem of inducere (see induce).
Electromagnetic sense begins in 1837.


indulge (v.)

1630s, to grant as a favor; 1650s, of both persons and desires, to treat with unearned favor; a
back-formation from indulgence, or else from Latin indulgere to be complaisant. Related: Indulged;
indulging.


indulgence (n.)

mid-14c., freeing from temporal punishment for sin, from Old French indulgence or directly from
Latin indulgentia complaisance, fondness, remission, from indulgentem (nominative indulgens)
indulgent, kind, tender, fond, present participle of indulgere be kind, yield, of unknown origin;
perhaps from in- in + derivative of PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself.    Sense of gratification of
another's desire or humor is attested from late 14c. That of yielding to one's inclinations
(technically self-indulgence) is from 1640s. In British history, Indulgence also refers to grants of
certain liberties to Nonconformists under Charles II and James II, as special favors rather than
legal rights; specifically the Declarations of Indulgence of 1672, 1687, and 1688 in England and
1669, 1672, and 1687 in Scotland.


indulgent (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin indulgentem (nominative indulgens), present participle of indulgere (see
indulgence). Related: Indulgently.


indurate (v.)

1530s, from Latin induratus, past participle of indurare to make hard, harden (see endure). Related:
Indurated.


induration (n.)

late 14c., from Old French induracion hardness, obstinacy (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin
indurationem (nominative induratio) hardness (especially of the heart), noun of action from indurare
(see endure).


Indus

river in Asia, from Sanskrit sindhu river. The southern constellation, created 1603 by Bayer,
represents an Indian, not the river.


industrial (adj.)

1774, from French industriel, from Medieval Latin industrialis, from Latin industria (see industry).
Earlier the word had been used in English in a sense resulting from labor (1580s); the modern use is
considered a reborrowing. Meaning suitable for industrial use is from 1904. As a style of dance
music, attested from 1988. Industrial revolution was in use by 1840 to refer to recent developments
and changes in England and elsewhere.


industrialisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of industrialization (q.v.); for spelling, see -ize.


industrialism (n.)

1831, from industrial + -ism. Compare French industrialisme (Saint-Simon, 1823).


industrialist (n.)

1846, from industrial + -ist. Perhaps modeled on French industrialiste (Saint-Simon, 1823). Earlier
one who makes a living by productive industry (1837).


industrialization (n.)

1883, from industrialize + -ation.


industrialize (v.)

1852, from industrial + -ize, or else from French industrialiser (1842), from Medieval Latin
industrialis. Related: Industrialized; industrializing.


industrious (adj.)

characterized by energy, effort, and attention, 1520s (implied in industriously), from Middle French
industrieux and directly from Late Latin industriosus, from Latin industria (see industry). Retains
the etymological sense. Related: Industriousness.


industry (n.)

late 15c., cleverness, skill, from Old French industrie activity; aptitude (14c.) or directly from
Latin industria diligence, activity, zeal, fem. of industrius industrious, diligent, used as a noun,
from early Latin indostruus diligent, from indu in, within + stem of struere to build (see structure
(n.)). Sense of diligence, effort is from 1530s; meaning trade or manufacture first recorded 1560s;
that of systematic work is 1610s.


indwelling (n.)

act of residing, late 14c. (Wyclif's translation of Latin inhabitatio), present participle of
obsolete indwell, from in (adv.) + dwell (v.). He also used indweller for Latin inhabitans.


inebriate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin inebriatus, past participle of inebriare to make drunk, from in- in (see in-
(2)) + ebriare make drunk, from ebrius drunk, of unknown origin. Related: Inebriated; inebriating.
Also inebriacy; inebriant (n. and adj.); inebriety; and inebrious.


inebriated (adj.)

drunken, c.1600, past participle adjective from inebriate.


inebriation (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin inebriationem (nominative inebriatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of inebriare (see inebriate).


inedible (adj.)

unfit to eat, 1822, from in- (1) not, opposite of + edible. Related: Inedibly; inedibility.


ineducable (adj.)

1884, from in- (1) not + educable. Related: Ineducability.


ineffability (n.)

1620s; see ineffable + -ity.


ineffable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ineffable (14c.) or directly from Latin ineffabilis unutterable, from in-
not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + effabilis speakable, from effari utter, from ex- out (see ex-) +
fari speak (see fame (n.)). Plural noun ineffables was, for a time, a jocular euphemism for trousers
(1823). Related: Ineffably.


ineffective (adj.)

1650s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + effective. Related: Ineffectively; ineffectiveness.


ineffectual (adj.)

early 15c., from in- (1) not, opposite of + effectual. Related: Ineffectually; ineffectuality.


inefficacious (adj.)

1650s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + efficacious. Related: Inefficaciously; inefficaciousness
(1640s).


inefficacy (n.)

want of force or virtue to produce the desired effect, 1610s, from Late Latin inefficacia, from
inefficacem (nominative inefficax), from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + efficax (see
efficacy).


inefficient (adj.)

1750, not producing the desired effect, from in- (1) not, opposite of + efficient. Related:
Inefficiency (1749); inefficiently.


inelastic (adj.)

1748, from in- (1) not, opposite of + elastic. Figurative use attested by 1867.


inelegant (adj.)

c.1500, from French in&eacute;l&eacute;gant (15c.), from Latin inelegantem (nominative inelegans)
not choice, without taste, without judgment, from in- not (see in- (1)) + elegans (see elegant).
Related: Inelegantly; inelegance.


ineligible (adj.)

1770, from in- (1) not, opposite of + eligible.


ineluctable (adj.)

not to be escaped by struggling, 1620s, from Latin ineluctabilis unavoidable, inevitable, from in-
not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + eluctari to struggle out of, from ex- out (see ex-) + luctari to
struggle (see reluctance).


inept (adj.)

c.1600, from Old French inepte (14c.) or directly from Latin ineptus unsuitable, improper, absurd,
awkward, silly, tactless, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + aptus apt (see apt). Related:
Ineptly; ineptness.


ineptitude (n.)

1610s, from French ineptitude, from Latin ineptitudo, noun of quality from ineptus unsuitable,
absurd (see inept).


inequable (adj.)

1717, from Latin inaequabilis uneven, from in- not (see in- (1)) + aequabilis (see equable).


inequality (n.)

early 15c., difference of rank or dignity, from Old French inequalit&eacute; (14c.) and directly
from Medieval Latin inaequalitas, from Latin inaequalis unequal, from in- not, opposite of (see in-
(1)) + aequalis equal (see equal).


inequitable (adj.)

1660s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + equitable. Related: Inequitably.


inequity (n.)

1550s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + equity. Formed from the same elements as iniquity, but
natively. Related: Inequities.


ineradicable (adj.)

1794, from in- (1) not, opposite of + eradicable (see eradicate). Related: Ineradicably.


inerrancy (n.)

1818, from inerrant + -cy.


inerrant (adj.)

1650s, in reference to fixed stars (as opposed to wandering planets), from Latin inerrantem
(nominative inerrans) not wandering, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + errans, present
participle of errare to err (see err).


inert (adj.)

1640s, from French inerte (16c.) or directly from Latin inertem (nominative iners) unskilled,
inactive, helpless, sluggish, worthless, from in- without + ars (genitive artis) skill (see art
(n.)). Originally of matter; specifically of gases from 1885. Of persons or creatures, from 1774.


inertia (n.)

1713, introduced as a term in physics 17c. by German astronomer and physician Johann Kepler
(1571-1630), from Latin inertia unskillfulness, idleness, from iners (genitive inertis) unskilled,
inactive; see inert. Used in Modern Latin by Newton (1687). Sense of apathy first recorded 1822.


inertial (adj.)

1737, from inertia + -al (1).


inertness (n.)

1660s, from inert + -ness.


inescapable (adj.)

1792, from in- (1) not, opposite of + escapable (see escape). Related: Inescapably.


inestimable (adj.)

late 14c., beyond estimation, from Old French inestimable (14c.) or directly from Latin
inaestimabilis, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + aestimabilis (see estimable). Meaning too
precious to set a value on, priceless is attested by 1570s. Related: Inestimably.


inevitability (n.)

1640s, from inevitable + -ity.


inevitable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin inevitabilis unavoidable, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + evitabilis
avoidable, from evitare to avoid, from ex- out (see ex-) + vitare shun, originally go out of the
way.


inevitably (adv.)

mid-15c., from inevitable + -ly (2).


inexact (adj.)

1828, from in- (1) not, opposite of + exact. Related: Inexactly.


inexactitude (n.)

1786, from in- (1) not, opposite of + exactitude.


inexcusable (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin inexcusabilis, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + excusabilis, from
excusare (see excuse). Related: Inexcusably.


inexhaustible (adj.)

c.1600, from in- (1) not, opposite of + exhaustible (see exhaust). Related: Inexhaustibly.


inexorable (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French inexorable and directly from Latin inexorabilis that cannot be moved by
entreaty, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + exorabilis able to be entreated, from exorare to
prevail upon, from ex- out (see ex-) + orare pray (see orator). Related: Inexorably; inexorability.


inexpedient (adj.)

c.1600, from in- (1) not, opposite of + expedient. Related: Inexpedience; inexpediently.


inexpensive (adj.)

1837 (implied in inexpensively), from in- (1) not, opposite of + expensive.


inexperience (n.)

1590s, from French inexp&eacute;rience (mid-15c.), from Late Latin inexperientia, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + experientia (see experience).


inexperienced (adj.)

1620s, adjective from inexperience.


inexpert (adj.)

mid-15c., from in- (1) not, opposite of + expert (adj.), or else from Old French inexpert, from
Latin inexpertus without experience, unpracticed. Related: Inexpertly.


inexpiable (adj.)

1560s, from Latin inexpiabilis that cannot be atoned for, from in- not (see in- (1)) + expiabilis,
from expiare (see expiation).


inexplicable (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French inexplicable or directly from Latin inexplicabilis that cannot be
unfolded or disentangled, very intricate, figuratively, inexplicable, from in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + explicabilis that may be explained (see explicable). Related: Inexplicably.


inexplicit (adj.)

1775 (implied in inexplicitly), from in- (1) not, opposite of + explicit. Or else from Latin
inexplicitus not to be unfolded; unexplained. Related: Inexplicitly; inexplicitness.


inexpressible (adj.)

1620s, from in- (1) not + expressible (see express (v.)). Related: Inexpressibly.


inexpugnable (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin inexpugnabilis not to be taken by assault, from in- not (see in- (1) +
expuglabilis, from expugnare (see expugn).


inextinguishable (adj.)

c.1500, from in- (2) not + extinguishable (see extinguish). Related: Inextinguishably;
inextinguishability.


inextricable (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin inextricabilis that cannot be disentangled, from in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + extricare (see extricate). Related: Inextricably.


Inez

fem. proper name, Spanish form of Agnes (q.v.).


infallibility (n.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin infallibilitas, from infallibilis (see infallible).


infallible (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin infallibilis, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Late Latin
fallibilis (see fallible). In reference to Popes, attested from 1870. Related: Infallibly.


infamous (adj.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin infamosus, from Latin in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + famosus
celebrated (see famous).  Meaning influenced by Latin infamis of ill fame (see infamy). As a legal
term, disqualified from certain rights of citizens in consequence of conviction of certain crimes
(late 14c.). Related: Infamously.


infamy (n.)

early 15c., from Old French infamie (14c.), earlier infame, and directly from Latin infamia ill
fame, bad repute, dishonor, from infamis of ill fame, from in- not, without + fama reputation (see
fame (n.)).


infancy (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French enfaunce and directly from Latin infantia early childhood, literally
inability to speak, from infantem (see infant).


infant (n.)

late 14c., child during earliest period of life (sometimes extended to age 7 and sometimes including
a fetus), from Latin infantem (nominative infans) young child, babe in arms, noun use of adjective
meaning not able to speak, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + fans, present participle of
fari speak (see fame (n.)). As an adjective, 1580s, from the noun.


Infanta (n.)

daughter of a king of Spain or Portugal, c.1600, from Spanish and Portuguese infanta, fem. of
infante, from Latin infantem (see infant).


infanticide (n.)

1650s, the killing of infants; 1670s, one who kills an infant, from infant + -cide.


infantile (adj.)

mid-15c., pertaining to infants, from Latin infantilis pertaining to an infant, from infans (see
infant). Sense of infant-like is from 1772.


infantilism (n.)

1894 in a psychological sense; see infantile + -ism. Earlier in a physiological sense, retarded and
imperfect physical development.


infantry (n.)

1570s, from French infantrie, from older Italian, Spanish infanteria foot soldiers, force composed
of those too inexperienced or low in rank for cavalry, from infante foot soldier, originally a
youth, from Latin infantem (see infant). Meaning infants collectively is recorded from 1610s.


infantryman (n.)

1837, from infantry + man (n.).


infarct (n.)

1873, from medical Latin infarctus (Latin infartus), past participle of infarcire to stuff into,
from in- + farcire â&euro;&oelig;to stuffâ&euro;? (see farce).


infarction (n.)

1680s, noun of action from Latin infarcire (see infarct).


infatigable (adj.)

c.1500, from French infatigable (15c.), from Latin infatigabilis, from in- not, opposite of (see in-
(1)) + fatigabilis, from fatigare to weary (see fatigue).


infatuate (v.)

1530s, turn (something) to foolishness, frustrate, from Latin infatuatus, past participle of
infatuare make a fool of, from in- in (see in- (2)) + fatuus foolish. Specific sense of inspire (in
someone) a foolish romantic passion is from 1620s. Related: Infatuated; infatuating.


infatuation (n.)

1640s, noun of action from infatuate, or else from French infatuation or directly from Late Latin
infatuationem (nominative infatuatio), from past participle stem of infatuare.


infeasibility (n.)

1650s, from infeasible + -ity.


infeasible (adj.)

1530s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + feasible.


infect (v.)

late 14c., from Latin infectus, past participle of inficere to spoil, stain, literally to put in to,
dip into, from in- in (see in- (2)) + facere perform (see factitious). Related: Infected; infecting.


infection (n.)

late 14c., infectious disease; contaminated condition; from Old French infeccion contamination,
poisoning (13c.) and directly from Late Latin infectionem (nominative infectio), noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin inficere (see infect). Meaning communication of disease by agency of
air or water (distinguished from contagion, which is body-to-body communication), is from 1540s.


infectious (adj.)

catching, having the quality of spreading from person to person, 1540s of diseases, 1610s of
emotions, actions, etc.; see infect + -ous.


infective (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin infectivus, from infectus (see infect).


infelicitous (adj.)

1754, from in- (1) not, opposite of + felicitous. Related: infelicitously.


infelicity (n.)

late 14c., from Latin infelicitas ill luck, misfortune, from infelix (genitive infelicis)
unfruitful, barren; unfortunate, unhappy, causing misfortune, unlucky, from in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + felix (see felicity).


infer (v.)

1520s, from Latin inferre bring into, carry in; deduce, infer, conclude, draw an inference; bring
against, from in- in (see in- (2)) + ferre carry, bear, from PIE *bher- (1) to bear, to carry, to
take (cognates: Sanskrit bharati carries; Avestan baraiti carries; Old Persian barantiy they carry;
Armenian berem I carry; Greek pherein to carry; Old Irish beru/berim I catch, I bring forth; Gothic
bairan to carry; Old English and Old High German beran, Old Norse bera barrow; Old Church Slavonic
birati to take; Russian brat' to take, bremya a burden). Sense of draw a conclusion is first
attested 1520s.


inference (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin inferentia, from Latin inferentem (nominative inferens), present
participle of inferre (see infer).


inferential (adj.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin inferentia (see inference) + adj. suffix -al (1).


inferior (adj.)

early 15c., of land, low, lower, from Latin inferior lower, further down (also used figuratively),
comparative of inferus (adj.) that is below or beneath, from infra below (see infra-). Meaning lower
in degree, rank, or importance is from 1530s; also in an absolute sense, of low quality or rank.


inferior (n.)

person inferior to another in rank, etc., early 15c., from inferior (adj.).


inferiority (n.)

1590s, probably from Medieval Latin *inferioritas; see inferior + -ity. Inferiority complex first
attested 1922.The surrender of life is nothing to sinking down into acknowledgment of inferiority.
[John C. Calhoun]


infernal (adj.)

late 14c., in reference to the underworld, from Old French enfernal, infernal (12c.), from Late
Latin infernalis of the lower regions, from infernus hell (Ambrose), literally the lower (world),
noun use of Latin infernus lower, lying beneath, from infra below (see infra-). Meaning devilish,
hateful is from early 15c. For the name of the place, or things which resemble it, the Italian form
inferno has been used in English since 1834, from Dante. Related: Infernally.


inferno (n.)

1834, from Italian inferno, from Latin infernus (see infernal).


infertile (adj.)

1590s, from French infertile (late 15c.), from Late Latin infertilis unfruitful, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + fertilis (see fertile).


infertility (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin infertilitatem (nominative infertilitas), from infertilis (see infertile).


infest (v.)

late 15c., to attack, assail, hurt, distress, annoy, from Middle French infester, from Latin
infestare to attack, disturb, trouble, from infestus hostile, dangerous, originally inexorable, not
able to be handled, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + -festus (able to be) seized. Sense of
swarm over in large numbers first recorded c.1600. Related: Infested; infesting.


infestation (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin infestationem (nominative infestatio) a troubling, disturbing,
molesting, noun of action from past participle stem of infestare (see infest).


infibulate (v.)

1620s, from Latin infibulatus, past participle of infibulare to close with a clasp, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + fibula a clasp, pin (see fibula). Related: Infibulated.


infibulation (n.)

1640s, noun of action from infibulate.


infidel

mid-15c. (adjective and noun), from Middle French infid&egrave;le, from Latin infidelis unfaithful,
not to be trusted, later unbelieving, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + fidelis faithful
(see fidelity). In 15c. a non-Christian (especially a Saracen); later one who does not believe in
religion (1520s). Also used to translate Arabic qafir, which is from a root meaning to disbelieve,
to deny, strictly referring to all non-Muslims but virtually synonymous with Christian; hence, from
a Muslim or Jewish point of view, a Christian (1530s; see kaffir).


infidelity (n.)

c.1400, want of faith, unbelief in religion; false belief, paganism; also (early 15c.)
unfaithfulness or disloyalty to a person (originally to a sovereign, by 16c. to a lover or spouse),
from French infid&eacute;lit&eacute;, from Latin infidelitatem (nominative infidelitas)
unfaithfulness, faithlessness, noun of quality from infidelis (see infidel).


infield (n.)

1733, the land of a farm which lies nearest the homestead, from in + field. Baseball diamond sense
first attested 1867. Related: Infielder.


infiltrate (v.)

1758, of fluids, from in- (2) in + filtrate. Related: Infiltrated; infiltrating. Military sense of
penetrate enemy lines attested from 1934.


infiltration (n.)

early 15c., a knitting together, noun of action from infiltrate. In physics, from 1796. Figurative
sense of a passing into (anything immaterial) is from 1840; military sense of stealthy penetration
of enemy lines dates from 1930.


infinite (adj.)

late 14c., eternal, limitless, also extremely great in number, from Old French infinit endless,
boundless, and directly from Latin infinitus unbounded, unlimited, from in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + finitus defining, definite, from finis end (see finish (v.)). The noun meaning that which
is infinite is from 1580s.


infinitely (adv.)

early 15c., from infinite + -ly (2).


infinitesimal (adj.)

1710 (1650s as a noun), infinitely small, from Modern Latin infinitesimus, from Latin infinitus
infinite (see infinite) + -esimus, as in centesimus hundredth. Related: Infinitesimally.


infinitive (n.)

simple, uninflected form of a verb, 1510s (mid-15c. as an adjective), from Late Latin infinitivus
unlimited, indefinite, from Latin infinitus (see infinite). Indefinite because not having definite
person or number.


infinitude (n.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin *infinitudo, from Latin infinitus on model of multitudo, magnitudo; see
infinite. Perhaps modeled on French infinitude (1610s).


infinity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French infinit&eacute; infinity; large number or quantity (13c.), from Latin
infinitatem (nominative infinitas) boundlessness, endlessness, from infinitus boundless, unlimited
(see infinite). Infinitas was used as a loan-translation of Greek apeiria infinity, from apeiros
endless.


infirm (adj.)

late 14c., weak, unsound (of things), from Latin infirmus weak, frail, feeble (figuratively
superstitious, pusillanimous, inconstant), from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + firmus (see
firm (adj.)). Of persons, not strong, unhealthy, first recorded c.1600. As a noun from 1711.


infirmary (n.)

mid-15c., sick bay in a monastery, from Medieval Latin infirmaria a place for the infirm, from Latin
infirmus weak, frail, (see infirm). The common name for a public hospital in 18c. England.


infirmity (n.)

late 14c., disease, sickness; lack of capability, weakness, from Latin infirmitatem (nominative
infirmitas) want of strength, weakness, feebleness, noun of quality from infirmus (see infirm).
Perhaps in part from Middle French infirmit&eacute;, Old French enfermete.


inflame (v.)

mid-14c., to set on fire with passion, from Latin inflammare to set on fire, kindle, figuratively to
rouse, excite, from in- in (see in- (2)) + flammare to flame, from flamma flame (see flame (n.)).
Literal sense of to cause to burn first recorded in English late 14c.


inflammable (adj.)

early 15c., in medicine, liable to inflammation, from Middle French inflammable and directly from
Medieval Latin inflammabilis, from Latin inflammare (see inflame). As able to be set alight, c.1600.
Related: Inflammability.


inflammation (n.)

redness or swelling in a body part, early 15c., from Middle French inflammation and directly from
Latin inflammationem (nominative inflammatio) a setting on fire, noun of action from past participle
stem of inflammare (see inflame). Literal sense in English from 1560s.


inflammatory (adj.)

1680s (n.), from Latin inflammat-, past participle stem of inflammare (see inflame) + -ory. As an
adjective, tending to rouse passions or desires, 1711; from 1732 in pathology.


inflate (v.)

early 15c., cause to swell, from Latin inflatus, past participle of inflare to blow into, inflate
(see inflation). Economics sense from 1844. In some senses a back-formation from inflation. Related:
Inflatable; inflated; inflating.


inflation (n.)

mid-14c., swelling caused by gathering of 'wind' in the body; flatulence; figuratively, outbursts of
pride, from Latin inflationem (nominative inflatio) a puffing up; flatulence, noun of action from
past participle stem of inflare blow into, puff up, from in- into (see in- (2)) + flare to blow (see
blow (v.1)). Monetary sense of enlargement of prices (originally by an increase in the amount of
money in circulation) first recorded 1838 in American English.


inflationary (adj.)

1916, from inflation + -ary.


inflect (v.)

early 15c., to bend inward, from Latin inflectere (past participle inflexus) to bend in, bow, curve,
figuratively, to change, from in- in (see in- (1)) + flectere to bend (see flexible). Grammatical
sense is attested 1660s; pronunciation sense (in inflection) is c.1600. Related: Inflected;
inflecting.


inflection (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French inflexion and directly from Latin inflexionem (nominative inflexio) a
bending, inflection, modification, noun of action from past participle stem of inflectere (see
inflect). For spelling, see connection. Grammatical sense is from 1660s.


inflexibility (n.)

1610s, from inflexible + -ity.


inflexible (adj.)

late 14c., incapable of being bent, physically rigid, also figuratively, unbending in temper or
purpose, from Middle French inflexible and directly from Latin inflexibilis, from inflexus, past
participle of inflectere (see inflect). In early 15c. an identical word had an opposite sense,
capable of being swayed or moved, from in- in, on. Related: Inflexibly.


inflexion (n.)

see inflection; also see -xion.


inflict (v.)

1560s, from Latin inflictus, past participle of infligere to strike or dash against, from in- on,
against (see in- (2)) + fligere (past participle flictus) to dash, strike (see afflict). You inflict
trouble on someone; you afflict someone with trouble. Shame on you.


infliction (n.)

1530s, from Late Latin inflictionem (nominative inflictio) an inflicting, a striking against, noun
of action from past participle stem of Latin infligere (see inflict).


inflight (adj.)

also in-flight, during a flight, 1945, from in + flight.


inflorescence (n.)

1760, from Modern Latin inflorescentia, from Late Latin inflorescentem (nominative inflorescens)
flowering, present participle of Latin inflorescere to come to flower, from in- in (see in- (2)) +
florescere to begin to bloom (see flourish).


inflow (n.)

1839, from in + flow (n.).


influence (n.)

late 14c., an astrological term, streaming ethereal power from the stars acting upon character or
destiny of men, from Old French influence emanation from the stars that acts upon one's character
and destiny (13c.), also a flow of water, from Medieval Latin influentia a flowing in (also used in
the astrological sense), from Latin influentem (nominative influens), present participle of influere
to flow into, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + fluere to flow (see fluent). Meaning
exercise of personal power by human beings is from mid-15c.; meaning exertion of unseen influence by
persons is from 1580s (a sense already in Medieval Latin, for instance Aquinas). Under the influence
drunk first attested 1866.


influence (v.)

1650s, from influence (n.). Related: Influenced; influencing.


influent (adj.)

mid-15c., abundant, in reference to occult power of the stars, etc., also of grace, from Latin
influentem (nominative influens), present participle of influere â&euro;&oelig;to flow inâ&euro;?
(see influence).


influential (adj.)

powerful, 1650s, from Medieval Latin influentialis, from influentia (see influence). Earlier in an
astrological sense (1560s).


influenza (n.)

1743, borrowed during an outbreak of the disease in Europe, from Italian influenza influenza,
epidemic, originally visitation, influence (of the stars), from Medieval Latin influentia (see
influence). Used in Italian for diseases since at least 1504 (as in influenza di febbre scarlattina
scarlet fever) on notion of astral or occult influence. The 1743 outbreak began in Italy. Often
applied since mid-19c. to severe colds.


influx (n.)

1620s, from French influx (1540s) or directly from Late Latin influxus a flowing in, from past
participle stem of influere to flow in (see influence). Originally of rivers, air, light, spiritual
light, etc.; used of people from 1650s.


info (n.)

1906, short for information.


info-

word-forming element abstracted from information.


infomercial (n.)

1983, from info- + commercial. Before infomercial was the print form, advertorial (1961).


inform (v.)

early 14c., to train or instruct in some specific subject, from Old French informer instruct,
inform, teach, and directly from Latin informare to shape, form, figuratively train, instruct,
educate, from in- into (see in- (2)) + formare to form, shape, from forma form (see form (n.)).
Varied with enform until c.1600. Sense of report facts or news first recorded late 14c. Related:
Informed; informing.


informal (adj.)

mid-15c., lacking form; not in accordance with the rules of formal logic, from in- (1) not, opposite
of + formal. Meaning irregular, unofficial is from c.1600. Sense of done without ceremony is from
1828. Related: Informally.


informality (n.)

1590s, from informal + -ity.


informant (n.)

1660s, someone or something that supplies information, from Latin informantem (nominative
informans), present participle of informare (see inform). Meaning one who gives information to the
authorities, informer is from 1783. As an adjective from 1890. The older noun was informer.


informatics (n.)

1967, translating Russian informatika (1966), from information; also see -ics.


information (n.)

late 14c., act of informing, from Old French informacion, enformacion information, advice,
instruction, from Latin informationem (nominative informatio) outline, concept, idea, noun of action
from past participle stem of informare (see inform). Meaning knowledge communicated is from mid-15c.
Information technology attested from 1958. Information revolution from 1969.


informative (adj.)

instructive, late 14c., formative, shaping, plastic, from Medieval Latin informativus, from Latin
informatus, past participle of informare (see inform). Related: Informatively.


informer (n.)

late 14c., enfourmer instructor, teacher, native agent noun from inform and also from Old French
enformeor. Meaning one who gives information against another (especially in reference to law-
breaking) is c.1500.


infotainment (n.)

1983, from info- + entertainment.


infra (adv.)

under, below, further on, from Latin infra (see infra-).


infra dig.

1824, colloquial abbreviation of Latin infra dignitatem beneath the dignity of.


infra-

word-forming element from Latin infra (adv., prep.) below, underneath, beneath; later than, smaller,
inferior to, from PIE *ndher under (cognates: Sanskrit adnah below, Old English under under, among;
see under). Opposed to super-. Its use as a prefix was rare in Latin.


infra-red

also infrared, 1881 (noun and adjective), from infra- + red.


infraction (n.)

mid-15c., the breaking of an agreement, from Middle French infraction and directly from Latin
infractionem (nominative infractio) a breaking, weakening, noun of action from past participle stem
of infringere (see infringe).


infralapsarian (adj.)

1731, from infra- + Latin lapsus a fall (see lapse (n.)) + ending from unitarian, etc. In reference
to the Calvinist doctrine that god's election of some to everlasting life was consequent to his
decree to allow the Fall of man, and was thus a remedial measure. Contrasted to supralapsarian, in
reference to the belief that He always meant to consign most of mankind to eternal fire and that the
decision to create some men to be damned was his first decree. There's also a moderate sublapsarian
view. Here the decree to elect those who would believe and leave those who do not believe to
damnation also comes after the decree to allow the fall, but the decree to provide salvation for man
comes immediately after the decree to elect.


infrasonic (adj.)

1927, from infra- + sonic.


infrastructure (n.)

1887, from French infrastructure (1875); see infra- + structure (n.). The installations that form
the basis for any operation or system. Originally in a military sense.


infrequency (n.)

c.1600, from Latin infrequentia a small number, thinness, scantiness, noun of quality from
infrequentem (see infrequent). Related: Infrequence (1640s).


infrequent (adj.)

1530s, from Latin infrequentem (nominative infrequens) occurring seldom, unusual, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + frequens (see frequent). Related: Infrequently.


infrigidation (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin infrigidationem (nominative infrigidatio), noun of action from
infrigidare to make cold, from in- in, into (see in- (2)) + frigidare, from frigidus cold (see
frigid). Related: infrigidate (v.).


infringe (v.)

mid-15c., enfrangen, to violate, from Latin infringere to damage, break off, break, bruise, from in-
in (see in- (2)) + frangere to break (see fraction). Meaning of encroach first recorded c.1760.
Related: Infringed; infringing.


infringement (n.)

1590s, from infringe + -ment.


infundibulum (n.)

1799 in the anatomical sense, from Latin infundibulum, literally a funnel, from infundere to pour
into (see infuse) + -bulum, suffix forming names of instruments. In some cases a loan-translation
into Latin of Greek khoane funnel. Related: Infundibular.


infuriate (v.)

1660s, from Italian infuriato, from Medieval Latin infuriatus, past participle of infuriare to
madden, from Latin in furia in a fury, from ablative of furia (see fury). Related: Infuriated;
infuriating; infuriatingly.


infuse (v.)

early 15c., to pour in, introduce, soak, from Latin infusus, past participle of infundere to pour
into, from in- in (see in- (2)) + fundere pour, spread (see found (v.2)). Figurative sense of
instill, inspire first recorded 1520s (infusion in this sense dates from mid-15c.). Related:
Infused; infusing.


infusion (n.)

c.1400, from Old French infusion (13c.) or directly from Latin infusionem (nominative infusio), noun
of action from past participle stem of infundere (see infuse).


ingenious (adj.)

early 15c., intellectual, talented, from Middle French ing&eacute;nieux clever, ingenious (Old
French engeignos), from Latin ingeniosus of good capacity, full of intellect; clever, gifted with
genius, from ingenium innate qualities, ability, literally that which is inborn, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + gignere, from PIE *gen- produce (see genus). Sense of skillful, clever at contrivance
first recorded 1540s. In a sense of crafty, clever, skillful Middle English had enginous (mid-14c.),
from Old French engeignos. Related: Ingeniously; ingeniousness.


ingenue (n.)

1848, from French ing&eacute;nue artless girl, especially on the stage, fem. of ing&eacute;nu
ingenuous, artless, simple (13c.), from Latin ingenuus (see ingenuous). Italicized in English into
20c.


ingenuity (n.)

1590s, honor, nobility, from Middle French ing&eacute;nuit&eacute; and directly from Latin
ingenuitatem (nominative ingenuitas) condition of a free-born man, figuratively generosity, noble-
mindedness, from ingenuus (see ingenuous). Etymologically, this word belongs to ingenuous, but in
17c. ingenious and ingenuous so often were confused (even by Shakespeare) that ingenuity has
acquired the meaning capacity for invention or construction (first attested 1640s).


ingenuous (adj.)

1590s, noble in nature, from Latin ingenuus with the virtues of freeborn people, of noble character,
frank, upright, candid, originally native, freeborn, from in- in (see in- (2)) + gen-, root of
gignere beget, produce (see genus). Sense of artless, innocent is 1670s, via evolution from high-
minded to honorably open, straightforward, to innocently frank. Related: Ingenuously; ingenuousness.


ingest (v.)

1610s, from Latin ingestus, past participle of ingerere to throw in, pour in, heap upon, from in-
into (see in- (2)) + gerere to carry (see gest). Related: Ingested; ingesting.


ingestion (n.)

1610s, from Latin ingestionem (nominative ingestio) a pouring in, noun of action from past
participle stem of ingerere (see ingest).


ingle (n.)

fireplace, c.1500, from Scottish, probably from Gaelic aingeal fire, of uncertain origin. The vogue
for Scottish poetry in late 18c. introduced ingleside, ingle-nook to literary English.


inglorious (adj.)

1570s, from Latin ingloriosus, from in- not (see in- (1)) + gloriosus (see glorious). Related:
Ingloriously; ingloriousness.


ingoing (adj.)

also in-going, 1825, from in + going.


ingot (n.)

late 14c., mold in which metal is cast, probably from in- (2) in + Old English goten, past
participle of geotan to pour (see found (v.2)). Sense of mass of cast metal first attested early
15c.


ingrain (v.)

1766, see engrain. Figurative use, of qualities, habits, etc., attested from 1851 (in ingrained). Of
dyed carpets, etc., 1766, from in grain.


ingrate (n.)

ungrateful person, 1670s, from earlier adjective meaning unfriendly (late 14c.) also ungrateful,
unthankful, from Latin ingratus unpleasant, also ungrateful, from in- not (see in- (1)) + gratus
pleasing, beloved, dear, agreeable (see grace (n.)). The noun meaning ungrateful person dates from
1670s.


ingratiate (v.)

1620s, possibly via 16c. Italian ingraziarsi to bring (oneself) into favor, from Latin in gratiam
for the favor of, from in in (see in- (2)) + gratia favor, grace (see grace).


ingratitude (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French ingratitude (13c.) and directly from Latin ingratitudinem (nominative
ingratitudo), noun of quality from ingratus (see ingrate).


ingredient (n.)

early 15c., from Latin ingredientem (nominative ingrediens) that which enters into (a compound,
recipe, etc.), present participle of ingredi go in, enter, from in- in (see in- (2)) + gradi to
step, go (see grade (n.)).


ingress (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin ingressus an advance; walking; an entry, from past participle stem of ingredi
to step into, enter (see ingredient). The verb, sometimes said to be American English, is attested
from early 14c.


ingrown (adj.)

1660s, native, innate, from in + grown. Of nails, that has grown into the flesh, 1878.


inguinal (adj.)

1680s, from Latin inguinalis of the groin, from inguen (genitive inguinis) groin, from PIE *engw-
groin, internal organ (cognates: Greek aden gland).


inhabit (v.)

late 14c., from Old French enhabiter dwell in (12c.), from Latin inhabitare to dwell in, from in- in
(see in- (2)) + habitare to dwell, frequentative of habere hold, have (see habit (n.)). Related:
Inhabited; inhabiting.


inhabitable (adj.)

a word used in two opposite senses: not habitable (late 14c., from in- (1) not + habitable) and
capable of being inhabited (c.1600, from inhabit + -able).


inhabitant (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French inhabitant, from Latin inhabitantem (nominative inhabitans), present
participle of inhabitare (see inhabit). Related: Inhabitants. As an adjective, also from early 15c.


inhalant

1825 (adj.), c.1830 (n.)., from Latin inhalantem, present participle of inhalare (see inhale).


inhalation (n.)

1620s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin inhalare (see inhale).


inhale (v.)

1725, to breathe in, back-formation from inhalation or else from Latin inhalare breathe upon, from
in- upon (see in- (2)) + halare breathe. Related: Inhaled; inhaling. Current sense is because the
word was taken as the opposite of exhale. Slang sense of eat rapidly is recorded from 1924. As a
noun, by 1934. Related: Inhaled; inhaling.


inhance (v.)

obsolete form of enhance.


inharmonious (adj.)

1711, from in- (1) not + harmonious. Related: Inharmoniously.


inhere (v.)

1580s, to exist, have being, from Latin inhaerere to stick in or to (see inherent). Figurative
(immaterial) use attested by 1610s (also in Latin). Related: Inhered; inhering.


inherence (n.)

1570s, from Medieval Latin inhaerentia, from inhaerentem (see inherent). Related: Inherency
(c.1600).


inherent (adj.)

1570s, from Latin inhaerentem (nominative inhaerens), present participle of inhaerere be closely
connected with, literally adhere to, from in- in (see in- (2)) + haerere to stick (see hesitation).
Related: Inherently.


inherit (v.)

c.1300, to make (someone) an heir, from Old French enheriter make heir, appoint as heir, from Late
Latin inhereditare to appoint as heir, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + hereditare to inherit, from
heres (genitive heredis) heir (see heredity). Sense of receive inheritance arose mid-14c.; original
sense is retained in disinherit. Related: Inherited; inheriting.


inheritance (n.)

late 14c., enheritaunce fact of receiving by hereditary succession; early 15c. as that which is
inherited, from Anglo-French enheritance, Old French enheritaunce, from enheriter (see inherit).
Heritance act of inheriting is from mid-15c.


inhibit (v.)

early 15c., to forbid, prohibit, back-formation from inhibition or else from Latin inhibitus, past
participle of inhibere to hold in, hold back, keep back (see inhibition). Psychological sense (1876)
is from earlier, softened meaning of restrain, check, hinder (1530s). Related: Inhibited;
inhibiting.


inhibition (n.)

late 14c., formal prohibition; interdiction of legal proceedings by authority; also, the document
setting forth such a prohibition, from Old French inibicion and directly from Latin inhibitionem
(nominative inhibitio) a restraining, from past participle stem of inhibere to hold in, hold back,
keep back, from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + habere to hold (see habit (n.)). Psychological sense of
involuntary check on an expression of an impulse is from 1876.


inhibitor (n.)

1868 in scientific use (earlier as a Scottish legal term), agent noun in Latin form from inhibit.


inhibitory (adj.)

late 15c., from Medieval Latin inhibitorius, from past participle stem of Latin inhibere (see
inhibition).


inhospitable (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French inhospitable (15c.), from Medieval Latin inhospitabilis (equivalent of
Latin inhospitalis), from in- not (see in- (1)) + Medieval Latin hospitabilis (see hospitable).


inhouse (adj.)

also in-house, 1955, from in + house.


inhuman (adj.)

mid-15c., cruel, from Latin inhumanus inhuman, savage, cruel, rude, barbarous, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + humanus human (see human). Spelled inhumane till 18c. (see humane).


inhumane (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin inhumanus (see inhuman). Originally a variant spelling and pronunciation of
inhuman, it appears to have died out 17c. but been revived c.1822 as a negative form of humane.


inhumanity (n.)

late 15c., from French inhumanit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Latin inhumanitatem (nominative
inhumanitas) inhuman conduct, savageness, noun of quality from inhumanus (see inhuman).    And Man,
whose heav'n-erected face   The smiles of love adorn,--   Man's inhumanity to man   Makes countless
thousands mourn!  [Robert Burns, Man was Made to Mourn, 1784]


inhumation (n.)

1630s, noun of action from Latin inhumare (see inhume).


inhume (v.)

c.1600 (implied in inhumed), from Latin inhumare to bury, literally to put into the ground, from in-
in (see in- (2)) + humus earth, soil (see humus).


Inigo

masc. proper name, from Spanish I&ntilde;igo, probably from Latin Ignatius.


inimical (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin inimicalis hostile, from Latin inimicus unfriendly, an enemy (see enemy).


inimitability (n.)

1711, from inimitable + -ity.


inimitable (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin inimitabilis that cannot be imitated, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1))
+ imitabilis (see imitable). Related: Inimitably.


iniquitous (adj.)

1726, from iniquity + -ous. Related: Iniquitously.


iniquity (n.)

c.1300, hostility, malevolence; a hostile action, from Old French iniquit&eacute; wickedness,
unfavorable situation, from Latin iniquitatem (nominative iniquitas) unequalness, unevenness,
injustice, noun of quality from iniquus unjust, unequal; slanting, steep, from in- not (see in- (1))
+ aequus just, equal (see equal (adj.)). For vowel change, see acquisition. Meaning evil, wickedness
is from late 14c.


initial (adj.)

1520s, of or pertaining to a beginning, from Middle French initial or directly from Latin initialis
initial, incipient, from initium a beginning, an entrance, from past participle stem of inire to go
into, enter upon, begin, from in- into, in (see in- (2)) + ire to go (see ion).


initial (n.)

initial letter of a name or surname, 1620s, from initial (adj.) in a specialized sense standing at
the beginning of a word, sentence, etc.


initial (v.)

to mark or sign with initials, 1864, American English, from initial (n.). Related: Initialed;
initialing.


initialism (n.)

word formed from the first letters of other words or a phrase, 1957, from initial (n.) + -ism. The
distinction from acronym is not universally agreed-upon; in general, words such as NATO, where the
letters form a word, are regarded as acronyms, those such as FBI, where the letters sound as
letters, are initialisms. The use of acronym in entries in this dictionary that are technically
initialisms is a deliberate error, because many people only know to search for all such words under
acronym.


initialize (v.)

1833, to designate by initials, from initial + -ize. Meaning to make ready for operation is from
1957. Related: Initialized; initializing.


initiate (n.)

one who has been initiated, 1811, from past participle adjective initiate (c.1600); see initiate
(v.).


initiate (v.)

c.1600, introduce to some practice or system, also begin, set going, from Latin initiatus, past
participle of initiare to begin, originate, from initium beginning (see initial). In some senses a
back-formation from initiation. Related: Initiated; initiates; initiating; initiator.


initiation (n.)

1580s, from Middle French initiation or directly from Latin initiationem (nominative initiatio)
participation in secret rites, noun of action from past participle stem of initiare originate,
initiate, from initium (see initial).


initiative (n.)

1793, that which begins, also power of initiating, from French initiative (1560s), from Latin
initiatus (see initiation). First attested in English in writings of William Godwin. Phrase take the
initiative recorded by 1844.


initiatory (adj.)

1610s, from Latin initiat-, stem of initiare (see initiate (v.)) + -ory.


inject (v.)

c.1600, from Latin iniectus a casting on, throwing over, past participle of inicere to throw in or
on, from in- in (see in- (2)) + -icere, comb. form of iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Related:
Injectable; injected; injecting.


injection (n.)

forcing a fluid into a body (with a syringe, etc.), early 15c., from Middle French iniection (14c.)
or directly from Latin iniectionem (nominative iniectio), noun of action from past participle stem
of inicere (see inject).


injudicious (adj.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + judicious. Related: Injudiciously.


Injun (n.)

1812 (from 1683 as Ingin), spelling representing American English colloquial pronunciation of Indian
(q.v.). Honest Injun as an asseveration of truthfuless first recorded 1868, from the notion of
assurance extracted from Indians of their lack of duplicity.    Honest Injun? inquired Mr. Wilder,
using a Western phrase equivalent to demanding of the narrator of a story whether he is strictly
adhering to the truth. [The Genial Showman, London, 1870]    The term honest Indian is attested from
1676.


injunction (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin injunctionem (nominative injunctio) a command, noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin injungere impose, literally attach to (see enjoin).


injunctive

1620s, from Latin injunct-, past participle stem of injungere (see enjoin) + -ive. As a term in
grammar, from 1910.


injure (v.)

mid-15c., do an injustice to, dishonor, probably a back-formation from injury, or else from Middle
French injuriier, from Latin injurare. Injury also served as a verb (late 15c.). Related: Injured;
injuring.


injurious (adj.)

early 15c., abusive, from Middle French injurios (14c., Modern French injurieux) and directly from
Latin injuriosus unlawful, wrongful, harmful, noxious, from injuria (see injury). Related:
Injuriously.


injury (n.)

late 14c., harm, damage, loss; a specific injury, from Anglo-French injurie wrongful action, from
Latin injuria wrong, hurt, injustice, insult, noun use of fem. of injurius wrongful, unjust, from
in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + ius (genitive iuris) right, law (see jurist).


injustice (n.)

late 14c., from Old French injustice, from Latin injustitia injustice, from injustus unjust,
wrongful, oppressive, from in- not (see in- (1)) + justus just (see just (adj.)).


ink (n.)

the black liquor with which men write [Johnson], mid-13c., from Old French enque dark writing fluid
(11c.), from Late Latin encaustum, from Greek enkauston purple or red ink, used by the Roman
emperors to sign documents, originally a neuter adjective form of enkaustos burned in, from stem of
enkaiein to burn in, from en- in + kaiein to burn (see caustic). The word is from a Greek method of
applying colored wax and fixing it with heat. The Old English word for it was simply bl&aelig;c,
literally black. Ink-blot test attested from 1928.


ink (v.)

to mark or stain in ink, 1560s, from ink (n.). Meaning to cover (a printing plate, etc.) with ink is
from 1727. Related: Inked; inking.


inkhorn (n.)

late 14c., small portable vessel (originally made of horn) for holding ink, from ink (n.) + horn
(n.). Used attributively as an adjective for things (especially vocabulary) supposed to be beloved
by scribblers and bookworms (1540s). An Old English word for the thing was bl&aelig;chorn.


inkling (n.)

c.1400, apparently from the gerund of Middle English verb inclen utter in an undertone, hint at,
hint (mid-14c.), which is of unknown origin; perhaps related to Old English inca doubt, suspicion.


inky (adj.)

as black as ink, 1590s, from ink (n.) + -y (2). Related: Inkily; inkiness.


inlaid (adj.)

1590s, from in + laid, past participle of lay (v.).


inland (adj.)

Old English inn lond land around the mansion of an estate, from in + land (n.). Meaning interior
parts of a country, remote from the sea or borders is from 1570s. As an adjective, of or pertaining
to interior parts of a country, from 1550s.


inlandish (adj.)

1650s, produced at home, domestic, native, from inland + -ish. Also characteristic of inland regions
(1849).


inlay

1590s (v.), 1650s (n.), from in + lay. Related: Inlaid.


inlet (n.)

1570s, narrow opening into a coast, arm of the sea, a special use of Middle English inleten to let
in (c.1300), from in + let (v.). In this sense said by old sources to be originally a Kentish term.


inline (adj.)

1923 of printing, 1929 of engines, 1958 of computers, by 1989 of roller skates; from in + line (n.).


inly (adv.)

Old English inlice internally; sincerely; see in + -ly (2).


inmate (n.)

1580s, one allowed to live in a house rented by another (usually for a consideration), from in
inside + mate companion. Sense of one confined to an institution is first attested 1834.


inmost (adj.)

Old English innemest; see in + -most.


inn (n.)

Old English inn lodging, dwelling, house, probably from inne (adv.) inside, within (see in). Meaning
public house with lodging is perhaps by c.1200, certainly by c.1400. Meaning lodging house or
residence for students is early 13c. in Anglo-Latin, obsolete except in names of buildings that were
so used (such as Inns of Court, mid-15c.).


innards (n.)

1825, innerds, dialectal variant of inwards the bowels (c.1300); see inward.


innate (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin innatus inborn, past participle of innasci to be born in, originate in,
from in- in (see in- (2)) + nasci to be born (Old Latin gnasci; see genus). Related: Innately.


inner (adj.)

c.1400, from Old English inra, comparative of inne (adv.) inside (see in). Similar formation in Old
High German innaro, German inner. An unusual evolution for a comparative, it has not been used with
than since Middle English. Inner tube in the pneumatic tire sense is from 1894. Inner city, in
reference to poverty and crime, is attested from 1968.


innermost (adj.)

mid-14c., from inner + -most. Innermore also existed in Middle English.


innervate (v.)

1870, from in- (2) in + Latin nervus (see nerve) + -ate. Probably rather a back-formation from
innervation (1832). Related: Innervated. Innervation in psychology is from 1880.


innie (n.)

in reference to navels, by 1972, from in (adv.) + -ie.


inning (n.)

Old English innung a taking in, a putting in, gerundive of innian get within, put or bring in, from
inn (adv.) in (see in). Meaning a team's turn in a game first recorded 1735, usually plural in
cricket, singular in baseball.


innkeeper (n.)

1540s, from inn + keeper.


innocence (n.)

mid-14c., freedom from guilt, from Old French inocence innocence, purity, chastity (12c.), from
Latin innocentia, from innocens harmless, blameless (see innocent). Meaning lacking in guile or
artifice is from late 14c.


innocense (n.)

alternative spelling of innocence.


innocent (adj.)

mid-14c., doing no evil, free from sin or guilt, from Old French inocent harmless; not guilty; pure
(11c.), from Latin innocentem (nominative innocens) not guilty, harmless, blameless, from in- not
(see in- (1)) + nocentem (nominative nocens), present participle of nocere to harm (see noxious).
Meaning free from guilt of a specific crime or charge is from late 14c. The earliest use was as a
noun, person who is innocent of sin or evil (c.1200). The Holy Innocents (early 14c.) were the young
children slain by Herod sfter the birth of Jesus (Matt. ii:16).


innocently (adv.)

c.1400, from innocent (adj.) + -ly (2).


innocuous (adj.)

1590s, from Latin innocuus harmless, from in- not (see in- (1)) + nocuus hurtful, from root of
nocere to injure, harm, from *nok-s-, suffixed form of PIE root *nek- (1) death (see necro-).
Related: Innocuously; innocuousness.


innovate (v.)

1540s, introduce as new, from Latin innovatus, past participle of innovare to renew, restore; to
change, from in- into (see in- (2)) + novus new (see new). Meaning make changes in something
established is from 1590s. Related: Innovated; innovating.


innovation (n.)

mid-15c., restoration, renewal, from Latin innovationem (nominative innovatio), noun of action from
past participle stem of innovare (see innovate).


innovative (adj.)

1806 (with an isolated use from c.1600), from innovate + -ive. Related: Innovatively;
innovativeness.


innovator (n.)

1590s, from Late Latin innovator, agent noun from innovare (see innovate).


innuendo (n.)

1670s, oblique hint, indiscreet suggestion, usually a deprecatory one, from Latin innuendo by
meaning, pointing to, literally giving a nod to, ablative of gerund of innuere to mean, signify,
literally to nod to, from in- at + nuere to nod (see numinous). Originally a legal phrase (1560s)
from Medieval Latin, with the sense of to wit. It often introduced the derogatory meaning alleged in
libel cases, which influenced its broader meaning. As a verb, from 1706.


Innuit

1765, from Inupiaq Eskimo inuit people, plural of inuk man, person.


innumerable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin innumerabilis countless, immeasurable, from in- not (see in- (1)) + numerabilis
able to be numbered, from numerare to count, number, from numerus a number (see number (n.)).


inobservant (adj.)

1660s, from Latin inobservantem (nominative inobservans) inattentive, negligent, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + observans (see observance).


inoculate (v.)

mid-15c., implant a bud into a plant, from Latin inoculatus, past participle of inoculare graft in,
implant, from in- in (see in- (2)) + oculus bud, originally eye (see eye (n.)). Meaning implant
germs of a disease to produce immunity first recorded (in inoculation) 1714, originally in reference
to smallpox. After 1799, often used in sense of to vaccine inoculate. Related: Inoculated;
inoculating.


inoculation (n.)

mid-15c. in horticulture; 1714 in pathology, from Latin inoculationem (nominative inoculatio) an
engrafting, budding, noun of action from past participle stem of inoculare (see inoculate).


inoffensive (adj.)

1590s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + offensive. Related: Inoffensively; inoffensiveness.


inoperable (adj.)

1856, from in- (1) not, opposite of + operable.


inoperative (adj.)

1630s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + operative.


inopportune (adj.)

1530s, from Late Latin inopportunus unfitting, from in- not + opportunus (see opportune). A rare
word before 19c. Related: Inopportunely.


inordinate (adj.)

late 14c., not ordered, lacking order or regularity, from Latin inordinatus unordered, not arranged,
from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + ordinatus, past participle of ordinare to set in order
(see order). Sense of immoderate, excessive is from notion of not kept within orderly limits.
Related: Inordinately; inordinateness.


inorganic (adj.)

1794, without organized organic structure, from in- (1) not, opposite of + organic. Sense of not
arriving by natural growth recorded from 1862.


inpatient

1760 (n.); 1959 (adj.), from in + patient.


input (n.)

1793, a sum (of cash) put in, from in + put. Computing sense of data fed into a machine is from
1948; the verb in the computing sense is attested from 1946. There was a Middle English verb input
(late 14c.) meaning to put in, place, set, but it died out long before this.


inquest (n.)

late 13c., an-queste legal or judicial inquiry, from Old French enqueste inquiry, from Vulgar Latin
*inquaestia (source also of Italian inchiesta), from fem. past participle of Vulgar Latin *inquirere
inquire (see inquire).


inquire (v.)

late 13c., from Old French enquerre ask, inquire about (Modern French enqu&eacute;rir), from Vulgar
Latin *inquaerere, from Latin in- into (see in- (2)) + quaerere ask, seek (see query (v.)).
Respelled 14c. on Latin model, but half-Latinized enquire still persists. Related: Inquired;
inquiring; inquiringly.


inquirer (n.)

1560s, one who inquires, agent noun from inquire.


inquiry (n.)

mid-15c., enquery, from enquere (see inquire). Respelled from mid-16c. to conform to Latin.


inquisition (n.)

late 14c., judicial investigation, act or process of inquiring, from Old French inquisicion inquiry,
investigation (12c.), from Latin inquisitionem (nominative inquisitio) a searching into, legal
examination, noun of action from past participle stem of inquirere (see inquire).    In Church
history, inquisitors were appointed from 382 C.E. to root out heretics, and the Inquisition refers
to the ecclesiastical court (Congregation of the Holy Office) appointed 13c. by Innocent III to
suppress heresy. It never operated in Britain. The capital letter form appeared in English only
after c.1500, and usually refers to the office's reorganization 1478-1483 in Spain as what is
commonly called the Spanish Inquisition.


inquisitive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French inquisitif, from Late Latin inquisitivus making inquiry, from Latin
inquisit-, past participle stem of inquirere (see inquire).An housbonde shal nat been Inquisityf of
goddes pryuetee nor of his wyf. [Chaucer, Miller's Prologue]  Related: Inquisitively;
inquisitiveness.


inquisitor (n.)

c.1400, from Old French inquisiteur (c.1400) or directly from Latin inquisitor searcher, examiner,
in law, an investigator, collector of evidence, agent noun from Latin inquirere (see inquire). As
the title of an officer of the Inquisition, from 1540s. Related: Inquisitorial.


inro

1610s, from Japanese, from Chinese yin seal + lung basket.


inroad (n.)

1540s, hostile incursion, raid, foray, from in- (2) in; second element is road in the obsolete sense
of riding; related to raid. Related: Inroads.


insalubrious (adj.)

1630s, from Latin insalubris unhealthy, unwholesome, from in- not (see in- (1)) + salubris (see
salubrious).


insane (adj.)

1550s, from Latin insanus mad, insane; outrageous, excessive, extravagant, from in- not (see in-
(1)) + sanus well, healthy, sane (see sane). Originally only of persons; of actions, from 1842.
Compare lunatic; and Italian pazzo insane, originally a euphemism, from Latin patiens suffering.
German verr&uuml;ckt, literally past participle of verr&uuml;cken to displace, applied to the brain
as to a clock that is 'out of order'  [Buck]. The noun meaning insane person is attested from 1786.


insanity (n.)

1580s, state of being insane, from Latin insanitatem (nominative insanitas) unhealthfulness, noun of
quality from insanus (see insane). Meaning extreme folly is from 1844.


insatiability (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin insatiabilitas, from insatiabilis (see insatiable).


insatiable (adj.)

early 15c., insaciable, from Old French insaciable (13c.), or directly from Late Latin insatiabilis
not to be satisfied, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + satiabilis, from satiare (see
satiate). Related: Insatiably.


insatiate (adj.)

mid-15c., insaciate, from Latin insatiatus unsatisfied, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
satiatus, past participle of satiare (see satiate).


inscribe (v.)

1550s (form inscriven is from late 14c.), from Latin inscribere to write in or on, (see
inscription). Meaning to dedicate (by means of an inscription) is from 1640s. Related: Inscribed;
inscribing.


inscription (n.)

late 14c., from Latin inscriptionem (nominative inscriptio) a writing upon, inscription, noun of
action from past participle stem of inscribere inscribe, to write on or in anything, from in- in
(see in- (2)) + scribere to write (see script (n.)).


inscrutability (n.)

1650s, from inscrutable + -ity.


inscrutable (adj.)

c.1500, from Late Latin inscrutabilis, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + scrutabilis, from
scrutari examine, ransack (see scrutiny). Related: Inscrutably.


insect (n.)

c.1600, from Latin (animal) insectum (animal) with a notched or divided body, literally cut into,
from neuter past participle of insectare to cut into, to cut up, from in- into (see in- (2)) +
secare to cut (see section (n.)). Pliny's loan-translation of Greek entomon insect (see entomology),
which was Aristotle's term for this class of life, in reference to their notched bodies.    First in
English in 1601 in Holland's translation of Pliny. Translations of Aristotle's term also form the
usual word for insect in Welsh (trychfil, from trychu cut + mil animal), Serbo-Croatian (zareznik,
from rezati cut), Russian (nasekomoe, from sekat cut), etc.


insecticide (n.)

substance which kills insects, 1865, from insect + -cide.


insectivore (n.)

1863, from French insectivore (1817), from Latin insectivorus, from comb. form of insectum (see
insect) + vorare devour, swallow (see voracity).


insecure (adj.)

1640s, unsafe, from Medieval Latin insecurus, from in- not (see in- (1)) + Latin securus (see
secure). Psychological sense dates from 1935; insecurity in this sense dates from 1917. Related:
Insecurely.


insecurity (n.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin insecuritas, from insecurus (see insecure). Specific psychological sense
is by 1917.


inseminate (v.)

1620s, to cast as seed, from Latin inseminatus, past participle of inseminare to sow, implant, from
in- in (see in- (2)) + semen (genitive semenis) seed. Meaning to impregnate with semen is attested
from 1923. Related: Inseminated; inseminating.


insemination (n.)

1650s, action of sowing, noun of action from inseminate. Meaning infusion of semen is from 1860.


insensate (adj.)

1510s, from Late Latin insensatus irrational, foolish, from Latin in- not (see in- (1)) + sensatus
gifted with sense (see sensate). Insensate means not capable of feeling sensation, often inanimate;
insensible means lacking the power to feel with the senses, hence, often, unconscious; insensitive
means having little or no reaction to what is perceived by one's senses, often tactless.


insense (v.)

cause (someone) to understand, c.1400, ensense, from Old French ensenser to enlighten, to bring to
sense, from en- in (see in- (2)) + sens (see sense (n.)). Restricted to Northern English dialect
from 17c.


insensibility (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin insensibilitas, from Latin insensibilis (see insensible).


insensible (adj.)

c.1400, lacking the power to feel with the senses, from Latin insensibilis that cannot be felt, from
in- not (see in- (1)) + sensibilis (see sensible). Also sometimes in Middle English incapable of
being felt or perceived by the senses (early 15c.). Meaning unconscious is attested from early 15c.
See insensate.


insensibly (adv.)

early 15c.; see insensible + -ly (2).


insensitive (adj.)

c.1600, having little or no reaction to what is perceived by one's senses, from in- (1) not,
opposite of + sensitive. For sense, see insensate. Meaning without consideration for the feelings of
others attested by 1975. Related: Insensitively.


inseparability (n.)

1620s, from Late Latin inseparabilitas, from Latin inseparabilis (see inseparable).


inseparable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin inseparabilis that cannot be separated, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1))
+ separabilis, from separare (see separate (v.)). Related: Inseparably.


insert (v.)

to set in, put or place in, 1520s, from insert, past participle of Middle English inseren to set in
place, to graft, to introduce (into the mind) (late 14c.), from Latin inserere to put in, implant,
from in- in (see in- (2)) + serere join together (see series). Related: Inserted; inserting. The
noun meaning something inserted is from 1893.


insertion (n.)

1590s, act of putting in, from Late Latin insertionem (nominative insertio), noun of action from
past participle stem of inserere (see insert). Meaning that which is inserted attested from 1620s.


inservice (adj.)

also in-service, 1928, from in + service.


inset (n.)

1550s, influx of water, place where water flows in, from in + set (n.2). Meaning extra pages of a
book, etc. is from 1875; that of small map in the border of a larger one is from 1881.


inshallah

1857, phonetic spelling of Arabic in sha Allah if Allah wills (it).


inside (n.)

late 14c., ynneside interior of the body, compound of in (adv.) + side (n.). The adjective is 1610s,
from the noun. Inside job robbery, espionage, etc., committed by or with the help of a resident or
servant of a place is attested by 1887, American English (also, late 19c., early 20c., indoors
work). Inside track advantage is metaphoric because those lanes are shorter on a curved track.
Inside of, in reference to time, is from 1839.


inside-out (adj.)

with the in side being out, c.1600, from inside + out (adv.).


insider (n.)

one in possession of special information by virtue of being within some organization, 1848, from
inside + -er (1). Originally in reference to the stock markets.


insidious (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French insidieux (15c.) or directly from Latin insidiosus deceitful, cunning,
artful, from insidiae (plural) plot, snare, ambush, from insidere sit on, occupy, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). Related: Insidiously; insidiousness.


insight (n.)

c.1200, innsihht, sight with the eyes of the mind, mental vision, understanding, from in + sight.
Sense shaded into penetrating understanding into character or hidden nature (1580s).


insightful (adj.)

1881, from insight + -ful. Related: Insightfully; insightfulness.


insignia (n.)

1640s, from Latin insignia, neuter plural of insigne badge, mark, from in- in (see in- (2)) + signum
mark (see sign). Singular is insigne.


insignificance (n.)

1690s, from insignificant + -ance. Related: Insignificancy (1650s).


insignificant (adj.)

1650s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + significant. Related: Insignificantly.


insincere (adj.)

1620s (implied in insincerely), from Latin insincerus not genuine, not pure, adulterated, from in-
not (see in- (1)) + sincerus (see sincere).


insincerity (n.)

1540s, from Latin insincerus (see insincere) + -ity.


insinuate (v.)

1520s, from Latin insinuatus, past participle of insinuare to throw in, push in, make a way; creep
in, intrude, bring in by windings and curvings, wind one's way into, from in- in (see in- (2)) +
sinuare to wind, bend, curve, from sinus a curve, winding (see sinus). Sense of to introduce
tortuously or indirectly is from 1640s. Related: Insinuated; insinuating; insinuatingly.


insinuation (n.)

1520s, from Latin insinuationem (nominative insinuatio) entrance through a narrow way; an
ingratiating oneself, noun of action from past participle stem of insinuare (see insinuate).


insipid (adj.)

1610s, without taste or perceptible flavor, from French insipide (16c.), from Late Latin inspidus
tasteless, from Latin in- not (see in- (1)) + sapidus tasty, from sapere have a taste (also be wise;
see sapient). Figurative meaning uninteresting, dull first recorded 1640s, but it was also a
secondary sense in Medieval Latin.In ye coach ... went Mrs. Barlow, the King's mistress and mother
to ye Duke of Monmouth, a browne, beautifull, bold, but insipid creature. [John Evelyn, diary, Aug.
18, 1649]  Related: Insipidly.


insipidity (n.)

c.1600, from insipid + -ity.


insipience (n.)

early 15c., lack of wisdom, foolishness, from Old French insipience, from Latin insipientia folly,
from insipientem (see insipient).


insipient (adj.)

foolish, mid-15c., from Latin insipientem (nominative insipiens) unwise, foolish, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + sapientem (see sapient). Now mostly, or wholly, disused to avoid confusion with incipient
[OED].


insist (v.)

1580s, from Latin insistere persist, dwell upon, stand upon, from in- upon (see in- (2)) + sistere
take a stand (see assist). Perhaps in some cases a back-formation from insistence. Related:
Insisted; insisting.


insistence (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French insister (see insist) + -ence.


insistent (adj.)

1620s, standing on something, from Latin insistentem (nominative insistens), present participle of
insistere (see insist). Meaning dwelling firmly on something asserted is from 1868. Related:
Insistently.


insobriety (n.)

1610s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + sobriety.


insolate (v.)

to expose to the rays of the sun, 1620s, from Latin insolatus, past participle of insolare, from in-
in (see in- (2)) + sol sun (see Sol). Related: Insolated; insolation.


insole (n.)

1850s, from in + sole.


insolence (n.)

late 14c., from Latin insolentia unusualness, haughtiness, arrogance, from insolentem (see
insolent).


insolent (adj.)

late 14c., contemptuous, arrogant, haughty, from Latin insolentem (nominative insolens) arrogant,
immoderate, literally unusual, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + solentem, present
participle of solere be accustomed, which possibly is related to sodalis close companion, and to
suescere become used to. Meaning contemptuous of rightful authority is from 1670s. Related:
Insolently.


insolubility (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin insolubilitas, from Latin insolubilis (see insoluble).


insoluble (adj.)

late 14c., unable to be loosened, from Latin insolubilis that cannot be loosened, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + solubilis (see soluble). Figurative use, of problems, etc., is from late 14c.It was a
tacit conviction of the learned during the Middle Ages that no such thing as an insoluble question
existed. There might be matters that presented serious difficulties, but if you could lay them
before the right man -- some Arab in Spain, for instance, omniscient by reason of studies into the
details of which it was better not to inquire -- he would give you a conclusive answer. The real
trouble was only to find your man. [Gertrude Bell, The Desert and the Sown, 1907]


insolvency (n.)

1660s; see insolvent + -cy. Insolvence (1793) is rare.


insolvent (adj.)

1590s, unable to pay one's debts, from in- (1) not + Latin solventem paying (see solvent).
Originally of one who was not a trader; only traders could become bankrupt.


insomnia (n.)

1620s, insomnie, from Latin insomnia want of sleep, from insomnis sleepless, from in- not (see in-
(1)) + somnus sleep (see Somnus). The modern form is from 1758.


insomniac

1877 (adj.); 1879 (n.), from insomnia.


insomuch

late 14c. as a phrase; tending to be run together from 16c.


insouciance (n.)

1799, from French insouciant carelessness, thoughtlessness, heedlessness, from in- not (see in- (1))
+ se soucier to care, from Latin sollicitare to agitate (see solicit).


insouciant (adj.)

1829, from French insouciant careless, thoughtless, heedless, from in- not (see in- (1)) + souciant
caring, present participle of soucier to care, from Latin sollicitare to agitate (see solicit).
Related: Insouciantly.


inspect (v.)

1620s, from Latin inspectus, past participle of inspicere to look into (see inspection). Related:
Inspected; inspecting.


inspection (n.)

late 14c., from Old French inspeccion inspection, examination (13c.), from Latin inspectionem
(nominative inspectio) a looking into, noun of action from past participle stem of inspicere look
into, inspect, examine, from in- into (see in- (2)) + specere to look (see scope (n.1)).


inspector (n.)

c.1600, overseer, superintendent, from Latin inspector, agent noun from past participle stem of
inspicere (see inspection). As a police ranking between sergeant and superintendent, it dates from
1840. Related: Inspectorial. Of the 18c. feminine formations, inspectrix (1715) is earlier than
inspectress (1785).


inspiration (n.)

c.1300, immediate influence of God or a god, especially that under which the holy books were
written, from Old French inspiracion inhaling, breathing in; inspiration, from Late Latin
inspirationem (nominative inspiratio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin inspirare
inspire, inflame, blow into, from in- in (see in- (2)) + spirare to breathe (see spirit). Literal
sense act of inhaling attested in English from 1560s. Meaning one who inspires others is attested by
1867.


inspirational (adj.)

1839, influenced by inspiration; 1884, tending to inspire; see inspiration + -al (1).


inspire (v.)

mid-14c., enspiren, to fill (the mind, heart, etc., with grace, etc.); also to prompt or induce
(someone to do something), from Old French enspirer (13c.), from Latin inspirare inflame; blow into
(see inspiration), a loan-translation of Greek pnein in the Bible. General sense of influence or
animate with an idea or purpose is from late 14c. Also sometimes used in literal sense in Middle
English. Related: Inspired; inspires; inspiring.


inspirer (n.)

c.1500, agent noun from inspire.


inspissate (v.)

1620s, from Late Latin inspissatus, past participle of inspissare, from in- + spissare to thicken,
related to spissus thick (see spissitude). Related: Inspissated; inspissating.


instability (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French instabilite inconstancy, from Latin instabilitatem (nominative
instabilitas) unsteadiness, from instabilis unsteady, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
stabilis (see stable (2)).


instable (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin instabilis, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + stabilis (see stable). Now
mostly replaced by unstable.


install (v.)

early 15c., place in (ecclesiastical) office by seating in an official stall, from Medieval Latin
installare, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + Medieval Latin stallum stall, from a Germanic source
(compare Old High German stal standing place; see stall (n.1)). Related: Installed; installing.


installation (n.)

action of installing, mid-15c., of church offices or other positions, from Medieval Latin
installationem (nominative installatio), noun of action from past participle stem of installare (see
install). Of machinery, etc., act of setting up, from 1882.


installment (n.)

act of installing, 1580s, from install + -ment. Meaning arrangement of payment by fixed portions at
fixed times is from 1732, alteration of Anglo-French estaler fix payments, from Old French estal
fixed position, place, from a Germanic source akin to Old High German stal standing place (see stall
(n.1)). Figurative sense of part of a whole produced in advance of the rest is from 1823.


Instamatic

1962, proprietary name (reg. Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, N.Y.) for a type of self-loading camera,
from instant + automatic.


instance (n.)

mid-14c., urgency, from Old French instance eagerness, anxiety, solicitation (13c.), from Latin
instantia presence, effort intention; earnestness, urgency, literally a standing near, from instans
(see instant). In Scholastic logic, a fact or example (early 15c.), from Medieval Latin instantia,
used to translate Greek enstasis. This led to use in phrase for instance as an example (1650s), and
the noun phrase To give (someone) a for instance (1953, American English).


instant (n.)

late 14c., infinitely short space of time, from Old French instant (adj.) assiduous, at hand, from
Medieval Latin instantem (nominative instans), in classical Latin present, pressing, urgent,
literally standing near, present participle of instare to urge, to stand near, be present (to urge
one's case), from in- in (see in- (2)) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Elliptical use of the French adjective as a noun.


instant (adj.)

mid-15c., present, urgent, from Old French instant (14c.), from Latin instantem (nominative instans)
pressing, urgent, literally standing near (see instant (n.)). Meaning now, present is from 1540s,
and led to the use of the word in dating of correspondence, in reference to the current month, often
abbreviated inst. and persisting at least into the mid-19c. Thus 16th inst. means sixteenth of the
current month. Sense of immediately is from 1590s. Of foods, by 1912. Televised sports instant
replay attested by 1965. Instant messaging attested by 1994.


instantaneous (adj.)

1640s (implied in instantaneously), formed in English from Medieval Latin *instantaneus, from
instantem (see instant (n.)) on model of spontaneous. Related: Instantaneousness.


instantiate (v.)

1946, from instant (Latin instantia) + -ate. Related: Instantiated; instantiation.


instantly (adv.)

late 15c., urgently, persistently, from instant (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning immediately is 1550s.


instate (v.)

to put someone in a certain state or condition, c.1600, from in + state (n.1). Related: Instated;
instating.


instatement (n.)

1670s, from instate + -ment.


instead (adv.)

1590s, from Middle English ine stede (early 13c.; see stead); loan-translation of Latin in loco
(French en lieu de). Still often two words until c.1640.


instep (n.)

mid-15c., apparently from in + step, though this hardly makes sense [Weekley]. An Old English word
for instep was fotwelm. Middle English also had a verb instep to track, trace (c.1400).


instigate (v.)

1540s, back-formation from instigation or else from Latin instigatus, past participle of instigare
to urge on, incite (see instigation). Related: Instigated; instigates; instigating.


instigation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French instigation and directly from Latin instigationem (nominative
instigatio), noun of action from past participle stem of instigare urge on, incite, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + *stigare, a root meaning to prick, from PIE root *steig- to prick, stick, pierce (see
stick (v.)).


instigator (n.)

1590s, from Latin instigator, agent noun from instigare (see instigation). Fem. formation
instigatrix is recorded from 1610s.


instill (v.)

also instil, early 15c., to introduce (liquid, feelings, etc.) little by little, from Latin
instillare put in by drops, to drop, trickle, from in- in (see in- (2)) + stilla a drop (see
distill). Related: Instilled; instilling.


instillation (n.)

1540s, from Latin instillationem (nominative instillatio) a dropping in, noun of action from past
participle stem of instillare (see instill).


instinct (n.)

early 15c., a prompting, from Latin instinctus instigation, impulse, noun use of past participle of
instinguere to incite, impel, from in- on (see in- (2)) + stinguere prick, goad, from PIE *steig- to
prick, stick, pierce (see stick (v.)). Meaning animal faculty of intuitive perception is from mid-
15c., from notion of natural prompting. Sense of innate tendency is first recorded 1560s.


instinctive (adj.)

1610s (implied in instinctively), from Latin instinct-, past participle stem of instinguere (see
instinct) + -ive. Related: Instinctiveness.


instinctual (adj.)

1841, from instinct (Latin instinctus) + -al (1). Related: Instinctually.


institute (v.)

early 14c., to establish in office, appoint, from Latin institutus, past participle of instituere to
set up, from in- in (see in- (2)) + statuere establish, to cause to stand, from PIE root *sta- to
stand, with derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). General sense of set up,
found, introduce first attested late 15c. Related: Instituted; instituting.


institute (n.)

1510s, purpose, design, from institute (v.). From 1540s as an established law. The sense of
organization, society is from 1828, borrowed from French Institut national des Sciences et des Arts,
established 1795 to replace the royal academies, from Latin institutum, neuter past participle of
instituere.


institution (n.)

c.1400, action of establishing or founding (a system of government, a religious order, etc.), from
Old French institucion foundation; thing established, from Latin institutionem (nominative
institutio) disposition, arrangement; instruction, education, noun of state from institutus (see
institute). Meaning established law or practice is from 1550s. Meaning establishment or organization
for the promotion of some charity is from 1707.


institutional (adj.)

1610s, from institution + -al (1).


institutionalization (n.)

1911, from institutionalize + -ation.


institutionalize (v.)

to put into institutional life (usually deprecatory), 1905; see institution. Related:
Institutionalized. Earlier (1865) it meant to make into an institution.


instruct (v.)

early 15c., from Latin instructus, past participle of instruere arrange, inform, teach, literally to
build, erect, from in- on (see in- (2)) + struere to pile, build (see structure (n.)). Related:
Instructed; instructing.


instruction (n.)

c.1400, instruccioun, action or process of teaching, from Old French instruccion (14c.), from Latin
instructionem (nominative instructio) building, arrangement, teaching, from past participle stem of
instruere arrange, inform, teach, from in- on (see in- (2)) + struere to pile, build (see structure
(n.)). Meaning an authoritative direction telling someone what to do; a document giving such
directions, is early 15c. Related: Instructions.


instructional (adj.)

1801, from instruction + -al (1).


instructive (adj.)

1610s, from instruct + -ive. Related: Instructively; instructiveness.


instructor (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French instructeur and directly from Medieval Latin instructor teacher (in
classical Latin, preparer), agent noun from instruere (see instruct).


instrument (n.)

late 13c., musical instrument, from Old French instrument means, device; musical instrument (14c.,
earlier estrument, 13c.) and directly from Latin instrumentem a tool, apparatus, furniture, dress,
document, from instruere arrange, furnish (see instruct). Meaning tool, implement, utensil is early
14c. in English; meaning written document by which formal expression is given to a legal act is from
early 15c.


instrumental (adj.)

late 14c., of the nature of an instrument, from Old French instrumental, from Medieval Latin
instrumentalis, from Latin instrumentum (see instrument). Meaning serviceable, useful is from
c.1600. Of music, c.1500; noun meaning musical composition for instruments only is attested by 1940.
Related: Instrumentally; instrumentality.


instrumentalist (n.)

1823, from instrumental in the musical sense + -ist.


instrumentation (n.)

composition and arrangement of music for instruments, 1845, from French instrumentation, from
instrument (see instrument) + -ation.


insubordinate (adj.)

1849, on model of French insubordonn&eacute; (1789); from in- (1) not, opposite of + subordinate.
Related: Insubordinately.


insubordination (n.)

1790, from in- (1) not, opposite of + subordination. Perhaps on model of French insubordination
(1788).


insubstantial (adj.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin insubstantialis, from in- not (see in- (1)) + substantialis (see
substantial). Related: Insubstantially.


insubstantiality (n.)

1827, from insubstantial + -ity.


insue (v.)

obsolete form of ensue.


insufferable (adj.)

early 15c., from in- (1) not, opposite of + sufferable (see suffer). Related: Insufferably.


insufficiency (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin insufficientia, noun of quality from insufficientem (see insufficient).
Insufficience deficiency is from early 15c.


insufficient (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French insufficient (14c.), from Latin insufficientem (nominative insufficiens)
insufficient, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + sufficientem (see sufficient). Originally of
persons, inadequate, unable; of things, from late 15c. Related: Insufficiently.


insula (n.)

Latin, literally an island (also, in ancient Rome, a block of buildings); see isle.


insular (adj.)

1610s, of or pertaining to an island, from Late Latin insularis, from Latin insula island (see
isle). Metaphoric sense narrow, prejudiced is 1775, from notion of being cut off from intercourse
with other nations, especially with reference to the situation of Great Britain. Earlier adjective
in the literal sense was insulan (mid-15c.), from Latin insulanus.


insularity (n.)

1755, narrowness of feelings, from insular + -ity. Literal sense attested from 1790.


insulate (v.)

1530s, make into an island, from Latin insulatus, from insula (see insular). Sense of cause a person
or thing to be detached from surroundings is from 1785. Electrical/chemical sense of block from
electricity or heat is from 1742. Related: Insulated; insulating.


insulation (n.)

1848, act of making (something) into an island, noun of action from insulate. Transferred sense
attested by 1798. Electrical sense is from 1767. The concrete sense of insulating material is
recorded by 1870.


insulator (n.)

1801, agent noun in Latin form from insulate.


insulin (n.)

1922 (earlier insuline, 1914), coined in English from Latin insula island, so called because the
hormone is secreted by the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. Insuline was coined independently
in French in 1909.


insult (v.)

1560s, triumph over in an arrogant way, from Middle French insulter (14c.) and directly from Latin
insultare to assail, to leap upon (already used by Cicero in sense of insult, scoff at, revile),
frequentative of insilire leap at or upon, from in- on, at (see in- (2)) + salire to leap (see
salient (adj.)). Sense of to verbally abuse, affront, assail with disrespect is from 1610s. Related:
Insulted; insulting.


insult (n.)

c.1600 in the sense of attack; 1670s as an act of insulting, from Middle French insult (14c.) or
directly from Late Latin insultus, from insilire (see insult (v.)). To add insult to injury
translates Latin injuriae contumeliam addere.


insuperable (adj.)

mid-14c., unconquerable, from Latin insuperabilis that cannot be passed over, unconquerable, from
in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + superabilis that may be overcome, from superare to overcome,
from superus one that is above, from super over (see super-). Figurative use from 1650s. Related:
Insuperably.


insupportable (adj.)

1520s, from French insupportable (14c.) or directly from Late Latin insupportabilis, from in- not
(see in- (1)) + Latin supportare to carry (see support).


insurance (n.)

1550s, engagement to marry, a variant of ensurance (see ensure). Commercial sense of security
against loss or death in exchange for payment is from 1650s. Assurance was the older term for this
(late 16c.).


insure (v.)

mid-15c., insuren, spelling variant of ensuren (see ensure). Took on its particular sense of make
safe against loss by payment of premiums from mid-17c. (replacing assure in that meaning). Related:
Insured; insuring.


insurer (n.)

1650s, agent noun from insure.


insurgence (n.)

1847; see insurgency + -ence.


insurgency (n.)

1803, from insurgent + -cy.


insurgent (n.)

one who rises in revolt, 1765, from Latin insurgentem (nominative insurgens), present participle of
insurgere rise up, rise against, revolt, from in- against, or perhaps merely intensive, + surgere to
rise (see surge). An obsolete verb insurge to rise in opposition or insurrection is attested from
1530s.


insurmountable (adj.)

1690s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + surmountable (see surmount). Related: Insurmountably.


insurrection (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French insurrection, from Late Latin insurrectionem (nominative insurrectio)
a rising up, noun of action from past participle stem of insurgere to rise up (see insurgent).


insurrectionary

1796 (adj.), 1893 (n.), from insurrection + -ary.


intact (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin intactus untouched, uninjured, undefiled, from in- not (see in- (1)) + tactus,
past participle of tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)).


intaglio (n.)

1640s, from Italian intaglio engraved work (plural intagli), from intagliare to cut in, engrave,
from in- in (see in- (2)) + tagliare to cut (see entail).


intail (v.)

obsolete form of entail.


intake (n.)

c.1800, place where water is taken into a channel or pipe, from verbal phrase, from in (adv.) + take
(v.). Meaning act of taking in (food, breath, etc.) is first attested 1808.


intangible (adj.)

1630s, incapable of being touched, from French intangible (c.1500) or directly from Medieval Latin
intangibilis, from in- not (see in- (1)) + Late Latin tangibilis that may be touched (see tangible).
Figurative sense of that cannot be grasped by the mind is from 1880. Noun meaning anything
intangible is from 1914. Related: Intangibly.


integer (n.)

a whole number (opposed to fraction), 1570s, from Latin integer (adj.) whole, complete,
figuratively, untainted, upright, literally untouched, from in- not (see in- (1)) + root of tangere
to touch (see tangent (adj.)). The word was used earlier in English as an adjective meaning whole,
entire (c.1500).


integral (adj.)

late 15c., of or pertaining to a whole, from Middle French int&eacute;gral (14c.), from Medieval
Latin integralis forming a whole, from Latin integer whole (see integer). Related: Integrally. As a
noun, 1610s, from the adjective.


integrate (v.)

1630s, to render (something) whole, from Latin integratus, past participle of integrare make whole,
from integer whole (see integer). Meaning to put together parts or elements and combine them into a
whole is from 1802. Integrate in the racially desegregate sense is a back-formation from
integration, dating to the 1948 U.S. presidential contest. Related: Integrated; integrating.


integrated (adj.)

1580s, combined into a whole, past participle adjective from integrate (v.). Sense of not divided by
race, etc. is from 1948.


integration (n.)

1610s, from French int&eacute;gration and directly from Latin integrationem (nominative integratio)
renewal, restoration, noun of action from past participle stem of integrare (see integrate). Anti-
discrimination sense is recorded from 1940 in a S.African context.


integrity (n.)

c.1400, innocence, blamelessness; chastity, purity, from Old French integrit&eacute; or directly
from Latin integritatem (nominative integritas) soundness, wholeness, blamelessness, from integer
whole (see integer). Sense of wholeness, perfect condition is mid-15c.


integument (n.)

1610s, from Latin integumentum a covering, from integere to cover over, from in- in, upon (see in-
(2)) + tegere to cover (see stegosaurus).


integumentary (adj.)

1826, from integument + -ary.


intellect (n.)

late 14c. (but little used before 16c.), from Old French intellecte intellectual capacity (13c.),
and directly from Latin intellectus discernment, a perception, understanding, from noun use of past
participle of intelligere to understand, discern (see intelligence).


intellectual (adj.)

late 14c., grasped by the understanding (rather than by the senses), from Old French intellectuel
and directly from Latin intellectualis relating to the understanding, from intellectus discernment,
understanding, from past participle stem of intelligere to understand, discern (see intelligence).
Intellectual property attested from 1845. Other adjective formations included intellective (late
15c.), intellectile (1670s).


intellectual (n.)

1590s, mind, intellect, from intellectual (adj.); sense of an intellectual person is from 1650s.
Related: Intellectuals.


intellectualism (n.)

1829; see intellectual + -ism. Probably based on German Intellektualismus (said by Klein to have
been coined 1803 by Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling (1775-1854) from Late Latin
intellectualis). In English, originally with reference to the doctrines of Leibnitz.


intellectuality (n.)

mid-15c., the part of the mind which understands; understanding, intellect; from Old French
intellectualit&eacute; and directly from Late Latin intellectualitas, from Latin intellectualis (see
intellectual).


intellectualization (n.)

1821, noun of action from intellectualize.


intellectualize (v.)

1819, from intellectual + -ize. Related: Intellectualized; intellectualizing.


intellectually (adv.)

late 14c., from intellectual + -ly (2).


intelligence (n.)

late 14c., faculty of understanding, from Old French intelligence (12c.), from Latin intelligentia,
intellegentia understanding, power of discerning; art, skill, taste, from intelligentem (nominative
intelligens) discerning, present participle of intelligere to understand, comprehend, from inter-
between (see inter-) + legere choose, pick out, read (see lecture (n.)).    Meaning superior
understanding, sagacity is from early 15c. Sense of information, news first recorded mid-15c.,
especially secret information from spies (1580s). Intelligence quotient first recorded 1921 (see
I.Q.).


intelligencer (n.)

1580s, spy, informant, agent noun from intelligence. Meaning bringer of news is from 1630s; as a
newspaper name from 1640s.


intelligent (adj.)

c.1500, a back-formation from intelligence or else from Latin intelligentem (nominative
intelligens), present participle of intelligere, earlier intellegere (see intelligence). Intelligent
design, as a name for an alternative to atheistic cosmology and the theory of evolution, is from
1999. Related: Intelligently.


intelligentsia (n.)

the intellectual class collectively, 1905, from Russian intelligyentsia, from Latin intelligentia
(see intelligence). Perhaps via Italian intelligenzia.


intelligibility (n.)

1670s, from intelligible + -ity.


intelligible (adj.)

late 14c., able to understand, from Latin intelligibilis, intellegibilis that can understand, that
can be understood, from intellegere to understand (see intelligence). In English, sense of capable
of being understood first recorded c.1600. Related: Intelligibly.


intemperance (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French intemperance (14c.), from Latin intemperantia intemperateness,
immoderation, excess, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + temperantia (see temperance).
Originally of climate; meaning lack of moderation in English is from 1540s.


intemperate (adj.)

characterized by excessive indulgence in a passion or appetite, late 14c., from Latin intemperatus
untempered, inclement, immoderate, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + temperantia (see
temperance). Related: Intemperately.


intend (v.)

c.1300, direct one's attention to, from Old French entendre, intendre to direct one's attention (in
Modern French principally to hear), from Latin intendere turn one's attention, strain, literally
stretch out, extend, from in- toward (see in- (2)) + tendere to stretch (see tenet). Sense of have
as a plan (late 14c.) was present in Latin. A Germanic word for this was ettle, from Old Norse
&aelig;tla to think, conjecture, propose, from Proto-Germanic *ahta consideration, attention
(cognates: Old English eaht, German acht). Intended (n.) one's intended husband or wife is from
1767.


intendant (n.)

one who has charge of some business, 1650s, from French intendant (16c.), from Latin intendantem,
present participle of intendere (see intend).


intense (adj.)

c.1400, from Middle French intense (13c.), from Latin intensus stretched, strained, tight,
originally past participle of intendere to stretch out, strain (see intend); thus, literally, high-
strung. Related: Intensely.


intensification (n.)

1847, noun of action from intensify.


intensify (v.)

1817, from intense + -ify, first attested in Coleridge, in place of intend, which he said no longer
was felt as connected with intense. Middle English used intensen (v.) to increase (something),
strengthen, intensify, early 15c. Related: Intensified; intensifying.


intension (n.)

c.1600, from Latin intensionem (nominative intensio) a stretching, straining, effort, noun of action
from past participle stem of intendere (see intend).


intensity (n.)

formed in English 1660s from intense + -ity. Earlier was intenseness (1610s). Sense of extreme depth
of feeling first recorded 1830.


intensive (adj.)

mid-15c., from French intensif (14c.), from Latin intens-, past participle stem of intendere (see
intend). As a noun, 1813, from the adjective. Alternative intensitive is a malformation. Intensive
care attested from 1958. Related: Intensively.


intent (n.)

purpose, early 13c., from Old French entente, from Latin intentus a stretching out, in Late Latin
intention, attention, noun use of past participle of intendere stretch out, lean toward, strain,
literally to stretch out  (see intend).


intent (adj.)

very attentive, late 14c., from Latin intentus attentive, eager, waiting, strained, past participle
of intendere to strain, stretch (see intend). Related: Intently.


intention (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French entencion stretching, intensity, will, thought (12c.), from Latin
intentionem (nominative intentio) a stretching out, straining, exertion, effort; attention, noun of
action from intendere to turn one's attention, literally to stretch out (see intend).


intentional (adj.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin intentionalis, from intentionem (see intention). Intentional fallacy
recorded from 1946. Related: Intentionality.


intentionally (adv.)

on purpose, 1660s; see intentional + -ly (2).


intentions (n.)

one's purposes with regard to courtship and marriage, by 1796; see intention.


intentive (adj.)

late 13c., from Old French ententif, intentif (12c.), from Late Latin intentivus, from intent-, past
participle stem of intendere (see intend).


inter (v.)

c.1300, from Old French enterer (11c.), from Medieval Latin interrare put in the earth, bury, from
Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + terra earth (see terrain). Related: Interred; interring.


inter alia

Latin, literally amongst other things. (Latin for among other persons is inter alios), from inter
among, between (see inter-).


inter-

Latin inter (prep., adv.) among, between, betwixt, in the midst of, from PIE *enter between, among
(cognates: Sanskrit antar, Old Persian antar among, between, Greek entera (plural) intestines, Old
Irish eter, Old Welsh ithr among, between, Gothic undar, Old English under under), a comparative of
*en in (see in). Also in certain Latin phrases in English, such as inter alia among other things. A
living prefix in English from 15c. Spelled entre- in French, most words borrowed into English in
that form were re-spelled 16c. to conform with Latin except entertain, enterprise.


inter-war (adj.)

1939, in reference to the period between the world wars,   from inter- + war (n.).


interact (v.)

to act on each other, 1805, from inter- + act (v.). Related: Interacted; interacting.


interaction (n.)

1812, from inter- + action.


interactive (adj.)

1832, from interact, probably on model of active. Related: Interactivity.


interbreed (v.)

1859, from inter- + breed. Related: Interbred; interbreeding.


intercalary (adj.)

1610s, from Latin intercalarius, from intercalare (see intercalate).


intercalate (v.)

to insert a day into the calendar, 1610s, from Latin intercalatus, past participle of intercalare to
proclaim the insertion of an intercalary day, from inter- between (see inter-) + calare (see
calendar). Related: Intercalated; intercalating.


intercalation (n.)

1570s, from Latin intercalationem (nominative intercalatio) insertion of an intercalary day, noun of
action from past participle stem of intercalare (see intercalate).


intercede (v.)

1570s, a back-formation from intercession, or else from Latin intercedere intervene, come between,
be between, from inter- between (see inter-) + cedere go (see cede). Related: Interceded;
interceding.


intercept (v.)

c.1400, from Latin interceptus, past participle of intercipere take or seize between, to seize in
passing, from inter- between (see inter-) + -cipere, comb. form of capere to take, catch (see
capable). Related: Intercepted; intercepting.


interception (n.)

early 15c., action of intercepting (the flow of a bodily fluid), from Latin interceptionem
(nominative interceptio) a seizing, taking away, noun of action from intercipere (see intercept).
Specific football/rugby sense is attested by 1906. Meaning action of closing in on and destroying an
enemy aircraft, etc. is recorded from 1941.


interceptor (n.)

1590s, from Latin interceptor, agent noun from intercipere (see intercept). As a type of fast
fighter aircraft, from 1930.


intercession (n.)

early 15c., act of interceding, from Latin intercessionem (nominative intercessio) a going between,
noun of action from past participle stem of intercedere (see intercede). The modern sense was not in
classical Latin.


intercessor (n.)

late 15c., from Latin intercessor one who intervenes, agent noun from intercedere (see intercede).
Related: Intercessory.


interchange (v.)

late 14c., from Old French entrechangier, from entre- (see inter-) + changier to change (see change
(v.)). Related: Interchanged; interchanging.


interchange (n.)

1540s, act of exchange, from Old French entrechange, from entrechangier (see interchange (v.)). In
reference to a type of road junction, 1944.


interchangeable (adj.)

late 14c. (implied in interchangeably), from inter- + changeable. Related: Interchangeability.


intercoastal (adj.)

within the coasts, 1927, from inter- + coastal.


intercom (n.)

1940, colloquial shortening of intercommunication (mid-15c., discussion, conference; see inter- +
communication), which is attested from 1911 in reference to systems of linked telephones.


interconnect (v.)

1863, from inter- + connect. Related: Interconnected; interconnecting; interconnectedness;
interconnection.


intercontinental (adj.)

1825, American English, from inter- + continental. Of missiles, from 1956.


intercostal (adj.)

between the ribs, 1590s; see inter- + costal.


intercourse (n.)

mid-15c., communication to and fro, from Old French entrecours exchange, commerce, from Late Latin
intercursus a running between, intervention, from intercursus, past participle of intercurrere to
run between, from Latin inter- between (see inter-) + currere to run (see current (adj.)). Meaning
sexual relations first recorded 1798, from earlier sense social contact and relations (1540s).


intercrural (adj.)

between the thighs, or in madicine, between leg-like structures, 1690s, from inter- + Latin crus
shin, shinbone leg; supports of a bridge.


interdepartmental (adj.)

also inter-departmental, 1861, from inter- + departmental.


interdependence (n.)

1822, from inter- + dependence.


interdependency (n.)

1838, from interdependent + -cy.


interdependent (adj.)

1817, from inter- + dependent.  Related: Interdependently.


interdict (v.)

late 13c., from Old French entredit, past participle of entredire forbid by decree, from Latin
interdicere interpose by speech, prohibit, from inter- between (see inter-) + dicere to speak, to
say (see diction). Related: Interdicted; interdicting.


interdiction (n.)

mid-15c., enterdiccioun, from Latin interdictionem (nominative interdictio) prohibition,
interdiction, noun of action from past participle stem of interdicere (see interdict).


interdisciplinary (adj.)

1937, from inter- + disciplinary.


interest (n.)

mid-15c., legal claim or right; concern; benefit, advantage; earlier interesse (late 14c.), from
Anglo-French interesse what one has a legal concern in, from Medieval Latin interesse compensation
for loss, noun use of Latin interresse to concern, make a difference, be of importance, literally to
be between, from inter- between (see inter-) + esse to be (see essence).    Compare German
Interesse, from the same Medieval Latin source. Form in English influenced 15c. by French interest
damage, from Latin interest it is of importance, it makes a difference, third person singular
present of interresse. Financial sense of money paid for the use of money lent (1520s) earlier was
distinguished from usury (illegal under Church law) by being in reference to compensation due from a
defaulting debtor. Meaning curiosity is first attested 1771. Interest group is attested from 1907;
interest rate by 1868.


interest (v.)

to cause to be interested, c.1600, earlier interesse (1560s), from the noun (see interest (n.)).
Perhaps also from or influenced by interess'd, past participle of interesse.


interested (adj.)

motivated by self-interest, 1705; having an interest or stake (in something); from past participle
of interest (v.).


interesting (adj.)

1711, that concerns, important, from interest (v.). Meaning so as to excite interest is from 1768.
Related: Interestingly. Euphemistic phrase interesting condition, etc., pregnant is from 1748.


interface

1882 (n.), 1967 (v.), from inter- + face. Related: Interfaced; interfacing.


interfaith (adj.)

1921, from inter- + faith.


interfere (v.)

mid-15c., to strike against, from Middle French enterferer to strike each other, from entre- between
(see entre-) + ferir to strike, from Latin ferire to knock, strike, related to Latin forare to bore,
pierce (see bore (v.), and compare punch (v.), which has both the senses to hit and to make a hole
in). Figurative sense of to meddle with, oppose unrightfully is from 1630s. Related: Interfered;
interfering.


interference (n.)

1783, formed irregularly from interfere on model of difference, etc. Broadcasting and telephoning
sense is from 1887. In chess from 1913; in U.S. football from 1894.


interferometer (n.)

instrument for measuring the interference of light waves, 1897, a hybrid from interfere + meter (3).


interferon (n.)

1957, coined in English, so called because it interferes with the reduplication of viruses. From
interfere + subatomic particle suffix -on.


intergalactic (adj.)

1928, from inter- + galactic.


intergenerational (adj.)

1964, from inter- + generation + -al (1).


interglacial (adj.)

1867, from German, coined 1865 by Swiss naturalist Oswald Heer (1809-1883); see inter- + glacial.


interim (n.)

1540s, from Latin interim (adv.) in the meantime, meanwhile, originally in the midst of that, from
inter- between (see inter-) + im, ancient adverb from stem of pronoun is this, that.


interior (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French int&eacute;rieur and directly from Latin interior inner, interior,
middle, comparative adjective of inter within (see inter-). Meaning of the interior parts of a
country is from 1777; meaning internal affairs of a country or state (as in U.S. Department of the
Interior) is from 1838. Interior decoration first attested 1807. Interior design from 1927.


interior (n.)

part of a country distant from the coast, 1796, from interior (adj.); meaning inside of a building
or room is from 1829.


interiority (n.)

1701, from interior + -ity.


interjacent (adj.)

1590s, from Latin interiacentem (nominative interiacens) lying between, present participle of
interiacere to lie between, from inter- (see inter-) + iacere (see jet (v.)).


interject (v.)

1570s, back-formation from interjection or else from Latin interiectus, past participle of
intericere to throw between, insert, interject (see interjection). Related: Interjected;
interjecting.


interjection (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French interjection (Old French interjeccion, 13c.), from Latin
interiectionem (nominative interiectio) a throwing or placing between, noun of action from past
participle stem of intericere, from inter- between (see inter-) + -icere, comb. form of iacere to
throw (see jet (v.)).


interlace (v.)

late 14c., from Middle French entrelacer, from entre- (see entre-) + lacer (see lace). Television
sense is from 1927. Related: Interlaced; interlacing. The noun is 1904, from the verb.


interlard (v.)

early 15c., to mix with alternate layers of fat (before cooking), from Middle French entrelarder,
from entre- between (see inter-) + larder to lard, from Old French lard bacon fat (see lard (n.)).
Figurative sense of diversify with something intermixed first recorded 1560s. Related: Interlarded;
interlarding.


interleague (adj.)

also inter-league, by 1917 in a U.S. baseball sense, from inter- + league. Earlier (1580s) as a
verb.


interline (v.)

c.1400, make corrections or insertions between the lines of (a document), from inter- + line;
perhaps modeled on Medieval Latin interlineare. Related: Interlined; interlining.


interlinear (adj.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin interlinearis that which is between the lines, from inter- (see
inter-) + Latin linearis (see linear).


interlock (v.)

1630s, from inter- + lock. Related: Interlocked; interlocking. As a noun, attested by 1874.


interlocution (n.)

1530s, from Latin interlocutionem (nominative interlocutio) a speaking between, interlocution, noun
of action from past participle stem of interloqui (see interlocutor).


interlocutor (n.)

1510s, agent noun from Latin interlocut-, past participle stem of interloqui interrupt, from inter-
between (see inter-) + loqui to speak (see locution). Related: Interlocutory.


interlope (v.)

early 17c., a back-formation from interloper, or else from inter- + lope (see interloper). Related:
Interloped; interloping.


interloper (n.)

1590s, enterloper, unauthorized trader trespassing on privileges of chartered companies, probably a
hybrid from inter- between + -loper (from landloper vagabond, adventurer, also, according to
Johnson, a term of reproach used by seamen of those who pass their lives on shore); perhaps a
dialectal form of leap, or from Middle Dutch loper runner, rover, from lopen to run, from Proto-
Germanic *hlaupan to leap (see leap (v.)). General sense of self-interested intruder is from 1630s.


interlude (n.)

c.1300, from Medieval Latin interludium an interlude, from Latin inter- between (see inter-) + ludus
a play (see ludicrous). Originally farcical episodes introduced between acts of long mystery plays;
transferred sense of interval in the course of some action is from 1751.


intermarriage (n.)

1570s, from inter- + marriage.


intermarry (v.)

1570s, to marry one another, from inter- + marry. Meaning to marry across families, castes, tribes,
etc. is from 1610s. Related: Intermarried; intermarrying.


intermeddle (v.)

late 14c., from Latin inter- (see inter-) + Anglo-French medler (see meddle (v.)).


intermediary

1788 (adj.); 1791 (n.), from French interm&eacute;diaire (17c.), from Medieval Latin intermedium,
from Latin intermedius (see intermediate).


intermediate (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin intermediatus lying between, from Latin intermedius that which is
between, from inter- between (see inter-) + medius in the middle (see medial (adj.)).


intermediate (v.)

c.1600, from inter- + mediate (v.). Related: Intermediated; intermediating.


interment (n.)

early 14c., from Old French enterrement, from enterrer (see inter).


intermesh (v.)

1909, from inter- + mesh.


intermezzo (n.)

1834, from Italian intermezzo short dramatic performance between the acts of a play or opera,
literally that which is between, from Latin intermedius (see intermediate).


interminable (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin interminabilis, from in- not (see in- (1)) + terminabilis, from
terminalis (see terminal (adj.)). Related: Interminably.


intermingle (v.)

late 15c., from inter- + mingle. Related: Intermingled; intermingling.


intermission (n.)

early 15c., from Latin intermissionem (nominative intermissio) interruption, noun of action from
past participle stem of intermittere to leave off, from inter- between (see inter-) + mittere let
go, send (see mission).<b>Intermission</b> is used in U.S. for what we call an interval (in a
musical or dramatic performance). Under the influence of LOVE OF THE LONG WORD, it is beginning to
infiltrate here and should be repelled; our own word does very well. [H.W. Fowler, Modern English
Usage, 1926]


intermit (v.)

1540s, from Latin intermittere to leave off, omit, suspend, interrupt, neglect, from inter- between
(see inter-) + mittere to send (see mission). Related: Intermitted; intermitting; intermittingly.


intermittence (n.)

1796; see intermittent + -ence.


intermittent (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin intermittentem (nominative intermittens), present participle of intermittere (see
intermission). Related: Intermittently.


intermix (v.)

1550s (implied in intermixed), from inter- + mix (v.). Related: Intermixed; intermixing.


intermixture (n.)

1590s; see inter- + mixture.


intermodal (adj.)

1963, from inter- + modal.


intermural (adj.)

1650s, from Latin intermuralis situated between walls, from inter- between (see inter-) + murus
(genitive muralis) wall (see mural).


intern (v.)

1866, to confine within set limits, from French interner send to the interior, confine, from Middle
French interne inner, internal, from Latin internus within, internal (see internal; also compare
intern (n.)).


intern (n.)

1879, American English, one working under supervision as part of professional training, especially
doctor in training in a hospital, from French interne assistant doctor, literally resident within a
school, from Middle French interne internal (see intern (v.)). The verb in this sense is attested
from 1933. Related: Interned; interning.


internal (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin internalis, from Latin internus within, inward, internal,
figuratively domestic, expanded from pre-Latin *interos, *interus on the inside, inward, from PIE
*en-ter- (cognates: Old Church Slavonic anter, Sanskrit antar within, between, Old High German unter
between, and the down sense of Old English under); suffixed (comparative) form of *en in (see in).
Meaning of or pertaining to the domestic affairs of a country (as in internal revenue) is from 1795.
Internal combustion first recorded 1884. Related: Internally.


internalization (n.)

1853, from internal + -ization.


internalize (v.)

1856, American English, from internal + -ize. Related: Internalized; internalizing.


international (adj.)

1780, apparently coined by Jeremy Bentham from inter- + national. In communist jargon, as a noun and
with a capital -i-, it is short for International Working Men's Association, the first of which was
founded in London by Marx in 1864. The Internationale (from fem. of French international), the
socialist hymn, was written 1871 by Eug&egrave;ne Pottier. International Date Line is from 1910.
Related: Internationally.


internationalisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of internalization (q.v.). For spelling, see -ize.


internationalism (n.)

1851, from international + -ism.


internationalization (n.)

1860, with reference to law; see international + -ization.


internecine (adj.)

1660s, deadly, destructive, from Latin internecinus very deadly, murderous, destructive, from
internecare kill or destroy, from inter (see inter-) + necare kill (see noxious). Considered in the
OED as misinterpreted in Johnson's Dictionary [1755], which defined it as endeavouring mutual
destruction, on association of inter- with mutual when the prefix supposedly is used in this case as
an intensive. From Johnson, wrongly or not, has come the main modern definition of mutually
destructive.


Internet (n.)

1985, the linked computer networks of the U.S. Defense Department, shortened from internetwork, from
inter- + network (n.).


interneuron

1939, from internuncial + neuron.


internist (n.)

1904, American English, from internal medicine + -ist.


internment (n.)

1870, from intern (v.) + -ment. Compare French internement. Internment camp is attested from 1916.


internship (n.)

1904, from intern (n.) + -ship.


interoffice (adj.)

by 1934, from inter- + office.


interoperable (adj.)

1969, from inter- + operable. Related: Interoperability.


interpellate (v.)

1590s, from Latin interpellatus, past participle of interpellare to interrupt by speaking (see
interpellation). Related: Interpellated; interpellating.


interpellation (n.)

late 15c., an appeal, from Latin interpellationem, noun of action from past participle stem of
interpellare to interrupt by speaking, from inter between (see inter-) + pellare, collateral form of
pellere to drive (see pulse (n.1)).


interpenetrate (v.)

1809, from inter- + penetrate. Related: Interpenetrated; interpenetrating.


interpenetration (n.)

1809, from inter- + penetration.


interpersonal (adj.)

1842, from inter- + personal. Introduced in a psychological sense 1938 by H.S. Sullivan (1892-1949)
to describe behavior between people in an encounter.


interphase (n.)

1913, from German interphase (1912); see inter- + phase.


interplanetary (adj.)

1690s, existing between planets, from inter- + planetary. In reference to travel between planets,
attested from 1897.


interplay (n.)

1862, from inter- + play. Reciprocal play, thus free interaction.


Interpol

1952, abbreviation of international police, in full, The International Criminal Police Commission,
founded 1923 with headquarters in Paris.


interpolate (v.)

1610s, to alter or enlarge (a writing) by inserting new material, from Latin interpolatus, past
participle of interpolare alter, freshen up, polish; of writing, falsify, from inter- up (see
inter-) + polare, related to polire to smoothe, polish. Sense evolved in Latin from refurbish, to
alter appearance of, to falsify (especially by adding new material). Middle English had interpolen
(early 15c.) in a similar sense. Related: Interpolated; interpolating.


interpolation (n.)

1610s, from French interpolation (early 17c.), or directly from Latin interpolationem (nominative
interpolatio), noun of action from past participle stem of interpolare (see interpolate).


interpolator (n.)

1650s, from Latin interpolator, agent noun from past participle stem of interpolare (see
interpolate).


interpose (v.)

1590s, from Middle French interposer (14c.), from inter- (see inter-) + poser (see pose (v.1)).
Related: Interposed; interposing.


interposition (n.)

late 14c., from Old French interposicion (12c.), from Latin interpositionem (nominative
interpositio), noun of action from past participle stem of interponere to put between, place among;
put forward, from inter- (see inter-) + ponere (see position).


interpret (v.)

late 14c., from Old French interpreter (13c.) and directly from Latin interpretari explain, expound,
understand, from interpres agent, translator, from inter- (see inter-) + second element of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to Sanskrit prath- to spread abroad, PIE *per- (5) to traffic in, sell (see
pornography). Related: Interpreted; interpreting.


interpretable (adj.)

1610s, from Late Latin interpretabilis, from Latin interpretari (see interpret).


interpretation (n.)

mid-14c. (late 13c. in Anglo-French), from Old French interpretacion (12c.) and directly from Latin
interpretationem (nominative interpretatio) explanation, exposition, noun of action from past
participle stem of interpretari (see interpret).


interpretative (adj.)

1560s, properly formed from past participle stem of Latin interpretari (see interpret). Interpretive
means the same thing, but is less correct. Related: Interpretatively.


interpreter (n.)

one who translates spoken languages; a translator of written texts, late 14c., from Old French
interpreteor, from Late Latin interpretatorem, agent noun from interpretari (see interpret).


interpretive (adj.)

1670s, from interpret + -ive; also see interpretative. Listed by Fowler among the words that for one
reason or another should not have been brought into existence.


interpunction (n.)

punctuation, 1610s, from Latin interpunctionem (nominative interpunctio) a putting of points
between, noun of action from past participle stem of interpungere to put points between, from inter-
(see inter-) + pungere (see pungent).


interracial (adj.)

also inter-racial, 1883, from inter- + racial.


interregnum (n.)

1570s, from Latin interregnum, literally between-reign, from inter- (see inter-) + regnum (see reign
(n.)). In the republic, a vacancy in the consulate.


interrelate (v.)

1827 (implied in interrelated), from inter- + relate. Related: Interrelating.


interrelation (n.)

1841, from inter- + relation.


interrelationship (n.)

also inter-relationship, 1841, from inter- + relationship.


interrogate (v.)

late 15c., a back-formation from interrogation, or else from Latin interrogatus, past participle of
interrogare to ask, question (see interrogation). Related: Interrogated; interrogating.


interrogation (n.)

late 14c., a question; c.1500, a questioning; a set of questions, from Old French interrogacion
(13c.) or directly from Latin interrogationem (nominative interrogatio) a question, questioning,
interrogation, noun of action from past participle stem of interrogare to ask, question, inquire,
interrogate, from inter- between (see inter-) + rogare ask, to question (see rogation).


interrogative (adj.)

c.1500, from Late Latin interrogativus pertaining to a question, from Latin interrogat-, past
participle stem of interrogare to ask, question (see interrogation) + -ive.


interrogator (n.)

1751, from Late Latin interrogator, agent noun from interrogare to ask, question (see
interrogation).


interrogatory (adj.)

1570s, from Late Latin interrogatorius consisting of questions, from past participle stem of
interrogare to ask, question (see interrogation).


interrupt (v.)

c.1400, to interfere with a legal right, from Latin interruptus, past participle of interrumpere
break apart, break off, from inter- between (see inter-) + rumpere to break (see rupture (n.), and
compare corrupt). Meaning to break into (a speech, etc.) is early 15c. Related: Interrupted;
interrupting.


interrupt (n.)

1957, originally in computers, from interupt (v.).


interruption (n.)

late 14c., a break of continuity, from Old French interrupcion and directly from Latin
interruptionem (nominative interruptio) a breaking off, interruption, interval, noun of action from
past participle stem of interrumpere (see interrupt). Meaning a breaking in upon some action is from
c.1400; that of a pause, a temporary cessation is early 15c.


intersect (v.)

1610s, back-formation from intersection, or else from Latin intersectus, past participle of
intersecare intersect, cut asunder, from inter- between (see inter-) + secare to cut (see section
(n.)). Related: Intersected; intersecting.


intersect (n.)

1650s, from Latin intersectum (see intersect (v.)).


intersection (n.)

act or fact of crossing, 1550s, from Middle French intersection (14c.) and directly from Latin
intersectionem (nominative intersectio) a cutting asunder, intersection, noun of action from past
participle stem of intersecare intersect, cut asunder, from inter- between (see inter-) + secare to
cut (see section). Originally a term in geometry; meaning crossroads is from 1864.


intersex (n.)

one having characteristics of both sexes, 1917, from German intersexe (1915); see inter- + sex.
Coined by German-born U.S. geneticist Richard Benedict Goldschmidt (1878-1958). Related:
Intersexual; intersexuality.


interspecific (adj.)

1889, from inter- + specific, used here as an adjective from species.


intersperse (v.)

1560s, from Latin interspersus strewn, scattered, sprinkled upon, past participle of *interspergere,
from inter- between (see inter-) + spargere to scatter (see sparse). Related: Interspersed;
interspersing.


interspersion (n.)

1650s, noun of action from intersperse.


interstate (adj.)

1845, from inter- + state (n.). As an interstate highway, by 1986, American English.


interstellar (adj.)

1620s, situated between the stars, from inter- + stellar.


interstice (n.)

early 15c., from Old French interstice (14c.) and directly from Latin interstitium interval,
literally space between, from inter- between (see inter-) + stem of stare to stand (see stet).
Related: Interstices.


interstitial (adj.)

1640s, from Latin interstitium (see interstice) + -al (1). Related: Interstitially.


intersubjective (adj.)

1899, from inter- + subjective.


intertextuality (n.)

by 1974, from inter- + textuality (see textual). Related: Intertextual.


intertidal (adj.)

1883, from inter- + tidal.


intertwine (v.)

1640s, from inter- + twine (v.). Related: Intertwined; intertwining.


interurban (adj.)

1883, from inter- + urban.


interval (n.)

early 14c., from Old French intervalle (14c.), earlier entreval (13c.), from Late Latin intervallum
space, interval, distance, originally space between palisades or ramparts, from inter between (see
inter-) + vallum rampart (see wall (n.)). Metaphoric sense of gap in time was present in Latin.


intervene (v.)

1580s, back-formation from intervention, or else from Latin intervenire to come between, intervene,
interrupt, from inter between (see inter-) + venire to come (see venue). Related: Intervened;
intervening.


intervent (v.)

to come between, 1590s, from Latin interventus, past participle of intervenire (see intervention).
Related: Intervented; interventing.


intervention (n.)

early 15c., intercession, intercessory prayer, from Middle French intervention or directly from Late
Latin interventionem (nominative interventio) an interposing, noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin intervenire to come between, interrupt, from inter- between (see inter-) + venire come
(see venue).


interventionism (n.)

1923, from intervention + -ism. Interventionist, as a noun, is recorded from 1839.


interview (n.)

1510s, face-to-face meeting, formal conference, from Middle French entrevue, verbal noun from
s'entrevoir to see each other, visit each other briefly, have a glimpse of, from entre- between (see
inter-) + Old French voir to see (from Latin videre; see vision). Modern French interview is from
English. Journalistic sense is first attested 1869 in American English.The 'interview,' as at
present managed, is generally the joint product of some humbug of a hack politician and another
humbug of a newspaper reporter. [The Nation, Jan. 28, 1869]


interview (v.)

to have a personal meeting, 1540s, from interview (n.). Related: Interviewed; interviewing.


interviewee (n.)

1884, from interview (v.) + -ee.


interviewer (n.)

1869, agent noun from interview (v.).


interweave (v.)

1570s, hybrid from inter- + weave (v.). Related: Interweaving; interwoven.


interwork (v.)

c.1600, from inter- + work (v.). Related: interworking. Past tense can be either interworked or
interwrought.


intestacy (n.)

1767, from intestate + -acy.


intestate (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French intestat (13c.) and directly from Latin intestatus having made no will,
from in- not (see in- (1)) + testatus, past participle of testari make a will, bear witness (see
testament). As a noun, one who has not made out a will, from 1650s.


intestinal (adj.)

early 15c., from medical Latin intestinalis, from Latin intestinum (see intestine).


intestine (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French intestin (14c.) or directly from Latin intestinum a gut, in plural,
intestines, bowels, noun use of neuter of adjective intestinus â&euro;&oelig;inward,
internalâ&euro;? (see intestines). Distinction of large and small intestines in Middle English was
made under the terms gross and subtle. The word also was used as an adjective in English from 1530s
with a sense of â&euro;&oelig;internal, domestic, civil.â&euro;?


intestines (n.)

bowels, 1590s, from Latin intestina, neuter plural of intestinus (adj.) internal, inward, intestine,
from intus within, on the inside (see ento-). Compare Sanskrit antastyam, Greek entosthia bowels.
The Old English word was hropp, literally rope.


intice (v.)

obsolete spelling of entice.


Intifada (n.)

Palestinian revolt, 1985, from Arabic, literally a jumping up (in reaction to something), from the
verb intafada to be shaken, shake oneself.


intimacy (n.)

1640s, from intimate + -cy. As a euphemism for sexual intercourse, from 1670s.


intimate (adj.)

1630s, closely acquainted, very familiar, from Late Latin intimatus, past participle of intimare
make known, announce, impress, from Latin intimus inmost (adj.), close friend (n.), superlative of
in in (see in- (2)). Used euphemistically in reference to women's underwear from 1904. Related:
Intimately.


intimate (v.)

suggest indirectly, 1530s, back-formation from intimation, or else from Late Latin intimatus, past
participle of intimare. Related: Intimated; intimating.


intimate (n.)

1650s, person with whom one is intimate, from intimate (adj.).


intimation (n.)

mid-15c., action of making known, from Middle French intimation (late 14c.), from Late Latin
intimationem (nominative intimatio) an announcement (in Medieval Latin a judicial notification),
noun of action from past participle stem of intimare (see intimate). Meaning suggestion, hint is
from 1530s.


intimidate (v.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin intimidatus, past participle of intimidare to frighten, intimidate, from
Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + timidus fearful (see timid). Related: Intimidated; intimidating.


intimidation (n.)

1650s, noun of action from intimidate; perhaps modeled on French intimidation.


into (prep.)

Old English into, originally in to. The word is a late Old English development to replace the fading
dative case inflections that formerly distinguished, for instance, in the house from into the house.
To be into something, be intensely involved in, first recorded 1969 in American English.


intolerability (n.)

1590s, from Late Latin intolerabilitas, from Latin intolerabilis (see intolerable).


intolerable (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin intolerabilis that cannot bear, that cannot be borne, from in- not, opposite
of (see in- (1)) + tolerabilis that may be endured, from tolerare to tolerate (see toleration).
Related: Intolerably.


intolerance (n.)

unwillingness to endure a differing opinion, 1765, from Latin intolerantia impatience,
unendurableness, insufferableness, insolence, from intolerantem (see intolerant). Especially of
religious matters through mid-19c. Now-obsolete intolerancy was used in same sense from 1620s.


intolerant (adj.)

1735, from Latin intolerantem (nominative intolerans) not enduring, impatient, intolerant;
intolerable, from in- â&euro;&oelig;notâ&euro;? (see in- (1)) + tolerans, present participle of
tolerare â&euro;&oelig;to bear, endureâ&euro;? (see toleration). Of plants, from 1898. The noun
meaning intolerant person or persons is from 1765.


intonate (v.)

1795, from Medieval Latin intonatus, past participle of intonare (see intone) + -ate (2). Compare
Italian intonare, French entonner. Related: Intonated; intonating.


intonation (n.)

1610s, opening phrase of a melody, from French intonation, from Medieval Latin intonationem
(nominative intonatio), from past participle stem of intonare (see intone). Meaning modulation of
the voice in speaking is from 1791.


intone (v.)

late 14c., entunen sing, chant, recite, from Old French entoner sing, chant (13c.), from Medieval
Latin intonare sing according to tone, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + tonus tone, from Greek
tonos (see tenet). A different verb intone was in use 17c.18c., from Latin intonare to thunder,
resound, figuratively to cry out vehemently, from tonare to thunder. Related: Intoned; intoning.


intoxicant (n.)

liquor, 1863; see intoxicate.


intoxicate (v.)

to poison, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin intoxicatus, past participle of intoxicare to poison, from
Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + toxicare to poison, from toxicum poison (see toxic). Meaning make drunk
first recorded 1570s. Related: Intoxicated; intoxicating.


intoxicated (adj.)

1550s, poisoned; 1570s, drunk, past participle adjective from intoxicate (v.).


intoxication (n.)

c.1400, intoxigacion poisoning, from Medieval Latin intoxicationem (nominative intoxicatio)
poisoning, noun of action from past participle stem of intoxicare (see intoxicate). Meaning
drunkenness is from 1640s.


intra-

word-forming element meaning within, inside, on the inside, from Latin intra on the inside, within,
related to inter between, from PIE *en-t(e)ro-, from root *en in (see in). Commonly opposed to
extra-, but the use of intra as a prefix was rare in classical Latin.


intracellular (adj.)

1876, from intra- + cellular.


intractability (n.)

1570s, from intractable + -ity.


intractable (adj.)

c.1500, rough, stormy; 1540s, not manageable, from Latin intractabilis not to be handled,
unmanageable, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + tractabilis (see tractable). Related:
Intractably.


intramural (adj.)

1846, literally within the walls, from intra- within + Latin muralis pertaining to a wall, from
murus wall (see mural). Activity within the walls of a city, building, community, school, etc.
Equivalent to Late Latin intramuranus.


intramuscular (adj.)

1874, from intra- + muscular.


intransigence (n.)

1882, from French intransigeant, from intransigeant (see intransigent). Related: Intransigency.


intransigent (adj.)

1881, from French intransigeant, from Spanish los intransigentes, literally those not coming to
agreement, name for extreme republican party in the Spanish Cortes 1873-4, from in- not (see in-
(1)) + transigente compromising, from Latin transigentem (nominative transigens), present participle
of transigere come to an agreement, accomplish, to carry through (see transaction). Acquired its
generalized sense in French.


intransitive (adj.)

1610s, from Late Latin intransitivus not passing over (to another person), Priscian's term, from
Latin in- not (see in- (1)) + transitivus that may pass over, from transire to pass over (see
transitive).


intraocular (adj.)

1826, from intra- + ocular.


intraperitoneal (adj.)

1835, from intra- + peritoneal.


intrapersonal (adj.)

also intra-personal, 1853, from intra- + personal.


intrapsychic (adj.)

1917, from intra- + psychic.


intravenous (adj.)

1847, coined in English from intra- within, inside + Latin venous, from vena vein (see vein).
Related: Intravenously.


intrepid (adj.)

1620s (implied in intrepidness), from French intr&eacute;pide (16c.) and directly from Latin
intrepidus unshaken, undaunted, from in- not (see in- (1)) + trepidus alarmed (see trepidation).
Related: Intrepidly.


intrepidity (n.)

1704, from intrepid + -ity.


intricacy (n.)

c.1600, from intricate + -acy.


intricate (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin intricatus entangled, past participle of intricare to entangle, perplex,
embarrass, from in- in (see in- (2)) + tricae (plural) perplexities, hindrances, toys, tricks, of
uncertain origin (compare extricate). Related: Intricately.


intrigante (n.)

women given to intrigue, 1806, from fem. of French intrigant, from Italian intrigante, present
participle of intrigare (see intrigue).


intrigue (v.)

1610s, to trick, deceive, cheat (earlier entriken, late 14c.), from French intriguer (16c.), from
Italian intrigare to plot, meddle, from Latin intricare entangle (see intricate). Meaning to plot or
scheme first recorded 1714; that of to excite curiosity is from 1894. Related: Intrigued; intriguing
(1680s, plotting, scheming; meaning exciting curiosity is from 1909).


intrigue (n.)

1640s, probably from intrigue (v.).


intrinsic (adj.)

late 15c., interior, inward, internal, from Middle French intrins&egrave;que inner (13c.), from
Medieval Latin intrinsecus interior, internal, from Latin intrinsecus (adv.) inwardly, on the
inside, from intra within (see intra-) + secus alongside, originally following (related to sequi to
follow; see sequel). Meaning belonging to the nature of a thing is from 1640s. Related: Intrinsicly.


intro (n.)

short for introduction, attested from 1923.


intro-

word-forming element, from Latin intro on the inside, within, to the inside, from PIE *en-t(e)ro-,
suffixed form of preposition *en in (see in).


introduce (v.)

early 15c., back-formation from introduction, or else from Latin introducere to lead in, bring in
(see introduction). Related: Introduced; introducing.


introduction (n.)

late 14c., act of bringing into existence, from Old French introduccion and directly from Latin
introductionem (nominative introductio) a leading in, noun of action from past participle stem of
introducere to lead in, bring in, to introduce, from intro- inward, to the inside (see intro-) +
ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Meaning initial instruction in a subject; an introductory statement
is mid-15c. The sense of formal presentation of one person to another is from 1711.


introductory (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin introductorius, from introduct-, past participle stem of introducere to lead
in, bring in (see introduction). Also used in English from c.1400 as a noun meaning introductory
treatise or textbook.


introit (n.)

late 15c., from Old French introit (14c.), from Latin introitus a going in, past participle of
introire to enter, from intro- (see intro-) + ire to go (see ion).


introject (v.)

1925, probably a back-formation from introjection. Related: Introjected; introjecting.


introjection (n.)

1866, from intro- + stem abstracted from projection. In philosophical and psychoanalytical use, from
German introjektion.


intron

1978, from intragenic + -on.


introspect (v.)

1680s, from Latin introspectus, past participle of introspicere look at, look into (see
introspection). Related: Introspected; introspecting.


introspection (n.)

1670s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin introspicere to look into, look at, from
intro- inward (see intro-) + specere to look at (see scope (n.1)).


introspective (adj.)

1820, from Latin introspect-, past participle stem of introspicere (see introspection) + -ive.


introversion (n.)

1650s, of thought or contemplation, from Modern Latin introversionem, noun of action from past
participle stem of *introvertere (see introvert). Meaning tendency to withdraw from the world is
from 1912.


introvert (v.)

1650s, from Latin intro- inward (see intro-) + vertere to turn (see versus). The noun, introverted
person (opposed to extrovert) is 1918, from German psychology, introduced there by C.G. Jung
(1875-1961).


introverted (adj.)

1781, directed inward, past participle adjective from introvert. Psychological sense is from 1915.


intrude (v.)

early 15c., back-formation from intrusion, or else from Latin intrudere to thrust in (see
intrusion). Related: Intruded; intruding.


intruder (n.)

1530s, agent noun from intrude. Originally legal.


intrusion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French intrusion (14c.), from Medieval Latin intrusionem (nominative intrusio) a
thrusting in, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin intrudere, from in- in (see in- (2))
+ trudere to thrust, push (see extrusion).


intrusive (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin intrus-, past participle stem of intrudere (see intrusion) + -ive. Related:
Intrusively; intrusiveness.


intubate (v.)

1610s, to form into tubes, from in- (2) in + Latin tuba tube (see tuba) + -ate (2). Medical sense is
from 1889. Related: Intubated; intubation.


intuit (v.)

1776, to tutor, from Latin intuit-, past participle stem of intueri (see intuition). Meaning to
perceive directly without reasoning is from 1840, in this sense perhaps a back-formation from
intuition. Related: Intuited; intuiting.


intuition (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin intuitionem (nominative intuitio) a looking at, consideration, noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin intueri look at, consider, from in- at, on (see in- (2)) +
tueri to look at, watch over (see tuition).


intuitive (adj.)

1640s, from Middle French intuitif or directly from Medieval Latin intuitivus, from intuit-, past
participle stem of intueri look at, consider (see intuition). Related: Intuitively; intuitiveness.


intumescence (n.)

1650s, from French intumescence, from Latin intumescere (see intumescent).


intumescent (adj.)

1796, from Latin intumescentem (nominative intumescens), present participle of intumescere to swell
up, from in- in (see in- (2)) + tumescere (see tumescence).


inturn (n.)

1590s, turning in of the toes (especially in dancing), from in + turn.


intussusception (n.)

1707, literally a taking in, from Latin intus within (see ento-) + susceptionem a taking up (see
susceptible).


inundate (v.)

1620s, back-formation from inundation, or else from Latin inundatus, past participle of inundare to
overflow, run over (see inundation). Related: Inundated; inundating.


inundation (n.)

early 15c., from Latin inundationem (nominative inundatio) an overflowing, noun of action from past
participle stem of inundare to overflow, from in- onto (see in- (2)) + undare to flow, from unda
wave (see water (n.1)).


inure (v.)

early 15c., in ure in practice, from obsolete ure work, practice, exercise, use, probably from Old
French uevre, oeuvre work, from Latin opera (see opus). Related: Inured; inuring.


inutile (adj.)

late 15c., from French inutile (12c., inutele), from Latin inutilis useless, unprofitable, from in-
not (see in- (1)) + utilis (see utility).


inutility (n.)

1590s, from Middle French inutilit&eacute; (15c.), from Latin inutilitatem (nominative inutilitas)
uselessness, from inutilis (see inutile).


invade (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French invader to invade, and directly from Latin invadere to go into, enter
upon; assail, assault, attack (see invasion). Related: invaded; invading.


invader (n.)

1540s, agent noun from invade.


invaginate (v.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin invaginatus, past participle of invaginare to put into a sheath, from
Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + vagina a sheath (see vagina). Related: Invaginated; invagination.


invalid (adj.1)

not strong, infirm, 1640s, from Latin invalidus not strong, infirm, weak, feeble, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + validus strong (see valid). Specific meaning infirm from sickness, disease, or injury is
from 1640s.


invalid (adj.2)

of no legal force, 1630s, from special use of Latin invalidus (see invalid (adj.1)).


invalid (n.)

1709, originally of disabled military men, from invalid (adj.1). Invalides is short for French
H&ocirc;tel des Invalides, home for old and disabled soldiers in the 7th arrondissement of Paris.


invalidate (v.)

1640s, from invalid + -ate (2). Related: Invalidated; invalidating.


invalidation (n.)

1771, noun of action from invalidate (v.).


invalidity (n.)

1540s, from Latin invalidatus (see invalid (adj.)).


invaluable (adj.)

1570s, above value, from in- (1) not + value (v.) estimate the worth of + -able. It also has been
used in a sense without value, worthless (1630s).


invariability (n.)

1640s, from invariable + -ity.


invariable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French invariable (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin invariabilis, from
in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + variabilis (see variable). Related: Invariably.


invariant (adj.)

1851, from in- (1) not + variant.


invasion (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French invasion invasion, attack, assaut (12c.), from Late Latin invasionem
(nominative invasio) an attack, invasion, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin invadere
go into, fall upon, attack, invade, from in- in (see in- (2)) + vadere go, walk (see vamoose).


invasive (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French invasif (15c.), from Medieval Latin invasivus, from invas-, past
participle stem of invadere (see invasion).


invective (n.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin invectiva abusive speech, from Late Latin invectivus abusive, from Latin
invectus, past participle of invehi to attack with words (see inveigh). For nuances of usage, see
humor. The earlier noun form was inveccion (mid-15c.).


inveigh (v.)

late 15c., to introduce, from Latin invehi to attack with words, originally carry oneself against,
passive infinitive of invehere bring in, carry in, from in- against (see in- (1)) + vehere to carry
(see vehicle). Meaning to give vent to violent denunciation is from 1520s. Related: Inveighed;
inveighing.


inveigle (v.)

late 15c., to blind (someone's) judgment, alteration of Middle French aveugler delude, make blind,
from Vulgar Latin *aboculus without sight, blind, from Latin ab- without (see ab-) + oculus eye (see
eye (n.)). Loan-translation of Greek ap ommaton without eyes. Meaning to win over by deceit, seduce
is 1530s.


invent (v.)

late 15c., find, discover, a back-formation from invention or else from Latin inventus, past
participle of invenire â&euro;&oelig;to come upon; devise, discoverâ&euro;? (see invention).
Meaning make up, think up is from 1530s, as is that of produce by original thought. Related:
Invented; inventing.


invention (n.)

c.1400, devised method of organization, from Old French invencion (13c.) and directly from Latin
inventionem (nominative inventio) faculty of invention; a finding, discovery, noun of action from
past participle stem of invenire devise, discover, find, from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + venire to
come (see venue).    Meaning finding or discovering of something is early 15c. in English; sense of
thing invented is first recorded 1510s. Etymological sense preserved in Invention of the Cross,
Church festival (May 3) celebrating the reputed finding of the Cross of the Crucifixion by Helena,
mother of Constantine, in 326 C.E.


inventive (adj.)

early 15c., skilled in invention, from Old French inventif (15c.), from Latin invent-, past
participle stem of invenire (see invention). Related: Inventively; inventiveness.


inventor (n.)

c.1500, a discoverer, from Latin inventor (fem. inventrix) contriver, author, discoverer, agent noun
from past participle stem of invenire (see invention). Meaning one who contrives or produces a new
thing or process is from 1550s.


inventory (n.)

early 15c., from Old French inventoire inventory, detailed list of goods, catalogue, from Medieval
Latin inventorium (Late Latin inventarium) list of what is found, from Latin inventus, past
participle of invenire to find (see invention). The verb is first recorded c.1600, from the noun.


inverse (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin inversus, past participle of invertere (see invert). Related: Inversely. As a
noun, 1680s, from the adjective.


inversion (n.)

1550s, from Latin inversionem (nominative inversio) an inversion, noun of action from past
participle stem of invertere (see invert).


invert (v.)

1530s, from Middle French invertir or directly from Latin invertere turn upside down, turn about,
from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + vertere to turn (see versus). Related: Inverted; inverting;
invertedly.


invertebrate (n.)

1826, from Latin in- not (see in- (1)) + vertebra joint (see vertebra). Invertebrata as a biological
classification was coined 1805 by French naturalist Georges L&eacute;opole Chr&eacute;tien
Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Dagobert, Baron Cuvier (1769-1832). As an adjective by 1838.


invest (v.)

late 14c., to clothe in the official robes of an office, from Latin investire to clothe in, cover,
surround, from in in, into (see in- (2)) + vestire to dress, clothe (see wear (v.)). The meaning use
money to produce profit first attested 1610s in connection with the East Indies trade, and is
probably a borrowing of Italian investire (13c.) from the same Latin root, via the notion of giving
one's capital a new form. The military meaning to besiege is from c.1600. Related: Invested;
investing.


investigable (adj.)

c.1400, from Late Latin investigabilis that may be searched into, from investigare (see
investigation).


investigate (v.)

c.1500, back-formation from investigation, or else from Latin investigatus, past participle of
investigare to trace out, search after (see investigation). Related: Investigated; investigating.


investigation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French investigacion (14c.), from Latin investigationem (nominative
investigatio) a searching into, a searching for, noun of action from past participle stem of
investigare to trace out, search after, from in- in, into (see in- (2)) + vestigare to track, trace,
from vestigium footprint, track (see vestige).


investigative (adj.)

1803, from Latin investigat-, past participle stem of investigare (see investigation) + -ive.
Journalism sense is from 1951.


investigator (n.)

1550s, a native agent-noun formation from investigate, or else from Latin investigator he that
searches into, agent noun from past participle stem of investigare (see investigation).


investiture (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin investitura, from past participle stem of Latin investire to clothe
(see invest).


investment (n.)

1590s, act of putting on vestments (a sense now found in investiture); later act of being invested
with an office, right, endowment, etc. (1640s); and surrounding and besieging of a military target
(1811); see invest + -ment. Commercial sense is from 1610s, originally of the finances of the East
India Company; general use is from 1740 in the sense of conversion of money to property in hopes of
profit, and by 1837 in the sense amount of money so invested; property viewed as a vehicle for
profit. For evolution of commercial senses, see invest.


investor (n.)

1580s, one who clothes; 1862, one who invests money, agent noun from invest.


inveteracy (n.)

1690s, from inveterate + -cy.


inveterate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin inveteratus of long standing, chronic, past participle of inveterare become
old in, from in- in, into (see in- (2)) + veterare to make old, from vetus (genitive veteris) old
(see veteran).


inviable (adj.)

1918, from in- (1) not + viable. Related: Inviability.


invictus

Latin adjective, unconquered, unsubdued, invincible.


invidious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin invidiosus full of envy, envious, from invidia envy, grudge, jealousy, ill will
(see envy). Related: Invidiously; invidiousness.


invigilate (v.)

1550s, from Latin invigilatus, past participle of invigilare watch over, be watchful, be devoted,
from in- in (see in- (2)) + vigilare (see vigil). Especially in reference to student exams. Related:
Invigilated; invigilating.


invigilator (n.)

1892, agent noun from invigilate.


invigorate (v.)

1640s, from in- (2) + vigor + -ate (2). Earlier verb was envigor (1610s). Related: Invigorated;
invigorating.


invigorating (adj.)

1690s, adjective from present participle of invigorate. Related: Invigoratingly.


invigoration (n.)

1660s, noun of action from invigorate.


invincibility (n.)

1670s, from invincible + -ity.


invincible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French invincible (14c.) or directly from Latin invincibilis unconquerable,
from in- not (see in- (1)) + vincibilis conquerable, from vincere to overcome (see victor). Related:
Invincibly. Noun meaning one who is invincible is from 1630s.  Invincible ignorance is from Church
Latin ignorantia invincibilis (Aquinas). Related: Invincibly.


inviolability (n.)

1793, from inviolable + -ity.


inviolable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin inviolabilis inviolable, invulnerable, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1))
+ violabilis, from violare to do violence to (see violation). Related: Inviolably.


inviolate (adj.)

unbroken, intact, early 15c., from Latin inviolatus â&euro;&oelig;unhurt,â&euro;? from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + violatus (see violation).


invisibility (n.)

1560s, from Late Latin invisibilitas, from invisibilis (see invisible).


invisible (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French invisible (13c.), from Latin invisibilis unseen, invisible, from in- not
(see in- (1)) + visibilis (see visible). As a noun, things invisible, from 1640s. Invisible Man is
from H.G. Wells's novel (1897). Related: Invisibly.


invision (n.)

want of vision, 1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + vision.


invita Minerva

Latin, literally Minerva (goddess of wisdom) unwilling; i.e. without inspiration, not being in the
mood for it.


invitation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin invitationem (nominative invitatio) an invitation, incitement, challenge, noun
of action from past participle stem of invitare invite, treat, entertain, originally be pleasant
toward, from in- toward (see in- (2)). Second element is obscure; Watkins suggests a suffixed form
of root *weie- to go after something, pursue with vigor, and a connection to English gain (see
venison). Meaning the spoken or written form in which a person is invited is from 1610s.


invite (v.)

1530s, a back-formation from invitation, or else from Middle French inviter, from Latin invitare to
invite, also to summon, challenge. As a noun variant of invitation it is attested from 1650s.
Related: Invited; inviting.


invite (n.)

1650s, from invite (v.).


invitee (n.)

1837, from invite (v.) + -ee.


inviting (adj.)

â&euro;&oelig;attractive, alluring,â&euro;? c.1600, from present participle of invite (v.).


invocation (n.)

late 14c., petition (to God or a god) for aid or comfort; invocation, prayer; also a summoning of
evil spirits, from Old French invocacion (12c.), from Latin invocationem (nominative invocatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of invocare to call upon, invoke, appeal to (see invoke).


invoice (n.)

1550s, apparently from Middle French envois, plural of envoi dispatch (of goods), literally a
sending, from envoyer to send (see envoy). As a verb, 1690s, from the noun.


invoke (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French envoquer (12c.), from Latin invocare call upon, implore, from in- upon
(see in- (2)) + vocare to call, related to vox (genitive vocis) voice (see voice (n.)). Related:
Invoked; invoking.


involuntary (adj.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin involuntarius involuntary, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Latin
voluntarius (see voluntary). Related: Involuntarily.


involute (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin involutus rolled up, intricate, obscure, past participle of involvere (see
involve).


involution (n.)

late 14c., from Latin involutionem (nominative involutio) a rolling up, noun of action from past
participle stem of involvere (see involve). Related: Involutional.


involve (v.)

late 14c., envelop, surround, from Latin involvere envelop, surround, overwhelm, literally roll
into, from in- in (see in- (2)) + volvere to roll (see volvox). Originally envelop, surround, sense
of take in, include first recorded c.1600. Related: Involved; Involving.


involved (adj.)

complicated, 1640s, past participle adjective from involve.


involvement (n.)

1706, from involve + -ment.


invulnerability (n.)

1775, from invulnerable + -ity.


invulnerable (adj.)

1590s, from Latin invulnerabilis invulnerable, from in- not (see in- (1)) + vulnerabilis (see
vulnerable). Related: Invulnerably.


inward

Old English inweard, inneweard (adj., adv.) inmost; sincere; internal, intrinsic; deep, from Proto-
Germanic *inwarth inward (cognates: Old Norse innanver&eth;r, Old High German inwart, Middle Dutch
inwaert), from root of Old English inne in (see in) + -weard (see -ward).


inwardly (adv.)

Old English inweardlice; see inward + -ly (2).


inwardness (n.)

late 14c., from inward + -ness.


inwit (n.)

Middle English word meaning conscience (early 13c.), reason, intellect (c.1300), from in (adv.) +
wit (n.). Not related to Old English inwit, which meant deceit. Joyce's use in Ulysses (1922), which
echoes the 14c. work Ayenbite of Inwyt, is perhaps the best-known example of the modern use of the
word as a conscious archaism.&THORN;ese ben also &thorn;y fyve inwyttys: Wyl, Resoun, Mynd,
Ymaginacioun, and Thoght [Wyclif, c.1380]   <hr />   If ... such good old English words as inwit and
wanhope should be rehabilitated (and they have been pushing up their heads for thirty years), we
should gain a great deal. [Robert Bridges, 1922]


Io

in Greek mythology, daughter of the river god Inachus, she was pursued by Zeus and consequently
changed into a heifer. The Jovian moon was discovered in 1610 and named for her by Galileo.


iodide (n.)

from comb. form of iodine + -ide.


iodine (n.)

1814, formed by English chemist Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829) from French iode iodine, coined 1812
by French chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac from Greek ioeides violet-colored, from ion the violet;
dark blue flower, + eidos appearance (see -oid). Davy added the chemical suffix -ine (2) to make it
analogous with chlorine and fluorine. So called from the color of the vapor given off when the
crystals are heated.


iodize (v.)

1841, from comb. form of iodine + -ize. Related: Iodized; iodizing.


ion (n.)

1834, introduced by English physicist and chemist Michael Faraday (suggested by the Rev. William
Whewell, English polymath), coined from Greek ion, neuter present participle of ienai go, from PIE
root *ei- (1) to go, to walk (cognates: Greek eimi I go; Latin ire to go, iter a way; Old Irish
ethaim I go; Irish bothar a road (from *bou-itro- cows' way), Gaulish eimu we go, Gothic iddja went,
Sanskrit e'ti goes, imas we go, ayanam a going, way; Avestan ae'iti goes; Old Persian aitiy goes;
Lithuanian eiti to go; Old Church Slavonic iti go; Bulgarian ida I go; Russian idti to go). So
called because ions move toward the electrode of opposite charge.


Ionian (adj.)

of Ionia, the districts of ancient Greece inhabited by the Ionians (including Attica and the north
coast of the Peloponnesus, but especially the coastal strip of Asia Minor, including the islands of
Samos and Chios). The name (which Herodotus credits to an ancestral Ion, son of Apollo and Creusa)
probably is pre-Greek, perhaps related to Sanskrit yoni womb, vulva, and a reference to goddess-
worshipping people.    Also used of the sea that lies between Italy and the northern Peloponnesus
(1630s). The musical Ionian mode (1844) corresponds to our basic major scale but was characterized
by the Greeks as soft and effeminate, as were the Ionians generally.  The Ionians delighted in
wanton dances and songs more than the rest of the Greeks ... and wanton gestures were proverbially
termed Ionic motions. [Thomas Robinson, Arch&aelig;ologica Gr&aelig;ca, 1807]


Ionic (adj.)

pertaining to Ionia, 1570s of music; 1580s of architecture, from Latin Ionicus, from Greek Ionikos
(see Ionian).


ionic (adj.)

pertaining to ions, 1890, from ion + -ic.


ionization (n.)

1891; see ionize + -ation.


ionize (v.)

1896, from ion + -ize. Related: Ionized; ionizing.


ionosphere (n.)

1926, from ion + sphere. Coined by Scottish radar pioneer Robert A. Watson-Watt (1892-1973). So
called because it contains many ions.


iota (n.)

very small amount, 1630s, figurative use of iota, ninth and smallest letter in the Greek alphabet.
Modern use is after Matt. v:18 (see jot), but iota in classical Greek also was proverbially used of
anything very small. The letter name is from Semitic (compare Hebrew yodh).


Iowa

organized as a U.S. territory 1838; admitted as a state 1846, ultimately from the name of the native
people, of the Chiwere branch of the Aiouan family; said to be from Dakota ayuxba sleepy ones.


ipecac

1710, borrowing via Portuguese of a shortened form of Tupi ipecacuana (a word attested in English
from 1682), a medicinal plant of Brazil. The Indian word is said to mean small plant causing vomit.


ipse dixit

Latin, literally he (the master) said it, translation of Greek autos epha, phrase used by disciples
of Pythagoras when quoting their master.


ipseity (n.)

1650s, from Latin ipse self + -ity.


ipsilateral (adj.)

1907, from Latin ipse self + lateral.


ipso facto

Latin, literally by that very fact.


ir-

assimilated form of Latin prefixes in- (see in-) before -r-.


Ira

masc. proper name, from Hebrew, literally watchful, from stem of 'ur to awake, to rouse oneself.


Iran

from Persian Iran, from Middle Persian &#274;r&#257;n (land) of the Iranians, genitive plural of
&#275;r- an Iranian, from Old Iranian *arya- (Old Persian ariya-, Avestan airya-) Iranian, from
Indo-Iranian *arya- or *&#257;rya- (see Aryan), a self-designation, perhaps meaning compatriot. In
1935 the government of Reza Shah Pahlavi requested governments with which it had diplomatic
relations to call his country Iran, after the indigenous name, rather than the Greek-derived Persia.


Iranian

1841 (adj.); 1873 (n.), from Iran + -ian.


Iraq

country name, 1920, from an Arabic name attested since 6c. for the region known in Greek as
Mesopotamia; often said to be from Arabic `araqa, covering notions such as perspiring, deeply
rooted, well-watered, which may reflect the impression the lush river-land made on desert Arabs. But
the name may be from, or influenced by, Sumerian Uruk (Biblical Erech), anciently a prominent city
in what is now southern Iraq (from Sumerian uru city).


irascibility (n.)

1750, from irascible + -ity.


irascible (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle French irascible (12c.) and directly from Late Latin irascibilis, from Latin
irasci be angry, be in a rage, from ira anger (see ire).


irate (adj.)

1838, from Latin iratus angry, enraged, violent, furious, past participle of irasci grow angry, from
ira anger (see ire).


ire (n.)

c.1300, from Old French ire anger, wrath, violence (11c.), from Latin ira anger, wrath, rage,
passion, from PIE root *eis-, forming various words denoting passion cognates: Greek hieros filled
with the divine, holy, oistros gadfly, originally thing causing madness; Sanskrit esati drives on,
yasati boils; Avestan aesma anger).    Old English irre in a similar sense is from an adjective irre
wandering, straying, angry, cognate with Old Saxon irri angry, Old High German irri wandering,
deranged, also angry; Gothic airzeis astray, and Latin errare wander, go astray, angry (see err
(v.)).


Ireland

12c., Anglo-Norman, with land + native Eriu (see Irish).


Irene

fem. proper name, from French Ir&egrave;ne, from Latin Irene, from Greek Eirene, literally peace,
time of peace.


irenic (adj.)

1864; see eirenic.


irenology (n.)

study of peace, 1974, from Greek eirene peace + -ology. Related: Irenological.


Irgun

militant Zionist organization, 1946, from Modern Hebrew, literally organization, in full Irgun Zvai
Leumi national military organization.


iridescence (n.)

1804, from iridescent + -ence. Related: Iridescency (1799).


iridescent (adj.)

1796, literally rainbow-colored, coined from comb. form of Latin iris (genitive iridis) rainbow (see
iris). Related: Iridescently.


iridium (n.)

1804, Modern Latin, coined by its discoverer, English chemist Smithson Tennant (1761-1815) from
Greek iris (genitive iridos) rainbow; so called for the striking variety of colours which it gives
while dissolving in marine acid [Tennant]


iris (n.)

late 14c., flowering plant (Iris germanica), also prismatic rock crystal, from Latin iris (plural
irides) iris of the eye, iris plant, rainbow, from Greek iris (genitive iridos) a rainbow; the lily;
iris of the eye, originally messenger of the gods, personified as the rainbow. The eye region was so
called (early 15c. in English) for being the colored part; the Greek word was used of any brightly
colored circle, as that round the eyes of a peacock's tail [Liddell &amp; Scott].


Irish (n.)

c.1200, Irisce, from stem of Old English Iras inhabitant of Ireland, from Old Norse irar, ultimately
from Old Irish Eriu (accusative Eirinn, Erinn) Erin, which is from Old Celtic *Iveriu (accusative
*Iverionem, ablative *Iverione), perhaps from PIE *pi-wer- fertile, literally fat, from root *peie-
to be fat, swell (see fat (adj.)).    Meaning temper, passion is 1834, American English (first
attested in writings of Davy Crockett), from the legendary pugnacity of Irish people. Irish-American
is from 1832; Irish stew is attested from 1814; Irish coffee is from 1950. Wild Irish (late 14c.)
originally were those not under English rule; Black Irish in reference to those of Mediterranean
appearance is from 1888.


Irishman (n.)

c.1200, from Irish + man (n.).


irk (v.)

mid-15c., irken be weary of, be disgusted with; earlier intransitive, to feel weary (early 14c.). Of
uncertain origin, perhaps related to Old Norse yrkja work (from PIE root *werg- to work; see organ),
or Middle High German erken to disgust. Modern sense of annoy is from late 15c. An adjective, irk
weary, tired is attested from c.1300 in northern and midlands writing.


irksome (adj.)

bothersome, burdensome, early 15c., from irk + -some (1). Related: Irksomely; irksomeness.


Irma

fem. proper name; see Emma.


iron (n.)

Old English is&aelig;rn (with Middle English rhotacism of -s-) the metal iron; an iron weapon, from
Proto-Germanic *isarnan (cognates: Old Saxon isarn, Old Norse isarn, Middle Dutch iser, Old High
German isarn, German Eisen) holy metal or strong metal (in contrast to softer bronze) probably an
early borrowing of Celtic *isarnon (compare Old Irish iarnhaiarn), from PIE *is-(e)ro- powerful,
holy, from PIE *eis strong (cognates: Sanskrit isirah vigorous, strong, Greek ieros strong).Right so
as whil that Iren is hoot men sholden smyte. [Chaucer, c.1386]  Chemical symbol Fe is from the Latin
word for the metal, ferrum (see ferro-). Meaning metal device used to press or smooth clothes is
from 1610s. The adjective is Old English iren, isern. To have (too) many irons in the fire to be
doing too much at once is from 1540s. Iron lung artificial respiration tank is from 1932.


iron (v.)

c.1400, irenen, to make of iron, from iron (n.). Meaning press clothes (with a heated flat-iron) is
recorded from 1670s. Related: Ironed; ironing.


Iron Age

1590s, originally from Greek and Roman mythology, the last and worst age of the world; the
archaeological sense of period in which humans used iron tools and weapons is from 1879.


Iron Cross

from German das eiserne kreuz, instituted by Frederick Wilhelm III of Prussia, originally for
distinguished military service in the wars against Napoleon.


Iron Curtain (n.)

in reference to the Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe, famously coined by Winston Churchill March
5, 1946, in speech at Westminster College, Fulton, Missouri, but it had been used earlier in this
context (for example by U.S. bureaucrat Allen W. Dulles at a meeting of the Council on Foreign
Relations, Dec. 3, 1945). The figurative sense of impenetrable barrier is attested from 1819, and
the specific sense of barrier at the edge of the sphere of influence of the Soviet Union is recorded
from 1920. During World War II, Goebbels used it in German (ein eiserner Vorhang) in the same sense.
Its popular use in the U.S. dates from Churchill's speech.


iron-gray

Old English isengr&aelig;gum; see iron (n.) + gray. The color of freshly broken cast iron.


iron-on (adj.)

1959, from the verbal phrase, from iron (v.) + on (adv.).


ironclad (adj.)

1852, of warships, American English, from iron (n.) + clad. Of contracts, etc., 1884. As a noun
meaning iron-clad ship, it is attested from 1862.


ironic (adj.)

1620s, from Late Latin ironicus, from Greek eironikos dissembling, putting on a feigned ignorance,
from eironeia (see irony). Related: Ironical (1570s); ironically.


ironing (n.)

act of pressing and smoothing clothes with a heated flat-iron, c.1710, from present participle of
iron (v.). Ironing board attested from 1843.


Ironside

name given to a man of great hardihood or bravery, c.1300, first applied to Edmund II, king of
England (d.1016), later also to Oliver Cromwell and his troops. Old Ironsides as a nickname of
U.S.S. Constitution dates from that ship's defeat of H.M.S. Guerriere on Aug. 19, 1812, in the War
of 1812.


ironwork (n.)

early 15c., from iron (n.) + work (n.).


irony (n.)

c.1500, from Latin ironia, from Greek eironeia dissimulation, assumed ignorance, from eiron
dissembler, perhaps related to eirein to speak (see verb). Used in Greek of affected ignorance,
especially that of Socrates. For nuances of usage, see humor. Figurative use for condition opposite
to what might be expected; contradictory circumstances is from 1640s.


irony (adj.)

of or resembling iron, late 14c., from iron (n.) + -y (2).


Iroquois

1660s, from French (c.1600); not an Iroquoian word, perhaps from an Algonquian language. Related:
Iroquoian.


irradiance (adj.)

1660s, from irradiant (1520s), from Latin irradiantem (nominative irradians), present participle of
irradiare (see irradiate). Related: Irradiancy (1640s).


irradiate (v.)

c.1600, to cast beams of light upon, from Latin irradiatus, past participle of irradiare shine
forth, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + radiare to shine (see radiate). Meaning
expose to radiation other than light (originally X-rays) is from 1901. Related: Irradiated;
irradiating.


irradiation (n.)

1580s, from French irradiation, from Latin *irradiationem, noun of action from past participle stem
of irradiare (see irradiate). Originally of light (literally and figuratively); of X-rays, etc.,
from 1901.


irradicable (adj.)

1728, from ir- not + radicable.


irrational (adj.)

late 15c., not endowed with reason (of beats, etc.); earlier (of quantities) inexpressible in
ordinary numbers (late 14c.); from Latin irrationalis without reason, from assimilated form of in-
not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + rationalis reason (see rational). Meaning illogical, absurd is
attested from 1640s. Related: Irrationally.


irrationality (n.)

1560s, from irrational + -ity.


irreconcilable (adj.)

1590s, from French irr&eacute;concilable (16c.), from Medieval Latin *irreconcilabilis, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + reconcilabilis (see reconcile). Related:
Irreconcilably. As a noun from 1748.


irrecoverable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French irrecovrable, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1))
+ recovrable (see recover). In same sense irrecuperable (from Late Latin irrecuperabilis) is from
mid-14c. Related: Irrecoverably.


irredeemable (adj.)

c.1600, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + redeemable. Related: Irredeemably.


irredentist (n.)

1882, member of Italian political party which (after 1878) demanded the annexation of neighboring
Italian-speaking regions (Trieste, S. Tyrol, Nice, Corsica, etc.), from Italian Irredentista, from
(Italia) irredenta unredeemed (Italy). Related: Irredentism.


irreducible (adj.)

1530s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + reducible. Related: Irreducibly;
irreducibility.


irrefragable (adj.)

that cannot be refuted, 1530s, from Late Latin irrefragabilis, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + Latin refragari to oppose, contest, from re- back (see re-) + frag-,
base of frangere to break (see fraction). Related: irrefragably; irrefragability.


irrefrangible (adj.)

c.1719, that cannot be broken, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
refrangible.


irrefutable (adj.)

1610s, from Latin irrefutabilis irrefutable, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in-
(1)) + refutabilis, from refutare (see refute). Related: Irrefutably; irrefutability.


irregardless

an erroneous word that, etymologically, means the opposite of what it is used to express. Attested
in non-standard writing from at least 1870s (e.g. Portsmouth Times, Portsmouth, Ohio, U.S.A., April
11, 1874: We supported the six successful candidates for Council in the face of a strong opposition.
We were led to do so because we believed every man of them would do his whole duty, irregardless of
party, and the columns of this paper for one year has [sic] told what is needed.); probably a blend
of irrespective and regardless. Perhaps inspired by the colloquial use of the double negative as an
emphatic.


irregular (adj.)

late 14c., not in conformity with Church rules, from Old French irreguler (13c., Modern French
irr&eacute;gulier), from Medieval Latin irregularis, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + Latin regularis (see regular (adj.)). General sense is from late 15c.


irregular (n.)

a soldier not of the regular army, 1747, from irregular (adj.).


irregularity (n.)

early 14c., violation of Church rules, from Old French irregularit&eacute; (14c.) and directly from
Medieval Latin irregularitas, from irregularis (see irregular). Meaning state of being not regular
is from 1590s.


irrelevance (n.)

1735, from irrelevant + -ance. Earlier in the same sense was irrelevancy (1590s).


irrelevant (adj.)

1680s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + relevant. Related: Irrelevantly.


irreligion (n.)

1590s, from Late Latin irreligionem (nominative irreligio) irreligion, impiety, from assimiliated
form of in- not (see in- (1)) + religio (see religion).


irreligious (adj.)

c.1400, from Late Latin irreligiosus irreligious, impious, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + religiosus (see religious). Related: Irreligiously.


irremediable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin irremediabilis, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in-
(1)) + remediabilis (see remediable).


irremediably (adv.)

mid-15c., irremediabili, from irremediable + -ly (2).


irremovable (adj.)

1590s, from ir- not + removable. Related: Irremovably; irremovability.


irreparable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French irr&eacute;parable (12c.), from Latin irreparabilis irreparable,
irrecoverable, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + reparabilis that can be
repaired (see repair).


irreparably (adv.)

mid-15c., from irreparable + -ly (2).


irreplaceable (adj.)

1807, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + replaceable. Related: Irreplaceably.


irreprehensible (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin irreprehensibilis, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in-
(1)) + reprehens-, past participle stem of reprehendere (see reprehend).


irrepressible (adj.)

1767, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + repressible (see repress).    Increase of
population, which is filling the States out to their very borders, together with a new and extended
network of railroads and other avenues, and an internal commerce which daily becomes more intimate,
is rapidly bringing the States into a higher and more perfect social unity or consolidation. Thus,
these antagonistic systems are continually coming into closer contact, and collision results.
Shall I tell you what this collision means? They who think that it is accidental, unnecessary, the
work of interested or fanatical agitators, and therefor ephemeral, mistake the case altogether. It
is an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces, and it means that the United
States must and will, sooner or later, become either entirely a slaveholding nation, or entirely a
free-labor nation. [William H. Seward, speech at Rochester, N.Y., Oct. 2, 1858]    Related:
Irrepressibly.


irreproachable (adj.)

1630s, from French irr&eacute;prochable (15c.), from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + r&eacute;prochable (see reproach). Related: Irreproachably.


irreputable (adj.)

1709, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + reputable.


irresistible (adj.)

1590s, from Late Latin irresistibilis, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
resistere (see resist). Related: Irresistibly; irresistibility.


irresolute (adj.)

1570s, from Latin irresolutus, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
resolutus (see resolute). Related: Irresolutely.


irresolution (n.)

1590s, from French irr&eacute;solution (16c.), from ir-, assimilated form of in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + r&eacute;solution (see resolution).


irresolvable (adj.)

1650s, from ir- + resolvable. Related: Irresolvably.


irrespective (adj.)

1620s (implied in irrespectively), disrespectful, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of
+ respective. Meaning without taking account of (something) is from 1690s. Main modern use is
adverbial (irrespective of), attested from 1839.


irresponsibility (n.)

1818; see irresponsible + -ity.


irresponsible (adj.)

1640s, not legally answerable for conduct or actions, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite
of + responsible. Meaning not acting with a sense of responsibility is from 1680s. Related:
Irresponsibly.


irretrievable (adj.)

1690s (implied in irretrievably), from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + retrievable
(see retrieve). Related: Irretrievably.


irreverence (n.)

mid-14c., from Latin irreverentia want of reverence, disrespect, from irreverentem (nominative
irreverens) disrespectful, irreverent, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
reverens, present participle of revereri to stand in awe of (see revere).


irreverent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin irreverentem (see irreverence). Related: Irreverently (early 15c.);
irreverential.


irreversible (adj.)

1620s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + reversible. Related: Irreversibly.


irrevocable (adj.)

also irrevokable, late 14c., from Latin irrevocabilis that cannot be recalled, unalterable, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + revocabilis (see revoke). Related:
Irrevocably.


irrigable (adj.)

1844, from stem of irrigate (v.) + -able.


irrigate (v.)

supply land with water, 1610s, from Latin irrigatus, past participle of irrigare lead water to,
refresh, irrigate, flood, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + rigare to
water, to moisten, of uncertain origin, perhaps cognate with rain. Related: Irrigated; irrigating.
In Middle English it was an adjective, watered, flooded (mid-15c.).


irrigation (n.)

a supplying of water to land, 1610s, from Latin irrigationem (nominative irrigatio) a watering, noun
of action from past participle stem of irrigare (see irrigate).


irritability (n.)

1755, from irritable + -ity.


irritable (adj.)

1660s, from French irritable and directly from Latin irritabilis easily excited, from irritare (see
irritate). Related: Irritably.


irritant (adj.)

1630s, from Latin irritantem (nominative irritans), present participle of irritare (see irritate).
As a noun, from 1802.


irritate (v.)

1530s, stimulate to action, rouse, incite, from Latin irritatus, past participle of irritare excite,
provoke. An earlier verb form was irrite (mid-15c.), from Old French irriter. Meaning annoy, make
impatient is from 1590s. Related: Irritated; irritating.


irritation (n.)

early 15c., in reference to sores and morbid swelling, from Middle French irritation or directly
from Latin irritationem (nominative irritatio) incitement, irritation, noun of action from past
participle stem of irritare (see irritate).


irrupt (v.)

to break into, 1855, back-formation from irruption or else from Latin irruptus, past participle of
irrumpere (see irruption).


irruption (n.)

1570s, from Middle French irruption or directly from Latin irruptionem (nominative irruptio) a
breaking in, bursting in, invasion, noun of action from past participle stem of irrumpere, from
assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + rumpere (see rupture (n.)). Frequently
confused with eruption.


IRS

also I.R.S., initialism (acronym) of Internal Revenue Service, U.S. federal government tax
collection agency, attested by 1954. The office dates to 1862; name changed 1953 from Bureau of
Internal Revenue.


Irwin

masc. proper name, Old English Eoforwine boar-friend; often confused with Irving, Irvin, which are
from Irvine, Ayrshire, or Irving, Dumfries.


is (v.)

third person singular present of be, Old English is, from Germanic stem *es- (cognates: Old High
German, German, Gothic ist, Old Norse es, er), from PIE *es-ti- (cognates: Sanskrit asti, Greek
esti, Latin est, Lithuanian esti, Old Church Slavonic jesti), from PIE root *es- to be. Old English
lost the final -t-. See be. Until 1500s, pronounced to rhyme with kiss. Phrase it is what it is,
indicating resigned acceptance of an unpleasant but inevitable situation or circumstance about which
nothing positive really can be said, is attested by 2001.


Isaac

masc. proper name, name of a biblical patriarch, from Late Latin, from Greek Isaak, from Hebrew
Yitzhaq, literally he laughs, imperf. of tzahaq he laughed.


Isabel

fem. proper name, a form of Elizabeth that seems to have developed in Provence. A popular name in
Middle Ages; pet forms included Ibb, Libbe, Nibb, Tibb, Bibby, and Ellice. The Spanish form was
Isabella, which is attested as a color name (greyish-yellow) from 1600; the Isabella who gave her
name to it has not been identified. Related: Isabelline.


isagoge (n.)

1650s, from Latin isagoge, from Greek eisagoge introduction (into court), importation (of goods),
from eis into + agoge a leading, from agein to lead (see act). Related: Isagogic; isagogical
(1520s).


Isaiah

masc. proper name, name of a biblical prophet, from Hebrew Yesha'yah, abbreviated form of
Yesha'yahu, literally salvation of the Lord, from yesha, yeshua salvation, deliverance.


ISBN

1969, acronym for International Standard Book Number.


Iscariot

traitor, 1640s, from the surname of Judas, betrayer of Jesus, in New Testament, from Latin
Iscariota, from Greek Iskariotes, said to be from Hebrew ishq'riyoth man of Kerioth (a place in
Palestine).


ischaemia (n.)

also ischemia, 1866 (but as far back as 1660s in form ischaimes), from medical Latin ischaemia, from
ischaemus stopping blood, from Greek iskhaimos stanching or stopping of blood, from iskhein to hold
+ haima blood (see -emia). Related: Ischemic.


ischium (n.)

the seat bone, 1640s, from Latin, from Greek iskhion hip joint, in plural, the hips, probably from
iskhi loin, of unknown origin.


ish kabibble

1913, I should worry, of unknown origin, but perhaps derived from Yiddish nisht gefidlt. Said to
have been popularized by comedienne Fanny Brice (1891-1951), but earliest references do not mention
her.    Chicken pox doesn't poison the wellsprings of one's existence like 'Ish kabibble,' and 'I
should worry.!' Do you think it's any fun to bring up children to speak decent English, and then
have their conversation strewed with phrases like that and with ain'ts? Do you think I like to hear
Robert talking about his little friends as 'de guys' and 'de ginks?' [Mary Heaton Vorse, Their
Little Friends, in Woman's Home Companion, February 1916]


Ishihara

name for the popular type of colorblindness test, 1924, from Japanese ophthalmologist Shinobu
Ishihara (1879-1963), who devised it in 1917.


Ishmael

masc. proper name, biblical son of Abraham and Hagar, from Hebrew Yishma'el, literally God hears,
from yishma, imperf. of shama he heard. The Arabs claim descent from him. Figurative sense of an
outcast, whose hand is against every man, and every man's hand against him is from Gen. xvi:12.


Ishtar

ancient Sumero-Babylonian goddess of love and fertility, counterpart of Phoenician Astarte (q.v.),
from Akkad. Ishtar.


Isidore

masc. proper name, from French, from Latin Isidorus, from Greek Isidoros, literally gift of Isis,
from doron gift (see date (n.1)). St. Isidore, archbishop of Seville (600-636) wrote important
historical, etymological, and ecclesiastical works and in 2001 was named patron saint of computers,
computer users, and the Internet.


isinglass (n.)

1520s, said to be perversion of Dutch huysenblas, literally sturgeon bladder, from huysen sturgeon +
blas bladder; so called because the substance was obtained from it.


Islam (n.)

religious system revealed by Muhammad, 1818, from Arabic islam, literally submission (to the will of
God), from root of aslama he resigned, he surrendered, he submitted, causative conjunction of salima
he was safe, and related to salam peace.    ... Islam is the only major religion, along with
Buddhism (if we consider the name of the religion to come from Budd, the Divine Intellect, and not
the Buddha), whose name is not related to a person or ethnic group, but to the central idea of the
religion. [The Heart of Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, 2002]    Earlier
English names for the faith include Mahometry (late 15c.), Muhammadism (1610s), Islamism (1747), and
Ismaelism (c.1600), which in part is from Ishmaelite, a name formerly given (especially by Jews) to
Arabs, as descendants of Ishmael (q.v.), and in part from Arabic Ismailiy, name of the Shiite sect
that after 765 C.E. followed the Imamship through descendants of Ismail (Arabic for Ishmael), eldest
son of Jafar, the sixth Imam. The Ismailians were not numerous, but among them were the powerful
Fatimid dynasty in Egypt and the Assassins, both of whom loomed large in European imagination.


Islamic (adj.)

1791, from Islam + -ic.


island (n.)

1590s, earlier yland (c.1300), from Old English igland island, from ieg island (from Proto-Germanic
*aujo thing on the water, from PIE *akwa- water; see aqua-) + land (n.). Spelling modified 15c. by
association with similar but unrelated isle. An Old English cognate was ealand river-land, watered
place, meadow by a river. In place names, Old English ieg is often used of slightly raised dry
ground offering settlement sites in areas surrounded by marsh or subject to flooding [Cambridge
Dictionary of English Place-Names]. Related: Islander.


isle (n.)

late 13c., from Old French ile, earlier isle, from Latin insula island, of uncertain origin, perhaps
(as the Ancients guessed) from in salo (that which is) in the sea, from ablative of salum the open
sea. The -s- was restored first in French, then in English in the late 1500s.


islet (n.)

1530s, from Middle French islette (Modern French &icirc;lette), diminutive of isle (see isle).


iso-

word-forming element meaning equal, similar, identical; isometric, from comb. form of Greek isos
equal to, the same as (as in isometor like one's mother). Used properly only with words of Greek
origin; the Latin equivalent is equi- (see equi-).


isobar (n.)

1864, coined from Greek isos equal (see iso-) + baros weight (see grave (adj.)). Line connecting
places with the same barometric pressure at the same time.


isocephalic (adj.)

having the heads of the principal figures at about the same level, from Greek isokephalos like-
headed, from isos equal (see iso-) + kephale head (see cephalo-).


isochronous (adj.)

1706, with suffix -ous, from Modern Latin isochronus, from Greek isokhronos equal in time, from iso-
equal (see iso-) + khronos time (see chrono-). Earlier in same sense was isochronal (1670s).


isocracy (n.)

equal power, 1650s, from Greek isokratia equality of power, from isokrates of equal power,
possessing equal rights, from isos equal (see iso-) + -kratia power, rule, authority (see -cracy).
Related: Isocratic.


isokinetic (adj.)

1958, from iso- + kinetic.


isolate (v.)

by 1786, a new formation from isolated (q.v.).    The translation of this work is well performed,
excepting that fault from which few translations are wholly exempt, and which is daily tending to
corrupt our language, the adoption of French expressions. We have here evasion for escape, twice or
more times repeated; brigands very frequently; we have the unnecessary and foolish word isolate;
and, if we mistake not, paralize, which at least has crept in through a similar channel. Translators
cannot be too careful on this point, as it is a temptation to which they are constantly exposed.
[The British Critic, April 1799]    As a noun from 1890, from earlier adjectival use (1819).


isolated (adj.)

1763, from French isol&eacute; isolated (17c.) + English -ated (see -ate (2)). The French word is
from Italian isolato, from Latin insulatus made into an island, from insula island.  The French word
was used at first in English (isole, also isole'd, c.1750), then after isolate became an English
word, isolated became its past participle.


isolation (n.)

1800, noun of action from isolate, or else from French isolation, noun of action from isoler (see
isolated).


isolationist

in reference to U.S. foreign policy, 1899 (earlier in reference to treatment of leprosy), from
isolation + -ist. Isolationism is attested by 1922.


Isold

fem. proper name, French Isolt, Iseut, of Germanic origin, literally ice-rule, from *is ice (see ice
(n.)) + *waltan (see wield).


isomer (n.)

1866, back-formation from isomeric. Greek isomeres meant sharing equality, from iso- (see iso-) +
meros part, share (see merit (n.)).


isometric (adj.)

1838, literally of the same measure, coined from Greek isos equal (see iso-) + metron measure (see
meter (n.2)). Originally a method of using perspective in drawing; the physiological sense relating
to muscular action is from 1891, from German isometrisch in this sense (1882).


isometrics (n.)

1962, American English, from isometric; also see -ics.


isometry (n.)

1941, from Greek isometria equality of measure, from iso- (see iso-) + metria a measuring (see
-metry).


isomorphic (adj.)

1862, from iso- + Greek morphe (see Morpheus).


isomorphism (n.)

from German Isomorphismus, 1828, coined by German chemist Eilhard Mitscherlich (1794-1863) from
isomorph; see isomorphic. Related: Isomorph.


isopod (n.)

1835, from French isopode, from Latin isopoda (neuter plural), from Greek iso- (see iso-) + pod-,
stem of pous foot (see foot (n.)).


isosceles (adj.)

having two equal sides, 1550s, from Late Latin isosceles, from Greek isoskeles with equal sides,
from isos equal (see iso-) + skelos leg, from PIE *skel-es-, from root *(s)kel- (3) crooked (see
scoliosis).


isostasy (n.)

1889, from iso- + Greek stasis setting, weighing, standing (see stasis). Related: Isostatic.


isotherm (n.)

1860, from French isotherme (Humboldt, 1817), from Greek iso- (see iso-) + therme heat (see
thermal).


isothermal

1826 (adj.); 1852 (n.), from French isotherme (see isotherm) + -al (1).


isotonic (adj.)

1828, from Greek isotonos of level pitch; equally stretched, from iso- (see iso-) + tonos (see
tenet).


isotope (n.)

1913, literally having the same place, introduced by British chemist Frederick Soddy (1877-1956) on
suggestion of Margaret Todd, from Greek isos equal (see iso-) + topos place (see topos); so called
because despite the different atomic weights, the various forms of an element occupy the same place
on the periodic table.


isotropic (adj.)

1864, from iso- + Greek tropikos belonging to a turning, from tropos a turning, way, manner (see
trope).


Israel

Old English, the Jewish people, from Latin Israel, from Greek, from Hebrew yisra'el he that striveth
with God (Gen. xxxii.28),  symbolic proper name conferred on Jacob and extended to his descendants,
from sara he fought, contended + El God. As an independent Jewish state in the country formerly
called Palestine, it is attested from 1948.


Israeli

1948; from Israel + Hebrew national designation suffix -i. Coined to distinguish citizens of the
modern state from the ancient people who had been known in English since late 14c. as Israelites.


Israelite (n.)

late 14c., from Latin israelita, from Greek Israelites, from Israel (see Israel).


Issachar

son of Jacob by Leah (Old Testament), name of a biblical tribe of Israel, from Greek issakhar, from
Hebrew Yissakhar, probably [Klein] from yesh sakhar there is a reward (see Gen. xxx:18).


Issei

c.1930s, term used among Japanese immigrants for first-generation immigrants, in Japanese, literally
first generation, related to ichi one.


issuance (n.)

1863, American English, from issue (v.) + -ance.


issue (n.)

c.1300, exit, a going out, flowing out, from Old French issue a way out, exit, from fem. past
participle of issir to go out, from Latin exire (source also of Italian uscire, Catalan exir), from
ex- out (see ex-) + ire to go, from PIE root *ei- to go (see ion). Meaning discharge of blood or
other fluid from the body is from 1520s; sense of offspring is from late 14c. Meaning outcome of an
action is attested from late 14c., probably from French; legal sense of point in question at the
conclusion of the presentation by both parties in a suit (early 14c. in Anglo-French) led to
transferred sense of a point to be decided (1836). Meaning action of sending into publication or
circulation is from 1833.


issue (v.)

c.1300, to flow out, from issue (n.) or else from Old French issu, past participle of issir; sense
of to send out authoritatively is from c.1600; that of to supply (someone with something) is from
1925. Related: Issued; issuing.


Istanbul

Turkish name of Constantinople, a corruption of Greek phrase eis tan (ten) polin into the city,
which is how the local Greek population referred to it. Picked up in Turkish 16c., though Turkish
folk etymology traces the name to Islam bol plenty of Islam. Greek polis city has been adopted into
Turkish as a place-name suffix as -bolu.


isthmian (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin isthmius, from Greek isthmios, from isthmos (see isthmus).


isthmus (n.)

1550s, from Latin isthmus, from Greek isthmos narrow passage, narrow neck of land, especially that
of Corinth, of unknown origin, perhaps from eimi to go + suffix -thmo (compare ithma a step,
movement).


it (pron.)

Old English hit, neuter nominative and accusative of third person singular pronoun, from Proto-
Germanic demonstrative base *khi- (cognates: Old Frisian hit, Dutch het, Gothic hita it), from PIE
*ko- this (see he). Used in place of any neuter noun, hence, as gender faded in Middle English, it
took on the meaning thing or animal spoken about before.    Whether the charmer sinner it or saint
it,  If the folly grow romantic, I must paint it.  [Pope, Moral Essays, 1735]    The h- was lost due
to being in an unemphasized position, as in modern speech the h- in give it to him, ask her, is only
heard in the careful speech of the partially educated [Weekley]. It the sex act is from 1610s;
meaning sex appeal (especially in a woman) first attested 1904 in works of Rudyard Kipling,
popularized 1927 as title of a book by Elinor Glyn, and by application of It Girl to silent-film
star Clara Bow (1905-1965). In children's games, meaning the one who must tag the others is attested
from 1842.


Italian (n.)

early 15c., native of Italy, from Italian Italiano, from Italia Italy (see Italy). As an adjective
from 1640s.


Italianate (adj.)

1570s, from Italian Italianato rendered Italian, from Italiano (see Italian).


italic

1610s (adj.), 1670s (n.) italic type, from Latin italicus Italian (see Italian); so called because
it was introduced in 1501 by Aldus Manutius, printer of Venice (who also gave his name to Aldine),
and first used in an edition of Virgil dedicated to Italy. Earlier (1570s) the word was used for the
plain, sloping style of handwriting, as opposed to Gothic. Related: Italics.


italicize (v.)

to print in italics (for emphasis, etc.), 1795, from italic + -ize. Related: Italicized;
italicizing.


Italy

from Latin Italia, from Greek Italia, perhaps from an alteration of Oscan Viteliu Italy, but
originally only the southwestern point of the peninsula, traditionally from Vitali, name of a tribe
that settled in Calabria, whose name is perhaps somehow connected with Latin vitulus calf, or
perhaps the country name is directly from vitulus as land of cattle, or it might be from an Illyrian
word, or an ancient or legendary ruler Italus.


itch (n.)

Old English gicce, from giccan (v.) to itch (see itch (v.)). Sense of restless desire is first
attested 1530s; itching in this sense is from mid-14c.


itch (v.)

Old English giccan to itch, from West Germanic *jukkjan (cognates: Middle Dutch j&ouml;ken to itch,
Old High German jucchen, German jucken). Related: Itched; itching.


itchy (adj.)

Old English giccig; see itch + -y (2). Figurative itchy palm is attested by 1590s. Related:
Itchiness.


item

late 14c. (adv.) moreover, in addition, from Latin item (adv.) likewise, just so, moreover, used to
introduce a new fact or statement, probably from ita thus, id it (see id) + adverbial ending -tem
(compare idem the same). Thus a statement or maxim (of the kind formerly introduced by the word
item), first recorded 1560s. Meaning detail of information (especially in a newspaper) is from 1819;
item sexually linked unmarried couple is 1970, probably from notion of being an item in the gossip
columns. Noun sense of an article of any kind (1570s) developed from adverbial sense of moreover, in
addition, which was used before every article in a list (such as an inventory or bill).


itemize (v.)

1864, American English, from item + -ize. Related: Itemized; itemizing. Earlier verb was simply item
(c.1600).


iterate (v.)

1530s, to do again, repeat, back-formation from iteration, or else from Latin iteratus, past
participle of iterare. Related: Iterated; iterating.


iteration (n.)

late 15c., from Latin iterationem (nominative iteratio) repetition, noun of action from past
participle stem of iterare do again, repeat, from iterum again, from PIE *i-tero-, from pronomial
root *i- (see yon).


iterative (adj.)

involving repetition, late 15c., from French iteratif (c.1400), from Late Latin iterativus, from
iterat-, past participle stem of iterare (see iteration). As a noun, from 1854. Related:
Iteratively.


Ithaca

western Greek Island, legendary home of Odysseus; the first element is perhaps Phoenician I island;
the rest is unknown.


ither

Scottish form of other.


ithyphallic

1610s, poem in ithyphallic meter, from Greek ithyphallos phallos carried in the festivals, from
ithys straight + phallos erect penis (see phallus). As an adjective from 1795. The meter was that of
the Bacchic hymns, which were sung in the rites during which such phalloses were carried. Thus, in
Victorian times, the word also meant grossly indecent (1864).


itinerant (adj.)

1560s (attested in Anglo-Latin from late 13c.), from Late Latin itinerantem (nominative itinerans),
present participle of itinerare to travel, from Latin iter (genitive itineris) journey, from ire go
(see ion). Originally in reference to circuit courts.


itinerary (n.)

mid-15c., route of travel, from Late Latin itinerarium account of a journey, noun use of neuter of
itinerarius of a journey, from Latin itineris journey (see itinerant). By late 15c. it meant record
of a journey; extended sense sketch of a proposed route is from 1856.


itinerate (v.)

c.1600, from Late Latin itineratus, past participle of itinerare to travel (see itinerant).
Especially to travel from place to place preaching (1775). Related: Itinerated; itinerating.


its

neuter possessive pronoun; the modern word begins to appear in writing at the end of 16c., from it +
genitive/possessive ending 's (q.v.), and at first commonly written it's, a spelling retained by
some to the beginning of the 19c. [OED]. The apostrophe came to be omitted, perhaps because it's
already was established as a contraction of it is, or by general habit of omitting apostrophes in
personal pronouns (hers, yours, theirs, etc.).    The neuter genitive pronoun in Middle English was
his, but the clash between grammatical gender and sexual gender, or else the application of the word
to both human and non-human subjects, evidently made users uncomfortable. Restriction of his to the
masculine and avoidance of it as a neuter pronoun is evidenced in Middle English, and of it and
thereof (as in KJV) were used for the neuter possessive. Also, from c.1300, simple it was used as a
neuter possessive pronoun. But in literary use, his as a neuter pronoun continued into the 17c.


itself (pron.)

late 14c., from Old English hit sylf, from it + self. Since 17c. usually regarded as its self
(compare its own self).


itsy-bitsy (adj.)

charmingly small, 1890, from itty and/or bitsy. Bitsy-itsy is recorded from 1875.


itty (adj.)

1798, in a letter of Jane Austen, baby-talk form of little. Related: itty-bitty (1855); tiddy-itty
(1852).


Ivan

masc. proper name, from Russian, literally John, from Greek Ioannes John. As the personification of
Russia, or the typical name for a Russian man (originally a Russian soldier), attested from 1870.


ivory (n.)

mid-13c. (late 12c. as a surname), Anglo-French ivorie, from Old North French ivurie (12c.), from
Latin eboreus of ivory, from ebur (genitive eboris) ivory, probably via Phoenician from an African
source (compare Egyptian ab elephant, Coptic ebu ivory). Replaced Old English elpendban, literally
elephant bone. Applied in slang to articles made from it, such as dice (1830) and piano keys (1854).
As a color, especially in reference to human skin, it is attested from 1580s. Ivories as slang for
teeth dates from 1782. Related: Ivoried.


ivory tower (n.)

as a symbol of artistic or intellectual aloofness, by 1889, from French tour d'ivoire, used in 1837
by critic Charles-Augustin Sainte-Beuve (1804-1869) with reference to the poet Alfred de Vigny, whom
he accused of excessive aloofness.  Et Vigny, plus secret, comme en sa tour d'ivoire, avant midi
rentrait. [Sainte-Beuve, Pens&eacute;es d'Ao&#251;t, &#224; M. Villemain, 1837]  Used earlier as a
type of a wonder or a symbol of the ideal. The literal image is perhaps from Song of Solomon
[vii:4]:    Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; thine eyes like the fishpools in Heshbon, by the gate
of Bathrabbim: thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus. [KJV]


ivy (n.)

Old English ifig, from West Germanic *ibakhs (cognates: Middle Low German iflof, Dutch eiloof, Old
High German ebahewi, German Efeu), of unknown origin; the second element in the Old High German word
might be hay.   Ivy bush as a sign of a tavern where wine is served is attested from mid-15c. Ivy
League, inspired by the notion of old, ivy-coated walls, dates to 1933 (perhaps originally in
reference to football; it consists of Brown, Columbia, Cornell, Dartmouth, Harvard, Pennsylvania,
Princeton, and Yale).


ixnay

no, no more, pig Latin for nix.


izard (n.)

chamois-like antelope of the Pyrenees, 1791, from French isard, Gascon isart, perhaps of Iberian
origin, or [Klein] from Basque (which has izzara star).


izzard (n.)

old name for Z, 1738, a variant of zed.


