J

the letter is a late modification of Roman -i-, originally a scribal creation in continental
Medieval Latin to distinguish small -i- in cursive writing from the strokes of other letters,
especially in the final positions of words. But in English, -y- was used for this, and -j- was
introduced c.1600-1640 to take up the consonantal sound that had evolved from -i- since Late Latin
times. This usage first was attested in Spanish, where it was in place before 1600. English
dictionaries continued to lump together words beginning in -i- and -j- until 19c., and -j- formerly
was skipped when letters were used to express serial order.    Used in modern writing to represent
Latin -i- before a, e, o, u in the same syllable, which in Latin was sounded as the consonant in
Modern English you, yam, etc., but the custom is controversial among Latinists:    The character J,
j, which represents the letter sound in some school-books, is an invention of the seventeenth
century, and is not found in MSS., nor in the best texts of the Latin authors. [Lewis]


j&#039;accuse

French, literally I accuse, phrase made famous by Emile Zola in a public letter attacking the
irregularities of the Dreyfus trial (published Jan. 13, 1898).


jab (v.)

1825, to thrust with a point, Scottish variant of job to strike, pierce, thrust, from Middle English
jobben to jab, thrust, peck (late 15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps echoic. Related: Jabbed;
jabbing.


jab (n.)

1825, from jab (v.). Meaning a punch with the fist is from 1889. Sense of injection with a
hypodermic needle, beloved by headline writers, is from 1914.


jabber (v.)

1650s, spelling variant of Middle English jablen (c.1400), also javeren, jaberen, probably
ultimately echoic. Related: Jabbered; jabbering. The noun is 1727, from the verb.


Jabberwocky

1872, nonsense word (perhaps based on jabber) coined by Lewis Carroll, for the poem of the same
name, which he published in Through the Looking-Glass. The poem is about a fabulous beast called the
Jabberwock.


jabot (n.)

frill of a shirt, 1823, from French jabot grizzard (of a bird), frill on a shirt front (16c.), of
unknown origin. Klein suggests a connection with gaver to cram, gorge, and thus ultimately with
English jaw.


jabroni (n.)

c.2000, professional wrestling slang for one whose main purpose is to make the better-known
wrestlers of the organization look good; he or she does this by losing to them. More commonly known
as a jobber (though some enthusiasts claim there is a difference), and perhaps a mock-Italianized
form of that word (but compare jaboney naive person, immigrant, hoodlum, of unknown origin, American
English, in use c.1990).   <b>Jobber</b> -- A performer who regularly loses on television and
doesn't receive much if any push. A comparable term for such a performer is jabroni, which is a
favorite catch-phrase of Dwayne The Rock Johnson. To soften the blow of such labels, some wrestling
promotions refer to jobbers as enhancement talent. Carpenter was the phrase used by earlier
generations. [The Professional Wrestlers' Instructional and Workout Guide, 2005]


jacaranda (n.)

tropical American tree, 1753, from Portuguese jacarand&aacute;, from Tupi yacaranda.


jacinth (n.)

c.1200, a blue gem (occasionally a red one), from Old French jacinte hyacinth; jacinth (see
hyacinth). In modern use, a reddish-orange gem.


Jack

masc. proper name, 1218, probably an anglicization of Old French Jacques (which was a diminutive of
Latin Jacobus; see Jacob), but in English the name always has been associated with Johan, Jan John,
and some have argued that it is a native formation.    Alliterative coupling of Jack and Jill is
from 15c. (Ienken and Iulyan). In England, applied familiarly or contemptuously to anybody
(especially one of the lower classes) from late 14c. Later used especially of sailors (1650s; Jack-
tar is from 1781). In U.S., as a generic name addressed to an unknown stranger, attested from 1889.


jack (n.)

late 14c., jakke a mechanical device, from the masc. name Jack. The proper name was used in Middle
English for any common fellow (mid-14c.), and thereafter extended to various appliances replacing
servants (1570s). Used generically of men (jack-of-all-trades, 1610s), male animals (1620s, see
jackass, jackdaw, etc.), and male personifications (1520s, such as Jack Frost, 1826).    As the name
of a device for pulling off boots, from 1670s. The jack in a pack of playing cards (1670s) is in
German Bauer peasant. Jack shit nothing at all is attested by 1968, U.S. slang. The plant jack-in-
the-pulpit is attested by 1837. Jack the Ripper was active in London 1888. The jack of Union Jack is
a nautical term for small flag at the bow of a ship (1630s).


jack (v.)

1860, jack up hoist, raise, American English, from the noun (see jack (n.)). Figurative sense
increase (prices, etc.) is 1904, American English. Related: Jacked; jacking. Jack off (v.) to
masturbate is attested from 1916, probably from jack (n.) in the sense of penis.


Jack o&#039;lantern (n.)

also jack-o-lantern, 1660s, a local name for a will-o-the-wisp (Latin ignis fatuus), mainly attested
in East Anglia but also in southwestern England. The extension to carved pumpkins is attested by
1834, American English.


Jack Russell

type of terrier (not recognized as a distinct breed), 1907, named for the Rev. John Russell
(1795-1883) of Devonshire, the sporting parson.


jack-in-the-box (n.)

1560s, originally a name for a sharp or cheat, who deceived tradesmen by substituting empty boxes
for others full of money [Robert Nares, A Glossary of Words, Phrases, Names, and Allusions, London,
1905]. As a type of toy, it is attested from 1702.


jack-knife (n.)

also jackknife, large pocket knife, 1711, probably American English, perh[aps] associated with some
sense of JACK sb.1, but compare jackleg knife [OED]; see jack + knife (n.). Jackleg was a U.S.
colloquial term of contempt from c.1850. On another theory, so called because it originally was
associated with sailors. As a kind of swimming dive, from 1922. As a type of tractor-trailer
accident, 1966. Both from the notion of folding, as the knife does.


jack-knife (v.)

1776, to stab, from jack-knife (n.). Intransitive meaning to fold or bend the body is said to date
from the time of the American Civil War. The truck accident verbal sense is from 1949. Related:
Jackknifed; jackknifing.


jackal (n.)

c.1600, from Turkish &ccedil;akal, from Persian shaghal, from or cognate with Sanskrit srgala-s,
literally the howler. Figurative sense of skulking henchman is from the old belief that jackals
stirred up game for lions.


jackanapes (n.)

mid-15c., a monkey, also an impertinent, conceited fellow; apparently from Jack of Naples, but
whether this is some specific personification or folk etymology of jack (n.) + ape is unknown. See
note in OED.


jackass (n.)

mule ass, 1727, from jack (n.) + ass (n.1). Meaning stupid person is attested from 1823.


jackboot (n.)

also jack-boot, 1680s, type of large, strong cavalry boot of 17c.-18c., later a type worn by German
military and para-military units in the Nazi period. From jack (n.), though the exact sense here is
unclear + boot (n.1). Figurative of military oppression since 1768. Related: Jackbooted.


jackdaw (n.)

1540s, the common name of the daw (Corvus monedula), which frequents church towers, old buildings,
etc.; noted for its loquacity and thievish propensities [OED]. See jack (n.) + daw.    In modern
times, parrots are almost the only birds that have the gift of speech, though connoisseurs are not
ignorant that starlings and jackdaws have good abilities in that way, when properly educated.
[Chambers' Home Book and Pocket Miscellany, 1853]


jacket (n.)

mid-15c., short garment for men, from Middle French jaquet short coat with sleeves, diminutive of
Old French jaque, a kind of tunic, probably from Jacque, the male proper name, also the generic name
of a French peasant (see jacquerie), but possibly associated with jaque (de mailles) short, tight-
fitting coat, originally coat of mail, from Spanish jaco, from Arabic shakk breastplate. Iakke a
short, close-fitting stuffed or quilted tunic, often serving as a defensive garment is attested in
English from late 14c., and by c.1400 was being used for woman's short tunic. Meaning paper wrapper
of a book is first attested 1894.


jackhammer (n.)

also jack hammer, 1903, from jack (n.) + hammer (n.). As a verb by 1965.


jackpot (n.)

also jack-pot, big prize, 1944, from slot machine sense (1932), from obsolete poker sense (1881) of
antes that begin when no player has a pair of jacks or better; from jack (n.) in the card-playing
sense + pot (n.1). Earlier, in criminal slang, it meant trouble, especially an arrest (1902).    The
regular Draw-Poker game is usually varied by occasional Jack-Pots, which are played once in so many
deals, or when all have refused to play, or when the player deals who holds the buck, a marker
placed in the pool with every jack-pot. In a jack-pot each player puts up an equal stake and
receives a hand. The pot must then be opened by a player holding a hand of the value of a pair of
knaves (jacks) or better. If no player holds so valuable a hand the deal passes and each player adds
a small sum to the pot or pool. When the pot is opened the opener does so by putting up any sum he
chooses, within the limit, and his companions must pay in the same amount or drop. They also possess
the right to raise the opener. The new cards called for are then dealt and the opener starts the
betting, the play proceeding as in the regular game. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed., 1911,
Poker. The article notes Jack-Pots were introduced about 1870.]


jackrabbit (n.)

1863, American English, shortening of jackass-rabbit (1851), so called for its long ears. Proverbial
for bursts of speed (up to 45 mph).


Jacksonian

1824, of or in the character of U.S. politician Andrew Jackson (1767-1845). The surname is recorded
from early 14c., literally son of a man named Jack.


Jacob

masc. proper name, name of Old Testament patriarch, son of Isaac and Rebecca and father of the
founders of the twelve tribes, from Late Latin Iacobus, from Greek Iakobos, from Hebrew Ya'aqobh,
literally one that takes by the heel (Gen. xxviii:12), a derivative of 'aqebh heel. The most popular
name for boys born in the U.S. from 1999 through 2008. Jacob's ladder, in various transferred uses
from 1733, is from Gen. xxviii:12.


Jacobean

1770, literally of James (king or apostle), later especially of the literary and architectural style
of the time of James I (1844). See James.


Jacobin

early 14c., in reference to an order of Dominican friars, from Old French Jacobin (13c.) Dominican
friar (also, in the Middle East, a Copt); so called because the order built its first convent near
the church of Saint-Jacques in Paris (the masc. proper name Jacques is from Late Latin Iacobus; see
Jacob). The Revolutionary extremists made their club headquarters there October 1789 and supported
Robespierre during the Terror. It was suppressed in November 1794. In English, used generically of
radicals and allegedly radical reformers since 1793. Related: Jacobinism.


Jacquard

1841, from Joseph Marie Jacquard (1752-1834) of Lyons, inventor of new weaving technology c.1800.


jacquerie (n.)

1520s, from Middle French jacquerie peasants or villeins collectively, from Jacques, the proper
name, which is used as Jack is used in English, in the sense of any common fellow. So, also, the
rising of the northern French peasants against the nobles, 1357-8, from a French usage.
Etymologically, Jacques is from Late Latin Iacobus (see Jacob).


Jacuzzi (n.)

1966, U.S. proprietary name, from Jacuzzi Bros., Inc., Little Rock, Arkansas.


jade (n.1)

ornamental stone, 1721, earlier iada (1590s), from French le jade, error for earlier l'ejade, from
Spanish piedra de (la) ijada (1560s), stone of colic, pain in the side (jade was thought to cure
this), from Vulgar Latin *iliata, from Latin ilia (plural) flanks, kidney area (see ileum).


jade (n.2)

worn-out horse, late 14c., cart horse, of uncertain origin. Barnhart suggests a variant of yaid,
yald whore, literally mare, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse jalda mare, from Finno-
Ugric (compare Mordvin al'd'a mare). But OED finds the assumption of a Scandinavian connection
without reason. As a term of abuse for a woman, it dates from 1550s.


jade (v.)

to weary, tire out, make dull, c.1600, from jade (n.2). Related: Jaded; jading.


jaded (adj.)

bored by continual indulgence, 1630s; past participle adjective from jade (v.).


jag (n.1)

period of unrestrained activity, 1887, American English, perhaps via intermediate sense of as much
drink as a man can hold (1670s), from earlier meaning load of hay or wood (1590s), of unknown
origin. Used in U.S. colloquial speech from 1834 to mean a quantity, a lot.


jag (n.2)

slash or rend in a garment, c.1400, of unknown origin.


jager (n.)

German sharpshooter, 1776, from German j&auml;ger, literally huntsman, from jagen to hunt, from Old
High German jagon, related to Old Frisian jagia, Dutch jagen to hunt, Old Norse jaga to drive, to
move to and fro (see yacht). Applied to riflemen and sharpshooters in the German and Austrian
armies. Englished as yager, yaeger from 1804.


jagged (adj.)

mid-15c., from verb jaggen (c.1400) to pierce, slash, cut; to notch or nick; cut or tear unevenly,
Scottish and northern English, of unknown origin. Originally of garments with regular toothed edges;
meaning with the edge irregularly cut is from 1570s. Related: Jaggedly; jaggedness.


jaguar (n.)

big cat of the Americas (Felis onca), c.1600, from Portuguese jaguar, from Tupi jaguara, said to be
a name denoting any larger beast of prey [Klein]. Also a type of British-made car; in this sense the
abbreviation Jag is attested from 1959.


Jah (n.)

1530s, a form of Hebrew Yah, short for Yahweh Jehovah. Used in some English bibles. Cognate with the
second element in hallelujah and in Elijah.


jai alai (n.)

1902, American English, originally in a Cuban context, from Basque, from jai celebration + alai
merry.


jail (n.)

late 13c., gayhol, from Old North French gaiole and Old French jaole, both meaning a cage, prison,
from Medieval Latin gabiola, from Late Latin caveola, diminutive of Latin cavea cage, enclosure,
stall, coop (see cave (n.)). Both forms carried into Middle English; now pronounced jail however it
is spelled. Persistence of Norman-derived gaol (preferred in Britain) is chiefly due to statutory
and official tradition [OED].


jail (v.)

to put in jail, c.1600, from jail (n.). Related: Jailed; jailing.


jailbait (n.)

also jail bait, jail-bait, girl under the legal age of consent, 1930, from jail (n.) + bait (n.).


jailbird (n.)

1610s, based on an image of a caged bird; from jail (n.) + bird (n.1).


jailbreak (n.)

also jail-break, prison escape, 1872, perhaps 1828, from jail (n.) + break (n.).


jailer (n.)

also gaoler, late 14c., from Old North French gayolierre, Old French jaioleur, agent noun from jaole
(see jail (n.)).


Jain

1805, from Hindi Jaina, from Sanskrit jinah saint, literally overcomer, from base ji to conquer,
related to jayah victory, from PIE root *gweie- (2) to press down, conquer. The sect dates from 6c.
B.C.E.


Jainism (n.)

1858, from Jain + -ism. Jainist is attested from 1816.


Jake

colloquial or familiar abbreviation of the masc. proper name Jacob (q.v.). As the typical name of a
rustic lout, from 1854. (Jakey still is the typical name for an Amishman among the non-Amish of
Pennsylvania Dutch country). Slang meaning excellent, fine is from 1914, American English, of
unknown origin.


jakes (n.)

a privy, mid-15c., genitive singular of jack (n.).


jalapeno (n.)

type of pepper, by 1957, literally of Jalapa, from Mexican Spanish Jalapa, place in Mexico, from
Aztec Xalapan, literally sand by the water, from xalli sand + atl water + -pan place.


jalopy (n.)

battered old automobile, 1924 (early variants include jaloupy, jaloppi, gillopy), of unknown origin;
perhaps from Jalapa, Mexico, where many U.S. used cars supposedly were sent (see jalapeno).


jalousie (n.)

1766, French, literally jealousy (see jealousy), from notion of looking through blinds without being
seen.


jam (v.)

to press tightly, also to become wedged, 1706, of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of champ (v.).
Of a malfunction in the moving parts of machinery, by 1851. Sense of cause interference in radio
signals is from 1914. Related: Jammed; jamming. The adverb is recorded from 1825, from the verb.


jam (n.1)

fruit preserve, 1730s, probably a special use of jam (v.) with a sense of crush fruit into a
preserve.


jam (n.2)

a tight pressing between two surfaces, 1806, from jam (v.). Jazz meaning short, free improvised
passage performed by the whole band dates from 1929, and yielded jam session (1933); but this is
perhaps from jam (n.1) in sense of something sweet, something excellent. Sense of machine blockage
is from 1890, which probably led to the colloquial meaning predicament, tight spot, first recorded
1914.


Jamaica

West Indian island, from Taino (Arawakan) xaymaca, said to mean rich in springs. Columbus when he
found it in 1494 named it Santiago, but this did not stick. Related: Jamaican. The Jamaica in New
York probably is a Delaware (Algonquian) word meaning beaver pond altered by influence of the island
name.


jamb (n.)

side-piece of a door, window, etc., early 14c., from Old French jambe pier, side post of a door,
originally a leg, shank (12c.), from Late Latin gamba leg, (horse's) hock (see gambol).


jambalaya (n.)

1872, from Louisiana French, from Proven&ccedil;al jambalaia stew of rice and fowl.


jamboree (n.)

1866, represented as typical of American English, perhaps from jam (n.) on pattern of shivaree
[Barnhart]. For the second element, Weekley suggests French bourree, a kind of rustic dance. Klein
thinks the whole thing is of Hindu origin (but he credits its introduction to English, mistakenly,
to Kipling). Boy Scouts use is from 1920. Noted earlier as a term in cribbage:   Jamboree signifies
the combination of the five highest cards, as, for example, the two Bowers [jacks], Ace, King, and
Queen of trumps in one hand, which entitles the holder to count sixteen points. The holder of such a
hand, simply announces the fact, as no play is necessary; but should he play the hand as a Jambone,
he can count only eight points, whereas he could count sixteen if he played it, or announced it as a
Jamboree. [The American Hoyle, New York, 1864]


James

masc. proper name, name of two of Christ's disciples, late 12c. Middle English vernacular form of
Late Latin Jacomus (source of Old French James, Spanish Jaime, Italian Giacomo), altered from Latin
Jacobus (see Jacob).    The Welsh form was Iago, the Cornish Jago. Fictional British spy James Bond
dates from 1953, created by British author Ian Fleming (1908-1964), who plausibly is said to have
taken the name from that of U.S. ornithologist James Bond (1900-1989), an expert on Caribbean birds.


Jamesian (adj.)

of or in the mode of James, 1875 in reference to William James (1842-1910) U.S. philosopher and
exponent of pragmatism; 1905 in reference to his brother Henry James (1843-1916), U.S. expatriate
novelist.


jams (n.)

1966, abstracted from pajamas (q.v.).


Jane

fem. proper name, from French Jeanne, Old French Jehane, from Medieval Latin Johanna (see John). As
a generic name for girl, girlfriend it is attested from 1906 in U.S. slang. Never a top-10 list name
for girls born in the U.S., it ranked in the top 50 from 1931 to 1956. It may owe its everywoman
reputation rather to its association with John.


Janet

fem. proper name, a diminutive of Jane. In Middle English, Ionete-of-the-steues was a common name
for a prostitute (late 14c.).


jangle (n.)

late 13c., gossip, slanderous conversation, dispute, from Old French jangle, from jangler (see
jangle (v.)). Meaning discordant sound is from 1795.


jangle (v.)

c.1300, jangeln, to talk excessively, chatter, talk idly, from Old French jangler to chatter,
gossip, bawl, argue noisily (12c.), perhaps from Frankish *jangelon to jeer or some other Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch jangelen to whine). Meaning make harsh noise is first recorded late
15c. Related: Jangled; jangling.


janitor (n.)

1580s, an usher in a school, later doorkeeper (1620s), from Latin ianitor doorkeeper, porter, from
ianua door, entrance, gate, from ianus arched passageway, arcade (see Janus) + agent suffix -tor.
Meaning caretaker of a building first recorded 1708.


janitorial (adj.)

1869, from janitor + -ial.


janizary (n.)

elite Turkish infantry, 1520s, from French janissaire (15c.), from Italian giannizzero, from Turkish
yenicheri, literally new troops, from yeni new + cheri soldiery. Formed 1362 from slaves and
prisoners of war, until late 17c. largely recruited from compulsory conscripts and converts taken
from Christian subjects. In later times Turks and other Muslims joined the corps because of the
various privileges attached to it; abolished 1826.


Jankin

masc. proper name, from Jan, variant of John, + diminutive suffix -kin. In Middle English, applied
contemptuously to priests.


Jansenism (n.)

1650s, in reference to doctrine of Cornelius Jansen (1585-1638), Catholic bishop of Ypres, who
maintained the perverseness and inability for good of the natural human will. Related: Jansenist.


January (n.)

late 13c., Ieneuer, from Old North French Genever, Old French Jenvier (Modern French Janvier),
attested from early 12c. in Anglo-French, from Latin Ianuarius (mensis) (the month) of Janus, to
whom the month was sacred as the beginning of the year (see Janus; cognates: Italian Gennajo,
Proven&ccedil;al Genovier, Portuguese Janeiro). The form was gradually Latinized by c.1400. Replaced
Old English geola se &aelig;fterra Later Yule. In Chaucer, a type-name for an old man.


Janus

ancient Italic deity, guardian god of portals, doors, and gates; patron of beginnings and endings,
c.1500, from Latin Ianus, literally gate, arched passageway, perhaps from PIE root *ei- (1) to go
(cognates: Sanskrit yanah path, Old Church Slavonic jado to travel). He is shown as having two
faces, one in front the other in back. His temple in Rome was closed only in times of peace.


JAP (n.)

acronym for Jewish-American Princess, attested from 1971.


Jap

Colloquial abbreviation of Japanese, by 1880 as a noun, 1892 as an adjective, not originally
pejorative but became so during World War II. It was protested by Japanese before the war, but did
not begin to be taboo in the U.S. before 1960s. For some years after World War II in American
English the word also functioned as a verb, to execute a sneak attack upon, a reference to Pearl
Harbor.


Japan

1570s, via Portuguese Japao, Dutch Japan, acquired in Malacca from Malay Japang, from Chinese jih
pun sunrise (equivalent of Japanese Nippon), from jih sun + pun origin. Earliest form in Europe was
Marco Polo's Chipangu. Cultural contact led to japaning coat with lacquer or varnish (1680s),
japonaiserie (1896, from French), etc.


Japanese

1580s, Iapones; see Japan + -ese. Japanese beetle attested from 1919, accidentally introduced in
U.S. 1916 in larval stage in a shipment of Japanese iris.


jape (v.)

late 14c., to trick, beguile, jilt, perhaps from Old French japer to howl, bawl, scream, of echoic
origin, or from Old French gaber to mock, deride. Phonetics suits the former, but sense the latter
explanation. Took on a slang sense mid-15c. of have sex with, and disappeared from polite usage.
Revived in harmless Middle English sense of say or do something in jest by Scott, etc. Related:
Japed; japing.


jape (n.)

early 14c., trick, deceit, later a joke, a jest (late 14c.); see jape (v.). By mid-14c. it meant
frivolous pastime, by 1400, bawdiness.


Japheth

youngest of the three sons of Noah, from Latin Japheth, from Greek Iapheth, from Hebrew Yepheth,
literally enlargement, from causative form of the stem p-t-h to be wide, spacious.


Japhetic

old name for Indo-European (see Aryan), 1828, from Biblical Japheth.


Japlish (n.)

Japanese with many English words, 1960, from Japanese + English.


japonica (n.)

camelia, 1819, Modern Latin, literally Japanese, from Japonica Japan, from Japon, variant of Japan.


jar (v.)

1520s, to make a harsh, grating sound, usually said to be echoic or imitative, but no one explains
how, or of what. Figurative sense of have an unpleasant effect on is from 1530s; that of cause to
vibrate or shake is from 1560s. Related: Jarred; jarring.


jar (n.)

cylindrical vessel, early 15c., possibly from Middle French jarre liquid measure (smaller than a
barrel), 12c., from Proven&ccedil;al jarra, from Arabic jarrah earthen water vessel (whence also
Spanish jarra, Italian giarra) [Klein].


jardiniere (n.)

ornamental flower stand, 1841, from French jardini&egrave;re flower pot; female gardener, gardener's
wife, noun use of fem. of adjective jardinier of the garden, from jardin (see garden (n.)).


jargon (n.)

mid-14c., unintelligible talk, gibberish; chattering, jabbering, from Old French jargon a chattering
(of birds), also language, speech, especially idle talk; thieves' Latin. Ultimately of echoic origin
(compare Latin garrire to chatter, English gargle). Often applied to something the speaker does not
understand, hence meaning mode of speech full of unfamiliar terms (1650s). Middle English also had
it as a verb, jargounen to chatter (late 14c.), from French.


jarhead (n.)

U.S. Marine, by 1985 (but in a biographical book with a World War II setting), from jar + head. Also
used as a general term of insult (by 1979) and by 1922 as a Georgia dialectal word for mule.


jarl (n.)

see earl.


jasmine (n.)

1570s, from French jasmin (Middle French jessemin), from Arabic yas(a)min, from Persian yasmin
(compare Greek iasme, iasmelaion, name of a Persian perfume). The plant first was grown in England
16c.


Jason

masc. proper name, from Greek Eason, from Hebrew Yehoshua, a common name among Hellenistic Jews (see
Joshua). In Greek mythology, son of Aeson, leader of the Argonauts, from Latin Jason, from Greek
Iason, perhaps related to iasthai to heal (see -iatric). The names were somewhat merged in Christian
Greek.


jasper (n.)

precious stone, c.1300, from Anglo-French jaspre, Old French jaspre, jaspe, from Latin iaspidem
(nominative iaspis), from Greek iaspis jasper, via an Oriental language (compare Hebrew yashpeh,
Akkadian yashupu).


Jasper

masc. proper name, English form of Caspar or of Gaspar, the traditional name of one of the Three
Kings. Said by Klein to be of Persian origin and meaning literally treasure-holder. Used from 1896
for a rustic simpleton.


jaundice (n.)

c.1300, jaunis, from Old French jaunice, earlier jalnice, yellowness (12c.), from jaune yellow, from
Latin galbinus greenish yellow, probably from PIE *ghel- yellow, green (see Chloe).    With
intrusive -d- (compare gender, astound, thunder). Figurative meaning feeling in which views are
colored or distorted first recorded 1620s, from yellow's association with bitterness and envy (see
yellow). As a verb, from 1791, but usually in figurative use. Related: Jaundiced.


jaunt (n.)

1670s in modern sense of short pleasure trip, earlier tiresome journey (1590s), earlier as a verb,
tire a horse by riding back and forth on it (1560s), of unknown origin, perhaps from some obscure
Old French word. As a verb in the modern sense from 1640s. Related: Jaunted; jaunting.


jaunty (adj.)

1660s, elegant, stylish, from French gentil nice, pleasing, in Old French noble (see gentle). Form
reflects attempt to render the French pronunciation of gentil. Meaning easy and sprightly in manner
first attested 1670s. Related: Jauntily; jauntiness.


java (n.)

1850, originally a kind of coffee grown on Java and nearby islands of modern Indonesia. By early
20c., coffee generally. The island name is shortened from Sanskrit Yavadvipa Island of Barley, from
yava barley + dvipa island.


javelin (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French javeline (15c.), fem. diminutive of Old French javelot a spear,
probably from Gaulish (compare Old Irish gabul fork; Welsh gafl fork, gaflach feathered spear),
ultimately from PIE *ghabholo- a fork, branch of a tree. Also found in Italian (giavelotto) and
Middle High German (gabilot). Javelot also was borrowed in Middle English, but this is the form of
the word that has endured.


javelot (n.)

see javelin.


jaw (n.)

late 14c., the bones of the mouth, perhaps from Old French joue cheek, from Gaulish *gauta cheek, or
perhaps a variant of Germanic words related to chew (q.v.); compare also jowl. Replaced Old English
ceace, ceafl.


jaw (v.)

1610s, to catch in the jaws, devour, from jaw (n.). In slang from 1748, to gossip, to speak 1810, to
scold. Related: Jawed; jawing. Hence 19c. U.S. slang jawsmith talkative person (1887).


jaw-breaker (n.)

also jawbreaker 1839, word hard to pronounce (jawbreakingly, in reference to pronouncing words, is
from 1824), from jaw (n.) + agent noun from break (v.). As a type of candy, by 1911.


jawbone (n.)

mid-15c., from jaw (n.) + bone (n.). Hence jawboning lecturing, hectoring, a term associated with
the U.S. Lyndon Johnson presidential administration (1966); compare jaw (v.).


jay (n.)

c.1300, common European bird (Garrulus glandarinus), from Old North French gai, Old French jai
magpie, jay, from Late Latin gaius a jay, probably echoic and supposedly influenced by Latin Gaius,
a common Roman proper name. For other bird names from proper names, compare martin and parrot.
Applied to the North American blue jay (Cyanocitta cristata) from 1709. Applied to humans in sense
of impertinent chatterer, flashy dresser from 1620s.


jay (adj.)

fourth-rate, worthless (as in a jay town), 1888, American English, apparently from some disparaging
sense of jay (n.). Perhaps from a decaying or ironical use of jay flashy dresser.


jaybird (n.)

1660s, from jay + bird (n.). It appears after the time jay began to be used of persons, too.


Jaycee (n.)

1946, American English, from pronunciation of J.C., in Junior Chamber (of Commerce).


jayhawker (n.)

American English, 1858, originally freebooter, guerrilla, Kansas irregular (especially one who came
from the North). Hence back-formed verb jayhawk harass (1866).


jaywalking (n.)

by 1912, American English (said in original citation to be a Kansas City term), from jay, perhaps
with notion of boldness and impudence. Related: Jaywalk; jaywalker.


jazz (v.)

to speed or liven up, 1917, from jazz (n.). Related: jazzed; jazzing.


jazz (n.)

by 1912, American English, first attested in baseball slang; as a type of music, attested from 1913.
Probably ultimately from Creole patois jass strenuous activity, especially sexual intercourse but
also used of Congo dances, from jasm (1860) energy, drive, of African origin (compare Mandingo jasi,
Temne yas), also the source of slang jism.If the truth were known about the origin of the word
'Jazz' it would never be mentioned in polite society. [&Eacute;tude, Sept. 1924] All that jazz et
cetera first recorded 1939.


Jazz Age

1921; see jazz (n.); popularized 1922 in writings of F. Scott Fitzgerald; usually regarded as the
years between the end of World War I (1918) and the Stock Market crash of 1929.    We are living in
a jazz age of super-accentuated rhythm in all things; in a rhythm that (to jazz a word) is super-
normal, a rhythm which is the back-flare from the rhythm of a super war. [Jacobs' Band Monthly, Jan.
1921]


jazzbo (n.)

1917, low, vulgar jazz, from jazz. Later in 20c. in use as a derogatorty term for persons,
especially blacks.


Jazzercise (n.)

1977, originally a proprietary name, from jazz (n.) + ending from exercise.


jazzetry (n.)

poetry reading accompanioed by jazz music, 1959, from jazz (n.) + poetry.


jazzy (adj.)

1919, from jazz (n.) + -y (2). Related: Jazzily; jazziness.


je ne sais quoi (n.)

an inexpressible something, French, literally I do not know what.[T]hey are troubled with the je-ne-
scay-quoy, that faign themselves sick out of niceness but know not where their own grief lies, or
what ayls them. [Thomas Blount, Glossographia, 1656]


jealous (adj.)

c.1200, gelus, later jelus (early 14c.), possessive and suspicious, originally in the context of
sexuality or romance; in general use late 14c.; also in a more positive sense, fond, amorous,
ardent, from c.1300, from Old French jalos keen, zealous; avaricious; jealous (12c., Modern French
jaloux), from Late Latin zelosus, from zelus zeal, from Greek zelos, sometimes jealousy, but more
often in a good sense (emulation, rivalry, zeal). See zeal. In biblical language (early 13c.)
tolerating no unfaithfulness.    Most of the words for 'envy' ... had from the outset a hostile
force, based on 'look at' (with malice), 'not love,' etc. Conversely, most of those which became
distinctive terms for 'jealousy' were originally used also in a good sense, 'zeal, emulation.'
[Buck, pp.1138-9]    Among the ways to express this in other tongues are Swedish svartsjuka,
literally black-sick, from phrase bara svarta strumpor wear black stockings, also be jealous. Danish
skinsyg jealous, literally skin-sick, is from skind hide, skin said to be explained by Swedish
dialectal expression fa skinn receive a refusal in courtship.


jealously (adv.)

late 14c., in a zealous manner; 1718, in a suspicious and possessive manner, from jealous + -ly (2).


jealousy (n.)

c.1200, of God; c.1300, of persons, from Old French jalousie enthusiasm, love, longing, jealousy
(12c.), from jalos (see jealous). Meaning zeal, fervor, devotion is late 14c.


Jean

masc. proper name, from French equivalent of John. Fem. proper name is from French equivalent of
Jane.


jean (n.)

twilled cotton cloth, mid-15c., from Middle French jean fustian fustian (a type of twilled cotton
cloth) of Genoa, the city in Italy, from Old French Jannes Genoa, from Latin Genua (see Genoa). The
plural form jeans became standard 19c.


jeans (n.)

see jean.


Jedi (n.)

characters in the Star Wars sagas, 1977, apparently an invented word.


jeep (n.)

early 1941, American English military slang, from G.P. general purpose (car), but influenced by
Eugene the Jeep (who had extraordinary powers but only said jeep), from E.C. Segar's comic strip
Thimble Theater (also home of Popeye the Sailor). Eugene the Jeep first appeared in the strip March
13, 1936. The vehicle was in development from 1940, and the Army planners' initial term for it was
light reconnaissance and command car.


jeepers (interj.)

1900, American English, euphemistic alteration of Jesus.


jeer (v.)

1550s, gyr, to deride, to mock, of uncertain origin; perhaps from Dutch gieren to cry or roar, or
German scheren to plague, vex, literally to shear. OED finds the suggestion that it is an ironical
use of cheer plausible and phonetically feasible, ... but ... beyond existing evidence. Related:
Jeered; jeering.


jeer (n.)

1620s, from jeer (v.).


Jeeves

personification of the perfect valet, 1930, from character in P.G. Wodehouse's novels.


jeez (interj.)

minced oath, also jeeze, 1922, American English, euphemistic corruption Jesus.


Jeff

shortened or familiar form of masc. proper name Jeffrey; in early to mid-20c., sometimes used by
U.S. blacks to indicate a Southern white hick, probably from Jeff Davis, president of the
Confederate States of America.


Jeffersonian

1799 (n.), 1800 (adj.), in reference to the politics and policies of U.S. revolutionary and
president Thomas Jefferson.


Jeffrey

masc. proper name, from Old French Jeufroi, Jefroi, variants of Geuffroi (see Geoffrey).


Jehosaphat

biblical name (II Sam. viii:16), used as a mild expletive in American English from 1857.


Jehovah

1530, Tyndale's erroneous transliteration of Hebrew Tetragramaton YHWH using vowel points of Adhonai
my lord (see Yahweh). Used for YHWH (the full name being too sacred for utterance) in four places in
the Old Testament in the KJV where the usual translation lord would have been inconvenient; taken as
the principal and personal name of God.    The vowel substitution was originally made by the
Masoretes as a direction to substitute Adhonai for the ineffable name. European students of Hebrew
took this literally, which yielded Latin JeHoVa (first attested in writings of Galatinus, confessor
to Leo X, 1516). Jehovah's Witnesses member of Watchtower Bible and Tract Society first attested
1933; the organization founded c.1879 by Charles Taze Russell (1852-1916); the name from Isa.
xliii:10.


Jehovist (n.)

the presumed authnor or authors of the parts of the Hexateuch in which the divine name is written
Yhwh (see Jehovah) + -ist. Opposed to the Elohist.


Jehu

fast, skillful driver, 1680s, from Jehu, a king of Israel in the Old Testament, who driveth
furiously (II Kings ix:20).


jejune (adj.)

1610s, dull in the mind, flat, insipid, from Latin ieiunus empty, dry, barren, literally fasting,
hungry, of obscure origin.


jejunum (n.)

late 14c., from Latin ieiunum, neuter of ieiunus (see jejune). Translating Greek nestis (Galen). So
called because it typically is found empty during dissections, perhaps because it would tend to
drain in a body laid on its back.


Jekyll and Hyde

in reference to opposite aspects of a person's character, from Robert Louis Stevenson's story, The
Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, published 1886. The surname Jekyll is of Breton origin and
was originally a personal name.    Though so profound a double-dealer, I was in no sense a
hypocrite. Both sides of me were in dead earnest; I was no more myself when I laid aside restraint
and plunged in shame, than when I labored, in the eye of day, at the furtherance of knowledge or the
relief of sorrow and suffering. [Robert Louis Stevenson, The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde, 1886]


jell (v.)

1830, American English, probably a back-formation of jelly (v.). Related: Jelled; jelling.
Figurative sense is first attested 1908. Middle English had gelen congeal, but it disappeared 15c.


jellied (adj.)

1590s, past participle adjective from jelly (v.).


Jello (n.)

from Jell-O, trademark for powdered gelatin food, registered 1934 by The Jell-o Company of Canada,
Ltd., Montreal, Quebec, Canada.


jelly (n.)

late 14c., from Old French gelee a frost; jelly, noun use of fem. past participle of geler congeal,
from Latin gelare to freeze, from gelu frost (see cold (adj.)).


jelly (v.)

c.1600, from jelly (n.). Related: Jellied; jellying.


jellybean (n.)

1905, from jelly (n.) + bean (n.). So called for its shape. Soon used in U.S. slang for stupid
person, probably encouraged by the slang sense of bean as head.


jellyfish (n.)

popular name of the medusa and similar sea-creatures, 1796, from jelly (n.) + fish (n.). Earlier it
had been used of a type of actual fish (1707).


jellyroll (n.)

also jelly-roll, cylindrical cake containing jelly or jam, 1873, from jelly + roll (n.). As slang
for vagina, sexual intercourse it dates from 1914 (St. Louis Blues).


Jemima

fem. personal name, biblical daughter of Job, from Hebrew Yemimah, literally dove (compare Arabic
yamama). The Aunt Jemima ready-mix food product in U.S. dates from 1889.


Jemmy

a popular pet form of the masc. proper name James (in Middle English records, Gemme, Jemme are more
common than Jimme). In mid-18c. often associated with effeminacy and male fastidiousness. As a
crowbar from 1811.


jennet (n.)

small Spanish horse, mid-15c., from French genet, from Spanish jinete a light horseman, perhaps from
Arabic Zenata, name of a Barbary tribe [Klein]. Sense transferred in English and French from the
rider to the horse.


Jennifer

fem. proper name, from Welsh Gwenhwyvar, from gwen fair, white + (g)wyf smooth, yielding. The most
popular name for girls born in America 1970-1984; all but unknown there before 1938. Also attested
as a surname from late 13c.


Jenny

fem. personal name, originally diminutive of Jane or Janet; attested from c.1600 as female
equivalent of jack (n.), and like it applied to animals (for example Jenny wren, 1640s) and
machinery (spinning jenny, 1783).


jeopardise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of jeopardize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Jeopardised;
jeopardising.


jeopardize (v.)

1640s, from jeopardy + -ize. Related: Jeopardized; jeopardizing. As a verb, Middle English used
simple jeopard (late 14c.).


jeopardy (n.)

c.1300, ioparde (13c. in Anglo-French), from Old French jeu parti, literally a divided game, game
with even chances, from jeu a game (from Latin iocus jest; see joke (n.)) + parti, past participle
of partir to divide (see part (v.)). Originally a stratagem; sense of danger, risk is late 14c.


Jephthah

biblical judge of Israel, from Greek Iephthae, from Hebrew Yiphtah, literally God opens,
imperfective of pathah he opened (compare pethah opening, entrance).


jerboa (n.)

small desert rodent, 1660s, Modern Latin, from Arabic jarbu flesh of the loins, also the name of a
small jumping rodent of North Africa. Compare gerbil.


jeremiad (n.)

1780, from French j&eacute;r&eacute;miade (1762), in reference to Lamentations of Jeremiah in Old
Testament.


Jeremiah

masc. proper name, Old Testament prophet (see jeremiad) who flourished c.626-586 B.C.E., from Late
Latin Jeremias, from Hebrew Yirmeyah, probably literally may Jehovah exalt, but Klein suggests it
also might be short for Yirmeyahu the Lord casts, the Lord founds, and compares the first element in
Jerusalem. The vernacular form in English was Jeremy.


Jeremy

popular anglicized form of Jeremiah; compare French J&eacute;r&eacute;mie.


Jericho

Biblical city (Num. xxii:1, etc.), perhaps ultimately from Hebrew yareakh moon, month, and thus a
reference to an ancient moon cult. As a figurative place of retirement (17c.), the reference is to
II Sam. x:5.


jerk (v.1)

to pull, 1540s, to lash, strike as with a whip, of uncertain origin, perhaps echoic. Related:
Jerked; jerking.


jerk (v.2)

as a method of preserving meat, 1707, American English, from American Spanish carquear, from charqui
(see jerky). Related: Jerked.


jerk (n.2)

tedious and ineffectual person, 1935 (the lyric in Big Rock Candy Mountain apparently is Where they
hung the Turk [not jerk] that invented work), American English carnival slang, of uncertain origin.
Perhaps from jerkwater town (1878), where a steam locomotive crew had to take on boiler water from a
trough or a creek because there was no water tank [Barnhart, OED]. This led 1890s to an adjectival
use of jerk as inferior, insignificant. Alternatively, or influenced by, verbal phrase jerk off
masturbate [Rawson].


jerk (n.1)

1550s, stroke of a whip, from jerk (v.1). Sense of sudden sharp pull or twist first recorded 1570s.
Meaning involuntary spasmodic movement of limbs or features first recorded 1805. As the name of a
popular dance, it is attested from 1966. Sense in soda jerk attested from 1883, from the pulling
motion required to work the taps.


jerk off (v.)

slang, perform male masturbation, by 1896, from jerk (v.) denoting rapid pulling motion + off.
Farmer &amp; Henley also list as synonyms jerk (one's) jelly and jerk (one's) juice. The noun jerk
off or jerkoff as an emphatic form of jerk (n.) is attested by 1968. As an adjective from 1957.


jerkin (n.)

1510s, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to Dutch jurk a frock, but this is a modern word, itself
of unknown origin, and the initial consonant presents difficulties (Dutch -j- typically becomes
English -y-).


jerky (n.)

1850, American English, from American Spanish charqui jerked meat, from Quechua (Inca) ch'arki dried
flesh.


jerky (adj.)

characterized by jerks, 1858, from jerk (v.1) + -y (2). Related: Jerkily; jerkiness.


jeroboam (n.)

1816, large wine bottle, from Jeroboam, a mighty man of valour (I Kings xi:28) who made Israel to
sin (xiv:16), from Hebrew Yarobh'am, literally let the people increase.


Jerome

masc. proper name, from French J&eacute;rome, from Late Latin Hieronymus, from Greek Hieronymos,
literally holy name, from hieros holy (see ire) + onyma, dialectal form of onoma name (see name
(n.)).


Jerry (n.)

World War I British Army slang for a German, the Germans, 1919, probably an alteration of German,
but also said to be from the shape of the German helmet, which was thought to resemble a jerry,
British slang for chamber pot (1827), this being probably an abbreviation of jeroboam. Hence jerry-
can 5-gallon metal container (1943), a type first used by German troops in World War II, later
adopted by the Allies.


jerry-built (adj.)

1869, in which jerry has a sense of bad, defective, probably a pejorative use of the male nickname
Jerry (a popular form of Jeremy; compare Jerry-sneak, mid-19c., sneaking fellow, a hen-pecked
husband [OED]). Or from or influenced by nautical slang jury temporary, which came to be used of all
sorts of makeshift and inferior objects (see jury (adj.)).


jersey (n.)

1580s as a type of knitted cloth; 1842 as a breed of cattle; both from Jersey, one of the Channel
Islands. Its name is said to be a corruption of Latin Caesarea, the Roman name for the island (or
another near it), influenced by Old English ey island; but perhaps rather a Viking name (perhaps
meaning Geirr's island). The meaning woolen knitted close-fitting tunic, especially one worn during
sporting events, is from 1836.


Jerusalem

holy city in ancient Palestine, from Greek Hierousalem, from Hebrew Yerushalayim, literally
foundation of peace, from base of yarah he threw, cast + shalom peace. Jerusalem artichoke is folk
etymology of Italian girasole sunflower.


jess (n.)

leg-strap used in hawking and falconry, mid-14c., from Old French jes straps fastened round the legs
of a falcon, plural of jet, literally cast, throw, from Latin iactus a throw, cast, from iacere (see
jet (v.)). Related: Jesses.


jessamine (n.)

Middle English, from Middle French jassemin, variant of jasmine.


Jesse

masc. proper name, biblical father of David, from Latin, from Greek Iessai, from Hebrew Yishay, of
unknown origin.


Jessica

fem. proper name, from Late Latin Jesca, from Greek Ieskha, from Hebrew Yiskah, name of a daughter
of Haran (Gen. xi:29). Among the top 5 popular names for girls born in the U.S. every year between
1977 and 1997. The familiar form Jessie was one of many fem. names used 20c. for cowardly or
effeminate male.


jest (n.)

early 13c., geste, narrative of exploits, from Old French geste action, exploit, from Latin gesta
deeds, neuter plural of gestus, past participle of gerere to carry, behave, act, perform (see gest).
Sense descended through idle tale (late 15c.) to mocking speech, raillery (1540s) to joke (1550s).


jest (v.)

1520s, to speak in a trifling manner; 1550s, to joke, from Middle English gesten recite a tale (late
14c.), from geste (see jest (n.)). Related: Jested; jesting.


jester (n.)

mid-14c., jestour (Anglo-Latin), late 14c., gestour a minstrel, professional reciter of romances,
agent noun from gesten recite a tale, which was a jester's original function (see jest). Sense of
buffoon in a prince's court is from c.1500.


Jesuit

1540s, from Modern Latin Jesuita, member of the Society of Jesus, founded 1533 by Ignatius Loyola to
combat Protestantism. Their enemies (in both Catholic and Protestant lands) accused them of belief
that ends justify means, hence the sense a dissembling person (1630s), and jesuitical deceitful
(1610s).


Jesus

late 12c. (Old English used h&aelig;lend savior), from Greek Iesous, which is an attempt to render
into Greek the Aramaic proper name Jeshua (Hebrew Yeshua) Jah is salvation, a common Jewish personal
name, the later form of Hebrew Yehoshua (see Joshua).    As an oath, attested from late 14c. For
Jesus H. Christ (1924), see I.H.S. First record of Jesus freak is from 1970. Jesu, common in Middle
English, is from the Old French objective case.


jet (n.1)

stream of water, 1690s, from French jet, from jeter (see jet (v.)). Sense of spout or nozzle for
emitting water, gas, fuel, etc. is from 1825. Hence jet propulsion (1867) and the noun meaning
airplane driven by jet propulsion (1944, from jet engine, 1943). The first one to be in service was
the German Messerschmitt Me 262. Jet stream is from 1947. Jet set first attested 1951, slightly
before jet commuter plane flights began. Jet age is attested from 1952.


jet (v.)

early 15c., to prance, strut, swagger, from Middle French jeter to throw, thrust, from Late Latin
iectare, abstracted from deiectare, proiectare, etc., in place of Latin iactare toss about,
frequentative of iacere to throw, cast, from PIE root *ye- to do (cognates: Greek iemi, ienai to
send, throw; Hittite ijami I make). Meaning to sprout or spurt forth is from 1690s. Related: Jetted;
jetting.


jet (n.2)

deep black lignite, mid-14c., from Anglo-French geet, Old French jaiet jet, lignite (12c.), from
Latin gagates, from Greek gagates lithos stone of Gages, town and river in Lycia. As a deep black
color, also as an adjective, attested from mid-15c.


jet lag (n.)

also jetlag, 1966, from jet (n.2) + lag (n.). Also known in early days as time zone syndrome.


jete (n.)

ballet step, 1830, from French (pas) jet&eacute;, from past participle of jeter to throw (see jet
(v.)).


Jethro

masc. proper name, biblical father-in-law of Moses, from Hebrew Yithro, collateral form of Yether,
literally abundance, from base y-t-r to be left over, to remain.


jetsam (n.)

1560s, jottsome act of throwing goods overboard to lighten a ship, alteration and contraction of
Middle English jetteson, from Anglo-French getteson, Old French getaison a throwing (see jettison).
Intermediate forms were jetson, jetsome; the form perhaps was deformed by influence of flotsam. From
1590s as goods thrown overboard; figurative use by 1861. For distinction of meaning, see flotsam.


jettison (v.)

1848, from jettison (n.) act of throwing overboard to lighten a ship. This noun was an 18c. Marine
Insurance writers' restoration of the earlier form and original sense of the 15c. word that had
become jetsam, probably because jetsam had taken on a sense of things cast overboard and an
unambiguous word was needed for act of throwing overboard.    Middle English jetteson (n.) act of
throwing overboard is from Anglo-French getteson, from Old French getaison act of throwing (goods
overboard), especially to lighten a ship in distress, from Late Latin iactionem (nominative
iactatio) act of throwing, noun of action from past participle stem of iectare toss about (see jet
(v.)). Related: Jettisoned.


jetty (n.)

early 15c., from Old French jetee a jetty, a projecting part of a building, also a throw, noun use
of fem. past participle of jeter to throw (see jet (v.)). Notion is of a structure thrown out past
what surrounds it.


jeu (n.)

a French word for play, game occurring in some phrases borrowed into English, from Latin jocum jest,
joke, play, sport (see joke (n.)).


jeune fille (n.)

French, literally young girl.


Jew (n.)

late 12c. (in plural, giwis), from Anglo-French iuw, Old French giu, from Latin Iudaeum (nominative
Iudaeus), from Greek Ioudaios, from Aramaic jehudhai (Hebrew y'hudi) Jew, from Y'hudah Judah,
literally celebrated, name of Jacob's fourth son and of the tribe descended from him. Replaced Old
English Iudeas the Jews. Originally, Hebrew of the kingdom of Judah.   Jews' harp simple mouth harp
is from 1580s, earlier Jews' trump (1540s); the connection with Jewishness is obscure. Jew-baiting
first recorded 1853, in reference to German Judenhetze. In uneducated times, inexplicable ancient
artifacts were credited to Jews, based on the biblical chronology of history: such as Jews' money
(1570s) Roman coins found in England. In Greece, after Christianity had erased the memory of
classical glory, ruins of pagan temples were called Jews' castles, and in Cornwall, Jews' houses was
the name for the remains of ancient tin-smelting works.


jew (v.)

to cheat, to drive a hard bargain, 1824, from Jew (n.) (compare gyp, welsh, etc.). The campaign to
eliminate it in early 20c. was so successful that people began to avoid the noun and adjective, too,
and started using Hebrew instead.Now I'll say 'a Jew' and just the word Jew sounds like a dirty word
and people don't know whether to laugh or not. [Lenny Bruce (1925-1966)]


jewel (n.)

late 13c., article of value used for adornment, from Anglo-French juel, Old French jouel ornament,
jewel (12c.), perhaps from Medieval Latin jocale, from Latin jocus pastime, sport, in Vulgar Latin
that which causes joy (see joke (n.)). Another theory traces it to Latin gaudium, also with a notion
of rejoice (see joy).    Sense of precious stone developed early 14c. Meaning beloved person,
admired woman is late 14c. Colloquial family jewels testicles is from 1920s, but jewel as testicle
dates to late 15c.


jeweler (n.)

also jeweller, late 14c. (mid-14c. as a surname, Alice la Jueler), from Anglo-French jueler, from
Old French juelier (Modern French joaillier), from joel (see jewel).


jewellery (n.)

see jewelry.


jewelry (n.)

late 14c., juelrye precious ornaments, jewel work, from Old French juelerye, from jouel (see jewel).
In modern use it can be analyzed as jewel + -ery or jeweler + -y (1). Also jewellery.    The longer
is the commercial &amp; popular form, the shorter the rhetorical &amp; poetic. [Fowler]


Jewess (n.)

late 14c. (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French j&uuml;iesse, fem. of j&uuml;if (see Jew).


jewfish (n.)

1670s, from Jew (n.) + fish (n.).


Jewish (adj.)

1540s, from Jew + -ish. Old English had Iudeisc; early Middle English used Judewish, Judeish (late
12c.). Figurative use in reference to extortionate money-lending attested by c.1600.


Jewry (n.)

c.1200, Jeuerie ghetto, the Jewish district in a town, from Anglo-French Juerie, Old French Juierie
(13c.; Modern French Juiverie); see Jew + -ery. Early 14c. as Jews collectively; mid-14c. as the
land of the Jews, Judea.


jezebel (n.)

impudent woman, 1550s, after Jezebel, the wicked Tyrean princess who married Ahab, king of Israel
(Kings xxi:5-23), from Hebrew Izebhel, a name of uncertain origin and meaning [Klein].


jib (n.)

foresail of a ship, 1660s, gibb, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to gibbet, from notion of a
sail hanging from a masthead [Barnhart, OED]. Or perhaps from jib (v.) shift a sail or boom (1690s),
from Dutch gijben, apparently related to gijk boom or spar of a sailing ship. Said to indicate a
ship's character to an observant sailor as a strange vessel approaches at sea; also nautical slang
for face, hence cut of (one's) jib personal appearance (1821).


jibber-jabber (v.)

1728, to talk gibberish, reduplication of jabber (q.v.). Related: Jibber-jabbering. As a noun, from
1813.


jibe (v.)

agree, fit, 1813, of unknown origin, perhaps a figurative extension of earlier jib, gybe (v.) shift
a sail or boom (see jib). OED, however, suggests a phonetic variant of chime, as if meaning to chime
in with, to be in harmony. Related: Jibed; jibes; jibing.


jibe (n.)

1560s, perhaps from Middle French giber to handle roughly, or an alteration of gaber to mock.


jiff (n.)

1797, short for jiffy.


jiffy (n.)

1785, a moment, an instant, colloquial, origin unknown; said to be originally thieves' slang for
lightning.


jig (n.)

lively dance, 1560s, perhaps related to Middle French giguer to dance, or to the source of German
Geige violin. Meaning piece of sport, trick is 1590s, now mainly in phrase the jig is up (first
attested 1777 as the jig is over). As a verb from 1580s.


jigaboo (n.)

insulting name for a black person, 1909, perhaps from jig (q.v.), which had been applied insultingly
to persons since late 18c., and ending from bugaboo.


jigger (n.)

1.5-ounce shot glass, 1836, American English, in early use also of the drink itself, from jigger
illicit distillery (1824), of unknown origin; or else perhaps from jigger, a 1756 alteration of
chigger tiny mite or flea. As a name for various appliances, the word is attested by 1825, from jig.


jiggle (v.)

1836, from jig (q.v.) + -le, frequentative suffix. Related: Jiggled; jiggling. As a noun, from 1840.


jigsaw (n.)

also jig-saw, vertical reciprocating saw, 1855, American English, from jig with its notion of rapid
up-and-down motion + saw (n.1). Jigsaw puzzle first recorded 1906; originally one with pieces cut by
a jigsaw.


jihad (n.)

1869, from Arabic, usually translated as holy war, literally struggle, contest, effort, from
infinitive of jahada he waged war, he applied himself to. Used in English since c.1880 for any sort
of doctrinal crusade.


Jill

fem. proper name, variant of Gill, familiar shortening of  Jillian, Gillian, the common Middle
English pronunciation of Juliana (see Gillian).


jillion (n.)

by 1939, arbitrary coinage, modeled on million, etc.


jilt (v.)

to deceive (especially after holding out hopes), cheat, trick, 1660s, from the same source as jilt
(n.). Related: Jilted; jilting.


jilt (n.)

1670s, loose, unchaste woman; harlot; also woman who gives hope then dashes it, perhaps ultimately
from Middle English gille lass, wench, a familiar or contemptuous term for a woman or girl (mid-
15c.), originally a shortened form of woman's name Gillian (see Jill).


Jim Crow

black person, 1838, American English, originally the name of a black minstrel character in a popular
song-and-dance act by T.D. Rice (1808-1860) that debuted 1828 and attained national popularity by
1832:    Wheel about, an' turn about, an' do jis so;  Eb'ry time I wheel about, I jump Jim Crow.
Where and how Rice got it, or wrote it, is a mystery. Even before that, crow (n.) had been a
derogatory term for a black man. Association with segregation dates from 1842, in reference to a
railroad car for blacks. Modern use as a type of racial discrimination is from 1943. In mid-19c.,
Jim Crow also could be a reference to someone's change of (political) principles (from the jump in
the song).


jim-dandy (n.)

remarkable person or thing, 1844, perhaps from an old song, Dandy Jim of Caroline (1840s).


jiminy

exclamation of surprise, 1803, a disguised oath, perhaps for Jesu Domine Jesus Lord. Extended form
jiminy cricket is attested from 1848 and suggests Jesus Christ (compare also Jiminy Christmas,
1890).


jimmies (n.)

bits of candy as ice cream topping, by 1963, American English.


jimmy (n.)

burglar's crowbar, 1848, variant of jemmy, name for a type of crowbar much used by burglars, special
use of Jemmy, familiar form of proper name James (also see jack).


jimmy (v.)

1893, from jimmy (n.). Related: Jimmied; jimmying.


jimson weed (n.)

also jimsonweed, 1812, American English, shortening of Jamestown-weed (1680s), from Jamestown,
Virginia colony, where it was discovered by Europeans (1676), when British soldiers mistook it for
an edible plant and subsequently hallucinated for 11 days.


jingle (v.)

late 14c., gingeln, of imitative origin (compare Dutch jengelen, German klingeln). Related: Jingled;
jingling.


jingle (n.)

1590s, from jingle (v.). Meaning song in an advertisement first attested 1930, from earlier sense of
catchy array of words in prose or verse (1640s).


jingo (n.)

mindless, gung-ho patriot, 1878, picked up from the refrain of a music hall song written by G.W.
Hunt, and sung by Gilbert H. MacDermott (1845-1901), supporting aggressive British policy toward
Russia at a time of international tension. (We don't want to fight, But by Jingo! if we do, We've
got the ships, we've got the men, We've got the money too.)    Hunt's patriotic song of 1878, with a
swinging tune ... became at Macdermott's instigation the watchword of the popular supporters of
England's bellicose policy. The Daily News on 11 March 1878 first dubbed the latter 'Jingoes' in
derision .... [Dictionary of National Biography, London, 1912]    As an asseveration, it was in
colloquial use since 1690s, and is apparently yet another euphemism for Jesus, influenced by
conjurer's gibberish presto-jingo (1660s). The frequent suggestion that it somehow derives from
Basque Jinko god is not impossible, but as yet unsupported by evidence [OED].


jingoism (n.)

1878, from jingo + -ism. Related: Jingoist; jingoistic.


jink (v.)

to wheel or fling about in dancing, 1715, Scottish, of unknown origin. As a noun, 1786, act of
eluding, probably from the verb in the sense elude (1774). For high jinks, see hijinks.


jinn (n.)

1680s, djen, from Arabic jinn, collective plural, demons, spirits, angels. The proper singular is
jinni. Compare genie.


jinx (n.)

1911, American English, originally baseball slang; perhaps ultimately from jyng a charm, a spell
(17c.), originally wryneck, a bird used in witchcraft and divination, from Latin iynx wryneck, from
Greek iynx.    Most mysterious of all in the psychics of baseball is the jinx, that peculiar hoodoo
which affects, at times, a man, at other times a whole team. Let a man begin to think that there is
a jinx about, and he is done for for the time being. [Technical World Magazine, 1911]    The verb is
1912 in American English, from the noun. Related: Jinxed; jinxing.


jirgah (n.)

Afghan council of elders, 1843, from Persian jarga ring of men.


jism (n.)

seminal fluid, cum, 1899; earlier energy, strength (1842), of uncertain origin; see jazz.


jitney (n.)

bus which carries passengers for a fare, 1915, short for jitney bus (1906), American English, from
gitney, said to be slang for any small coin, especially a nickel, because the buses' fare typically
was a nickel, the coin name perhaps via New Orleans from French jeton coin-sized metal disk, slug,
counter, from Old French jeter to calculate, literally to throw (see jet (v.)).    I'll give a
nickel for a kiss,  Said Cholly to a pretty miss.  Skiddo, she cried, you stingy cuss,  You're
looking for a jitney buss.     [Jitney Jingle, 1915]    The origin and signification of the word was
much discussed when the buses first appeared. Some reports say the slang word for nickel comes from
the bus; most say the reverse, but there does not seem to be much record of jitney in a coin sense
before the buses came along (a writer in The Hub, August 1915, claims to have heard and used it as a
small boy in San Francisco, and reported hearsay that It has been in use there since the days of
'49. In some sources it is said to be a St. Louis word, but most credit it to the U.S. West,
especially California, though others trace it to southern negroes, especially in Memphis [The
Pacific, Feb. 7, 1915].


jitter (v.)

to move agitatedly, 1931, American English; see jitters. Related: Jittered; jittering.


jitterbug (n.)

popular type of fast swing dance, 1938, American English, from Jitter Bug, title of a song recorded
by Cab Calloway in 1934. Probably the literal sense is one who has the jitters (see jitters; for
second element see bug (n.) in the slang person obsessed with sense). Another sense current about
this time was swing music enthusiast. As a verb from 1938.


jitters (n.)

extreme nervousness, 1925, American English, perhaps an alteration of dialectal chitter tremble,
shiver, from Middle English chittern to twitter, chatter.


jittery (adj.)

1931, American English, from jitter + -y (2). Related: Jitteriness.


jive (v.1)

1928, to deceive playfully, also empty, misleading talk (n.) and a style of fast, lively jazz and
dance music, American English, from Black English, probably of African origin (compare Wolof jev,
jeu talk about someone absent, especially in a disparaging manner). Related: Jived; jiving. Used
from 1938 for New York City African-American slang.


jive (v.2)

agree, 1943, apparently a mistake for jibe (q.v.).


jive (adj.)

not acting right, 1969, U.S. black English, from jive (n.) (see jive (1)). Extended form jive-ass
(1964, adj.; 1969, n.) is defined in OED as A word of fluid meaning and application.


jo

Scottish form of joy, attested from 1520s as a term of endearment.


Joan

fem. proper name, originally Joanna, fem. of Johannes (see John). Often 17c.-18c. used as a generic
name for a female rustic. Among U.S. births, a top 10 name for girls born between 1930 and 1937.


job (n.)

1550s, in phrase jobbe of worke piece of work (contrasted with continuous labor), of uncertain
origin, perhaps a variant of gobbe mass, lump (c.1400; see gob) via sense of a cart-load. Sense of
work done for pay first recorded 1650s. Thieves' slang sense of theft, robbery, a planned crime is
from 1722. Printing sense is from 1795. Slang meaning specimen, thing, person is from 1927.    job.
(1) A low mean lucrative busy affair. (2) Petty, piddling work; a piece of chance work. [Johnson's
Dictionary]   On the job hard at work is from 1882. Job lot is from obsolete sense of cartload,
lump, which might also ultimately be from gob. Job security attested by 1954; job description by
1920; job-sharing by 1972.


Job

Biblical masc. proper name, from Hebrew Iyyobh, which according to some scholars is literally hated,
persecuted, from ayyabh he was hostile to, related to ebhah enmity. Others say it means the penitent
one.


job (v.)

1660s, to buy and sell as a broker, from job (n.). Meaning to cheat, betray is from 1903. Related:
Jobbed; jobbing.


jobber (n.)

one who does odd jobs, 1706, agent noun from job.


jobless

1905 (adj.), 1909 (n.), from job (n.) + -less. Related: Joblessness.


Jocelin

masc. proper name with many variant forms, introduced in English by the Normans, from Old High
German Gautelen, from Gauta, literally Goth (see Goth). French fem. form is Joceline.


Jocelyn

proper name, variant of Jocelin.


jock (n.)

1952, short for jockstrap supporter of the male genital organs, which also meant, in slang, athletic
male. Jock with the meaning an athletic man is from 1963, American English slang.


jockey (n.)

1520s, boy, fellow, originally a Scottish proper name, variant of Jack. The meaning person who rides
horses in races first attested 1660s.


jockey (v.)

1708, trick, outwit, gain advantage, from jockey (n.) perhaps from its former additional sense of
horse trader (1680s). Meaning to ride a horse in a race is from 1767. Related: Jockeyed; jockeying.


jockstrap (n.)

also jock-strap, supporter of the male genital organs, used in sports, 1897, with strap (n.) + jock
slang for penis c.1650-c.1850, probably from Jock, the nickname for John, which was used generically
for common man from c.1500.


jocose (adj.)

1670s, from Latin iocosus full of jesting, joking, from iocus pastime, sport; a jest, joke (see joke
(n.)). Implies ponderous humor. Related: Jocosely; jocoseness.


jocosity (n.)

1640s; see jocose + -ity.


jocular (adj.)

1620s, from Latin iocularis funny, comic, from ioculus, diminutive of iocus (see joke (n.)). Implies
evasion of an issue by a joke.


jocularity (n.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin iocularitas jocular, facetious, from iocularis (see jocular).


jocund (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin iocundus (source of Spanish jocunde, Italian giocondo), variant (influenced by
iocus joke) of Latin iucundus pleasant, originally helpful, contraction of *iuvicundus, from iuvare
to please, benefit, help (see adjutant).


jocundity (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin iocunditas, from iocundus (see jocund).


jod (n.)

Medieval Latin spelling of Hebrew letter yodh (see iota). Also see jot (n.).


jodhpurs (n.)

1913 (earlier as jodhpur breeches, 1899), from Jodhpur, former state in northwestern India. The city
at the heart of the state was founded 1459 by Rao Jodha, a local ruler, and is named for him.


joe (n.)

coffee, by 1941, perhaps late 1930s, of unknown origin. Meaning generic fellow, man is from 1846,
from the pet-form of Joseph (q.v.). Joe college typical college man is from 1932. Joe Blow average
fellow is U.S. military slang, first recorded 1941.


Joe Miller (n.)

stale joke, 1816, from Joseph Miller (1684-1738), a comedian, whose name was affixed after his death
to a popular jest-book, Joe Miller's jests, or the Wit's Vade-mecum (1739) compiled by John Mottley.


joe-pye weed (n.)

1818, said to be so called from the name of an Indian who used it to cure typhus in New England.


Joel

masc. proper name, from Hebrew Yoh'el, name of a minor Old Testament prophet, literally the Lord is
God; the same name as Elijah (q.v.) but with the elements reversed. But the personal name that
became common in Devon and Cornwall and the Breton districts of Yorkshire and the Eastern Counties
immediately after the Conquest is from Old Breton Iudhael, from Iud- chief, lord + hael generous. It
is the source of the modern British surname Joel, as well as Jewell, Joule, and Jolson.


joey (n.)

young kangaroo, 1839, sometimes said to be from a native Australian word jo&egrave;, but more
recently often said to be of unknown origin. Perhaps an extended use of Joey, the familiar form of
the male proper name Joseph, for which Partridge lists many common or coarse meanings in 20c.
Australian slang. Farmer &amp; Henley (Slang and Its Analogues) quote an 1887 article on Australian
Colloquialisms:    JOEY is a familiar name for anything young or small, and is applied indifferently
to a puppy, or a kitten, or a child, while a WOOD-AND-WATER-JOEY is a hanger about hotels and a doer
of odd jobs.


jog (v.)

1540s, to shake up and down, perhaps altered from Middle English shoggen to shake, jolt, move with a
jerk (late 14c.), of uncertain origin. Meanings shake, stir up by hint or push, and walk or ride
with a jolting pace are from 16c. The main modern sense in reference to running as training mostly
dates from 1948; at first a regimen for athletes, it became a popular fad c.1967. Perhaps this sense
is extended from its use in horsemanship.   <b>Jogging.</b> The act of exercising, or working a
horse to keep him in condition, or to prepare him for a race. There is no development in jogging,
and it is wholly a preliminary exercise to bring the muscular organization to the point of
sustained, determined action. [Samuel L. Boardman, Handbook of the Turf, New York, 1910]    Related:
Jogged; jogging. As a noun from 1610s.


jogger (n.)

c.1700, one who walks heavily, also one who gives a sudden push; agent noun from jog (v.). Running
sense is from 1968.


jogging (n.)

1560s, verbal noun from jog (v.). In the running exercise sense, from 1948. As an adjective, by
1971.


joggle (v.)

1510s, apparently a frequentative of jog, though attested earlier than it. Related: Joggled;
joggling. Carpentry sense is from 1703, of unknown origin. As a noun from 1727.


Johannine (adj.)

of or pertaining to the Apostle John, 1861, from Latin Joannes (see John) + -ine (1).


John

masc. proper name, mid-12c., from Medieval Latin Johannes, from Late Latin Joannes, from Greek
Ioannes, from Hebrew Yohanan (longer form y'hohanan) literally Jehovah has favored, from hanan he
was gracious.    As the name of John the Baptist and John the Evangelist, it was one of the most
common Christian given names, and in England by early 14c. it rivaled William in popularity. The Old
French form was Jean, but in England its variants Johan, Jehan yielded Jan, Jen (also compare
surname Jensen). Welsh form was Ieuan (see Evan), but Ioan was adopted for the Welsh Authorized
Version of the Bible, hence frequency of Jones as a Welsh surname.


john (n.)

toilet, 1932, probably from jakes, used for toilet since 15c. Meaning prostitute's customer is from
1911, probably from the common, and thus anonymous, name by which they identified themselves.
Meaning policeman is 1858, from shortening of johndarm, jocular anglicization of gendarme.


John Bull

Englishman who exemplifies the national character, 1772, from name of a character representing the
English nation in Arbuthnot's satire History of John Bull (1712).


John Doe (n.)

fictitious plaintiff in a legal action, attested from 1768 (in Blackstone). The fictitious defendant
was Richard Roe. If female, Jane Doe, Jane Roe. Replaced earlier John-a-nokes (1530s) or Jack Nokes,
who usually was paired with John-a-stiles or Tom Stiles. Also used of plaintiffs or defendants who
have reason to be anonymous. By 1852, John Doe was being used in North America for any man whose
name is not known, but Britain tended to preserve it in the narrower legal sense name of the
fictitious plaintiff in actions of ejectment. John Doe warrant attested from 1935.


John Hancock

colloquial for signature, 1903 (sometimes, through some unexplainable error, John Henry), from the
Boston merchant and rebel (1736-1793), signer of the U.S. Declaration of Independence. The extended
sense is from his signing that dangerous document first or most flamboyantly.    John Hancock,
president of Congress, was the first to sign the Declaration of Independence, writing his name in
large, plain letters, and saying: There; John Bull can read my name without spectacles. Now let him
double the price on my head, for this is my defiance. [H&eacute;l&egrave;ne Adeline Guerber, The
Story of the Thirteen Colonies, New York, 1898]    The family name is attested from 1276 in
Yorkshire, a diminutive (see cock) of Hann, a very common given name in 13c. Yorkshire as a pet form
of Henry or John.


John Q. Public (n.)

average American citizen, attested from 1934.


Johnny

pet form of masc. proper name John (see -y (3)). Used as a contemptuous or humorous designation for
some class or group of men from 1670s (it was the typical name in the North and the Northern armies
for a Confederate soldier during the American Civil War). In the Mediterranean, it was a typical
name for an Englishman by c.1800; in the Crimean War, it became the typical name among the English
for a Turk, later extended to an Arab (who by World War II were using it in turn as the typical name
for a British man). Johnny-come-lately first attested 1839.


johnny-cake (n.)

1739, American English, of unknown origin, perhaps from Shawnee cake, from the Indian tribe. Folk
etymology since 1775, however, connects it to journey cake.


johnson (n.)

penis, 1863, perhaps related to British slang John Thomas, which has the same meaning (1887).


joie de vivre (n.)

1889, French, literally joy of living.


join (v.)

c.1300, from stem of Old French joindre join, connect, unite; have sexual intercourse with (12c.),
from Latin iungere to join together, unite, yoke, from PIE *yeug- to join, unite (see jugular).
Related: Joined; joining. In Middle English, join sometimes is short for enjoin. Join up enlist in
the army is from 1916. Phrase if you can't beat them, join them is from 1953.


joinder (n.)

act of joining together (usually in specific legal senses), c.1600, from French joindre to join,
taken as a noun (see join).


joiner (n.)

early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), joynour maker of furniture, small boxes, etc., from Old French
joigneor joiner, carpenter, agent noun from joindre to join (see join). A craftsman who did lighter
and more ornamental work than a carpenter. Meaning one who makes a habit of joining (societies,
clubs, etc.) is from 1890. Related: Joinery.


joint (n.)

late 13c., a part of a body where two bones meet and move in contact with one another, from Old
French joint joint of the body (12c.), from Latin iunctus united, connected, associated, past
participle of iungere join (see jugular). Related: Joints. Slang meaning of place, building,
establishment (especially one where persons meet for shady activities) first recorded 1877, American
English, from an earlier Anglo-Irish sense (1821), perhaps on the notion of a side-room, one joined
to a main room. The original U.S. sense was especially of an opium-smoking den.    Meaning marijuana
cigarette (1938) is perhaps from notion of something often smoked in common, but there are other
possibilities; earlier joint in drug slang meant hypodermic outfit (1935). Meaning prison is
attested from 1953 but probably is older. Out of joint in the figurative sense is from early 15c.
(literally, of bone displacement, late 14c.).


joint (adj.)

early 15c., united, from Old French jointiz (adj.) and joint, literally joined, past participle of
joindre (see join (v.)).


jointed (adj.)

early 15c., from joint (n.).


jointly (adv.)

c.1300, from joint (adj.) + -ly (2). It seems to have chased out joinly (early 15c.).


jointure (n.)

late 14c., act or fact of being joined, from Old French jointure a putting together, from Latin
iunctura a joining, juncture (see juncture). Specific legal sense from mid-15c.


joist (n.)

early 14c. (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French giste beam supporting a bridge (Modern French
g&icirc;te), noun use of fem. past participle of gesir to lie, from Latin iacere to lie, rest,
related to iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Notion is of wooden beam on which boards lie down.


joke (n.)

1660s, joque, a jest, something done to excite laughter, from Latin iocus joke, sport, pastime, from
PIE root *yek- (1) to speak (cognates: Breton iez language, Old High German jehan to say, German
Beichte confession).    Originally a colloquial or slang word. Meaning something not to be taken
seriously is 1791. Practical joke trick played on someone for the sake of a laugh at his expense is
from 1804 (earlier handicraft joke, 1741). Black joke is old slang for smutty song (1730s), from use
of that phrase in the refrain of a then-popular song as a euphemism for the monosyllable.


joke (v.)

1660s, to make a joke, from Latin iocari to jest, joke, from iocus (see joke (n.)). Related: Joked;
joking.


joker (n.)

1729, jester, merry fellow, agent noun from joke (v.). In generic slang use for any man, fellow,
chap by 1811, which probably is the source of the meaning odd face card in the deck (1868). An 1857
edition of Hoyle's Games lists a card game called Black Joke in which all face cards were called
jokers.  American manufacturers of playing-cards are wont to include a blank card at the top of the
pack; and it is, alas! true that some thrifty person suggested that the card should not be wasted.
This was the origin of the joker. [St. James's Gazette, 1894]


jokester (n.)

1819, from joke + -ster.


joky (adj.)

1825, from joke (n.) + -y (2). Related: Jokiness.


jollification (n.)

merrymaking, 1809, American English, from jolly + -fication. Shortened form jolly led to phrase get
(one's) jollies have fun (1957).


jollify (v.)

1824, back-formation from jollification. Related: Jollified; jollifying.


jolliness (n.)

late 14c., from jolly + -ness.


jollity (n.)

c.1300, jolyfte, iolite, from Old French jolivete gaity, cheerfulness; amorous passion; life of
pleasure, from jolif (see jolly).


jolly (adj.)

c.1300 (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French jolif festive, merry, amorous, pretty (12c.) of
uncertain origin (cognate with Italian giulivo merry, pleasant).    Perhaps a Germanic loan-word
from a source akin to Old Norse jol a winter feast (see yule), or from Latin gaudere to rejoice,
from PIE *gau- to rejoice (see joy). For loss of -f, compare tardy, hasty. Related: Jollily;
jolliness.


jolly boat (n.)

1727, of unknown origin, probably from Danish jolle (17c.) or Dutch jol (1680s), both related to
yawl; or it may be from Middle English jolywat (late 15c.) a ship's small boat, of unknown origin.


jolt (v.)

1590s, perhaps from Middle English jollen, chollen to knock, to batter (early 15c.), or an
alteration of obsolete jot (v.) to jostle (1520s). Perhaps related to earlier jolt head a big,
stupid head (1530s). Figurative sense of to startle, surprise is from 1872. Related: Jolted;
jolting.


jolt (n.)

1590s, a knock, from jolt (v.). Meaning jarring shock is from 1630s.


Jonah

masc. proper name, biblical prophet, from Hebrew Yonah, literally dove, pigeon.


Jonas

masc. proper name, from Late Latin Jonas, from Greek Ionas, from Hebrew yonah dove, pigeon (compare
Jonah).


Jonathan

masc. proper name, biblical son of Saul, from Hebrew Yonathan, short for Yehonathan, literally the
Lord has given (compare Nathan). As a pre-Uncle Sam emblem of the United States, sometimes
personified as Brother Jonathan, it dates from 1816, said to have been applied by Washington to Gov.
Jonathan Trumbull Sr. of Connecticut (1710-1785), to whom he sometimes turned for advice (see 2 Sam.
i:26); hence a New Englander, and eventually an American. As a variety of red apple it dates from
1831, so called because it was introduced in the U.S.


Jones

surname, literally John's (child); see John. Phrase keep up with the Joneses (1913, American
English) is from the title of a comic strip by Arthur R. Momand. The slang sense intense desire,
addiction (1968) probably arose from earlier use of Jones as a synonym for heroin, presumably from
the proper name, but the connection, if any, is obscure. Related: Jonesing.


jongleur (n.)

wandering minstrel, 1779, from Norman-French jongleur, variant of Old French jogleor, from Latin
ioculator jester, joker (see juggler). Revived in a technical sense by modern writers.


jonquil (n.)

1660s, species of narcissus, from French jonquille (17c.), from Spanish junquillo, diminutive of
junco rush, reed, from Latin iuncus rush; so called in reference to its leaves. The type of canary
bird (1865) is so called for its pale yellow color, which is like that of the flower.


jook (v.)

dodge, duck, 1510s, Scottish, of unknown origin. Related: Jooked; jooking.


Jordan

river in ancient Palestine; the crossing of it is symbolic of death in high-flown language as a
reference to Num. xxxiii:51. The modern nation-state dates to 1921.


Jose

masc. proper name, from Spanish Jos&eacute;, Spanish form of Joseph.


Joseph

masc. proper name, biblical son of Jacob and Rachel, from Late Latin Joseph, Josephus, from Greek
Ioseph, from Hebrew Yoseph (also Yehoseph; see Ps. lxxxi:6) adds, increases, causative of yasaph he
added. Its use in names of clothing and plants often is in reference to his coat of many colors.


Josephine

fem. proper name, from French J&oacute;sephine, fem. of Joseph. Another feminized form of it is
Josepha.


josh (v.)

to make fun of, to banter, 1845, American English, probably from the familiar version of the proper
name Joshua, but just which Joshua, or why, is long forgotten. Perhaps it was taken as a typical
name of an old farmer. The word was in use earlier than the career of U.S. humorist Josh Billings,
pseudonym of Henry Wheeler Shaw (1818-1885), who did not begin to write and lecture until 1860; but
his popularity after 1869 may have influence that of the word.About the most originality that any
writer can hope to achieve honestly is to steal with good judgment. [Josh Billings]  Related:
Joshed; joshing.


Joshua

masc. proper name, biblical successor of Moses, from Hebrew Yehoshua, literally the Lord is
salvation. Joshua tree (1867) is perhaps so called because its shape compared to pictures of Joshua
brandishing a spear (Josh. viii:18). In the top 10 list of names for boys in the U.S. since 1979.


joss (n.)

Chinese figure of a deity, 1711, from Chinese Pidgin English, from Javanese dejos, taken 16c. from
Portuguese deus god, from Latin deus (see Zeus). Colloquially, it came to mean luck. Joss stick
Chinese incense first recorded 1883.


jostle (v.)

1540s, justle, to knock against, formed from jousten (see joust) + frequentative suffix -tle. The
usual spelling 17c.-18c. was justle. An earlier meaning of the word was to have sex with (c.1400).
Meaning to contend for the best position or place is from 1610s. Related: Jostled; jostling. As a
noun from c.1600.


jot (n.)

1520s, borrowing of Latin jota, variant spelling of Greek iota the letter -i-, the smallest letter
in the alphabet, hence the least part of anything (see iota).


jot (v.)

to make a short note of, 1721, from jot (n.). Related: Jotted; jotting.


jota (n.)

Spanish folk dance; by 1846, of uncertain etymology.


jotun (n.)

1842, a word revived from Old Norse jotunn (see ettin).


jouissance (n.)

late 15c., from Old French jouissance, from jouissant, present participle of joir to enjoy (see
enjoy).


jouk (v.)

see jook.


joule (n.)

unit of electrical energy, 1882, coined in recognition of British physicist James P. Joule
(1818-1889).


jounce (v.)

mid-15c., of unknown origin, perhaps a blend of jump and bounce. Related: Jounced; jouncing. The
noun is 1787, from the verb.


journal (n.)

mid-14c., book of church services, from Anglo-French jurnal a day, from Old French jornel, day,
time; day's work, noun use of adjective meaning daily, from Late Latin diurnalis daily (see
diurnal). Meaning book for inventories and daily accounts is late 15c.; that of personal diary is
c.1600, from a sense found in French. Meaning daily publication is from 1728. Initial -d- in Latin
usually remains in French, but according to Brachet, when it is followed by an -iu-, the -i- becomes
consonantized as a -j- and eventually ejects the d. He also cites jusque from de-usque.


journalism (n.)

1821, regarded as a French word at first, from French journalisme (1781), from journal (see
journal).    Journalism will kill you, but it will keep you alive while you're at it. [Horace Greely
(1811-1872), U.S. journalist]   Journalese language typical of newspaper articles or headlines is
from 1882.    Where men are insulated they are easily oppressed; when roads become good, and
intercourse is easy, their force is increased more than a hundred fold: when, without personal
communication, their opinions can be interchanged, and the people thus become one mass, breathing
one breath and one spirit, their might increases in a ratio of which it is difficult to find the
measure or the limit. Journalism does this office .... [New Monthly Magazine, London, 1831]   <hr />
[G&#233;o] London was in western France covering the trial of a parricide that began in mid-
afternoon. Because he had an early deadline, he telephoned a story that he was certain would take
place: an angry crowd cursing the accused as he was marched to the courthouse from his holding cell
at the police station. London then relaxed over lunch until he saw with dismay the guards and the
prisoner coming but not even the shadow of a gawker. His reputation at stake, he stalked to the
door, cried out, Kill him! and returned to his table. [Benjamin F. Martin, France in 1938]


journalist (n.)

1690s, one whose work is to write or edit public journals or newspapers, from journal + -ist.
Meaning one who keeps a journal is from 1712. Related: Journalistic.


journey (n.)

c.1200, a defined course of traveling; one's path in life, from Old French journee day's work or
travel (12c.), from Vulgar Latin diurnum day, noun use of neuter of Latin diurnus of one day (see
diurnal). Meaning act of traveling by land or sea is c.1300. In Middle English it also meant a day
(c.1400); a day's work (mid-14c.); distance traveled in one day (mid-13c.), and as recently as
Johnson (1755) the primary sense was still the travel of a day.


journey (v.)

mid-14c., travel from one place to another, from Anglo-French journeyer, Old French journoier, from
journee (see journey (n.)). Related: Journeyed; journeying.


journeyman (n.)

qualified worker at a craft or trade who works for wages for another (a position between apprentice
and master), early 15c., from journey (n.), preserving the etymological sense of the word, + man
(n.). Figurative depricatory sense of hireling, drudge is from 1540s. Its American English
colloquial shortening jour (adj.) is attested from 1835.


joust (v.)

c.1300, fight with a spear or lance on horseback with another knight; tilt in a tournament, from Old
French joster to joust, tilt, from Vulgar Latin *iuxtare to approach, come together, meet,
originally be next to, from Latin iuxta beside, near, related to iungere join together (see
jugular). Formerly spelled, and until modern times pronounced, just. Related: Jousted; jousting.


joust (n.)

c.1300, from Old French joustes, from joster (see joust (v.)). The sport was popular with Anglo-
Norman knights.  These early tournaments were very rough affairs, in every sense, quite unlike the
chivalrous contests of later days; the rival parties fought in groups, and it was considered not
only fair but commendable to hold off until you saw some of your adversaries getting tired and then
to join in the attack on them; the object was not to break a lance in the most approved style, but
frankly to disable as many opponents as possible for the sake of obtaining their horses, arms, and
ransoms. [L.F. Salzman, English Life in the Middle Ages, Oxford, 1950]


Jove

Roman god of the bright sky, late 14c., from Latin Iovis, from PIE *dyeu- to shine, with derivatives
referring to the sky, heavens, a god (see diurnal, and compare Zeus). In classical Latin, the
compound Iuppiter replaced Old Latin Iovis as the god's name.


jovial (adj.)

1580s, under the influence of the planet Jupiter, from Middle French jovial (16c.), from Italian
joviale, literally pertaining to Jupiter, and directly from Latin Iovialis of Jupiter, from Iovius
(used as genitive of Iuppiter) Jupiter, Roman god of the sky (see Jove). The meaning good-humored,
merry, is from astrological belief that those born under the sign of the planet Jupiter are of such
dispositions. Related: Jovially.


joviality (n.)

1620s, from French jovialite, from jovial (see jovial).


Jovian (adj.)

1520s, of Jove, from Latin Jovis (see Jove) + -ian. Meaning of the planet Jupiter is recorded from
1794. Latin Jovianus was a masculine proper name.


jowl (n.1)

jaw, 1570s, alteration of Middle English chawl (late 14c.), chavel (early 14c.), from Old English
ceafl, from Proto-Germanic *kefalaz (cognates: Middle High German kiver, German kiefer, Old Norse
kjoptr jaw, Danish k&aelig;ft, Flemish kavel, Dutch kevel gum), from PIE *gep(h)- jaw, mouth
(cognates: Old Irish gop, Irish gob beak, mouth). The change from ch- to j- has not been explained.


jowl (n.2)

fold of flesh under the jaw, 1590s, alteration of Middle English cholle fold of flesh hanging from
the jaw (c.1300), perhaps from Old English ceole throat, from PIE root *gwele- (3) to swallow (see
glut (v.)). This word and jowl (n.1) influenced one another in form and sense.


joy (n.)

c.1200, feeling of pleasure and delight; c.1300, source of pleasure or happiness, from Old French
joie (11c.), from Latin gaudia, plural of gaudium joy, from gaudere rejoice, from PIE root *gau- to
rejoice (cognates: Greek gaio I rejoice, Middle Irish guaire noble). Joy-riding is American English,
1908.


Joyce

proper name, earlier Josse, Goce, etc., and originally used of both men and women. Of Celtic origin.
Joycean, in reference to the fiction of Irish writer James Joyce (1882-1941) is attested from 1927.


joyful (adj.)

mid-13c., from joy + -ful. Related: Joyfully; joyfulness.


joyless (adj.)

mid-14c., from joy + -less. Related: Joylessly; joylessness.


joyous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French joyous, Old French joios happy, cheerful, merry, glad (12c., Modern French
joyeux), from joie (see joy). Related: Joyously; joyousness.


joystick (n.)

also joy stick, 1910, aviators' slang for the control lever of an airplane, from joy + stick (n.).


Juan

masc. proper name, Spanish form of John.


jubate (adj.)

having a mane, 1826, from Latin jubatus maned, from juba mane.


jubilance (n.)

1860; see jubilant + -ance.


jubilant (adj.)

1660s, from Latin jubilantem (nominative jubilans), present participle of jubilare to call to
someone, in Christian writers, to shout for joy, related to jubilum wild shout. First attested in
Milton. Related: Jubilantly.


jubilate (v.)

make a joyful noise, 1640s, from Latin jubilatus, past participle of jubilare (see jubilant).
Related: Jubilated; jubilating.


jubilation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French jubilacion jubilation, rejoicing, and directly from Latin jubilationem
(nominative jubilatio), noun of action from past participle stem of jubilare (see jubilant).


jubilee (n.)

late 14c., in the Old Testament sense, from Old French jubileu jubille; anniversary; rejoicing, from
Late Latin jubilaeus the jubilee year, originally an adjective, of the jubilee, altered (by
association with Latin jubilare to shout with joy) from Greek iabelaios, from iobelos, from Hebrew
yobhel jubilee, formerly a trumpet, ram's horn, literally ram.    The original notion was of a year
of emancipation of slaves and restoration of lands, to be celebrated every 50th year (Levit. xxv:9);
it was proclaimed by the sounding of a ram's horn on the Day of Atonement. The Catholic Church sense
of a period for remission of sin penalties in exchange for pilgrimages, alms, etc. was begun in 1300
by Boniface VIII. The general sense of season of rejoicing is first recorded mid-15c., though
through early 20c. the word kept its specific association with 50th anniversaries. As a type of
African-American folk song, it is attested from 1872.


Judah

masc. proper name, biblical son of Jacob by Leah, also the name of a tribe of Israel, from Hebrew
Yehudah, from stem of y-d-h, literally praised.


Judaic (adj.)

1610s, from Middle French juda&#239;que (15c.), and directly from Latin Iudaicus, from Greek
Ioudaikos, from Ioudaios Jew (see Jew). Earlier in same sense was Judaical (late 15c.).


Judaism (n.)

c.1400 (attested in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c.), from Old French Judaisme and directly from Late
Latin Judaismus (Tertullian), from Greek Ioudaismos, from Ioudaios Jew (see Jew). The Anglo-Latin
reference is from a special tax levied on the Jews of England. Earlier in same sense was Juhede
Jewish faith, Judaism, literally Jew-hood (early 14c.).


Judas

biblical betrayer of Christ, Latin form of Greek Ioudas, from Hebrew Yehudha (see Judah). As a name
for a malicious traitor, it is attested from late 15c. Judas priest as an exclamation in place of
Jesus Christ is from 1914. Judas tree (1660s) supposedly was the type from which Judas hanged
himself. The Judas goat (1941) leads sheep to the shackling pen.


Jude

masc. proper name, Hellenized form of Judah (q.v.), maintained in the Bible for the names of two
disciples of Christ, to distinguish them from Judas (q.v.).


Judea

from Latin Judaea, from Judah (see Judah).


judge (v.)

c.1300, to form an opinion about; make a decision, also to try and pronounce sentence upon (someone)
in a court, from Anglo-French juger, Old French jugier to judge, pronounce judgment; pass an opinion
on, from Latin iudicare to judge, to examine officially; form an opinion upon; pronounce judgment,
from iudicem (nominative iudex) a judge, a compound of ius right, law (see just (adj.)) + root of
dicere to say (see diction). Related: Judged; judging. From mid-14c. as to regard, consider. The Old
English word was deman (see doom). Spelling with -dg- emerged mid-15c.


judge (n.)

mid-14c. (early 13c. as a surname), also judge-man; see judge (v.). In Hebrew history, it refers to
a war leader vested with temporary power (as in Book of Judges), from Latin iudex being used to
translate Hebrew shophet.


judgement (n.)

see judgment. Related: Judgemental.


judgeship (n.)

1670s, from judge (n.) + -ship.


judgment (n.)

mid-13c., action of trying at law, trial, also capacity for making decisions, from Old French
jugement legal judgment; diagnosis; the Last Judgment (11c.), from jugier (see judge (v.)). From
late 13c. as penalty imposed by a court; early 14c. as any authoritative decision, verdict. From
c.1300 in referfence to the Last Judgment. Also from c.1300 as opinion. Sense of discernment is
first recorded 1530s.


judgmental (adj.)

1892, from judgment + -al (1). Meaning inclined to make moral judgments is attested from 1952.
Related: Judgmentally.


judicable (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin iudicabilis, from iudicare to judge, which is related to iudicem (see judge
(v.)).


judication (n.)

1620s, from Latin iudicationem (nominative iudicatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
iudicare to judge, related to iudicem (see judge (v.)).


judicative (adj.)

1640s, from Latin iudicat-, past participle stem of iudicare to judge, which is related to iudicem
(see judge (v.)) + -ive.


judicatory (n.)

1570s, from French judicatoire, from Late Latin iudicatorius judicial, pertaining to judgment, from
iudicat-, past participle stem of Latin iudicare to judge (see judge (v.)).


judicature (n.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin iudicatura, from iudicat-, past participle stem of Latin iudicare to
judge (see judge (v.)).


judicial (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin iudicalis of or belonging to a court of justice, from iudicium judgment,
decision, from iudicem (see judge (v.)). Related: Judicially.


judiciary (adj.)

relating to courts, early 15c., from Latin iudiciarius of or belonging to a court of justice, from
iudicium judgment, from iudicem (see judge (v.)). The noun meaning a body of judges, judges
collectively is from 1802 (judicature was used in this sense from 1590s).


judicious (adj.)

1590s, having sound judgment, from Middle French judicieux (16c.), from Latin iudicium judgment,
from iudicem (see judge (v.)). Meaning careful, prudent is from c.1600. Related: Judiciously;
judiciousness.


Judith

fem. proper name, from Latin, from Greek Ioudith, from Hebrew Yehudith, fem. of Yehudh Jewish,
Jewess, from Yehudha (see Judah). Judy is a pet form of it.


judo (n.)

1889, from Japanese judo, from ju softness, gentleness (from Chinese jou soft, gentle) + do way,
art, from Chinese tao way. A refined form of ju-jitsu introduced in 1882 by Dr. Jigoro Kano, using
principles of movement and balance, and practiced as a sport or form of physical exercise [OED].


Judy

pet form of Judith. Figurative uses often are from the Punch and Judy puppet show.


jug (n.)

deep vessel for carrying liquids, late 15c., jugge, variant of jubbe, of unknown origin, perhaps
from jug a low woman, a maidservant (mid-16c.), a familiar alteration of a common personal name,
Joan or Judith. Use as a musical instrument is attested from 1946. Jughead klutz is from 1926;
jughandle tight curved road used for turns is from 1961. Jugs for woman's breasts first recorded
1920 in Australian slang, short for milk jugs.


jug band (n.)

musical ensemble in which the bass line is carried or augmented by a player blowing on the open lip
of a jug (n.), 1886, American English.


Jugendstil (n.)

German equivalent of art nouveau, from Jugend, literally youth, name of a German magazine begun in
1896 + stil style.


juggernaut (n.)

1630s, huge wagon bearing an image of the god Krishna, especially that at the town of Puri, drawn
annually in procession in which (apocryphally) devotees allowed themselves to be crushed under its
wheels in sacrifice. Altered from Jaggernaut, a title of Krishna (an incarnation of Vishnu), from
Hindi Jagannath, literally lord of the world, from Sanskrit jagat world (literally moving, present
participle of *jagati he goes, from PIE *gwa- to go, come (see come (v.)) + natha-s lord, master,
from nathate he helps, protects, from PIE *na- to help. The first European description of the
festival is by Friar Odoric (c.1321). Figurative sense of anything that demands blind devotion or
merciless sacrifice is from 1854.


juggle (v.)

late 14c., entertain by clowning or doing tricks, back-formation from juggler and in part from Old
French jogler play tricks, sing songs, from Late Latin ioculare (source of Italian giocolare), from
Latin ioculari to jest (see jocular). Related: Juggled; juggling.


juggler (n.)

c.1100, iugulere jester, buffoon, also wizard, sorcerer, from Old English geogelere magician,
conjurer, also from Anglo-French jogelour, Old French jogleor (accusative), from Latin ioculatorem
(nominative ioculator) joker, from ioculari to joke, to jest (see jocular). Connecting notion
between magician and juggler is dexterity.


Jugoslavia

see Yugoslavia. Related: Jugoslav; Jugoslavian.


jugular (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the throat or neck (especially in reference to the great veins of the neck),
from Modern Latin jugularis, from Latin iugulum collarbone, throat, neck, diminutive of iugum yoke,
related to iungere to join, from PIE *yeug- to join (cognates: Sanskrit yugam yoke, yunjati binds,
harnesses, yogah union; Hittite yugan yoke; Greek zygon yoke, zeugnyanai to join, unite; Old Church
Slavonic igo, Old Welsh iou yoke; Lithuanian jungas yoke, jungiu fastened in a yoke; Old English
geoc yoke; probably also Latin iuxta close by). As a noun, 1610s, from the adjective.


juice (n.)

c.1300, liquid extract obtained by boiling herbs, from Old French jus juice, sap, liquid (13c.),
from Latin ius broth, sauce, juice, from PIE root *yeue- to blend, mix food (cognates: Sanskrit yus-
broth, Greek zyme a leaven, Old Church Slavonic jucha broth, soup, Lithuanian juse fish soup).
Meaning liquor is from 1828; that of electricity is first recorded 1896.


juice (v.)

1630s, to suffuse with juice, from juice (n.). Meaning to enliven attested by 1964; juiced drunk
attested by 1946; in reference to steroids, by 2003. Related: Juiced; juicing.


juicer (n.)

agent noun from juice (v.). From 1928 as electrician, by 1967 as alcoholic; from 1938 as the name of
an appliance for extracting juice.


juicy (adj.)

early 15c., from juice (n.) + -y (2). Figurative sense weathly, full of some desired quality is from
1620s; sense of lively, suggestive, sensational is from 1883. Related: Juiciness.


jujitsu (n.)

also ju-jitsu, 1875, from Japanese jujutsu, from ju softness, gentleness (from Chinese jou soft,
gentle) + jutsu art, science, from Chinese shu, shut.


juju (n.2)

marijuana cigarette, 1940, supposedly from reduplicated middle syllable of marijuana.


juju (n.1)

object of religious veneration among West Africans, 1860, supposedly ultimately from French joujou
toy, plaything.


jujube (n.)

late 14c., date-like fruit from a tree found in Asia, from Medieval Latin jujuba (plural), from Late
Latin zizyphum, from zizyphus, an Asiatic tree with datelike fruit, from Greek zizyphon, from
Persian zayzafun. The meaning soft candy with date-like flavor first recorded 1835.


juke (n.)

roadhouse, 1935; see jukebox.


juke (v.)

to duck, dodge, feint, by 1971, variant of jook (q.v.). Related: Juked; juking.


jukebox (n.)

1937, jook organ, from jook joint roadhouse (1935), Black English slang, from juke, joog wicked,
disorderly, in Gullah (the creolized English of the coastlands of South Carolina, Georgia, and
northern Florida), probably from Wolof and Bambara dzug unsavory. Said to have originated in central
Florida (see A Note on Juke, Florida Review, vol. VII, no. 3, spring 1938). The spelling with a -u-
might represent a deliberate attempt to put distance between the word and its origins.    For a long
time the commercial juke trade resisted the name juke box and even tried to raise a big publicity
fund to wage a national campaign against it, but juke box turned out to be the biggest advertising
term that could ever have been invented for the commercial phonograph and spread to the ends of the
world during the war as American soldiers went abroad but remembered the juke boxes back home.
[Billboard, Sept. 15, 1945]


julep (n.)

late 14c., a syrupy drink in which medicine was given, from Old French julep (14c.), from Medieval
Latin julapium, from Arabic julab, from Persian gulab rose water, from gul rose (related to Greek
rhodon, Latin rosa) + ab water, from PIE root *ap- (2) water (see water (n.1)). Sense of alcoholic
drink flavored with mint is first recorded 1787, American English.


Julia

fem. proper name, from Latin Iulia, fem. of Iulius (see Julius).


Julian (adj.)

old style calendar, 1590s, in reference to reforms by Julius Caesar in 46 B.C.E. (see Julius). The
masc. proper name is from Latin Iulianus, from Iulius.


Julie

fem. proper name, Englishing of Julia.


julienne (n.)

kind of clear soup, 1841, from French, literally (soup made) in the manner of Julien, the proper
name, from an otherwise unknown cook. Related: Julienned.


Juliet

fem. proper name, from Italian Giulietta, diminutive of Giulia Julia (see Julia). Compare French
Juliette. Juliet cap (1904) was felt to resemble a type worn in stage productions of Romeo and
Juliet.    A Parisian fancy which is finding little favor here, is the Juliet cap. It is a net of
beads or of meshed cord jewelled or beaded at the intersections. Clustered bunches of blossoms and
foliage are set at each side of the cap, above the ears. [Fabrics, Fancy-Goods &amp; Notions, trade
publication, New York, January 1904]


Julius

masc. proper name, from Latin Iulius, name of a Roman gens, perhaps a contraction of *Iovilios
pertaining to or descended from Jove.


July

c.1050, Iulius, from Anglo-French julie, Old French Jule, from Latin Iulius fifth month of the Roman
calendar (which began its year in March), renamed after his death and deification in honor of Gaius
Julius Caesar, who was born in this month, which formerly in republican Rome was named Quintilis
fifth. Accented on first syllable in English until 18c. Replaced Old English li&eth;a se
&aelig;fterra later mildness, from li&eth;e mild.


jumble (v.)

1520s, originally to move confusedly, perhaps coined on model of stumble, tumble, etc. In 17c., it
was yet another euphemism for have sex with (a sense first attested 1580s). Meaning mix or confuse
is from 1540s. Related: Jumbled; jumbling.


jumble (n.)

a confused mixture, 1660s, from jumble (v.).


jumbo (adj.)

very large, unusually large for its type, 1882, a reference to Jumbo, name of the London Zoo's huge
elephant (acquired from France, said to have been captured as a baby in Abyssinia in 1861), sold
February 1882 to U.S. circus showman P.T. Barnum amid great excitement in America and great outcry
in England, both fanned by Barnum. The name is perhaps from slang jumbo clumsy, unwieldy fellow
(1823), which itself is possibly from a word for elephant in a West African language (compare Kongo
nzamba).    I tell you conscientiously that no idea of the immensity of the animal can be formed. It
is a fact that he is simply beyond comparison. The largest elephants I ever saw are mere dwarfs by
the side of Jumbo. [P.T. Barnum, interview, Philadelphia Press, April 22, 1882]    As a product
size, by 1886 (cigars). Jumbo jet attested by 1964.


jump (v.)

1520s, perhaps imitative (compare bump); another theory derives it from words in Gallo-Roman
dialects of southwestern France (compare jumba to rock, to balance, swing, yumpa to rock), picked up
during English occupation in Hundred Years War. Superseded native leap, bound, and spring in most
senses. Meaning to attack is from 1789; that of to do the sex act with is from 1630s. Related:
Jumped; jumping. To jump to a conclusion is from 1704. Jumping-rope is from 1805. Jump in a lake go
away and stop being a pest attested from 1912.


jump (n.)

1550s, act of jumping, from jump (v.). Meaning jazz music with a strong beat first recorded 1937, in
Count Basie's One O'Clock Jump. Jump suit one-piece coverall modeled on those worn by paratroopers
and skydivers is from 1948.


jumper (n.)

1610s, one who jumps, agent noun from jump (v.). The word meaning sleeveless dress (1853) apparently
is from mid-17c. jump short coat, also woman's under bodice, of uncertain origin, perhaps from
French jupe skirt (see jupe). Meaning sleeveless dress worn over a blouse first recorded American
English 1939.


jumpstart (v.)

also jump-start, to start a car using battery booster cables, by 1970, from jumper wire used to cut
out part of a circuit or close a gap (1901 in telegraphy); see jump + start. Related: Jumpstarted;
jumpstarting. Figurative use by 1975.


jumpy (adj.)

nervous, 1869, from jump (n.) + -y (2). Related: Jumpiness.


jun

old abbreviation of junior.


junco (n.)

1706, from Spanish junco reed, bush, as in junco ave reed sparrow, a bird of the Indies.


junction (n.)

1711, act of joining, from Latin iunctionem (nominative iunctio), noun of action from past
participle stem of iungere to join together (see jugular). Meaning place where things meet first
attested 1836, American English, originally in reference to railroad tracks.


juncture (n.)

late 14c., place where two things are joined, from Latin iunctura a joining, uniting, a joint, from
iunctus, past participle of iungere to join (see jugular). Sense of point in time first recorded
1650s, probably from astrology.


June

c.1100, from Latin Iunius (mensis), probably a variant of Iunonius, sacred to Juno (see Juno).
Replaced Old English li&eth;e se &aelig;rra earlier mildness.


Juneau

city in Alaska, settled 1881 and named for prospector Joe Juneau.


junebug (n.)

also june bug, 1829, name for various beetles which emerge in adult form and are active in June,
first attested in Southern U.S. dialect, from June + bug (n.).


Jungian (adj.)

1933, of or pertaining to the psychoanalytic school of Dr. Carl Gustav Jung (1875-1961); for suffix,
see -ian.


jungle (n.)

1776, from Hindi jangal desert, forest, wasteland, uncultivated ground, from Sanskrit jangala-s
arid, sparsely grown with trees, of unknown origin. Specific sense of land overgrown by vegetation
in a wild, tangled mass is first recorded 1849; meaning place notoriously lawless and violent is
first recorded 1906, from Upton Sinclair's novel (compare asphalt jungle, 1949, William R. Burnett's
novel title, made into a film 1950 by John Huston; blackboard jungle, 1954, Evan Hunter's novel
title, movie in 1955). Jungle gym was a trademark name, 1923, by Junglegym Inc., Chicago, U.S.
Jungle bunny, derogatory for black person, attested from 1966.


junior (adj.)

late 13c., from Latin iunior, comparative of iuvenis young, young man (see young). Used after a
person's name to mean the younger of two from late 13c. Abbreviation Jr. is attested from 1620s.
Meaning of lesser standing, more recent is from 1766. That of meant for younger people, of smaller
size is from 1860. Junior college first attested 1896; junior high school is from 1909. Junior miss
young teenage girl is from 1907.    The junior high school is rapidly becoming the people's high
school. The percentage of pupils completing the ninth year is constantly rising where junior high
schools have been established. [Anne Laura McGregor, Supervised Study in English for Junior High
School Grades, New York, 1921]


junior (n.)

1520s, from junior (adj.).


juniority (n.)

1590s, from junior + -ity.


juniper (n.)

evergreen shrub, late 14c., from Latin iuniperus (source of French geni&egrave;vre, Spanish enebro,
Portuguese zimbro, Italian ginepro), of uncertain origin, perhaps related to iunco reed. Watkins has
it from PIE *yoini-paros bearing juniper berries, from *yoi-ni- juniper berry. Applied to various
North American species from 1748. In the Bible, it renders Hebrew rethem, the name of a white-
flowered shrub unrelated to the European evergreen.


Junius

masc. proper name, from Latin Junius, name of a Roman gens. The pseudonym of the author of a famous
series of letters in the Public Advertiser from 1768-1772.


junk (n.1)

worthless stuff, mid-14c., junke old cable or rope (nautical), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old
French junc rush, reed, also used figuratively as a type of something of little value, from Latin
iuncus rush, reed (but OED finds no evidence of connexion). Nautical use extended to old refuse from
boats and ships (1842), then to old or discarded articles of any kind (1884). Junk food is from
1971; junk art is from 1966; junk mail first attested 1954.


junk (n.2)

Chinese sailing ship, 1610s, from Portuguese junco, from Malay jong ship, large boat (13c.),
probably from Javanese djong.


junk (v.)

1803, to cut off in lumps, from junk (n.1). The meaning to throw away as trash, to scrap is from
1908. Related: Junked; junking.    New settlers (who should always be here as early in the spring as
possible) begin to cut down the wood where they intend to erect their first house. As the trees are
cut the branches are to be lopped off, and the trunks cut into lengths of 12 or 14 feet. This
operation they call junking them; if they are not junked before fire is applied, they are much worse
to junk afterwards. [letter dated Charlotte Town, Nov. 29, 1820, in A Series of Letters Descriptive
of Prince Edward Island, 1822]


junker (n.)

young German noble, 1550s, from German Junker, from Old High German juncherro, literally young lord,
from junc young (see young) + herro lord (see Herr). Pejorative sense of reactionary younger member
of the Prussian aristocracy (1865) dates from Bismarck's domestic policy.


junket (n.)

late 14c., basket in which fish are caught or carried, from Medieval Latin iuncata rush basket,
perhaps from Latin iuncus rush. Shifted meaning by 1520s to feast, banquet, probably via notion of a
picnic basket, which led to extended sense of pleasure trip (1814), and then to tour by government
official at public expense for no discernable public benefit (by 1886, American English). Compare
Italian cognate giuncata cream cheese (originally made in a rush basket), a sense of junket also
found in Middle English and preserved lately in dialects.


junkie (n.)

drug addict, 1923, from junk (n.1) in the narcotics sense + -y (3). Junker in the same sense is
recorded from 1922. Junk for narcotic is older.


junky (adj.)

run-down, seedy, trashy, 1876, from junk (n.1) + -y (2).


Juno

Roman goddess of women and marriage, mid-14c., perhaps literally the young one (perhaps as goddess
of the new moon), from an Italic root akin to Latin iunior younger, iuvenis young (see young).


Junoesque (adj.)

in reference to stately, mature beauty, 1861, from Juno + -esque. Qualities associated with the
Roman goddess, who also was notable for her fits of rage.


junta (n.)

1620s, Spanish legislative council, from Spanish and Portuguese junta council, meeting, convention,
from Medieval Latin iuncta joint, from Latin iuncta, fem. past participle of iungere to join (see
jugular).    Meaning political or military group in power first recorded 1640s as junto (from
confusion with Spanish nouns ending in -o), originally with reference to the Cabinet Council of
Charles I. Modern spelling in this sense is from 1714; popularized 1808 in connection with councils
formed across Spain to resist Napoleon.


junto (n.)

1640s, erroneous formation of junta on model of Spanish nouns ending in -o.


jupe (n.)

late 13c., men's loose jacket, from Old French jupe, from Arabic jubbah loose outer garment. As a
woman's bodice, from 1810.


Jupiter (n.)

c.1200, supreme deity of the ancient Romans, from Latin Iupeter, from PIE *dyeu-peter- god-father
(originally vocative, the name naturally occurring most frequently in invocations [Tucker]), from
*deiw-os god (see Zeus) + peter father in the sense of male head of a household (see father).
Compare Greek Zeu pater, vocative of Zeus pater Father Zeus; Sanskrit Dyauspita heavenly father. The
planet name is attested from late 13c. Jupiter Pluvius Jupiter as dispenser of rain was used
jocularly from 1864.


Jurassic (adj.)

in reference to geological period between the Triassic and the Cretaceous, 1847, from French
Jurassique, literally of the Jura Mountains, between France and Switzerland, whose limestones were
laid down during this geological period. Used in English in a literal sense pertaining to the Jura
Mountains by 1831. The name is said to be from Gaulish *iuris wooded mountain.


jurat (n.)

one who has taken an oath, early 15c. (mid-14c. in Anglo-French), from Medieval Latin iuratus,
literally sworn man, noun use of past participle of iurare to swear (see jury (n.)).


juridical (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin iuridicalis relating to right; pertaining to justice, from iuridicus, from ius
right, law (genitive iuris; see jurist) + dicere to say, to speak (see diction). Related:
Juridically.


jurisdiction (n.)

early 14c. administration of justice (attested from mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French
juridiccion (13c.) and directly from Latin iurisdictionem (nominative iurisdictio) administration of
justice, jurisdiction, from ius (genitive iuris; see jurist) right, law + dictio a saying (see
diction). Meaning extent or range of administrative power is from late 14c. Related: Jurisdictional.


jurisprudence (n.)

1620s, knowledge of law, from French jurisprudence (17c.) and directly from Late Latin
iurisprudentia the science of law, from iuris of right, of law (genitive of ius; see jurist) +
prudentia knowledge, a foreseeing (see prudence). Meaning the philosophy of law is first attested
1756. Related: Jurisprudential.


jurist (n.)

mid-15c., one who practices law, from Middle French juriste (14c.), from Medieval Latin iurista
jurist, from Latin ius (genitive iuris) law, from PIE *yewes- law, originally a term of religious
cult, perhaps meaning sacred formula (compare Latin iurare to pronounce a ritual formula, Vedic yos
health, Avestan yaoz-da- make ritually pure, Irish huisse just).    The Germanic root represented by
Old English &aelig; custom, law, Old High German ewa, German Ehe marriage, though sometimes
associated with this group, seems rather to belong to PIE *ei- to go. Meaning a legal writer is from
1620s.


juror (n.)

c.1300 (attested from late 12c. in Anglo-Latin), from Anglo-French jurour (late 13c.; Old French
jureor), from Latin iuratorem (nominative iurator) swearer, agent noun from iurare to swear (see
jury (n.)).


jury (n.)

early 14c. (attested from late 12c. in Anglo-Latin), from Anglo-French juree (late 13c.), from
Medieval Latin iurata an oath, an inquest, fem. past participle of Latin iurare to swear, from ius
(genitive iuris) law (see jurist). Meaning body of persons chosen to award prizes at an exhibition
is from 1851. Grand jury attested from early 15c. in Anglo-French (le graund Jurre).


jury (adj.)

temporary, 1610s, in jury-mast, a nautical term for a temporary mast put in place of one broken or
blown away, of uncertain origin. The word perhaps is ultimately from Old French ajurie help, relief,
from Latin adjutare (see aid (n.)).


jus

French, literally juice (see juice).


jussive

grammatical mode expressing command, 1846, from Latin iuss-, past participle stem of iubere to bid,
command, from PIE *yeudh- to move violently, fight; + -ive.


just (adj.)

late 14c., righteous in the eyes of God; upright, equitable, impartial; justifiable, reasonable,
from Old French juste just, righteous; sincere (12c.), from Latin iustus upright, equitable, from
ius right, especially legal right, law, from Old Latin ious, perhaps literally sacred formula, a
word peculiar to Latin (not general Italic) that originated in the religious cults, from PIE root
*yewes- law (cognates: Avestan yaozda- make ritually pure; see jurist). The more mundane Latin law-
word lex covered specific laws as opposed to the body of laws. The noun meaning righteous person or
persons is from late 14c.


just (adv.)

merely, barely, 1660s, from Middle English sense of exactly, precisely, punctually (c.1400), from
just (adj.), and paralleling the adverbial use of French juste. Just-so story first attested 1902 in
Kipling, from the expression just so exactly that, in that very way (1751).


justice (n.)

mid-12c., the exercise of authority in vindication of right by assigning reward or punishment; also
quality of being fair and just, from Old French justice justice, legal rights, jurisdiction (11c.),
from Latin iustitia righteousness, equity, from iustus upright, just (see just (adj.)). The Old
French word had widespread senses, including uprightness, equity, vindication of right, court of
justice, judge. The word began to be used in English c.1200 as a title for a judicial officer.
Meaning right order, equity is late 14c. Justice of the peace first attested early 14c. In the
Mercian hymns, Latin iustitia is glossed by Old English rehtwisnisse. To do justice to (someone or
something) render fully and fairly showing due appreciation is from 1670s.


justiciable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French justisable amenable to a jurisdiction, from justicier, from Latin iustitia
(see justice).


justifiability (n.)

1835, from justifiable + -ity.


justifiable (adj.)

1520s, from Old French justifiable, from justifiier (see justify). Earlier in same sense was
justificable (mid-15c.). Related: Justifiably (mid-15c.).


justification (n.)

late 14c., administration of justice, from Late Latin iustificationem (nominative iustificatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of iustificare (see justify). Meaning action of justifying
is from late 15c. Theological sense is from 1520s.


justified (adj.)

1580s, made right, past participle adjective from justify. Typesetting sense is from 1670s.


justify (v.)

c.1300, to administer justice; late 14c., to show (something) to be just or right, from Old French
justifiier submit to court proceedings (12c.), from Latin iustificare act justly toward, make just,
from iustificus dealing justly, righteous, from iustus just (see just (adj.)) + root of facere to do
(see factitious). Of circumstances, to afford justification, from 1630s. Meaning to make exact (now
largely restricted to typesetting) is from 1550s. Related: Justified; justifying.


Justin

masc. proper name, from Latin Iustinus, literally just, from iustus (see just (adj.)).


Justine

fem. proper name, fem. of Latin Iustinus (see Justin).


justly (adv.)

early 14c., in an adjacent position, closely, from just (adj.) + -ly (2). Meanings truthfully,
honestly, in an equitable manner, with justice, fairly are from late 14c. Sense of justifiably, with
good reason is from c.1400; that of legally, legitimately, rightfully is early 15c.


justness (n.)

early 15c., from just (adj.) + -ness.


jut (v.1)

to protrude, mid-15c., corruption of obsolete jet (see jetty). Related: Jutted; jutting.


jut (v.2)

to strike, hit, push, 1540s, echoic. Related: Jutted; jutting.


jute (n.)

plant fiber, 1746, from Bengali jhuto, from Sanskrit juta-s twisted hair, related to jata braid of
hair, of unknown origin, probably from a non-Indo-European language.


Jute

Old English Eotas, one of the ancient Germanic inhabitants of Jutland in Denmark; traditionally they
were said to have settled in Kent and Hampshire during the 5c. invasion of Britain. The name is
related to Old Norse Iotar.


juvenal

1580s (n.), 1630s (adj.), from Latin iuvenalis of or belonging to youth, from iuvenis a young person
(see young). The Roman satirist is Decimius Junius Juvenalis.


juvenescence (n.)

1800; see juvenescent + -ence.


juvenescent (adj.)

1821, from Latin iuvenescentem (nominative iuvenescens), present participle of iuvenescere to grow
into youth, from iuvenis young (see young).


juvenile (adj.)

1620s, from Latin iuvenilis of or belonging to youth, from iuvenis young person, originally young
(compare French jeune; see young). Juvenile delinquency first recorded 1816; Juvenile delinquent the
following year.


juvenilia (n.)

works of a person's youth, 1620s, from Latin iuvenilia, neuter plural of iuvenilis (see juvenile).


juvenility (n.)

1620s, from Latin iuvenilitas youth, from iuvenilis (see juvenile).


Juventus

Roman god of youth, personification of iuventas youth, from iuvenis a young person (see young).


juxtapose (v.)

1851, from French juxtaposer (1835), from Latin iuxta (see juxtaposition) + French poser (see pose
(v.1)). Related: Juxtaposed; juxtaposing.


juxtaposition (n.)

1660s, from French juxtaposition (1660s), from Latin iuxta beside, near + French position (see
position (n.)). Latin iuxta is a contraction of *iugista (adv.), superlative of adjective *iugos
closely connected, from stem of iugum yoke, from iungere to join (see jugular).


jynx (n.)

wryneck, 1640s, from Modern Latin jynx (plural jynges), from Latin iynx (see jinx).


