-kin

diminutive suffix, first attested late 12c. in proper names adopted from Flanders and Holland,
probably from Middle Dutch -kin, properly a double-diminutive, from -k + -in. Equivalent to German
-chen. Also borrowed in Old French as -quin, where it usually has a bad sense.    This suffix, which
is almost barren in French, has been more largely developed in the Picard patois, which uses it for
new forms, such as verquin, a shabby little glass (verre); painequin, a bad little loaf (pain);
Pierrequin poor little Pierre, &amp;c.; [An Etymological Dictionary of the French Language, transl.
G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]    Used in later Middle English with common nouns. In some words it is
directly from Dutch or Flemish.


K

Roman letter, from Greek kappa, ultimately from Phoenician and general Semitic kaph, said to be
literally hollow of the hand, so called for its shape. For more on the history of its use, see see
C. As a symbol for potassium, it represents Latin kalium potash. Slang meaning one thousand dollars
is 1970s, from kilo-. K as a measure of capacity (especially in computer memory) meaning one
thousand also is an abbreviation of kilo-. As an indication of strikeout in baseball scorekeeping it
dates from 1874, said to be from last letter of struck, perhaps because first letter already was
being used as abbreviation for sacrifice. The invention of the scorecard symbols is attributed to
U.S. newspaperman Henry Chadwick (1824-1908) of the old New York Clipper.    Smith was the first
striker, and went out on three strikes, which is recorded by the figure 1 for the first out, and the
letter K to indicate how put out, K being the last letter of the word struck. The letter K is used
in this instance as being easier to remember in connection with the word struck than S, the first
letter, would be. [Henry Chadwick, Chadwick's Base Ball Manual, London, 1874]


k.p. (n.)

kitchen duty, 1935, apparently short for kitchen police (duties), itself attested from 1933 as part
of Boy Scouting and other camping activities; the expression's sense sometimes shifted to kitchen
patrol (1940) during World War II.


Kaaba (n.)

1734, Caaba, cube-shaped building in the Great Mosque of Mecca, containing the Black Stone, from
Arabic ka'bah square house, from ka'b cube.


kabbalah (n.)

see cabbala.


kabuki (n.)

1896, from Japanese, popular theater (as opposed to shadow puppet-plays or lyrical Noh dramas),
literally art of song and dance, from ka song + bu dance + ki art, skill [Barnhart, OED].
Alternative etymology (in Webster's) is from nominal form of kabuku to be divergent, to deviate,
from early opinion of this form of drama. Since c.1650, all parts are played by males.


Kabul

capital of Afghanistan, named for its river, which carries a name of unknown origin.


Kabyle

Berber of Algeria and Tunisia, 1738, also of their language, from French, from Arabic qaba'il,
plural of qabilah tribe.


kaddish (n.)

doxology of the Jewish ritual, 1610s, from Aramaic qaddish holy, holy one, from stem of q'dhash was
holy, ithqaddash was sanctified, related to Hebrew qadhash was holy, qadhosh holy. According to
Klein, the name probably is from the second word of the text veyithqaddash and sanctified be.


kaffeeklatsch (n.)

gossip over cups of coffee, 1877, from German Kaffeeklatsch, from kaffee coffee (see coffee) +
klatsch gossip (see klatsch).    THE living-room in a German household always contains a large sofa
at one side of the room, which is the seat of honor accorded a guest. At a Kaffeeklatsch (literally,
coffee gossip) the guests of honor are seated on this sofa, and the large round table is wheeled up
before them. The other guests seat themselves in chairs about the table. [Mary Alden Hopkins, A
'Kaffeeklatsch,' Boston Cooking-School Magazine of Culinary Science and Domestic Economics, May
1905]


Kaffir (n.)

1790, from Arabic kafir unbeliever, infidel, impious wretch, with a literal sense of one who does
not admit the blessings of God, from kafara to cover up, conceal, deny, blot out. Technically, non-
Muslim, but in Ottoman times it came to be used almost exclusively for Christian. Early English
missionaries used it as an equivalent of heathen to refer to Bantus in South Africa (1792), from
which use it came generally to mean South African black regardless of ethnicity, and to be a term of
abuse since at least 1934.


Kafkaesque (adj.)

1947, resembling situations from the writings of Franz Kafka (1883-1924), German-speaking Jewish
novelist born in Prague, Austria-Hungary. The surname is Czech German, literally jackdaw, imitative.


kafuffle (n.)

variant of kerfuffle.


Kahlua

Mexican coffee-flavored liqueur, produced from 1936, the name said to be from the native Acolhua
people, allies of the Aztecs.


kahuna (n.)

1886, in a report in English by the Hawaiian government, which defines the word as doctor and
sorcerer, from Hawaiian, where it was applied as well to priests and navigators. In surfer slang,
for a god of surfing, it is attested from 1962 (but big kahuna in same sense is said to date from
1950s.


kaiser (n.)

an emperor, Old English casere, fallen from use after Middle English, but revived 1858 in reference
to the German emperors of Austria and, after 1870, Germany, from German Kaiser, from Bavarian and
Austrian spelling of Middle High German keisar, from Old High German keisar emperor, an early
borrowing of Latin cognomen Caesar. The Germanic and Slavic peoples seem to have called all Roman
emperors caesar (compare Old English casere, Old Norse keisari). Said to be the earliest Latin loan
word in Germanic.


kakistocracy (n.)

1829, government by the worst element of a society, coined on analogy of its opposite, aristocracy,
from Greek kakistos worst, superlative of kakos bad (which perhaps is related to the general IE word
for defecate; see caco-) + -cracy.


Kalashnikov (n.)

type of rifle or submachine gun made in the U.S.S.R., 1968, from Russian Kalashnikov, weapon
developed in Soviet Union c.1946 and named for Mikhail Kalashnikov, gun designer and part of the
team that built it. In AK-47, the AK stands for Avtomat Kalashnikov.


kale (n.)

also kail, c.1300, alternative form of cawul (c.1200), surviving in this spelling after Middle
English as a Scottish variant of cole cabbage (see cole-slaw). Slang meaning money is from 1902.


kaleidoscope (n.)

1817, literally observer of beautiful forms, coined by its inventor, Scottish scientist David
Brewster (1781-1868), from Greek kalos beautiful (see Callisto) + eidos shape (see -oid) + -scope,
on model of telescope, etc. They sold by the thousands in the few years after their invention, but
Brewster failed to secure a patent.    Figurative meaning constantly changing pattern is first
attested 1819 in Lord Byron, whose publisher had sent him one of the toys. As a verb, from 1891. A
kaleidophone (1827) was invented by English physicist Sir Charles Wheatstone (1802-1875) to make
sound waves visible.


kaleidoscopic (adj.)

1820, from kaleidoscope + -ic. Figurative use by 1855.


Kali

a name of Devi, the Hindu mother-goddess, in her death-goddess aspect, 1798, from Sanskrit kali,
literally the black one, fem. of kalah blue-black, black, from a Dravidian language. Also taken as
the fem. of kala time (as destroyer). She is portrayed as black-skinned, blood-smeared, and wearing
a necklace of skulls and a girdle of snakes.


Kama Sutra

also Kamasutra, 1874, from Sanskrit Kama Sutra, name of the ancient treatise on love and sexual
performance, from kama love (see whore) + sutra series of aphorisms (see sutra).


Kamchatka

Siberian peninsula, named for a native people, the Kamchadal, from Koriak konchachal, said to mean
men of the far end.


kami

Japanese for superior, lord, a title given to governors, also used of deities; the word was chosen
by Japanese converts and Protestant missionaries to refer to the Christian god.


kamikaze (n.)

suicide flier, 1945, Japanese, literally divine wind, from kami god, providence, divine (see kami) +
kaze wind. Originally the name given in folklore to a typhoon which saved Japan from Mongol invasion
by wrecking Kublai Khan's fleet (August 1281). The attacks began in October 1944 off the
Philippines.    As an aside, at war's end, the Japanese had, by actual count, a total of 16,397
aircraft still available for service, including 6,374 operational fighters and bombers, and if they
had used only the fighters and bombers for kamikaze missions, they might have realized,
additionally, 900 ships sunk or damaged and 22,000 sailors killed or injured. In fact, however, the
Japanese had outfitted many aircraft, including trainers, as potential suicide attackers. As
intelligence estimates indicated, the Japanese believed they could inflict at least 50,000
casualties to an invasion force by kamikaze attacks alone. [Richard P. Hallion, Military Technology
and the Pacific War, 1995]    As an adjective by 1946.


Kampuchea

name taken by Cambodia after the communist takeover in 1975, representing a local pronunciation of
the name that came into English as Cambodia.


kanaka (n.)

U.S. nautical and Australian name for native of South Sea islands, 1840, from Hawaiian kanaka man
(Samoan tangata).


kangaroo (n.)

1770, used by Capt. Cook and botanist Joseph Banks, supposedly an aborigine word from northeast
Queensland, Australia, usually said to be unknown now in any native language. However, according to
Australian linguist R.M.W. Dixon (The Languages of Australia, Cambridge, 1980), the word probably is
from Guugu Yimidhirr (Endeavour River-area Aborigine language) /gaNurru/ large black kangaroo.In
1898 the pioneer ethnologist W.E. Roth wrote a letter to the Australasian pointing out that gang-oo-
roo did mean 'kangaroo' in Guugu Yimidhirr, but this newspaper correspondence went unnoticed by
lexicographers. Finally the observations of Cook and Roth were confirmed when in 1972 the
anthropologist John Haviland began intensive study of Guugu Yimidhirr and again recorded /gaNurru/.
[Dixon] Kangaroo court is American English, first recorded 1850 in a Southwestern context (also
mustang court), from notion of proceeding by leaps.


kanji (n.)

Chinese ideographs that make up the bulk of Japanese writing, 1920, from Japanese kan Chinese + ji
letter, character.


Kansas

named for the river, which is named for the native people, from French variant of Kansa, native name
of the Siouan people who lived there (1722). It is a plural (see Arkansas). Established as a U.S.
territory in 1854, admitted as a state 1861. Related: Kansan.


Kantian (adj.)

1796, of or pertaining to German thinker Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) or his philosophy.


kaolin (n.)

china clay, 1727, from French kaolin (1712), from Chinese Kao-ling, old-style transliteration of the
name of a mountain in Jiangxi, China (near which it was originally dug up), from Chinese gao high +
ling mountain, hill.


kapellmeister (n.)

conductor, 1838, German, literally chapel master, from Kapelle chapel (also the name given to a band
or orchestra) + Meister master.


kapok (n.)

1735, from Malay kapoq, name of the large tropical tree which produces the fibers.


kappa

tenth letter of the Greek alphabet, from an Aramaized form of qoph; see K.


kaput (adj.)

finished, worn out, dead, 1895, from German kaputt destroyed, ruined, lost (1640s), which in this
sense probably is a misunderstanding of the phrase capot machen, a partial translation of French
faire capot, a phrase which meant to win all the tricks (from the other player) in piquet, an
obsolete card game. Literally to make a bonnet; perhaps the notion is throwing a hood over the other
player, but faire capot also meant in French marine jargon to overset in a squall when under sail.
The word was popularized in English during World War I.   Kaput -- a slang word in common use which
corresponds roughly to the English done in, the French fichu. Everything enemy was kaput in the
early days of German victories. [F. Britten Austin, According to Orders, New York, 1919]    French
capot is literally cover, bonnet, also the name of a type of greatcloak worn by sailors and soldiers
(see capote). The card-playing sense attested in German only from 1690s, but capot in the
(presumably) transferred sense of destroyed, ruined, lost is attested from 1640s. [see William
Jervis Jones, A Lexicon of French Borrowings in the German Vocabulary (1575-1648), Berlin, de
Gruyter, 1976]. In Hoyle and other English gaming sources, faire capot is to win all the tricks, and
a different phrase, &ecirc;tre capot, to be a bonnet, is sometimes cited as the term for losing
them. The sense reversal in German might have come about because if someone wins all the tricks the
other player has to lose them, and the same word capot, when it entered English from French in the
mid-17c. meant to score a cabot against; to win all the tricks from.    There are others, says a
third, that have played with my Lady Lurewell at picquet besides my lord; I have capotted her myself
two or three times in an evening. [George Farquhar (1677-1707), Sir Harry Wildair]


karabiner (n.)

coupling device, 1932, shortened from German karabiner-haken, usually translated as spring hook.


karaoke (n.)

1979, Japanese, from kara empty + oke orchestra, shortened form of okesutora, which is a
Japanization of English orchestra.


karat (n.)

variant of carat (q.v.). In U.S., karat is used for proportion of fine gold in an alloy and carat
for weight of a precious stone.


karate (n.)

1955, Japanese, literally empty hand, bare hand, from kara empty + te hand. A devotee is a karateka.


Karen (1)

Mongoloid people of Burma, 1759, from Burmese ka-reng wild, dirty, low-caste man [OED].


Karen (2)

fem. proper name, Danish shortened form of Katherine. Rare before 1928; a top-10 name for girls born
in the U.S. 1951-1968.


Karl

see Carl.


karma (n.)

1827, in Buddhism, the sum of a person's actions in one life, which determine his form in the next;
from Sanskrit karma action, work, deed; fate, related to krnoti, Avestan kerenaoiti makes, Old
Persian kunautiy he makes; from PIE root *kwer- to make, form (see terato-). Related to the second
element in Sanskrit.


karmic (adj.)

1883, from karma + -ic.


karoo (n.)

barren table land in South Africa, 1789, said to be from a Hottentot word.


karst (n.)

name of a high, barren limestone region around Trieste; used by geologists from 1894 to refer to
similar landforms. The word is the German form of Slovenian Kras.


kart (n.)

1959, short for go-kart (see go-cart).


karyo-

before vowels kary-, word-forming element used since c.1874 in biological terms referring to cell
nuclei, from Greek karyon nut, kernel, possibly from PIE root *kar- hard (see hard (adj.)).


karyotype (n.)

1929, ultimately from Russian kariotip (1922); see karyo- + type.


kasbah (n.)

see casbah.


Kashmir

from Sanskrit Kashypamara land of Kashyap, said to be the name of a renowned sage. Related:
Kashmiri.


katakana (n.)

from Japanese katakana, from kata side + kana borrowed letter(s).


katana (n.)

1610s, from Japanese.


Kate

fem. proper name, pet form of Katherine. In World War II it was the Allies' nickname for the
standard torpedo bomber used by the Imperial Japanese Navy.


kathenotheism (n.)

a form of polytheism characteristic of the Vedic religion, in which one god at a time is considered
supreme, 1865, coined in German by Max M&uuml;ller from Greek kath' hena one by one + theism.
M&uuml;ller also coined henotheism (1860), from Greek henos one, for faith in a single god as
distinguished from exclusive belief in only one god, in writings on early Hebrew religion.


Katherine

fem. proper name, also Katharine, see Catherine.


Kathmandu

Nepalese capital, from Nepalese Kathmandu, from kath wooden + mandu temple.


Katie

diminutive form of Kate.


katydid (n.)

insect of the locust family (Microsentrum rhombifolium), 1784, American English (perhaps first used
by John Bartram), imitative of the stridulous sound the male makes when it rubs its front wings
together. The sound itself is more accurately transcribed from 1751 as catedidist.    [T]heir noise
is loud and incessant, one perpetually and regularly answering the other in notes exactly similar to
the words Katy did, or Katy Katy did, repeated by one, and another immediately bawls out Katy
didn't, or Katy Katy didn't. In this loud clamour they continue without ceasing until the fall of
the leaf, when they totally disappear. [J.F.D. Smyth, A Tour in the United States of America, 1784]


katzenjammer (n.)

1849, a hangover, American English colloquial, from German katzen, comb. form of katze cat (see cat
(n.)) + jammer distress, wailing (see yammer). Hence, any unpleasant reaction (1897).    Pleasure
can intoxicate, passion can inebriate, success can make you quite as drunk as champagne. The waking
from these several stages of delights will bring the same result--Katzenjammer. In English you would
call it reaction; but whole pages of English cannot express the sick, empty, weary, vacant feeling
which is so concisely contained within these four German syllables. [Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine,
August 1884]   Katzenjammer Kids spectacularly naughty children is from title of comic strip first
drawn by German-born U.S. comic strip artist Rudolph Dirks (1877-1968) in 1897 for the New York
Journal. It was temporarily de-Germanized during World War I:    THE SHENANIGAN KIDS is the new
American name for the original Katzenjammer Kids. Although the original name and idea were pure
Holland Dutch, some people may have had the mistaken impression that they were of Germanic origin,
and hence the change. It is the same splendid comic as in the past. [International Feature Service
advertisement in Editor &amp; Publisher, July 6, 1918]


Kay

fem. proper name, often a shortening of Katherine. As a given name for girls, from 1890s in the
U.S.; in the top 100 for girls born there 1936-1945.


kayak (n.)

1757, from Danish kajak, from Greenland Eskimo qayaq, literally small boat of skins. The verb is
attested from 1875, from the noun. Related: Kayaking.


Kayla

fem. proper name, extended form of Kay. Rare before 1962; a top-20 name for girls born in the U.S.
1988-2004.


kayo

spelled-out form of K.O. (for knockout in the pugilism sense), from 1923. Also used in 1920s as a
slang reversal of OK.


Kazakhstan

from the indigenous Kazakh people (from the Turkish root kazak nomad; see Cossack) + Iranian root
-stan country, land (see -stan).


kazoo (n.)

1884, American English, probably altered from earlier bazoo trumpet (1877); probably ultimately
imitative (compare bazooka). In England, formerly called a Timmy Talker, in France, a
mirliton.Kazoos, the great musical wonder, ... anyone can play it; imitates fowls, animals,
bagpipes, etc. [1895 Montgomery Ward catalogue, p.245]  But mostly etc.


kebab (n.)

pieces of meat roasted on a skewer, 1813 (compare shish kebab).


keck (v.)

to make a sound as if to vomit, 1530s, echoic. Related: Kecked; kecking.


Ked

proprietary name of a brand of canvas sneakers, 1917, registered by United States Rubber Co., N.Y.
Based on Latin ped-, stem of pes foot (see foot (n.))We wanted to call it Peds, but ... it came too
close to ... other brand names. So we batted it around for awhile and decided on the hardest-
sounding letter in the alphabet, K, and called it Keds, that was in 1916. [J.Healey, in R.L. Cohen,
Footwear Industry, x.93]


keel (n.)

lowest timber of a ship or boat, mid-14c., probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse
kj&ouml;lr keel, Danish kj&oslash;l, Swedish k&ouml;l), from Proto-Germanic *keluz, of uncertain
origin. Some etymologists say this is unconnected with the keel that means a ship, barge, which also
is the root of Middle Dutch kiel ship, Old English ceol ship's prow, Old High German kiel, German
Kiel ship, but the two words have influenced each other. Barnhart, however, calls them cognates.
Keel still is used locally in England and U.S. for flat-bottomed boat, especially on the Tyne.


keel (v.2)

to keep cool, from Middle English kelen, from Old English celan to cool, from col cool (see cool).
The form kele (from Old English colian) was used by Shakespeare, but it later was assimilated with
the adjective form into the modern verb cool. Cognate with Dutch koelen, Old High German chuolen,
German k&uuml;hlen.


keel (v.1)

1838, American English, from keel (n.). To keel over (1876) is from the nautical image of a ship
turning keel-up. Related: Keeled; keeling.


keelboat (n.)

1690s, from keel + boat.


keelhaul (v.)

1660s (the experience itself is described from 1620s), from Dutch kielhalen, literally to haul under
the keel, an old punishment. See keel (n.) + haul (v.). Related: Keelhauled. German kielholen,
Danish kj&oslash;lhale, Swedish k&ouml;lhala also are from Dutch.


keelson (n.)

also kelson, 1620s, altered (by influence of keel (n.)) from Middle English kelsyng (late 13c.),
which probably is of Scandinavian origin (compare Swedish k&ouml;lsvin, Danish and Norwegian
kj&oslash;lsvin, from root of Old Norse kj&ouml;lr; see keel (n.)) + swin swine, used of timber (see
swine). Or else from a similar Low German source.


keen (adj.)

c.1200, from Old English cene bold brave, later clever, wise, from Proto-Germanic *kan- be able to
(see can). Original prehistoric senses seem to have been both brave and skilled; cognate with Old
Norse k&aelig;nn skillful, wise, Middle Dutch coene bold, Dutch koen, Old High German kuon
pugnacious, strong, German k&uuml;hn bold, daring. Sense of eager is from mid-14c. The meaning sharp
is peculiar to English: of blades and edges early 13c., of sounds c.1400, of eyesight c.1720. A
popular word of approval in teenager and student slang from c.1900.


keen (v.)

lament, 1811, from Irish caoinim I weep, wail, lament, from Old Irish coinim I wail. Related:
Keened; keening. As a noun from 1830.


keenly (adv.)

Old English cenlice; see keen (adj.) + -ly (2).


keenness (n.)

1520s, from keen (adj.) + -ness.


keep (v.)

late Old English cepan to seize, hold, also to observe, from Proto-Germanic *kopijan, but with no
certain connection to other languages. It possibly is related to Old English capian to look, from
Proto-Germanic *kap- (cepan was used c.1000 to render Latin observare), which would make the basic
sense to keep an eye on.The word prob. belongs primarily to the vulgar and non-literary stratum of
the language; but it comes up suddenly into literary use c.1000, and that in many senses, indicating
considerable previous development. [OED]Sense of preserve, maintain is from mid-14c. Meaning to
maintain in proper order is from 1550s; meaning financially support and privately control (usually
in reference to mistresses) is from 1540s. Related: Kept; keeping.


keep (n.)

mid-13c., care or heed in watching, from keep (v.). Meaning innermost stronghold of a tower is from
1580s, perhaps a translation of Italian tenazza, with a notion of that which keeps (someone or
something); the sense of food required to keep a person or animal is attested from 1801. For keeps
completely, for good is American English colloquial, from 1861.


keeper (n.)

c.1300 (late 13c. as a surname), one who has charge of some person or thing, warden, agent noun from
keep (v.). Sense of one who carries on some business is from mid-15c. Sporting sense (originally
cricket) is from 1744. Meaning something (or someone) worth keeping is attested by 1999. Brother's
keeper is from Genesis iv:9.


keepsake (n.)

1790, from keep (v.) + sake; on model of namesake; thus an object kept for the sake of the giver. As
an adjective by 1839.


kef (n.)

1808, from Arabic kaif well-being, good-humor. Specifically, state of dreaming intoxication produced
by smoking cannabis; dolce far niente. In Morocco and Algeria, it was the name for Indian hemp.


keg (n.)

1630s, earlier kag (mid-15c.), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse kaggi keg, cask, of
unknown origin. Cognate with Swedish kagge, Norwegian kagg. Specific sense of barrel of beer is from
1945. U.S. student slang kegger party featuring a keg of beer attested by 1969.


keister (n.)

buttocks, 1931, perhaps transferred from underworld meaning safe, strongbox (1914), earlier a
burglar's toolkit that can be locked (1881); probably from British dialect kist (northern form of
chest) or its German cognate Kiste chest, box. The connection may be via pickpocket slang sense of
rear trouser pocket (1930s).


keld (n.)

1690s in northern dialect, but frequent in place names, from Old Norse kelda a well, fountain,
spring, also a deep, still, smooth part of a river.


Kellogg

surname, attested from late 13c., literally kill hog, a name for a butcher. The U.S. cereal company
began in Battle Creek, Michigan, in 1906, founded by W.K. Kellogg (business manager of the Battle
Creek Sanatorium) as Battle Creek Toasted Corn Flake Company.


Kelly

common Irish surname, from Old Irish ceallach war. As a type of pool played with 15 balls, it is
attested from 1898. Kelly green first recorded 1917.


keloid (n.)

also cheloid, 1854, from French k&eacute;lo&#239;de, from Greek khele crab claw, talon, cloven hoof
+ -oides (see -oid). Related: Keloidal; cheloidal.


kelp (n.)

1660s, from Middle English culpe (late 14c.), of unknown origin. Kelper native or inhabitant of the
Falkland Islands is attested from 1960.


kelpie (n.)

1747, Scottish, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Gaelic colpach heifer, steer, colt; colpa cow,
horse. The Lowland name of a demon in the shape of a horse that was reputed to haunt lakes and
rivers and to delight in causing drownings. But unlike its equivalents in Danish (n&oslash;kken) and
Icelandic (nykur), it occasionally was benevolent, especially to millers by keeping their streams
running.


Kelvin

unit of absolute temperature scale, 1911, in honor of British physicist Sir William Thompson, Lord
Kelvin (1824-1907).


kempt (adj.)

well-combed, neat, late 14c., from past tense of dialectal kemb, from Old English cemdan (see
unkempt). A rare word after c.1500; any modern use probably is a whimsical back-formation from
unkempt.


ken (v.)

to know, Scottish dialect, from Old English cennan make known, declare, acknowledge (in late Old
English also to know), originally make to know, causative of cunnan to become acquainted with, to
know (see can (v.)). Cognate with German kennen, Danish kjende, Swedish k&auml;nna. Related: Kenned;
kenning.


ken (n.2)

house where thieves meet, 1560s, vagabonds' slang, probably a shortening of kennel.


ken (n.1)

range of sight, 1580s, a nautical abbreviation of kenning.


kendal (n.)

green woolen cloth, late 14c., from place name in Westmoreland where it was manufactured. The place
so called for being in the dale of the River Kent.


Kenelm

masc. proper name, Old English Cenhelm, from cene brave, bold (see keen (adj.)) + helm helmet (see
helmet).


Kennedy

Irish surname, said to be from Old Irish cinneide ugly head.


kennel (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French *kenil, Old French chenil, from Vulgar Latin *canile, from Latin canem
(nominative canis) dog (see canine (n.)). With suffix as in ovile sheepfold from ovus, equile horse-
stable from equus, etc. As a verb, 1550s, from the noun.


Kenneth

masc. proper name, Scottish, from Gaelic Caioneach, literally handsome, comely.


kenning (n.)

Old English cenning procreation; declaration in court, present participle of ken (v.). From early
14c. in senses sign, token; teaching, instruction; c.1400 as mental cognition. From 1871 as
periphrastic expression in early Germanic poetry; in this sense it probably is from a modern learned
use of Old Norse cognate verb kenna to know, to recognize, to feel or perceive; to call, to name (in
a formal poetic metaphor).    In the whole poem of Beowulf there are scarcely half a dozen of them
[similes], and these of the simplest character, such as comparing a ship to a bird. Indeed, such a
simple comparison as this is almost equivalent to the more usual kenning (as it is called in
Icelandic), such as brimfugol, where, instead of comparing the ship to a bird, the poet simply calls
it a sea-bird, preferring the direct assertion to the indirect comparison. [Henry Sweet, Sketches of
the History of Anglo-Saxon Poetry, London, 1871]


keno (n.)

game of chance (akin to bingo), 1814, American English, probably from French quine five winning
numbers in a lottery, from Latin quini five each, distributive of quinque five (see five). The
numbers are arranged in rows of five.


keno-

before vowels, ken-, word-forming element meaning empty, from comb. form of Greek kenos empty, from
PIE root *ken- (3) empty.


kenosis (n.)

from Greek kenosis an emptying, from kenoein to empty, from PIE *ken- (3) empty. From Phil. ii:7.
Related: Kenotic.


Kent

Old English, from Latin Canticum, Greek Kantion (51 B.C.E.), an ancient Celtic name often explained
as coastal district, but possibly land of the hosts or armies. Related: Kentish.


Kentucky

U.S. state, earlier a county of Virginia, organized 1776; the name is of Iroquois or Shawnee origin,
perhaps a Wyandot (Iroquoian) word meaning meadow (compare Seneca geda'geh at the field); the
original use in English seems to have been the river name; the native use perhaps was first in
reference to a village in what now is Clark County known in Shawnee as Eskippakithiki. Related:
Kentuckian.


Kenya

African nation, named for Mount Kenya, which probably is a shortening of Kikuyu Kirinyaga, from kere
nyaga, literally white mountain (though just south of the equator, it is snowcapped). Related:
Kenyan.


kepi (n.)

soldier's peaked cap, 1861, from French k&eacute;pi, from German Swiss k&auml;ppi, diminutive of
German Kappe a cap, from Late Latin cappa hood, cap (see cap (n.)).


kept

past tense of keep (v.).


ker-

U.S. slang prefix, by 1836 as che-, 1843 as ker-, possibly from influence of German or Dutch ge-,
past participial prefix; or ultimately echoic of the sound of the fall of some heavy body.


keratin (n.)

basic substance of horns, nails, feathers, etc., 1847, from Greek keras (genitive keratos) horn (see
kerato-) + chemical suffix -in (2).


kerato-

before vowels, kerat-, word-forming element meaning horn, horny, from Greek keras (genitive keratos)
horn, from PIE *ker- (1) horn, head (see horn (n.)).


kerb (n.)

1660s, a variant of curb (n.). The preferred British English spelling in certain specialized senses,
especially edging of stone on a pavement (1805).


kerchief (n.)

early 13c., kovrechief piece of cloth used to cover part of the head, especially a woman's headcloth
or veil, from Anglo-French courchief, Old French couvrechief, literally cover head, from couvrir to
cover (see cover (v.)) + chief head (see chief). From late 14c. as piece of cloth used about the
person generally, and from c.1400 as piece of cloth carried in the hand to wipe the face, etc.,
handkerchief.


kerfuffle (n.)

row, disturbance, 1973, said to have been used c.1930 in Canadian English, ultimately from Scottish
curfuffle.


kermes (n.)

shield louse, c.1600 of the insect preparation used as a dye, etc.; 1590s of the species of oak on
which the insects live, from Medieval Latin cremesinus (also source of French kerm&egrave;s, Italian
chermes, Spanish carmes), from Arabic qirmiz kermes, from Sanskrit krmi-ja a compound meaning (red
dye) produced by a worm.    The Sanskrit compound is krmih worm (from PIE root *kwrmi- worm and
cognate with Lithuanian kirmis, Old Irish cruim, Albanian krimp worm) + -ja- produced (from PIE
*gene-; see genus). The insect lives in the Levant and southern Europe on a species of oak (kermes
oak). They were esteemed from ancient times as a source of red and scarlet dye. The dye is harvested
from pregnant females, which in that state resemble small roundish grains about the size of peas and
cling immobile to the tree on which they live.    From this fact kermes dye was, for a long time,
mistaken in Europe as being from a seed or excrescence of the tree, and the word for it in Greek was
kokkos, literally a grain, seed (see cocco-). This was passed to Latin as coccum, coccus berry [sic]
yielding scarlet dye, in late use scarlet color, scarlet garment.   So important was kermes (coccus)
as a commercial source of scarlet dye that derivatives of the name for it have displaced the
original word for red in many languages, such as Welsh coch (from Latin), Modern Greek kokkinos.
Compare also crimson (n.).  Kermes dyes have been found in burial wrappings in Anglo-Scandinavian
York, but the use of kermes dyes seems to have been lost in Europe from the Dark Ages until early
15c. It fell out of use again with the introduction of cochineal (the word for which might itself be
from coccus) from the New World.    Cloths dyed with kermes are of a deep red colour; and though
much inferior in brilliancy to the scarlet cloths dyed with real Mexican cochineal, they retain the
colour better and are less liable to stain. The tapestries of Brussels and other parts of Flanders,
which have scarcely lost any thing of their original brilliancy, even after a lapse of 200 years,
were all dyed with kermes. [W.T. Brande, Dictionary of Science, Literature, &amp; Art, London, 1842]


kern (n.)

1680s, part of a metal type projecting beyond the body, as the head of an -f- or the tail of a -j-,
from French carne projecting angle, quill of a pen, from Latin cardinem hinge.


kernel (n.)

Old English cyrnel seed, kernel, pip, from Proto-Germanic *kurnilo- (cognates: Middle High German
kornel, Middle Dutch cornel), from the root of corn seed, grain (see corn (n.1)) + -el, diminutive
suffix. Figurative sense of core or central part of anything is from 1550s.


kerosene (n.)

1852, coined irregularly by Canadian geologist Abraham Gesner (1797-1864), who discovered how to
distill it c.1846, from Greek keros wax  (see cere) + chemical suffix -ene. So called because it
contains paraffin (hence the British English name, paraffin oil).


kerygma (n.)

preaching, 1889, from Greek kerygma proclamation, preaching, from keryssein to proclaim, related to
keryx herald.


kestrel (n.)

kind of falcon, c.1600, earlier castrell (15c.), probably from Middle French cresserelle, which
apparently is related to crecerelle rattle, from Latin crepitacillium small rattle, diminutive of
crepitaculum noisy bell, rattle, from crepitare to crackle, rattle; possibly from the old belief
that their noise frightened away other hawks.


ketamine (n.)

1966, from keto-, comb. form of ketone, + amine.


ketch (n.)

kind of small sailing vessel, 1650s, earlier catch (mid-15c.), cache (late 14c.), probably from
Middle English cacchen to capture, ensnare, chase (see catch (v.)). Compare the sense development in
yacht.


ketchup (n.)

1711, said to be from Malay kichap, but probably not original to Malay. It might have come from
Chinese koechiap brine of fish, which, if authentic, perhaps is from the Chinese community in
northern Vietnam [Terrien de Lacouperie, in Babylonian and Oriental Record, 1889, 1890]. Catsup
(earlier catchup, 1680s) is a failed attempt at Englishing, still in use in U.S., influenced by cat
and sup.    Originally a fish sauce, the word came to be used in English for a wide variety of
spiced gravies and sauces; Apicius Redivivus; or, the Cook's Oracle, by William Kitchiner, London,
1817, devotes 7 pages to recipes for different types of catsup (his book has 1 spelling of ketchup,
72 of catsup), including walnut, mushroom, oyster, cockle and mussel, tomata, white (vinegar and
anchovies figure in it), cucumber, and pudding catsup. Chambers's Encyclopaedia (1870) lists
mushroom, walnut, and tomato ketchup as the three most esteemed kinds. Tomato ketchup emerged c.1800
in U.S. and predominated from early 20c.


ketone (n.)

chemical group, 1851, from German keton, coined in 1848 by German chemist Leopold Gmelin (1788-1853)
from German Aketon, from French ac&eacute;tone (see acetone). Its combining form is keto-.


ketosis (n.)

1900, from keto-, comb. form of ketone, + -osis.


kettle (n.)

Old English cetil (Mercian), from Proto-Germanic *katilaz (compare Old Saxon ketel, Old Frisian
zetel, Middle Dutch ketel, Old High German kezzil, German Kessel), probably from Latin catillus deep
pan or dish for cooking, diminutive of catinus bowl, dish, pot. One of the few Latin loan-words in
Proto-Germanic, along with *punda- measure of weight or money (see pound (n.1)) and a word relating
to merchant that yielded cheap (adj.). [I]t is striking that all have something to do with trade
[Don Ringe, From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic, Oxford 2006]. Spelling with a -k- (c.1300)
probably is from influence of Old Norse cognate ketill. The smaller sense of tea-kettle is attested
by 1769.


kettledrum (n.)

1540s, from kettle + drum (n.).


Kevlar

registered trademark (DuPont) for a synthetic fiber developed there c.1965.


kew

1939, as a clipped form of thank you.


kewl

1996 as a representation of a casual pronunciation of cool.


kewpie (n.)

1909, American English, coined by their illustrator, Rose C. O'Neill (1874-1944), as an altered form
of a diminutive of Cupid.


kex (n.)

dry, hollow plant stem, late 14c., of uncertain origin. Klein says ultimately from Latin cicuta
hemlock.


key (n.1)

metal piece that works a lock, from Old English c&aelig;g key, of unknown origin, with no certain
cognates other than Old Frisian kei. Perhaps related to Middle Low German keie lance, spear on
notion of tool to cleave with, from Proto-Germanic *ki- to cleaver, split (cognates: German Keil
wedge, Gothic us-kijans come forth, said of seed sprouts, keinan to germinate). But Liberman writes,
The original meaning of *kaig-jo- was presumably '*pin with a twisted end.' Words with the root
*kai- followed by a consonant meaning 'crooked, bent; twisted' are common only in the North Germanic
languages. Modern pronunciation is a northern variant predominating from c.1700; earlier it was
often spelled and pronounced kay.    Figurative sense of that which serves to open or explain was in
Old English; meaning that which holds together other parts is from 1520s. As answer to a test, it is
from chess, short for key move, first move in a solution to a set problem. Musical sense of tone,
note is 15c., but modern sense of scale is 1580s, probably as a translation of Latin clavis or
French clef (see clef; also see keynote). Extended c.1500 to mechanism on a musical instrument. As a
verb meaning to scratch (a car's paint job) with a key it is recorded by 1986.


key (n.2)

low island, 1690s, from Spanish cayo shoal, reef, from Taino cayo small island; spelling influenced
by Middle English key wharf (c.1300), from Old French kai sand bank (see quay).


keyboard (n.)

1819, from key (n.1) in sense of mechanism of a musical instrument + board (n.1). Originally of
pianos, organs, etc., extended to other machines 1846. The verb is first recorded 1926 (implied in
keyboarding).


keyhole (n.)

1590s, from key (n.1) + hole (n.).


Keynesian

1937 (adj.), 1942 (n.), from name of British economist John Maynard Keynes (1883-1946).


keynote (n.)

also key-note, lowest note of a musical scale, basis of a scale, 1776, from key (n.1) in sense of
musical scale + note (n.). Figurative sense of leading idea is from 1783; keynote address is 1905,
American English.


keypad (n.)

1975, from key (n.1) + pad (n.).


keypunch (n.)

1933, from keyboard (which operated it) + punch (v.), which is what it did to the cards inserted in
it to record date.


keystone (n.)

stone in the middle of an arch, which holds up the others, 1630s, from key (n.1) in figurative sense
of that which holds together other parts + stone. Figurative sense is from 1640s. Pennsylvania was
called the Keystone State because of its position (geographical and political) in the original
American confederation, between northern states and southern ones. Keystone cops were the bumbling
police in the slapstick silent movies produced by Keystone Company, formed by Canadian-born U.S.
film director Mack Sennett (1884-1960) in 1912.


keystroke (n.)

1902, from key (n.1) + stroke (n.). Not in common use until the rise of computers. As a verb, by
1966 (implied in keystroking).


keyword (n.)

also key-word, 1807, from key (n.1) + word (n.). Originally in reference to codes and ciphers.


Keziah

fem. proper name, biblical daughter of Job, from Hebrew Qetzi'ah, literally cassia, the aromatic
tree that produces cinnamon.


KGB

national security agency of the Soviet Union from 1954 to 1991, attested from 1955 in English,
initialism (acronym) of Russian Komitet gosudarstvennoy bezopasnosti Committee for State Security.


khaki (n.)

dust-colored cloth, 1857, from Urdu khaki, literally dusty, from khak dust, from Persian. First
introduced in uniforms of British cavalry in India (the Guide Corps, 1846); widely adopted for
camouflage purposes in the Boer Wars (1899-1902). As an adjective from 1863. Related: Khakis.


khan (n.)

c.1400, from Turkic, literally lord, prince, contraction of khaqan ruler, sovereign. Known in Europe
since 13c.; compare Medieval Latin chanis, Greek kanes, Old French chan.


khanate (n.)

1799, from khan + -ate (1).


khedive (n.)

Turkish viceroy of Egypt, 1867, from French kh&eacute;dive, from Turkish khidiv, from Persian khidiw
prince, derivative of khuda master, prince, from Old Persian khvadata- lord, from compound *khvat-
data-, literally created from oneself, from khvat- (from PIE *swe-tos from oneself, ablative of root
*s(w)e-; see idiom) + data- created.


Khmer

1867, native name. Khmer Rouge, communist party of Cambodia, literally Red Khmer, is with French
rouge (see rouge (n.)).


kibble (n.)

ground-up meat used as dog food, etc., apparently from the verb meaning to bruise or grind coarsely,
attested from 1790, first in milling, but of unknown origin. The same or an identical word was used
in the coal trade in the late 19c. and in mining from the 1670s for bucket used to haul up ore or
waste.


kibbutz (n.)

Israeli collective settlement, 1931, from Modern Hebrew qibbus gathering, earlier a gathering
together, verbal noun from root of qibbetz he gathered together. Plural is kibbutzim. Related to
Arabic quabada he grasped, seized.


kibitz (v.)

1927, from Yiddish kibitsen to offer gratuitous advice as an outsider, from German kiebitzen to look
on at cards, to kibitz, originally in thieves' cant to visit, from Kiebitz, name of a shore bird
(European pewit, lapwing) with a folk reputation as a meddler, from Middle High German gibitz pewit,
imitative of its cry. Young lapwings are proverbially precocious and active, and were said to run
around with half-shells still on their heads soon after hatching.


kibitzer (n.)

1927, agent noun from kibitz.


kibosh (n.)

1836, kye-bosk, in British English slang phrase put the kibosh on, of unknown origin, despite
intense speculation. The earliest citation is in Dickens. Looks Yiddish, but its original appearance
in a piece set in the heavily Irish Seven Dials neighborhood in the West End of London seems to
argue against this. One candidate is Irish caip bh&aacute;is, caip&iacute;n b&aacute;is cap of
death, sometimes said to be the black cap a judge would don when pronouncing a death sentence, but
in other sources identified as a gruesome method of execution employed by Brit. forces against 1798
insurgents [Bernard Share, Slanguage, A Dictionary of Irish Slang]. Or the word might somehow be
connected with Turkish bosh (see bosh).


kick (v.)

late 14c., to strike out with the foot (earliest in biblical phrase now usually rendered as kick
against the pricks), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse kikna bend backwards, sink at the
knees. The doubts OED has about the Scandinavian origin of kick are probably unfounded [Liberman].
Related: Kicked; kicking.    Figurative sense of complain, protest, rebel against (late 14c.)
probably is from the Bible verse. Slang sense of die is attested from 1725 (kick the wind was slang
for be hanged, 1590s; see also bucket). Meaning to end one's drug habit is from 1936. Kick in
contribute is from 1908; kick out expel is from 1690s. To kick oneself in self-reproach is from
1891. The children's game of kick the can is attested from 1891.


kick (n.)

1520s, from kick (v.). Meaning recoil (of a gun) when fired is from 1826. Meaning surge or fit of
pleasure (often as kicks) is from 1941; originally literally, stimulation from liquor or drugs
(1844). The kick the fashion is c.1700.


kick-off (n.)

also kickoff, kick off, 1857, first kick in a football match, from kick (v.) + off. Figurative sense
of start, beginning event is from 1875.


kickback (n.)

also kick-back, c.1900 in various mechanical senses, from kick (v.) + back (adv.). By 1926 in a
slang sense of be forced to return pelf, pay back to victims, which was extended to illegal partial
give-backs of government-set wages that were extorted from workers by employers. Hence sense of
illegal or improper payment (1932).


kickboxing (n.)

also kick-boxing, 1968 (as one word, from 1971), from kick + boxing. Related: Kickbox (v.);
kickboxer.


kicker (n.)

1570s, agent noun from kick (v.).


kickshaw (n.)

late 16c., a fancy dish in cookery (especially a non-native one), from English pronunciation of
French quelque chose a something, a little something.


kicksie-wicksie (n.)

a fanciful word for wife in Shakespeare (All's Well, II iii.297), 1601, apparently a perversion of
kickshaw a fancy dish in cookery.


kickstand (n.)

metal support for holding a bicycle upright, 1936, from kick (v.) + stand (n.). So called for the
method of putting it in position.


kicky (adj.)

1790, clever; showy, gaudy, from kick (n.) + -y (2). Meaning full of thrills, providing kicks is
from 1968.


kid (n.)

c.1200, the young of a goat, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse ki&eth; young goat, from
Proto-Germanic *ki&eth;jom (cognates: Old High German kizzi, German kitze, Danish and Swedish kid).
Extended meaning of child first recorded as slang 1590s, established in informal usage by 1840s.
Applied to skillful young thieves and pugilists since at least 1812. Kid stuff something easy is
from 1913 (The phrase was in use about that time in reference to vaudeville acts or advertisements
featuring children, and to children-oriented features in newspapers). Kid glove a glove made of
kidskin leather is from 1680s; sense of characterized by wearing kid gloves, therefore dainty,
delicate is from 1856.


kid (v.)

tease playfully, 1839, earlier, in thieves' cant, to coax, wheedle, hoax (1811), probably from kid
(n.), via notion of treat as a child, make a kid of. Related: Kidded; kidding.


Kidderminster

type of carpet, 1832, named for the town in England where it was manufactured.


kiddo (n.)

1893, familiar form of kid (n.) in the child sense.


kiddy (n.)

also kiddie; 1570s as young goat; 1780 as flash thief; 1889 as child, from various senses of kid
(n.) + -y (3). Related: Kiddies.


kidnap (v.)

1680s, compound of kid (n.) child and nap snatch away, variant of nab; originally steal children to
provide servants and laborers in the American colonies. Related: Kidnapped; kidnapping.


kidnapper (n.)

1670s; see kidnap (though this word is attested a few years earlier).


kidney (n.)

early 14c., of unknown origin, originally kidenere, perhaps a compound of Old English cwi&eth; womb
(see bowel) + ey egg (see egg (n.)) in reference to the shape of the organ. Figurative sense of
temperament is from 1550s. Kidney bean is from 1540s, so called for its shape.


kielbasa (n.)

1951, from Polish kie&#322;basa sausage (Russian kolbasa, Serbo-Croatian kobasica); perhaps from
Turkish kulbasti, grilled cutlet, literally pressed on the ashes. Or perhaps, via Jewish butchers,
from Hebrew kolbasar all kinds of meat.


Kiev

Ukrainian Kyyiv, of unknown origin; explanation from the name of a founding prince named Kiy
probably is folk etymology. Related: Kievan.


kike (n.)

derogatory slang for a Jew, by 1901, American English; early evidence supports the belief that it
was used at first among German-American Jews in reference to newcomers from Eastern Europe, perhaps
because the names of the latter ended in -ki or -ky.    There is no charity organization of any kind
here [a small city in Pennsylvania] and, what is sadder to relate, the Jews in this city will not
form one; that is, if the present temper of the people can be used as a criterion. The German Jews
are bitterly opposed to the Kikes, as they persist in calling the Russian Jews .... [Report of the
National Conference of Jewish Charities in the United States, Cleveland, 1912]    Philip Cowen,
first editor of The American Hebrew, suggests a source in Yiddish kikel circle. According to him,
Jewish immigrants, ignorant of writing with the Latin alphabet, signed their entry forms with a
circle, eschewing the X as a sign of Christianity. On this theory, Ellis Island immigration
inspectors began calling such people kikels, and the term shortened as it passed into general use.


kil

first element in many Celtic place names, literally cell (of a hermit), church, burial place, from
Gaelic and Irish -cil, from cill, gradational variant of ceall cell, church, burial place, from
Latin cella (see cell).


Kilimanjaro

mountain in Africa, from Swahili, literally mountain of the god of cold, from kilima mountain +
njaro god of cold.


Kilkenny

county in Leinster, Ireland. The county is named for its town, from Irish Cill Chainnigh Church of
(St.) Kenneth. The story of the Kilkenny cats, a pair of which fought until only their tails were
left, is attested from 1807.


kill (v.)

c.1200, to strike, hit, beat, knock; c.1300, to deprive of life, perhaps from an unrecorded variant
of Old English cwellan to kill (see quell), but the earliest sense suggests otherwise. Sense in to
kill time is from 1728. Related: Killed; killing. Kill-devil, colloquial for rum, especially if new
or of bad quality, is from 1630s.


kill (n.2)

stream, 1630s, American English, from Dutch kil, from Middle Dutch kille riverbed, especially in
place names (such as Schuylkill). A common Germanic word, the Old Norse form, kill, meant bay, gulf
and gave its name to Kiel Fjord on the German Baltic coast and thence to Kiel, the port city founded
there in 1240.


kill (n.1)

early 13c., a stroke, a blow, from kill (v.). Meaning act of killing is from 1814; that of a killed
animal is from 1878. Lawn tennis serve sense is from 1903. The kill the knockout is boxing jargon,
1950.


killable (adj.)

1755, from kill (v.) + -able.


killdeer (n.)

also killdee, 1731, American English, species of North American ring-plover, the name imitative of
its cry.


killer (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from kill (v.). But a surname, Ric[hard] Le Kyller is attested from 1288.
Figurative use from 1550s. Meaning impressive person or thing is by 1900 (as an adjective, 1979);
reduplicated form killer-diller attested by 1938. Killer whale is from 1725; killer instinct is
attested from 1931, originally in boxing.


killing (adj.)

mid-15c., present participle adjective from kill (v.). Meaning very funny is from 1844. As a noun,
large profit, 1886, American English slang.


killjoy (n.)

also kill-joy, 1776, from kill (v.) + joy. Formerly used with other stems (such as kill-courtesy
boorish person, kill-cow bully, big man, etc.).


kiln (n.)

Old English cyln, cylen kiln, oven, from Latin culina kitchen, cooking stove, unexplained variant of
coquere to cook (see cook (n.)). Old Norse kylna, Welsh cilin probably are from English.


kilo (n.)

1870, shortening of kilogram. Slang shortening key (in drug trafficking) is attested from 1968.


kilo-

word-forming element meaning one thousand, introduced in French 1795, when the metric system was
officially adopted there, from Greek khilioi thousand, of unknown origin.


kilobyte (n.)

1970, from kilo- + byte.


kilogram (n.)

one thousand grams, 1797, from French kilogramme (1795); see kilo- + gram.


kilojoule (n.)

1893, from kilo- + joule.


kiloliter (n.)

1810, from French kilolitre; see kilo- + liter.


kilolitre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of kiloliter; also see -re.


kilometer (n.)

1810, from French kilom&egrave;tre (1795); see kilo- + meter (n.2). Related: Kilometric.


kilometre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of kilometer; also see -re.


kilowatt (n.)

1884, from kilo- + watt. Kilowatt hour is from 1892. Related: Kilowattage.


Kilroy

U.S. military graffito character, 1945, said to be either Sgt. Francis J. Kilroy Jr., U.S. Army Air
Transport, whose friend or friends began writing his name everywhere as a prank; or war
materi&eacute;ls inspector James J. Kilroy of Quincy, Mass., who wrote Kilroy was here on everything
he checked.


kilt (n.)

plaited tartan skirt, c.1730, from Middle English verb kilten to tuck up (mid-14c.), from a
Scandinavian source (compare Danish kilte op to tuck up; Old Norse kilting shirt, kjalta fold made
by gathering up to the knees).


kilt (v.)

to tuck up, mid-14c., of Scandinavian origin; compare Danish kilte, Swedish kilta to tuck up; see
kilt (n.). Related: Kilted; kilting.


kilter (n.)

in out of kilter (1620s) variant of English dialectal kelter (c.1600) good condition, order, of
unknown origin.


Kimberley

South African city, founded 1871; also region in northwest Australia; both named for John Wodehouse,
1st Earl of Kimberley, who was British secretary of state for the colonies; the earldom is from a
place in Norfolk, England (the name alsi is found in Nottinghamshire, Warwickshire). The second
element is Old English leah meadow, clearing in a woodland (see lea), the first reflect various Old
English personal names; the one in Norfolk appears first as Chineburlai (1086) and seems to be
clearing of a woman called Cyneburg.


Kimberly

fem. proper name, apparently from the place or surname Kimberley. Not much known in U.S. before
1946; a top-10 name for girls born there 1964-1977.


kimchi (n.)

1898, from Korean.


kimono (n.)

1630s, from Japanese kimono, literally a thing put on, from ki wear, put on + mono thing.


kin (n.)

c.1200, from Old English cynn family; race; kind, sort, rank; nature; gender, sex, from Proto-
Germanic *kunjam family (cognates: Old Frisian kenn, Old Saxon kunni, Old Norse kyn, Old High German
chunni kin, race; Danish and Swedish k&ouml;n, Middle Dutch, Dutch kunne sex, gender; Gothic kuni
family, race, Old Norse kundr son, German Kind child), from PIE *gene- to produce (see genus).


kinase (n.)

1902, from Greek kinein to move (see cite) + chemical suffix -ase.


kind (n.)

class, sort, variety, from Old English gecynd kind, nature, race, related to cynn family (see kin),
from Proto-Germanic *kundjaz family, race, from PIE *gene- to give birth, beget (see genus).
&AElig;lfric's rendition of the Book of Genesis into Old English came out gecyndboc. The prefix
disappeared 1150-1250. No exact cognates beyond English, but it corresponds to adjective endings
such as Goth -kunds, Old High German -kund. Also in English as a suffix (mankind, etc.). Other
earlier, now obsolete, senses in English included character, quality derived from birth and manner
or way natural or proper to anyone. Use in phrase a kind of (1590s) led to colloquial extension as
adverb (1804) in phrases such as kind of stupid (a kind of stupid (person)).


kind (adj.)

friendly, deliberately doing good to others, from Old English gecynde natural, native, innate,
originally with the feeling of relatives for each other, from Proto-Germanic *kundi- natural,
native, from *kunjam family (see kin), with collective prefix *ga- and abstract suffix *-iz. Sense
development from with natural feelings, to well-disposed (c.1300), benign, compassionate (c.1300).


kind-hearted (adj.)

also kindhearted, 1530s; see kind (adj.) + hearted. Related: Kindheartedly, kindheartedness.


kinda

1890, representing a casual pronunciation of kind of.


kindergarten (n.)

1852, from German, literally children's garden, from Kinder children (plural of Kind child; see kin
(n.)) + Garten garden (see yard (n.1)). Coined 1840 by German educator Friedrich Fr&ouml;bel
(1782-1852) in reference to his method of developing intelligence in young children.   Kindergarten
means a garden of children, and Froebel, the inventor of it, or rather, as he would prefer to
express it, the discoverer of the method of Nature, meant to symbolize by the name the spirit and
plan of treatment. How does the gardener treat his plants? He studies their individual natures, and
puts them into such circumstances of soil and atmosphere as enable them to grow, flower, and bring
forth fruit,-- also to renew their manifestation year after year. [Mann, Horace, and Elizabeth P.
Peabody, Moral Culture of Infancy and Kindergarten Guide, Boston, 1863]    The first one in England
was established 1850 by Johannes Ronge, German Catholic priest; in America, 1868, by Elizabeth
Peabody of Boston, Mass. Taken into English untranslated, whereas other nations that borrowed the
institution nativized the name (Danish b&ouml;rnehave, Modern Hebrew gan yeladim, literally garden
of children). Sometimes partially anglicized as kindergarden (attested by 1879).


kindergartener (n.)

kindergarten teacher, 1872, from kindergarten + -er (1). The German form kindergartner is recorded
in American English from 1863. As kindergarten pupil, attested from 1935.


kindle (v.)

c.1200, cundel, to set fire to, to start on fire, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old
Norse kynda to kindle, to light a fire, Swedish quindla kindle, of uncertain origin, + frequentative
suffix -le. Figurative use from c.1300. Intransitive sense to begin to burn, to catch fire is from
c.1400. Related: Kindled; kindling.    Influenced in form, and sometimes in Middle English in sense,
with kindel to give birth (of animals), bring forth, produce (c.1200), from kindel (n.) offspring of
an animal, young one, from Old English gecynd (see kind (n.)) + -el.


kindling (n.)

material for lighting fire, 1510s, from present participle of kindle (v.). Earlier a setting alight
(c.1300).


kindly (adj.)

early 14c., from Old English gecyndelic natural, innate; suitable, lawful; see kind (adj.) + -ly
(1). Related: Kindliness.


kindly (adv.)

with kind feelings, Old English gecyndelice; see kind (adj.) -ly (2).


kindness (n.)

c.1300, courtesy, noble deeds, from kind (adj.) + -ness. Meaning kind deeds; kind feelings is from
late 14c. Old English kyndnes meant nation; produce, an increase.


kindred (n.)

c.1200, kinraden, compound of kin (q.v.) + -rede, from Old English r&aelig;den condition, rule,
related to r&aelig;dan to advise, rule (see read (v.)). With intrusive -d- (17c.) probably for
phonetic reasons (compare thunder) but perhaps encouraged by kind (n.). As an adjective, 1520s, from
the noun.


kine (n.)

archaic plural of cow, a double plural (compare children) or genitive plural of Middle English kye
cows, from Old English cy (genitive cyna), plural of cu cow.


kinema

see cinema.


kinematics (n.)

science of motion, 1840, from French cin&eacute;matique (Amp&egrave;re, 1834), from Greek kinesis
movement, motion (see cite). Related: Kinematic (1864); kinematical.


kinesics (n.)

study of body language, 1952, from Greek kinesis movement, motion (see cite) + -ics. Related:
kinesic.


kinesiology (n.)

1894, from kinesi-, comb. form of Greek kinesis movement, motion (see cite) + -ology. Related:
Kinesiological; kinesiologically.


kinesis (n.)

physical movement, 1819, from Greek kinesis movement, motion (see cite).


kinesthesia (n.)

also kinaesthesia, 1888, Modern Latin compound of Greek kinein to set in motion; to move (see cite)
+ aisthesis perception (see anaesthesia).


kinesthetic (adj.)

also kinaesthetic, pertaining to kinesthesia, 1880, coined by British neurologist Henry Charlton
Bastian (1837-1915) from Greek kinein to move (see cite) + aisthesis sensation (see anaesthesia).
Perhaps on model of aesthetic, prosthetic.


kinesthetics (n.)

also kinaesthetics, by 1893, from kinesthetic pertaining to kinesthesia + -ics.


kinetic (adj.)

relating to motion, 1841, from Greek kinetikos moving, putting in motion, from kinetos moved, verbal
adjective of kinein to move (see cite).    Buster Keaton's subject was kinetic man, a being he
approached with the almost metaphysical awe we reserve for a Doppelg&auml;nger. This being was,
eerily, himself, played by himself, then later in a projection room, watched by himself: an
experience never possible to any generation of actors in the previous history of the world. [Hugh
Kenner, The Counterfeiters, 1968]    Related: Kinetical; kinetically.


kinetics (n.)

1864, from kinetic; see -ics.


kineto-

word-forming element meaning motion, from Greek kineto-, comb. form of kinetos (see kinetic).


kinfolk (n.)

also kin-folk, 1802, principally American English, but the earliest references are British, from kin
(n.) + folk (n.). Kinsfolk is recorded from 1844.


king (n.)

Old English cyning king, ruler, from Proto-Germanic *kuninggaz (cognates: Dutch koning, Old Norse
konungr, Danish konge, Old Saxon and Old High German kuning, Middle High German k&uuml;nic, German
K&ouml;nig). Possibly related to Old English cynn family, race (see kin), making a king originally a
leader of the people; or from a related root suggesting noble birth, making a king originally one
who descended from noble birth. The sociological and ideological implications render this a topic of
much debate.    Finnish kuningas king, Old Church Slavonic kunegu prince (Russian knyaz, Bohemian
knez), Lithuanian kunigas clergyman are loans from Germanic.  As leon is the king of bestes. [John
Gower, Confessio Amantis, 1390]  In Old English, used for names of chiefs of Anglian and Saxon
tribes or clans, then of the states they founded. Also extended to British and Danish chiefs they
fought. The chess piece so called from early 15c.; the playing card from 1560s; use in
checkers/draughts first recorded 1820. Applied in nature to species deemed remarkably big or
dominant (such as king crab, 1690s). In marketing, king-size is from 1939, originally of cigarettes.
[I]t was [Eugene] Field who haunted the declining years of Creston Clarke with his review of that
actor's Lear. ... Said he, Mr. Clarke played the King all the evening as though under constant fear
that someone else was about to play the Ace. [Theatre Magazine, January 1922]


King Kong

U.S. film released 1933.


king&#039;s evil (n.)

scrofula, late 14c., translates Medieval Latin regius morbus; so called because the kings of England
and France claimed to heal it by their touch. In England, the custom dates from Edward the Confessor
and was continued through the Stuarts (Charles II touched 90,798 sufferers) but was ended by the
Hanoverians (1714).


kingdom (n.)

Old English cyningdom; see king + -dom. Cognate with Old Saxon kuningdom, Middle Dutch koninghdom,
Old Norse konungdomr. The usual Old English word was cynedom; Middle English also had kingrick (for
second element, see Reichstag). Meaning one of the realms of nature is from 1690s. Kingdom-come the
next world (1785) is from the Lord's Prayer.


kingfisher (n.)

mid-15c., originally king's fisher, for obscure reasons; see king + fisher.


kingmaker (n.)

also king-maker, 1590s, originally in reference to the 15c. Earl of Warwick.


kingpin (n.)

also king-pin, 1801 as the name of the large pin in the game of kayles (similar to bowls except a
club or stick was thrown instead of a ball; see Games, Gaming and Gamesters' Laws, Frederick Brandt,
London, 1871), from king with a sense of chief + pin (n.). The modern use is mainly figurative and
is perhaps from the word's use as another name for the king-bolt (itself from 1825) in a machinery,
though the figurative use is attested earlier (1867) than the literal.


Kings

biblical book, late 14c., so called because it tells the history of the kings of Judah and Israel.


kingship (n.)

early 14c., from king + -ship.


kink (n.)

1670s, a nautical term, from Dutch kink twist in a rope (also found in French and Swedish), probably
related to Old Norse kikna to bend backwards, sink at the knee (see kick). Figurative sense of odd
notion, mental twist first recorded in American English, 1803, in writings of Thomas Jefferson. As a
verb, 1690s, from the noun.


kinkajou (n.)

1796, from French (1670s), from an Algonquian word.


kinky (adj.)

1844, full of kinks, twisted, curly, from kink + -y (2). Meaning odd, eccentric, crotchety is from
1859; that of sexually perverted is from 1959. Related: Kinkiness.


kino-

before vowels, kin-, word-forming element meaning motion, from Greek kino-, from kinein to move (see
cite).


kinship (n.)

by 1764, from kin + -ship. A more pure word than relationship, which covers the same sense but is a
hybrid.


kinsman (n.)

c.1200, kenesmen, from late Old English cynnes mannum; see kin + man. Kinswoman is recorded from
c.1400.


kiosk (n.)

1620s, open pavilion, from French kiosque (17c.), from Turkish koshk, ki&ouml;shk pavilion, palace,
from Persian kushk palace, portico. Later of newsstands (1865). Modern sense influenced by British
telephone kiosk (1928).


kipper (n.)

Old English cypera male salmon, perhaps related to coper reddish-brown metal (see copper), on
resemblance of color. Another theory connects it to kip, name for the sharp, hooked lower jaw of the
male salmon in breeding season, from Middle English kippen to snatch, tug, pull. The modern word
usually refers to kippered herring, from a verb meaning to cure a fish by cleaning, salting, and
spicing it (early 14c.). The theory is that this originally was done to salmon, hence the name.


kir (n.)

white wine and cr&egrave;me de cassis, 1966 (popular in U.S. 1980s), from Canon Felix Kir
(1876-1968), mayor of Dijon, who is said to have invented the recipe.


Kiribati

island nation in the Pacific, formerly Gilbert Islands and named for Capt. Thomas Gilbert, who
arrived there 1788 after helping transport the first shipload of convicts to Australia. At
independence in 1979 it took the current name, which represents the local pronunciation of Gilbert.
Christmas Island, named for the date it was discovered by Europeans, is in the chain and now goes by
Kiritimati, likewise a local pronunciation of the English name.


kirk (n.)

c.1200, northern England and Scottish dialectal form of church, from a Scandinavian source such as
Old Norse kirkja church, from Old English cirice (see church).


kirschwasser (n.)

liquor distilled from fermented cherry juice, 1819, from German Kirschwasser, literally cherry-
water; first element from Middle High German kirse, from Old High German kirsa, from Vulgar Latin
*ceresia, from Late Latin cerasium cherry (see cherry). For second element, see water (n.1).


kirtle (n.)

a man's tunic; a woman's skirt, Old English cyrtel, related to Old Norse kyrtill tunic; both
regarded as probably from Latin curtus short (see curt) + diminutive suffix -el.


kismet (n.)

fate, destiny, 1834, from Turkish qismet, from Arabic qismah, qismat portion, lot, fate, from root
of qasama he divided.    From a nation of enthusiasts and conquerors, the Osmanlis became a nation
of sleepers and smokers. They came into Europe with the sword in one hand and the Koran in the
other: were they driven out of their encampment, it would be with the Koran in one hand and the pipe
in the other, crying: 'Kismet! Kismet! Allah kehrim!' (God hath willed it! God is great!) [Dr. James
O. Noyes, The Ottoman Empire, The Knickerbocker, October 1858]    Popularized as the title of a
novel in 1877.


kiss (v.)

Old English cyssan to kiss, from Proto-Germanic *kussjan (cognates: Old Saxon kussian, Old Norse
kyssa, Old Frisian kessa, Middle Dutch cussen, Dutch, Old High German kussen, German k&uuml;ssen,
Norwegian and Danish kysse, Swedish kyssa), from *kuss-, probably ultimately imitative of the sound.
Related: Kissed; kissing. For vowel evolution, see bury. There appears to be no common Indo-European
root word for kiss, though suggestions of a common ku- sound may be found in the Germanic root and
Greek kynein to kiss, Hittite kuwash-anzi they kiss, Sanskrit cumbati he kisses.Kissing, as an
expression of affection or love, is unknown among many races, and in the history of mankind seems to
be a late substitute for the more primitive rubbing of noses, sniffing, and licking. [Buck,
p.1113]Some languages make a distinction between the kiss of affection and that of erotic love
(compare Latin saviari erotic kiss, vs. osculum, literally little mouth). French embrasser kiss, but
literally embrace, came about in 17c. when the older word baiser (from Latin basiare) acquired an
obscene connotation. Insulting invitation kiss my ass is at least from 1705, but probably much older
(see The Miller's Tale).


kiss (n.)

Old English coss; see kiss (v.). It became Middle English cuss, but this yielded to kiss, from the
verb. Kiss of death in figurative sense thing that signifies impending failure is from 1944
(Billboard, Oct. 21), ultimately in reference to Judas's kiss in Gethsemane (Matt. xxvi:48-50). The
kiss of peace was, in Old English, sibbecoss (for first element, see sibling).


kissable (adj.)

1783, from kiss (v.) + -able. Related: Kissably; kissability.


kisser (n.)

slang for mouth, attested from 1860, agent noun from kiss (v.).


kist (n.)

chest, c.1300, from Old Norse kista chest, from Latin cista (see chest).


kit (n.1)

late 13c., round wooden tub, perhaps from Middle Dutch kitte jug, tankard, wooden container, of
unknown origin. Meaning collection of personal effects, especially for traveling (originally in
reference to a soldier), is from 1785; that of outfit of tools for a workman is from 1851. Of drum
sets, by 1929. Meaning article to be assembled by the buyer is from 1930s.


kit (n.2)

small fiddle used by dancing teachers, 1510s, probably a shortening of Old English cythere, from
Latin cithara, from Greek kithara (see guitar).


kit and caboodle (n.)

also kaboodle, 1861, from kit (n.1) in dismissive sense number of things viewed as a whole (1785) +
boodle lot, collection, perhaps from Dutch boedel property. Kit also was paired with other words in
similar formations.


kit-cat

club founded by Whig politicians in London, 1703; so called from Christopher (Kit) Catling, keeper
of the tavern on Shire Lane, near Temple Bar, in which the club first met. Meaning a size of
portrait less than half length (1754), supposedly is because the dining room in which portraits of
club members hung was too low for half-length portraits.


kit-fox (n.)

1812, perhaps from a shortening of kitten, in reference to smallness.


kitab (n.)

Islamic, a book, especially the Quran or the Bible, 1885, from Arabic kitab book, literally a
writing, from Aramaic kethabh a writing.


kitch (n.)

colloquial shortening of kitchen, attested by 1919. Sometimes also an erroneous spelling of kitsch.


kitchen (n.)

c.1200, from Old English cycene, from Proto-Germanic *kokina (cognates: Middle Dutch c&ouml;kene,
Old High German chuhhina, German K&uuml;che, Danish kj&oslash;kken), probably borrowed from Vulgar
Latin *cocina (source also of French cuisine, Spanish cocina), variant of Latin coquina kitchen,
from fem. of coquinus of cooks, from coquus cook, from coquere to cook (see cook (n.)).    The Old
English word might be directly from Vulgar Latin. Kitchen cabinet informal but powerful set of
advisors is American English slang, 1832, originally in reference to administration of President
Andrew Jackson. Kitchen midden (1863) in archaeology translates Danish kj&oslash;kken
m&oslash;dding. Surname Kitchener (one in charge of a monastic kitchen) is from early 14c. Old
English also had cycen&#240;enung service in the kitchen.


kitchen sink (n.)

attested by 1824. Phrase everything but (or and) the kitchen sink is 1944, from World War II armed
forces slang, in reference to intense bombardment.    Out for blood, our Navy throws everything but
the kitchen sink at Jap vessels, warships and transports alike. [Shell fuel advertisement, Life,
Jan. 24, 1944]


kitchenette (n.)

1905, American English, a hybrid from kitchen + -ette.


kite (n.)

bird of prey (Milvus ictinus), Old English cyta kind of hawk, probably imitative of its cries
(compare ciegan to call, German Kauz screech owl). The toy kite first so-called 1660s, from its way
of hovering in the air like a bird. The dismissive invitation to go fly a kite is attested by 1942,
American English, probably tracing to the popular song of the same name (lyrics by Johnny Burke),
sung by Bing Crosby in The Star Maker (1939):    Go fly a kite and tie your troubles to the tail
They'll be blown away by a merry gale,   Go fly a kite and toss your worries to the wind   And they
won't come back, they'll be too chagrined.


kite (v.)

write a fictitious check, 1839, American English, from 1805 phrase fly a kite raise money by issuing
commercial paper on nonexistent funds; see kite (n.). Related: Kited; kiting.


kith (n.)

Old English cy&eth;&eth; kinship, relationship; kinsfolk, fellow-countrymen, neighbors; native
country, home; knowledge, acquaintance, familiarity, from cu&eth; known, past participle of cunnan
to know (see can (v.)). Cognate with Old High German chundida. The alliterative phrase kith and kin
(late 14c.) originally meant country and kinsmen and is almost the word's only survival.


kitsch (n.)

1926, from German kitsch, literally gaudy, trash, from dialectal kitschen to smear.    What we
English people call ugliness in German art is simply the furious reaction against what Germans call
s&uuml;sses Kitsch, the art of the picture postcard, and of what corresponds to the royalty ballad.
It has for years been their constant reproach against us that England is the great country of
Kitsch. Many years ago a German who loved England only too well said to me, 'I like your English
word plain; it is a word for which we have no equivalent in German, because all German women are
plain.' He might well have balanced it by saying that English has no equivalent for the word Kitsch.
[Edward J. Dent, The Music of Arnold Sch&ouml;nberg, The Living Age, July 9, 1921]


kitschy (adj.)

1965, from kitsch + -y (2). Related: Kitchiness.


kitten (n.)

late 14c., probably from an Anglo-French variant of Old French chitoun (Old North French caton)
little cat, from chat cat, from Late Latin cattus (see cat). Applied playfully to a young girl, a
sweetheart, from 1870.


kittenish (adj.)

1754, from kitten + -ish. Related: Kittenishly; Kittenishness.


kitty (n.1)

young cat, 1719, variant of kitten, perhaps influenced by kitty girl, young woman (c.1500),
originally a pet form of fem. proper name Catherine. Kitty Hawk, N.C., apparently is a mangling of a
native Algonquian name; it also has been written as Chicahauk.


kitty (n.2)

pool of money in a card game, 1887, probably from kit (n.1), in a sense of collection of necessary
supplies (1833); but perhaps rather from northern England slang kitty prison, jail, lock-up (1825),
of uncertain origin.


Kiwanis

businessmen's and professionals' society, formed in Detroit, Michigan, U.S., in 1915, the name is of
obscure meaning.


kiwi (n.)

type of flightless bird, 1835, from Maori kiwi, said to be of imitative origin. As slang for a New
Zealander, it is attested from 1918. The kiwi fruit (Actinia chinesis), was so called in U.S. from
c.1966 when it was imported there, but it is known in New Zealand as Chinese gooseberry (1925).


KKK

1868, abbreviation of ku klux klan.


Klan (n.)

1867, short for ku klux klan.


klatsch (n.)

1953, from German Klatsch gossip, which is said in German sources to be imitative (compare klatschen
clap hands, klatsch a single clap of the hands). Also see clap (v.), which in Middle English also
had a sense of talk noisily or too much, chatter (late 14c.).


klaxon (n.)

loud warning horn, 1908, originally on automobiles, said to have been named for the company that
sold them (The Klaxon Company; distributor for Lovell-McConnell Mfg. Co., Newark, N.J.), but
probably the company was named for the horn, which bore a word likely based on Greek klazein to
roar, cognate with Latin clangere to resound.


Kleagle (n.)

title of an officer in the KKK, 1924, from Klan + eagle.


Kleenex (n.)

1925, proprietary name, registered by Cellucotton Products Company, Neenah, Wisconsin, U.S.; later
Kimberly-Clark Corp. An arbitrary alteration of clean + brand-name suffix -ex.


klepto

1914 (adj.); 1919 (n.); shortened form of kleptomaniac.


kleptocracy (n.)

rule by a class of thieves, 1819, originally in reference to Spain; see kleptomania + -cracy.


kleptomania (n.)

1830, formed from mania + Greek kleptes thief, from kleptein to steal, act secretly, from PIE *klep-
to steal, an extention of root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell; cognate with Latin clepere to
steal, listen secretly to, Old Prussian au-klipts hidden, Old Church Slavonic poklopu cover,
wrapping, Gothic hlifan to steal, hliftus thief). Much-derided 19c. as a fancy term for old-
fashioned thievery and an opportunity for the privileged to claim a psychological motive for
criminal misbehavior.    There is a popular belief that some of the criminal laws under which the
poor are rigorously punished are susceptible of remarkable elasticity when the peccadilloes of the
rich are brought under judgment, and that there is some truth in the old adage which declares that
one man may steal a horse where another dare not look over the hedge. This unwholesome distrust is
not likely to diminish if, in cases of criminal prosecutions where so-called respectable persons
commit theft without sufficiently obvious motive for the act, they have their crime extenuated on
the plea of kleptomania, as has recently occurred in several notable instances. [Kleptomania, The
Lancet, Nov. 16, 1861]


kleptomaniac (n.)

1861; see kleptomania.


klezmer (n.)

late 19c. (plural klezmorim); originally, an itinerant East European Jewish professional musician,
from Hebrew kley zemer, literally vessels of song, thus musical instruments.


klieg

kind of arc lamp used as a studio light, 1921, from Bavarian-born U.S. engineers brothers Anton and
John Kliegl, who invented it.


Klondike

tributary of the Yukon River in northwestern Canada, from Kutchin (Athabaskan) throndiuk, said to
mean hammer-water and to be a reference to the practice of driving stakes into the riverbed to
support fish traps. Scene of a gold rush after 1896.


kludge

1962, noun and verb, U.S. slang, fanciful coinage by U.S. author Jackson W. Granholm (b.1921).
Related: Kludgy.


klutz (n.)

1967, American English, from Yiddish klots clumsy person, blockhead, literally block, lump, from
Middle High German klotz lump, ball. Compare German klotz boor, clod, literally wooden block (see
clot).


klutzy (adj.)

1965, from klutz + -y (2). Related: Klutziness.


kn-

Germanic consonant cluster; the sound is still evident in most sister languages but in English it
has been reduced to n- in standard pronunciation since before 1750, and for about a century before
that it had been pronounced hn-, dn-, tn-. It was fully voiced in Old and Middle English.


knack (n.)

mid-14c., deception, trick, device, of uncertain origin, probably from a Low German word meaning a
sharp sounding blow (compare Middle English knak, late 14c.; German knacken to crack), of imitative
origin. Sense of special skill is first recorded 1580s, if this is in fact the same word.


knacker (v.)

usually in past tense, knackered, to kill, castrate (1855), but most often used in weakened sense of
to tire out (1883); apparently from knacker (n.) worn-out or useless horse, 1812, of unknown origin;
possibly from a dialectal survival of a Scandinavian word represented by Old Norse hnakkur saddle,
hnakki back of the neck, and thus possibly related to neck (n.).


knackered (adj.)

worn out, tired, past participle adjective from knacker (v.).


knap (v.)

to strike with a sharp sound, late 15c., echoic. Earlier (c.1400) as a noun meaning abrupt stroke.
Related: Knapped; knapping.


knapsack (n.)

c.1600, from Low German Knapsack (Dutch knapzak), probably from knappen to eat literally to crack,
snap + Sack bag (see sack (n.1)).


knave (n.)

Old English cnafa boy, male servant, common Germanic (cognates: Old High German knabo boy, youth,
servant, German knabe boy, lad, also probably related to Old English cnapa boy, youth, servant, Old
Norse knapi servant boy, Dutch knaap a youth, servant, Middle High German knappe a young squire,
German Knappe squire, shield-bearer). The original meaning might have been stick, piece of wood
[Klein]. Sense of rogue, rascal first recorded c.1200. In playing cards, the jack, 1560s.


knavery (n.)

1520s, from knave + -ery.


knavish (adj.)

late 14c., from knave + -ish. Related: Knavishly; knavishness.


knead (v.)

Old English cnedan to knead, from Proto-Germanic *knedan (cognates: Old Saxon knedan, Middle Dutch
cneden, Dutch kneden, Old High German knetan, German kneten, Old Norse kno&eth;a to knead).
Originally a strong verb (past tense cn&aelig;d, past participle cneden).


knee (n.)

Old English cneo, cneow knee, from Proto-Germanic *knewam (cognates: Old Norse kne, Old Saxon kneo,
Old Frisian kni, Middle Dutch cnie, Dutch knie, Old High German kniu, German Knie, Gothic kniu),
from PIE root *g(e)neu- (cognates: Sanskrit janu, Avestan znum, Hittite genu knee; Greek gony knee,
gonia corner, angle; Latin genu knee). Knee-slapper funny joke is from 1955.


knee (v.)

early 13c., to bend the knee, kneel, from Old English cneowian, from cneow (see knee (n.)). The
meaning to strike with the knee is first recorded 1892. Related: Kneed; kneeing.


knee-deep (adj.)

1530s, from knee (n.) + deep (adj.).


knee-high (adj.)

1743, from knee (n.) + high (adj.). Phrase knee-high to a grasshopper first recorded 1851 (earliest
form was knee-high to a toad, 1814).


knee-jerk (n.)

patellar reflex, neurological phenomenon discovered and named 1876; the figurative use appeared soon
after the phrase was coined.


kneecap (n.)

1650s, a covering or protection for the knee, from knee (n.) + cap (n.). Meaning bone in front of
the knee joint is from 1869; the verb in the underworld sense of to shoot (someone) in the knee as
punishment is attested by 1975. Related: Kneecapped.


kneel (v.)

Old English cneowlian, from cneow (see knee (n.)). Similar formation in Middle Low German knelen,
Middle Dutch cnielen, Dutch knielen Gothic knussjan. Past tense knelt is a modern formation (19c.)
on analogy of feel/felt, etc. Related: Kneeling.


knell (n.)

Old English cnyll sound made by a bell when struck or rung slowly, perhaps of imitative origin. The
Welsh cnull death-bell appears to be a borrowing from English. For vowel evolution, see bury.


knell (v.)

Old English cnyllan to toll a bell; strike, knock, cognate with Middle High German erknellen to
resound, Old Norse knylla to beat, thrash; probably imitative. Related: Knelled; knelling.


Knesset

Israeli parliament, 1949, from Mishnaic Hebrew keneseth gathering, assembly, from stem of Hebrew
kanas he gathered, assembled, collected.


knew

Old English cneow, past tense of know (v.).


knick-knack (n.)

also knickknack, 1570s, reduplication of knack stratagem, trick.


Knickerbocker

descendant of Dutch settlers of New York, 1831, from Diedrich Knickerbocker, the name under which
Washington Irving published his popular History of New York (1809). The pen-name was borrowed from
Irving's friend Herman Knickerbocker, and literally means toy marble-baker.


knickers (n.)

short, loose-fitting undergarment, now usually for women but not originally so, 1866, shortening of
knickerbockers (1859), said to be so called for their resemblance to the trousers of old-time
Dutchmen in Cruikshank's illustrations for Washington Irving's History of New York (see
knickerbocker).


knife (n.)

late Old English cnif, probably from Old Norse knifr, from Proto-Germanic *knibaz (cognates: Middle
Low German knif, Middle Dutch cnijf, German kneif), of uncertain origin. To further confuse the
etymology, there also are forms in -p-, such as Dutch knijp, German kneip. French canif penknife
(mid-15c.) is borrowed from Middle English or Norse.


knife (v.)

1865, from knife (n.). Related: Knifed; knifing.


knight (n.)

Old English cniht boy, youth; servant, attendant, common West Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian
kniucht, Dutch knecht, Middle High German kneht boy, youth, lad, German Knecht servant, bondman,
vassal), of unknown origin. The plural in Middle English sometimes was knighten. Meaning military
follower of a king or other superior is from c.1100. Began to be used in a specific military sense
in Hundred Years War, and gradually rose in importance until it became a rank in the nobility 16c.
The chess piece so called from mid-15c. Knight in shining armor in figurative sense is from 1917,
from the man who rescues the damsel in distress in romantic dramas (perhaps especially Lohengrin).
Knights of Columbus, society of Catholic men, founded 1882 in New Haven, Connecticut, U.S.; Knights
of Labor, trade union association, founded in Philadelphia, 1869; Knights of Pythias, secret order,
founded in Washington, 1864.


knight (v.)

to make a knight of (someone), early 13c., from knight (n.). Related: Knighted; knighting.


knighthood (n.)

Old English cnihthad the period between childhood and manhood; see knight (n.) + -hood. Sense of
rank or dignity of a knight is from c.1300, and probably is an independent formation.


knightly (adj.)

Old English cnihtlic; see knight (n.) + -ly (1).


knish (n.)

1930, from Yiddish, from Russian knysh, a kind of cake.


knit (v.)

Old English cnyttan to tie with a knot, bind, fasten, related to Old Norse knytja bind together,
Middle Low German  kn&uuml;tten to tie, knot, Old English cnotta a knot, from Proto-Germanic
*knuttjan, from stem *knutt-. Of brows, late 14c. Meaning to do knitting (especially plain stitch)
is from 1520s. Related: Knitted; knitting.


knitter (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from knit (v.).


knitting (n.)

knitted work, 1848, from present participle of knit (v.). Knitting-needle is from 1590s.


knob (n.)

late 14c., knobe, probably from a Scandinavian or German source (compare Middle Low German knobbe
knob, Middle Dutch cnoppe, Dutch knop, Old Frisian knopp, knapp, Old High German knopf, German Knopf
button, Old Norse knyfill short horn). Meaning knoll, isolated round hill is first recorded 1640s,
especially in U.S.


knobby (adj.)

1540s, from knob + -y (2). Alternative form knobbly attested from 1859. Related: Knobbiness.


knock (v.)

Old English cnocian (West Saxon cnucian), to pound, beat; knock (on a door), likely of imitative
origin. Meaning deprecate, put down is from 1892. Related: Knocked; knocking. Knock-kneed first
attested 1774. Knock-down, drag-out is from 1827. Command knock it off stop it is first recorded
1880, perhaps from auctioneer's term for dispose of quickly:    At the commencement of the sales, he
gave every one that wanted to purchase a paper containing a description of the lands that were to be
sold; and, as the sales were cried, he called over the numbers and described the land; and when it
got up to one dollar and a quarter an acre, if no body bid, after it was cried two or three times,
he would say, knock it off, knock it off. [U.S. Senate record, 1834]


knock (n.)

mid-14c., from knock (v.). As an engine noise, from 1899.


knock off (v.)

desist, stop, 1640s; do hastily, 1817; kill, murder, 1919; from knock (v.) + off.


knock up (v.)

1660s in sense of arouse by knocking at the door, from knock (v.). However it is little used in this
sense in American English, where the phrase means get a woman pregnant (1813), possibly ultimately
from knock to copulate with (1590s; compare slang knocking-shop brothel, 1860).   Knocked up in the
United States, amongst females, the phrase is equivalent to being enciente, so that Englishmen often
unconsciously commit themselves when amongst our Yankee cousins. [John Camden Hotten, The Slang
Dictionary, London, 1860]


knocker (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from knock. Sense of door banger is by 1590s. Knockers a woman's breasts is
slang attested from 1941.


knockoff (n.)

cheap imitation, 1966, from the verbal phrase knock off do hastily; in reference to the casual way
the things are made.


knockout (n.)

also knock-out, in fighting, 1887, from verbal phrase knock out to stun by a blow for a 10-count in
boxing, short for to knock out of time; see knock (v.) + out. Slang meaning attractive person is
from 1892. To knock oneself out make a great effort is from 1936.


knoll (n.)

Old English cnoll hilltop, small hill, clod, ball, related to Old Norse knollr hilltop; German
knolle clod, lump; Dutch knol turnip, nol a hill.


knot (n.)

Old English cnotta intertwining of ropes, cords, etc., from Proto-Germanic *knuttan- (cognates: Low
German kn&uuml;tte, Old Frisian knotta knot, Dutch knot, Old High German knoto, German Knoten,
perhaps also Old Norse knutr knot, knob). Figurative sense of difficult problem was in Old English
(compare Gordian knot). Symbolic of the bond of wedlock, early 13c. As an ornament of dress, first
attested c.1400. Meaning thickened part or protuberance on tissue of a plant is from late 14c. The
nautical unit of measure (1630s) is from the practice of attaching knotted string to the log line.
The ship's speed can be measured by the number of knots that play out while the sand glass is
running.The distance between the knots on the log-line should contain 1/120 of a mile, supposing the
glass to run exactly half a minute. [Jorge Juan and Antonio de Ulloa, A Voyage to South America
1760]


knot (v.)

to tie in a knot, mid-15c., from knot (n.). Related: Knotted (late 12c.), knotting.


knothead (n.)

stupid person, by 1899, American English, from knot (n.) + head (n.). Joe Knothead is the name of a
character in an 1857 blackface satire publication. And a local history from Massachusetts published
in 1879 describes an old-time character known as knot-head because [d]uring the hottest days of
summer ... he worked bare-headed in the sun ....   Knothead also was used as a term in cattle and
sheep raising, defined in 1922 as a type of poorly bred, stunted northern cattle, about the size of
yearlings, but with heavy horns indicating that they are older. It turns up, however, in an 1849
petition to the Ohio Legislature, recommending a certain person for a court position, in part
because he is a knot-head, which the report of the petition notes is a term of praise for a judge
because they are asked to untangle knotty legal questions, but which phrase, it adds, is believed
not to be in use among gentlemen in the north part of the State. [Appendix to the Journal of the
Ohio House of Representatives, Session of 1848-9]


knothole (n.)

1726, see knot (n.) + hole (n.).


knotty (adj.)

mid-13c. (figurative use early 13c.), from knot (n.) + -y (2). Related: Knottiness.


know (v.)

Old English cnawan (class VII strong verb; past tense cneow, past participle cnawen), to know,
perceive; acknowledge, declare, from Proto-Germanic *knew- (cognates: Old High German bi-chnaan, ir-
chnaan to know), from PIE root *gno- to know (cognates: Old Persian x&#353;nasatiy he shall know;
Old Church Slavonic znati, Russian znat to know; Latin gnoscere; Greek *gno-, as in gignoskein;
Sanskrit jna- know). Once widespread in Germanic, this form is now retained only in English, where
however it has widespread application, covering meanings that require two or more verbs in other
languages (such as German wissen, kennen, erkennen and in part k&ouml;nnen; French conna&icirc;tre,
savoir; Latin novisse, cognoscere; Old Church Slavonic znaja, vemi). The Anglo-Saxons used two
distinct words for this, witan (see wit) and cnawan.    Meaning to have sexual intercourse with is
attested from c.1200, from the Old Testament. To not know one's ass from one's elbow is from 1930.
To know better to have learned from experience is from 1704. You know as a parenthetical filler is
from 1712, but it has roots in 14c. To know too much (to be allowed to live, escape, etc.) is from
1872. As an expression of surprise, what do you know attested by 1914.


know (n.)

inside information (as in in the know), 1883; earlier fact of knowing (1590s), from know (v.).


know-nothing (n.)

ignoramus, 1827, from know + nothing. As a U.S. nativist political party, active 1853-56, the name
refers to the secret society at the core of the party, about which members were instructed to
answer, if asked about it, that they know nothing. The party eventually merged into the Republican
Party.


knowable (adj.)

c.1400, from know (v.) + -able.


knowhow (n.)

also know-how, technical expertise, 1838, American English, from know (v.) + how.


knowing (adj.)

with knowledge of truth, late 14c., from present participle of know (v.). Related: Knowingly.


knowingly (adv.)

late 14c., from knowing + -ly (2).


knowledge (n.)

early 12c., cnawlece acknowledgment of a superior, honor, worship; for first element see know.
Second element obscure, perhaps from Scandinavian and cognate with the -lock action, process, found
in wedlock. Meaning capacity for knowing, understanding; familiarity; fact of knowing is late 14c.
Sense of an organized body of facts or teachings is from c.1400, as is that of sexual intercourse.
Also a verb in Middle English, knoulechen acknowledge (c.1200), later find out about; recognize, and
to have sexual intercourse with (c.1300).


knowledgeable (adj.)

also knowledgable, c.1600, capable of being known, recognizable (a sense now obsolete), from
knowledge in its Middle English verbal sense + -able. The modern sense of having knowledge,
displaying knowledge is from 1829 and probably a new formation.


known

past participle of know.


knub (n.)

small lump, 1560s, probably cognate with Low German knubbe knot, knob, Danish knub block, log, stump
(see knob).


knuckle (n.)

mid-14c., knokel finger joint; any joint of the body, especially a knobby one; morbid lump or
swelling; common Germanic (cognates: Middle Low German kn&ouml;kel, Middle Dutch cnockel, German
kn&ouml;chel), literally little bone, a diminutive of Proto-Germanic root *knuck- bone (compare
German Knochen bone).    As a verb from 1740, originally in the game of marbles. To knuckle down
apply oneself earnestly is 1864 in American English, extended from marbles (putting a knuckle on the
ground in assuming the hand position preliminary to shooting); to knuckle under submit, give in is
first recorded 1740, supposedly from the former more general sense of knuckle and here meaning knee,
hence to kneel. The face-busting knuckle-duster is from 1858 (a duster was a type of protective coat
worn by workmen).


knuckleball (n.)

also knuckle-ball, baseball pitch, by 1909, from knuckle (n.) + ball (n.1). So called from the
position of the fingers in throwing it. Related: Knuckleballer.


knucklehead (n.)

stupid person, 1890, American English, from knuckle (n.) + head (n.).    That infernal knuckle-head
at the camp ought to have reported before now, he thought to himself, as he smoked. [Charles H.
Shinn, The Quicksands of Toro, in Belford's Magazine, vol. V, June-November 1890, New York]    From
1869 as the name of a part in a type of mechanical coupling device. Popularized in the stupid person
sense from 1942, from character R.F. Knucklehead, star of Don't posters hung up at U.S. Army Air
Force training fields.    Everything Knucklehead does is wrong and ends in disaster. He endures one
spectacular crash after another so that the students at the Gulf Coast Air Force Training Center may
profit by his mistakes, and it looks now as if there will be no let-up in his agony. [Life, May 25,
1942]


knurl (n.)

hard excrescence, c.1600, probably a diminutive of Middle English knor knot (c.1400), related to
gnarl, from Proto-Germanic *knur- (cognates: German knorren a knotty excrescence). Related: Knurly.


koala (n.)

Australian marsupial, 1808, from the Aboriginal name of the animal, variously given as koola, kulla,
kula.


koan (n.)

Zen paradox, 1946, from Japanese ko public + an matter for thought.


Kobe

type of fine beef, named for the region in Japan where it is raised, from Japanese ko god + he
house.


Kodak

brand of camera, arbitrary coinage by U.S. inventor George Eastman (1854-1932), U.S. trademark
registered Sept. 4, 1888. In 1890s, practically synonymous with camera and also used as a verb.
Kodachrome, registered trademark for a method of color photography, 1915; the product was
discontinued in 2006.


Kodiak

Alaskan island, from Russian Kadiak, from Alutiiq (Eskimo) qikertaq island.


Koh-i-noor (n.)

famous diamond, one of the British crown jewels after the annexation of Punjab in 1849, from Persian
koh-i-nur, literally mountain of light, from Persian koh mountain + Arabic nur light.


kohl (n.)

powder used to darken eyelids, 1799, from Arabic kuhl (see alcohol).


kohlrabi (n.)

also kohl-rabi, kohl rabi, kind of cabbage, 1807, from German Kohlrabi (16c.), from Italian cavoli
rape, plural of cavolo rapo cole-rape; see cole + rape (n.2). Form influenced in German by German
kohl cabbage.


koi (n.)

1727, from a Japanese local name for carp.


koine (n.)

common literary dialect of Greek in Roman and early medieval period, 1903, from feminine singular of
Greek koinos common, ordinary (see coeno-). Used earlier as a Greek word in English.


koinonia (n.)

1865, Greek, literally communion, fellowship, from koinos common, ordinary (see coeno-).


kola (n.)

the cola nut, 1830, variant of cola (q.v.).


kolkhoz (n.)

U.S.S.R. collective farm, 1921, from Russian kolkhoz, contraction of kollektivnoe khozyaistvo
collective farm.


Komodo dragon (n.)

1927, named for Indonesian island of Komodo, where it lives.


Komsomol (n.)

Russian communist youth organization, 1934, from Russian Komsomol, contraction of Kommunisticheskii
Soyuz Molodezhi Communist Union of Youth.


kook (n.)

1960, American English slang; see kooky.


kookaburra (n.)

1890, from a native Australian word.


kooky (adj.)

1959, American English, originally teenager or beatnik slang, possibly a shortening of cuckoo.
Using the newest show-business jargon, Tammy [Grimes] admits, I look kooky, meaning cuckoo. [Life
magazine, Jan. 5, 1959]    Related: Kookily; kookiness.


kop (n.)

hill, 1835, from Afrikaans, from Dutch kop head, from the Germanic form of the root of English cup
(compare German Kopf head).


kopeck (n.)

1/100 of a ruble, from Russian kopeika, from kop'e lance (cognate with Greek kopis chopper, cleaver;
see hatchet); so called because the coin showed the czar with lance in hand.


kopje (n.)

small hill in South Africa, from S.African Dutch, diminutive of Dutch kop hill; head (see kop).


Koran

1610s, from Arabic qur'an a reading, recitation, book, from root of quara-a he read, recited.
Related: Koranic.


Kore

in Greek mythology, the daughter of Zeus and Demeter, also called Persephone in her aspect as
Hades's wife, from Greek kore maiden (see crescent).


Korea

from Chinese Gao li, name of a dynasty founded 918, literally high serenity. Japanese Chosen is from
Korean Choson, literally land of morning calm, from cho morning + son calm. Related: Korean (1610s).


kos (n.)

measure of distance in India (about 2 miles), from Hindi kos, from Sanskrit krosah, literally a
call, a shout; thus, distance within which a man's shout can be heard.


kosher (adj.)

ritually fit or pure (especially of food), 1851, from Yiddish kosher, from Hebrew kasher fit,
proper, lawful, from base of kasher was suitable, proper. Generalized sense of correct, legitimate
is from 1896.


kowtow (n.)

also kow-tow, 1804, from Chinese k'o-t'ou custom of touching the ground with the forehead to show
respect or submission, literally knock the head, from k'o knock, bump + t'ou head. The verb in the
figurative sense of act in an obsequious manner is from 1826. Related: Kowtowed; kowtowing.


kraal (n.)

village, pen, enclosure, 1731, South African, from colonial Dutch kraal, from Portuguese curral (see
corral).


kraken (n.)

monster of the North Sea, 1755, from Norwegian dialectal krake.


Krakow

city in southern Poland, said to have been named for a supposed founder, Krak.


Kraut (n.)

a German (especially a German soldier), 1841, but popularized during World War I, from German kraut
cabbage, considered a characteristic national dish.


Krebs cycle

1941, named for Sir Hans Adolf Krebs (1900-1981), German-born British biochemist.


Kremlin

1660s, Cremelena, from Old Russian kremlinu, later kremlin (1796), from kreml' citadel, fortress,
perhaps of Tartar origin. Originally the citadel of any Russian city, now especially the one in
Moscow. Used metonymically for government of the U.S.S.R. from 1933. The modern form of the word in
English might be via French.


kriegspiel (n.)

war games played with pieces on maps, 1811 as a German word in English, from German Kriegsspiel,
literally war game, from Krieg war, from Middle High German kriec, combat, mostly exertion, effort;
opposition, enmity, resistance, from Old High German chreg stubbornness, defiance, obstinacy,
perhaps from PIE *gwere- (2) heavy (see grave (adj.)) or cognate with Greek hybris violence (see
hubris; also see war (n.)). For second element, see spiel (n.). Introduced 1870s as officer training
in British army.


krill (n.)

1907, from Norwegian kril small fry of fish.


kris (n.)

short Malay dagger with a wavy blade, 1570s, said to be a Javanese word.


Krishna

eighth avatar of Vishnu, 1875, from Sanskrit krshnah, literally the Black One, from PIE *kers-no-,
suffixed form of root *kers- dark, dirty (cognates: Old Church Slavonic crunu, Russian coron, Serbo-
Croatian crn, Czech cerny, Old Prussian krisnas black, Lithuanian kersas black and white,
variegated).


Kriss Kringle

1830, Christ-kinkle (in a Pennsylvania German context, and as a reminiscence of times past, so
probably at least a generation older in that setting), from German Christkindlein, Christkind'l
Christ child. Properly Baby Jesus, not Santa Claus.


Kristallnacht (n.)

in reference to the pogrom of Nov. 9-10, 1938, in Germany and Austria; from German, literally
crystal night; often translated as Night of Broken Glass.


krone (n.)

name of currency unit and silver coin in Scandinavian countries, 1875, from Danish krone (plural
kroner), Swedish krona (plural kronor), literally crown (see crown). Also the name of a 10-mark gold
piece issued by the German Empire. So called for the devices stamped on them.


kroner (n.)

see krone.


Krugerrand (n.)

also Kruger rand, 1967, South African gold coin (issued for investment purposes) bearing a portrait
of Transvaal President Stephanus Johannes Paulus Kruger (1825-1904); second element is rand, unit of
decimal currency introduced in Republic of South Africa 1961, named for The Rand, gold-mining area
in Transvaal, short for Witwatersrand (see rand).


krummhorn (n.)

also crummhorn, curved wind instrument, 1864, from German, literally crooked horn, from krumm
curved, crooked.


Krupp (n.)

1883, gun made at the armaments works in Essen, Germany, founded by German metallurgist Alfred Krupp
(1812-1887).


krypton (n.)

inert gaseous element, 1898, coined by its discoverers (Sir William Ramsay and Morris W. Travers)
from Greek krypton, neuter of adjective kryptos hidden (see crypt); so called because it was so
difficult to find.


kryptonite (n.)

fictional substance in the Superman series, where it weakens the otherwise invulnerable hero, 1943;
perhaps from elements of krypton (which is a gas) + meteorite.


Ku Klux Klan

1867, American English, Kuklux Klan, a made-up name, supposedly from Greek kyklos circle (see cycle
(n.)) + English clan. Originally an organization of former Confederate officers and soldiers, it was
put down by the U.S. military, 1870s. Revived 1915 as a national racist Protestant fraternal
organization, it grew to prominence but fractured in the 1930s. It had a smaller national revival
1950s as an anti-civil rights group, later with anti-government leanings.


kudos (n.)

fame, renown, 1799, probably originally in university slang, from Greek kydos glory, fame,
especially in battle, literally that which is heard of (see caveat). A singular noun in Greek, but
the final -s often is mistaken as a plural suffix in English, leading to the barbarous back-
formation kudo (attested by 1936).


kudu (n.)

African antelope, 1777, from Xosa-Kaffir iqudu.


kudzu (n.)

1893, from Japanese kuzu. Perennial climbing plant native to Japan and China, introduced in U.S.
southeast as forage (1920s) and to stop soil erosion (1930s) and quickly got out of hand.


kulak (n.)

1877, from Russian kulak (plural kulaki) tight-fisted person, literally fist, from Turki (Turkish)
kul hand.


kultur (n.)

1914, originally, civilization as conceived by the Germans (especially their own), a word from the
First World War and always at first ironic, from German kultur, from Latin cultura (see culture
(n.)).


Kulturkampf (n.)

1879, originally in reference to the struggle between the German government and the Catholic Church
over control of educational and ecclesiastical appointments, 1872-86, German, literally struggle for
culture, from Kultur + Kampf combat, fight, struggle, from Latin campus field, battlefield (see
campus).


kumquat (n.)

1690s, from Chinese (Cantonese) kamkwat, from kam golden + kwat orange. Cantonese dialectal form of
Chinese kin-ku.


kung fu (n.)

1966, from dialectal Chinese kung fu, said to meant literally merit master, but Barnhart has it as
boxing method.


kunst (n.)

a word from German, literally art, originally knowledge, skill, from the root of kennen to know,
k&ouml;nnen know how, be able (see can (v.)).


Kuomintang

1912, Chinese nationalist party founded by Sun Yat-Sen, led after 1925 by Chiang Kai-Shek; from kuo
nation, nationalist + min people + tang party.


Kurd

1610s, the people's self-designation.


kurgan (n.)

1889, from Russian, originally a Tatar word.


Kuwait

Persian Gulf country, named for its capital city (said to have been founded in current form 1705),
which is from Arabic al-kuwayt, diminutive of kut, a word used in southern Iraq and eastern Arabia
for a fortress-like house surrounded by a settlement and protected by encircling water, and said to
be ultimately from Persian. Related: Kuwaiti.


kvass (n.)

Russian fermented drink made from rye or barley, 1550s, from Russian kvas leaven, from Old Church
Slavonic kvasu yeast, cognate with Latin caseus cheese (see cheese (n.1)).


kvetch (v.)

to complain, whine, 1953 (implied in kvetching), from Yiddish kvetshn, literally squeeze, press,
from German quetsche crusher, presser. As a noun, from 1936 as a term of abuse for a person.


kwashiorkor (n.)

1935, from a native name in Ghana for the disease.


kylix (n.)

from Greek kylix cup, cognate with Latin calix, from PIE root *kal- (1) cup (see chalice).


kymatology (n.)

science of waves, from Greek kyma (genitive kymatos) wave + -ology. Related: Kymatological.


Kyoto

city in Japan, from kyo + to, both meaning capital. Founded 794 as Heionkyo Capital of Calm and
Peace, it also has been known as Miyako and Saikyo. Kyoto Protocol so called because it was
initially adopted Dec. 11, 1997, in the Japanese city.


kyphosis (n.)

from Greek kyphos crooked + -osis.


kyrie eleison

early 13c., Greek liturgical formula, adopted untranslated into the Latin mass, literally lord have
mercy (Ps. cxxii:3, Matt. xv:22, xvii:15, etc.). From kyrie, vocative of kyrios lord, master (see
church) + eleeson, aorist imperative of eleo I have pity on, show mercy to, from eleos pity, mercy
(see alms).


