-later

word-forming element meaning worshipper, from Greek -latres worshipper of, related to latreia
worship (see -latry).


-latry

word-forming element meaning worship of, used as an element in native formations from 19c. (such as
bardolatry), from Greek -latreia worship, service paid to the gods, hired labor, related to latron
(n.) pay, hire, latris servant, worshipper, from PIE *le- (1) to get (see larceny).


-less

word-forming element meaning lacking, cannot be, does not, from Old English -leas, from leas free
(from), devoid (of), false, feigned, from Proto-Germanic *lausaz (cognates: Dutch -loos, German -los
-less, Old Norse lauss loose, free, vacant, dissolute, Middle Dutch los, German los loose, free,
Gothic laus empty, vain). Related to loose and lease.


-ling

diminutive word-forming element, early 14c., from Old English -ling a nominal suffix (not originally
diminutive), from Proto-Germanic *-linga-; attested in historical Germanic languages as a simple
suffix, but probably representing a fusion of two suffixes: 1. that represented by English -le
(thimble, handle), from Old English -ol, -ul, -el, representing PIE *-lo- (see -ule); and 2. -ing,
suffix indicating person or thing of a specific kind or origin; in masculine nouns also son of
(farthing, atheling, Old English horing adulterer, fornicator), from PIE *-(i)ko- (see -ic).    Both
these suffixes had occasional diminutive force, but this was only slightly evident in Old English
-ling and its equivalents in Germanic languages except Norse, where it commonly was used as a
diminutive suffix, especially in words designating the young of animals (such as g&aelig;slingr
gosling). Thus it is possible that the diminutive use that developed in Middle English is from Old
Norse.


-lite

word-forming element meaning stone, from French -lite, variant of -lithe, from Greek lithos stone
(see litho-).


-lith

word-forming element meaning stone, rock, from Modern Latin -lithus or French -lithe (see -lith).


-logue

word-forming element meaning one who is immersed in or driven by, mostly from French-derived words,
ultimately from Greek -logos, -logon. Now mostly superseded by -loger, -logist except in ideologue
and a few others. As a combining element meaning kind of discourse, it is from French -logue, from
Greek -logos.


-logy

word-forming element meaning a speaking, discourse, treatise, doctrine, theory, science, from Greek
-logia (often via French -logie or Medieval Latin -logia), from root of legein to speak; thus, the
character or deportment of one who speaks or treats of (a certain subject); see lecture (n.).


-long

adverbial suffix indicating direction, from Old Norse -langr, from langr long (adj.); see long
(adj.). Displaced native -ling.


-ly (1)

suffix forming adjectives from nouns and meaning having qualities of, appropriate to, fitting;
irregularly descended from Old English -lic, from Proto-Germanic *-liko- (Old Frisian -lik, Dutch
-lijk, Old High German -lih, German -lich, Old Norse -ligr), related to *likom- appearance, form
(Old English lich corpse, body; see lich, which is a cognate; see also like (adj.), with which it is
identical).


-ly (2)

adverbial suffix, Middle English, from Old English -lice, from Proto-Germanic *-liko- (cognates: Old
Frisian -like, Old Saxon -liko, Dutch -lijk, Old High German -licho, German -lich, Old Norse -liga,
Gothic -leiko); see -ly (1). Cognate with lich, and identical with like (adj.). Weekley notes as
curious that Germanic uses a word essentially meaning body for the adverbial formation, while
Romanic uses one meaning mind (as in French constamment from Latin constanti mente). The modern
English form emerged in late Middle English, probably from influence of Old Norse -liga.


-lyse

see -lyze.


-lysis

scientific/medical word-forming element meaning loosening, dissolving, dissolution, from Greek lysis
a loosening, setting free, releasing, dissolution, from lyein to unfasten, loose, loosen, untie (see
lose).


-lytic

word-forming element used in making adjectives corresponding to nouns in -lysis, from Greek
-lytikos, from lytikos able to loose, loosing, from lytos loosed, verbal adjective of lyein to
unfasten, loose, loosen, untie (see lose).


-lyze

word-forming element for making verbs corresponding to nouns in -lysis. Chiefly U.S.; the British
preferring -lyse.


L

Roman letter, from Greek lambda, from Semitic lamed. The shape of the Roman letter is an early one
in Greek, adopted before it was superseded in Greek by the inverted form which became the Greek
lambda.


L.A.

abbreviation for Los Angeles, attested from 1949.


L.L.

contraction of Latin legum of laws, in degrees; as in L.L.D., which stands for Legum Doctor Doctor
of Laws. Plural abbreviations in Latin were formed by doubling the letter.


l.s.d.

abbreviation of British currency units, from Latin librae, soldi, denarii, Roman equivalent of
pounds, shillings, pence.


la

musical note (sixth note of the diatonic scale), early 14c., see gamut. It represents the initial
syllable of Latin labii of the lips.


la-di-da

mocking of affected gentility, 1874, in derisive imitation of swell way of talking.


la-la

nonsense refrain in songs, probably from Old English la, a common exclamation; but la-la is
imitative of babbling speech in many languages (compare Greek lalage babble, prattle, Sanskrit
lalalla imitation of stammering Latin lallare to sing to sleep, lull, German lallen to stammer,
Lithuanian laluoti to stammer).


La-Z-Boy

brand of recliner chair, named 1929, Floral City Furniture Co., Monroe, Michigan, U.S. According to
company lore, chosen from names submitted in a contest.


lab (n.)

shortened form of laboratory, 1895.


labefaction (n.)

1610s, process of shaking; downfall, noun of action from Latin labefactus, past participle of
labefacere to cause to totter, shake; overthrow, from labi to slip, slide (see lapse (n.)) + facere
to make, do (see factitious). Related: Labefy.


label (n.)

c.1300, narrow band or strip of cloth (oldest use is as a technical term in heraldry), from Old
French label, lambel ribbon, fringe worn on clothes (13c., Modern French lambeau strip, rag, shred,
tatter), possibly from Frankish *labba or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German lappa
flap), from Proto-Germanic *lapp- (see lap (n.)).    Later dangling strip of cloth or ribbon used as
an ornament in dress, strip attached to a document to hold a seal (both early 15c.), and with a
general meaning tag, sticker, slip of paper (1670s). Meaning circular piece of paper in the center
of a gramophone record (1907), containing information about the recorded music, led to meaning a
recording company (1947).


label (v.)

to affix a label to, c.1600, see label (n.); figurative sense of to categorize is from 1853.
Related: Labeled; labeling; labelled; labelling.


labia (n.)

from Latin labia, plural of labium lip (see lip (n.)). Specifically of the folds on either side of
the vulva from 1630s (labia pudendi).


labia majora (n.)

the outer fold of skin around the vulva, 1813, Modern Latin, literally great lips (see labia). The
singular is labium majus.


labia minora (n.)

inner folds of skin around the vulva, 1781, Modern Latin, literally lesser lips (see labia). The
singular is labium minus.


labial (adj.)

pertaining to the lips, 1590s, from Medieval Latin labialis having to do with the lips, from Latin
labium lip (see lip (n.)). The noun meaning â&euro;&oelig;a labial soundâ&euro;? is from 1660s.
Related: Labially.


labiate (adj.)

having a lip or lip-like part, 1706, from Modern Latin labiatus lipped, from Latin labium lip (see
lip (n.)).


labio-

word-forming element in medical use, taken as a comb. form of Latin labium lip (see lip (n.)).


labium (n.)

1590s, plural labia, from Latin labium lip (see lip (n.)).


labonza (n.)

belly, 1943, American English slang, probably from dialectal pronunciation of Italian la pancia the
belly, from Latin pantex (genitive panticis) belly (see paunch).


labor (n.)

c.1300, a task, a project; later exertion of the body; trouble, difficulty, hardship (late 14c.),
from Old French labor labor, toil, work, exertion, task (12c., Modern French labeur), from Latin
laborem (nominative labor) labor, toil, exertion; hardship, pain, fatigue; a work, a product of
labor, of uncertain origin, perhaps originally from the notion of tottering under a burden, and
related to labere to totter.    Meaning body of laborers considered as a class (usually contrasted
to capitalists) is from 1839. Sense of physical exertions of childbirth is 1590s, earlier labour of
birthe (early 15c.), a sense also found in Old French, and compare French en travail in (childbirth)
suffering (see travail). Labor Day first marked 1882 in New York City.


labor (v.)

late 14c., perform manual or physical work; work hard; keep busy; take pains, strive, endeavor (also
copulate), from Old French laborer work, toil; struggle, have difficulty, from Latin laborare, from
labor (see labor (n.)). The verb in modern French, Spanish, Portuguese means to plow; the wider
sense being taken by the equivalent of English travail. Sense of to endure pain, suffer is early
15c., especially in phrase labor of child. Related: Labored; laboring.


laboratory (n.)

c.1600, building set apart for scientific experiments, from Medieval Latin laboratorium a place for
labor or work, from Latin laboratus, past participle of laborare to work (see labor (n.)).
Figurative use by 1660s.


labored (adj.)

also laboured, learned, mid-15c., past participle adjective from labor (v.). Meaning done with much
labor is from c.1600.


laborer (n.)

mid-14c., manual worker, especially an unskilled one, agent noun from labor (v.). Meaning member of
the working class, member of the lowest social rank is from c.1400.


laborious (adj.)

late 14c., hard-working, industrious, from Old French laborios arduous, wearisome; hard-working
(12c., Modern French laborieux), from Latin laboriosus toilsome, wearisome, troublesome, from labor
(see labor (n.)). Meaning costing much labor, burdensome is from early 15c.; meaning resulting from
hard work is mid-15c. Related: Laboriousness.


laboriously (adv.)

early 15c., with difficulty, laboriously, slowly, from laborious + -ly (2). Meaning earnestly,
strongly is from c.1500.


labour

chiefly British English spelling of labor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or. As short for the British
Labour Party it is from 1906.


labourer (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of laborer; for suffix, see -or.


Labrador

large province of eastern Canada, probably from Portuguese lavrador landholder, perhaps in reference
to 15c. Portuguese explorer Joao Fernandes, a landholder in the Azores. The name was first applied
to Greenland. The breed of retriever dog so called from 1815. Related: Labradorian.


labret (n.)

ornament inserted into a lip, 1843 (first reference is to Eskimo men), from Latin labrum lip (see
labrum) + -et, as in anklet, bracelet, etc.


labrum (n.)

lip or lip-like part, 1816, in various anatomical and zoological uses, from Latin labrum, cognate
with labium lip (see lip (n.)). Also noted mid-15c. as the name of some herb.


laburnum (n.)

1570s, from Latin laburnum (Pliny), of unknown origin; perhaps from Etruscan.


labyrinth (n.)

c.1400, laberynthe (late 14c. in Latinate form laborintus) labyrinth, maze, figuratively bewildering
arguments, from Latin labyrinthus, from Greek labyrinthos maze, large building with intricate
passages, especially the structure built by Daedelus to hold the Minotaur near Knossos in Crete,
from a pre-Greek language; perhaps related to Lydian labrys double-edged axe, symbol of royal power,
which fits with the theory that the labyrinth was originally the royal Minoan palace on Crete and
meant palace of the double-axe. Used in English for maze early 15c., and in figurative sense of
confusing state of affairs (1540s).


labyrinthine (adj.)

1630s; see labyrinth + -ine (1). Earlier adjective forms were labyrinthian (1580s); labyrinthial
(1540s).


lac (n.)

red resinous substance, 1550s (perhaps via Middle French lacce), earlier lacca (early 15c., from
Medieval Latin form lacca), from Persian lak, from Hindi lakh (Prakrit lakkha), from Sanskrit laksha
red dye, of uncertain origin. According to Klein, literally one hundred thousand, in reference to
the insects that gather in great numbers on the trees and make the resin run out. But others say
lakh is an alteration of Sanskrit rakh, from an IE root word for color, dye [Watkins]. Still another
guess is that Sanskrit laksha is related to English lax, lox salmon, and the substance was perhaps
originally so called from being somewhat the color of salmon [Barnhart].


lace (n.)

early 13c., laz, cord made of braided or interwoven strands of silk, etc., from Old French laz a
net, noose, string, cord, snare (Modern French lacs), from Vulgar Latin *lacium, from Latin laqueum
(nominative laqueus) noose, snare (source also of Italian laccio, Spanish lazo), a trapping and
hunting term, probably from Italic base *laq- to ensnare (compare Latin lacere to entice). Later
also net, noose, snare (c.1300); and piece of cord used to draw together the edges of slits or
openings in an article of clothing (late 14c., as in shoelace). The ornamental net pattern meaning
is first recorded 1550s. As an adjective, lace-curtain middle class (or lower-class with middle-
class pretensions), usually is used in reference to Irish-Americans, is attested by 1928.


lace (v.)

c.1200, fasten (clothing, etc.) with laces and ties, from Old French lacier, from laz (see lace
(n.)). Also tighten (a garment) by pulling its laces (early 14c.). To lace coffee, etc., with a dash
of liquor (1670s) originally was used of sugar, and comes via the notion of to ornament or trim.
Related: Laced; lacing. Laced mutton was an old word for a whore [Johnson].


lace-up (adj.)

1831, originally of boots, from the verbal phrase, from lace (v.) + up (adv.).


Lacedaemonian (adj.)

1780, from Latin Lacedaemonius, from Greek Lakedaimonios, from Lakedaimon, an ancient Greek name for
Sparta and the district around it.


lacerate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin laceratus, past participle of lacerare tear to pieces, mangle, figuratively,
to slander, censure, abuse, from lacer torn, mangled, from PIE root *lek- to rend, tear (cognates:
Greek lakis tatter, rag, lakizein to tear to pieces; Russian lochma rag, tatter, scrap; Albanian
l'akur naked). Related: Lacerated; lacerating.


laceration (n.)

1590s, from Middle French lac&eacute;ration, from Latin lacerationem (nominative laceratio), noun of
action from past participle stem of lacerare (see lacerate).


lacey

see lacy.


laches (n.)

negligence in performance of legal dute, 1570s, earlier simply slackness, negligence, want of zeal
(late 14c.), from Anglo-French laches, Old French lachesse, from Old French lasche (Modern French
l&acirc;che), verbal adjective from lascher, from Vulgar Latin *lascare, classical laxare, from
laxus (see loose). Compare riches.


lachrymal (adj.)

also lachrimal, early 15c., from Medieval Latin lacrimalis, from Latin lacrima (see lachrymose).


lachrymose (adj.)

1660s, tear-like, from Latin lacrimosus tearful, sorrowful, weeping, also causing tears, lamentable,
from lacrima tear, a dialect-altered borrowing of Greek dakryma tear, from dakryein to shed tears,
from dakry tear, from PIE *dakru- (see tear (n.1)). Meaning given to tears, tearful is first
attested 1727; meaning of a mournful character is from 1822.    The -d- to -l- alteration in Latin
is the so-called Sabine -L-; compare Latin olere smell, from root of odor, and Ulixes, the Latin
form of Greek Odysseus. The Medieval Latin practice of writing -ch- for -c- before Latin -r- also
altered anchor, pulchritude, sepulchre. The -y- is pedantic, from belief in a Greek origin. Middle
English had lacrymable tearful (mid-15c.).


lack (n.)

c.1300, absence, want; shortage, deficiency, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English *lac, or else
borrowed from Middle Dutch lak deficiency, fault; in either case from Proto-Germanic *laka-
(cognates: Old Frisian lek disadvantage, damage, Old Norse lakr lacking), from PIE *leg- to dribble,
trickle (see leak (v.)). Middle English also had lackless without blame or fault.


lack (v.)

late 12c., perhaps from Middle Dutch laken to be wanting, from lak (n.) deficiency, fault, or an
unrecorded native cognate word (see lack (n.)). Related: Lacked; lacking.


lackadaisical (adj.)

1768 (Sterne), from interjection lackadaisy alas, alack (1748), an alteration of lack-a-day (1690s),
from alack the day (1590s). Hence, given to crying 'lack-a-day,' vapidly sentimental. Sense probably
altered by influence of lax. Related: Lackadaisically.


lackey (n.)

1520s, footman, running footman, valet, from Middle French laquais foot soldier, footman, servant
(15c.), of unknown origin; perhaps from Old Proven&ccedil;al lacai, from lecai glutton, covetous,
from lecar to lick. Alternative etymology is via French from Catalan alacay, from Arabic al-qadi the
judge. Yet another guess traces it through Spanish lacayo, from Italian lacch&egrave;, from Modern
Greek oulakes, from Turkish ulak runner, courier. This suits the original sense better, but OED says
Italian lacch&egrave; is from French. Sense of servile follower appeared 1580s. As a political term
of abuse it dates from 1939 in communist jargon.


lackluster (adj.)

also lack-luster, c.1600, first attested in As You Like It, from lack + luster. Combinations with
lack- were frequent in 16c., such as lackland (1590s), of a landless man; lack-Latin (1530s), of an
ignorant priest.


lacklustre (adj.)

chiefly British English spelling of lackluster (q.v.); for spelling, see -re.


laconic (adj.)

concise, abrupt, 1580s, probably via Latin Laconicus, from Greek Lakonikos, from Lakon person from
Lakonia, the district around Sparta in southern Greece in ancient times, whose inhabitants were
famously proud of their brevity of speech. When Philip of Macedon threatened them with, If I enter
Laconia, I will raze Sparta to the ground, the Spartans' reply was, If. An earlier form was
laconical (1570s). Related: Laconically.


Lacoste

Paris-based high-end apparel company, founded 1933, named for Ren&eacute; Lacoste (1904-1996),
company co-founder.


lacquer (n.)

1570s as dye obtained from lac; 1670s as lacquer, from obsolete French lacre, name for a kind of
sealing wax, from Portuguese lacre, unexplained variant of lacca resinous substance, from Arabic
lakk, from Persian lak (see lac).


lacquer (v.)

cover or coat with laqueur, 1680s, from lacquer (n.). Related: Lacquered; lacquering.


lacrosse (n.)

1718, American English, from Canadian French jeu de la crosse game of the hooked sticks, from crosse
hooked stick, which is used to throw the ball, from Proto-Germanic *kruk- (see crook). Originally a
North American Indian game. The native name is represented by Ojibwa (Algonquian) baaga'adowe to
play lacrosse.


lactate (v.)

secrete milk from the breasts, 1889, probably a back-formation from lactation. Related: Lactated;
lactating.


lactate (n.)

1794, from stem of lactic + -ate (1).


lactation (n.)

1660s, process of suckling an infant, from French lactation, from Late Latin lactationem (nominative
lactatio) a suckling, noun of action from past participle stem of lactare suckle, from lac (genitive
lactis) milk, from PIE root *glakt- (cognates: Greek gala, genitive galaktos, milk), which, along
with *melg- (see milk (n.)), accounts for words for milk in most Indo-European languages (the
absence of a common word for it is considered a mystery). Meaning process of secreting milk from the
breasts first recorded 1857. Middle Irish lacht, Welsh llaeth milk are loan words from Latin.


lacteal (adj.)

1650s, formed in English from Latin lacteus, from lac (genitive lactis) milk, from PIE root *glakt-
(see lactation) + -al (1).


lactic (adj.)

pertaining to milk, 1790 (in lactic acid; so called because it was obtained from sour milk), from
French lactique, from Latin lactis, genitive of lac milk (see lactation) + French -ique.


lacto-

before vowels, lac-, word-forming element meaning milk, from Latin lac (genitive lactis) milk, from
PIE root *glakt- (see lactation).


lactose (n.)

sugar from milk, 1858, from French, coined by French chemist Marcelin-Pierre-Eug&egrave;ne Berthelot
(1827-1907) from Latin lac (genitive lactis) milk (see lactation) + chemical suffix -ose (2).


lacuna (n.)

blank or missing portion in a manuscript, 1660s, from Latin lacuna hole, pit, diminutive of lacus
pond, lake (see lake (n.1)). The Latin plural is lacunae. Related: Lacunal; lacunar; lacunose.


lacunae

plural of lacuna (q.v.).


lacy (adj.)

1804, from lace (n.) in the decorative sense + -y (2).


lad (n.)

c.1300, ladde foot soldier, also young male servant (attested as a surname from late 12c.), possibly
from a Scandinavian language (compare Norwegian -ladd, in compounds for young man), but of obscure
origin in any case. OED hazards a guess on Middle English ladde, plural of the past participle of
lead (v.), thus one who is led (by a lord). Liberman derives it from Old Norse ladd hose; woolen
stocking. The development must have been from 'stocking,' 'foolish youth' to 'youngster of inferior
status' and (with an ameliorated meaning) to 'young fellow.' He adds, Words for socks, stockings,
and shoes seem to have been current as terms of abuse for and nicknames of fools. Meaning boy,
youth, young man is from mid-15c. Scottish form laddie, a term of endearment, attested from 1540s.


ladder (n.)

Old English hl&aelig;der ladder, steps, from Proto-Germanic *khlaidri (cognates: Old Frisian
hledere, Middle Dutch ledere, Old High German leitara, German Leiter), from PIE root *klei- to lean
(cognates: Greek klimax ladder; see lean (v.)). In late Old English, rungs were
l&aelig;ddrest&aelig;f&aelig; and the side pieces were ledder steles. The belief that walking under
one brings bad luck is attested from 1787, but its origin likely is more pragmatic than symbolic.
Ladder-back (adj.) as a type of chair is from 1898.


lade (v.)

Old English hladan (past tense hlod, past participle gehladen) to load, heap (the general Germanic
sense), also to draw water (a meaning peculiar to English), from Proto-Germanic *khlad- (cognates:
Old Norse hla&eth;a, Old Saxon hladan, Middle Dutch and Dutch laden, Old Frisian hlada to load, Old
High German hladen, German laden), from PIE *kla- to spread out flat (cognates: Lithuanian kloti to
spread, Old Church Slavonic klado to set, place).


laden (adj.)

loaded, weighted down, 1590s, from the original past participle of lade.


ladies (n.)

plural of lady (q.v.).


Ladin (n.)

Rhaeto-Romanic dialect spoken in Switzerland and Tyrol, 1873, from Latin Latinus Latin (see Latin
(adj.)).


lading (n.)

act of loading a boat, early 15c., verbal noun from lade (v.).


Ladino (n.)

1889, Spanish mixed with Hebrew, Arabic, and other elements, written in Hebrew characters, spoken by
Sephardim in Turkey, Greece, etc. From Spanish Ladino sagacious, cunning crafty, originally knowing
Latin, Latin, from Latin Latinus. The Spanish word also has appeared in 19c. American English in its
senses vicious horse and, in Central America, mestizo, white person.


ladle (n.)

large, long-handled spoon for drawing liquids, Old English hl&aelig;del ladle, from hladan to load
(see lade) + -le, suffix expressing appliance, tool (compare shovel, handle, thimble). The verb is
first recorded 1520s, from the noun. Related: Ladled; ladling.


lady (n.)

c.1200, lafdi, lavede, from Old English hl&aelig;fdige mistress of a household, wife of a lord,
literally one who kneads bread, from hlaf bread (see loaf) + -dige maid, related to d&aelig;ge maker
of dough (see dey (n.1); also compare lord (n.)). The medial -f- disappeared 14c. Not found outside
English except where borrowed from it.    Sense of woman of superior position in society is c.1200;
woman whose manners and sensibilities befit her for high rank in society is from 1861 (ladylike in
this sense is from 1580s, and ladily from c.1400). Meaning woman as an object of chivalrous love is
from early 14c. Used commonly as an address to any woman since 1890s. Applied in Old English to the
Holy Virgin, hence many extended usages in plant names, place names, etc., from genitive singular
hl&aelig;fdigan, which in Middle English merged with the nominative, so that lady- often represents
(Our) Lady's, as in ladybug. Ladies' man first recorded 1784. Lady of pleasure recorded from 1640s.


ladybird (n.)

sweetheart, 1590s, from lady + bird (n.2).


ladybug (n.)

1690s, from lady + bug (n.). The lady is the Virgin Mary (compare German cognate Marienk&auml;fer).
In Britain, now usually ladybird beetle (1704), through aversion to the word bug, which there has
overtones of sodomy.


ladylike (adj.)

also lady-like, 1580s; see lady + like (adj.). Middle English had ladily queenly, exalted (late
14c.).


Laertes

king of Ithaca, father of Odysseus, Greek, literally gatherer of the people, from laos people (see
lay (adj.)) + eirein to fasten together (see series (n.)).


lag (v.)

fail to keep pace, 1520s, earlier as a noun meaning last person (1510s), later also as an adjective
(1550s, as in lag-mon last man), all of uncertain relationship, possibly from a Scandinavian source
(compare Norwegian lagga go slowly), or some dialectal version of last, lack, or delay. Related:
Lag; lagging. The noun meaning retardation is from 1855. First record of lag time is from 1951.


lager (n.)

1858, American English, short for lager beer (1845), from German Lagerbier beer brewed for keeping
some months before being drunk, from Lager storehouse (see lair) + Bier beer.


laggard

1702 (adj.), from lag (v.) + -ard. From 1757 as a noun.


lagniappe (n.)

dividend, something extra, 1849, from New Orleans creole, of unknown origin though much speculated
upon. Originally a bit of something given by New Orleans shopkeepers to customers. Said to be from
American Spanish la &ntilde;apa the gift. Klein says this is in turn from Quechua yapa something
added, gift.We picked up one excellent word -- a word worth travelling to New Orleans to get; a
nice, limber, expressive, handy word -- 'lagniappe.' They pronounce it lanny-yap. It is Spanish --
so they said. [Mark Twain, Life on the Mississippi]


lagoon (n.)

1670s, lagune, earlier laguna (1610s), from French lagune or directly from Italian laguna pond,
lake, from Latin lacuna pond, hole, from lacus pond (see lake (n.1)). Originally in reference to the
region of Venice; applied 1769 (by Capt. Cook) to the lake-like stretch of water enclosed in a South
Seas atoll. Also see -oon.


lai

see lay (n.).


laic (adj.)

1560s, from French la&#239;que (16c.), from Late Latin laicus, from Greek laikos of or belonging to
the people, from laos people (see lay (adj.)).


laid

past tense and past participle of lay (v.). Laid-up injured, sick, originally was a nautical term
(1769) describing a ship moored in harbor. Laid off temporarily unemployed is from 1916. Get laid
have sex (with someone) attested from 1952, U.S. slang. Laid-back relaxed is first attested 1973,
perhaps in reference to the posture of highway motorcyclists. Laid up incapacitated originally was
of ships.


laidly (adj.)

c.1300, Scottish and northern English variant of loathly hideous, repulsive (see loath).


lain

past participle of lie (v.2).


lair (n.)

Old English leger bed, couch, grave; act or place of lying down, from Proto-Germanic *legraz
(cognates: Old Norse legr grave, also nuptials (a lying down); Old Frisian leger situation, Old
Saxon legar bed, Middle Dutch legher act or place of lying down, Dutch leger bed, camp, Old High
German legar bed, a lying down, German Lager bed, lair, camp, storehouse, Gothic ligrs place of
lying), from PIE *legh- to lie, lay (see lie (v.2)). Meaning animal's den is from early 15c.


laird (n.)

mid-15c. (mid-13c. as a surname), Scottish and northern England dialectal variant of lord, from
Middle English laverd (see lord). Related: Lairdship.


laissez-faire

laissez faire, 1822, French, literally let (people) do (as they think best), from laissez,
imperative of laisser to let, to leave (from Latin laxare, from laxus loose; see lax) + faire to do
(from Latin facere; see factitious). From the phrase laissez faire et laissez passer, motto of
certain 18c. French economists, chosen to express the ideal of government non-interference in
business and industry.


laity (n.)

body of people not in religious orders, early 15c., from Anglo-French laite, from lay (adj.) + -ity.


lake (n.1)

body of water, early 12c., from Old French lack and directly from Latin lacus pond, lake, also
basin, tank, related to lacuna hole, pit, from PIE *laku- (cognates: Greek lakkos pit, tank, pond,
Old Church Slavonic loky pool, puddle, cistern, Old Irish loch lake, pond). The common notion is
basin. There was a Germanic form of the word, which yielded cognate Old Norse l&ouml;gr sea flood,
water, Old English lacu stream, lagu sea flood, water, leccan to moisten (see leak (v.)). In Middle
English, lake, as a descendant of the Old English word, also could mean stream; river gully; ditch;
marsh; grave; pit of hell, and this might have influenced the form of the borrowed word. The North
American Great Lakes so called from 1660s.


lake (n.2)

deep red coloring matter, 1610s, from French laque (see lac), from which it was obtained.


laker (n.)

used of people or things associated in various ways with a lake or lakes, including tourists to the
English Lake country (1798); the poets (Wordsworth, etc.) who settled in that region (1814); boats
on the North American Great Lakes (1887), and a person whose work is on lakes (1838); see lake
(n.1). The U.S. professional basketball team began 1947 as the Minneapolis Lakers, where the name
was appropriate; before the 1960-1 season it moved to Los Angeles, but the name was kept.


Lakshmi

Hindu goddess of beauty, from Sanskrit lakshmi mark, fortue, riches, beauty.


lallygag (v.)

1862; see lollygag. Related: Lallygagged; lallygagging.


lam (n.)

flight, as in on the lam, 1897, from a U.S. slang verb meaning to run off (1886), of uncertain
origin, perhaps somehow from the first element of lambaste, which was used in British student slang
for beat since 1590s; if so, it would give the word the same etymological sense as the slang
expression beat it.


lama (n.)

Buddhist priest of Mongolia or Tibet, 1650s, from Tibetan blama chief, high priest, with silent b-.
Related: Lamasery.


Lamarckian (adj.)

1846, pertaining to French botanist and zoologist J.B.P. Lamarck (1744-1829), especially his view
that the process of evolution includes the inheritance of acquired characteristics.


Lamaze

childbirth technique, developed 1940s by French obstetrician Dr. Fernand Lamaze (1891-1957) and
named for him.


lamb (n.)

Old English lamb lamb, from Proto-Germanic *lambaz (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian, Gothic lamb,
Middle Dutch, Dutch lam, Middle High German lamp, German Lamm lamb). Common to the Germanic
languages, but with no certain cognates outside them. Old English plural was lomberu. Applied to
persons (especially young Church members, gentle souls, etc.) from late Old English. Also sometimes
used ironically for cruel or rough characters (such as Kirke's Lambs in wars of 1684-86).
Lamb's-wool (adj.) is from 1550s.


lambada (n.)

sensual Brazilian dance, 1988, from Portuguese, said in some sources to be literally a beating, a
lashing. But others connect it ultimately to Latin lumbus loin.


lambaste (v.)

1630s, from lam (1590s, ultimately from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse lemja to beat, to
lame) + baste to thrash (see baste). Related: Lambasted; lambasting.


lambda (n.)

Greek letter name, from a Semitic source akin to Hebrew lamedh.


lambency (n.)

1817, from lambent + -cy.


lambent (adj.)

1640s, from figurative use of Latin lambentem (nominative lambens), present participle of lambere to
lick, from PIE root *lab-, indicative of smacking lips or licking (cognates: Greek laptein to sip,
lick, Old English lapian to lick, lap up, suck; see lap (v.1)).


Lambert

masc. proper name, from French, from German Lambert, from Old High German Lambreht, from lant land +
beraht bright. Old English cognate was Landbeorht. The popularity of the name from 12c. is probably
due to immigration from Flanders, where St. Lambert of Maestricht was highly venerated. Attested as
a surname from mid-12c.


Lambeth

used metonymically for Church of England, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1859, from the archbishop's
palace in Lambeth, a South London borough. The Lambeth Walk was a Cockney song and dance,
popularized in Britain 1937 in the revue Me and my Gal, named for a street in the borough. The place
name is Old English lambehy&eth;e, place where lambs are embarked or landed.


lambic (n.)

strong Belgian beer, 1829, related to French alambic a still (see alembic).


lambkin (n.)

mid-13c., as a surname, from lamb + diminutive suffix -kin.


lambskin (n.)

mid-14c., from lamb + skin (n.).


lame (n.)

silk interwoven with metallic threads, 1922, from French lame, earlier thin metal plate (especially
in armor), gold wire; blade; wave (of the sea), from Middle French lame, from Latin lamina, lamna
thin piece or flake of metal.


lame (adj.)

Old English lama crippled, lame; paralytic, weak, from Proto-Germanic *lamon (cognates: Old Norse
lami, Dutch and Old Frisian lam, German lahm lame), weak-limbed, literally broken, from PIE root
*lem- to break; broken, with derivatives meaning crippled (cognates: Old Church Slavonic lomiti to
break, Lithuanian luomas lame). In Middle English, crippled in the feet, but also crippled in the
hands; disabled by disease; maimed. Sense of socially awkward is attested from 1942. Noun meaning
crippled persons collectively is in late Old English.


lame (v.)

to make lame, c.1300, from lame (adj.). Related: Lamed; laming.


lame duck (n.)

1761, any disabled person or thing; especially Stock Exchange slang for defaulter.    A lame duck is
a man who cannot pay his differences, and is said to waddle off. [Thomas Love Peacock, Gryll Grange,
1861]    Sometimes also in naval use for an old, slow ship. Modern sense of public official serving
out term after an election is recorded by 1878 in American English, from an anecdote published in
that year of President Lincoln, who is alleged to have said, [A] senator or representative out of
business is a sort of lame duck. He has to be provided for.


lame-brain (n.)

1921, from lame (adj.) + brain (n.).


lamely (adv.)

1590s, from lame (adj.) + -ly (2).


lameness (n.)

1520s, from lame (adj.) + -ness.


lament (v.)

mid-15c., back-formation from lamentation or else from Middle French lamenter to moan, bewail (14c.)
and directly from Latin lamentari, from lamentum (see lamentation). Related: Lamented; lamenting.


lament (n.)

1590s, from Middle French lament and directly from Latin lamentum (see lamentation).


lamentable (adj.)

c.1400, from Middle French lamentable and directly from Latin lamentabilis full of sorrow, mournful,
lamentable, from lamentari to lament (see lamentation). Related: Lamentably.


lamentation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French lamentacion and directly from Latin lamentationem (nominative lamentatio)
wailing, moaning, weeping, noun of action from past participle stem of lamentari to wail, moan,
weep, lament, from lamentum a wailing, from PIE root *la- to shout, cry, probably ultimately
imitative. Replaced Old English cwi&thorn;an.


Lamentations (n.)

Biblical book, late 14c., short for Lamentations of Jeremiah, from Latin Lamentationes, translating
Greek Threnoi (see lamentation).


lamented (adj.)

mourned for, 1610, from past participle of lament (v.).


lamia (n.)

late 14c., from Latin lamia, from Greek lamia female vampire, literally swallower, lecher, from
laimos throat, gullet. Probably cognate with Latin lemures spirits of the dead (see lemur). Used in
early translations of the Bible for screech owls and sea monsters. Sometimes also, apparently,
mermaids.    Also kynde erre&thorn; in som beestes wondirliche j-schape, as it fare&thorn; in a
beest &thorn;at hatte lamia, &thorn;at ha&thorn; an heed as a mayde &amp; body as a grym fissche[;]
whan &thorn;at best lamya may fynde ony man, first a flatere&thorn; wi&thorn; hym with a wommannes
face and make&thorn; hym ligge by here while he may dure, &amp; whanne he may nofer&thorn;ere
suffice to here lecherye &thorn;anne he rende&thorn; hym and sle&thorn; and ete&thorn; hym. [John of
Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


laminate (v.)

1660s, to beat or roll into thin plates, from Latin lamina thin piece of metal or wood, thin slice,
plate, leaf, layer, of unknown origin. Many modern senses are from the noun meaning an artificial
thin layer (1939), especially a type of plastic adhesive. Related: Laminated; laminating.


lamination (n.)

any layer of laminated substance, 1670s, noun of state from laminate. Meaning process of
manufacturing laminated products is from 1945.


Lammas (n.)

Aug. 1 harvest festival with consecration of loaves, Old English hlafm&aelig;sse, literally loaf
mass, from hlaf (see loaf (n.)) + m&aelig;sse (see mass (n.2)). Altered by influence of lamb (and
occasionally spelled lamb- in 16c.-17c.).


lamp (n.)

c.1200, from Old French lampe lamp, lights (12c.), from Latin lampas a light, torch, flambeau, from
Greek lampas torch, lamp, beacon, meteor, light, from lampein to shine, from nasalized form of PIE
root *lap- to shine (cognates: Lithuanian lope light, Old Irish lassar flame). Replaced Old English
leohtf&aelig;t light vessel. To smell of the lamp be a product of laborious night study is from
1570s.


lamp-black (n.)

pigment made from pure, fine carbon, originally from the soot produced by burning oil in lamps,
1590s, see lamp.


lamp-post (n.)

also lamppost, 1731, from lamp + post (n.1).


lamp-shade (n.)

also lampshade, 1829, from lamp + shade (n.).


lamplight (n.)

also lamp-light, late 14c., from lamp + light (n.).


lampoon (v.)

1650s, from lampoon (n.), or else from French lamponner, from the Middle French noun. Related:
Lampooned; lampooning.


lampoon (n.)

A personal satire; abuse; censure written not to reform but to vex [Johnson], 1640s, from French
lampon (17c.), of unknown origin, said by French etymologists to be from lampons let us drink,
popular refrain for scurrilous 17c. songs, from lamper to drink, guzzle, a nasalized form of laper
to lap, from a Germanic source akin to lap (v.). Also see -oon.


lamprey (n.)

c.1300 (c.1200 as a surname?), from Old French lamproie, from Medieval Latin lampreda, from Late
Latin lampetra lamprey, of uncertain origin, usually explained as literally lick-rock, from Latin
lambere to lick (see lap (v.1)) + petra rock (see petrous). The animals attach themselves to things
with their sucker-like mouths.


Lancaster

Loncastre (1086) Roman Fort on the River Lune, a Celtic river name probably meaning healthy, pure.
The Lancastrians in the War of the Roses took their name from their descent from John of Gaunt, Duke
of Lancaster.


lance (n.)

late 13c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French lance (12c.), from Latin lancea light spear,
Spanish lance (Italian lancia, Spanish lanza), possibly of Celt-Iberian origin. The French word
spread into Germanic (German Lanze, Middle Dutch lanse, Dutch lans, Danish landse). Lance corporal
(1786) is from obsolete lancepesade officer of lowest rank (1570s), from Old Italian lancia spezzata
old soldier, literally broken lance.


lance (v.)

to pierce with a lance, c.1300, from Old French lancier, from Late Latin lanceare wield a lance;
pierce with a lance, from lancea (see lance (n.)). The surgical sense (properly with reference to a
lancet) is from late 15c. Related: Lanced; lancing.


Lancelot

masc. proper name, Old French, a double-diminutive of Frankish Lanzo, a hypocoristic name formed
from some one of the Germanic names in Land-; compare Old English Landbeorht land-bright, in Old
French Lambert.


lancer (n.)

1580s, soldier armed with a lance, from French lancier, from Old French lance (see lance (n.)).


lancet (n.)

late 14c., launcet, from Old French lancette small lance (12c.), diminutive of lance (see lance
(n.)).


land (n.)

Old English land, lond, ground, soil, also definite portion of the earth's surface, home region of a
person or a people, territory marked by political boundaries, from Proto-Germanic *landom (cognates:
Old Norse, Old Frisian Dutch, German, Gothic land), from PIE *lendh- land, heath (cognates: Old
Irish land, Middle Welsh llan an open space, Welsh llan enclosure, church, Breton lann heath, source
of French lande; Old Church Slavonic ledina waste land, heath, Czech lada fallow land).
Etymological evidence and Gothic use indicates the original sense was a definite portion of the
earth's surface owned by an individual or home of a nation. Meaning early extended to solid surface
of the earth, which had been the sense of the root of Modern English earth. Original sense of land
in English is now mostly found under country. To take the lay of the land is a nautical expression.
In the American English exclamation land's sakes (1846) land is a euphemism for Lord.


land (v.1)

to bring to land, early 13c., from land (n.). Originally of ships; of fish, in the angling sense,
from 1610s; hence figurative sense of to obtain (a job, etc.), first recorded 1854. Of aircraft,
attested from 1916. Related: Landed; landing.


land (v.2)

to make contact, to hit home (of a blow, etc.), by 1881, perhaps altered from lend in a playful
sense, or else an extension of land (v.1).


landau (n.)

type of four-wheeled carriage, 1743, from Landau, town in Bavaria where they first were made. The
first element is the common Germanic element found in English land (n.); the identity of the second
is disputed. But Klein says the vehicle name is in reality Spanish lando originally a light four-
wheeled carriage drawn by mules, from Arabic al-andul.


landed (adj.)

possessed of land, late Old English gelandod; see land (n.).


landfall (n.)

sighting of land, 1620s, also the first land 'made' on a sea voyage; from land (v.1) + fall (v.) in
the sense of happen. From the days of imprecise nautical navigation.   Land-fall. The first land
discovered after a sea voyage. Thus a good land fall implies the land expected or desired; a bad
landfall the reverse. [John Hamilton Moore, The New Practical Navigator, London, 1814]    Of
hurricanes, by 1932.


landfill (n.)

1916, from land (n.) + fill (n.). A euphemism for dump.


landform (n.)

1893; see land (n.) + form (n.). Perhaps immediately from German Landform.


landing (n.)

c.1600, place for boats; of stairs, first attested 1789; from present participle of land (v.1).


landlady (n.)

1520s, from land (n.) + lady.


landline (n.)

also land-line, by 1861, originally a telegraph wire run over land (as opposed to under sea); from
land (n.) + line (n.). In modern use (by 1965), a telephone line which uses wire or some other
material (distinguished from a radio or cellular line).


landlocked (adj.)

1620s, from land (n.) + past participle of lock (v.).


landlord (n.)

early 15c. in modern usage, from land (n.) + lord (n.).


landlubber (n.)

also land-lubber, sailor's term of contempt for a landsman, c.1700, from land (n.) + lubber (q.v.).


landmark (n.)

Old English landmearc, from land (n.) + mearc (see mark (n.1)). Originally object set up to mark the
boundaries of a kingdom, estate, etc.; general sense of conspicuous object in a landscape is from
1560s. Modern figurative sense of event, etc., considered a high point in history is from 1859.


landscape (n.)

c.1600, painting representing natural scenery, from Dutch landschap, from Middle Dutch landscap
region, from land land (see land) + -scap -ship, condition (see -ship). Originally introduced as a
painters' term. Old English had cognate landscipe, and compare similarly formed Old High German
lantscaf, German Landschaft, Old Norse landskapr. Meaning tract of land with its distinguishing
characteristics is from 1886.


landscape (v.)

 to lay out lawns, gardens, etc., plant trees for the sake of beautification, by 1916, from
landscape (n). Related: Landscaped; landscaping.


landscaping (n.)

by 1861; see landscape (v.).    The question, however, is, Can landscape-gardening (or short and
sweet, landscaping) be taught? It, plainly, cannot. [The Gardener's Monthly July 1861]    Also of
artists, depiction as a landscape (1868).


landslide (n.)

1856, American English, from land (n.) + slide (n.). Earlier was landslip, still preferred in
Britain. Old English used eor&eth;gebyrst in this sense; literally earth-burst. In the political
sense, landslide lopsided electoral victory is attested from 1888.


landslip (n.)

1670s, from land (n.) + slip (n.).


landwehr (n.)

German military reserves, from German Landwehr, from Old High German lantweri, from lant land (see
land (n.)) + weri protection (see weir).


lane (n.)

Old English lane, lanu narrow hedged-in road, common Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian lana, Middle
Dutch lane, Dutch laan lane, Old Norse l&ouml;n row of houses), of unknown origin. As one track of a
marked road, from 1921, American English.


lang syne

c.1500, Scottish variant of long since; popularized in Burns' song, 1788.


language (n.)

late 13c., langage words, what is said, conversation, talk, from Old French langage (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *linguaticum, from Latin lingua tongue, also speech, language (see lingual). The form
with -u- developed in Anglo-French. Meaning a language is from c.1300, also used in Middle English
of dialects:    Mercii, &thorn;at bee&thorn; men of myddel Engelond[,] vnderstonde&thorn; bettre
&thorn;e side langages, nor&thorn;erne and sou&thorn;erne, &thorn;an nor&thorn;erne and
sou&thorn;erne vnderstonde&thorn; ei&thorn;er o&thorn;er. [John of Trevisa, translation of
Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]   <hr />   In o&thorn;ir inglis was it
drawin, And turnid ic haue it til ur awin Language of the nor&thorn;in lede, &THORN;at can na
no&thorn;ir inglis rede. [Cursor Mundi, early 14c.]   Language barrier attested from 1933.


languedoc (n.)

language of medieval France south of the Loire, 1660s, from French langue d'oc speech of the south
of France, literally the language of 'yes,'  from oc the word used for yes in southern France, from
Latin hoc this; as opposed to langue d'o&#239;l, from the way of saying yes in the north of France
(Modern French oui); each from a different word in Latin phrase hoc ille (fecit) this he (did). The
langue d'o&#239;l has developed into standard Modern French.


languet (n.)

early 15c., literally little tongue, from French languette, diminutive of langue tongue, from Latin
lingua (see lingual).


languid (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French languide (16c.) and directly from Latin languidus faint, listless, from
languere be weak or faint, from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack (see lax). Related: Languidly;
languidness.


languish (v.)

early 14c., fail in strength, exhibit signs of approaching death, from languiss-, present participle
stem of Old French languir be listless, pine, grieve, fall ill, from Vulgar Latin *languire, from
Latin languere be weak or faint (see lax). Weaker sense be lovesick, grieve, lament, grow faint, is
from mid-14c. Related: Languished; languishing.


languor (n.)

c.1300, disease, distress, mental suffering, from Old French langor sickness, weakness (Modern
French langueur), from Latin languorem (nominative languor) faintness, feebleness, lassitude, from
languere be weak or faint (see lax). Sense shifted to faintness, weariness (1650s) and habitual want
of energy (1825).


languorous (adj.)

late 15c., mournful, from Old French langoros (11c.), from langor (see languor). Meaning suggestive
of languor is from 1821. Related: Languorously; languorousness.


Lanier

surname, from Old French lainier wool-monger, from Latin lana wool (see wool).


lank (adj.)

Old English hlanc loose and empty, slender, flaccid, from Proto-Germanic *khlankaz, perhaps from a
root meaning flexible (cognates: German lenken to bend, turn aside, Old Norse hlykkr bend, noose,
loop), from PIE root *kleng- to bend, turn (see link (n.)). Some examples may be long adj. with
unvoicing of g [Middle English Dictionary]


lanky (adj.)

1630s, straight and flat, used of hair, from lank + -y (2); sense of awkwardly tall and thin is
first recorded 1818. Related: Lankiness.


lanolin (n.)

fatty matter extracted from sheep's wool, 1885, from German Lanolin, coined by German physician
Mathias Eugenius Oscar Liebreich (1838-1908) from Latin lana wool (see wool) + oleum oil, fat (see
oil (n.)) + chemical suffix -in (2).


lantern (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French lanterne lamp, lantern, light (12c.), from Latin lanterna lantern, lamp,
torch, altered (by influence of Latin lucerna lamp) from Greek lampter torch, from lampein to shine
(see lamp). Variant lanthorn (16c.-19c.) was folk etymology based on the common use of horn as a
translucent cover. Lantern-jaws hollow, long cheeks is from a resemblance noted since at least mid-
14c.


lanthanum (n.)

metallic rare earth element, 1841, coined in Modern Latin by Swedish chemist and mineralogist Carl
Gustav Mosander (1797-1858), who discovered it in 1839, from Greek lanthanein to lie hidden, escape
notice, from PIE root *ladh- to be hidden (see latent). So called because the element was concealed
in rare minerals.


lanyard (n.)

also laniard, alternative spelling (influenced by nautical yard (2) long beam used to support a
sail) of Middle English lainer, thong for fastening parts of armor or clothing (late 14c.), from Old
French laniere thong, lash, from lasniere, from lasne strap, thong, apparently altered (by
metathesis and influence of Old French las lace) from nasliere, from Frankish *nastila or some other
Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *nastila- (cognates: Old High German, Old Saxon nestila lace,
strap, band, German nestel string, lace, strap), from PIE root *ned- to knot.


Laocoon

Trojan priest of Apollo, from Latin Laocoon, from Greek Laukoun, from laos people (see lay (adj.)) +
koeo I mark, perceive.   <b>Laoco&ouml;n</b>, n. A famous piece of antique sculpture representing a
priest of that time and his two sons in the folds of two enormous serpents. The skill and diligence
with which the old man and lads support the serpents and keep them up in their work have been justly
regarded as one of the noblest artistic illustrations of the mastery of human intelligence over
brute inertia. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


Laodicean

lukewarm in religion, 1560s, from Laodicea, Syrian city (modern Latakia) whose early Christians were
chastised in the Bible for indifference to their religion [Rev. iii:14-16]. The city is said to be
named for the 3c B.C.E. Syrian queen Laodice, wife of Antiochus II.


Laos

Southeast Asian land, from the name of legendary founder Lao. Related: Laotian.


lap (n.)

Old English l&aelig;ppa (plural l&aelig;ppan) skirt or flap of a garment, from Proto-Germanic *lapp-
(cognates: Old Frisian lappa, Old Saxon lappo, Middle Dutch lappe, Dutch lap, Old High German lappa,
German Lappen rag, shred, Old Norse leppr patch, rag), from PIE root *leb- be loose, hang down.
Sense of lower part of a shirt led to that of upper legs of seated person (c.1300). Used
figuratively (bosom, breast) from late 14c., as in lap of luxury, first recorded 1802. From 15c.-In
17c. the word (often in plural) was a euphemism for female pudendum, but this is not the source of
lap dance, which is first recorded 1993.To lap dance, you undress, sit your client down, order him
to stay still and fully clothed, then hover over him, making a motion that you have perfected by
watching Mister Softee ice cream dispensers. [Anthony Lane, review of Showgirls, New Yorker, Oct.
16, 1995]That this is pleasure and not torment for the client is something survivors of the late
20c. will have to explain to their youngers.


lap (v.1)

take up liquid with the tongue, from Old English lapian to lap up, drink, from Proto-Germanic
*lapajan (cognates: Old High German laffen to lick, Old Saxon lepil, Dutch lepel, German L&ouml;ffel
spoon), from PIE imitative base *lab- (cognates: Greek laptein to sip, lick, Latin lambere to lick),
indicative of licking, lapping, smacking lips. Meaning splash gently first recorded 1823, based on
similarity of sound. Related: Lapped; lapping.


lap (v.2)

to lay one part over another, early 14c., to surround (something with something else), from lap
(n.). Figurative use, to envelop (in love, sin, desire, etc.) is from mid-14c. The sense of to get a
lap ahead (of someone) on a track is from 1847, on notion of overlapping. The noun in this sense is
1670s, originally something coiled or wrapped up; meaning a turn around a track (1861) also is from
this sense. Related: Lapped; lapping; laps.


laparoscopy (n.)

1855, from -scopy + Greek lapara flank, from laparos soft, from PIE *lep- to peel; + -scopy.
Related: Laparoscopic; laparoscope.


lapdog (n.)

also lap-dog, 1640s, from lap (n.) + dog (n.); figurative sense of subservient person is by 1950.
Senator McCarthy (R-Wis) renewed his Communists-in-Government charges today and called Senator
Tydings (D-Md) the Truman administration's whimpering lap dog. [AP news story, Aug. 7, 1950]


lapel (n.)

1751 (implied in lapelled), from lap (n.) + -el, diminutive suffix. Compare lappet.


lapful (n.)

1610s, from lap (n.) + -ful.


lapidary (n.)

one skilled in working with precious stones, late 14c., from Old French lapidaire (12c.), from Latin
lapidarius stonecutter, originally an adjective of or working with stone, from lapis (genitive
lapidis) stone. Meaning a treatise on precious stones is late 14c. Related: Lapidarist.


lapidation (n.)

stoning to death, 1610s, from Latin lapidationem (nominative lapidatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of lapidare to throw stones at, from the stem of lapis stone.


lapis lazuli (n.)

early 15c., from Middle Latin lapis lazuli, literally stone of azure, from Latin lapis stone +
Medieval Latin lazuli, genitive of lazulum, from Arabic lazuward (see azure).


Laplace

in scientific phrases, a reference to French astronomer and mathematician Pierre Simon, Marquis de
Laplace (1749-1827).


Lapland

1570s, from Lapp, the Swedish name for this Finnic people (their name for themselves was Sabme),
which probably originally was an insulting coinage (compare Middle High German lappe simpleton). In
English traditionally the home of witches and wizards who had power to conjure winds and tempests.
Related: Laplander.


Lapp

1859; see Lapland.


lappet (n.)

a small flap, 1570s; earlier lobe of a body part (early 15c.), from Middle English lappe lap (see
lap (n.)) + -et, diminutive suffix.


lapse (n.)

mid-15c., elapsing of time, expiration; also temporary forfeiture of a legal right, from Middle
French laps lapse, from Latin lapsus a slipping and falling, flight (of time), falling into error,
from labi to slip, glide, fall. Meaning moral transgression, sin is c.1500; that of slip of the
memory is 1520s; that of a falling away from one's faith is from 1650s.


lapse (v.)

early 15c., said to be from lapse (n.) or from Latin lapsare to lose one's footing. Related: Lapsed;
lapses; lapsing.


laptop

also lap-top, as a type of portable computer, 1984, from lap (n.) + top (1), on model of desktop.


lapwing (n.)

Middle English lappewinke (late 14c.), lapwyngis (early 15c.), folk etymology alteration of Old
English hleapewince, probably literally leaper-winker, from hleapan to leap + wince totter, waver,
move rapidly, related to wincian to wink. Said to be so called from the manner of its flight [OED]
in reference to its irregular flapping manner of flight [Barnhart], but the lapwing also flaps on
the ground pretending to have a broken wing to lure egg-hunters away from its nest, which seems a
more logical explanation. Its Greek name was polyplagktos luring on deceitfully.


larboard (n.)

left-hand side of a ship (to a person on board and facing the bow), 1580s, from Middle English
ladde-borde (c.1300), perhaps literally the loading side, if this was the side on which goods were
loaded onto a ship, from laden to load + bord ship's side. Altered 16c. on influence of starboard,
then largely replaced by the specialized sense of port (n.1). to avoid confusion of similar-sounding
words. The Old English term was b&aelig;cboard, literally back board (see starboard).


larcenist (n.)

1803, from larceny + -ist. Earlier was larcener (1630s).


larcenous (adj.)

1742, from larceny + -ous.


larceny (n.)

late 15c., with -y (3) + Anglo-French larcin (late 13c.), from Old French larrecin, larcin theft,
robbery (11c.), from Latin latrocinium robbery, freebooting, highway-robbery, piracy, from latro
robber, bandit, also hireling, mercenary, ultimately from a Greek source akin to latron pay, hire,
wages, from a suffixed form of PIE root *le- (1) to get.


larch (n.)

1540s, from German L&auml;rche, from Middle High German larche, from Old High German *larihha, from
Latin larix (genitive laricis), probably a loan-word from an Alpine Gaulish language, corresponding
phonetically to Old Celtic *darik- oak (see Druid and tree).


lard (n.)

late 14c. (possibly early 13c.), rendered fat of a swine, from Old French larde joint, meat,
especially bacon fat (12c.), and directly from Latin lardum lard, bacon, cured swine's flesh,
probably cognate with Greek larinos fat, laros pleasing to the taste.


lard (v.)

prepare (meat) for roasting by inserting of pieces of salt pork, etc., into it, mid-14c., from Old
French larder to lard (12c.), from lard bacon fat (see lard (n.)). Figuratively, of speech or
writing, from 1540s. Related: Larded; larding.


larder (n.)

c.1300, supply of salt pork, bacon, and other meats, later in reference to the room for processing
and storing such (late 14c.), from Anglo-French larder, Old French lardier a place for meats, from
Medieval Latin lardarium a room for meats, from Latin lardum lard, bacon (see lard (n.)). Meaning
department of the royal household or of a monastic house in charge of stored meats is mid-15c.
Surname Lardner person in charge of a larder is attested from mid-12c.


lardy (adj.)

1879, from lard (n.) + -y (2). Related: Lardiness.


lares (n.)

Roman tutelary gods, household deities, Latin, plural of lar.


large (adj.)

c.1200, bountiful, inclined to give or spend freely, also, of areas, great in expanse, from Old
French large broad, wide; generous, bounteous, from Latin largus abundant, copious, plentiful;
bountiful, liberal in giving, of unknown origin. Main modern meanings extensive; big in overall size
emerged 14c. An older sense of liberated, free from restraining influence is preserved in at large
(late 14c.). Adjective phrase larger-than-life first attested 1937 (bigger than life is from 1640s).


largely (adv.)

c.1200, liberally, generously, bountifully; also in large measure; abundantly, from large + -ly (2).
Meaning extensively, to a great extent is c.1400.


largeness (n.)

c.1300, from large + -ness.


larger

comparative of large (q.v.).


largesse (n.)

also largess, willingness to give or spend freely; munificence, c.1200, from Old French largesse a
bounty, munificence, from Vulgar Latin *largitia abundance, from Latin largus abundant (see large).
In medieval theology, the virtue whose opposite is avarice, and whose excess is prodigality [Middle
English Dictionary]. The Old French suffix -esse is from Latin -itia, added to adjectives to form
nouns of quality (compare duress, riches).


largest (adj.)

superlative of large (q.v.).


lariat (n.)

1832, American English, from Spanish la reata the rope, from reatar to tie against, from re- back +
atar to tie, from Latin aptare to join (see adapt).


lark (n.1)

songbird, early 14c., earlier lauerche (c.1200), from Old English lawerce (late Old English
laferce), from Proto-Germanic *laiw(a)rikon (cognates: Old Saxon lewerka, Frisian liurk, Old Norse
l&aelig;virik, Dutch leeuwerik, German Lerche), of unknown origin. Some Old English and Old Norse
forms suggest a compound meaning treason-worker, but there is no folk tale to explain or support
this.


lark (n.2)

spree, frolic, 1811, possibly shortening of skylark (1809), sailors' slang play rough in the rigging
of a ship (larks were proverbial for high-flying), or from English dialectal lake/laik to play
(c.1300, from Old Norse leika to play, from PIE *leig- to leap) with intrusive -r- common in
southern British dialect. The verb lake, considered characteristic of Northern English vocabulary,
is the opposite of work but lacks the other meanings of play. As a verb, from 1813. Related: Larked;
larking.


larking (n.)

fun, frolicking, 1813, from present participle of lark (v.); see lark (n.2).


larkspur (n.)

type of plant, 1570s, from lark (n.) + spur (n.); so called from resemblance to the bird's large
hind claws.


larrup (v.)

to beat, thrash, 1823, of unknown origin, possibly related to Dutch larpen to thrash. First
mentioned as a Suffolk dialect word.


Larry

masc. proper name, often a familiar form of Lawrence.


larva (n.)

1650s, a ghost, specter, from Latin larva (plural larvae), earlier larua ghost, also mask; applied
in biological sense 1768 by Linnaeus because immature forms of insects mask the adult forms. On the
double sense of the Latin word, Carlo Ginzburg, among other students of mythology and folklore, has
commented on the well-nigh universal association between masks and the spirits of the dead.


larvae (n.)

plural of larva (q.v.).


larval (adj.)

1650s, from Latin larvalis, from larva (see larva).


laryngeal (adj.)

1795, from medical Latin laryngeus, from Greek larynx (see larynx) + English -al (1).


laryngitis (n.)

1822, Medical Latin, from comb. form of larynx (q.v.) + -itis.


larynx (n.)

1570s, from Middle French larynx (16c.), from Modern Latin, from Greek larynx (genitive laryngos)
the upper windpipe, probably from laimos throat, influenced by pharynx throat, windpipe.


lasagna (n.)

pasta cut in long, wide strips; a dish made from this, 1760 (as an Italian word in English), from
Italian (plural is lasagne), from Vulgar Latin *lasania, from Latin lasanum a pot, from Greek
lasanon pot with feet, trivet.


lascar (n.)

East Indian sailor, 1620s, from Portuguese lachar, from Hindi lashkari soldier, native sailor, from
lashkar army, camp, from Persian lashkar. Compare Arabic al-'askar the army, perhaps from Persian.


lascivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lascivieux or directly from Late Latin lasciviosus (used in a scolding
sense by Isidore and other early Church writers), from Latin lascivia lewdness, playfulness,
frolicsomeness, jolity, from lascivus lewd, playful, frolicsome, wanton, from PIE *las-ko-, from
*las- to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Sanskrit -lasati yearns, lasati plays, frolics,
Hittite ilaliya- to desire, covet, Greek laste harlot, Old Church Slavonic laska flattery, Slovak
laska love, Old Irish lainn greedy, Gothic lustus, Old English lust lust). Related: Lasciviously;
lasciviousness. In 17c. also with a verbal form, lasciviate.


laser (n.)

1960, acronym for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation, on pattern of 1955 MASER.
A corresponding verb, lase, was coined 1962.


lash (n.)

c.1300, las a blow, a stroke, later flexible part of a whip (late 14c.), possibly imitative. The
verb might be the source of the noun.


lash (v.2)

bind, 1620s, originally nautical, from Middle French lachier, from Old French lacier to lace (see
lace (v.)). Related: Lashed; lashing.


lash (v.1)

to strike with a whip, c.1300, to deal a blow; later to whip (late 14c.); see lash (n.). Lash out to
strike out violently is from 1560s. Related: Lashed; lashing.


lashing (n.)

a beating, flogging, c.1400, verbal noun from lash (v.1).


lass (n.)

young woman, c.1300, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Swedish l&oslash;sk kona
unmarried woman, but also perhaps related to Old Norse l&ouml;skr idle, weak, West Frisian lask
light, thin. Liberman suggests Old Danish las rag. Slang words for 'rag' sometimes acquire the
jocular meaning 'child' and especially 'girl.' Used now only of mean girls [Johnson, who also has
lasslorn forsaken by his mistress]. Scottish diminutive lassie first recorded 1725.


lassitude (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French lassitude (14c.), from Latin lassitudinem (nominative lassitudo)
faintness, weariness, from lassus faint, tired, weary, from PIE *led- slow, weary (source also of
Old English l&aelig;t sluggish, slow; see late (adj.)), from root *le- to let go, slacken (see
lenient).


lasso

1807 (v.); 1808 (n.), American English, from Spanish lazo, from Latin laqueum (nominative laqueus)
noose, snare (see lace (n.)).


last (adj., adv.)

following all others, from Old English latost (adj.) and l&aelig;test (adv.), superlative of
l&aelig;t (see late). Cognate with Old Frisian lest, Dutch laatst, Old High German laggost, German
letzt. Meaning most recent is from c.1200. The noun, last person or thing, is c.1200, from the
adjective. Last hurrah is from the title of Edwin O'Connor's 1956 novel. Last word final, definitive
statement is from 1650s. A dying person's last words so called by 1740. As an adjective, last-minute
attested from 1913. Last-chance (adj.) is from 1962.


last (v.)

endure, go on existing, from Old English l&aelig;stan to continue, endure, earlier accomplish, carry
out, literally to follow a track, from Proto-Germanic *laistjan to follow a track (cognates: Gothic
laistjan to follow, Old Frisian lasta to fulfill, to pay (duties), German leisten to perform,
achieve, afford), from PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow (see learn).    Related to last (n.), not to
last (adj.). Related: Lasted; lasting.


last (n.)

shoemaker's block, from Old English l&aelig;ste, from last track, footprint, trace, from Proto-
Germanic *laist- (cognates: Old Norse leistr the foot, Middle Dutch, Dutch leest form, model, last,
Old High German leist track, footprint, German Leisten last, Gothic laistjan to follow, Old English
l&aelig;ran to teach); see last (v.).


last-ditch (adj.)

on the last line of defense, 1715, attributed to William of Orange; if so, originally in a Dutch
context.    We have no space to enter into the detail of the heroic struggle maintained by the young
stadtholder and his faithful Dutchmen; how they laid their country under water, and successfully
kept the powerful invader at bay. Once the contest seemed utterly hopeless. William was advised to
compromise the matter, and yield up Holland as the conquest of Louis XIV. No, replied he; I mean to
die in the last ditch. A speech alone sufficient to render his memory immortal. [Agnes Strickland,
Lives of the Queens of England, London, 1847]


lastly (adv.)

late 14c., from last (adj.) + -ly (2).


latch (v.)

Old English l&aelig;ccan to grasp or seize, from Proto-Germanic *lakkijanan. Not found in other
Germanic languages; probably from PIE *(s)lagw- to seize (see analemma). In its original sense the
verb was paralleled in Middle English and then replaced by French import catch (v.). Meaning to
fasten with a latch is mid-15c. Related: Latched; latching.


latch (n.)

a fastening for a door, etc., late 13c., probably from latch (v.).


latchkey

also latch-key, 1825, a key to draw back the latch of a door, from latch (n.) + key (n.1). Latchkey
child first recorded 1944, American English, in reference to children who come home from school
while both parents are at work.


late (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;t occurring after the customary or expected time, originally slow, sluggish,
from Proto-Germanic *lata- (cognates: Old Norse latr sluggish, lazy, Middle Dutch, Old Saxon lat,
German la&szlig; idle, weary, Gothic lats weary, sluggish, lazy, latjan to hinder), from PIE *led-
slow, weary (cognates: Latin lassus faint, weary, languid, exhausted, Greek ledein to be weary),
from root *le- to let go, slacken (see let (v.)).    The sense of deceased (as in the late Mrs.
Smith) is from late 15c., from an adverbial sense of recently. Of women's menstrual periods,
attested colloquially from 1962. Related: Lateness. As an adverb, from Old English late.


lateen

mid-18c., phonetic spelling of French latine in voile latine, literally Latin sail (see Latin). So
called because it was used in the Mediterranean.


lately (adv.)

Old English l&aelig;tlice slow, sluggish; see late (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning within recent times is
from late 15c., probably a new formation.


latency (n.)

1630s, condition of being concealed, from latent + -cy. Meaning delay between stimulus and response
is from 1882; computer sense (latency time) is from 1954.


latent (adj.)

mid-15c., concealed, secret, from Latin latentem (nominative latens) lying hid, secret, unknown,
present participle of latere to lie hidden, from PIE *laidh-, from root *la- to be hidden (cognates:
Greek lethe forgetfulness, oblivion, Old Church Slavonic lajati to lie in wait for). Meaning dormant
is from 1680s.


later

comparative of late. Meaning farewell is from 1954, U.S. slang, short for see you later.


lateral (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French lat&eacute;ral and directly from Latin lateralis belonging to the
side, from latus (genitive lateris) side (see oblate (n.)). As a noun, from 1630s, a side part. As a
type of pass to the side in U.S. football, it is attested from 1934. Related: Laterally.


Lateran

c.1300, popular name of cathedral church of St. John Lateran at Rome, which is built on the site of
the palace of the Plautii Laterani, a Roman family. As a papal headquarters, it was the site of five
general councils of the Western Church.


latescent (adj.)

tending to become latent, 1836, from Latin latescentem (nominative latescens), present participle of
latescere to hide oneself, be hidden, inchoative of latere (see latent).


latest (adj.)

superlative of late. The latest the news attested from 1886.


latex (n.)

1660s, body fluid, from Latin latex (genitive laticis) liquid, fluid, probably from Greek latax
dregs, from PIE root *lat- wet (cognates: Middle Irish laith beer, Welsh llaid mud, mire, Lithuanian
latakas pool, puddle, Old Norse le&thorn;ja filth). Used 1835 to mean milky liquid from plants.
Meaning water-dispersed polymer particles (used in rubber goods, paints, etc.) is from 1937. As an
adjective by 1954, in place of clasically correct laticiferous.


lath (n.)

late 13c., probably from Old English *l&aelig;&eth;&eth;e, variant of l&aelig;tt lath, apparently
from a Proto-Germanic *la&thorn;&thorn;o (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse latta, Middle Dutch, German
latte lath, Dutch lat, Middle High German lade plank, which is source of German Laden counter,
hence, shop). As a verb, 1530s, from the noun.


lathe (n.)

machine for turning, early 14c., of uncertain origin, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare
Danish drejelad turning-lathe, Old Norse hla&eth;a pile of shavings under a lathe, related to
hla&eth;a to load, lade; see lade (v.)).


lather (n.)

Old English lau&thorn;r foam, washing soda, from Proto-Germanic *lauthran (cognates: Old Norse
lau&eth;r washing soap, foam), from PIE *loutro- (cognates: Gaulish lautron, Old Irish loathar
bathing tub, Greek louein to bathe, Latin lavere to wash), which is from root *leu(e)- to wash +
instrumentative suffix *-tro-. The modern noun might be a 16c. redevelopment from the verb. Meaning
violent perspiration (especially of horses) is from 1650s. Meaning state of agitation (such as
induces sweating) is from 1839.


lather (v.)

Old English la&thorn;ran, from Proto-Germanic *lauthrjan (source also of Old Norse ley&eth;ra to
clean, wash; see lather (n.)). Related: Lathered; lathering.


Latin (adj.)

Old English latin, from Latin Latinus belonging to Latium, the region of Italy around Rome, possibly
from PIE root *stela- to spread, extend, with a sense of flat country (as opposed to the mountainous
district of the Sabines), or from a prehistoric non-IE language. The Latin adjective also was used
of the Roman language and people.   <b>Centurion:</b> What's this, then? â&euro;&tilde;People
called Romanes they go the house?â&euro;&trade;  <b>Brian:</b> It ... it says,
â&euro;&tilde;Romans, go home.â&euro;&trade;  <b>Centurion</b> [thrashing him like a schoolboy]:
No, it doesn't. â&euro;&tilde;Go home?' This is motion towards. Isn't it, boy?  <b>Brian:</b> Ah
... ah, dative, sir! Ahh! No, not dative! Not the dative, sir! No! Ah! Oh, the ... accusative!
Domum, sir! Ah! Oooh! Ah!  <b>Centurion</b> [pulling him by the ear]: Except that domum takes the
...?  <b>Brian:</b> The locative, sir!  [Monty Python, Life of Brian]    Used as a designation for
people whose languages descend from Latin (1856), hence Latin America (1862). The Latin Quarter
(French Quartier latin) of Paris, on the south (left) bank of the Seine, was the site of university
buildings in the Middle Ages, hence the place where Latin was spoken. The surname Latimer,
Lattimore, etc. is from Vulgar Latin latimarus, from Latin latinarius interpreter, literally a
speaker of Latin.


Latin (n.)

the language of the (ancient) Romans, Old English latin, from Latin latinium (see Latin (adj.)). The
more common form in Old English was l&aelig;den, from Vulgar Latin *ladinum, probably influenced by
Old English leoden language.


Latin America

1862; see Latin (adj.). Related: Latin American (adj.), 1871.


Latino

male Latin inhabitant of the United States (fem. Latina), 1946, American English, from American
Spanish, shortening of Latinoamericano Latin-American (see Latin America). As an adjective, attested
from 1974.


Latino-

prefix in use from 1939; see Latino.


latitude (n.)

late 14c., breadth, from Old French latitude (13c.) and directly from Latin latitudo breadth, width,
extent, size, from latus wide, from PIE root *stele- to spread (cognates: Old Church Slavonic steljo
to spread out, Armenian lain broad). Geographical sense also is from late 14c., literally breadth of
a map of the known world. Figurative sense of allowable degree of variation is early 15c. Related:
Latitudinal.


latitudinarian (adj.)

1660s, characterized by broad-mindedness, especially in reference to Episcopal clergymen indifferent
to doctrinal details; from Latin latitudin-, from latitude in its meaning freedom from narrow
restrictions (c.1600). Related: Latitudinarianism.


latke (n.)

pancake made with grated potatoes, 1927, from Yiddish, from Russian latka pastry, said to mean
literally a patch, but by Watkins traced to Greek elaia olive.


latrine (n.)

c.1300, probably from Latin latrina, contraction of lavatrina washbasin, washroom, from lavatus,
past participle of lavare to wash (see lave) + -trina, suffix denoting workplace. Its reappearance
in 1640s is probably a re-borrowing from French; especially of a privy of a camp, barracks, college,
hospital, etc. Latrine rumor baseless gossip (of the kind that spreads in conversations in latrines)
is military slang, first recorded 1918.


latte (n.)

by 1990, espresso coffee with milk, short for caff&egrave; latte, from Italian, literally milk
coffee (see cafe au lait).


latter (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;tra slower, comparative of l&aelig;t late (see late (adj.)). Sense of second of
two first recorded 1550s. The modern later is a formation from mid-15c.


latterly

1734, from latter + -ly (2). Called by Johnson a low word lately hatched. Related: Lattermost.


lattice (n.)

c.1300, from Old French latiz lattice, from late lath, board, plank, batten (Modern French latte),
from Frankish or some other Germanic source, such as Old High German latta lath; see lath).


latticework (n.)

also lattice-work, late 15c., from lattice + work (n.).


Latvia

Baltic nation, independent from 1918, named for its inhabitants, Latvian Latvji, whose ancient name
is of unknown origin. In English, the people name was Lett. Parts of the modern state were known
previously as Livonia (from Estonian liiv sand) and Courland (from Curonians, name of a Lettish
people, of unknown origin).


laud (v.)

late 14c., from Old French lauder praise, extol, from Latin laudare to praise, commend, honor,
extol, eulogize, from laus (genitive laudis) praise, fame glory. Probably cognate with Old English
leo&eth; song, poem, hymn, from Proto-Germanic *leuthan (cognates: Old Norse ljo&eth; strophe,
German Lied song, Gothic liu&thorn;on to praise), and from an echoic PIE root *leu-. Related:
Lauded; lauding.


laudable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French laudable and directly from Latin laudabilis praiseworthy, from laudare
(see laud). Related: Laudably.


laudanum (n.)

c.1600, from Modern Latin laudanum (1540s), coined by Paracelsus for a medicine he mixed, supposed
to contain gold and crushed pearls and many expensive ingredients, but probably owing its
effectiveness to only one of them, opium. Perhaps from Latin laudare to praise, or from Latin
ladanum a gum resin, from Greek ladanon, a word perhaps of Semitic origin. The word soon came to be
used for any alcoholic tincture of opium. Latin ladanum was used in Middle English of plant resins,
but this is not regarded as the source of the 16c. word.


laudation (n.)

late 15c., from Latin laudationem (nominative laudatio) a praising, commendation, noun of action
from past participle stem of laudare to praise (see laud).


laudator temporis acti

Latin phrase, 1736, from Horace's laudator temporis acti se puero a praiser of times past when he
was a boy [Ars Poetica, 173].


laudatory (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French laudatoire and directly from Late Latin laudatorius, from Latin laudare
(see laud).


lauds (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French; morning Church service in which psalms of praise to God (Psalms 148-150)
are sung (see laud).


laugh (v.)

late 14c., from Old English (Anglian) hl&aelig;hhan, earlier hlihhan, from Proto-Germanic *klakhjan
(cognates: Old Norse hl&aelig;ja, Danish le, Old Frisian hlakkia, Old Saxon hlahhian, Middle Dutch
and Dutch lachen, Old High German hlahhan, German lachen, Gothic hlahjan), from PIE *kleg-, of
imitative origin (compare Latin cachinnare to laugh aloud, Sanskrit kakhati laughs, Old Church
Slavonic chochotati laugh, Lithuanian klageti to cackle, Greek kakhazein). Originally with a hard
-gh- sound, as in Scottish loch; the spelling remained after the pronunciation shifted to -f.    If
I coveted nowe to avenge the injuries that you have done me, I myght laughe in my slyve. [John Daus,
Sleidanes Commentaries, 1560]    Related: Laughed; laughing.


laugh (n.)

1680s, from laugh (v.). Meaning a cause of laughter is from 1895; ironic use (as in that's a laugh)
attested from 1930. Laugh track canned laughter on a TV program is from 1961.


laughable (adj.)

1590s, from laugh (v.) + -able. Related: Laughably.


laughing (n.)

mid-14c., verbal noun from laugh (v.). Laughing matter (usually with negative) is from 1560s.
Nitrous oxide has been called laughing gas since 1842 (for its exhilarating effects). Davy,
experimenting with the gas, discovered these as far back as 1779: When I took the bag from my mouth,
I immediately laughed. The laughter was involuntary, but highly pleasurable, accompanied by a thrill
all through me.


laughing-stock (n.)

also laughingstock; 1510s, formed by analogy with whipping-stock whipping post, later also object of
frequent whipping (but that word is not attested in writing in this sense until 1670s). See laughing
+ stock (n.1).


Laughlin

Gaelic Lachlann, earlier Lochlann, literally lake- or fjord-land, i.e. Scandinavia; as a name,
denoting one from Norway.


laughter (n.)

late 14c., from Old English hleahtor, from Proto-Germanic *hlahtraz (cognates: Old Norse hlatr,
Danish latter, Old High German lahtar, German Gel&auml;chter); see laugh (v.).


launch (v.)

c.1300, to rush, plunge, leap, start forth; to be set into sudden motion, from Old North French
lancher (Old French lancier) to fling, hurl, throw, cast, from Late Latin lanceare wield a lance,
from Latin lancea light spear (see lance (n.)). Sense of set (a boat) afloat first recorded c.1400,
from notion of throwing it out on the water; generalized by 1600 to any sort of beginning. The noun
meaning a leap or a bound is from mid-15c., from the verb. Meaning the liftoff of a missile,
spacecraft, etc. is from 1935. Launch pad attested from 1960.


launch (n.)

large boat carried on a warship, 1690s, from Portuguese lancha barge, launch, apparently from Malay
lancharan, from lanchar quick, agile; English spelling influenced by launch (v.).


launder (v.)

1660s, to wash linen, from noun launder one who washes (especially linen), mid-15c., a contraction
of lavender, from Old French lavandier washer, launderer, from Medieval Latin lavandaria a washer,
ultimately from Latin lavare to wash (see lave). Criminal banking sense first recorded 1961, from
notion of making dirty money seem clean; brought to widespread use during U.S. Watergate scandal,
1973. Related: Laundered; laundering.


laundress (n.)

1540s; see laundry + -ess.


laundromat (n.)

automatic coin-operated public laundry, 1946, originally (1942) a proprietary name by Westinghouse
for a type of automatic washing machine; from laundry + ending probably suggested by automat. Also
used for public clothes-washing places in U.S. were washateria (1935), laundrette (1945). The
Westinghouse machine was popular after the war and was available with coin chutes and timers.


laundry (n.)

late 14c., place for washing; mid-15c. act of washing, from Old French lavanderie, from Latin
lavandaria, plural of lavandarium things to be washed, from lavare to wash (see lave). As a verb,
from 1880. Laundry list in figurative sense is from 1958.


Laura

fem. proper name, from Italian, probably originally a pet form of Laurentia, fem. of Laurentius (see
Laurence). Among the top 20 names for girls born in U.S. between 1963 and 1979.


Laurasia

1931; see Laurentian.


laureate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin laureatus crowned with laurels, from laurea laurel crown (emblematic of
victory or distinction in poetry), from fem. of laureus of laurel, from laurus laurel. Laureat poete
first found in Canterbury Tales (form with the noun before the adjective, in imitation of Latin word
order, is from c.1400 in English); the first official one was probably Ben Jonson (1638), though the
first recorded one was Dryden (1668). Extended to Nobel prize winners, 1947. As a noun, 1520s, from
the adjective. Related: Laureateship.


laurel (n.)

c.1300, lorrer, from Old French laurier (12c.), from Latin laurus laurel tree, probably related to
Greek daphne laurel (for change of d- to l- see lachrymose), probably from a pre-IE Mediterranean
language. The change of second -r- to -l- after mid-14c. is by dissimilation. An emblem of victory
or of distinction, hence the phrase to rest (originally repose) on one's laurels, first attested
1831.


Laurence

masc. proper name, from Old French Lorenz (French Laurent), from Latin Laurentius, literally of
Laurentum, a maritime town in Latium, literally town of bay trees, from laurus (see laurel). The
Italian form is Lorenzo. A popular given name in the Middle Ages, as a surname it is attested in
England from mid-12c. Larkin is a pet-form. For some reason, the name since at least 18c. has been
the personification of indolence (compare German der faule Lenz Lazy Lawrence). But in Scotland, the
pet form Lowrie has been used for a fox (c.1500), also for a crafty person (1560s).


Laurentian

in reference to granite strata in eastern Canada, 1863, named for the Laurentian Mountains, where it
is found, which are named for the nearby St. Lawrence River. Hence, Laurasia, Paleozoic
supercontinent comprising North America and Eurasia, 1931, from German (1928), from Laurentia,
geologists' name for the ancient core of North America + (Eur)asia.


lav (n.)

colloquial shortening of lavatory, attested from 1913.


lava (n.)

1750, from Italian (Neapolitan or Calabrian dialect) lava torrent, stream, traditionally from Latin
lavare to wash (see lave). Originally applied in Italian to flash flood rivulets after downpours,
then to streams of molten rock from Vesuvius. Alternative etymology is from Latin labes a fall, from
labi to fall. Lava lamp is attested from 1965, also lava light (reg. U.S., 1968, as Lava Lite).


lavage (n.)

a washing, 1895, from French lavage, from laver to wash (see lave).


lavalier (n.)

kind of ornament that hangs around the neck, from French lavalli&egrave;re, a kind of tie, after
Louise Fran&ccedil;oise de La Baume Le Blanc de La Valli&egrave;re, Duchesse de La Valli&egrave;re
(1644-1710), mistress of Louis XIV from 1661-1667.


lavaliere

see lavalier.


lavation (n.)

act of washing, 1620s, from Latin lavationem (nominative lavatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of lavare (see lave). Related: Lavations.


lavatory (n.)

late 14c., washbasin, from Latin lavatorium place for washing, noun use of neuter of adjective
lavatorius pertaining to washing, from lavatus, past participle of lavare to wash (see lave). Sense
of washroom is first attested 1650s; as a euphemism for toilet, W.C., it is attested by 1864.


lave (v.)

c.1200, from Old English gelafian wash by pouring, pour (water), possibly an early English or West
Germanic borrowing (compare Dutch laven, German laben) of Latin lavare to wash, or its Old French
descendant, laver. Latin lavare is from PIE *leu(e)- to wash (cognates: Latin luere to wash, Greek
louein to wash, bathe, Old Irish loathar basin, Breton laouer trough, Old English lea&thorn;or
lather).


lavender (n.)

fragrant plant of the mint family, c.1300, from Anglo-French lavendre, Old French lavendre, from
Medieval Latin lavendula lavender (10c.), perhaps from Latin lividus bluish, livid. Associated with
French lavande, Italian lavanda a washing (from Latin lavare to wash; see lave) because it was used
to scent washed fabrics and as a bath perfume. (An identical Middle English word meant laundress,
washerwoman; also, apparently, prostitute, whore; camp follower and is attested as a surname from
early 13c.). The adjective meaning pale purple color is from 1840.


lavish (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lavasse (n.) torrent of rain, deluge, from Old French lavache, from
laver to wash, from Latin lavare to wash (see lave). Related: Lavishly.


lavish (v.)

1540s, from lavish (adj.). Related: Lavished; lavishing.


law (n.)

Old English lagu (plural laga, comb. form lah-) law, ordinance, rule, regulation; district governed
by the same laws, from Old Norse *lagu law, collective plural of lag layer, measure, stroke,
literally something laid down or fixed, from Proto-Germanic *lagan put, lay (see lay (v.)).
Replaced Old English &aelig; and gesetnes, which had the same sense development as law. Compare also
statute, from Latin statuere; German Gesetz law, from Old High German gisatzida; Lithuanian
istatymas, from istatyti set up, establish. In physics, from 1660s. Law and order have been coupled
since 1796.


law-abiding (adj.)

1839, from law + abiding.


lawbreaker (n.)

also law-breaker, mid-15c., from law + agent noun from break (v.).


lawful (adj.)

c.1300, laghful; see law + -ful. Similar construction in Old Norse logfullr. Related: Lawfully;
lawfulness.


lawless (adj.)

c.1200, lawelese (see law + -less) Related: Lawlessly; lawlessness.


lawmaker (n.)

also law-maker, late 15c., from law + maker.


lawman (n.)

1530s, lawyer, from law + man (n.). Meaning law-enforcement officer is from 1865. There is an Anglo-
Latin lagamannus magistrate from early 12c.


lawn (n.1)

turf, stretch of grass, 1540s, laune glade, open space between woods, from Middle English launde
(c.1300), from Old French lande heath, moor, barren land; clearing (12c.), from Gaulish (compare
Breton lann heath), or from its Germanic cognate, source of English land (n.). The -d perhaps
mistaken for an affix and dropped. Sense of grassy ground kept mowed first recorded 1733.


lawn (n.2)

thin linen or cotton cloth, early 15c., probably from Laon, city in northern France, a center of
linen manufacture. The town name is Old French Lan, from Latin Laudunum, of Celtic origin.


lawn mower (n.)

also lawn-mower, 1853 as a type of machine to cut grass, from lawn (n.1) + mower.


Lawrence

see Laurence.


Lawrencium (n.)

1961, Modern Latin, from the name of Ernest O. Lawrence (1901-1958), U.S. physicist, cyclotron
pioneer and founder of the lab where it was discovered.


lawsuit (n.)

1620s, from law + suit (n.).


lawyer (n.)

late 14c. (mid-14c. as a surname), from Middle English lawe law (see law) + -iere. Spelling with -y-
first attested 1610s (see -yer).


lax (adj.)

c.1400, loose (in reference to bowels), from Latin laxus wide, loose, open, figuratively loose,
free, wide, from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack, be languid (cognates: Greek legein to leave off,
stop, lagos hare, literally with drooping ears, lagnos lustful, lascivious, lagaros slack, hollow,
shrunken; Latin languere to be faint, weary, languidis faint, weak, dull, sluggish, languid). Of
rules, discipline, etc., attested from mid-15c.


lax (n.)

salmon, from Old English leax (see lox).


laxative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French laxatif (13c.), from Medieval Latin laxativus loosening, from Latin
laxatus, past participle of laxare loosen, from laxus loose, lax (see lax). The noun meaning a
laxative medicine is from late 14c.


laxity (n.)

1520s, from Middle French laxit&eacute;, from Latin laxitatem (nominative laxitas) width,
spaciousness, from laxus (see lax).


lay (v.)

Old English lecgan to place on the ground (or other surface), also put down (often by striking),
from Proto-Germanic *lagjan (cognates: Old Saxon leggian, Old Norse leggja, Old Frisian ledza,
Middle Dutch legghan, Dutch leggen, Old High German lecken, German legen, Gothic lagjan to lay, put,
place), causative of lie (v.2). As a noun, from 1550s, act of laying. Meaning way in which something
is laid (as in lay of the land) first recorded 1819.    Meaning have sex with first recorded 1934,
in U.S. slang, probably from sense of deposit (which was in Old English, as in lay an egg, lay a
bet, etc.), perhaps reinforced by to lie with, a phrase frequently met in the Bible. The noun
meaning woman available for sexual intercourse is attested from 1930, but there are suggestions of
it in stage puns from as far back as 1767. To lay for (someone) await a chance at revenge is from
late 15c.; lay low stay inconspicuous is from 1839. To lay (someone) low preserves the secondary Old
English sense.


lay (adj.)

uneducated; non-clerical, early 14c., from Old French lai secular, not of the clergy (Modern French
laÃ¯que), from Late Latin laicus, from Greek laikos of the people, from laos people, of unknown
origin. In Middle English, contrasted with learned, a sense revived 1810 for non-expert.


lay (n.)

short song, mid-13c., from Old French lai song, lyric, of unknown origin, perhaps from Celtic
(compare Irish laid song, poem, Gaelic laoidh poem, verse, play) because the earliest verses so
called were Arthurian ballads, but OED finds this out of the question and prefers a theory which
traces it to a Germanic source, such as Old High German leich play, melody, song.


layabout (n.)

habitual loafer, 1932, from lay (v.) + about. One who lays about the house, etc.


layaway

1961, as a system of payments for merchandise, from lay (v.) + away. Earlier in the same sense was
Australian lay-by (1930).


layer (n.)

late 14c., one who or that lays (especially stones, a mason), agent noun from lay (v.). Passive
sense of that which is laid over a surface first recorded 1610s, but because earliest English use
was in cookery, this is perhaps from French liue binding, used of a thickened sauce. Layer cake
attested from 1881.


layer (v.)

1832, from layer (n.). Related: Layered; layering.


layette (n.)

baby's outfit, 1839, from French layette, properly the box in which it comes, subsequently
transferred to the linen, from Middle French layette chest of drawers, from laie drawer, box, from
Middle Dutch laeye, related to lade, load (v.).


layman (n.)

non-cleric, early 15c., from lay (adj.) + man (n.). Meaning outsider, non-expert (especially in
regards to law or medicine) is from late 15c. Related: Laymen.


layoff (n.)

also lay-off, lay off; 1889, rest, respite; from lay (v.) + off. Via seasonal labor with periodic
down time, it came to have a sense of temporary release from employment, and by 1960s was being used
somewhat euphemistically for permanent releases of masses of workers by employers. The verbal phrase
lay off is attested from 1868 as dismiss (an employee); meaning stop disturbing is from 1908.


layout (n.)

also lay-out, configuration, arrangement, 1852, from lay (v.) + out. Meaning rough design of a
printing job is from 1910.


layover (n.)

also lay-over, a stop overnight, 1873, from lay (v.) + over. Earlier as a cloth laid over a table-
cloth (1777).


layperson (n.)

1972, gender-neutral version of layman.


layup (n.)

also lay-up, temporary period out of work, 1927, from lay (v.) + up (adv.). Basketball shot so
called from 1948.


laywoman (n.)

1520s, from lay (adj.) + woman; probably modeled on layman.


lazar (n.)

filthy beggar, leper, c.1300, from Medieval Latin lazarus leper, from the Biblical name (see
Lazarus).


lazaretto (n.)

house for reception of lepers and diseased poor persons, 1540s, from Italian lazareto place set
aside for performance of quarantine (especially that of Venice, which received many ships from
plague-infested districts in the East), from the Biblical proper name Lazarus. Meaning building set
apart for quarantine is c.1600 in English. The word in Italian was perhaps influenced by the name of
another hospital in Venice, that associated with the church of Santa Maria di Nazaret.


Lazarus

Biblical character (Luke xvi:20), the poor man covered in sores; his name was extended in medieval
usage to any poor and visibly diseased person (compare lazar, mid-14c., one deformed and nauseous
with filthy and pestilential diseases [Johnson]). The name is from a Greek rendition of Hebrew
El'azar, literally God has helped.


laze (v.)

1590s, back-formation from lazy. Related: Lazed; lazing.


lazily (adv.)

1580s, from lazy + -ly (2).


laziness (n.)

1570s, from lazy + -ness.


lazy (adj.)

1540s, laysy, of unknown origin. Replaced native slack, slothful, and idle as the main word
expressing the notion of averse to work. In 19c. thought to be from lay (v.) as tipsy from tip.
Skeat is responsible for the prevailing modern view that it probably comes from Low German, from a
source such as Middle Low German laisch weak, feeble, tired, modern Low German l&auml;&ouml;sig,
early modern Dutch leuzig, all of which may go back to the PIE root *(s)leg- slack. According to
Weekley, the -z- sound disqualifies a connection with French lass&eacute; tired or German lassig
lazy, weary, tired. A supposed dialectal meaning naught, bad, if it is the original sense, may tie
the word to Old Norse lasenn dilapidated, lasm&oslash;yrr decrepit, fragile, root of Icelandic las-
fur&eth;a ailing, las-leiki ailment. Lazy Susan is from 1917. Grose (Dictionary of the Vulgar
Tongue, 1788) has Lazy Man's Load: Lazy people frequently take up more than they can safely carry,
to save the trouble of coming a second time.


lazybones (n.)

1590s, from lazy + plural of bone (n.).


LCD

1973, initialism (acronym) from liquid crystal display, which is attested from 1968.


lea (n.)

Old English leah open field, meadow, piece of untilled ground, earlier l&aelig;ch, recorded in place
names, from Proto-Germanic *laukhaz (cognates: Old High German loh cluster of bushes, and probably
also Flemish -loo, which forms the second element in Waterloo), from PIE *louquo- (cognates:
Sanskrit lokah open space, Latin lucus grove, Lithuanian laukas open field), perhaps from or related
to *leuk- to shine, be bright (see light (n.)).


leach (v.)

Old English leccan to moisten, water, wet, irrigate, (see leak (v.)). The word disappears, then re-
emerges late 18c. in a technological sense in reference to percolating liquids. Related: Leached;
leaching.


leachate (n.)

1920, from leach + -ate (1).


lead (v.1)

to guide, Old English l&aelig;dan cause to go with one, lead, guide, conduct, carry; sprout forth;
bring forth, pass (one's life), causative of li&eth;an to travel, from Proto-Germanic *laidjan
(cognates: Old Saxon lithan, Old Norse li&eth;a to go, Old High German ga-lidan to travel, Gothic
ga-lei&thorn;an to go), from PIE *leit- to go forth.    Meaning to be in first place is from late
14c. Sense in card playing is from 1670s. Related: Led; leading. Lead-off commencement, beginning
attested from 1879; lead-in introduction, opening is from 1928.


lead (n.1)

heavy metal, Old English lead, from West Germanic *loudhom (cognates: Old Frisian lad, Middle Dutch
loot, Dutch lood lead, German Lot weight, plummet). The name and the skill in using the metal seem
to have been borrowed from the Celts (compare Old Irish luaide), probably from PIE root *plou(d)- to
flow.    Figurative of heaviness since at least early 14c. Black lead was an old name for graphite,
hence lead pencil (1680s) and the colloquial figurative phrase to have lead in one's pencil be
possessed of (especially male sexual) vigor, attested by 1902. Lead balloon a failure, American
English slang, attested by 1957 (as a type of something heavy that can be kept up only with effort,
from 1904). Lead-footed slow is from 1896; opposite sense of fast emerged 1940s in trucker's jargon,
from notion of a foot heavy on the gas pedal.


lead (n.2)

c.1300, action of leading, from lead (v.1). Meaning the front or leading place is from 1560s.
Johnson stigmatized it as a low, despicable word. Sense in card-playing is from 1742; in theater,
from 1831; in journalism, from 1912; in jazz bands, from 1934.


lead (v.2)

early 15c., to make of lead, from lead (n.1). Meaning to cover with lead is from mid-15c. Related:
Leaded (early 13c.); leading.


lead-up (n.)

1917, from lead (v.1) + up (adv.).


leaden (adj.)

made of lead, Old English leaden, from lead (n.1) + -en (2). The figurative sense of heavy,
oppressive, dull is attested by 1570s. Related: Leadenly; leadenness.


leader (n.)

Old English l&aelig;dere one who leads, agent noun from l&aelig;dan (see lead (v.)). As a title for
the head of an authoritarian state, from 1918 (translating f&uuml;hrer, Duce, caudillo, etc.).
Meaning writing or statement meant to begin a discussion or debate is late 13c.; in modern use often
short for leading article (1807) opinion piece in a British newspaper (leader in this sense attested
from 1837).


leaderless (adj.)

1590s, from leader (n.1) + -less. Related: Leaderlessly; leaderlessness.


leadership (n.)

1821, position of a leader, from leader + -ship. Sense extended by late 19c. to characteristics
necessary to be a leader.


leading (n.1)

lead work; lead covering or frame of lead, mid-15c., from lead (n.1).


leading (n.2)

mid-13c., a bringing by force, from present participle of lead (v.1). Meaning direction, guidance is
from late 14c. As an adjective, directing, guiding.


leaf (n.)

Old English leaf leaf of a plant; page of a book, from Proto-Germanic *laubaz (cognates: Old Saxon
lof, Old Norse lauf, Old Frisian laf, Dutch loof, Old High German loub, German Laub foliage, leaves,
Gothic lauf), perhaps from PIE *leup- to peel off, break off (cognates: Lithuanian luobas, Old
Church Slavonic lubu bark, rind). Extended 15c. to very thin sheets of metal (especially gold).
Meaning hinged flap on the side of a table is from 1550s.


leaf (v.)

to turn over (the pages of a book), 1660s, from leaf (n.). The notion of a book page also is in the
phrase to turn over a (new) leaf (1570s). Related: Leafed; leaved; leafing.


leafless (adj.)

1580s, from leaf (n.) + -less.


leaflet (n.)

1787 as a term in botany; 1867 as a term in printing and publication; diminutive of leaf (n.)    A
newspaperman asked the British authorities for a copy of the leaflets distributed in Germany by
British airplanes. According to the London Daily Herald, his request was refused with the following
answer: Copies are not given out, as they might fall into enemy hands. [The Living Age magazine,
Sept. 1939-Feb. 1940]


leafy (adj.)

1550s, from leaf (n.) + -y (2). Related: Leafily; leafiness.


league (n.1)

alliance, mid-15c., ligg, from Middle French ligue confederacy, league (15c.), from Italian lega,
from legare to tie, to bind, from Latin ligare to bind (see ligament). Originally among nations,
subsequently extended to political associations (1846) and sports associations (1879). League of
Nations first attested 1917 (created 1919).


league (n.2)

distance of about three miles, late 14c., ultimately from Late Latin leuga (source also of French
lieue, Spanish legua, Italian lega), said by Roman writers to be from Gaulish. A vague measure
(perhaps originally an hour's hike) never in official use in England, where it is recorded more
often in poetic than in practical writing.


league (v.)

to form a league, 1610s, from league (n.1). Related: Leagued; leaguing.


leak (v.)

to let water in or out [Johnson], late 14c., from Middle Dutch leken to drip, to leak, or from Old
Norse leka, both of them related to Old English leccan to moisten (which did not survive into Middle
English), all from Proto-Germanic *lek- deficiency (cognates: Old High German lecchen to become dry,
German lechzen to be parched with thirst), from PIE root *leg- to dribble, trickle. The figurative
meaning come to be known in spite of efforts at concealment dates from at least 1832; transitive
sense first recorded 1859. Related: Leaked; leaking.


leak (n.)

late 15c., from leak (v.) or Old Norse cognate leki. Sense of revelation of secret information is
from 1950. Meaning act of urination is attested from 1934 (Tropic of Cancer); but the verb meaning
to piss is from 1590s: Why, you will allow vs ne're a Iourden, and then we leake in your Chimney. [I
Hen. IV, II.i.22]


leakage (n.)

late 15c., from leak (v.) + -age.


leaky (adj.)

mid-15c., from leak (n.) + -y (2). Related: Leakiness.


leal (adj.)

loyal, faithful, honest, true, c.1300, lele, surviving from Middle English as Northern English and
Scottish form of loyal. The Land of the leal is Heaven, not Scotland.


lean (v.)

c.1200, from Old English hleonian to bend, recline, lie down, rest, from Proto-Germanic *khlinen
(cognates: Old Saxon hlinon, Old Frisian lena, Middle Dutch lenen, Dutch leunen, Old High German
hlinen, German lehnen to lean), from PIE root *klei- to lean, to incline (cognates: Sanskrit srayati
leans, sritah leaning; Old Persian cay to lean; Lithuanian slyti to slope, slieti to lean; Latin
clinare to lean, bend, clivus declivity, inclinare cause to bend, declinare bend down, turn aside;
Greek klinein to cause to slope, slant, incline; Old Irish cloin crooked, wrong; Middle Irish cle,
Welsh cledd left, literally slanting; Welsh go-gledd north, literally left -- for similar sense
evolution, see Yemen, Benjamin, southpaw).    Meaning to incline the body against something for
support is mid-13c. Figurative sense of to trust for support is from early 13c. Sense of to lean
toward mentally, to favor is from late 14c. Related: Leaned; leaning. Colloquial lean on put
pressure on (someone) is first recorded 1960.


lean (adj.)

thin, spare, with little flesh or fat, c.1200, from Old English hl&aelig;ne lean, thin, possibly
from hl&aelig;nan cause to lean or bend, from Proto-Germanic *khlainijan, which would connect it to
Old English hleonian (see lean (v.)). But perhaps rather, according to OED, from a PIE *qloinio-
(with cognates in Lithuanian klynas scrap, fragment, Lettish kleins feeble). Extended and figurative
senses from early 14c. The noun meaning lean animals or persons is from c.1200, from the adjective.


lean (n.)

action or state of leaning, 1776, from lean (v.).


lean-to (n.)

building whose rafters pitch against another building or wall, mid-15c., from lean (v.) + to.


Leander

youth of Abydos, lover of Hero, who swam nightly across the Hellespont to visit her, from Greek
Leiandros, literally lion-man, from leon lion + aner (genitive andros) man (see anthropo-).


leanness (n.)

Old English hl&aelig;nnesse; see lean (adj.) + -ness.


leap (v.)

c.1200, from Old English hleapan to jump, run, leap (class VII strong verb; past tense hleop, past
participle hleapen), from Proto-Germanic *hlaupan (cognates: Old Saxon hlopan, Old Norse hlaupa, Old
Frisian hlapa, Dutch lopen, Old High German hlouffan, German laufen to run, Gothic us-hlaupan to
jump up), of uncertain origin, with no known cognates beyond Germanic. Leap-frog, the children's
game, is attested by that name from 1590s; figurative use by 1704.    First loke and aftirward lepe
[proverb recorded from mid-15c.]    Related: Leaped; leaping.


leap (n.)

c.1200, from Old English hliep, hlyp (West Saxon), *hlep (Mercian, Northumbrian) a leap, bound,
spring, sudden movement; thing to leap from; common Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian hlep, Dutch
loop, Old High German hlouf, German lauf); from the root of leap (v.). Leaps has been paired with
bounds since at least 1720.


leap year (n.)

late 14c., from leap (v.) + year. So called from its causing fixed festival days, which normally
advance one weekday per year, to leap ahead one day in the week.


learn (v.)

Old English leornian to get knowledge, be cultivated, study, read, think about, from Proto-Germanic
*liznojan (cognates: Old Frisian lernia, Middle Dutch leeren, Dutch leren, Old High German lernen,
German lernen to learn, Gothic lais I know), with a base sense of to follow or find the track, from
PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow. Related to German Gleis track, and to Old English l&aelig;st sole of
the foot (see last (n.)).    The transitive sense (He learned me how to read), now vulgar, was
acceptable from c.1200 until early 19c., from Old English l&aelig;ran to teach (cognates: Dutch
leren, German lehren to teach, literally to make known; see lore), and is preserved in past
participle adjective learned having knowledge gained by study. Related: Learning.


learnable (adj.)

1620s, from learn + -able.


learned (adj.)

having knowledge gained by study, mid-14c., past participle adjective from learn (v.) in former
transitive sense. Related: Learnedly; learnedness.


learning (n.)

Old English leornung learning, study, from leornian (see learn). Learning curve attested by 1907.


lease (n.)

late 14c., legal contract conveying property, usually for a fixed period of time and with a fixed
compensation, from Anglo-French les (late 13c.), from lesser to let, let go, from Old French
laissier to let, allow, permit; bequeath, leave, from Latin laxare loosen, open, make wide, from
laxus loose (see lax). Modern French equivalent legs is altered by erroneous derivation from Latin
legatum bequest, legacy.


lease (v.)

late 15c., to take a lease, from Anglo-French lesser, Old French laissier to let, leave (see lease
(n.). Related: Leased; leasing. Lessor, lessee in contract language preserves the Anglo-French form.


leash (v.)

to attach to or with a leash, 1590s, from leash (n.). Related: Leashed; leashing.


leash (n.)

thong for holding a dog or hound, c.1300, from Old French laisse hound's leash, from laissier
loosen, from Latin laxare, from laxus loose (see lax). Figurative sense attested from early 15c. The
meaning a set of three is from early 14c., originally in sporting language.


least (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;st, earlier l&aelig;sest smallest (superlative of lytel small), from Proto-
Germanic superlative *laisistaz (see less). Qualifying phrase at least is Middle English &aelig;t
l&aelig;stan. As a noun, from early 12c.; as an adverb, c.1200.


leastways

1825, colloquial, from least + way (n.). Regarded as vulgar, but simply a one-word form of Chaucer's
leest weye (late 14c.).


leather (n.)

Old English le&eth;er (in compounds only) hide, skin, leather, from Proto-Germanic *lethran
(cognates: Old Norse le&eth;r, Old Frisian lether, Old Saxon lethar, Middle Dutch, Dutch leder, Old
High German ledar, German leder), from PIE *letro- leather (cognates: Old Irish lethar, Welsh lledr,
Breton lezr). As an adjective from early 14c.; it acquired a secondary sense of sado-masochistic
1980s, having achieved that status in homosexual jargon in the 1970s.


leathern (adj.)

Old English le&#240;ren; see leather + -en (2).


leatherneck (n.)

U.S. Marine, 1914, Navy slang, from leather + neck (n.). So called for the leather collars of their
early uniforms; earlier in British use (1890) as a sailor's term for a soldier.


leathery (adj.)

1550s, from leather + -y (2). Related: Leatheriness.


leave (v.)

Old English l&aelig;fan to let remain; remain; have left; bequeath, from Proto-Germanic *laibijan
(cognates: Old Frisian leva to leave, Old Saxon farlebid left over), causative of *liban remain,
(source of Old English belifan, German bleiben, Gothic bileiban to remain), from root *laf- remnant,
what remains, from PIE *leip- to stick, adhere; also fat.    The Germanic root has only the sense
remain, continue, which also is in Greek lipares persevering, importunate. But this usually is
regarded as a development from the primary PIE sense of adhere, be sticky (compare Lithuanian lipti,
Old Church Slavonic lipet to adhere, Greek lipos grease, Sanskrit rip-/lip- to smear, adhere to.
Seemingly contradictory meaning of depart (early 13c.) comes from notion of to leave behind (as in
to leave the earth to die; to leave the field retreat).


leave (n.)

permission, Old English leafe leave, permission, license, dative and accusative of leaf permission,
from Proto-Germanic *lauba (cognates: Old Norse leyfi permission, Old Saxon orlof, Old Frisian
orlof, German Urlaub leave of absence), from PIE *leubh- to care, desire, love, approve (see love
(n.)). Cognate with Old English lief dear, the original idea being approval resulting from pleasure.
Compare love, believe. In military sense, it is attested from 1771.


leave-taking (n.)

late 14c., from leave (n.) + present participle of take (v.).


leaved (adj.)

having leaves, past participle adjective from verb leave to put forth leaves, mid-13c., from leaf
(n.).


leaven (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French levain leaven, sourdough (12c.), from Latin levamen alleviation,
mitigation, but used in Vulgar Latin in its literal sense of a means of lifting, something that
raises, from levare to raise (see lever). Figurative use from late 14c.


leaven (v.)

c.1400, from leaven (n.). Related: Leavened; leavening.


Lebanese

1860, from Lebanon + -ese.


Lebanon

name of a nation in western Asia, from Semitic root l-b-n white, probably in reference to snow-
capped peaks, or possibly to chalk or limestone cliffs. The Greek name of the island Lemnos is of
Phoenician origin and from the same root.


lebensraum (n.)

territory needed for a nation's or people's natural development, 1905, from German genitive of leben
life (see life) + raum space (see room (n.)).


lecanomancy (n.)

divination by inspection of water in a basin, c.1600, from Latinized form of Greek lekane dish-pan +
-mancy.


lech (n.1)

Celtic monumental stone, 1768, from Welsh llech, cognate with Gaelic and Irish leac (see cromlech).


lech (n.2)

yen, strong desire (especially sexual), 1796, variant of letch. Meaning a lecher is by 1943.


lecher (n.)

man given to excessive sexual indulgence, late 12c., from Old French lecheor (Modern French
l&#233;cheur) one living a life of debauchery, especially one given to sexual indulgence, literally
licker, agent noun from lechier to lick, to live in debauchery or gluttony, from Frankish *likkon or
some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *likkojan to lick or some other Germanic source (see
lick). The Old French feminine form was lechiere. Middle English, meanwhile, had lickestre female
who licks; figuratively a pleasure seeker, literally lickster.


lecherous (adj.)

c.1300, probably from lecher + -ous; or else from rare Old French lecheros. Related: Lecherously;
lecherousness.


lechery (n.)

c.1200, from Old French lecherie impertinence, deceit, from lecheor (see lecher).    The priests had
excellent cause to forbid us lechery: this injunction, by reserving to them acquaintance with and
absolution for these private sins, gave them an incredible ascendancy over women, and opened up to
them a career of lubricity whose scope knew no limits. [Marquis de Sade, Philosophy in the Bedroom]


lecithin (n.)

fatty substance found in the yolks of eggs (among other places), 1861, from French l&eacute;cithine
(coined 1850 by N.T. Gobley), from Greek lekithos egg yolk, + chemical suffix -ine (2). Greek
lekithos is of unknown origin.


lectern (n.)

early 14c., lettorne, lettron, from Old French letron, from Medieval Latin lectrinum, from Late
Latin lectrum lectern, from root of Latin legere to read (see lecture (n.)). Half-re-Latinized in
English in 15c.


lectio difficilior

Latin, literally harder reading, from phrase maxim difficilior lectio potior. In textual
reconstruction (of the Bible, etc.) the idea that, of two alternative manuscript readings, the one
whose meaning is less obvious is less likely to be a copyist's alteration, and therefore should be
given precedence.


lection (n.)

1530s, from Old French lection, from Latin lectionem (nominative lectio), noun of action from past
participle stem of legere to read (see lecture (n.)).


lector (n.)

late 14c., reader, a cleric in one of the minor orders, from Late Latin lector reader, agent noun
from Latin legere to read (see lecture (n.)). Related: Lectorship.


lecture (n.)

late 14c., action of reading, that which is read, from Medieval Latin lectura a reading, lecture,
from Latin lectus, past participle of legere to read, originally to gather, collect, pick out,
choose (compare election), from PIE *leg- to pick together, gather, collect (cognates: Greek legein
to say, tell, speak, declare, originally, in Homer, to pick out, select, collect, enumerate; lexis
speech, diction; logos word, speech, thought, account; Latin lignum wood, firewood, literally that
which is gathered).    To read is to pick out words. Meaning action of reading (a lesson) aloud is
from 1520s. That of a discourse on a given subject before an audience for purposes of instruction is
from 1530s.


lecture (v.)

1580s, from lecture (n.). Meaning to address severely and at length is from 1706. Related: Lectured;
lecturing.


lecturer (n.)

1580s, agent noun from lecture (v.).


LED (n.)

1968, initialism (acronym) from light-emitting diode.


led

past tense and past participle of lead (v.).


lede (n.)

by 1965, alternative spelling of lead (n.2) in the newspaper journalism sense (see lead (v.)), to
distinguish this sense from other possible meanings of the written word, perhaps especially the
molten lead (n.1) used in typesetting machines.


lederhosen (n.)

leather shorts worn in Alpine regions, 1937, German, literally leather trousers (see leather and
hose). Old English had cognate le&eth;erhose. German hosen displaced Old High German bruch, from the
basic Germanic word for trousers (see breeches).


ledge (n.)

late 13c., crossbar on a door, perhaps from Middle English verb leggen to place, lay (see lay (v.)).
Sense of narrow shelf is first recorded 1550s; shelf-like projection of rock is from 1550s.


ledger (n.)

account book, c.1400, from leggen to place, lay (see lay (v.)). Originally a book that lies
permanently in a place (especially a large copy of a breviary in a church). Sense of book of
accounts is first attested 1580s, short for ledger-book (1550s).


lee (n.)

Old English hleo shelter, cover, defense, protection, from Proto-Germanic *khlewaz (cognates: Old
Norse hle, Danish l&aelig;, Old Saxon hleo, Dutch lij lee, shelter). No known cognates outside
Germanic; original sense uncertain and might have been warm (compare German lau tepid, Old Norse hly
shelter, warmth), which might link it to PIE *kele- (1) warm. As an adjective, 1510s, from the noun.


Lee-Enfield

1902, named for J.P. Lee (1831-1904), U.S. designer of bolt action + Enfield (q.v.).


leech (n.1)

bloodsucking aquatic worm, from Old English l&aelig;ce (Kentish lyce), of unknown origin (with a
cognate in Middle Dutch lake). Commonly regarded as a transferred use of leech (n.2), but the Old
English forms suggest a distinct word, which has been assimilated to leech (n.2) by folk etymology
[see OED]. Figuratively applied to human parasites since 1784.


leech (n.2)

obsolete for physician, from Old English l&aelig;ce, probably from Old Danish l&aelig;ke, from
Proto-Germanic *lekjaz enchanter, one who speaks magic words; healer, physician (cognates: Old
Frisian letza, Old Saxon laki, Old Norse l&aelig;knir, Old High German lahhi, Gothic lekeis
physician), literally one who counsels, perhaps connected with a root found in Celtic (compare Irish
liaig charmer, exorcist, physician) and Slavic (compare Serbo-Croatian lijekar, Polish lekarz), from
PIE *lep-agi conjurer, from root *leg- to collect, with derivatives meaning to speak (see lecture
(n.)).    For sense development, compare Old Church Slavonic baliji doctor, originally conjurer,
related to Serbo-Croatian bajati enchant, conjure; Old Church Slavonic vra&#269;i, Russian vra&#269;
doctor, related to Serbo-Croatian vra&#269; sorcerer, fortune-teller. The form merged with leech
(n.1) in Middle English, apparently by folk etymology. In 17c., leech usually was applied only to
veterinary practitioners. The fourth finger of the hand, in Old English, was l&aelig;cfinger,
translating Latin digitus medicus, Greek daktylus iatrikos, supposedly because a vein from that
finger stretches straight to the heart.


leechcraft (n.)

art of healing, Old English l&#230;cecr&#230;ft; see leech (2) + craft (n.).


leek (n.)

culinary herb, Old English l&aelig;c (Mercian), leac (West Saxon) leek, onion, garlic, from Proto-
Germanic *lauka- (cognates: Old Norse laukr leek, garlic, Danish l&oslash;g, Swedish l&ouml;k onion,
Old Saxon lok leek, Middle Dutch looc, Dutch look leek, garlic, Old High German louh, German Lauch
leek). No known cognates; Finnish laukka, Russian luk-, Old Church Slavonic luku are borrowed from
Germanic.


leer (v.)

to look obliquely (now usually implying with a lustful or malicious intent), 1520s, probably from
Middle English noun ler cheek, from Old English hleor the cheek, the face, from Proto-Germanic
*khleuzas near the ear, from *kleuso- ear, from PIE root *kleu- to hear (see listen). The notion is
probably of looking askance (compare figurative development of cheek). Related: Leered; leering.


leer (n.)

1590s, from leer (v).


leery (adj.)

untrusting, suspicious, alert, 1718, originally slang, with -y (2), and perhaps from dialectal lere
learning, knowledge (see lore), or from leer (v.) in some now-obscure sense. OED suggests connection
with archaic leer (adj.) empty, useless, a general Germanic word (cognate with German leer, Dutch
laar), of unknown origin.


lees (n.)

late 14c., from Old French lies, plural of lie sediment, probably from Celtic (compare Old Irish
lige a bed, a lying), from PIE root *legh- to lie (see lie (v.2)).


leet (2)

by 1997, ASCII alternative alphabet used mostly in Internet chat, derived from elite, and sometimes
the word is used in that sense (for example in online gaming).


leet (1)

in reference to special court proceedings, late 13c., from Anglo-French lete, Anglo-Latin leta, of
unknown origin; OED suggests possible connection to let (v.).


leeward (adj.)

1660s, situated away from the wind, on the opposite of the weather side of the ship; from lee +
-ward.


leeway (n.)

1660s, sideways drift of a ship caused by wind, from lee + way (n.). Figurative meaning extra space
is by 1835.


left (adj.)

c.1200, from Kentish and northern English form of Old English lyft- weak, foolish (compare lyft-adl
lameness, paralysis, East Frisian luf, Dutch dialectal loof weak, worthless). It emerged 13c. as
opposite of right (the left being usually the weaker hand), a derived sense also found in cognate
Middle Dutch and Low German luchter, luft. But German link, Dutch linker left are from Old High
German slinc and Middle Dutch slink left, related to Old English slincan crawl, Swedish linka limp,
slinka dangle.    Replaced Old English winestra, literally friendlier, a euphemism used
superstitiously to avoid invoking the unlucky forces connected with the left side (see sinister).
The Kentish word itself may have been originally a taboo replacement, if instead it represents PIE
root *laiwo-, meaning considered conspicuous (represented in Greek laios, Latin laevus, and Russian
levyi). Greek also uses a euphemism for left, aristeros the better one (compare also Avestan
vairyastara- to the left, from vairya- desirable). But Lithuanian kairys left and Lettish kreilis
left hand derive from a root that yields words for twisted, crooked.    As an adverb from early 14c.
As a noun from c.1200. Political sense arose from members of a legislative body assigned to the left
side of a chamber, first attested in English 1837 (by Carlyle, in reference to the French
Revolution), probably a loan-translation of French la gauche (1791), said to have originated during
the seating of the French National Assembly in 1789 in which the nobility took the seats on the
President's right and left the Third Estate to sit on the left. Became general in U.S. and British
political speech c.1900.    Used since at least c.1600 in various senses of irregular, illicit;
earlier proverbial sense was opposite of what is expressed (mid-15c.). Phrase out in left field out
of touch with pertinent realities is attested from 1944, from the baseball fielding position that
tends to be far removed from the play. To have two left feet be clumsy is attested by 1902. The Left
Bank of Paris (left bank of the River Seine, as you face downstream) has been associated with
intellectual and artistic culture since at least 1893.


left (v.)

past tense and past participle of leave (v.).


left wing (n.)

also (as an adjective) left-wing, 1871 in the political sense (1530s in a military formation sense),
from left (adj.) + wing (n.). Related: Left-winger.


left-handed (adj.)

late 14c., of persons; 1650s of tools, etc., from left (adj.) + handed. In 15c. it also could mean
maimed. Sense of underhanded is from early 17c., as in left-handed compliment (1787, also attested
1855 in pugilism slang for a punch with the left fist), as is that of illicit (as in left-handed
marriage). Related: Left-handedly; left-handedness.


leftish (adj.)

1934, in the political sense, from left (adj.) + -ish.


leftism (n.)

1917, from left in the political sense + -ism.


leftist (adj.)

1897, from left (adj.) in the political sense + -ist.


leftover (adj.)

also left-over, remaining, not used up, 1890, from left + over. The noun meaning something left over
is from 1891; leftovers excess food after a meal (especially if re-served later) is from 1878; in
this sense Old English had metelaf.


leftward (adv.)

late 15c., from left (adj.) + -ward. Related: Leftwards.


lefty (n.)

left-handed person, 1886, American English, baseball slang, from left + -y (3). Political sense by
1935.


leg (n.)

late 13c., from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse leggr leg, bone of the arm or leg, from
Proto-Germanic *lagjaz, with no certain ulterior connections, perhaps from a PIE root meaning to
bend [Buck]. Compare German Bein leg, in Old High German bone, leg. Replaced Old English shank. Of
furniture supports from 1670s. The meaning a part or stage of a journey or race (1920) is from
earlier sailing sense of a run made on a single tack (1867), which was usually qualified as long
leg, short leg, etc. Slang phrase shake a leg dance is attested from 1881. To be on (one's) last
legs at the end of one's life is from 1590s.


leg (v.)

to use the legs; walk or run, c.1500 (from the beginning usually with it); from leg (n.).


leg up (n.)

aid, boost, 1837, from leg (n.) + up.


leg-warmer (n.)

1974, from leg + agent noun from warm (v.). Related: Leg-warmers.


leg-work (n.)

1891, from leg (n.) + work (n.). Originally news reporter slang for an assignment that produced more
walking than text.


legacy (n.)

late 14c., body of persons sent on a mission, from Old French legatie legate's office, from Medieval
Latin legatia, from Latin legatus ambassador, envoy, noun use of past participle of legare appoint
by a last will, send as a legate (see legate). Sense of property left by will appeared in Scottish
mid-15c.


legal (adj.)

mid-15c. of or pertaining to the law, from Middle French l&#233;gal or directly from Latin legalis
legal, pertaining to the law, from lex (genitive legis) law, possibly related to legere to gather,
on notion of a collection of rules (see lecture (n.)).    Sense of permitted by law is from 1640s.
Related: Legally. The Old French form was leial, loial (see leal, loyal). Legal tender is from 1740.


legalese (n.)

the language of legal documents, 1914, from legal + language name ending -ese.


legalistic (adj.)

1843, from legalist (1640s); see legal + -istic.


legality (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French l&#233;galit&#233;, from Medieval Latin legalitatem (nominative
legalitas), from Latin legalis pertaining to the law (see legal).


legalization (n.)

1805, noun of action from legalize.


legalize (v.)

1716, from legal + -ize. Related: Legalized; legalizing.


legate (n.)

mid-12c., authorized representative of the Pope, from Old French legat and directly from Latin
legatus ambassador, envoy, originally provided with a commission, past participle of legare send as
a deputy, send with a commission, bequeath, from lex (genitive legis) contract, law (see legal).
General sense of ambassador, delegate, messenger is from late 14c.


legation (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French legation and directly from Latin legationem (nominative legatio) the
office of an ambassador, noun of action from past participle stem of legare (see legate).


legato

1811, from Italian legato, literally bound, past participle of legare, from Latin ligare (see
ligament). Of music to be played smoothly, without intervals.


legem pone

payment of money, cash down, 1570s, from first two words of the fifth division of Psalm cxix, which
begins the psalms at Matins on the 25th of the month; consequently associated with March 25, a
quarter day in the old financial calendar, when payments and debts came due.


legend (n.)

early 14c., narrative dealing with a happening or an event, from Old French legende (12c., Modern
French l&#233;gende) and directly from Medieval Latin legenda legend, story, literally (things) to
be read, on certain days in church, etc., from Latin legendus, neuter plural gerundive of legere to
read, gather, select (see lecture (n.)).    Used originally of saints' lives; extended sense of
nonhistorical or mythical story first recorded late 14c. Meaning writing or inscription (especially
on a coin or medal) is from 1610s; on a map, illustration, etc., from 1903.


legendary (adj.)

mid-16c., from Medieval Latin legendarius, from legenda (see legend). Earlier it was a noun meaning
a collection of legends (1510s).


legerdemain (n.)

early 15c., conjuring tricks, from Middle French l&eacute;ger de main quick of hand, literally light
of hand, from l&eacute;ger light in weight (from Latin levis light; see lever) + main hand (from
Latin manus; see manual).


legging (n.)

extra outer covering to protect the leg, 1763, from leg (n.). Related: Leggings.


leggy (adj.)

1787, from leg (n.) + -y (2).


Leghorn

breed of fowl, 1869, from Leghorn, city in Italy (modern Livorno, 16c.-17c. Legorno), from Latin
Liburnus, from the native people name Liburni, which is of unknown signification.


legibility (n.)

1670s; see legible + -ity.


legible (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin legibilis that can be read, from Latin legere to read (see lecture (n.)).
Related: Legibly.


legion (n.)

c.1200, from Old French legion Roman legion (3,000 to 6,000 men, under Marius usually with attached
cavalry), from Latin legionem (nominative legio) body of soldiers, from legere to choose, gather,
also to read (see lecture (n.)).    Generalized sense of a large number is due to translations of
allusive phrase in Mark v:9. American Legion, U.S. association of ex-servicemen, founded in 1919.
Legion of Honor is French l&eacute;gion d'honneur, an order of distinction founded by Napoleon in
1802. Foreign Legion is French l&eacute;gion &eacute;trang&egrave;re body of foreign volunteers in a
modern army, originally Polish, Belgian, etc. units in French army; they traditionally served in
colonies or distant expeditions.


legionnaire (n.)

1818, from French l&eacute;gionnaire, from l&eacute;gion (see legion). Legionnaires' Disease, caused
by Legionella pneumophilia, was named after the lethal outbreak of July 1976 at the American Legion
convention in Philadelphia's Bellevue Stratford Hotel. Hence Legionella as the name of the bacterium
that causes it.


legislate (v.)

1805, back-formation from legislation, etc. Related: Legislated; legislating.


legislation (n.)

1650s, from French l&eacute;gislation, from Late Latin legislationem (nominative legislatio),
properly two words, legis latio, proposing (literally 'bearing') of a law; see legislator.


legislative (adj.)

1640s; from legislator + -ive. Related: Legislatively.


legislator (n.)

c.1600, from Latin legis lator proposer of a law, from legis, genitive of lex law + lator proposer,
agent noun of latus borne, brought, carried (see oblate (n.)), used as past tense of ferre to carry
(see infer). Fem. form legislatrix is from 1670s.


legislature (n.)

1670s; see legislator + -ure.


legit

colloquial shortening of legitimate, 1897, originally in theater, in reference to legitimate drama,
that which has literary merit (Shakespeare, etc.).


legitimacy (n.)

1690s, of children; general use by 1836; see legitimate + -cy. Legitimateness an earlier word for
it.


legitimate (adj.)

mid-15c., lawfully begotten, from Middle French legitimer and directly from Medieval Latin
legitimatus, past participle of legitimare make lawful, declare to be lawful, from Latin legitimus
lawful, originally fixed by law, in line with the law, from lex (genitive legis) law (see legal).
Transferred sense of genuine, real is attested from 1550s. Related: Legitimately.


legitimate (v.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin legitimatus, past participle of legitimare (see legitimate (adj.)).
Related: Legitimated; legitimating.


legitimation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French l&#233;gitimation, from Medieval Latin legitimationem (nominative
legitimatio), noun of action from past participle stem of legitimare (see legitimate (adj.)).


legitimism (n.)

1877, from French l&#233;gitimisme; see legitimate (adj.) + -ism.


legitimist (n.)

1841, from French l&eacute;gitimiste, from l&eacute;gitime (see legitimate).


legitimize (v.)

1795, from Latin legitimus (see legitimate) + -ize. Earlier was legitimatize (1791). Related:
Legitimized; legitimizing.


legless (adj.)

1590s, from leg (n.) + -less. Related: Leglessly; leglessness.


Lego

1954, proprietary name (in use since 1934, according to the company), from Danish phrase leg godt
play well. The founder, Ole Kirk Christiansen, didn't realize until later that the word meant I
study or I put together in Latin.


legume (n.)

plant of the group of the pulse family, 1670s, from French l&eacute;gume (16c.), from Latin legumen
pulse, leguminous plant, of unknown origin. One suggestion ties it to Latin legere to gather (see
lecture (n.)), because they can be scooped by the handful. Used in Middle English in the Latin form
legumen (late 14c.).


leguminous (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin legumen (see legume) + -ous.


lei (n.)

1843, from Hawaiian, ornament worn about the neck or head.


Leica

1925, proprietary name of cameras made by firm of Ernst &amp; Leitz Gesellschaft, Wetzlar, Germany.


Leicester

Ligera ceaster (early 10c.) Roman Town of the People Called Ligore, a tribal name, of unknown
origin. For second element, see Chester.


Leila

fem. proper name, from Arabic Laylah, literally dark as night, from laylah night.


leio-

word-forming element meaning smooth, from Greek leio-, comb. form of leios smooth. E.g. leiotrichy
condition of having straight, lank hair (1924).


leisure (n.)

early 14c., leisir, opportunity to do something (as in phrase at (one's) leisure), also time at
one's disposal, from Old French leisir (Modern French loisir) capacity; permission; leisure, spare
time; free will; idleness, inactivity, noun use of infinitive leisir be permitted, from Latin licere
be permitted (see licence). The -u- appeared 16c., probably on analogy of words like pleasure.
Phrase leisured class attested by 1836.


leisurely (adj.)

c.1600, from leisure (n.) + -ly (1). As an adverb, with -ly (2), from late 15c. Related:
Leisureliness.


leitmotif (n.)

1876, a musical figure to which some definite meaning is attached, from German Leitmotiv, literally
lead motive, from leiten to lead (see lead (v.1)) + Motiv (see motive). A term associated with
Wagnerian musical drama, though the thing itself is at least as old as Mozart. The leitmotif must be
characteristic of the person or thing it is intended to represent. [Elson's Music Dictionary]


lek (v.)

to engage in courtship displays of certain animals, 1871, probably from Swedish leka to play,
cognate of English dialectal verb lake (see lark (v.)).


leman (n.)

sweetheart, paramour (archaic), late 13c., from Middle English leofman (c.1200), from Old English
leof dear (see lief) + man human being, person (see man (n.)). Originally of either gender, though
deliberate archaic usage tends to limit it to women.


lemma (n.)

1560s, first in mathematics, from Greek lemma (plural lemmata) something received or taken; an
argument; something taken for granted, from root of lambanein to take (see analemma).


lemming (n.)

small arctic rodent, c.1600, from Norwegian lemming, from Old Norse lomundr lemming. Perhaps from
Lapp luomek. Figurative sense (in reference to their mass migrations that sometimes end in plunges
into the sea) is from 1958.


lemniscus (n.)

1811, from Late Latin lemniscus a pendent ribbon, from Greek lemniskos woolen ribbon, perhaps
originally or literally of Lemnos, island in the Aegean. Related: Lemniscate (1781).


lemon (n.1)

type of citrus fruit, c.1400, lymon, from Old French limon citrus fruit (12c.), via Proven&#231;al
or Italian from Arabic laimun, from Persian limu(n), generic terms for citrus fruits (compare lime
(n.2)); cognate with Sanskrit nimbu the lime. Slang meaning a Quaalude is 1960s, from Lemmon, name
of a pharmaceutical company that once manufactured the drug.


lemon (n.2)

worthless thing, 1909, American English slang; from lemon (n.1), perhaps via criminal slang sense of
a person who is a loser, a simpleton, which is perhaps from the notion of someone a sharper can suck
the juice out of. A pool hall hustle was called a lemon game (1908); while to hand someone a lemon
was British slang (1906) for to pass off a sub-standard article as a good one. Or it simply may be a
metaphor for something which leaves a bad taste in one's mouth.


lemonade (n.)

1660s, from French limonade (17c.); see lemon (n.1) + -ade. Earlier English spelling was lemonado
(c.1640) with false Spanish ending.


lemony (adj.)

1846, from lemon (n.1) + -y (2). In Australia/New Zealand slang, also irritated, angry (1941).


lemur (n.)

nocturnal Madagascar mammal, 1795, coined by Linnaeus, from Latin lemures (plural) spirits of the
dead in Roman mythology.     The oldest usage of lemur for a primate that we are aware of is in
Linnaeus's catalog of the Museum of King Adolf Frederick of Sweden (Tattersall, 1982); .... In this
work, he explained his use of the name lemur thus: Lemures dixi  hos, quod noctu imprimis
obambulant, hominibus quodanmodo similes, &amp; lento passu vagantur [I call them lemurs, because
they go around mainly by night, in a certain way similar to humans, and roam with a slow pace]
[Dunkel, Alexander R., et al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur
names, part 1, in Lemur News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.65]   Lemuria (1864) was the name given by
English zoologist P.L. Sclater (1829-1913) to a hypothetical ancient continent connecting Africa and
Southeastern Asia (and including Madagascar), which was hypothesized to explain phenomena now
accounted for by continental drift. Earlier it was the name of the Roman feast of the Lemures.


Lena

fem. proper name, originally a shortened form of Helena or Magdalena.


Lenape

1728, native name for Delaware Indians, said to mean original people.


lend (v.)

late 14c., from Old English l&aelig;nan to lend, from l&aelig;n loan (see loan). Cognate with Dutch
lenen, Old High German lehanon, German lehnen, also verbs derived from nouns. Past tense form, with
terminal -d, became the principal form in Middle English on analogy of bend, send, etc.


lender (n.)

Old English laenere, agent noun from l&aelig;nan (see lend (v.)).


length (n.)

Old English leng&eth;u length, from Proto-Germanic *langitho, noun of quality from *langgaz (root of
Old English lang; see long (adj.)) + *-itho, abstract noun suffix (see -th (2)).    Cognate with Old
Norse lengd, Old Frisian lengethe, Dutch lengte. Figurative sense of the distance one goes,
extremity to which something is carried is from 1690s. Phrase at length to full extent is attested
from c.1500.


lengthen (v.)

late 14c., from length + -en (1). Related: Lengthened; lengthening. Earlier verb was simply length
(c.1300).


lengthways

1590s, from length + way (n.), with adverbial genitive -s.


lengthwise (adv.)

1570s, from length + wise (n.). As an adjective by 1871.


lengthy (adj.)

1759, American English, from length + -y (2). Until c.1840 always characterized in British English
as an Americanism.    This word has been very common among us, both in writing and in the language
of conversation; but it has been so much ridiculed by Americans as well as Englishmen, that in
writing it is now generally avoided. Mr. Webster has admitted it into his dictionary; but as need
hardly be remarked it is not in any of the English ones. It is applied by us, as Mr. Webster justly
observes, chiefly to writings or discourses. Thus we say, a lengthy pamphlet, a lengthy sermon,
&amp;c.; The English would say, a long or (in the more familiar style) a longish sermon. [John
Pickering, A Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases Which Have Been Supposed to be Peculiar
to the United States of America, Boston, 1816]     Related: Lengthily; lengthiness.


lenience (n.)

1796, from lenient + -ence.


leniency (n.)

1780, from lenient + -cy.


lenient (adj.)

1650s, relaxing, soothing, from Middle French lenient, from Latin lenientem (nominative leniens),
present participle of lenire to soften, alleviate, mitigate, allay, calm, from lenis mild, gentle,
calm, probably from PIE root *le- to leave, yield, let go, slacken (cognates: Lithuanian lenas
quiet, tranquil, tame, slow, Old Church Slavonic lena lazy, Latin lassus faint, weary, Old English
l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, l&aelig;tan to leave behind). Sense of mild, merciful (of persons) first
recorded 1787. In earlier use was lenitive, attested from early 15c. of medicines, 1610s of persons.


Lenin

pseudonym or alias chosen c.1902 (for publishing clandestine political works in exile) by Russian
revolutionary Vladimir Il'ich Ulyanov (1870-1924). Related: Leninist (1917); Leninism (1918).


lenitive (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin lenitivus, from Latin lenitus, past participle of lenire to soften
(see lenient). As a noun, from early 15c.


lenity (n.)

softness, early 15c., from Middle French l&eacute;nit&eacute; or directly from Latin lenitatem
(nominative lenitas), from lenis soft, mild (see lenient).


lens (n.)

1690s, glass to regulate light rays, from Latin lens (genitive lentis) lentil, on analogy of the
double-convex shape. See lentil. Of the eye from 1719.    In the vernacular of the photographer,
anyone crowding to the front of a group, staring into the lens, or otherwise attracting attention to
himself is known as a lens louse. [American Photography, vol. 40, 1946; the term dates from 1915]


Lent (n.)

late 14c., short for Lenten (n.) forty days before Easter (early 12c.), from Old English lencten
springtime, spring, the season, also the fast of Lent, from West Germanic *langa-tinaz long-days
(cognate with Old Saxon lentin, Middle Dutch lenten, Old High German lengizin manoth), from *lanngaz
(root of Old English lang long; see long (adj.)) + *tina-, a root meaning day (compare Gothic sin-
teins daily), cognate with Old Church Slavonic dini, Lithuanian diena, Latin dies day (see diurnal).
the compound probably refers to the increasing daylight. Compare similar form evolution in Dutch
lente (Middle Dutch lentin), German Lenz (Old High German lengizin) spring. Church sense of period
between Ash Wednesday and Easter is peculiar to English.


Lenten (adj.)

late Old English, from Lent + -en (2). Elizabethan English had Lenten-faced lean and dismal
(c.1600).


lenticular (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin lenticularis, from lenticula a small lentil, diminutive of lens lentil
(see lentil). Related: Lenticularity.


lentil (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French lentille lentil, also freckle, from Latin lenticula, diminutive of Latin
lens (genitive lentis) lentil, cognate with Greek lathyros, German linse, Old Church Slavonic
l&#281;&#353;ta.


lento

slowly (musical direction), 1724, from Italian lento slow, from Latin lentus flexible, pliant, slow,
sluggish (see lithe). Related: Lentissimo.


Leo

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin leo lion (see lion). Meaning person born under
the sign of Leo is from 1894. Leonid meteor which appears to radiate from Leo is from 1868. The
annual shower peaks Nov. 14.


Leon

medieval kingdom in northwestern Spain, said to be from Latin legionis (septimae) of the Seventh
Legion, which was founded in Spain in 65 B.C.E.; the name probably then conformed to Spanish leon
lion. Related: Leonese.


Leonard

masc. proper name, from French L&eacute;onard, Old French Leonard, from German Leonhard, from Old
High German *Lewenhart, literally strong as a lion, from lewo (from Latin Leo, see lion) + hart hard
(see hard (adj.)).


leonine (adj.)

lion-like, late 14c., from Old French leonin or directly from Latin leoninus belonging to or
resembling a lion, from leo (genitive leonis) lion. Weekley thinks that Leonine verse (1650s),
rhymed in the middle as well as the end of the line, probably is from the name of some medieval
poet, perhaps Leo, Canon of St. Victor, Paris, 12c.


leopard (n.)

late 13c., from Old French lebard, leupart (12c., Modern French l&#233;opard), from Late Latin
leopardus, literally lion-pard, from Greek leopardos, from leon lion + pardos male panther, which
generally is said to be connected to Sanskrit prdakuh panther, tiger. The animal was thought in
ancient times to be a hybrid of these two species.


Leopold

masc. proper name, from French L&eacute;opold, from Old High German Leutpald, Liutbald, literally
bold among the people, from leudi people + bald bold.


leotard (n.)

1881, leotards, named for Jules L&eacute;otard (1830-1870), popular French trapeze artist, who
performed in such a garment.


leper (n.)

one afflicted with leprosy, late 14c., from Late Latin lepra, from Greek lepra leprosy, from fem. of
lepros (adj.) scaly, from leops a scale, related to lepein to peel, from lopos a peel, from PIE root
*lep- to peel, scale (see leaf (n.)). Originally the word for the disease itself (mid-13c.); because
of the -er ending it came to mean person with leprosy, so leprosy was coined 16c. from adjective
leprous.


Lepidoptera (n.)

1773, insects with four scaly wings, the biological classification that includes butterflies and
moths, coined 1735 in Modern Latin by Swedish botanist Carolus Linnaeus (Karl von Linn&eacute;,
1707-1778) from Greek lepido-, comb. form of lepis (genitive lepidos) (fish) scale (related to
lepein to peel; see leper) + pteron wing, feather (see pterodactyl).


lepidopterist (n.)

1826, from Lepidoptera + -ist.


leprechaun (n.)

c.1600, from Irish lupracan, metathesis from Old Irish luchorpan literally a very small body, from
lu little (from PIE *legwh- having little weight; see light (adj.)) + corpan, diminutive of corp
body, from Latin corpus body (see corporeal). Commonly spelled lubrican in 17c. English. Leithbragan
is Irish folk etymology, from leith half + brog brogue, because the spirit was supposed to be always
employed in making or mending a single shoe.


leprosy (n.)

1530s (earlier lepruse, mid-15c.), from leprous; see leper. First used in Coverdale Bible, where it
renders Hebrew cara'ath, which apparently was a comprehensive term for skin diseases. Because of
pejorative associations, the use of the word in medical context has been banned by the World Health
Organization and replaced by Hansen's disease, named for Norwegian physician Armauer Hansen
(1841-1912) who in 1871 discovered the bacillus that causes it.


leprous (adj.)

early 13c., leprus, from Old French lepros (Modern French l&eacute;preux), from Late Latin leprosus,
from Latin lepra leprosy (see leper).


lepton (n.)

elementary particle of small mass, 1948, from Greek leptos small, slight, slender, delicate (from
lepein to peel, from PIE *lep-; see leper) + -on. Also the name of a small coin in ancient Greece,
from neuter of leptos


lesbian (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the island of Lesbos, from Latin Lesbius, from Greek lesbios of Lesbos, Greek
island in northeastern Aegean Sea (the name originally may have meant wooded), home of Sappho, great
lyric poet whose erotic and romantic verse embraced women as well as men, hence meaning relating to
homosexual relations between women (1890; lesbianism in this sense is attested from 1870) and the
noun, first recorded 1925. Her particular association in English with erotic love between women
dates to at least 1825, though the words formed from it are later. Before this, the principal
figurative use (common in 17c.) was lesbian rule (c.1600) a mason's rule of lead, of a type used on
Lesbos, which could be bent to fit the curves of a molding; hence, pliant morality or judgment.And
this is the nature of the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to its
universality. ... For when the thing is indefinite the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule
used in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone and is not
rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts. [Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics]  See also
tribadism. Greek had a verb lesbiazein to imitate the Lesbians, which implied sexual initiative and
shamelessness among women, but not necessarily female homosexuality.


lesbianism (n.)

1870, from lesbian + -ism.


lesbo

by 1940, colloquial shortening of lesbian.


lese-majesty (n.)

offense against sovereign authority, treason, 1530s (mid-15c. as an Anglo-French word), from French
l&egrave;se-majest&eacute;, from Latin laesa majestos violated majesty, from laesus, past participle
of laedere to hurt, injure, damage, offend, insult, of unknown origin.


lesion (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French lesion, from Latin laesionem (nominative laesio) injury, from past
participle stem of laedere to strike, hurt, damage, of unknown origin. Originally with reference to
any sort of hurt, whether physical or not.


less

Old English l&aelig;s (adv.), l&aelig;ssa (adj.), comparative of l&aelig;s small; from Proto-
Germanic *lais-izo smaller (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian les less; Middle Dutch lise soft,
gentle, German leise soft), from PIE root *leis- (2) small (cognates: Lithuanian liesas thin).
Formerly also younger, as a translation of Latin minor, a sense now obsolete except in James the
Less. Used as a comparative of little, but not related to it. The noun is Old English l&aelig;sse.


lessee (n.)

one to whom a lease is given, late 15c., from Anglo-French lesee, Old French less&eacute;, past
participle of lesser (Modern French laisser) to let, leave (see lease).


lessen (v.)

to become less, c.1300, from less + -en (1). Related: Lessened; lessening.


lesser (adj.)

early 13c., a double comparative, from less + -er (2). Johnson calls it a barbarous corruption of
less, formed by the vulgar from the habit of terminating comparatives in -er. As an adverb from
1590s; now generally poetic or obsolete except in expression lesser-known (1813).


lesson (n.)

early 13c., a reading aloud from the Bible, also something to be learned by a student, from Old
French le&ccedil;on, from Latin lectionem (nominative lectio) a reading, noun of action from past
participle stem of legere to read (see lecture (n.)). Transferred sense of an occurrence from which
something can be learned is from 1580s.


lessor (n.)

one who grants a lease, late 14c., from Anglo-French lessor (late 13c.), from verb lesser (see
lease).


lest (conj.)

c.1200, contracted from Middle English phrase les te less that, from Old English phrase &thorn;y
l&aelig;s &thorn;e whereby less that, from &thorn;y, instrumental case of demonstrative article
&thorn;&aelig;t that + l&aelig;s (see less) + &thorn;e the. The &thorn;y was dropped and the
remaining two words contracted into leste.


let (v.)

Old English l&aelig;tan to allow to remain; let go, leave, depart from; leave undone; to allow;
bequeath, also to rent (class VII strong verb; past tense let, past participle l&aelig;ten), from
Proto-Germanic *letan (cognates: Old Saxon latan, Old Frisian leta, Dutch laten, German lassen,
Gothic letan to leave, let), from PIE *le- (2) to let go, slacken (cognates: Latin lassus faint,
weary, Lithuanian leisti to let, to let loose; see lenient). If that derivation is correct, the
primary sense would be let go through weariness, neglect.    Of blood, from late Old English. To let
(something) slip originally (1520s) was a reference to hounds on a leash; figurative use from 1540s.
To let (someone) off allow to go unpunished is from 1814. To let on reveal, divulge is from 1725; to
let up cease, stop is from 1787. Let alone not to mention is from 1812.


let (n.)

stoppage, obstruction (obsolete unless in legal contracts), late 12c., from archaic verb letten to
hinder, from Old English lettan hinder, delay, from Proto-Germanic *latjan (cognates: Old Saxon
lettian to hinder, Old Norse letja to hold back, Old High German lezzen to stop, check, Gothic
latjan to hinder, make late, Old English l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, late); see late.


let up (n.)

cessation, 1837, from verbal phrase let up cease, stop (1787). In Old English the phrase meant to
put ashore.


letch (n.)

craving, longing, 1796, perhaps a back-formation from lecher, or from a figurative use of latch (v.)
in a secondary sense of grasp, grasp on to.


letdown (n.)

also let-down, disappointment, 1768, from let (v.) + down (adv.). The verbal phrase is from mid-12c.
in a literal sense; figuratively by 1795.


lethal (adj.)

1580s, from Late Latin lethalis, alteration of Latin letalis deadly, fatal, from letum death, of
uncertain origin. Form altered in Late Latin by association with lethe hydor water of oblivion in
Hades in Greek mythology, from Greek lethe forgetfulness.


lethality (n.)

1650s, from lethal + -ity.


lethargic (adj.)

late 14c., litargik, from Latin lethargicus affected with lethargy, from Greek lethargikos, from
lethargos (see lethargy). Related: Lethargically.


lethargy (n.)

late 14c., litarge, from Old French litargie or directly from Medieval Latin litargia, from Late
Latin lethargia, from Greek lethargia forgetfulness, from lethargos forgetful, originally inactive
through forgetfulness, from lethe forgetfulness (see latent) + argos idle (see argon). The form with
-th- is from 1590s in English.


Lethe

river of Hades (whose water when drunk caused forgetfulness of the past), from Greek lethe,
literally forgetfulness, oblivion, related to lethargos forgetful, lathre secretly, by stealth,
lathrios stealthy, lanthanein to be hidden. Cognate with Latin latere to be hidden (see latent).
Related: Lethean.


Letitia

fem. proper name, literally gladness, from Latin laetitia, from laetus glad, of unknown origin.


Lett

1831, from German Lette, from Old High German liuti people (German Leute). The native name is Latvji
(see Latvia). Related: Lettic; Lettish.


letter (n.1)

c.1200, graphic symbol, alphabetic sign, written character, from Old French letre (10c., Modern
French lettre) character, letter; missive, note, in plural, literature, writing, learning, from
Latin littera (also litera) letter of the alphabet, of uncertain origin, perhaps via Etruscan from
Greek diphthera tablet, with change of d- to l- as in lachrymose. In this sense it replaced Old
English bocst&aelig;f, literally book staff (compare German Buchstabe letter, character, from Old
High German buohstab, from Proto-Germanic *bok-staba-m).    Latin littera also meant a writing,
document, record, and in   plural litter&aelig; a letter, epistle, a sense first attested in English
early 13c., replacing Old English &aelig;rendgewrit, literally errand-writing. The Latin plural also
meant literature, books, and figuratively learning, liberal education, schooling (see letters).
School letter in sports, attested by 1908, were said to have been first awarded by University of
Chicago football coach Amos Alonzo Stagg. Expression to the letter precisely is from 1520s (earlier
as after the letter). Letter-perfect is from 1845, originally in theater jargon, in reference to an
actor knowing the lines exactly. Letter-press, in reference to matter printed from relief surfaces,
is from 1840.


letter (v.)

to write in letters, 1660s, from letter (n.1). Earlier it meant to instruct (mid-15c.). Related:
Lettered; lettering.


letter (n.2)

one who lets in any sense, c.1400, agent noun from let (v.).


lettered (adj.)

literate, c.1300, from letter (n.). Meaning inscribed is from 1660s.


letterhead (n.)

1868, short for letterheading (1867); from letter (n.1) + head (n.). So called because it was
printed at the head of the piece of paper.


lettering (n.)

1640s, act of writing; 1811 as act of putting letters on something, verbal noun from letter (v.).


letters (n.)

the profession of authorship or literature, mid-13c., from plural of letter (n.).


lettuce (n.)

late 13c., probably from Old French laitues, plural of laitue lettuce, from Latin lactuca lettuce,
from lac (genitive lactis) milk (see lactation); so called for the milky juice of the plant.


leu (n.)

monetary unit of Romania, introduced 1867, literally lion. Monetary names in the Balkans often
translate as lion because Dutch gold coins stamped with lions circulated widely in the region in the
17c. and the word for lion came to be a word for money in some languages in the region.


leukaemia (n.)

alternative spelling of leukemia.


leukemia (n.)

1851, on model of German Leuk&auml;mie (1848), coined by R. Virchow from Greek leukos clear, white
(cognate with Gothic liuha&thorn;, Old English leoht light; see light (n.)) + haima blood (see
-emia).


leukemic (adj.)

also leukaemic, 1852; see leukemia + -ic.


leukocyte (n.)

also leucocyte, 1860, via French leucocyte, from Greek leuko-, comb. form of leukos white (see light
(n.)) + -cyte (see cyto-).


lev (n.)

monetary unit of Bulgaria, introduced 1881, literally lion (see leu).


Levant

Mediterranean lands east of Italy, late 15c., from Middle French levant the Orient, from present
participle of lever to rise (from Latin levare to raise; see lever). The region so called in
reference to the direction of sunrise.


Levantine (adj.)

1640s, from Levant + -ine (1).


levari facias

Latin, literally cause to be levied.


levator (n.)

from medical Latin levator a lifter, from Latin levatus, past participle of levare to raise (see
lever).


levee (n.1)

1719, natural or artificial embankment to prevent overflow of a river, from New Orleans French
lev&eacute;e raising, lifting; embankment, from French, originally fem. past participle of lever to
raise, from Latin levare to raise (see lever).


levee (n.2)

morning assembly held by a prince or king (upon rising from bed), 1670s, from French lever a
raising, noun use of verb meaning to raise (see levee (n.1)).


level (n.)

mid-14c., tool to indicate a horizontal line, from Old French livel a level (13c.), ultimately from
Latin libella a balance, level, diminutive of libra balance, scale, unit of weight, from PIE
*lithra. Cognate Spanish nivel, Modern French niveau are from the same source but altered by
dissimilation. Meaning horizontality is from c.1400. Meaning position as marked by a horizontal line
is from 1530s. Phrase on the level fair, honest is from 1872; earlier it meant moderate, without
great ambition (1790).


level (v.)

mid-15c., to make level, from level (n.). From c.1600 as to bring to a level; 1958 as to cease
increasing. Meaning to aim a gun is late 15c. Slang sense of tell the truth is from 1920. To level
up to rise is attested by 1863.    A word here as to the misconception labored under by our English
neighbor; he evidently does not understand the American manner of doing things. We never level down
in this country; we are always at work on the up grade. Level up! Level up! is the motto of the
American people. [James E. Garretson, Professional Education, in The Dental Cosmos, Philadelphia,
1865]    To level off cease rising or falling is from 1920, originally in aviation.


level (adj.)

early 15c., from level (n.). To do one's level best is from 1851.


levelheaded (adj.)

also level-headed, 1869, from level (adj.) + head (n.). The notion is of balanced. Related:
Levelheadedness.


leveller (n.)

1590s, someone or something that makes level; agent noun of level (v.). From 1640s as the name of a
political party of the time of Charles I that advocated abolishing all differences of position and
rank.


lever (n.)

c.1300, from Old French levier (Modern French leveur) a lifter, a lever, agent noun from lever to
raise, from Latin levare to raise, from levis light in weight, from PIE root *legwh- light, having
little weight; easy, agile, nimble (cognates: Sanskrit laghuh quick, small; Greek elakhys small,
elaphros light; Old Church Slavonic liguku, Lithuanian lengvas light; Old Irish laigiu smaller,
worse; Gothic leihts, Old English leoht light (adj.)). As a verb, 1856, from the noun.


leverage (n.)

1724, action of a lever, from lever (n.) + -age. Meaning power or force of a lever is from 1827;
figurative sense from 1858. The financial sense is attested by 1933, American English; as a verb by
1956. Related: Leveraged; leverages; leveraging.


leveret (n.)

young hare, early 15c., from Old French levrat, diminutive of levre (12c., Modern French
li&#232;vre) hare, from Latin lepore, from lepus.


Levi

masc. proper name, biblical son of Jacob by Leah, from Hebrew lewi, literally joining, pledging,
attached, from stem of lawah he joined.


leviathan (n.)

late 14c., sea monster, sea serpent, also regarded as a form of Satan, from Late Latin leviathan,
from Hebrew livyathan dragon, serpent, huge sea animal, of unknown origin, perhaps related to liwyah
wreath, from root l-w-h- to wind, turn, twist. Of powerful persons or things from c.1600. Hobbes's
use is from 1651.


levirate (n.)

custom by which the male next-of-kin of a dead man was bound to marry his widow, 1725, from Latin
levir brother-in-law (from PIE *daiwer- husband's brother) + -ate (2).


Levis (n.)

1926, American English, originally Levi's, from Levi Strauss and Company, original manufacturer.
Strauss' innovation was the copper rivets at strain points. A cowboy's accessory, adopted as a
fashion c.1940s.


levitate (v.)

1670s, to rise by virtue of lightness, from Latin levitas lightness, patterned in English on
gravitate. Sense of raise (a person) into the air is mainly from spiritualism (1870s). Related:
Levitated; levitating.


levitation (n.)

1660s, noun of action from Latin levitas (see levitate) + -ion.


Leviticus

third book of the Pentateuch, c.1400, from Late Latin Leviticus (liber), literally book of the
Levites, from Greek to Leuitikon biblion, from Leuites, from Hebrew Lewi. Properly the part of the
Pentateuch dealing with the function of the priests who were of the tribe of Levi (a portion of the
tribe acted as assistants to the priests in the temple-worship). The Hebrew title is Torath Kohanim,
literally the law of the priests. Related: Levite; Levitical.


Levittown

used figuratively for generic suburban tract housing, American English, from the vast planned real
estate developments built by the firm Levitt &amp; Sons Inc., the first on Long Island, 1946-51
(more than 17,000 homes), the second north of Philadelphia (1951-55).


levity (n.)

want of seriousness, frivolity, 1560s, from Latin levitatem (nominative levitas) lightness,
frivolity, from levis light in weight (see lever) + -ity.


levo-

word-forming element meaning toward the left, from French l&#233;vo-, from Latin laevus left (see
left (adj.)).


levy (v.)

early 13c., act of raising or collecting, from Anglo-French leve, from Old French lev&eacute;e act
of raising, noun use of fem. past participle of lever to raise (see lever). Originally of taxes,
later of men for armies (c.1500). Related: Levied; levying.


levy (n.)

an act of levying, early 15c., from Anglo-French leve, Old French lev&#233;e a raising, lifting;
levying, noun use of fem. past participle of lever to raise (see lever).


lewd (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;wede nonclerical, of uncertain origin but probably ultimately from Vulgar Latin
*laigo-, from Latin laicus (see lay (adj.)). Sense of unlettered, uneducated (early 13c.) descended
to coarse, vile, lustful by late 14c. Related: Lewdly; lewdness.


Lewis

masc. proper name, Anglo-French form of French Louis (see Louis).


lex talionis

1590s, Latin, law of retaliation, from talionis, genitive of talio (see retaliation); an eye for an
eye, a tooth for a tooth.


lexeme (n.)

1937, from lexicon + -eme, ending abstracted from morpheme. Related: Lexemic.


lexical (adj.)

1833, from Greek lexikos pertaining to words (see lexicon) + -al (1). Related: Lexically.


lexico-

word-forming element, from Latinized comb. form of Greek lexikos (see lexicon).


lexicographer (n.)

1650s, from French lexicographe lexicographer, from Greek lexikographos, from lexikon wordbook (see
lexicon) + -graphos writer, from graphein to write (see -graphy).


lexicography (n.)

1670s, from lexico- + -graphy. Related: Lexicographic; lexicographical.


lexicology (n.)

1828, from lexico- + -logy.


lexicon (n.)

c.1600, a dictionary, from Middle French lexicon or directly from Modern Latin lexicon, from Greek
lexikon (biblion) word (book), from neuter of lexikos pertaining to words, from lexis word, from
legein say (see lecture (n.)).    Used originally of dictionaries of Greek, Syriac, Hebrew and
Arabic, because these typically were in Latin and in Modern Latin lexicon, not dictionarius, was the
preferred word. The modern sense of vocabulary proper to some sphere of activity (1640s) is a
figurative extension.


ley (n.)

line of a prehistoric track; alignment of natural and artificial features, 1922 [Alfred Watkins],
apparently a variant of lea. Popular topic in Britain in 1920s and 30s and again in 1960s-70s.


Leyden jar (n.)

1755, phial used for accumulating and storing static electricity, from Leyden (modern Leiden), city
in Holland; so called because it was first described (in 1746) by physicist Pieter van Musschenbroek
of Leyden (1692-1761). The place name is said to be from Germanic *leitha- canal.


lez

also les; by 1929, colloquial shortening of lesbian.


Lhasa apso

type of dog, 1935, from Tibetan, literally Lhasa terrier, from Lhasa, capital of Tibet.


liability (n.)

1790, originally a term in law; condition of being legally liable; see liable + -ity. General sense
is from 1809; meaning thing for which one is liable is first attested 1842. Related: Liabilities.


liable (adj.)

mid-15c., bound or obliged by law, probably from Anglo-French *liable, from Old French lier to bind,
tie up, fasten, tether; bind by obligation, from Latin ligare to bind, to tie (see ligament). With
-able. General sense of exposed to (something undesirable) is from 1590s. Incorrect use for likely
is attested by 1886.


liaise (v.)

1928, back-formation from liaison. Said to be a coinage of British military men in World War I.
Related: Liaised; liaising.


liaison (n.)

1640s, from French liaison a union, a binding together (13c.), from Late Latin ligationem
(nominative ligatio) a binding, from past participle stem of Latin ligare to bind (see ligament).
Originally a cookery term for a thickening agent for sauces. Sense of intimate relations is from
1806. Military sense of cooperation between branches, allies, etc. is from 1816. The noun meaning
one who is concerned with liaison of units, etc. is short for liaison officer.


liar (n.)

early 13c., from Old English leogere liar, false witness, agent noun from Anglian legan, West Saxon
leogan be untruthful, lie (see lie (v.1)). The form in -ar is probably in imitation of the
refashioned forms such as scholar for scoler and pillar for piler. [Barnhart]


lib (n.)

1969, American English, shortening of liberation, used with possessives, originally in Women's Lib.
Colloquial shortening libber for liberationist is attested from 1971.


libation (n.)

late 14c., pouring out of wine in honor of a god, from Latin libationem (nominative libatio) a drink
offering, noun of action from past participle stem of libare pour out (an offering), from PIE
*(s)leib- to pour, drop (source of Greek leibein to pour, make a libation), an enlargement of root
*lei- to pour, to flow (cognates: Sanskrit riyati to let run; Greek aleison a wine vessel;
Lithuanian lieju to pour, lytus rain; Hittite lilai- to let go; Albanian lyse, lise a stream; Welsh
lliant a stream, a sea, llifo to flow; Old Irish lie a flood; Breton livad inundation; Gaelic lighe
a flood, overflow; Gothic leithu fruit wine; Old Church Slavonic liti, l&ecirc;ju, Bulgarian leja I
pour; Czech liti, leji, Old Polish li&#263; to pour). Transferred sense of liquid poured out to be
drunk is from 1751. Related: Libations.


libel (n.)

c.1300, formal written statement, especially, in civil law, plaintiff's statement of charges (mid-
14c.); from Old French libelle (fem.) small book; (legal) charge, claim; writ; written report
(13c.), from Latin libellus a little book, pamphlet; petition, written accusation, complaint,
diminutive of liber book (see library). Broader sense of any published or written statement likely
to harm a person's reputation is first attested 1630s.


libel (v.)

mid-15c., make an initial statement setting out a plaintiff's case (modern sense from 1560s), from
libel (n.), q.v. for sense development. Related: Libeled; libelled; libeling; libelling.


libelous (adj.)

also libellous, 1610s, from libel (n.) + -ous. Related: Libelously; libelousness.


liberal (adj.)

mid-14c., generous, also, late 14c., selfless; noble, nobly born; abundant, and, early 15c., in a
bad sense extravagant, unrestrained, from Old French liberal befitting free men, noble, generous,
willing, zealous (12c.), from Latin liberalis noble, gracious, munificent, generous, literally of
freedom, pertaining to or befitting a free man, from liber free, unrestricted, unimpeded; unbridled,
unchecked, licentious, from PIE *leudh-ero- (source of Greek eleutheros free), probably originally
belonging to the people (though the precise semantic development is obscure), and a suffixed form of
the base *leudh- people (cognates: Old Church Slavonic ljudu, Lithuanian liaudis, Old English leod,
German Leute nation, people; Old High German liut person, people) but literally to mount up, to
grow.    With the meaning free from restraint in speech or action, liberal was used 16c.-17c. as a
term of reproach. It revived in a positive sense in the Enlightenment, with a meaning free from
prejudice, tolerant, which emerged 1776-88.    In reference to education, explained by Fowler as the
education designed for a gentleman (Latin liber a free man) &amp; ... opposed on the one hand to
technical or professional or any special training, &amp; on the other to education that stops short
before manhood is reached (see liberal arts). Purely in reference to political opinion, tending in
favor of freedom and democracy it dates from c.1801, from French lib&eacute;ral, originally applied
in English by its opponents (often in French form and with suggestions of foreign lawlessness) to
the party favorable to individual political freedoms. But also (especially in U.S. politics) tending
to mean favorable to government action to effect social change, which seems at times to draw more
from the religious sense of free from prejudice in favor of traditional opinions and established
institutions (and thus open to new ideas and plans of reform), which dates from
1823.<b>Conservative</b>, n. A statesman who is enamored of existing evils, as distinguished from
the Liberal, who wishes to replace them with others. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


liberal (n.)

1820, member of the Liberal party of Great Britain, from liberal (adj.). Used early 20c. of less
dogmatic Christian churches; in reference to a political ideology not conservative or fascist but
short of socialism, from c.1920.    This is the attitude of mind which has come to be known as
liberal. It implies vigorous convictions, tolerance for the opinions of others, and a persistent
desire for sound progress. It is a method of approach which has played a notable and constructive
part in our history, and which merits a thorough trial today in the attack on our absorbingly
interesting American task. [Guy Emerson, The New Frontier, 1920]


liberal arts

late 14c., translating Latin artes liberales; the seven attainments directed to intellectual
enlargement, not immediate practical purpose, and thus deemed worthy of a free man (liberal in this
sense is opposed to servile or mechanical). They were divided into the trivium -- grammar, logic,
rhetoric (see trivial) -- and the quadrivium -- arithmetic, geometry, music, astronomy.


liberalisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of liberalization; for spelling, see -ize.


liberalism (n.)

1819, from liberal + -ism.


liberality (n.)

mid-14c., generosity, from Old French liberalit&eacute; generosity, liberality (13c.), from Latin
liberalitatem (nominative liberalitas) way of thinking or acting befitting a free man, noun of
quality from liberalis (see liberal (adj.)).


liberalization (n.)

1794; see liberal + -ization.


liberalize (v.)

1774, from liberal (adj.) + -ize. Related: Liberalized; liberalizing.


liberally (adv.)

late 14c., generously, munificently, from liberal (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning freely is c.1500.


liberate (v.)

1620s, from Latin liberatus, past participle of liberare set free, from liber free (see liberal).
Meaning to free an occupied territory from the enemy (often used ironically) is from 1942. Related:
Liberated; liberating.


liberation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French lib&#233;ration and directly from Latin liberationem (nominative
liberatio) a setting or becoming free, noun of action from past participle stem of liberare set free
(see liberate). Liberation theology (1969) translates Spanish teologia de la liberaci&oacute;n,
coined 1968 by Peruvian priest Gustavo Guti&eacute;rrez.


liberator (n.)

1640s, from Latin liberator one who sets free, a deliverer, agent noun from past participle stem of
liberare (see liberate).


Liberia

African nation, begun as a resettlement project of freed American slaves in 1816 by the American
Colonization Society, the name chosen by society member and U.S. senator Robert Goodloe Harper
(1765-1825) from Latin liber free (see liberal).


libertarian (n.)

1789, one who holds the doctrine of free will (opposed to necessitarian), from liberty (q.v.) on
model of unitarian, etc. Political sense of person advocating liberty in thought and conduct is from
1878. As an adjective by 1882. U.S. Libertarian Party founded in Colorado, 1971.


liberticide (n.)

1793, from liberty + -cide.


libertine (n.)

late 14c., a freedman, an emancipated slave, from Latin libertinus member of a class of freedmen,
from libertus one's freedmen, from liber free (see liberal). Sense of freethinker is first recorded
1560s, from French libertin (1540s) originally the name given to certain Protestant sects in France
and the Low Countries. Meaning dissolute or licentious person first recorded 1590s; the darkening of
meaning being perhaps due to misunderstanding of Latin libertinus in Acts vi:9. As an adjective by
1570s.


liberty (n.)

late 14c., free choice, freedom to do as one chooses, from Old French libert&eacute; freedom,
liberty, free will (14c.), from Latin libertatem (nominative libertas) freedom, condition of a free
man; absence of restraint; permission, from liber free (see liberal)The spirit of liberty is the
spirit which is not too sure it is right. [Learned Hand, 1944]Nautical sense of leave of absence is
from 1758. To take liberties go beyond the bounds of propriety is from 1620s. Sense of privileges by
grant (14c.) led to sense of a person's private land (mid-15c.), which yielded sense in 18c. in both
England and America of a district within a county but having its own justice of the peace, and also
a district adjacent to a city and in some degree under its municipal jurisdiction (as in Northern
Liberties of Philadelphia). Also compare Old French libert&eacute;s local rights, laws, taxes.


libidinal (adj.)

1922, in psychology jargon, from libido (Latin genitive libidinis) + -al (1).


libidinous (adj.)

lustful, mid-15c., Old French libidineus (13c., Modern French libidineux), from Latin libidinosus
full of desire, lustful, from libido pleasure, desire, sensual passion, lust (see libido). Related:
Libidinously; libidinousness.


libido (n.)

psychic drive or energy, usually associated with sexual instinct, 1892, carried over untranslated in
English edition of Krafft-Ebing's Psychopathia Sexualis; and used in 1909 in A.A. Brill's
translation of Freud's Selected Papers on Hysteria (Freud's use of the term led to its popularity);
from Latin libido desire, lust, from libere to be pleasing, to please, ultimately cognate with Old
English lufu (see love (n.)).


Libra (n.)

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin libra, literally pound, balance, from
Mediterranean base *lithra- a scale. Nativized in Old Norse as skala-merki.


librarian (n.)

custodian of a library, 1713; see library + -an. Earlier form was library-keeper (1640s), and
librarian was used earlier in a sense scribe (1660s).


library (n.)

place for books, late 14c., from Anglo-French librarie, Old French librairie collection of books
(14c.), noun use of adj. librarius concerning books, from Latin librarium chest for books, from
liber (genitive libri) book, paper, parchment, originally the inner bark of trees, probably a
derivative of PIE root *leub(h)- to strip, to peel (see leaf). The equivalent word in most Romance
languages now means bookseller's shop. Old English had bochord, literally book hord.


libretto (n.)

(plural libretti), 1742, from Italian libretto, diminutive of libro book, from Latin liber (genitive
libri), see library. Related: Librettist.


Libya

north African nation, an ancient name, attested in heiroglyphics from 2000 B.C.E., of unknown
origin. In Greek use, sometimes meaning all of Africa. Related: Libyan.


licence (n.)

mid-14c., liberty (to do something), leave, from Old French licence freedom, liberty, power,
possibility; permission, (12c.), from Latin licentia freedom, liberty, license, from licentem
(nominative licens). present participle of licere to be allowed, be lawful, from PIE root *leik- to
offer, bargain (cognates: Lettish likstu I come to terms). Meaning formal (usually written)
permission from authority to do something (marry, hunt, drive, etc.) is first attested early 15c.
Meaning excessive liberty, disregard of propriety is from mid-15c. No etymological justification for
the spelling with -s-; attempts to confine license to verbal use and licence to noun use (compare
advise/advice, devise/device) seem to have failed.


licence (v.)

c.1400, grant formal authorization, from license (n.). Related: Licenced; Licencing.


license

see licence. Related: Licensed; licensing.


licensee (n.)

1837, from license + -ee.


licensure (n.)

1808, from license + -ure.


licentious (adj.)

morally unrestrained, 1530s, from Medieval Latin licentiosus full of license, unrestrained, from
Latin licentia (see license). Related: Licentiously; licentiousness.


lich (n.)

also litch, lych, body, corpse, southern England dialectal survival of Old English lic body, dead
body, corpse, cognate with Old Frisian lik, Dutch lijk, Old High German lih, German leiche dead
body, Old Norse lik, Danish lig, Gothic leik, from Proto-Germanic *likow. Compare litch-gate roofed
gate to a churchyard under which a bier is placed to await the coming of the clergyman.


lichen (n.)

c.1600, from Latin lichen, from Greek leichen, originally what eats around itself, probably from
leichein to lick (see lick). Originally used of liverwort; the modern sense first recorded 1715.
Related: Lichenaceous.


Lichfield

Licitfelda (c.710) Open Land near Letocetum (Celtic place name meaning gray wood) + Old English
feld.


licit (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French licite or directly from Latin licitus lawful, past participle of
licere be allowed, be lawful (see licence). Related: Licitly; licitness.


lick (v.1)

Old English liccian to pass the tongue over the surface, lap, lick up, from Proto-Germanic *likkon
(cognates: Old Saxon likkon, Dutch likken, Old High German lecchon, German lecken, Gothic bi-
laigon), from PIE imitative base *leigh- (cognates: Sanskrit ledhi he licks, Armenian lizum I lick,
Greek leikhein to lick, Latin lingere to lick, Old Irish ligim I lick, Welsh llwy spoon). French
l&#233;cher is a Germanic loan word.    To lick (someone or something) into shape (1610s) is in
reference to the supposed ways of bears:Beres ben brought forthe al fowle and transformyd and after
that by lyckyng of the fader and the moder they ben brought in to theyr kyndely shap. [The
Pylgremage of the Sowle, 1413]


lick (n.)

an act of licking, c.1600, from lick (v.1). Meaning small portion is 1814, originally Scottish;
hence U.S. colloquial sense. Sense of place where an animal goes to lick salt is from 1747. The jazz
music sense of short figure or solo is by 1922.


lick (v.2)

to beat, 1535, perhaps from figurative use of lick (v.1) in the Coverdale bible that year in sense
of defeat, annihilate (an enemy's forces) in Num. xxii:4:Now shal this heape licke up all that is
about vs, euen as an oxe licketh vp the grasse in the field.But to lick (of) the whip taste
punishment is attested from mid-15c.


lickerish (adj.)

fond of delicious fare, c.1500, from Middle English likerous pleasing to the palate (late 13c.),
from Anglo-French *likerous, Old French licherous (see lecherous). Unlike the French word, it
generally kept close to its literal sense.


lickety-split (adj.)

1852, American English (earlier lickety-cut, lickety-click, and simply licketie, 1817), from lick
(n.1) in dialectal sense very fast sprint in a race (1809) on the notion of a lick as a fast thing
(compare blink).


licking (n.)

an act of licking or lapping, late 14c., from present participle of lick (v.1); meaning a beating is
1756, from lick (v.2).


lickspittle (n.)

also lick-spittle, sycophant, abject toady, 1741, from lick (v.1) + spittle.


licorice (n.)

also liquorice, c.1200, from Anglo-French lycoryc, Old French licorece (also recolice), from Late
Latin liquiritia, alteration of Latin glychyrrhiza, from Greek glykyrrhiza, literally sweet root,
from glykys sweet (see glucose) + rhiza root (see radish); form influenced in Latin by liquere
become fluid, because of the method of extracting the sweet stuff from the root. French
r&eacute;glisse, Italian regolizia are the same word, with metathesis of -l- and -r-.


lictor (n.)

late 14c., from Latin lictor, literally binder, from past participle stem of *ligere to bind,
collect, collateral form of ligare (see ligament).


lid (n.)

mid-13c., from Old English hlid lid, cover, opening, gate, from Proto-Germanic *khlithan (cognates:
Old Norse hli&eth; gate, gap, Swedish lid gate, Old French hlid, Middle Dutch lit, Dutch lid, Old
High German hlit lid, cover), from PIE root *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)), with here perhaps the
sense of that which bends over. Meaning eyelid is from early 13c. Slang sense of hat, cap is
attested from 1896. Slang phrase put a lid on clamp down on, silence, end is from 1906.


Lido

famous resort island off Venice, from Italian lido, from Latin litus shore.


lie (v.1)

speak falsely, tell an untruth, late 12c., from Old English legan, ligan, earlier leogan deceive,
belie, betray (class II strong verb; past tense leag, past participle logen), from Proto-Germanic
*leugan (cognates: Old Norse ljuga, Danish lyve, Old Frisian liaga, Old Saxon and Old High German
liogan, German l&uuml;gen, Gothic liugan), from PIE root *leugh- to tell a lie.


lie (v.2)

rest horizontally, early 12c., from Old English licgan (class V strong verb; past tense l&aelig;g,
past participle legen) be situated, reamin; be at rest, lie down, from Proto-Germanic *legjan
(cognates: Old Norse liggja, Old Frisian lidzia, Middle Dutch ligghen, Dutch liggen, Old High German
ligen, German liegen, Gothic ligan), from PIE *legh- to lie, lay (cognates: Hittite laggari falls,
lies, Greek lekhesthai to lie down, Latin lectus bed, Old Church Slavonic lego to lie down,
Lithuanian at-lagai fallow land, Old Irish laigim I lie down, Irish luighe couch, grave). To lie
with have sexual intercourse is from c.1300, and compare Old English licgan mid cohabit with. To
take (something) lying down passively, submissively is from 1854.


lie (n.1)

an untruth, Old English lyge lie, falsehood, from Proto-Germanic *lugiz (cognates: Old Norse lygi,
Danish l&oslash;gn, Old Frisian leyne (fem.), Dutch leugen (fem.), Old High German lugi, German
L&uuml;ge, Gothic liugn a lie), from the root of lie (v.1). To give the lie to accuse directly of
lying is attested from 1590s. Lie-detector first recorded 1909.


lie (n.2)

manner of lying, 1690s, from lie (v.2). Sense in golf is from 1857.


lie-down (n.)

period of rest reclining, 1840, from lie (v.2) + down (adv.).


Liebfraumilch (n.)

German white wine, 1833, from German, literally milk of Our Lady.


lied (n.)

German romantic song, 1852, from German Lied, literally song, from Middle High German liet, from Old
High German liod, from Proto-Germanic *leuthan (see laud). Hence Liederkranz, in reference to German
singing societies, literally garland of songs.


lief (adj.)

Old English leof dear, valued, beloved, pleasant; also as a noun, a beloved person, friend, from
Proto-Germanic *leubo- (cognates: Old Norse ljutr, Old Frisian liaf, Dutch lief, Old High German
liob, German lieb, Gothic liufs dear, beloved), from PIE root *leubh- love (see love (n.)). As an
adverb, dearly, willingly from c.1250. I want and I'd love to are overworked and misused to fill the
hole left in the language when I would lief faded in 17c.


liege (adj.)

word used by a vassal to address his superior or lord in the feudal system, c.1300, from Anglo-
French lige (late 13c.), Old French lige (feudal) liege, free, giving or receiving fidelity, perhaps
from Late Latin laeticus cultivated by serfs, from laetus serf, which probably is from Proto-
Germanic *lethiga- freed (cognates: Old English l&aelig;t half-freedman, serf; Old High German laz,
Old Frisian lethar freedman), from PIE root *le- let go, slacken (see let (v.)). Or the Middle
English word may be directly from Old High German leidig free. As a noun from late 14c., both as
vassal and lord. Hence, liege-man a vassal sworn to the service and support of a lord, who in turn
is obliged to protect him (mid-14c.).


lien (n.)

right to hold property of another until debt is paid, 1530s, from Middle French lien a band or tie,
from Latin ligamen bond, from ligare to bind, tie (see ligament).


lieno-

word-forming element meaning spleen, from Latin lien spleen (see spleen).


lier (n.)

one who reclines; 1580s, agent noun from lie (v.2).


lieu

late 13c., from Old French lieu place, position, situation, rank, from Latin locum (nominative
locus) place.


lieutenancy (n.)

mid-15c., from lieutenant + -cy.


lieutenant (n.)

late 14c., one who takes the place of another, from Old French lieu tenant substitute, deputy,
literally placeholder, from lieu place (see lieu) + tenant, present participle of tenir to hold (see
tenant). The notion is of a substitute for higher authority. Specific military sense of officer next
in rank to a captain is from 1570s. Pronunciation with lef- is common in Britain, and spellings to
reflect it date back to 14c., but the origin of this is a mystery (OED rejects suggestion that it
comes from old confusion of -u- and -v-).


life (n.)

Old English life (dative lif) existence, lifetime, way of life, condition of being a living thing,
opposite of death, from Proto-Germanic *libam (cognates: Old Norse lif life, body, Dutch lijf body,
Old High German lib life, German Leib body), properly continuance, perseverance, from PIE *leip- to
remain, persevere, continue; stick, adhere (see leave (v.)). Much of the modern range of meanings
was present in Old English. Meaning property which distinguishes living from non-living matter is
from 1560s. Sense of vitality, energy is from 1580s. Extended 1703 to term of duration (of inanimate
objects).   Life-jacket is from 1840; life-preserver from 1630s of anything that is meant to save a
life, 1803 of devices worn to prevent drowning. Life-saver is from 1883, figurative use from 1909,
as a brand of hard sugar candy, from 1912, so called for shape. Life-form is from 1861. Life cycle
is from 1855.


life of Riley (n.)

life at ease, expression popularized by 1917, American English, sometimes said to trace to various
songs from c.1902.


life-boat

also lifeboat, 1801 (the thing itself attested by 1785), from life (n.) + boat.


life-size (adj.)

1820, from life (n.) + size (n.).


lifeblood (n.)

also life-blood, 1580s, blood necessary for life, from life (n.) + blood (n.). Figurative and
transferred use is from 1590s.


lifeguard (n.)

also life-guard, 1640s, bodyguard of soldiers, from life (n.) + guard (n.), translating German
leibgarde. Sense of person paid to watch over bathers is by 1896.


lifeless (adj.)

Old English lifleas inanimate, dead; see life + -less. Meaning with no living things is from 1728.
Related: Lifelessly; lifelessness.


lifelike (adj.)

1610s, likely to live, from life (n.) + like (adj.). Meaning exactly like the living original is
from 1725.


lifeline (n.)

also life-line, 1700, rope used somehow to save lives, from life (n.) + line (n.); figurative sense
first attested 1860. Sense in palmistry from 1890.


lifelong (adj.)

also life-long, continuing a lifetime, 1855, from life (n.) + long (adj.).


lifer (n.)

prisoner serving a life sentence, 1830, from life (n.).


lifespan (n.)

also life span, 1918, from life (n.) + span (n.1).


lifestyle (n.)

also life-style, 1929, from life (n.) + style (n.); originally a specific term used by Austrian
psychologist Alfred Adler (1870-1937); broader sense is by 1961.


lifetime (n.)

also life-time, early 13c., from life (n.) + time (n.). One word from 19c. Old English had
lifd&#230;g in same sense, literally life day.


lifeway (n.)

way of life, 1960s, an unconscious revival of Old English lifweg; see life (n.) + way (n.).


lift (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse lypta to raise, from Proto-Germanic *luftijan (cognates: Middle Low German
l&uuml;chten, Dutch lichten, German l&uuml;ften to lift; Old English lyft heaven, air, see loft).
The meaning steal (as in shop-lift) is first recorded 1520s. Related: Lifted; lifting.


lift (n.)

late 15c., act of lifting, from lift (v.). Meaning act of helping is 1630s; that of cheering
influence is from 1861. Sense of elevator is from 1851; that of upward force of an aircraft is from
1902. Meaning help given to a pedestrian by taking him into a vehicle is from 1712.


liftoff (n.)

also lift-off, vertical take-off of a rocket, etc., 1956, American English, from lift (v.) + off.


ligament (n.)

late 14c., from Latin ligamentum band, tie, ligature, from ligare to bind, tie, from PIE *leig- to
bind (cognates: Albanian lith I bind, Middle Low German lik band, Middle High German geleich joint,
limb). Related: Ligamental; ligamentary.


ligand (n.)

1952, from Latin ligandus, gerundive of ligare to bind (see ligament).


ligate (v.)

1590s, from Latin ligatus, past participle of ligare to bind (see ligament). Related: Ligated;
ligating.


ligation (n.)

1590s, from Middle French ligation, from Late Latin ligationem (nominative ligatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of ligare to bind (see ligament).


ligature (n.)

c.1400, something used in tying or binding, from Middle French ligature (14c.), from Late Latin
ligatura a band, from Latin ligatus, past participle of ligare to bind (see ligament). In musical
notation from 1590s; of letters joined in printing or writing from 1690s.


light (n.)

brightness, radiant energy, Old English leht, earlier leoht light, daylight; luminous, beautiful,
from Proto-Germanic *leukhtam (cognates: Old Saxon lioht, Old Frisian liacht, Middle Dutch lucht,
Dutch licht, Old High German lioht, German Licht, Gothic liuha&#254; light), from PIE *leuk- light,
brightness (cognates: Sanskrit rocate shines; Armenian lois light, lusin moon; Greek leukos bright,
shining, white; Latin lucere to shine, lux light, lucidus clear; Old Church Slavonic luci light;
Lithuanian laukas pale; Welsh llug gleam, glimmer; Old Irish loche lightning, luchair brightness;
Hittite lukezi is bright).    The -gh- was an Anglo-French scribal attempt to render the Germanic
hard -h- sound, which has since disappeared from this word. The figurative spiritual sense was in
Old English; the sense of mental illumination is first recorded mid-15c. Meaning something used for
igniting is from 1680s. Meaning a consideration which puts something in a certain view (as in in
light of) is from 1680s. Something that's a joy and a delight has been the light of (someone's) eyes
since Old English:   &#208;u eart dohtor min, minra eagna leoht [Juliana].    To see the light come
into the world is from 1680s; later in a Christian sense.


light (adj.1)

not heavy, from Old English leoht not heavy, light in weight; easy, trifling; quick, agile, from
Proto-Germanic *lingkhtaz (cognates: Old Norse lettr, Swedish l&auml;tt, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
licht, German leicht, Gothic leihts), from PIE root *legwh- not heavy, having little weight
(cognates: Latin levis light, Old Irish lu small; see lever).    The notion in make light of (1520s)
is of unimportance. Alternative spelling lite, the darling of advertisers, is first recorded 1962.
The adverb is Old English leohte, from the adjective. Light-skirts woman of easy virtue is attested
from 1590s. To make light of is from 1520s.


light (v.1)

touch down, from Old English lihtan to alight; alleviate, leave, from Proto-Germanic *linkhtijan,
literally to make light, from *lingkhtaz not heavy (see light (adj.1)). Apparently the ground sense
is to dismount a horse, etc., and thus relieve it of one's weight. To light out leave hastily is
1870, from a nautical meaning move out, move heavy objects, of unknown origin but perhaps belonging
to this word (compare lighter (n.1)).


light (v.2)

to illuminate, fill with brightness, Old English lyhtan, common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon
liohtian, Old High German liuhtan, German leuchten, Gothic liuhtjan to light), from source of from
light (n.). Related: Lighted; lighting.


light (adj.2)

not dark, Old English leoht, common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German lioht, Old
Frisian liacht, German licht bright, from the source of Old English leoht (see light (n.)). Meaning
pale-hued is from 1540s.


light bulb (n.)

also lightbulb, 1884, from light (n.) + bulb.


light year (n.)

also light-year, lightyear, distance light travels in one year, 1888, from light (n.) + year.


light-fingered (adj.)

thievish, 1540s, from light (adj.1) + finger.


light-headed (adj.)

also lightheaded, dizzy, 1530s; from light (adj.1) + head (n.). Related: Light-headedness.


light-hearted (adj.)

also lighthearted, cheerful, c.1400, from light (adj.1) + hearted. Related: Light-heartedly; light-
heartedness.


lighten (v.1)

to make less heavy, figuratively to make cheerful, mid-14c., from light (adj.1) + -en (1). Related:
Lightened; lightening.


lighten (v.2)

shed light upon, illuminate, brighten, early 14c., from light (n.) -en (1). Meaning to grow brighter
is late 14c. Of faces, expressions, etc., from 1795. Related: Lightened; lightening.


lightening (n.)

the shedding of light, mid-14c., verbal noun from lighten (v.2). Meaning alleviation of weight
(literal and figurative) is from 1520s, from lighten (v.1).


lighter (n.1)

barge, late 15c., agent noun from light (adj.1), with a sense of lightening a load, or else from
Dutch lichter, from lichten to lighten, unload, on the same notion. They are used in loading or
unloading ships that cannot approach a wharf.


lighter (n.2)

person who lights, 1550s, agent noun from light (v.2).


lighthouse (n.)

1620s, from light (n.) + house (n.).


lighting (n.)

shining, illumination, Old English lihting, from leoht (see light (n.)).


lightless (adj.)

Old English leohtleas; see light (n.) + -less.


lightly (adv.)

Old English leohtlice so as not to be heavy (of material things, but also of sleep, blows, etc.);
cognate with Old Frisian lichtelik, Old High German lihtlihho, German leichtlich, Old Norse lettlega
(see light (adj.1)). Meaning frivolously, indifferently is from early 13c.


lightness (n.)

quality of having little weight, late Old English, from light (adj.1) + -ness.


lightning (n.)

late 13c., present participle of lightnen make bright, extended form of Old English lihting, from
leht (see light (n.)). Meaning cheap, raw whiskey is attested from 1781, also sometimes gin.
Lightning bug is attested from 1778. Lightning rod from 1790.


lights (n.)

the lungs, c.1200, literally the light (in weight) organs, from light (adj.1); also see lung.
Obsolete now except in phrases like to knock (someone's) lights out.


lightweight (adj.)

also light-weight, 1773 in horse-racing, also in pugilism; from light (adj.1) + weight. Figurative
sense of inconsequential first attested 1809.


ligneous (adj.)

woody, 1620s, from French ligneux and directly from Latin ligneus, from lignum wood, firewood (see
ligni-).


ligni-

word-forming element meaning wood, from Latin lignum wood, firewood, from PIE *leg-no-, literally
that which is collected, from root *leg- to collect (see lecture (n.)).


lignin (n.)

1822, from Latin lignum wood (see ligni-) + chemical suffix -in (2).


lignite (n.)

imperfectly formed coal, 1808, from French, from Latin lignum wood (see ligni-). Brown coal that
still shows traces of the wood it once was. Probably directly from Lithanthrax Lignius, name given
to woody coal by Swedish chemist Johan Gottschalk Wallerius (1709-1785) in 1775.


like (adj.)

having the same characteristics or qualities (as another), Middle English shortening of Old English
gelic like, similar, from Proto-Germanic *galika- having the same form, literally with a
corresponding body (cognates: Old Saxon gilik, Dutch gelijk, German gleich, Gothic galeiks equally,
like), a compound of *ga- with, together + Germanic base *lik- body, form; like, same (cognates: Old
English lic body, German Leiche corpse, Danish lig, Swedish lik, Dutch lijk body, corpse).
Analogous, etymologically, to Latin conform. The modern form (rather than *lich) may be from a
northern descendant of the Old English word's Norse cognate, glikr.    Formerly with comparative
liker and superlative likest (still in use 17c.). The preposition (c.1200) and the adverb (c.1300)
both are from the adjective. As a conjunction, first attested early 16c. The word has been used as a
postponed filler (going really fast, like) from 1778; as a presumed emphatic (going, like, really
fast) from 1950, originally in counterculture slang and bop talk. Phrase more like it closer to what
is desired is from 1888.


like (n.)

c.1200, a similar thing (to another), from like (adj.).


like (v.)

Old English lician to please, be sufficient, from Proto-Germanic *likjan (cognates: Old Norse lika,
Old Frisian likia, Old High German lihhen, Gothic leikan to please), from *lik- body, form; like,
same.    The basic meaning seems to be to be like (see like (adj.)), thus, to be suitable. Like (and
dislike) originally flowed the other way: It likes me, where we would say I like it. The modern flow
began to appear late 14c. (compare please).


likeable (adj.)

also likable, 1730, from like (v.) + -able. Related: Likeableness.


likelihood (n.)

late 14c., resemblance, similarity, from likely + -hood. Meaning probability is from mid-15c.


likely (adj.)

c.1300, perhaps from Old Norse likligr likely, from likr like (see like (adj.)). Old English had
cognate geliclic. Meaning having the appearance of being strong and capable is from mid-15c., though
now mostly confined to American English; according to OED this sense is perhaps influenced by like
(v.). Sense of good-looking is from late 15c. Meaning probably is attested from late 14c., now
principally in American English.    LIKELY. That may be liked; that may please; handsome. In the
United States, as a colloquial term, respectable; worthy of esteem; sensible.--Worcester. [Bartlett]
As an adverb, late 14c., from the adjective.


likeminded (adj.)

also like-minded, 1520s, from like (adj.) + minded. One word from 19c.


liken (v.)

late 13c., to represent as like, from like (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Likened; likening.


likeness (n.)

Old English (Northumbrian) licnes likeness, similarity; figure, statue, image, shortened from
gelicness; see like (adj.) + -ness.


likes (n.)

predilections, preferences, 1851, plural of like (n.); earlier used in singular in this sense (early
15c.).


likewise (adv.)

mid-15c., from the phrase in like wise in the same manner (mid-15c.), from like (adj.) + wise (n.).


Likud (n.)

nationalist coalition party formed in Israel 1973, from Hebrew, literally union, combination.


lilac (n.)

1620s, from French lilac shrub of genus Syringa with mauve flowers, from Spanish lilac, from Arabic
lilak, from Persian lilak, variant of nilak bluish, from nil indigo (compare Sanskrit nilah dark
blue), of uncertain origin. As a color name, attested from 1791; as a scent, from 1895. As an
adjective, pale pinkish-purple, from 1801. Related: Lilaceous.


Lilith

female evil spirit, in medieval Hebrew folklore the first wife of Adam, from Hebrew Lilith, from
Akkad. Lilitu, which is connected by folk etymology with Hebrew laylah night.


Lilliputian (adj.)

diminutive, tiny, literally pertaining to Lilliput, the fabulous island whose inhabitants were six
inches high, a name coined by Jonathan Swift in Gulliver's Travels (1726). Swift left no explanation
of the origin of the word.


lilt (v.)

1510s, to lift up (the voice), probably from late 14c. West Midlands dialect lulten to sound an
alarm, of unknown origin. Possible relatives include Norwegian lilla to sing and Low German lul
pipe. It is possible that the whole loose group is imitative. Sense of sing in a light manner is
first recorded 1786. Related: Lilted; lilting. As a noun, 1728, lilting song, from the verb. As
rhythmical cadence, 1840.


lily (n.)

Old English lilie, from Latin lilia, plural of lilium a lily, cognate with Greek leirion, both
perhaps borrowed from a corrupted pronunciation of an Egyptian word. Used in Old Testament to
translate Hebrew shoshanna and in New Testament to translate Greek krinon. As an adjective, 1530s,
white, pure, lovely; later pale, colorless (1580s).    Also from the Latin word are German lilie,
French lis, Spanish lirio, Italian giglio. The lily of the valley translates Latin lilium convallium
(Vulgate), a literal rendition of the Hebrew term in Song of Solomon ii:1. It apparently was applied
to a particular plant (Convallaria majalis) first by 16c. German herbalists. Lily pad is from 1834,
American English.


lily-livered (adj.)

cowardly, 1605, in Macbeth; from lily (in its color sense of pale, bloodless) + liver (n.1), which
was a supposed seat of love and passion. A healthy liver is typically dark reddish-brown.


lily-white (adj.)

early 14c., from lily + white; from 1903 with reference to whites-only segregation; 1964 as
irreproachable.


Lima

Peruvian capital, founded 1535 by Pizarro, from Spanish corruption of Quechua (Inca) Rimak, name of
a god and his temple, from rima to speak (perhaps a reference to priests who spoke from concealed
places in statues of the gods).


lima bean (n.)

1756, associated with Lima, Peru, from which region the plant (Phaseolus lunatus) was introduced to
Europe c.1500. Among the earliest New World crops to be known in the Old World, Simmonds' Dictionary
of Trade (1858) describes it as esteemed, but it has the consistency of a diseased dog kidney.


limaceous (adj.)

pertaining to slugs, 1650s, with -ous + Latin limax (genitive limacis) snail, slug, from Greek
leimax, from PIE root *(s)lei- slime (see slime (n.)). The Greek word is cognate with Russian
slim&#225;k snail, Lithuanian sl&#237;ekas earthworm, and the first element in Old English slaw-wyrm
slow-worm.


limb (n.1)

part or member, Old English lim limb, joint, main branch of a tree, from Proto-Germanic *limu-
(cognates: Old Norse limr limb, lim small branch of a tree), a variant of *li&thorn;u- (source of
Old English li&thorn;, Old Frisian lith, Old Norse li&eth;r, Gothic li&thorn;us a limb; and with
prefix ga-, source of German Glied limb, member), from PIE root *lei- to bend, be movable, be
nimble. The parasitic -b began to appear late 1500s for no etymological reason (perhaps by influence
of limb (n.2)). In Old and Middle English, and until lately in dialects, it could mean any visible
body part.The lymmes of generacion were shewed manyfestly. [Caxton, The subtyl historyes and fables
of Esope, Auyan, Alfonce, and Poge, 1484]Hence, limb-lifter fornicator (1570s). To go out on a limb
in figurative sense enter a risky situation is from 1897. Life and limb in reference to the body
inclusively is from c.1200.


limb (n.2)

late 14c., edge of a quadrant or other instrument, from Latin limbus border, hem, fringe, edge, of
uncertain origin. Klein suggests cognate with Sanskrit lambate hangs down, and English limp. But
Tucker writes that the sense appears to be that of something which twists, goes round, or binds ...
not of something which hangs loose, and suggests cognates in Lithuanian linta ribbon, Old Norse
linnr whether. Astronomical sense of edge of the disk of a heavenly body first attested 1670s.


limbate (adj.)

edged, bordered, 1826, from Late Latin limbatus, from Latin limbus (see limb (n.2)).


limber (adj.)

pliant, flexible, 1560s, of uncertain origin, possibly from limb (n.1) on notion of supple boughs of
a tree [Barnhart], or from limp flaccid [Skeat], or somehow from Middle English lymer shaft of a
cart (see limber (n.)), but the late appearance of the -b- in that word argues against it. Related:
Limberness. Dryden used limber-ham (see ham (n.1) in the joint sense) as a name for a character
perswaded by what is last said to him, and changing next word.


limber (n.)

detachable forepart of a gun carriage, 1620s, from Middle English lymer (early 15c.), earlier lymon
(c.1400), probably from Old French limon shaft, a word perhaps of Celtic origin, or possibly from
Germanic and related to limb (n.1). Hence, limber (v.) to attach a limber to a gun (1783). Compare
related Spanish limon shaft, leman helmsman.


limber (v.)

1748, from limber (adj.). Related: Limbered; limbering.


limbic (adj.)

1879, from French limbique (1878, Broca), from limbe, from Latin limbus edge (see limb (n.2)).
Limbic system is attested from 1950.


limbless (adj.)

1590s, from limb (n.1) + -less. Related: Limblessness.


limbo (n.1)

region supposed to exist on the border of Hell reserved for pre-Christian saints (Limbus patrum) and
unbaptized infants (Limbus infantum); c.1300, from Latin limbo, ablative of limbus edge, border (see
limb (2)). It emerged from Latin in the ablative form from frequent use in phrases such as in limbo
(patrum), etc. Figurative sense of condition of neglect or oblivion is from 1640s.


limbo (n.2)

dance in which the dancer bends backward and passes under a bar, 1956, of W.Indian origin, probably
an alteration of limber.


Limburger (n.)

1870, short for Limburger cheese (1817), from Limburg, province in northeast Belgium, where the
cheese is made.  Some frauds a few years ago started a Limburger cheese factory down in Keyport, New
Jersey, but the imposition was soon exposed. A man could come within 300 yards of the spurious
article without being knocked down, and as the smell never had any effect on the town clock the
business was soon discontinued. [John E. Boyd, The Berkeley Heroine and Others Stories]    The place
name is from Germanic *lindo lime tree + *burg fortification.


limbus (n.)

Latin, literally edge, border (see limb (n.2)). In Medieval Latin, region on the border of Hell, and
thus sometimes used in English for limbo (n.1).


lime (n.1)

chalky mineral used in making mortar, from Old English lim sticky substance, birdlime, mortar,
cement, gluten, from Proto-Germanic *leimaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse, Danish lim, Dutch lijm,
German Leim birdlime), from PIE root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (cognates: Latin limus slime,
mud, mire, linere to smear; see slime (n.)). Lime is made by putting limestone or shells in a red
heat, which burns off the carbonic acid and leaves a brittle white solid which dissolves easily in
water. Hence lime-kiln (late 13c.), lime-burner (early 14c.). As a verb, c.1200, from the noun.


lime (n.2)

greenish-yellow citrus fruit, 1630s, probably via Spanish lima, from Arabic limah citrus fruit, from
Persian limun lemon (see lemon (n.1)). Related: Limeade (1892), with ending as in lemonade.


lime (n.3)

linden tree, 1620s, earlier line (c.1500), from Middle English lynde (early 14c.), from Old English
lind lime tree (see linden). Klein suggests the change of -n- to -m- probably began in compounds
whose second element began in a labial (such as line-bark, line-bast). An ornamental European tree
unrelated to the tree that produces the citrus fruit.


lime-juicer (n.)

see Limey.


limelight (n.)

1826, popular name for Drummond light, a brilliant light created by the incandescence of lime (n.1);
adopted for lighthouses and later for the Victorian stage, where it illuminated the principal
actors, hence the figurative sense of on stage, at the center of attention (1877).


limerick (n.)

nonsense verse of five lines, 1896, perhaps from the county and city in Ireland, but if so the
connection is obscure. Often (after OED's Murray) attributed to a party game in which each guest in
turn made up a nonsense verse and all sang a refrain with the line Will you come up to Limerick? but
he reported this in 1898 and earlier evidence is wanting. Or perhaps from Learic, from Edward Lear
(1812-1888) English humorist who popularized the form. Earliest examples are in French, which
further complicates the quest for the origin. OED's first record of the word is in a letter of
Aubrey Beardsley. The place name is literally bare ground, from Irish Liumneach, from lom bare,
thin. It was famous for hooks.    The limerick may be the only traditional form in English not
borrowed from the poetry of another language. Although the oldest known examples are in French, the
name is from Limerick, Ireland. John Ciardi suggests that the Irish Brigade, which served in France
for most of the eighteenth centiry, might have taken the form to France or developed an English
version of a French form. ... The contemporary limerick usually depends on a pun or some other turn
of wit. It is also likely to be somewhat suggestive or downright dirty. [Miller Williams, Patterns
of Poetry, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1986]


limestone (n.)

late 14c., from lime (n.1) + stone (n.).


limey (n.)

1888, Australian, New Zealand, and South African slang for English immigrant; U.S. use is attested
from 1918, originally British sailor, British warship, short for lime-juicer (1857), in derisive
reference to the British Navy's policy (begun 1795) of issuing lime (n.2) juice on ships to prevent
scurvy among sailors. In U.S., extended to any Englishman by 1924.Midway Signs Limey Prof to Dope
Yank Talk [Chicago Tribune headline, Oct. 18, 1924]


liminal (adj.)

1884, from Latin limen threshold, cross-piece, sill (see limit (n.)) + -al (1). Related: Liminality.


limit (n.)

c.1400, boundary, frontier, from Old French limite a boundary, from Latin limitem (nominative limes)
a boundary, limit, border, embankment between fields, related to limen threshold. Originally of
territory; general sense from early 15c. Colloquial sense of the very extreme, the greatest degree
imaginable is from 1904.


limit (v.)

late 14c., from Old French limiter mark (a boundary), restrict; specify, from Latin limitare to
bound, limit, fix, from limes boundary, limit (see limit (n.)). Related: limited; limiting.


limitary (adj.)

1610s, from Latin limitaris, from limes (genitive limitis); see limit (n.).


limitation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French limitacion and directly from Latin limitationem (nominative limitatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of limitare (see limit (v.)). Phrase statute of limitations
attested by 1768.


limited (adj.)

1550s, past participle adjective from limit (v.); as a stand-alone for limited express train, by
1883. Limited edition is from 1920; limited monarchy from 1640s; limited war is from 1948. In
British company names, Limited (abbrev. Ltd.), 1855, is short for limited liability company, one in
which the liability of partners is limited, usually to the amount of their capital investment.


limitless (adj.)

1580s, from limit (n.) + -less. Related: Limitlessly; limitlessness.


limn (v.)

early 15c., to illuminate (manuscripts), altered from Middle English luminen, to illuminate
manuscripts (late 14c.), from Old French luminer light up, illuminate, from Latin luminare
illuminate, burnish, from lumen (genitive luminis) radiant energy, light, related to lucere to shine
(see light (n.)). Sense of portray, depict first recorded 1590s. Related: Limned.


limnology (n.)

study of lakes and fresh water, 1892, with -logy + limno-, comb. form of Greek limne pool of
standing water, tidal pool, marsh, lake, from PIE root *(s)lei- slime (see slime (n.)). The science
founded and the name probably coined by Swiss geologist Fran&#231;ois-Alphonse Forel (1841-1912).
Related: Limnological; limnologist.


limo (n.)

abbreviation of limousine, by 1959, American English.


Limoges (n.)

painted porcelain or enamel from Limoges in France, 1838; for place name see Limousine.


limousine (n.)

1902, enclosed automobile with open driver's seat, from French limousine, from Limousin, region in
central France, originally an adjective referring to its chief city, Limoges, from Latin Lemovices,
name of a people who lived near there, perhaps named in reference to their elm spears or bows. The
Latin adjective form of the name, Lemovicinus, is the source of French Limousin.    Modern
automobile meaning evolved from perceived similarity of the car's profile to a type of hood worn by
the inhabitants of that province. Since 1930s, synonymous in American English with luxury car;
applied from 1959 to vehicles that take people to and from large airports. Limousine liberal first
attested 1969.


limp (v.)

1560s, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle English lympen to fall short (c.1400), which is
probably from Old English lemphealt halting, lame, limping, which has a lone cognate in the rare
Middle High German limphin, and perhaps is from a PIE root meaning slack, loose, to hang down
(cognates: Sanskrit lambate hangs down, Middle High German lampen to hang down). Related: Limped;
limping. As a noun, 1818, from the verb.


limp (adj.)

1706, flaccid, drooping, of obscure origin, perhaps related to limp (v.).


limpet (n.)

marine gastropod mollusk, early 14c., from Old English lempedu, from Medieval Latin lampreda limpet
(see lamprey).


limpid (adj.)

c.1600, from French limpide (15c.) and directly from Latin limpidus clear, from limpa water goddess,
water; probably cognate with lympha clear liquid (see lymph). Related: Limpidly.


limpidity (n.)

1650s, from French limpidit&#233; or directly from Late Latin limpiditatem (nominative limpiditas)
clarity, from Latin limpidus (see limpid).


limy (adj.)

resembling or coated with lime, 1550s, from lime (n.1) + -y (2).


linch (n.)

early 14c., lins, from Old English lynis linchpin, from Proto-Germanic *luniso (cognates: Old Saxon
lunisa, Middle Dutch lunse, Dutch luns, German L&uuml;nse).


linchpin (n.)

also linch-pin, late 14c., earlier linspin, from Middle English lins axletree (see linch) + pin
(n.). The peg that holds a wheel on an axle; now mainly figurative.


Lincoln

English city, county town of Lincolnshire, Old English Lindcylene, from Latin Lindum Colonia from a
Latinized form of British *lindo pool, lake (corresponding to Welsh llyn). Originally a station for
retired IX Legion veterans. Lincoln green as a type of dyed cloth fabric made there is from c.1500.
In reference to U.S. president Abraham Lincoln (1809-1865), Lincolnesque is from 1894 (earlierst
reference is to the beard); Lincolniana is from (1862).


linden (n.)

the lime tree, 1570s, noun use of an adjective, of linden wood, from Old English lind linden (n.),
from Proto-Germanic *lindjo (cognates: Old Saxon linda, Old Norse lind, Old High German linta,
German linde), probably from PIE *lent-o- flexible (see lithe); with reference to the tree's pliant
bast. Compare Russian lut&#301;ij&#243; forest of lime trees, Polish &#322;&#281;t switch, twig,
Lithuanian lenta board, plank.


Lindy Hop (n.)

popular dance, 1931, it originated in Harlem, N.Y., named for Lindy, nickname of U.S. aviator
Charles A. Lindbergh (1902-1974) who in 1927 made the first solo nonstop trans-Atlantic flight.


line (n.)

a Middle English merger of Old English line cable, rope; series, row, row of letters; rule,
direction, and Old French ligne guideline, cord, string; lineage, descent; both from Latin linea
linen thread, string, line, from phrase linea restis linen cord, from fem. of lineus (adj.) of
linen, from linum linen (see linen).    Oldest sense is rope, cord, string; extended late 14c. to a
thread-like mark (from sense cord used by builders for making things level, mid-14c.), also track,
course, direction. Sense of things or people arranged in a straight line is from 1550s. That of cord
bearing hooks used in fishing is from c.1300. Meaning one's occupation, branch of business is from
1630s, probably from misunderstood KJV translation of 2 Cor. x:16, And not to boast in another mans
line of things made ready to our hand, where line translates Greek kanon, literally measuring rod.
Meaning class of goods in stock is from 1834. Meaning telegraph wire is from 1847 (later telephone
wire).    Meaning policy or set of policies of a political faction is 1892, American English, from
notion of a procession of followers; this is the sense in party line. In British army, the Line
(1802) is the regular, numbered troops, as distinguished from guards and auxiliaries. In the Navy
(1704, as in ship of the line) it refers to the battle line. Lines words of an actor's part is from
1882. Lines of communication were originally transverse trenches in siegeworks.


line (v.1)

to cover the inner side of, late 14c., from Old English lin linen cloth (see linen). Linen was
frequently used in the Middle Ages as a second layer of material on the inner side of a garment.
Related: Lined; lining.


line (v.2)

late 14c., to tie with a cord, from line (n.). Meaning to mark or mark off with lines is from mid-
15c. Sense of to arrange in a line is from 1640s; that of to join a line is by 1773. To line up form
a line is attested by 1889, in U.S. football.


lineage (n.)

late 17c. alteration (by influence of line (n.)) of Middle English linage (c.1300), from Old French
lignage descent, extraction, race, from ligne line, from Latin linea (see line (n.)).


lineal (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French lineal (14c.), from Late Latin linealis pertaining to a line, from linea
(see line (n.)). Related: Lineally.


lineament (n.)

early 15c., distinctive feature of the body, outline, from Middle French lineament, from Latin
lineamentum contour, outline, literally a line, stroke, mark, from lineare to reduce to a straight
line, from linea (see line (n.)). Figurative sense of a characteristic is attested from 1630s.


linear (adj.)

1640s, from French lin&#233;aire, from Latin linearis belonging to a line, from linea string, line
(see line (n.)). Essentially the same word as lineal; in Latin linearis the original suffix -alis
was dissimilated to -aris, but in Late Latin this rule was no longer productive and the formation or
re-formation in -alis remained unchanged. [Barnhart]. Linear A and Linear B (1902-3) were names
given to two related forms of linear Minoan writing discovered 1894-1901 in Crete by Sir Arthur
Evans.


lineate (v.)

1550s, from Latin lineatus, past participle of lineare (see lineament). Related: Lineated;
lineating.


lineate (adj.)

1640s, from Latin lineatus, past participle of lineare (see lineament).


lineation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin lineationem (nominative lineatio) the making in a straight line, noun of
action from past participle stem of lineare (see lineament).


lined (adj.)

having a lining or backing (of some other material), mid-15c., from past participle of line (v.1);
meaning marked with lines is from 1776, from past participle of line (v.2).


lineman (n.)

1858, worker on telegraph (later telephone) lines, from line (n.) + man (n.).


linen (n.)

cloth from woven flax, early 14c.; earlier as an adjective, made of flax (c.1200), from Old English
linin (adj.) made of flax, from lin flax, linen thread, cloth, from Proto-Germanic *linam (cognates:
Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old High German lin flax, linen, German Leinen linen, Gothic lein linen
cloth), probably an early borrowing from Latin linum flax, linen, which, along with Greek linon is
from a non-Indo-European language.


liner (n.1)

ship belonging to a shipping line, 1838, from line (n.) on notion of a succession of ships plying
between ports along regular lines. Line in this sense first attested 1786 in reference to
stagecoaches. Cosmetics sense first recorded 1926, short for eye-liner. The type of baseball hit was
so called from 1874 (line drive attested from 1899).


liner (n.2)

person who fits a lining to, 1610s, agent noun from line (v.1). Meaning thing serving as a lining is
from 1869. Liner notes in a record album are attested from 1953.


linesman (n.)

1856, soldier in a regiment of the line, from genitive of line (n.) + man (n.). Sports sense, in
reference to umpires with specific duties in games with lines (originally tennis, also ice hockey)
is from 1890.


lineup (n.)

also line-up, from line (v.2) + up. The baseball version (1889) is older than the police version
(1907).


ling (n.)

long, slender fish, c.1300, common Germanic, cognate with Dutch leng, German Leng, Old Norse langa,
probably ultimately related to long (adj.).


lingam (n.)

phallic emblem under which Siva is worshipped, 1719, from Sanskrit linga (nominative lingam) mark,
token, sign, emblem, of unknown origin.


linger (v.)

c.1300, lenger reside, dwell, northern England frequentative of lengen to tarry, from Old English
lengan prolong, lengthen, from Proto-Germanic *langjan to make long (cognates: Old Frisian lendza,
Old High German lengan, Dutch lengen to lengthen), source of Old English lang (see long (adj.)).
Sense of delay going, depart slowly and unwillingly is from 1520s. Related: Lingered; lingering.


lingerie (n.)

1835 (but not in widespread use until 1852), from French lingerie things made of linen, also laundry
room, linen shop (15c.), from Old French linge linen (12c.), from Latin lineus (adj.) of linen, from
linum flax, linen (see linen). Originally introduced in English as a euphemism for scandalous under-
linen.


lingo (n.)

foreign speech, 1650s, possibly a corrupt form of lingua franca (q.v.), or from Proven&ccedil;al
lingo language, tongue, from Old Proven&ccedil;al lenga, from Latin lingua tongue (see lingual).


lingua franca (n.)

1620s, from Italian, literally Frankish tongue. Originally a form of communication used in the
Levant, a stripped-down Italian peppered with Spanish, French, Greek, Arabic, and Turkish words. The
name is probably from the Arabic custom, dating back to the Crusades, of calling all Europeans
Franks (see Frank). Sometimes in 17c. English sources also known as Bastard Spanish.


lingual (adj.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin lingualis of the tongue, from Latin lingua tongue, also speech, language,
from Old Latin dingua, from PIE *dnghu- tongue (cognates: Old English tunge, Gothic tuggo tongue;
see tongue). Altered in Latin probably in part by association with lingere to lick.


linguine (n.)

1948, from Italian linguine, plural of linguina little tongue, diminutive of lingua tongue, from
Latin lingua tongue (see lingual).


linguist (n.)

1580s, a master of language, one who uses his tongue freely, a hybrid from Latin lingua language,
tongue (see lingual) + -ist. Meaning a student of language first attested 1640s.


linguistic (adj.)

1856, from French linguistique (1833); see linguist + -ic. The use of linguistic to mean of or
pertaining to language or languages is hardly justifiable etymologically, according to OED, but has
arisen because lingual suggests irrelevant associations. Related: linguistically.


linguistics (n.)

the science of languages, 1847; see linguistic; also see -ics.


liniment (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin linimentum a soft ointment, from Latin linire, collateral form of
earlier linere to daub, smear, from PIE root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (see slime (n.)).


lining (n.)

stuff with which garments are lined, late 14c., from present participle of Middle English linen to
line (see line (v.1)).


link (n.)

early 15c., one of a series of rings or loops which form a chain; section of a cord, probably from
Old Norse *hlenkr or a similar Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse hlekkr link, Old Swedish
l&aelig;nker chain, link, Norwegian lenke, Danish l&aelig;nke), from Proto-Germanic *khlink-
(cognates: German lenken to bend, turn, lead, gelenk articulation, joint, link, Old English hlencan
(plural) armor), from PIE root *kleng- to bend, turn. Missing link between man and apes dates to
1880.


link (v.)

bind, fasten, to couple, late 14c., believed to be from link (n.), though it is attested earlier.
Related: Linked; linking.


link (n.2)

torch, 1520s, of uncertain origin, possibly from Medieval Latin  linchinus, from lichinus wick, from
Greek lykhnos portable light, lamp.


linkage (n.)

1874, from link (v.) + -age.     To understand the principle of Peaucellier's link-work, it is
convenient to consider previously certain properties of a linkage, (to coin a new and useful word of
general application), consisting of an arrangement of six links, obtained in the following manner
... (etc.). [Recent Discoveries in Mechanical Conservation of Motion, in Van Nostrand's Eclectic
Engineering Magazine, vol. XI, July-December 1874]


links (n.)

undulating sandy ground, 1728, from Scottish/Northumbrian link sandy, rolling ground near seashore,
from Old English hlinc rising ground, ridge; perhaps from the same Proto-Germanic root as lean (v.).
This type of landscape in Scotland was where golf first was played; the word has been part of the
names of golf courses since at least 1728.


linnet (n.)

small finch-like songbird, 1530s, from Middle French linette grain of flax, diminutive of lin flax,
from Latin linum linen (see linen). Flaxseed forms much of the bird's diet. Old English name for the
bird was linetwige, with second element perhaps meaning pluck. This yielded Middle English and
dialectal lintwhite.


lino (n.)

1907, short for linotype.


linoleum (n.)

1860, coined by English inventor Frederick Walton (1837-1928), from Latin linum flax, linen (see
linen) + oleum oil (see oil (n.)). Originally, a preparation of solidified linseed oil used to coat
canvas for making floor coverings; the word was applied to the flooring material itself after 1878.
The Linoleum Manufacturing Company was formed 1864.


Linotype (n.)

1886, American English, trademark name (Mergenthaler Linotype Co.), from line o' type, for a
composing machine invented by Ottmar Mergenthaler (1854-1899) in widespread use in newspaper
production early 20c.


linseed (n.)

Old English lins&aelig;d seed of flax, widely regarded in ancient times as a source of medical
treatments, from lin flax (see linen) + s&aelig;d seed (see seed).


linsey-woolsey (n.)

late 15c., originally a cloth woven from linen and wool; the words altered for the sake of a
jingling sound. Linsey is attested from mid-15c., apparently meaning coarse linen fabric. Some
sources suggest a connection or influence from the place name Lindsey in Suffolk.


linstock (n.)

forked staff used for firing a cannon, 1570s, from Dutch lonstok, from lont match + stok stick.


lint (n.)

late 14c., flax prepared for spinning, also refuse of flax used as kindling, somehow from the source
of Old English lin flax (see linen), perhaps from or by influence of Middle French linette grain of
flax, diminutive of lin flax, from Latin linum flax, linen; Klein suggests from Latin linteum linen
cloth, neuter of adjective linteus. Later flax refuse used as tinder or for dressing wounds
(c.1400). Still used for flax in Scotland in Burns' time. Applied in American English to stray
cotton fluff.


lintel (n.)

early 14c., from Old French lintel threshold (13c., Modern French linteau), of uncertain origin,
probably a variant of lintier, from Vulgar Latin *limitaris threshold, from Latin limitaris (adj.)
that is on the border, from limes (genitive limitis) border, boundary (see limit (n.)). Altered by
influence of Latin limen threshold.


Linux

computer operating system, named for Linux kernel,  written 1991 by Linus Torvalds of Finland (who
coined the word but did not choose it as the name).


Linzertorte (n.)

1906, from German Linzertorte, from Linzer (adj.) of Linz, city in Austria, + torte tart. The city
name probably is ultimately from the Germanic root for lime tree.


lion (n.)

late 12c., from Old French lion lion, figuratively hero, from Latin leonem (nominative leo) lion;
the constellation leo, from Greek leon (genitive leontos), from a non-Indo-European language,
perhaps Semitic (compare Hebrew labhi lion, plural lebaim; Egyptian labai, lawai lioness).    A
general Germanic borrowing from Latin (compare Old English leo, Anglian lea; Old Frisian lawa;
Middle Dutch leuwe, Dutch leeuw; Old High German lewo, German L&ouml;we); it is found in most
European languages, often via Germanic (Old Church Slavonic livu, Polish lew, Czech lev, Old Irish
leon, Welsh llew). Used figuratively from c.1200 in an approving sense, one who is fiercely brave,
and a disapproving one, tyrannical leader, greedy devourer. Lion's share the greatest portion is
attested from 1701.


Lionel

masc. proper name, from French, literally young lion (see lion).


lioness (n.)

c.1300, leoness, from lion + -ess.


lionize (v.)

to treat (someone) as a celebrity, a hybrid from lion + -ize. Used by Scott, 1809, and preserving
lion in the sense of person of note who is much sought-after (1715), originally in reference to the
lions formerly kept in the Tower of London (referred to from late 16c.), objects of general
curiosity that every visitor in town was taken to see. Related: Lionized; lionizing.


lip (n.)

Old English lippa, from Proto-Germanic *lepjon (cognates: Old Frisian lippa, Middle Dutch lippe,
Dutch lip, Old High German lefs, German Lefze, Swedish l&auml;pp, Danish l&aelig;be), from PIE *leb-
to lick; lip (source also of Latin labium).    French lippe is from a Germanic source. Transferred
sense of edge or margin of a cup, etc. is from 1590s. Slang sense saucy talk is from 1821, probably
from move the lip (1570s) utter even the slightest word (against someone). To bite (one's) lip show
vexation is from early 14c. Stiff upper lip as a sign of courage is from 1833. Lip gloss is attested
from 1939; lip balm from 1877. Related: Lips.


lip (v.)

c.1600, to kiss, from lip (n.). Meaning to pronounce with the lips only is from 1789. Related:
Lipped; lipping.


lip service (n.)

something proffered but not performed, 1640s, from lip (n.) + service (n.1). Earlier in same sense
was lip-labour (1530s).


lip-read (v.)

1880, back-formation from lip-reading, which is attested from 1852 in writings on educating deaf-
mutes; from lip (n.) + reading.


liparo-

before vowels lipar-, word-forming element meaning oily, from Greek liparos oily, fatty, greasy,
from lipos fat (see lipo-).


lipase (n.)

class of enzymes, 1897, from French lipase (1896), from Greek lipos fat (see lipo- (v.)) + chemical
ending -ase.


lipid (n.)

organic substance of the fat group, from French lipide, coined 1923 by G. Bertrand from Greek lipos
fat, grease (see lipo-) + chemical suffix -ide.


Lipizzan

1911, from Lipizza, home of the former Austrian Imperial Stud; term used to designate horses
originally bred there. The city is modern-day Lipica near Trieste in Slovenia (Lipizza is the
Italian form of the name).


lipless (adj.)

c.1400, from lip (n.) + -less. Related: Liplessly.


lipo-

word-forming element meaning fat (n.), from Greek lipo-, comb. form of lipos fat (n.), from PIE root
*leip- to stick, adhere, also used to form words for fat, see leave (v.)).


lipoma (n.)

fatty tumor (plural lipomata), 1830, medical Latin, from Greek lipos fat (n.), see lipo-, + -oma.


liposuction (n.)

1983, from Greek lipos fat (see lipo-) + suction (n.).


lipstick (n.)

1880, from lip (n.) + stick (n.).


liquefaction (n.)

late 15c., from French liqu&eacute;faction, from Late Latin liquefactionem (nominative liquefactio),
noun of action from past participle stem of liquefacere to make liquid, melt (see liquefy).


liquefy (v.)

early 15c., from Old French liquefier liquefy, dissolve, from Latin liquefacere make liquid, melt,
from liquere be fluid (see liquid (adj.)) + facere to make (see factitious).


liqueur (n.)

sweetened, flavored alcoholic liquor, 1729, from French liqueur liquor, liquid, from Old French
licor liquid. See liquor, which is the same word but borrowed earlier.


liquid (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French liquide liquid, running, from Latin liquidus fluid, liquid, moist,
figuratively flowing, continuing, from liquere be fluid, related to liqui to melt, flow, from PIE
*wleik- to flow, run. Of sounds, from 1630s (the Latin word also was used of sounds). Financial
sense of capable of being converted to cash is first recorded 1818.


liquid (n.)

a liquid substance, 1709, from liquid (adj.). Earlier it meant sound of a liquid consonant (1520s).


liquidate (v.)

1570s, to reduce to order, to set out clearly (of accounts), from Late Latin or Medieval Latin
liquidatus, past participle of liquidare to melt, make liquid or clear, clarify, from Latin liquidus
(see liquid). Sense of clear away (a debt) first recorded 1755. The meaning wipe out, kill is from
1924, possibly from Russian likvidirovat. Related: Liquidated; liquidating.


liquidation (n.)

1570s, noun of action from Late Latin liquidare (see liquidate); originally as a legal term in
reference to assets; of inconvenient groups of persons, 1925 in communist writings.


liquidator (n.)

1825, agent noun in Latin form from liquidate.


liquidity (n.)

1610s, quality of being liquid, from Late Latin liquiditatem (nominative liquiditas), from Latin
liquidus (see liquid). Meaning quality of being financially liquid is from 1897.


liquidize (v.)

1837, make liquid, from liquid + -ize. Meaning to run through a kitchen liquidizer is from 1954.
Related: Liquidized; liquidizing.


liquify (v.)

alternative spelling of liquefy.


liquor (n.)

c.1200, likur any matter in a liquid state, from Old French licor fluid, liquid; sap; oil (Modern
French liqueur), from Latin liquorem (nominative liquor) liquidity, fluidity, also a liquid, the
sea, from liquere be fluid, liquid (see liquid (adj.)). Narrowed sense of fermented or distilled
drink (especially wine) first recorded c.1300. To liquor up get drunk is from 1845. The form in
English has been assimilated to Latin, but the pronunciation has not changed.


liquorice (n.)

chiefly British alternative spelling of licorice.


lira (n.)

Italian monetary unit, 1610s, from Italian lira, literally pound, from Latin libra (see Libra).


lisle (n.)

1851, from French Lisle, earlier spelling of Lille, city in northwest France where the thread was
made; the name is apparently originally l'isle the island, referring to its location.


lisp (v.)

late Old English awlyspian to lisp, from wlisp (adj.) lisping, probably of imitative origin (compare
Middle Dutch, Old High German lispen, Danish l&aelig;spe, Swedish l&auml;spa). Related: Lisped;
lisping.


lisp (n.)

1620s, from lisp (v.).


lissome (adj.)

c.1800, variant of lithesome.


list (n.2)

a narrow strip, Old English liste border, hem, edge, strip, from Proto-Germanic *liston (cognates:
Old High German lista strip, border, list, Old Norse lista border, selvage,German leiste), from PIE
*leizd- border, band (see list (n.1)). The Germanic root also is the source of French liste, Italian
lista. This was the source of archaic lists place of combat, originally at the boundary of fields.


list (n.1)

catalogue consisting of names in a row or series, c.1600, from Middle English liste border, edging,
stripe (late 13c.), from Old French liste border, band, row, group, also strip of paper, or from Old
Italian lista border, strip of paper, list, both from a Germanic source (compare Old High German
lista strip, border, list, Old Norse lista border, selvage, Old English liste border), from Proto-
Germanic *liston, from PIE *leizd- border, band. The sense of enumeration is from strips of paper
used as a sort of catalogue.


list (v.1)

tilt, lean, especially of a ship, 1880, earlier (1620s) lust, of unknown origin, perhaps an
unexplained spelling variant of Middle English lysten to please, desire, wish, like (see list (v.4))
with a sense development from the notion of leaning toward what one desires (compare incline).
Related: Listed; listing. The noun in this sense is from 1630s.


list (v.4)

to be pleased, desire (archaic), mid-12c., lusten, listen to please, desire, from Old English lystan
to please, cause pleasure or desire, provoke longing, from Proto-Germanic *lustijan (cognates: Old
Saxon lustian, Dutch lusten to like, fancy, Old High German lusten, German l&uuml;sten, Old Norse
lysta); from the root of lust (n.). Related: Listed; listing. As a noun, c.1200, from the verb.
Somehow English has lost listy (adj.) pleasant, willing (to do something); ready, quick (mid-15c.).


list (v.2)

hear, hearken, now poetic or obsolete, from Old English hlystan hear, hearken, from hlyst hearing,
from Proto-Germanic *khlustiz, from PIE *kleu- to hear (see listen). Related: Listed; listing.


list (v.3)

to put down in a list; to make a list of, 1610s, from list (n.1). Meaning to place real estate on
the market is from 1904. Attested from c.1300 as put an edge around, from list (n.2). Related:
Listed; listing.


listed (adj.)

included in a roll or catalogue, 1882, from past participle of list (v.3). Of telephone numbers, in
the phone book, from 1919.


listen (v.)

Old English hlysnan to listen, from Proto-Germanic *khlusinon (cognates: Dutch luisteren, Old High
German hlosen to listen, German lauschen to listen), from PIE root *kleu- hearing, to hear
(cognates: Sanskrit srnoti hears, srosati hears, obeys; Avestan sraothra ear; Middle Persian srod
hearing, sound; Lithuanian klausau to hear, slove splendor, honor; Old Church Slavonic slusati to
hear, slava fame, glory, slovo word; Greek klyo hear, be called, kleos report, rumor, fame glory,
kleio make famous; Latin cluere to hear oneself called, be spoken of; Old Irish ro-clui-nethar
hears, clunim I hear, clu fame, glory, cluada ears; Welsh clywaf I hear; Old English hlud loud,
hleo&eth;or tone, tune; Old High German hlut sound; Gothic hilu&thorn; listening, attention). The
-t- probably is by influence of Old English hlystan (see list (v.2)). For vowel evolution, see bury.
As a noun from 1788 (on the listen alert).


listenable (adj.)

1919, from listen + -able. Related: Listenability.


listener (n.)

1610s, one who listens; agent noun from listen. Meaning one who hears a radio broadcast is from
1912; hence listenership (1938).


Listerine (n.)

1879, American English, formulated by Dr. Joseph Lawrence and Jordan Wheat Lambert as a multi-
purpose disinfectant and anti-septic for surgery. In 1895, after it was discovered to kill germs
commonly found in the mouth, the Lambert Company started marketing it as an oral antiseptic. Named
for Joseph Lord Lister (1827-1912), F.R.S., O.M., English surgeon, who revolutionized modern surgery
by applying Pasteur's discoveries and performing the first ever antiseptic surgery in 1865. Lister
objected in vain to the use of his name on the product. Lister (attested from 1286, an Anglian
surname) is from Middle English lit(t)e to dye (see litmus) + fem. suffix -ster, hence, a dyer.


listing (n.)

the placing of property with an agent to be catalogued for sale, 1906, from present participle of
list (v.3); meaning an entry in a catalogue is from 1962.


listless (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle English liste pleasure, joy, delight (see list (v.4)) + -less. Related:
Listlessly; listlessness.


lit (n.1)

color, hue, dye, early 12c., from Old Norse litr color, from Proto-Germanic *wlitiz (cognates: Old
English wlite brightness, beauty, Old Frisian wlite exterior, form, Gothic *wlits face, form).


lit (adj.)

past participle adjective from light (v.2). Slang meaning drunk is recorded from 1914.


lit (n.2)

colloquial shortening of literature, attested by 1850.


litany (n.)

c.1200, from Old French letanie and directly from Medieval Latin letania, Late Latin litania (source
also of Spanish letania, Italian litania), from Greek litaneia litany, an entreating, from lite
prayer, supplication, entreaty, of unknown origin. From notion of monotonous enumeration of
petitions in Christian prayer services came generalized sense of repeated series, early 19c.,
borrowed from French.    For those who know the Greek words, a litany is a series of prayers, a
liturgy is a canon of public service; the latter in practice includes prayer, but does not say so.
[Fowler]


lite (adj.)

alternative spelling of light (adj.1), by 1962. Used from at least 1917 in product names, often as a
variation of light (n.).    The word Adjusto-Lite for portable electric lamps was opposed by the
user of a trade mark Auto-lite registered before the date of use claimed by the applicant. [The
Trade-Mark Reporter, 1922]


liter (n.)

1797, from French litre (1793), from litron, obsolete French measure of capacity for grain, from
Medieval Latin litra, from Greek litra pound, apparently from the same Sicilian Italic source as
Latin libra.


literacy (n.)

1883, formed in English from literate + -cy. Illiteracy, however, dates back to 17c.


literal (adj.)

late 14c., taking words in their natural meaning (originally in reference to Scripture and opposed
to mystical or allegorical), from Old French literal and directly from Late Latin
literalis/litteralis of or belonging to letters or writing, from Latin litera/littera letter,
alphabetic sign; literature, books (see letter (n.1)). Meaning of or pertaining to alphabetic
letters is from late 15c. Sense of verbally exact is attested from 1590s, as is application to the
primary sense of a word or passage. Literal-minded is attested from 1791.


literalist (n.)

1640s, from literal + -ist. Related: Literalistic.


literally (adv.)

1530s, in a literal sense, from literal + -ly (2). Erroneously used in reference to metaphors,
hyperbole, etc., even by writers like Dryden and Pope, to indicate what follows must be taken in the
strongest admissible sense (1680s), which is opposite to the word's real meaning and a long step
down the path to the modern misuse of it.    We have come to such a pass with this emphasizer that
where the truth would require us to insert with a strong expression 'not literally, of course, but
in a manner of speaking', we do not hesitate to insert the very word we ought to be at pains to
repudiate; ... such false coin makes honest traffic in words impossible. [Fowler, 1924]


literary (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to alphabet letters, from French litt&eacute;raire, from Latin
literarius/litterarius belonging to letters or learning, from littera/litera letter (see letter
(n.1)). Meaning pertaining to literature is attested from 1737.


literate (adj.)

educated, instructed, early 15c., from Latin literatus/litteratus educated, learned, literally one
who knows the letters, formed in imitation of Greek grammatikos from Latin littera/litera letter
(see letter (n.1)).


literati (n.)

men and women of letters; the learned class as a whole, 1620s, from Latin literati/litterati, plural
of literatus/litteratus lettered (see literate). The proper singular would be literatus, though
Italian literato (1704) sometimes is used.


literation (n.)

representation of sounds by alphabetic letters, 1843, from Latin litera (see letter (n.1)) + -ation.


literature (n.)

late 14c., from Latin literatura/litteratura learning, a writing, grammar, originally writing formed
with letters, from litera/littera letter (see letter (n.1)). Originally book learning (it replaced
Old English boccr&aelig;ft), the meaning literary production or work is first attested 1779 in
Johnson's Lives of the English Poets (he didn't include this definition in his dictionary, however);
that of body of writings from a period or people is first recorded 1812.    Great literature is
simply language charged with meaning to the utmost possible degree. [Ezra Pound, ABC of Reading]
Meaning the whole of the writing on a particular subject is from 1860; sense of printed matter
generally is from 1895. The Latin word also is the source of Spanish literatura, Italian
letteratura, German Literatur.


lith (n.)

joint, limb, Old English li&thorn; limb, member, joint, cognate with Old Frisian lith, Dutch lid,
Old High German lid, Old Norse li&eth;r, Gothic li&thorn;us, German glied limb, member.


lithe (adj.)

Old English li&eth;e soft, mild, gentle, meek, from Proto-Germanic *linthja- (cognates: Old Saxon
lithi soft, mild, gentle, Old High German lindi, German lind, Old Norse linr, with characteristic
loss of n before th in English), from PIE root *lent- flexible (cognates: Latin lentus flexible,
pliant, slow, Sanskrit lithi). In Middle English, used of the weather. Current sense of easily
flexible is from c.1300. Related: Litheness.


lithesome (adj.)

1768, from lithe + -some (1). Related: Lithesomely; lithesomeness.


lithic (adj.)

1797, from Greek lithikos of or pertaining to stone, from lithos stone (see litho-).


lithium (n.)

silver-white metallic element, 1818, with element ending -ium + lithia, Modern Latin name given by
Swedish chemist J&ouml;ns Jacob Berzelius (1779-1848) to the earth from which it was extracted, from
Greek lithos stone (see litho-). So called from its mineral origin and to distinguish it from two
previously known alkalis of vegetable origin.


litho-

before vowels, lith-, word-forming element meaning stone, rock; from comb. form of Greek lithos
stone, a precious stone, marble; a piece on a game board, of unknown origin.


lithograph (n.)

1828, back-formation from lithography. As a verb, from 1825. Related: Lithographed; lithographer;
lithographic.


lithography (n.)

1813, from German Lithographie (c.1804), coined from Greek lithos stone (see litho-) + graphein to
write (see -graphy). The original printing surfaces were of stone. Process invented 1796 by Alois
Senefelder of Munich (1771-1833). Hence, lithograph a lithographic print, a back-formation first
attested 1828. Earlier senses, now obsolete, were description of stones or rocks (1708) and art of
engraving on precious stones (1730).


lithology (n.)

study of rock-formation, 1716, from Modern Latin lithologia, from litho- + -logia (see -logy).


lithosphere (n.)

solid part of the earth's surface, 1881; see litho- stone + sphere.


lithotomy (n.)

1721, from Late Latin lithotomia, from Greek lithotomia, from lithos stone (see litho-) + -tomia
cutting (see -tomy).


lithotripsy (n.)

1834, from litho- + -tripsy, from Greek tripsis rubbing, from tribein to rub, thresh, pound, wear
out, from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist (see throw (v.)). Klein says the intended Greek
word is thryptein to crush and there has been confusion with tribein.


Lithuania

Baltic nation, from Lithuanian Lietuva, of unknown origin, perhaps from a PIE source related to
Latin litus shore and thus meaning shoreland. Related: Lithuanian.


litigant

1630s (adj.); 1650s (n.), from French litigant, from Latin litigantem (nominative litigans), present
participle of litigare (see litigation).


litigate (v.)

1610s, from Middle French litigier and directly from Latin litigatus, past participle of litigare to
dispute, carry on a suit (see litigation). Related: Litigated; litigating.


litigation (n.)

1560s, disputation, from Late Latin litigationem (nominative litigatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin litigare to dispute, quarrel, strive, from phrase litem agere, from litem
(nominative lis) lawsuit, dispute, quarrel, strife + agere to drive, conduct (see act). Meaning act
of carrying on a lawsuit is from 1640s.


litigator (n.)

agent noun from Latin litigare (see litigation). Latin litigator meant a party to a lawsuit;
litigant.


litigious (adj.)

late 14c., fond of disputes, from Middle French litigieux and directly from Latin litigiosus
contentious, quarrelsome, from litigium dispute, strife, related to litigare (see litigation).
Meaning fond of engaging in lawsuits is from 1620s. Earlier in English than litigate or litigation.
Related: Litigiousness.


litmus (n.)

blue dye-stuff obtained from certain lichens, early 14c., from Middle Dutch lijkmoes (Dutch
lakmoes), from lac (see lac) + moes pulp. Another theory is that it represents Old Norse litmose,
literally lichen for dying, from Old Norse lita to dye, to stain, from litr color, dye (see lit
(n.1)) + mos moss. Yet another idea connects the first element to Middle Dutch leken to drip, leak
(see leak (v.)).    Whichever was the original word, it probably was influenced by the others. The
dye is obtained from certain lichens. It is naturally blue but turns red in acid and is restored to
blue by alkalis. Figurative use of litmus test is first attested 1957, from scientific use of
litmus-treated paper as a chemical indicator. Litmus paper with this meaning is from 1803.


litotes (n.)

rhetorical figure in which an affirmative is expressed by the negative of its opposite, from Greek
litotes, literally plainness, simplicity, from litos smooth, plain, small, meager, from PIE root
*(s)lei- slimy, sticky, slippery (hence smooth); see slime (n.).


litter (n.)

c.1300, a bed, also bed-like vehicle carried on men's shoulders (early 14c.), from Anglo-French
litere portable bed, Old French litiere litter, stretcher, bier; straw, bedding, from Medieval Latin
lectaria litter (altered in French by influence of lit bed), from Latin lectus bed, couch, from PIE
*legh-to-, from root *legh- to lie (see lie (v.2)).    Meaning extended early 15c. to straw used for
bedding (early 14c. in Anglo-French) and late 15c. to offspring of an animal at one birth (in one
bed); sense of scattered oddments, disorderly debris is first attested 1730, probably from Middle
English verb literen provide with bedding (late 14c.), with notion of strewing straw. Litter by 19c.
had come to mean both the straw bedding and the animal waste in it after use.


litter (v.)

late 14c., provide with bedding, from litter (n.). Meaning to strew with objects is from 1713.
Transitive sense of to scatter in a disorderly way is from 1731. Related: Littered; littering.


litterateur (n.)

a literary man, 1806, from French litt&eacute;rateur, from Latin litterator a grammarian,
philologist, from littera letter (see letter (n.1)). Sometimes Englished as literator (1630s, often
with a deprecatory sense). Fem. form is litt&eacute;ratrice.


litterbug (n.)

1947, from litter + bug (n.). According to Mario Pei (The Story of Language, Lippincott, 1949)
coined by the New York subways on the analogy of 'jitterbug' ....


littering (n.)

1540s, of animals, process of bringing forth young in a single birth, verbal noun from present
participle of litter (v.). Meaning act of furnishing with bedding is from c.1600. That of act of
dropping litter is from 1900.


little (adj.)

Old English lytel not large, not much; short in distance or time; unimportant, also used in late Old
English as a noun, small piece; a short time, from Proto-Germanic *lutilla- (cognates: Old Saxon
luttil, Dutch luttel, Old High German luzzil, German l&uuml;tzel, Gothic leitils little), perhaps
originally a diminutive of the root of Old English lyt little, few, from PIE *leud- small. Often
synonymous with small, but capable of emotional implications which small is not [OED].    Phrase the
little woman wife attested from 1795. Little people the faeries is from 1726; as children, it is
attested from 1752; as ordinary people (opposed to the great), it is attested from 1827. Little Neck
clams (1884) are so called for Little Neck, Long Island, a neck of land on the island's North Shore.
Little by little is from late 15c. (litylle be litille). Little green men space aliens is from 1950.
Little black dress is from 1939.    At the beginning of summer, smart women who stay in town like to
wear sheer little black dresses. Because most little black dresses look alike, retailers struggle
each year to find something which will make them seem new. [Life, June 13, 1939]   Little Orphan
Annie originally was (as Little Orphant Annie) the character in James Whitcomb Riley's 1885 poem,
originally titled Elf Child. The U.S. newspaper comic strip created by Harold Gray (1894-1968)
debuted in 1924 in the New York Daily News.    LITTLE Orphant Annie's come to our house to stay,
An' wash the cups an' saucers up, an' brush the crumbs away,  An' shoo the chickens off the porch,
an' dust the hearth, an' sweep,  An' make the fire, an' bake the bread, an' earn her board-an'-keep;
An' all us other childern, when the supper-things is done,  We set around the kitchen fire an' has
the mostest fun  A-list'nin' to the witch-tales 'at Annie tells about,  An' the Gobble-uns 'at gits
you  Ef you  Don't  Watch  Out!  [Riley, Elf Child]


little (v.)

OE lytlian, from root of little (adj.).


littleness (n.)

Old English lytelnes; see little + -ness.


littoral (adj.)

pertaining to the seashore, 1650s, from Latin littoralis of or belonging to the seashore, from litus
(genitive litoris) seashore (compare Lido), of unknown origin, possibly from PIE root *lei- to flow.
The noun is first recorded 1828, from Italian littorale, originally an adjective, from Latin
littoralis.


liturgical (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin liturgicus, from New Testament Greek leitourgikos ministering, from
leitourgos (see liturgy).


liturgy (n.)

1550s, the service of the Holy Eucharist, from Middle French liturgie or directly from Late
Latin/Medieval Latin liturgia public service, public worship, from Greek leitourgia a liturgy;
public duty, ministration, ministry, from leitourgos one who performs a public ceremony or service,
public servant, from leito- public (from laos people; compare leiton public hall, leite priestess;
see lay (adj.)) + -ergos that works, from ergon work (see organ). Meaning collective formulas for
the conduct of divine service in Christian churches is from 1590s.


Litvak (n.)

Jew from Lithuania, 1892, from Polish Litwak Lithuanian Jew, originally simply man from Lithuania.


livable (adj.)

also liveable, 1610s, likely to survive, from live (v.) + -able. Meaning conducive to living is from
1660s; sense of suitable for living in is from 1814 (Mansfield Park). Meaning endurable is from
1841.


live (v.)

Old English lifian (Anglian), libban (West Saxon) to be, to live, have life; to experience, also to
supply oneself with food, to pass life (in some condition), from Proto-Germanic *liben (cognates:
Old Norse lifa to live, remain, Old Frisian libba, German leben, Gothic liban to live), from PIE
root *leip- to remain, continue (source also of Greek liparein to persist, persevere; see leave).
Meaning to make a residence, dwell is from c.1200. Related: Lived; living.According to the Dutch
Prouerbe ... Leuen ende laetan leuen, To liue and to let others liue. [Malynes, 1622]To live it up
live gaily and extravagantly is from 1903. To live up to act in accordance with is 1690s, from
earlier live up live on a high (moral or mental) level (1680s). To live (something) down outwear
(some slander or embarrassment) is from 1842. To live with cohabit as husband and wife is attested
from 1749; sense of to put up with is attested from 1937. Expression live and learn is attested from
c.1620.


live (adj.)

1540s, having life, later (1610s) burning, glowing, a shortening of alive (q.v.). Sense of
containing unspent energy or power (live ammunition, etc.) is from 1799. Meaning in-person (of
performance) is first attested 1934. Live wire is attested from 1890; figurative sense of active
person is from 1903.


live-in (adj.)

residing on the premises, 1950, from live (v.) + in. Lived-in inhabited, occupied is first recorded
1873.


livelihood (n.)

1610s, alteration of livelode means of keeping alive (c.1300), from Old English lifad course of
life, from lif life + lad way, course (see load). Similar formation in Old High German libleita.
Spelling assimilated to words in -hood. Earlier livelihood was a different word, meaning liveliness,
from lively.


livelily (adv.)

1550s, from lively + -ly (2).


livelong (adj.)

also live-long, c.1400, lefe longe (day), from leve, lief dear (see lief), used here as an emotional
intensive + long (adj). From late 16c. conformed in spelling to live (v.) as lief grew strange.
German has cognate die liebe lange Nacht, literally the dear long night.


lively (adj.)

Old English liflic living, existing, literally life-like; from life + -ly (2). Sense of active,
energetic developed by early 13c., from notion full of life.


liven (v.)

1884, colloquial shortening of 17c. enliven, usually with up. Related: Livened; livening.


liver (n.1)

secreting organ of the body, Old English lifer, from Proto-Germanic *librn (cognates: Old Norse
lifr, Old Frisian livere, Middle Dutch levere, Dutch lever, Old High German lebara, German Leber
liver), perhaps from PIE *leip- to stick adhere; fat. Formerly believed to be the body's blood-
producing organ; in medieval times it rivaled the heart as the supposed seat of love and passion,
hence lily-livered. Liver-spots, once thought to be caused by a dysfunction of the organ, is
attested from 1730.


liver (n.2)

late 14c., agent noun from live (v.).


Liverpool

English city on the River Mersey, Liuerpul (c.1190) Pool with Muddy Water, from Old English lifer
thick, clotted water + pol (see pool (n.1)). The original reference was to a pool or tidal creek now
filled up into which two streams drained [Victor Watts, Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names,
2004]. The adjective and noun Liverpudlian (with jocular substitution of puddle for pool) is
attested from 1833.


liverwort (n.)

late Old English lifenwyrt, from lifer (see liver (n.1)) + wyrt (see wort). A loan-translation of
Medieval Latin hepatica. Applied to various plants with liver-shaped leaves or that were used to
treat liver disorders. Similar formation in German leberkraut.


liverwurst (n.)

1869, American English, partial translation of German Leberwurst, from Leber liver (see liver (n.1))
+ Wurst sausage (see wurst).


livery (n.)

c.1300, household allowance of any kind (food, provisions, clothing) to retainers or servants, from
Anglo-French livere (late 13c.), Old French livr&eacute;e, allowance, ration, pay, originally
(clothes) delivered by a master to his retinue, from fem. past participle of livrer to dispense,
deliver, hand over, from Latin liberare (see liberate). The sense later was reduced to servants'
rations and provender for horses (mid-15c.). The former led to the meaning distinctive clothing
given to servants (early 14c.); the latter now is obsolete except in livery stable (1705). Related:
Liveried.


livestock (n.)

1520s, from live (adj.) + stock (n.2).


liveware (n.)

people, 1966, computer-programmer jargon, from live (adj.) + ending abstracted from software, etc.


livid (adj.)

early 15c., of a bluish-leaden color, from Middle French livide and directly from Latin lividus of a
bluish color, black and blue, figuratively envious, spiteful, malicious, from livere be bluish,
earlier *slivere, from PIE *sliwo-, suffixed form of root *(s)leie- bluish (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic and Russian sliva plum; Lithuanian slywas plum; Old Irish li, Welsh lliw color, splendor,
Old English sla sloe). The sense of furiously angry (1912) is from the notion of being livid with
rage.


living (adj.)

alive, also residing, staying, c.1200, from present participle of live (v.)).


living (n.)

living persons, late Old English; early 14c. as the fact of dwelling in some place, from Old English
lifiende that lives or has life, present participle of lifan (see live (v.)). The meaning action,
process, or method of gaining one's livelihood is attested from c.1400.


living room (n.)

room set up for ordinary social use, 1795 (as opposed to bedroom, dining room, etc.); from living
(n.) + room (n.).


livre (n.)

former French money, 1550s, from French livre pound, in Old French in both the weight and money
senses, from Latin libra pound (see Libra). Equivalent to the 20c. franc, it was made up of 20 sous.


lixiviate (v.)

1758, from past participle stem of Modern Latin lixiviare, from Latin lixivium, neuter of lixivius
made into lye, from lix ashes, lye.


lizard (n.)

an animal resembling a serpent, with legs added to it [Johnson], late 14c., lusarde, from Anglo-
French lusard, Old French laisarde lizard (Modern French l&eacute;zard), from Latin lacertus (fem.
lacerta) lizard, of unknown origin, perhaps from PIE root *leq- to bend, twist [Klein].


Lizzie

pet form of fem. proper name Elizabeth, used colloquially for a motor car (especially an early-model
Ford) from 1913; also tin lizzie.


llama (n.)

woolly-haired South American ruminant, c.1600, from Spanish llama (1535), from Quechua (Peru) llama.


Llanfair

common in Welsh place names, literally St. Mary's Church, from Welsh llan church (see land (n.)) +
Mair Mary, with lentition of m- to f-.


llano (n.)

1610s, American Spanish, prairie, from Spanish llano plain, even, level, smooth, ultimately from
Latin planum plain, from planus smooth (see plane (n.1)). Hence, llanero a Latin-American cowboy
(1819), literally plainsman.


LLC

abbreviation of Limited Liability Company (see limited).


Llewelyn

male proper name, from Welsh Llywelin, often explained as lion-like, but probably from llyw leader.


Lloyd

male proper name, from Welsh Llwyd, literally gray, from PIE *pel- (2) pale (see pallor).  Lloyd's,
meaning the London-based association of marine underwriters, is first recorded as such 1805, from
Lloyd's Coffee House, Tower Street, London, opened in 1688 by Edward Lloyd, who supplied shipping
information to his patrons.


LMAO

by 1997, online abbreviation of laughing my ass off. Related: LMFAO (by 2000).


lo (interj.)

early 13c., from Old English la, exclamation of surprise, grief, or joy; influenced in Middle
English by lo!, short for lok look! imperative of loken to look (see look (v.)). Expression lo and
behold attested by 1779.


loach (n.)

small edible European fish, mid-14c., from Old French loche (13c.), also, in dialect, slug, of
unknown origin (see discussion in Gamillscheg).


load (v.)

late 15c., to place in or on a vehicle, from load (n.). Transitive sense of to put a load in or on
is from c.1500; of firearms from 1620s. Of a vehicle, to fill with passengers, from 1832. Related:
Loaded; loaden (obs.); loading.


load (n.)

that which is laid upon a person or beast, burden, c.1200, from Old English lad way, course,
carrying, from Proto-Germanic *laitho (cognates: Old High German leita, German leite, Old Norse
lei&eth; way, course); related to Old English l&aelig;dan to guide, from PIE *leit- to go forth (see
lead (v.)). Sense shifted 13c. to supplant words based on lade, to which it is not etymologically
connected; original association with guide is preserved in lodestone. Meaning amount customarily
loaded at one time is from c.1300.    Figurative sense of burden weighing on the mind, heart, or
soul is first attested 1590s. Meaning amount of work is from 1946. Colloquial loads lots, heaps is
attested from c.1600. Phrase take a load off (one's) feet sit down, relax is from 1914, American
English. Get a load of take a look at is American English colloquial, attested from 1929.


loaded (adj.)

drunk, slang, 1886, from past participle of load (v.), from expression take one's load drink one's
fill (1590s). In the sense of rich, loaded is attested from 1910.


loader (n.)

late 15c., person who loads, agent noun from load (v.). Of machinery, by 1862.


loaf (n.)

late 13c., from Old English hlaf portion of bread baked in a mass of definite form, from Proto-
Germanic *khlaibuz (cognates: Old Norse hleifr, Swedish lev, Old Frisian hlef, Old High German
hleib, German Laib, Gothic hlaifs bread, loaf), of uncertain origin, perhaps connected to Old
English hlifian to raise higher, tower, on the notion of the bread rising as it bakes, but it is
unclear whether loaf or bread is the original sense. Finnish leip&auml;, Old Church Slavonic chlebu,
Lithuanian klepas probably are Germanic loan words. Meaning chopped meat shaped like a bread loaf is
attested from 1787.


loaf (v.)

1835, American English, back-formation from loafer (1830). Related: Loafed; loafing.    The term
loafing is, of course, very vague. Its meaning, like that of its opposite, work, depends largely on
the user. The highly successful quarterback with an E in Greek is a loafer in his professor's eyes,
while the idea of the professor's working, in spite of his voluminous researches on Mycenean Table
Manners, would excite hoots of derision from the laborer that lays the drains before his study
window. [Yale Literary Magazine, May 1908]


loafer (n.)

idler, person who loafs, 1830, of uncertain origin, often regarded as a variant of land loper
(1795), a partial loan-translation of German Landl&auml;ufer vagabond, from Land land + L&auml;ufer
runner, from laufen to run (see leap (v.)). But OED finds this connection not very probable. As a
type of shoe, 1937. Related: Loafers.


loam (n.)

Old English lam clay, mud, mire, earth, from Proto-Germanic *laimaz (cognates: Old Saxon lemo, Dutch
leem, German Lehm loam), from PIE root *(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)). As a type of highly fertile
clayey soil, it is attested from 1660s. As a verb from c.1600.


loan (n.)

mid-13c., from Old Norse lan, related to lja to lend, from Proto-Germanic *laikhwniz (cognates: Old
Frisian len thing lent, Middle Dutch lene, Dutch leen loan, fief, Old High German lehan, German Lehn
fief, feudal tenure), originally to let have, to leave (to someone), from PIE *leikw- to leave (see
relinquish).    The Norse word also is cognate with Old English l&aelig;n gift, which did not
survive into Middle English, but its derived verb l&aelig;nan is the source of lend. As a verb, loan
is attested from 1540s, perhaps earlier, and formerly was current, but has now been supplanted in
England by lend, though it survives in American English.   Loan word (1874) is a translation of
German Lehnwort; loan-translation is attested 1933, from German Lehn&uuml;bersetzung. Slang loan
shark first attested 1900.


loaner (n.)

1884, one who lends, agent noun from loan (v.). Meaning a thing loaned especially in place of one
being repaired, is from 1926.


loath (adj.)

Old English la&eth; hated; hateful; hostile; repulsive, from Proto-Germanic *laithaz (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian leth loathsome, Old Norse lei&eth;r hateful, hostile, loathed; Middle Dutch
lelijc, Dutch leelijk ugly; Old High German leid sorrowful, hateful, offensive, grievous, German
Leid sorrow; French laid ugly, from Frankish (Germanic) *laid), from PIE root *leit- to detest.
Weakened meaning averse, disinclined is attested from late 14c. Loath to depart, a line from some
long-forgotten song, is recorded since 1580s as a generic term expressive of any tune played at
farewells, the sailing of a ship, etc. Related: Loathness.


loathe (v.)

Old English la&eth;ian to hate, to be disgusted with, from la&eth; hostile (see loath). Cognate with
Old Saxon lethon, Old Norse lei&eth;a. Related: Loathed; loathing.


loathing (n.)

abhorrence, mid-14c., verbal noun from loathe.


loathly (adj.)

Old English la&eth;lic hateful, horrible, unpleasant; see loath + -ly (2). As an adverb, Old English
la&eth;lice.


loathsome (adj.)

c.1300, foul, detestable, from loath in its older, stronger sense + -some (1). Related: Loathsomely;
loathsomeness.


lob (v.)

send up in a slow, high arc, 1824 (implied in lobbing), but the word existed 16c. in various senses
suggesting heavy, pendant, or floppy things, and  probably is ultimately from an unrecorded Old
English word; compare East Frisian lobbe hanging lump of flesh, Dutch lob hanging lip, ruffle,
hanging sleeve, Danish lobbes clown, bumpkin. Related: Lobbed; lobbing. The noun in this sense is
from 1875, from the verb.


lob (n.)

a word of widespread application to lumpish things, probably in Old English. Compare Middle Dutch,
Middle Low German lobbe, Old Norse lubba. From late 13c. as a surname; meaning pollack is from early
14c.; that of lazy lout is from late 14c.


lobate (adj.)

having lobes, 1760, from Modern Latin lobatus, from lobus (see lobe).


lobby (n.)

1530s, cloister, covered walk, from Medieval Latin laubia, lobia covered walk in a monastery, from a
Germanic source (compare Old High German louba hall, roof; see lodge (n.)). Meaning large entrance
hall in a public building is from 1590s. Political sense of those who seek to influence legislation
is attested by 1790s in American English, in reference to the custom of influence-seekers gathering
in large entrance-halls outside legislative chambers.


lobby (v.)

seek to influence legislation, 1826, American English, from lobby (n.). Related: Lobbied; lobbying.


lobbyist (n.)

1863, American English, from lobby (n.) in the political sense + -ist.    [A] strong lobbyist will
permit himself to lose heavily at the poker-table, under the assumption that the great Congressman
who wins the stake will look leniently upon the little appropriation he means to ask for. [George A.
Townsend, Events at the National Capital and the Campaign of 1876, Hartford, Conn., 1876]


lobe (n.)

early 15c., a lobe of the liver or lungs, from Middle French lobe and directly from Medieval Latin
lobus, from Late Latin lobus hull, husk, pod, from Greek lobos lobe of the ear, vegetable pod,
perhaps related to Greek leberis husk of fruits, from PIE *logwos. Extended 1670s to divisions of
the brain.


loblolly (n.)

thick gruel, 1590s, probably from lob, imitative of bubbling and boiling + lolly, obsolete
Devonshire dialect word for broth, soup, food boiled in a pot.


lobo (n.)

wolf of the U.S. southwest, 1859, from Spanish lobo, from Latin lupus (see wolf).


lobotomize (v.)

1943; see lobotomy + -ize. Related: Lobotomized.


lobotomy (n.)

1936, coined from lobe (in the brain sense) + medical suffix -tomy. Figurative use is attested from
1953.    Now I guess I'll have to tell 'em  That I got no cerebellum  [Ramones, Teenage Lobotomy,
1977]


lobster (n.)

marine shellfish, Old English loppestre lobster, locust, corruption of Latin locusta, lucusta
lobster, locust, by influence of Old English loppe spider, a variant of lobbe. The ending of Old
English loppestre is the fem. agent noun suffix (as in Baxter, Webster; see -ster), which
approximated the Latin sound.  Perhaps a transferred use of the Latin word; trilobite fossils in
Worcestershire limestone quarries were known colloquially as locusts, which seems to be the generic
word for unidentified arthropod, as apple is for foreign fruit. OED says the Latin word originally
meant lobster or some similar crustacean, the application to the locust being suggested by the
resemblance in shape. Locusta in the sense lobster also appears in French (langouste now crawfish,
crayfish, but in Old French lobster and locust; a 13c. psalter has God giving over the crops of
Egypt to the langoustes) and Old Cornish (legast). As slang for a British soldier since 1640s,
originally in reference to the jointed armor of the Roundhead cuirassiers, later (1660) to the red
coat.Sir William Waller having received from London [in June 1643] a fresh regiment of five hundred
horse, under the command of sir Arthur Haslerigge, which were so prodigiously armed that they were
called by the other side the regiment of lobsters, because of their bright iron shells with which
they were covered, being perfect curasseers. [Clarendon, History of the Rebellion, 1647]


loc. cit.

1854, abbreviation of Latin loco citato or locus citatus in the place cited; hence, in the book that
has been previously quoted.


locable (adj.)

1816, from Latin locare to place (see locate) + -able. Alternative formation locatable is attested
from 1838.


local (adj.)

pertaining to position, late 14c. (originally medical, confined to a particular part of the body),
from Old French local (13c.) and directly from Late Latin localis pertaining to a place, from Latin
locus place (see locus). The meaning limited to a particular place is from c.1500. Local color is
from 1721, originally a term in painting; meaning anything picturesque is from c.1900.


local (n.)

early 15c., a medicament applied to a particular part of the body, from local (adj.). Meaning
inhabitant of a particular locality is from 1825. The meaning a local train is from 1879; local
branch of a trade union is from 1888; neighborhood pub is from 1934.


locale (n.)

1772, local, from French local, noun use of local (adj.), from Latin locus place (see locus).
English spelling with -e (1816) probably is based on morale or else to indicate stress.The word's
right to exist depends upon the question whether the two indispensable words locality &amp; scene
give all the shades of meaning required, or whether something intermediate is useful. [Fowler]


localism (n.)

attachment to a particular locality, 1803, from local (adj.) + -ism. Meaning something
characteristic of a particular locality is from 1823.


localist (n.)

1680s, from local (adj.) + -ist. Related: Localistic.


localitis (n.)

obsession with the problems of one's locality and consequent failure to see big pictures, 1943, from
local (adj.) + transferred use of medical suffix -itis.


locality (n.)

1620s, fact of having a place, from French localit&eacute;, from Late Latin localitatem (nominative
localitas) locality, from localis belonging to a place (see local). Meaning a place or district is
from 1830.


localization (n.)

1811, noun of action from localize.


localize (v.)

1792, from local + -ize. Related: Localized; localizing.


locally (adv.)

mid-15c., from local (adj.) + -ly (2).


locate (v.)

1650s, to establish oneself in a place, settle, from Latin locatus, past participle of locare to
place, put, set, dispose, arrange, from locus a place (see locus). Sense of mark the limits of a
place (especially a land grant) is attested from 1739 in American English; this developed to
establish (something) in a place (1807) and to find out the place of (1882, American English).
Related: Located; locating.


location (n.)

position, place, 1590s, from Latin locationem (nominative locatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of locare (see locate); Hollywood sense of place outside a film studio where a scene
is filmed is from 1914.


locative (n.)

grammatical case indicating place, 1804, from Latin locus place (see locus) on model of Latin
vocativus vocative, from vocatus, past participle of vocare to call, summon. As an adjective by
1816.


locator (n.)

c.1600, of persons, from Latin locator, agent noun from locare (see locate). Of things which locate,
from 1902.


locavore (n.)

one who eats only locally grown or raised food, by 2001, from local + ending abstracted from
carnivore, etc., ultimately from Latin vorare to devour (see voracity).


loch (n.)

late 14c., from Gaelic loch lake, narrow arm of the sea, cognate with Old Irish loch body of water,
lake, Breton lagen, Anglo-Irish lough, Latin lacus (see lake (n.1)). The Loch Ness monster is first
attested 1933.


lochia (n.)

discharge from the uterus after childbirth, 1680s, Modern Latin, from Greek lokhia, neuter plural of
lokhios pertaining to childbirth, from lokhos a lying in, childbirth, also, an ambush, from PIE root
*legh- to lie, lay (see lie (v.2)).


lock (n.1)

means of fastening, Old English loc bolt, fastening; barrier, enclosure, from Proto-Germanic *lukan
(cognates: Old Norse lok fastening, lock, Gothic usluks opening, Old High German loh dungeon, German
Loch opening, hole, Dutch luik shutter, trapdoor). The great diversity of meaning in the Teut. words
seems to indicate two or more independent but formally identical substantival formations from the
root.    The Old English sense barrier, enclosure led to the specific meaning barrier on a river
(c.1300), and the more specific sense gate and sluice system on a water channel used as a means of
raising and lowering boats (1570s). Wrestling sense is from c.1600. Phrase under lock and key
attested from early 14c.


lock (n.2)

tress of hair, Old English locc lock of hair, curl, from Proto-Germanic *lukkoz (cognates: Old Norse
lokkr, Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch lok, Old High German loc, German Locke lock of hair), from PIE
*lugnos-, perhaps related to Greek lygos pliant twig, withe, Lithuanian lugnas flexible.


lock (v.)

to fasten with a lock, c.1300, from Old English lucan to lock, to close (class II strong verb; past
tense leac, past participle locen), from the same root as lock (n.1). Cognate with Old Frisian luka
to close, Old Saxon lukan, Old High German luhhan, Old Norse luka, Gothic galukan. Meaning to
embrace closely is from 1610s. Related: Locked; locking. Slang lock horns fight is from 1839.


lock-jaw (n.)

also lockjaw, 1786, earlier locked-jaw (1765), popular name for trismus, also applied to tetanus,
from lock (v.) + jaw.


lock-step (n.)

1802, in military writing, for a very tight style of mass marching, from lock (n.) + step (n.).
Lock-step. A mode of marching by a body of men going one after another as closely as possible, in
which the leg of each moves at the same time with and closely follows the corresponding leg of the
person directly before him. [Thomas Wilhelm, Military Dictionary and Gazetteer, Philadelphia, 1881]
Figurative use by 1836.


lock-up (n.)

detention cell for offenders, 1838, perhaps short for earlier lock-up house; from lock (v.) + up.
Meaning action of locking up is from 1845. The verbal phrase lock up is recorded from early 15c.


lockable (adj.)

1832, from lock (v.) + -able. Related: Lockability.


lockdown (n.)

also lock-down, from 1940s in various mechanical senses, from lock (v.) + down (adv.). Prison sense
is by 1975, American English.


locker (n.)

small chest that can be locked, late 14c., agent noun from Middle English lokken (see lock (v.)).
Earlier a mechanism for locking (early 14c.).


locket (n.)

mid-14c., iron cross-bar of a window, from Old French loquet door-handle, bolt, latch, diminutive of
loc lock, latch, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old Norse lok fastening, lock;
see lock (n.1)). Meaning ornamental case with hinged cover (containing a lock of hair, miniature
portrait, etc.) first recorded 1670s.


lockout (n.)

also lock-out, act of locking out workers, 1854, from lock (v.) + out.


locksmith (n.)

early 13c., from lock (n.1) + smith.


loco (adj.)

1844, American English, from Spanish loco (adj.) insane, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Arabic
lauqa, fem. of 'alwaq fool, crazy person. Loco-weed (1877) was name given to species of western U.S.
plants that cause cattle and horse diseases that make them stagger and act strangely.


loco-

word-forming element meaning from place to place, from comb. form of Latin locus (see locus).


loco-foco (n.)

self-igniting cigar or match, 1839 (but presumably older), American English, of unknown origin,
perhaps from a misapprehension of the meaning of the first element of locomotive as self- + Spanish
fuego fire. During one heated political meeting in N.Y., the lights went out and the delegates used
such matches to relight them, thence the name loco-foco entered U.S. political jargon (1837),
usually applied to a radical faction of the Democratic Party, but by the Whigs applied to all
Democrats.


locomote (v.)

1831, back-formation from locomotion.


locomotion (n.)

1640s, formed in English from Latin loco from a place (ablative of locus place) + motionem
(nominative motio) motion, a moving.


locomotive (adj.)

1610s, pertaining to movement, from French locomotif, from Latin loco from a place (ablative of
locus place; see locus) + Late Latin motivus moving (see motive). The noun meaning railroad engine
is from 1829, short for locomotive engine (1814).


locomotor (adj.)

1822, from Latin loco from a place (ablative of locus place) + motor.


locum tenens (n.)

Medieval Latin, one who holds the place (of another); from locum (nominative locus; see locus) +
tenens, present participle of tenere (see tenant).


locus (n.)

(plural loci), 1715, locality, from Latin locus a place, spot, position, from Old Latin stlocus,
literally where something is placed, from PIE root *st(h)el- to cause to stand, to place. Used by
Latin writers for Greek topos. Mathematical sense by 1750.


locust (n.1)

grasshopper, early 14c., borrowed earlier in Old French form languste (c.1200), from Latin locusta
locust, lobster (see lobster).In the Hebrew Bible there are nine different names for the insect or
for particular species or varieties; in the English Bible they are rendered sometimes 'locust,'
sometimes 'beetle,' 'grasshopper,' 'caterpillar,' 'palmerworm,' etc. The precise application of
several names is unknown. [OED]


locust (n.2)

North American tree, 1630s, originally carob tree (1610s), whose fruit supposedly resembled the
insect (see locust (n.1)). Greek akris locust often was applied in the Levant to carob pods. Soon
applied in English to other trees as well.


locution (n.)

style of speech, early 15c., from Latin locutionem (nominative locutio) a speaking, speech,
discourse; way of speaking, noun of action from past participle stem of loqui to speak, from PIE
root *tolk(w)- (cognates: Old Irish ad-tluch- to thank, to-tluch- to ask; Old Church Slavonic tloko
interpretation, explanation). Related: Locutionary.


lode (n.)

original Middle English spelling of load (n.), and custodian of most of the original meaning of way,
course, carrying. Differentiation in sense took place 16c. Mining sense of vein of metal ore is from
c.1600, from notion of miners following it through the rock.


loden (n.)

coarse woolen cloth, 1880, from German loden thick woolen cloth.


lodestar (n.)

late 14c. (late 13c. as a surname), an old name for the pole star (compare Old Norse
lei&eth;arstjarna) as the star that leads the way in navigation; from lode (n.) + star (n.).
Figurative use from late 14c.


lodestone (n.)

magnetically polarized oxide of iron, 1510s, literally way-stone, from lode + stone (n.). So called
because it was used to make compass magnets to guide mariners. Figurative use from 1570s.


lodge (n.)

mid-13c. in surnames and place names; late 13c. as small building or hut, from Old French loge
arbor, covered walk; hut, cabin, grandstand at a tournament, from Frankish *laubja shelter (cognate
with Old High German louba porch, gallery, German Laube bower, arbor), from Proto-Germanic *laubja-
shelter, likely originally shelter of foliage, or roof made from bark, from root of leaf (n.).
Hunter's cabin sense is first recorded late 14c. Sense of local branch of a society is first
recorded 1680s, from mid-14c. logge workshop of masons. Also used of certain American Indian
buildings, hence lodge-pole (1805). Feste of Logges (c.1400) was a Middle English rendition of the
Old Testament Jewish Feast of Tabernacles.


lodge (v.)

c.1200, loggen, to encamp, set up camp; c. 1300 to put in a certain place, from Old French logier
lodge; find lodging for (Modern French loger), from loge (see lodge (n.)). From late 14c. as to
dwell, live; to have temporary accomodations; to provide (someone) with sleeping quarters; to get
lodgings. Sense of to get a thing in the intended place, to make something stick is from 1610s.
Related: Lodged; lodging.


lodgement (n.)

1590s, from French logement (14c.) accommodation, lodgings, from Old French logier (see lodge (v.)).


lodger (n.)

early 14c., originally tent-dweller, agent noun from lodge (v.). From c.1200 as a surname. Meaning
one who lives in rented rooms is from 1590s.


lodging (n.)

early 14c., encampment; late 14c., temporary accommodation; place of residence, verbal noun from
lodge (v.). Related: Lodgings.


loess (n.)

1833 (in Lyell), unstratified deposit of loam, coined 1823 by German mineralogist Karl C&auml;sar
von Leonhard (1779-1862) from German L&ouml;ss yellowish-gray soil, from Swiss German l&ouml;sch
(adj.) loose (compare German los; see loose). Related: Loessial.


loft (v.)

to hit a ball high in the air, 1856, originally in golf, from loft (n.). Related: Lofted; lofting.
An earlier sense was to put a loft on (a building), 1560s; also to store (goods) in a loft (1510s).


loft (n.)

an upper chamber, c.1300, from late Old English loft the sky; the sphere of the air, from Old Norse
lopt air, sky, originally upper story, loft, attic (Scandinavian -pt- pronounced like -ft-), from
Proto-Germanic *luftuz air, sky (cognates: Old English lyft, Dutch lucht, Old High German luft,
German Luft, Gothic luftus air).    Sense development is from loft, ceiling to sky, air. Buck
suggests ultimate connection with Old High German louft bark, louba roof, attic, etc., with
development from bark to roof made of bark to ceiling, though this did not directly inform the
meaning air, sky. But Watkins says this is probably a separate Germanic root. Meaning gallery in a
church first attested c.1500.


lofty (adj.)

exalted, of high rank, early 15c.; also with a high purpose, from loft + -y (2). From early 14c. as
a surname. Literal sense of high is attested from 1580s. Related: Loftily; loftiness.


log (n.1)

unshaped large piece of tree, early 14c., of unknown origin. Old Norse had lag felled tree (from
stem of liggja to lie), but on phonological grounds many etymologists deny that this is the root of
English log. Instead, they suggest an independent formation meant to express the notion of something
massive by a word of appropriate sound. OED compares clog (n.) in its original Middle English sense
lump of wood. Log cabin (1770) in American English has been a figure of the honest pioneer since the
1840 presidential campaign of William Henry Harrison. Falling off a log as a type of something easy
to do is from 1839.


log (v.2)

to enter into a log-book, 1823, from log (n.2). Meaning to attain (a speed) as noted in a log is
recorded by 1883. Related: Logged; logging.


log (n.2)

record of observations, readings, etc., 1842, sailor's shortening of log-book daily record of a
ship's speed, progress, etc. (1670s), from log (n.1). The book so called because a wooden float at
the end of a line was cast out to measure a ship's speed. General sense by 1913.


log (v.1)

to fell a tree, 1717; earlier to strip a tree (1690s), from log (n.1). Related: Logged; logging.


log in (v.)

1963 in the computing sense, from log (v.2) + in (adv.).


loganberry (n.)

1893, American English, named for U.S. horticulturalist James H. Logan (1841-1928), who developed it
by crossing a blackberry and a raspberry.


logarithm (n.)

1610s, Modern Latin logarithmus, coined by Scottish mathematician John Napier (1550-1617), literally
ratio-number, from Greek logos proportion, ratio, word (see logos) + arithmos number (see
arithmetic).


logarithmic (adj.)

1690s, from logarithm + -ic. Related: Logarithmical (1630s).


logged (adj.)

reduced to the condition of a log (which was old sailors' slang for an incapacitated wooden ship),
thus inert in the water, c.1820, from log (n.1).


logger (n.1)

one who fells or cuts trees, by 1708, agent noun from log (v.1).


logger (n.2)

one who enters data in a log, 1958, agent noun from log (v.2).


loggerhead (n.)

1580s, stupid person, blockhead, perhaps from dialectal logger heavy block of wood + head (n.).
Later it meant a thick-headed iron tool (1680s), a type of cannon shot, a type of turtle (1650s).
Loggerheads fighting, fisticuffs is from 1670s, but the exact notion is uncertain, perhaps it
suggests the heavy tools used as weapons. The phrase at loggerheads in disagreement is first
recorded 1670s.    [W]e three loggerheads be: a sentence frequently written under two heads, and the
reader by repeating it makes himself the third. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


loggia (n.)

roofed galley used as an open-air room, 1742, from Italian loggia, from French loge (see lodge
(n.)).


logging (n.1)

act of felling timber, 1706, verbal noun from log (v.1).


logging (n.2)

act of recording in a log, 1941, verbal noun from log (v.2).


loggy (adj.)

heavy, sluggish, 1847, from log (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Logginess.


logic (n.)

mid-14c., branch of philosophy that treats of forms of thinking, from Old French logique (13c.),
from Latin (ars) logica, from Greek logike (techne) reasoning (art), from fem. of logikos pertaining
to speaking or reasoning, from logos reason, idea, word (see logos). Meaning logical argumentation
is from c.1600.


logical (adj.)

early 15c., based on reason, from logic + -al (1). Meaning pertaining to logic is c.1500. Attested
from 1860 as following as a reasonable consequence. Related: Logically.


logician (n.)

person skilled in logic, late 14c., from Old French logicien (13c.), from logique (see logic).


login

in the computer sense, as one word, by 1983, from log in.


logistic (adj.)

pertaining to logic, 1620s, from Medieval Latin logisticus, from Greek logistikos endued with
reason, from logikos (see logic). Related: Logistical (1560s); logistically. Logistics from this
word, in the sense art of arithmetical calculation is from 1650s.


logistics (n.)

art of moving, quartering, and supplying troops, 1879, from French (l'art) logistique (art) of
quartering troops, from Middle French logis lodging, from Old French logeiz shelter for an army,
encampment, from loge (see lodge (n.)) + Greek-derived suffix -istique (see -istic). The form in
French was influenced by logistique. Related: Logistical.


logjam (n.)

also log-jam, congestion of logs on a river, by 1851, American English; see log (n.1) + jam (v.).
The figurative sense is by 1890.


logo (n.)

1937, probably a shortening of logogram sign or character representing a word.


logo-

before vowels log-, word-forming element meaning speech, word, from Greek logos word (see logos).


logocentric (adj.)

centered on reason, 1931, from logo- + -centric.


logogram (n.)

sign or character representing a word, 1840, from Greek logos (see logos) + -gram. Generically, any
symbol representing graphically a product, idea, etc. is from 1966. The earliest use of the word
(1820) is in the sense logograph, but OED explains this as a substitute for logograph, which in this
sense is itself a mistake for logogriph.


logograph (n.)

instrument for giving a graphic representation of speech, 1879, from Greek logos (see logos) +
-graph instrument for recording; something written. Earliest use (1797) is in the sense logogriph,
and it frequently was used in this sense.


logogriph (n.)

a type of word puzzle based on synonyms, etc., and often in the form of a verse, 1590s, from French
logogriphe, from Greek logos (see logos) + griphos riddle, literally fishing basket.


logolatry (n.)

worship of words, 1810, from logo- + -latry.


logomachy (n.)

contention about, or with, words, 1560s, from logo- + -machy.


logon

in computer sense, as one word, by 1975, from log (v.) + on.


logorrhea (n.)

1878, from logos + ending from diarrhea.


logos (n.)

1580s, Logos, the divine Word, second person of the Christian Trinity, from Greek logos word,
speech, discourse, also reason, from PIE root *leg- to collect (with derivatives meaning to speak,
on notion of to pick out words; see lecture (n.)); used by Neo-Platonists in various metaphysical
and theological senses and picked up by New Testament writers.    Other English formations from
logos include logolatry worship of words, unreasonable regard for words or verbal truth (1810 in
Coleridge); logomania (1870); logophobia (1923).


logrolling (n.)

also log-rolling, in the legislative vote-trading sense, 1823, American English, from the notion of
neighbors on the frontier helping one another with the heavy work of clearing land and building
cabins (as in phrase you roll my log and I'll roll yours); see log (n.1) + rolling.    LOG-ROLLING.
1. In the lumber regions of Maine it is customary for men of different logging camps to appoint days
for helping each other in rolling the logs to the river, after they are felled and trimmed -- this
rolling being about the hardest work incident to the business. Thus the men of three or four camps
will unite, say on Monday, to roll for camp No. 1, -- on Tuesday for camp No. 2, -- on Wednesday for
camp No. 3, -- and so on, through the whole number of camps within convenient distance of each
other. [Bartlett]


logy (adj.)

dull and heavy, 1848, American English, perhaps from Dutch log heavy, dull + -y (2); compare Middle
Low German luggich sleepy, sluggish. Or perhaps a variant of loggy.


loimic (adj.)

pertaining to plague, 1822, from Greek loimikos, from loimos plague, pestilence.


loin (n.)

early 14c., side of the body of an animal used for food, from Old French loigne hip, haunch, lumbar
region, from Vulgar Latin *lumbea, from *lumbea caro meat of the loin, from fem. of *lumbeus,
adjective used as a noun, from Latin lumbus loin (see lumbago).    Replaced Old English lendenu
loins, from Proto-Germanic *landwin- (cognates: German Lende loin, Lenden loins; Old High German
lenti, Old Saxon lendin, Middle Dutch lendine, Dutch lende, Old Norse lend).    The Latin word
perhaps was borrowed from a Germanic source. In reference to the living human body, it is attested
from late 14c. In Biblical translations, often used for that part of the body that should be covered
and about which the clothes are bound (1520s). Related: Loins.


loincloth (n.)

1859, from loin + cloth.


loiter (v.)

early 15c., idle one's time, dawdle over work, from Middle Dutch loteren be loose or erratic, shake,
totter like a loose tooth or a sail in a storm; in modern Dutch, leuteren to delay, linger, loiter
over one's work. Probably cognate with Old English lutian lurk, and related to Old English loddere
beggar; Old High German lotar empty, vain, luzen lurk; German Lotterbube vagabond, rascal, lauschen
eavesdrop; Gothic luton mislead; Old English ly&eth;re base, bad, wicked. Related: Loitered;
loitering.


loitering (n.)

mid-14c., verbal noun from loiter.


lol

by 1993, computer chat abbreviation of laughing out loud.


Lola

fem. proper name, diminutive of Spanish Dolores.


Lolita

fem. proper name, diminutive of Lola. Title and name of character in the 1958 novel by Vladimir
Nabokov (1899-1977) about a precocious schoolgirl seduced by an older man; by 1960 the name was in
widespread figurative use.


loll (v.)

mid-14c., lollen to lounge idly, hang loosely, perhaps related to Middle Dutch lollen to doze,
mumble, or somehow imitative of rocking or swinging. Specifically of the tongue from 1610s. Related:
Lolled; lolling. As a noun, from 1709. Grose [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785] has lollpoop A
lazy, idle drone.


lollapalooza (n.)

also lallapaloosa, lallapalootza, etc.; remarkable or wonderful person or thing, 1901, American
English, fanciful formation. The annual North American alternative pop music concert of the same
name dates from 1991.


Lollard

name for certain heretics, late 14c. (in Chaucer, Loller, c.1386), from Middle Dutch lollaerd,
applied pejoratively to members of reforming sects c.1300 who devoted themselves to the care of the
sick and poor, literally mumbler, mutterer, so called by critics who regarded them as heretics
pretending to humble piety, from lollen to mumble or doze. Generic late Middle English term for
groups suspected of heresy, especially followers of John Wyclif.


lollipop (n.)

1784, lolly-pops sweetmeats, soft candy, perhaps related to loll to dangle (the tongue) + pop
strike, slap. Or the first element may be northern dialectal lolly the tongue. Meaning hard candy on
a stick is from 1920s.


lolly (n.)

1854, short for lollipop. In 20c. British slang, also money.


lollygag (v.)

dawdle, dally, 1862, lallygag, American English, perhaps from dialectal lolly tongue + gag deceive,
trick. Related: Lollygagged; lollygagging.


Lombard (n.)

from Late Latin Langobardus, proper name of a Germanic people who conquered Italy 6c. and settled in
the northern region that became known as Lombardy, from Proto-Germanic Langgobardoz, often said to
mean literally Long-beards, but perhaps rather from *lang- tall, long + the proper name of the
people (Latin Bardi). Their name in Old English was Langbeardas (plural), but also Hea&eth;obeardan,
from hea&eth;o war.    In Middle English the word meant banker, money-changer, pawnbroker (late
14c.), from Old French Lombart Lombard, also money-changer; usurer; coward, from Italian Lombardo
(from Medieval Latin Lombardus).    Lombards in Middle Ages were notable throughout Western Europe
as bankers and money-lenders, also pawn-brokers; they established themselves in France from 13c.,
especially in Montpellier and Cahors, and London's Lombard Street (c.1200) originally was the site
of the houses of Lombard bankers. French also gave the word in this sense to Middle Dutch and Low
German. Lombardy poplar, originally from Italy but planted in North American colonies as an
ornamental tree, is attested from 1766.


Lombardic

1690s, from Lombard + -ic.


London

chief city and capital of England, Latin Londinium (c.115), often explained as place belonging to a
man named Londinos, a supposed Celtic personal name meaning the wild one, but this etymology is
rejected in an emphatic footnote in Jackson 1953 (p.308), and we have as yet nothing to put in its
place [Margaret Gelling, Signposts to the Past: Place-Names and the History of England, Chichester,
1978]. London Bridge the children's singing game is attested from 1827. London broil large flank
steak broiled then cut in thin slices attested by 1939, American English; London fog first attested
1830.


Londoner (n.)

mid-15c., from London + -er (1).


lone (adj.)

late 14c., having no companion, solitary, shortening of alone (q.v.) by weakening of stress or else
by misdivision of what is properly all one. The Lone Star in reference to Texas is first recorded
1843, from its flag. Lone wolf in the figurative sense is 1909, American English.


loneliness (n.)

1580s, from lonely + -ness.


lonely (adj.)

c.1600, solitary, lone, from lone + -ly (1). Meaning dejected for want of company is from 1811.
Lonely heart (n.) a lonely-hearted person is from 1922. Lonely hearted (adj.) is attested from 1820.


loner (n.)

one who avoids company, 1946; see lone. Apparently first in U.S. baseball slang (earliest reference
is to Ted Williams).    Ted is likable enough in spite of his obsession with his specialty. He is
something of a loner, and he refuses to pal around with his teammates in off hours, but in the
clubhouse he does his share of the talking. [Life magazine, Sept. 23, 1946]


lonesome (adj.)

1640s, from lone + -some (1). Related: Lonesomeness.


long (adj.)

that extends considerably from end to end, Old English lang long, from Proto-Germanic *langgaz
(cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon lang, Old High German and German lang, Old Norse langr, Middle
Dutch lanc, Dutch lang, Gothic laggs long).    The Germanic words are perhaps from PIE *dlonghos-
(cognates: Latin longus, Old Persian darga-, Persian dirang, Sanskrit dirghah, Greek dolikhos long,
Greek endelekhes perpetual, Latin indulgere to indulge), from root *del- long.    The adverb is from
Old English lange, longe, from the adjective. No longer not as formerly is from c.1300; to be not
long for this world soon to die is from 1714.    The word illustrates the Old English tendency for
short a to become short o before -n- (also retained in bond/band and West Midlands dialectal lond
from land and hond from hand).   Long vowels (c.1000) originally were pronounced for an extended
time. Sporting long ball is from 1744, originally in cricket. Long jump as a sporting event is
attested from 1864. A ship's long-boat so called from 1510s. Long knives, name Native Americans gave
to white settlers (originally in Virginia/Kentucky) is from 1774.  Long in the tooth (1841 of
persons) is from horses showing age by recession of gums. Long time no see, imitative of American
Indian speech, is first recorded 1900. To be long on something, have a lot of it, is from 1900,
American English slang.


long (v.)

Old English langian to yearn after, grieve for, literally to grow long, lengthen, from Proto-
Germanic *langojanan (see long (adj.)). Cognate with Old Norse langa, Old Saxon langon, Middle Dutch
langhen, Old High German langen to long, German verlangen to desire. Related: Longed; longing.


long johns (n.)

type of warm underwear, 1943, originally for U.S. GIs. By 1919 as a type of pastry. Long john also
was used of various sorts of worm, potato, sled, etc.


long pig (n.)

human being eaten as food, 1848, in a Pacific Islander context:    Bau literally stank for many
days, human flesh having been cooked in every house, and the entrails thrown outside as food for
pigs, or left to putrefy in the sun. The Somosomo people were fed with human flesh during their stay
at Bau, they being on a visit at that time; and some of the Chiefs of other towns, when bringing
their food, carried a cooked human being on one shoulder, and a pig on the other; but they always
preferred the long pig, as they call a man when baked. [FEEJEE.--Extract of a Letter from the Rev.
John Watsford, dated Ono, October 6th, 1846. in Wesleyan Missionary Notices, Sept. 1847]


long run (n.)

also long-run, ultimate outcome, 1620s, from long (adj.) + run (n.), on notion of when events have
run their course. As an adjective from 1804.


long shot (n.)

in the figurative sense of something unlikely, 1867, from long (adj.) + shot (n.). The notion is of
a shot at a target from a great distance, thus difficult to make. Cinematic sense is from 1922.


long-ago (adj.)

1834, from long (adj.) + ago.


long-distance (adj.)

1884, in reference to telephoning, from long (adj.) + distance (n.).


long-headed (adj.)

discerning, c.1700, from long (adj.) + head (n.).


long-lived (adj.)

early 15c., from long (adj.) + past participle of live (v.). Old English had langlife long-lived.


long-playing (adj.)

1910, of recordings, from long (adj.) + present participle of play (v.).


long-running (adj.)

1943, of theatrical productions, from long (adj.) + running.


long-suffering

also longsuffering, 1520s (n.), 1530s (adj.), from long (adj.) + suffering (see suffer). Old English
had langmodig in this sense.


long-term (adj.)

also longterm, long term, 1876, originally in insurance, from long (adj.) + term (n.).


long-winded (adj.)

also longwinded, 1580s, given to lengthy speeches, from long (adj.) + wind (n.) in the secondary
Middle English sense breath in speaking (early 14c.).


longanimity (n.)

patience, mid-15c., from Late Latin longanimitas  long-suffering, patient, from longanimus, from
longus (see long (adj.)) + animus soul, spirit, mind (see animus).


longbow (n.)

also long-bow, the characteristic medieval English weapon, c.1500, from long (adj.) + bow (n.1).


longeron (n.)

1912, from French longeron, from longer to skirt, extend along, from allonger to lengthen (see
lunge).


longevity (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin longaevitatem (nominative longaevitas) great age, long life, from Latin
longaevus long-lived, from longus (see long (adj.)) + aevum lifetime, age (see eon).


longhair (n.)

also long-hair, cat with long hair, 1893, from long (adj.) + hair. As intellectual, especially in
musical tastes, devotee of classical music, 1920. Sense of hippie attested from 1969.


longhand (adj.)

also long-hand, of handwriting, 1660s,   from long (adj.) + hand (n.).


longhorn (adj.)

also long-horn, in reference to a type of cattle, 1808, from long (adj.) + horn (n.).


longi-

word-forming element meaning long, from Latin longi-, comb. form of longus (see long (adj.)).


longing (n.)

yearning, desire, Old English langung longing, weariness, sadness, dejection, from long (v.).
Related: Longingly.


longinquity (n.)

remoteness, 1540s, from Latin longinquitas length, extent, duration, from longinquus long,
extensive, remote, distant, from longus (see long (adj.)) -inquus.


longish (adj.)

1610s, from long (adj.) + -ish.


longitude (n.)

late 14c., length, from Latin longitudo length, duration, from longus (see long (adj.)). For
origins, see latitude.


longitudinal (adj.)

1706, from Latin longitudo (see longitude) + -al (1).


longship (n.)

Old English langscip man of war; see long (adj.) + ship (n.).


longshoreman (n.)

1811, shortening of alongshore + man (n.).


longstanding

also long-standing, c.1600 (n.), 1814 (adj.), from long (adj.) + standing.


longtime (adj.)

also long-time, 1580s, from long (adj.) + time (n.).


longways (adv.)

1580s, from long (adj.) + way (n.) + adverbial genitive -s.


loo (n.1)

lavatory, 1940, but perhaps 1922, probably from French lieux d'aisances, lavatory, literally place
of ease, picked up by British servicemen in France during World War I. Or possibly a pun on
Waterloo, based on water closet.


loo (n.2)

type of card game, 1670s, short for lanterloo (1660s), from French lanturelu, originally (1620s) the
refrain of a popular comic song; according to French sources the refrain expresses a mocking refusal
or an evasive answer and was formed on the older word for a type of song chorus, turelure;
apparently a jingling reduplication of loure bagpipe (perhaps from Latin lura bag, purse).     From
its primary signification -- a kind of bagpipe inflated from the mouth -- the word 'loure' came to
mean an old dance, in slower rhythm than the gigue, generally in 6-4 time. As this was danced to the
nasal tones of the 'loure,' the term 'loure' was gradually applied to any passage meant to be played
in the style of the old bagpipe airs. [Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians, London, 1906]
The refrain sometimes is met in English as turra-lurra.


looey (n.)

1916, American English, colloquial familiar form of lieutenant.


loof (n.)

palm of the hand, Scottish and Northern English, c.1300, from Old Norse lofe, cognate with Gothic
lofa, Russian lapa paw, Lettish lepa paw.


loofah (n.)

1879, from Egyptian Arabic lufah, the name of the plant (Luffa &aelig;gyptiaca) with fibrous pods
from which flesh-brushes are made.


loogie (n.)

nasal mucus, U.S. slang, by 1990.


look (v.)

Old English locian use the eyes for seeing, gaze, look, behold, spy, from West Germanic *lokjan
(cognates: Old Saxon lokon see, look, spy, Middle Dutch loeken to look, Old High German luogen,
German dialectal lugen to look out), of unknown origin, perhaps cognate with Breton lagud eye. In
Old English, usually with on; the use of at began 14c. Meaning seek, search out is c.1300; meaning
to have a certain appearance is from c.1400. Of objects, to face in a certain direction, late 14c.
Look after take care of is from late 14c., earlier to seek (c.1300), to look toward (c.1200). Look
into investigate is from 1580s; look up research in books or papers is from 1690s. To look down upon
in the figurative sense is from 1711; to look down one's nose is from 1921. To look forward
anticipate is c.1600; meaning anticipate with pleasure is mid-19c. To not look back make no pauses
is colloquial, first attested 1893. In look sharp (1711) sharp originally was an adverb, sharply.


look (n.)

c.1200, act or action of looking, from look (v.). Meaning appearance of a person is from late 14c.
Expression if looks could kill ... attested by 1827 (if looks could bite is attested from 1747).


look-alike (n.)

someone who closely resembles another, 1937, American English, from look (v.) + alike.


look-down (n.)

type of sea fish, 1882, from look (v.) + down (adv.). So called from facial structure.


look-see (n.)

inspection, 1865, Pidgin-like formation [OED], and first used in representations of English as
spoken by Chinese, from look (v.) + see (v.).


looker (n.)

Old English locere one engaged in looking, agent noun from look (v.). Meaning one who watches over
is from c.1300; that of one who has a certain appearance is late 15c. Slang meaning attractive woman
attested from 1893. Looker-in (1927) was an early word for television viewer.


looking-glass (n.)

1520s, from looking (see look) + glass.


lookout (n.)

also look-out, person who stands watch or acts as a scout, 1690s, from look + out. Verbal phrase
look out be on the watch attested from c.1600.


loom (n.)

weaving machine, Old English geloma utensil, tool, from ge-, perfective prefix, + -loma, of unknown
origin (compare Old English andloman (plural) apparatus, furniture). Originally implement or tool of
any kind (as in heirloom); thus, the penis (c.1400-1600). Specific meaning a machine in which yarn
or thread is woven into fabric is from c.1400.


loom (v.)

1540s, to come into view largely and indistinctly, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare
dialectal Swedish loma, East Frisian lomen move slowly), perhaps a variant from the root of lame
(adj.). Early used also of ships moving up and down. Figurative use from 1590s. Related: Loomed;
looming.


loon (n.1)

large diving bird (especially the Great Northern Diver), 1630s, from a Scandinavian source (compare
Norwegian lom, from Old Norse lomr).


loon (n.2)

crazy person, mid-15c., lowen rascal, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to Dutch loen stupid
person.


loony (adj.)

also loonie, looney, 1853, American English, short for lunatic, but also influenced by loon (n.2)
and perhaps loon (n.1), the bird being noted for its wild cry and method of escaping from danger. As
a noun by 1884, from the adjective. Slang loony bin insane asylum is from 1919. Looney left in
reference to holders of political views felt to be left-wing in the extreme is from 1977. Looney
Tunes, Warner Bros. studios' animated cartoon series, dates from 1930.


loop (n.)

late 14c., loop of cloth, rope, leather, etc., probably of Celtic origin (compare Gaelic lub bend,
Irish lubiam), influenced by or blended with Old Norse hlaup a leap, run (see leap (v.)). In
reference to magnetic recording tape or film, first recorded 1931. Computer programming sense first
attested 1947.


loop (v.)

to form a loop, c.1400, draw (a leash through a ring), from loop (n.). Related: Looped; looping.
Slang looped drunk is from 1934. Loop the loop (1900) originally was in reference to roller-coasters
at amusement parks.    Loop-the-Loop is the name of a new entertainment which goes further in the
way of tempting Providence than anything yet invented. The Loop is an immense circle of track in the
air. A car on a mimic railway shoots down a very steep incline, and is impelled around the inner
side of this loop. ... The authorities at Coney Island are said to have prohibited looping-the-loop
because women break their corset strings in their efforts to catch their breath as they sweep down
the incline, and moreover, a young man is reported to have ruptured a blood vessel in his liver.
[Philadelphia Medical Journal, Aug. 10, 1901]


loophole (n.)

also loop-hole, mid-15c., from Middle English loupe opening in a wall for shooting through or
admitting light (c.1300), perhaps related to Middle Dutch lupen to watch, peer; + hole (n.).
Figurative sense of outlet, means of escape is from 1660s.


loopy (adj.)

full of loops, 1856, from loop + -y (2). Slang sense crazy is attested from 1923. Earlier figurative
sense was cunning, deceitful (by 1825).


loose (adj.)

early 13c., not securely fixed; c.1300, unbound, from Old Norse lauss loose, free, vacant,
dissolute, cognate with Old English leas devoid of, false, feigned, incorrect, from Proto-Germanic
*lausaz (cognates: Danish l&oslash;s loose, untied, Swedish l&#246;s loose, movable, detached,
Middle Dutch, German los loose, free, Gothic laus empty, vain), from PIE *leu- to loosen, divide,
cut apart (see lose). Meaning not clinging, slack is mid-15c. Meaning not bundled is late 15c. Sense
of unchaste, immoral is recorded from late 15c. Meaning at liberty, free from obligation is 1550s.
Sense of rambling, disconnected is from 1680s. Figurative sense of loose cannon was in use by 1896,
probably from celebrated image in a popular story by Hugo:    You can reason with a bull dog,
astonish a bull, fascinate a boa, frighten a tiger, soften a lion; no resource with such a monster
as a loose cannon. You cannot kill it, it is dead; and at the same time it lives. It lives with a
sinister life which comes from the infinite. It is moved by the ship, which is moved by the sea,
which is moved by the wind. This exterminator is a plaything. [Victor Hugo, Ninety Three]   Loose
end in reference to something unfinished, undecided, unguarded is from 1540s; to be at loose ends is
from 1807. Phrase on the loose free, unrestrained is from 1749 (upon the loose).


loose (v.)

early 13c, to set free, from loose (adj.). Meaning to undo, untie, unfasten is 14c. Related: Loosed;
loosing.


loose-leaf (adj.)

1899, from loose (adj.) + leaf (n.).


loosely (adv.)

late 14c., from loose + -ly (2).


loosen (v.)

late 14c., losnen, later lousen (early 15c.), from loose (v.) + -en (1). Related: Loosened;
loosening.


looseness (n.)

c.1400, from loose + -ness.


loot (n.)

goods taken from an enemy, etc., 1788, Anglo-Indian, from Hindi lut, from Sanskrit loptram, lotram
booty, stolen property, from PIE *roup-tro-, from root *reup- to snatch (see rip (v.)). The verb is
first attested 1821, from the noun. Related: Looted; looting.


looter (n.)

1858, agent noun from loot (v.).


looting (n.)

1842, verbal noun from loot (v.).


lop (v.1)

cut off, 1510s, from Middle English loppe (n.) small branches and twigs trimmed from trees (early
15c.), of unknown origin. Related: Lopped (mid-15c.); lopping. Place name Loppedthorn is attested
from 1287.


lop (v.2)

droop, hang loosely, 1570s, probably a variant of lob or of lap (v.); compare lopsided (1711),
originally lapsided, first used of ships. Lop-eared attested from 1680s. Related: Lopped; lopping.


lope (v.)

to run with long strides, early 15c.; earlier to leap, jump, spring (c.1300), from Old Norse hlaupa
to run, leap, from Proto-Germanic *hlaupan (see leap (v.)). Related: Loped; loping. The noun meaning
a jump, a leap is from late 14c.; sense of long, bounding stride is from 1809.


lopsided (adj.)

also lop-sided, 1711, originally lapsided, first used of ships; from lop (v.2) + side (n.). Related:
Lopsidedly; lopsidedness.


loquacious (adj.)

1660s, back-formation from loquacity or else formed from stem of Latin loquax (genitive loquacis)
talkative, from loqui to speak (see locution) + -ous. Related: Loquaciously; loquaciousness.


loquacity (n.)

c.1200, from Latin loquacitatem (nominative loquacitas) talkativeness, from loquax talkative (see
loquacious). An Old English word for it was ofersprecolnes.


loquat (n.)

1820, from Cantonese luh kwat, literally rush orange.


loquitur

stage direction, he or she speaks, Latin, third person present indicative singular of loqui to talk
(see locution).


loran (n.)

1940, a word invented from initial letters in long-range navigation.


lord (n.)

mid-13c., laverd, loverd, from Old English hlaford master of a household, ruler, superior, also God
(translating Latin Dominus, though Old English drihten was used more often), earlier hlafweard,
literally one who guards the loaves, from hlaf bread, loaf (see loaf (n.)) + weard keeper, guardian
(see ward (n.)). Compare lady (literally bread-kneader), and Old English hlaf&aelig;ta household
servant, literally loaf-eater. Modern monosyllabic form emerged 14c. As an interjection from late
14c. Lord's Prayer is from 1540s. Lord of the Flies translates Beelzebub (q.v.) and was name of 1954
book by William Golding. To drink like a lord is from 1620s.


lord (v.)

c.1300, to exercise lordship, from lord (n.). Meaning to play the lord, domineer is late 14c.
Related: Lorded; lording. To lord it is from 1570s.


Lord&#039;s

cricket grounds in London, named for founder Thomas Lord (1757-1832).


lordly (adj.)

14c., from Old English hlafordlic lordly, noble; see lord (n.) + -ly (1). As an adverb from mid-14c.


lordosis (n.)

curvature of the spine, 1704, Modern Latin, from Greek lordosis, from lordos bent backwards.
Related: Lordotic.


lordship (n.)

c.1300, from Old English hlafordscipe authority, rule (translating Latin dominatio); see lord (n.) +
-ship.


Lordy (interj.)

1832, in imitation of U.S. black speech; extended form of Lord as an interjection.


lore (n.)

Old English lar learning, what is taught, knowledge, science, doctrine, art of teaching, from Proto-
Germanic *laizo (Old Saxon lera, Old Frisian lare, Middle Dutch lere, Dutch leer, Old High German
lera, German Lehre teaching, precept, doctrine), from PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow (see learn).


Lorelei

1843, from German, name of a rock in the River Rhine near Koblenz, Germany. In legend, a lovely
woman sat atop it and sang while combing her long blond hair, distracting sailors so their ships
foundered on the rock and they drowned. The second element of the name probably is Rhenish dialect
lei cliff, rock; the first element is perhaps from Middle High German l&#252;ren to lie in wait


lorgnette (n.)

opera glass with a handle, 1803 (from 1776 as a French word in English), from French lorgnette, from
lorgner to squint, also to leer at, oogle (16c.), from lorgne squinting, of uncertain origin. With
diminutive suffix -ette. Compare also French lorgnon eyeglass, eyeglasses.


lorimer (n.)

c.1200 (mid-12c. as surname), maker of bits for bridles and saddles, worker in small ironware, from
Old French loremier saddler, harness-maker, military leatherworker (Modern French lormier), from
loraim, from Latin lorum strap, thong, rein of a bridle, from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn (see
volvox).


loris (n.)

small primate of Sri Lanka, 1774, from French loris (Buffon), of unknown origin, said to be from
obsolete Dutch loeris booby, clown.


lorn (adj.)

(archaic) c.1300, lost, ruined, from Old English loren, past participle of leosan to lose (see
lose). Meaning abandoned, left alone is from late 15c. Compare forlorn.


Lorraine

region in eastern France, from Medieval Latin Lotharingia, literally Lothar's Realm, name later
given to the northern portion of the lands assigned by the Treaty of Verdun (843 C.E.) to Lothair I
in the first division of the Carolingian empire. His empire stretched from the North Sea to the
Mediterranean. Before his death (855 C.E.), Lothair subdivided his lands among his three sons. His
son, Lothair (for whom the region is named), was given Lotharingia as his kingdom.


lorry (n.)

a truck; a long, flat wagon, 1838, British railroad word, probably from verb lurry to pull, tug
(1570s), of uncertain origin. Meaning large motor vehicle for carrying goods is first attested 1911.


lory (n.)

small parrot of New Guinea and Australia, 1690s, from Malay luri, name of kind of parrot, variant of
nuri.


Los Angeles

city in southern California, U.S., founded 1781; the modern name is short for the original, given
variously as El Pueblo de Nuestra Se&ntilde;ora de los &Aacute;ngeles or El Pueblo de la Reyna de
los &Aacute;ngeles.


lose (v.)

Old English losian be lost, perish, from los destruction, loss, from Proto-Germanic *lausa-
(cognates: Old Norse los the breaking up of an army; Old English forleosan to lose, destroy, Old
Frisian forliasa, Old Saxon farliosan, Middle Dutch verliesen, Old High German firliosan, German
verlieren), from PIE root *leu- to loosen, divide, cut apart, untie, separate (cognates: Sanskrit
lunati cuts, cuts off, lavitram sickle; Greek lyein to loosen, untie, slacken, lysus a loosening;
Latin luere to loose, release, atone for, expiate).    Replaced related leosan (a class II strong
verb whose past participle loren survives in forlorn and lovelorn), from Proto-Germanic *leusanan
(cognates: Old High German virliosan, German verlieren, Old Frisian urliasa, Gothic fraliusan to
lose).    Transitive sense of to part with accidentally is from c.1200. Meaning fail to maintain is
from mid-15c. Meaning to be defeated (in a game, etc.) is from 1530s. Meaning to cause (someone) to
lose his way is from 1640s. To lose (one's) mind become insane is attested from c.1500. To lose out
fail is 1858, American English. Related: Lost; losing.


loser (n.)

mid-14c., a destroyer, agent noun from lose (v.). Sense of one who suffers loss is from 1540s;
meaning horse that loses a race is from 1902; convicted criminal is from 1912; hapless person is
1955 student slang.


loss (n.)

Old English los loss, destruction, from Proto-Germanic *lausa- (see lose). The modern word, however,
probably evolved 14c. with a weaker sense, from lost, the original past participle of lose. Phrase
at a loss (1590s) originally refers to hounds losing the scent. To cut (one's) losses is from 1885,
originally in finance.


lossy (adj.)

characterized by loss, 1948, a term in electrical engineering, from loss + -y (2).


lost (adj.)

defeated, c.1300; wasted, spent in vain, c.1500; also no longer to be found (1520s), from past
participle of lose. Lost Cause in reference to the Southern U.S. bid for independence is from the
title of E.A. Pollard's history of the CSA and the rebellion (1866). Lost Generation in reference to
the period 1914-18 first attested 1926 in Hemingway's The Sun Also Rises, where he credits it to
Gertrude Stein.


lot (n.)

Old English hlot object (anything from dice to straw, but often a chip of wood with a name inscribed
on it) used to determine someone's share, also what falls to a person by lot, from Proto-Germanic
*khlutom (cognates: Old Norse hlutr lot, share, Old Frisian hlot lot, Old Saxon hlot, Middle Dutch,
Dutch lot, Old High German hluz share of land, German Los; Old English hleotan to cast lots, to
foretell), of unknown origin. The object was placed with others in a receptacle, which was shaken,
the winner being the one that fell out first. Hence, to cast lots. In some cases the lots were drawn
by hand. The word was adopted from Germanic into the Romanic languages (compare lottery, lotto).
Meaning choice resulting from the casting of lots first attested c.1200.    Sense of plot of land is
first recorded 1630s (distribution of the best property in new settlements often determined by
casting lots), that of group, collection is 1725, from notion of auction lots. The generalized sense
of great many is first attested in 1812. To cast (one's) lot with another is to agree to share
winnings.


lote (n.)

1510s, anglicized form of lotus.


loth (adj.)

alternative spelling of loath.


Lothario

masc. proper name, Italian form of Old High German Hlothari, Hludher (whence German Luther, French
Lothaire), literally famous warrior, from Old High German lut (see loud) + heri host, army (see
harry (v.)). As a characteristic name for a lady-killer, 1756, from the name of the principal male
character of Nicholas Rowe's The Fair Penitent (1703).


lotion (n.)

c.1400, loscion, from Old French lotion (14c.), from Latin lotionem (nominative lotio) a washing,
from lotus, popular form of lautus, past participle of lavere to wash (see lave). As a verb, from
1817. Related: Lotioned; lotioning.


lottery (n.)

1560s, arrangement for a distribution of prizes by chance, from Italian lotteria, from lotto lot,
portion, share, from same root as Old English hlot (see lot). Compare Middle French loterie, from
Middle Dutch loterje, from lot (n.).


Lottie

also Lotta, fem. proper name, a diminutive of Charlotte.


lotto (n.)

1778, type of card game, from French loto and directly from Italian lotto a lot, from Old French lot
lot, share, reward, prize, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old English and Old
Frisian hlot; see lot (n.)). Meaning a lottery, a game of chance is attested from 1787.


lotus (n.)

1540s, from Latin lotus, from Greek lotos, name used for several plants before it came to mean
Egyptian white lotus (a sense attested in English from 1580s); perhaps from a Semitic source
(compare Hebrew lot myrrh). The yogic sense is attested from 1848. Lotus-eaters (1812) are from
Greek lotophagoi, mentioned in Odyssey, book IX.


louche (adj.)

dubious, disreputable, 1819, from French louche squinting, from Old French lousche, lois (12c.)
cross-eyed, squint-eyed, lop-sided, from Latin lusca, fem. of luscus one-eyed, of unknown origin.


loud (adj.)

Old English hlud noisy, making noise, sonorous, from West Germanic *khluthaz heard (cognates: Old
Frisian and Old Saxon hlud, Middle Dutch luut, Dutch luid, Old High German hlut, German laut loud),
from PIE past participle *klutos- (cognates: Sanskrit srutah, Greek klytos heard of, celebrated,
Armenian lu known, Welsh clod praise), from root *kleu- to hear (see listen).    Application to
colors first recorded 1849. The adverb is from Old English hlude, from Proto-Germanic *khludai
(cognates: Dutch luid, German laut). Paired with clear since at least c.1650.


loudly (adv.)

c.1400, from loud + -ly (2).


loudmouth (n.)

also loud-mouth, loud or talkative person, 1872, from loud (adj.) + mouth (n.).


loudness (n.)

Old English hludnis loudness, clamor; see loud + -ness.


loudspeaker (n.)

also loud-speaker, 1884, from loud (adj.) + speaker.


lough (n.)

a lake, pool, early 14c., Anglo-Celtic, representing a northern form of Irish and Gaelic loch, Welsh
llwch, from PIE root *laku- (see lake (n.1)).


Louis

masc. proper name, from French Louis, from Old French Loois, probably via Medieval Latin Ludovicus,
a Latinization of Old High German Hluodowig, literally famous in war (cognate with Clovis; for
etymology, see Ludwig). Louis Quatorze (1855) refers to styles reminiscent of the time of King Louis
XIV of France (1643-1715).


Louise

also Louisa, fem. proper name, fem. of  Louis.


Louisiana

named 1682 by French explorer la Salle for Louis XIV of France. The name originally applied to the
entire Mississippi basin.


lounge (n.)

comfortable drawing room, 1881, from lounge (v.); in the sense of couch on which one can lie at full
length, it is attested from 1830. Lounge lizard is by 1917, perhaps from 1912, a term of contempt,
originally in reference to men who hung around in tea rooms to flirt.


lounge (v.)

to loll idly, c.1500, Scottish, of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] from French s'allonger
(paresseusement) to lounge about, lie at full length, from Old French alongier lengthen, from Latin
longus long (see long (adj.)). Another etymology traces it through obsolete lungis (n.) slow, lazy
person (c.1560), from Middle French longis, a generic application of Longinus, supposed to be the
name of the centurion who pierced Christ's side with a spear in John xix:34. Popular etymology
associated the name directly with long (adj.). Related: Lounged; lounging.


loupe (n.)

watchmaker's magnifier, 1909, from French loupe.


lour (v.)

to frown, late 13c. variant of lower (v.2). Related: Loured; louring.


louse (n.)

parasitic insect infecting human hair and skin, Old English lus, from Proto-Germanic *lus (cognates:
Old Norse lus, Middle Dutch luus, Dutch luis, Old High German lus, German Laus), from PIE *lus-
louse (cognates: Welsh lleuen louse). Slang meaning obnoxious person is from 1630s. The plural lice
(Old English lys) shows effects of i-mutation. The verb meaning to clear of lice is from late 14c.;
to louse up ruin, botch first attested 1934, from the literal sense (of bedding), from 1931. Grose
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785] has louse ladder A stitch fallen in a stocking.


lousy (adj.)

mid-14c., lousi, infested with lice, from louse + -y (2). Figurative use as a generic adjective of
abuse dates from late 14c.; sense of swarming with (money, etc.) is American English slang from
1843. Related: Lousiness.


lout (n.)

1540s, awkward fellow, clown, bumpkin, perhaps from a dialectal survival of Middle English louten
(v.) bow down (c.1300), from Old English lutan bow low, from Proto-Germanic *lut- to bow, bend,
stoop (cognates: Old Norse lutr stooping, which might also be the source of the modern English
word), from PIE *leud- to lurk (cognates: Gothic luton to deceive, Old English lot deceit), also to
be small (see little). Non-Germanic cognates probably include Lithuanian liudeti to mourn; Old
Church Slavonic luditi to deceive, ludu foolish. Sense of cad is first attested 1857 in British
schoolboy slang.


loutish (adj.)

1550s, from lout + -ish. Related: Loutishly; loutishness.


louver (n.)

also louvre, early 14c., domed turret-like structure atop a building to disperse smoke and admit
light, from Old French lovier, of uncertain origin. One theory connects it to Medieval Latin
*lodarium, which might be from a Germanic source (compare Old High German louba upper room, roof;
see lobby). Another suggests it is from French l'ouvert, literally the open place, from le, definite
article, + past participle of ouvrir to open. Meaning overlapping strips in a window (to let in air
but keep out rain) first recorded 1550s. The form has been influenced by apparently unrelated French
Louvre, the name of the palace in Paris, which is said to be so named because its builder, Philip
Augustus, intended it as a wolf kennel. Related: Louvered.


lovable (adj.)

also loveable, mid-14c., from love (v.) + -able. Related: Lovably.


love (n.)

Old English lufu love, affection, friendliness, from Proto-Germanic *lubo (cognates: Old High German
liubi joy, German Liebe love; Old Norse, Old Frisian, Dutch lof; German Lob praise; Old Saxon liof,
Old Frisian liaf, Dutch lief, Old High German liob, German lieb, Gothic liufs dear, beloved).    The
Germanic words are from PIE *leubh- to care, desire, love (cognates: Latin lubet, later libet
pleases; Sanskrit lubhyati desires; Old Church Slavonic l'ubu dear, beloved; Lithuanian liaupse song
of praise).    Even now, she thought, almost no one remembers Esteban and Pepita but myself. Camilla
alone remembers her Uncle Pio and her son; this woman, her mother. But soon we shall die and all
memory of those five will have left the earth, and we ourselves shall be loved for a while and
forgotten. But the love will have been enough; all those impulses of love return the love that made
them. Even memory is not necessary for love. There is a land of the living and a land of the dead
and the bridge is love, the only survival, the only meaning. [Thornton Wilder, Bridge of San Luis
Rey, 1927]    Meaning a beloved person is from early 13c. The sense no score (in tennis, etc.) is
1742, from the notion of playing for love, i.e. for nothing (1670s). Phrase for love or money for
anything is attested from 1580s. Love seat is from 1904. Love-letter is attested from mid-13c.;
love-song from early 14c. To fall in love is attested from early 15c. To be in love with (someone)
is from c.1500. To make love is from 1570s in the sense pay amorous attention to; as a euphemism for
have sex, it is attested from c.1950. Love life one's collective amorous activities is from 1919,
originally a term in psychological jargon. Love affair is from 1590s. The phrase no love lost
(between two people) is ambiguous and was used 17c. in reference to two who love each other well
(c.1640) as well as two who have no love for each other (1620s).


love (v.)

Old English lufian to love, cherish, show love to; delight in, approve, from Proto-Germanic *lubojan
(cognates: Old High German lubon, German lieben), from root of love (n.). Related: Loved; loving.
Adjective Love-hate ambivalent is from 1937, originally a term in psychological jargon.


love apple (n.)

tomato, 1570s, corresponding to French pomme d'amour, German liebesapfel, but the reason for the
term remains obscure. One guess is that it is a corruption of Italian pomo de'Mori or Spanish pome
dei Moro, literally Moorish apple.


love bird (n.)

1590s, small species of West African parrot, noted for the remarkable attention mating pairs pay to
one another; figurative sense of a lover is attested from 1911.Hold hands, you lovebirds. [Emil
Sitka]


love child (n.)

child born out of wedlock, 1805, from love (n.) + child. Earlier was love brat (17c.).


loveless (adj.)

early 14c., feeling no love; late 14c. unloved, from   from love (n.) + -less. Attested from mid-
13c. as a surname. Related: Lovelessly; lovelessness.


lovelily (adv.)

early 14c., from lovely + -ly (2).


loveliness (n.)

mid-14c., lovableness, from lovely + -ness.


lovelonging (n.)

c.1300, luue langing, from love (n.) + infinitive of long (v.).


lovelorn (adj.)

also love-lorn, pining for love, 1630s, from love (n.) + lorn. Perhaps coined by Milton.


lovely (adj.)

Old English luflic affectionate, loveable; see love (n.) + -ly (1). The modern sense of lovable on
account of beauty, attractive is from c.1300, applied indiscriminately to all pleasing material
objects, from a piece of plum-cake to a Gothic cathedral [George P. Marsh, The Origin and History of
the English Language, 1862].


lovemaking (n.)

courtship, mid-15c., from love (n.) + make. Phrase make love is attested from 1570s in the sense pay
amorous attention to; as a euphemism for have sex, it is attested from c.1950.


lover (n.)

early 13c., agent noun from love (v.). Old English had lufend for male lovers, lufestre for women.
Meaning one who has a predilection for (a thing, concept, pursuit, etc.) is mid-14c. As a form of
address to a lover, from 1911. Related: Loverly.


lovesick (adj.)

also love-sick, 1520s, from love (n.) + sick (adj.).


lovesome (adj.)

Old English lufsum worthy of love, from love (v.) + -some (1). Early 13c. as lovely, 1720 as
amorous. An old word that might be useful in its original sense. Related: Lovesomely; lovesomeness.


lovestruck (adj.)

also love-struck, by 1762, from love (n.) + struck (see strike (v.)). Love stricken is attested from
1805.


lovey

affectionate pet name, 1731, from love (n.) + -y (3). Extended form lovey-dovey attested from 1819
(n.), 1847 (adj.).


loving

Old English lufenda (see love (v.)). Loving cup is attested from 1808. Lovingkindness was
Coverdale's word.


lovingly (adv.)

late 14c., from loving + -ly (2).


low (adj.)

not high, late 13c., from lah (late 12c.), not rising much, being near the base or ground (of
objects or persons); lying on the ground or in a deep place (late 13c.), from Old Norse lagr low, or
a similar Scandinavian source (compare Swedish l&#229;g, Danish lav), from Proto-Germanic *lega-
lying flat, low (cognates: Old Frisian lech, Middle Dutch lage, Dutch laag low, dialectal German
l&auml;ge flat), from PIE *legh- to lie (see lie (v.2)).    Meaning humble in rank is from c.1200;
undignified is from 1550s; sense of dejected, dispirited is attested from 1737; meaning coarse,
vulgar is from 1759. In reference to sounds, not loud, also having a deep pitch, it is attested from
c.1300. Of prices, from c.1400. In geographical usage, low refers to the part of a country near the
sea-shore (c.1300, as in Low Countries Holland, Belgium, Luxemburg, 1540s). As an adverb c.1200,
from the adjective.


low (v.)

Old English hlowan make a noise like a cow, from Proto-Germanic *khlo- (cognates: Middle Dutch
loeyen, Dutch loeien, Old Low Franconian luon, Old High German hluojen), from imitative PIE root
*kele- (2) to shout (see claim (v.)).


low (n.1)

sound made by cows, 1540s, from low (v.).


low (adv.)

early 13c., from low (adj.). Of voices or sounds, from c.1300.


low (n.2)

hill, obsolete except in place names, Old English hlaw hill, mound, especially barrow, related to
hleonian to lean (see lean (v.)). Compare Latin clivus hill from the same PIE root.


low key (adj.)

also low-key, 1895, from low (adj.) + key (n.1), perhaps from the musical sense.


low-budget (adj.)

1939, originally of motion pictures; from low (adj.) + budget (n.).


low-class (adj.)

1868, from low (adj.) + class (n.).


low-down (adj.)

also low down, lowdown, vulgar, 1888, from low (adj.) + down (adv.). Earlier it meant humble
(1540s). As a noun, 1915, from the adjective, American English.


low-grade (adj.)

1867, originally in mining, with reference to ores, from low (adj.) + grade (n.).


low-life (adj.)

disreputable, vulgar, 1794, from low (adj.) + life; as a noun, coarse, no-good person it is recorded
from 1911. Also lowlife.


low-profile (adj.)

1957, in reference to automobile wheels, from low (adj.) + profile (n.). General sense by 1970,
American English, in reference to Nixon Administration policy of partial U.S. disengagement from
burdensome commitments abroad.


lowboy (n.)

chest of drawers on short legs, 1891, a hybrid from low (adj.) + French bois wood (see bush).


lowbrow (n.)

also low-brow, person who is not intellectual, 1902, from low (adj.) + brow. Said to have been
coined by U.S. journalist Will Irwin (1873-1948). A low brow on a man as a sign of primitive
qualities was common in 19c. fiction, but it also was considered a mark of classical beauty in
women.    A low brow and not a very high one is considered beautiful in woman, whereas a high brow
and not a low one is the stamp of manhood. [Medical Review, June 2, 1894]    As an adjective from
1913.


lower (v.1)

c.1600, to descend, sink, from lower (adj.), from Middle English lahghere (c.1200), comparative of
low (adj.). Transitive meaning to let down, to cause to descend attested from 1650s. Related:
Lowered; lowering. In the sense to cause to descend the simple verb low (Middle English lahghenn,
c.1200) was in use into the 18c.


lower (v.2)

to look dark and threatening, also lour, Middle English louren, luren to frown (early 13c.), to lurk
(mid-15c.), from Old English *luran or from its cognates, Middle Low German luren, Middle Dutch
loeren lie in wait. Form perhaps assimilated to lower (1). Related: Lowered; lowering.


lower (adj.)

c.1200, lahre, comparative of lah (see low (adj.)).


lower-case (adj.)

also lowercase, 1680s; see lower (adj.) + case (n.2).


lowercase (v.)

to set (text) in lower-case type, 1911, from lower-case (adj.). Related: Lowercased; lowercasing.


lowermost

1560s, from lower (adj.) + -most.


lowest (adj.)

c.1200, laghesst, superlative of lah (see low (adj.)).


Lowestoft (n.)

type of porcelain, named for a town in Suffolk where it was made from 1757.


lowing (n.)

early 13c., verbal noun from low (v.).


lowland (n.)

c.1500, originally with reference to Scotland, from low (adj.) + land (n.). Related: Lowlander.


lowliness (n.)

early 15c., from lowly + -ness.


lowly

c.1300 (adv.); late 14c. (adj.) humble, from low (adj.) + -ly.


lowness (n.)

early 13c., from low (adj.) + -ness.


lox (n.)

1934, American English, from Yiddish laks, from Middle High German lahs salmon, from Proto-Germanic
*lakhs-, from the common IE root for the fish, *laks- (cognates: Lithuanian laszisza, Russian losos,
Polish &#322;oso&#347; salmon).


loxo-

word-forming element meaning oblique, before vowels lox-, from Greek loxos slanting, crosswise,
oblique. E.g. loxodromics art of oblique sailing.


loyal (adj.)

1530s, in reference to subjects of sovereigns or governments, from Middle French loyal, from Old
French loial, leal of good quality; faithful; honorable; law-abiding; legitimate, born in wedlock,
from Latin legalem, from lex law. In most cases it has displaced Middle English leal, which is from
the same French source. Sense development in English is feudal, via notion of faithful in carrying
out legal obligations. In a general sense (of dogs, lovers, etc.), from c.1600. As a noun meaning
those who are loyal from 1530s (originally often in plural).


loyalism (n.)

1812, from loyal + -ism.


loyalist (n.)

1680s, from loyal + -ist. Meaning different persons in different times and places.


loyally (adv.)

1570s, from loyal + -ly (2).


loyalty (n.)

c.1400, from Old French loialt&eacute;, leaut&eacute; loyalty, fidelity; legitimacy; honesty; good
quality (Modern French loyaut&eacute;), from loial (see loyal). Earlier leaute (mid-13c.), from the
older French form. Loyalty oath first attested 1852.


lozenge (n.)

figure having four equal sides and two acute and two obtuse angles, early 14c., from Old French
losenge windowpane, small square cake, etc., used for many flat quadrilateral things (Modern French
losange). It has cognates in Spanish losanje, Catalan llosange, Italian lozanga. Probably from a
pre-Roman Celtic language, perhaps Iberian *lausa or Gaulish *lausa flat stone (compare
Proven&ccedil;al lausa, Spanish losa, Catalan llosa, Portuguese lousa slab, tombstone), from a pre-
Celtic language.    Originally in English a term in heraldry; meaning small cake or tablet
(originally diamond-shaped) of medicine and sugar, etc., meant to be held in the mouth and dissolved
is from 1520s.


LP

1948, abbreviation of long-playing phonograph record.    The most revolutionary development to hit
the recording industry since the invention of the automatic changer is the Long Playing record,
which can hold an entire 45-minute symphony or musical-comedy score on a single 12-inch disk. ...
The disks, released a few weeks ago by Columbia Records and made of Vinylite, have phenomenally
narrow grooves (.003 of an inch). They are played at less than half the speed of the standard old-
style records. [Life magazine, July 26, 1948]


LSD

lysergic acid diethylamide, 1950, from German Lysergs&auml;ure-di&auml;thylamid (abbreviated LSD in
a Swiss journal from 1947). See lysergic. L.s.d. as the abbreviation of pounds, shillings, and pence
is recorded from 1853.


Ltd.

abbreviation of limited, attested by 1900.


luau (n.)

Hawaiian party or feast, 1853, from Hawaiian lu'au, literally young taro tops, which were served at
outdoor feasts.


lubber (n.)

mid-14c., big, clumsy, stupid fellow who lives in idleness, from lobre, earlier lobi lazy lout,
probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Swedish dialectal lubber a plump, lazy fellow). But OED
suggests a possible connection with Old French lobeor swindler, parasite, with sense altered by
association with lob (n.) in the bumpkin sense. A sailors' word since 16c. (as in landlubber), but
earliest attested use is of lazy monks (abbey-lubber). Compare also lubberwort, the name of the
mythical herb that produces laziness (1540s); and Lubberland imaginary land of plenty without work
(1590s). Sometimes also Lubbard (1580s).


lubber (v.)

1520s, from lubber (n.). Related: Lubbered; lubbering.


lubberly (adj.)

1570s, from lubber (n.) + -ly (1).


lube

1934, colloquial shortening of lubrication. As a verb (short for lubricate) recorded from 1961.


Lubish

1610s, from German l&#252;bisch, Dutch lubeksch, from L&#252;beck, Hanseatic city in northern
Germany, formerly a trade center, hence its use as an adjective in English. The city was founded
1143 and is said to be named for the former principality of the Liubichi, literally the people of
prince Liub (literally beloved).


lubric (adj.)

smooth, slippery, late 15c., also lascivious, wanton, from Middle French lubrique (15c.) or directly
from Latin lubricus slippery (see lubricant (adj.)). Related: Lubrical.


lubricant (n.)

1828, probably from lubricant (adj.), or from Latin lubricantem.


lubricant (adj.)

reducing friction, 1809, from Latin lubricantem (nominative lubricans), present participle of
lubricare to make slippery or smooth, from lubricus slippery; easily moved, sliding, gliding;
figuratively uncertain, hazardous, dangerous; seductive, from PIE *sleubh- to slip, slide (see
sleeve).


lubricate (v.)

1620s, to make slippery or smooth (especially by the application of an oil), from Latin lubricatus,
past participle of lubricare to make slippery or smooth, from lubricus slippery (see lubricant
(adj.)). Related: Lubricated; lubricating. Earlier verb was lubrify (1610s), from Medieval Latin
lubrificare.


lubrication (n.)

1640s, act of lubricating, noun of action from lubricate (v.). Earlier were lubifraction (1540s).


lubricity (n.)

late 15c., lasciviousness, from Middle French lubricit&#233; or directly from Latin lubricitatem
(nominative lubricitas), from lubricus slippery (see lubricant (adj.)). Sense of oiliness,
smoothness is from 1540s; figurative sense of shiftiness is from 1610s.


lubricous (adj.)

1530s, lascivious, from Latin lubricus slippery, smooth, from lubricus slippery (see lubricant
(adj.)). Literal meaning slippery, oily is from 1650s in English; figurative sense of shifty,
elusive is from 1640s. Also lubricious (1580s).


lubritorium (n.)

place where automobiles are greased, 1928; from lubrication + ending from auditorium. Mentioned as
an overworked suffix in the late 1920s; Mencken also lists infantorium, shavatorium, restatorium,
hatatorium, and odditorium (a slide-show).


lucency (n.)

1650s, from lucent + -cy. Lucence is from late 15c.


lucent (adj.)

mid-15c., shining, bright, luminous, from Latin lucentem (nominative lucens), present participle of
lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Meaning lucid, clear is from 1820. Related: Lucently.


Lucia

fem. proper name; see Lucy.


Lucian

masc. proper name, from Latin Lucianus (source also of French Lucien), a derivative of Roman Lucius,
from lux (genitive lucis) light (see light (n.)). The Hellenistic Greek writer (his name Latinized
from Greek Loukianos) was noted as the type of a scoffing wit.


lucid (adj.)

1590s, bright, shining, from Latin lucidus light, bright, clear, figuratively perspicuous, lucid,
clear, from lucere to shine, from lux (genitive lucis) light, from PIE root *leuk- to shine, be
bright (see light (n.)). Sense of easy to understand first recorded 1786. Lucid interval period of
calm or temporary sanity (1580s) is from Medieval Latin lucida intervalla (plural), which was common
in medieval English legal documents (non est compos mentis, sed gaudet lucidis intervallis).
Related: Lucidly; lucidness (1640s).


lucidity (n.)

1650s, brightness, from French lucidit&#233;, from Late Latin luciditas, from lucidus (see lucid).
Meaning intellectual clarity attested by 1851.


Lucifer

Old English Lucifer Satan, also morning star, from Latin Lucifer morning star, literally light-
bringing, from lux (genitive lucis) light (see light (n.)) + ferre carry (see infer).    Belief that
it was the proper name of Satan began with its use in Bible to translate Greek Phosphoros, which
translates Hebrew Helel ben Shahar in Isaiah xiv:12 -- How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning! [KJV] Because of the mention of a fall from Heaven, the verse was interpreted by
Christians as a reference to Satan, even though it is literally a reference to the King of Babylon
(see Isaiah xiv:4).   Lucifer match friction match is from 1831. Adjectival forms include
Luciferian, Luciferine, Luciferous. There was a noted Bishop Lucifer of Cagliari in Sardinia in the
4th century, regarded locally as a saint.


luciferase (n.)

supposed enzyme found in fireflies and other glowing creatures, 1888, from French lucif&#233;rase;
see Lucifer. Related: Luciferin.


luciferous (adj.)

light-bringing, emitting light, 1650s, from Latin lucifer (see Lucifer) + -ous. Figurative use is
earliest (1640s) and more common.


lucifugous (adj.)

shunning the light, 1650s, from Latin lucifugus, from stem of lucere to shine (see light (n.)) +
stem of fugax apt to flee, timid, figuratively transitory, fleeting, from fugere to flee (see
fugitive).


Lucille

fem. proper name, from French Lucille, diminutive of Latin Lucia (see Lucy).


Lucina

Roman goddess of childbirth, from Latin Lucina, literally she that brings to the light, fem. of
lucinus, from lux (see light (n.)).


Lucite

1937, proprietary name (E.I. DuPont de Nemours and Co., Wilmington, Delaware, U.S.) for a solid,
transparent plastic, from Latin luc(i)-, from stem of lucere to shine (see light (n.)).


Lucius

masc. proper name; see Lucian.


luck (n.)

late 15c. from early Middle Dutch luc, shortening of gheluc happiness, good fortune, of unknown
origin. It has cognates in Dutch geluk, Middle High German g(e)l&uuml;cke, German Gl&uuml;ck
fortune, good luck. Perhaps first borrowed in English as a gambling term. To be down on (one's) luck
is from 1832; to be in luck is from 1900; to push (one's) luck is from 1911. Good luck as a
salutation to one setting off to do something is from 1805. Expression better luck next time
attested from 1802.    A gentleman was lately walking through St Giles's, where a levelling citizen
attempting to pick his pocket of a handkerchief, which the gentleman caught in time, and secured,
observing to the fellow, that he had missed his aim, the latter, with perfect sang-froid, answered,
better luck next time master.Â  [â&euro;&oelig;Monthly Mirror,â&euro;? London, 1802]


luck (v.)

by 1945, from luck (n.). To luck out succeed through luck is American English colloquial, attested
by 1946; to luck into (something good) is from 1944. However, lukken was a verb in Middle English
(mid-15c.) meaning to happen, chance; also, happen fortunately.


luckily (adv.)

1520s, from lucky + -ly (2).


luckless (adj.)

1560s, from luck (n.) + -less. Related: Lucklessly; lucklessness.


lucky (adj.)

mid-15c., of persons; 1540s, of actions or objects, likely to bring luck; from luck + -y (2).
Meaning occurring by chance is 1590s. Related: Luckier; luckiest; luckiness. Lucky break is attested
from 1884 in billiards; 1872 as failure or break-down which turns out to be fortunate. Lucky Strike
as the name of a brand of cigarettes (originally chewing tobacco) popular mid-20c. is said to date
from 1871; popular from 1935 when the brandâ&euro;&trade;s maker picked up sponsorship of
â&euro;&oelig;Your Hit Paradeâ&euro;? on radio.


lucrative (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French lucratif profitable and directly from Latin lucrativus gainful,
profitable, from lucratus, past participle of lucrari to gain, from lucrum gain, profit (see lucre).
Related: Lucratively; lucrativeness.


lucre (n.)

late 14c., from Latin lucrum gain, advantage, profit; wealth, riches, from PIE root *lau- gain,
profit (cognates: Greek apo-lanein to enjoy, Gothic launs, German lohn wages, reward, and possibly
Sanskrit lotam, lotram booty). Filthy lucre (Tit. i:11) is Tyndale's rendering of Greek aischron
kerdos.


Lucretia

fem. proper name, from Latin Lucretia (source also of French Lucr&#232;ce), fem. of Lucretius, Roman
masc. proper name, originally the name of a Roman gens.


lucubrate (v.)

to work at night, 1620s, from Latin lucubratus, past participle of lucubrare to work by lamplight
(see lucubration). Literally, to work by artificial light, hence to work laboriously.


lucubration (n.)

1590s, literary work showing signs of too-careful elaboration, from Latin lucubrationem (nominative
lucubratio) nocturnal study, night work, noun of action from past participle stem of lucubrare,
literally to work by artificial light, from stem of lucere to shine (see light (n.)).


Lucy

fem. proper name, from French Lucie, from Latin Lucia, fem. of Lucius (see Lucian).


Luddite (n.)

also luddite, 1811, from name taken by an organized band of weavers who destroyed machinery in
Midlands and northern England 1811-16 for fear it would deprive them of work. Supposedly from Ned
Ludd, a Leicestershire worker who in 1779 had done the same before through insanity (but that story
first was told in 1847). Applied to modern rejecters of automation and technology from at least
1961. As an adjective from 1812.


lude (n.)

slang shortening of quaalude, by 1973.


ludic (adj.)

spontaneously playful, 1940, from French ludique, from Latin ludere to play (see ludicrous).


ludicrous (adj.)

1610s, pertaining to play or sport, from Latin ludicrus, from ludicrum a sport, game, toy, source of
amusement, joke, from ludere to play, which, with Latin ludus a game, play, perhaps is from
Etruscan, or perhaps from PIE root *leid- to play. Sense of ridiculous is attested from 1782.
Related: Ludicrously; ludicrousness.


Ludwig

masc. proper name, from Old High German hlud(o)wig, literally famous in war, from Proto-Germanic
*hluda- heard of, famous (see loud) + *wiga war. Compare Louis.


luff (n.)

c.1200, in sailing, from Old French lof spar, or some other nautical device, point of sail, also
windward side, probably from Germanic (compare Middle Dutch lof windward side of a ship (Dutch
loef), which might also be the direct source of the English word), from Proto-Germanic *lofo
(cognates: Old Norse lofi, Gothic lofa palm of the hand, Danish lab, Swedish labb paw), from PIE
*lep- to be flat (see glove). As a verb from late 14c., from the noun.


Luftwaffe

German air force in World War II era, 1935, from German Luftwaffe, literally air-weapon, from Luft
(see loft).


lug (v.)

late 14c., to move (something) heavily or slowly, from Scandinavian (compare Swedish lugga,
Norwegian lugge to pull by the hair); see lug (n.). Related: Lugged; lugging.


lug (n.)

1620s, handle of a pitcher, from lugge (Scottish) earflap of a cap, ear (late 15c.; according to
OED, the common word for ear in 19c. Scotland), probably from Scandinavian (compare Swedish lugg
forelock, Norwegian lugg tuft of hair). The connecting notion is something that can be gripped and
pulled. Applied 19c. to mechanical objects that can be grabbed or gripped. Meaning stupid fellow is
from 1924; that of lout, sponger is 1931, American English. Compare lug-nut (1869), nut closed at
one end as a cap.


luge (n.)

kind of small toboggan, 1905, from French luge small coasting sled, from Savoy dialect, from
Medieval Latin sludia sled (9c.), perhaps from a Gaulish word from the same root as English sled,
slide.


Luger (n.)

type of German automatic pistol, 1904, from Georg Luger (1849-1923), Austrian-born firearms expert.


luggage (n.)

1590s, from lug (v.) to drag + -age; so, literally what has to be lugged about (or, in Johnson's
definition, any thing of more weight than value). In 20c., the usual word for baggage belonging to
passengers.


lugger (n.)

small fishing or coasting boat, 1757, from lugsail (see lug (n.)) or else from Dutch logger to fish
with a dragnet.


lugubriosity (n.)

1839, from Latin lugubris (see lugubrious) + -ity. Sometimes also lugubrosity.


lugubrious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin lugubris mournful, pertaining to mourning, from lugere to mourn, from PIE root
*leug- to break; to cause pain (cognates: Greek lygros mournful, sad, Sanskrit rujati breaks,
torments, Lettish lauzit to break the heart). Related: Lugubriously; lugubriousness.


lugworm (n.)

c.1600, from lug, probably a Celtic word (the first recorded use is in a Cornwall context) unrelated
to lug (n.) or lug (v.) + worm. But OED suggests connection with lug (v.) on the notion of heavy,
clumsy.


luke (adj.)

obsolete except in lukewarm (late 14c.), from Middle English leuk tepid (c.1200), of unknown origin;
perhaps from Middle Dutch or Old Frisian leuk tepid, weak, or from Old English hleowe (adv.) warm,
all from Proto-Germanic *khlewaz (see lee).


Luke

masc. proper name, from Latin Lucas (Greek Loukas), contraction of Lucanus literally of Lucania,
district in Lower Italy, home of the Lucani, a branch of the Sabelline race.


lukewarm (adj.)

late 14c., from luke + warm (adj.). Figurative sense of lacking in zeal (of persons or their
actions) is from 1520s. Related: Lukewarmly; lukewarmness.


lull (v.)

early 14c., lullen hush to sleep, probably  imitative of lu-lu sound used to lull a child to sleep
(compare Swedish lulla to hum a lullaby, German lullen to rock, Sanskrit lolati moves to and fro,
Middle Dutch lollen to mutter). Figurative use from 1570s. Related: Lulled; lulling.


lull (n.)

1650s as the name of a soothing drink, from lull (v.). Meaning period of quiet in a storm is from
1815.


lullaby (n.)

1560s, lulley by, from Middle English lollai, lullay, from lullen (see lull (v.)). Second element
perhaps from by-by good-by.


lulu (n.)

remarkable person or thing, 1886 (first attested in a baseball article from New Orleans, U.S.), of
uncertain origin; some suggest a connection to earlier looly beautiful girl, of unknown origin. But
the reference more likely is to Lulu Hurst (1869-1950), the Georgia Wonder, who was a popular
attraction 1883-85 demonstrating her supposed mysterious force that allowed her to effortlessly
move, with just a light touch, umbrellas and canes held tight by others. She barnstormed the U.S.
and, at 15, was, briefly, one of the most famous women in the land. The skeptics soon explained her
trick and burst the bubble, but not before her name was used as a word:    Such [musically
uneducated persons] start from the avowed or unavowed supposition that the pianist or violinist's
art necessitates no higher qualities than does plate-spinning, dancing, or the feats of a Lulu. [The
Hero as Virtuoso, in London Society magazine, 1883]


lumbaginous (adj.)

1620s, from Latin lumbagin-, from lumbago (see lumbago) + -ous.


lumbago (n.)

1690s, from Late Latin lumbago weakness of loins and lower back, from Latin lumbus loin (usually
plural), from PIE *lendh- loin (cognates: Old Church Slavonic ledvije (plural) loins; soul, Russian
ljadveja loin; Old English lendenu loins, German Lende loin, Lenden loins).


lumbar (adj.)

pertaining to or situated near the loins, 1650s, from Modern Latin lumbaris, from Latin lumbus loin
(see lumbago).


lumber (n.)

timber sawn into rough planks, 1660s, American English (Massachusetts), earlier disused bit of
furniture; heavy, useless objects (1550s), probably from lumber (v.), perhaps influenced by Lombard,
from the Italian immigrants famous as pawnbrokers and money-lenders in England (see Lombard).
Lumbar, Lumbard were old alternative forms of Lombard in English. The evolution of sense then would
be because a lumber-house (pawn shop) naturally accumulates odds and ends of furniture.    Live
Lumber, soldiers or passengers on board a ship are so called by the sailors. [Grose, Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]   <hr />   LUMBER HOUSE. A house appropriated by thieves for the reception
of their stolen property. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket Eloquence,
London, 1811]


lumber (v.)

to move clumsily, c.1300, lomere, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Swedish
loma move slowly, walk heavily, Old Norse lami lame), ultimately cognate with lame (adj.). Related:
Lumbered; lumbering.


lumberjack (n.)

1831, Canadian English, from lumber (n.) + Jack.


lumbo-

word-forming element meaning loin, loins, from comb. form of Latin lumbus (see lumbago).


lumen (n.)

unit of luminosity, 1897, coined 1894 by French physicist Andr&eacute;-Eug&egrave;ne Blondel
(1863-1938) from Latin lumen light, related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)).


Lumiere

in reference to the early color photography process, from the names of French brothers Auguste
(1862-1954) and Louis (1864-1948) Lumi&#232;re, photographers. The name is literally light, lamp.


luminaire (n.)

electric light, 1921, from French luminaire, from Old French luminarie (see luminary).


Luminal (n.)

trade name of phenobarbitone, used as a sedative and hypnotic, coined 1912 in German from Latin
lumen light, related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)), + -al (3), the root here being used, very
irregularly, as an equivalent of pheno- [Flood].


luminal (adj.)

of or pertaining to a lumen, 1897, with -al (1).


luminance (n.)

luminousness, 1862, from Latin luminantem (nominative luminans), present participle of luminare (see
luminary).


luminary (n.)

mid-15c., lamp, source of (artificial) light, from Old French luminarie (12c.), lamp, lights,
lighting; candles; brightness, illumination, from Late Latin luminare light, torch, lamp, heavenly
body, literally that which gives light, from Latin lumen (genitive luminis) light, related to lucere
to shine (see light (n.)). Sense of notable person is first recorded 1690s, though the Middle
English word also had a figurative sense of source of spiritual light, example of holiness.


luminate (v.)

1620s (now obsolete), from Latin luminatus, past participle of luminare (see luminary). Related:
Luminated; luminating.


luminescence (n.)

1884, from Latin lumen (genitive luminis) light (see luminous) + -escence.    Fluorescence and
Phosphorescence -- Prof. E. Wiedmann has made a new study of these phenomena. He proposes the
general name luminescence for evolutions of light which do not depend on the temperature of the
substance concerned. [Photographic News, April 20, 1888]


luminescent

1889, from luminescence + -ent.


luminosity (n.)

1630s, quality of being luminous, from French luminosit&#233; or else a native formation from
luminous + -ity. In astronomy, intrinsic brightness of a heavenly body (as distinguished from
apparent magnitude, which diminishes with distance), attested from 1906.


luminous (adj.)

early 15c., full of light, from Latin luminosus shining, full of light, from lumen (genitive
luminis) light, related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Related: Luminously.


lummox (n.)

1825, East Anglian slang, perhaps from dumb ox, influenced by lumbering; or from E. Anglian
dialectal form of verb lummock move heavily or clumsily, of uncertain origin.


lump (n.)

early 14c., lumpe (1224 as surname), probably in Old English, perhaps from a Scandinavian source
(compare Danish lumpe, 16c.), of unknown origin. Compare also Middle High German lumpe, early modern
Dutch lompe. Phrase lump in (one's) throat feeling of tightness brought on by emotion is from 1803.
Lumps hard knocks, a beating is colloquial, from 1934. Lump sum, one covering a number of items, is
from 1867.


lump (v.2)

endure (now usually in contrast to like), 1791, apparently an extended sense from an older meaning
to look sulky, dislike (1570s), of unknown origin, perhaps a symbolic sound (compare grump, harumph,
etc.). Related: Lumped; lumping.    LUMPING. Great. A lumping pennyworth; a great qualtity for the
money, a bargain. He has got a lumping pennyworth; frequently said of a man who marries a fat woman.
[Grose, Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 3rd edition, 1796]


lump (v.1)

early 15c., to curl up in a ball, to gather into a lump (implied in lumped), from lump (n.). Meaning
to put together in one mass or group is from 1620s. Related: Lumped; lumping.


lumpectomy (n.)

1971, from lump (n.), coined on model of mastectomy.


lumpenproletariat (n.)

1897, from German Lumpenproletariat (1850), from Karl Marx, who coined it to mean rabble, poorest of
the working class, from German lump ragamuffin + proletariat. Secondary sense of boorish, stupid
people led to lumpen- being taken as a suffix meaning unenlightened.


lumpy (adj.)

1707, from lump (n.) + -y (2). Related: Lumpiness.


Luna (n.)

late 14c. moon, also an alchemical name for silver; from Latin luna moon, goddess of the moon, from
*leuksna- (cognates: Old Church Slavonic luna moon, Old Prussian lauxnos stars, Middle Irish luan
light, moon), from the same source as lux, lumen light, lucere to shine (see light (n.)). The luna
moth (1841, American English) so called for the crescent-shaped markings on its wings. Lunarian
(1708) was an early word for inhabitant of the moon.


lunacy (n.)

1540s, condition of being a lunatic, formed in English from lunatic + -cy. Originally in reference
to intermittent periods of insanity, such as were believed to be triggered by the moon's cycle. The
Old English equivalent was mona&eth;seocnes month-sickness.


lunar (adj.)

crescent-shaped, early 15c.; pertaining to the moon, 1620s, from Old French lunaire (15c.), from
Latin lunaris of the moon, from luna moon (with capital L- moon goddess); see Luna.


lunate (adj.)

crescent-shaped, 1777, from Latin lunatus, from luna (see Luna).


lunatic (adj.)

late 13c., affected with periodic insanity, dependent on the changes of the moon, from Old French
lunatique, lunage insane, or directly from Late Latin lunaticus moon-struck, from Latin luna moon
(see Luna). Compare Old English monseoc lunatic, literally moon-sick; Middle High German lune humor,
temper, mood, whim, fancy (German Laune), from Latin luna. Compare also New Testament Greek
seleniazomai be epileptic, from selene moon. Lunatic fringe (1913) apparently was coined by U.S.
politician Theodore Roosevelt.    Then, among the wise and high-minded people who in self-respecting
and genuine fashion strive earnestly for peace, there are foolish fanatics always to be found in
such a movement and always discrediting it -- the men who form the lunatic fringe in all reform
movements. [Theodore Roosevelt, autobiography, 1913].    Earlier it was a term for a type of
hairstyle worn over the forehead (1877). Lunatic soup (1933) was Australian slang for alcoholic
drink.


lunatic (n.)

lunatic person, late 14c., from lunatic (adj.).


lunation (n.)

time from one new moon to another, late 14c., from Medieval Latin lunationem, from luna moon (see
Luna).


lunch (n.)

mid-day repast, 1786, shortened form of luncheon (q.v.). The verb meaning to take to lunch (said to
be from the noun) also is attested from 1786:    PRATTLE. I always to be &#383;ure, makes a point to
keep up the dignity of the family I lives in. Wou'd you take a more &#383;olid refre&#383;hment?--
Have you lunch'd, Mr. Bribe?    BRIBE. Lunch'd O dear! Permit me, my dear Mrs. Prattle, to
refre&#383;h my sponge, upon the honey dew that clings to your ravi&#383;hing pouters. O! Mrs.
Prattle, this &#383;hall be my lunch. (ki&#383;&#383;es)     [The Mode, in William Davies' Plays
Written for a Private Theatre, London, 1786]    But as late as 1817 the only definition of lunch in
Webster's is a large piece of food. OED says in 1820s the word was regarded either as a vulgarism,
or as a fashionable affectation. Related: Lunched; lunching. Lunch money is attested from 1868;
lunch-time (n.) is from 1821; lunch hour is from 1840. Slang phrase out to lunch insane, stupid,
clueless first recorded 1955, on notion of being not there. Old English had nonmete afternoon meal,
literally noon-meat.


luncheon (n.)

light repast between mealtimes, 1650s (lunching; spelling luncheon by 1706); earlier thick piece,
hunk, 1570s (luncheon), of uncertain origin. Perhaps northern English dialectal lunch hunk of bread
or cheese (1580s; probably from Spanish lonja a slice, literally loin), blended with or influenced
by nuncheon (Middle English nonechenche, mid-14c.) light mid-day meal, from none noon (see noon) +
schench drink, from Old English scenc, from scencan pour out.     Despite the form lunching in the
1650s source OED discounts that it possibly could be from lunch (v.), which is much later. It
suggests perhaps an analogy with truncheon, etc. Especially in reference to an early afternoon meal
eaten by those who have a noontime dinner.


luncheonette (n.)

type of restaurant, 1906, American English, from luncheon + diminutive ending -ette.


lune (n.)

figure formed by two arcs of circles, 1704, from Latin luna moon; crescent-shaped badge (see luna).


lunette (n.)

1570s, semi-circular horseshoe, from Middle French lunette (13c.), literally little moon, diminutive
of lune moon, from Latin luna (see luna). Later applied to a wide range of objects and
ornamentations resembling a crescent moon.


lung (n.)

human respiratory organ, c.1300, from Old English lungen (plural), from Proto-Germanic *lungw-
(cognates: Old Norse lunge, Old Frisian lungen, Middle Dutch longhe, Dutch long, Old High German
lungun, German lunge lung), literally the light organ, from PIE *legwh- not heavy, having little
weight; easy, agile, nimble (cognates: Russian l&#235;gkij, Polish lekki light; Russian l&#235;gkoje
lung, Greek elaphros light in weight; see also lever).    The notion probably is from the fact that,
when thrown into a pot of water, lungs of a slaughtered animal float, while the heart, liver, etc.,
do not. Compare also Portuguese leve lung, from Latin levis light; Irish scaman lungs, from scaman
light; Welsh ysgyfaint lungs, from ysgafn light. See also lights, pulmonary. Lung cancer attested
from 1882.


lunge (n.)

1735, a thrust with a sword, originally a fencing term, shortened from allonge, from French allonger
to extend, thrust, from Old French alongier to lengthen, make long, from &agrave; to + Old French
long, from Latin longus long (see long (adj.)).


lunge (v.)

1735 (implied in lunged), from lunge (n.). Sense of to make a sudden forward rush is from 1821.
Related: Lunged; lunging.


lungfish (n.)

1883, from lung + fish (n.).


lunk (n.)

slow-witted person, 1867, American English colloquial, shortened from lunkhead (1852), possibly an
altered form of lump (n.) + head (n.)


Lupercalia (n.)

Roman festival held Feb. 15, in honor of Lupercus, god (identified with Lycean Pan) who had a grotto
at the foot of the Palatine Hill, from Latin Lupercalia (plural), from Lupercalis pertaining to
Lupercus, whose name derives from lupus wolf (see wolf (n.)).


lupin (n.)

plant of the genus lupinus, late 14c., from Latin lupinus, name of the plant, noun use of an
adjective meaning of a wolf (see lupine). The reason for association with the animal is unclear;
perhaps it was so called because of a belief that the plants were harmful to soil (compare lupus).


lupine (adj.)

wolf-like, 1650s, from French lupine wolf-like, from Latin lupinus of the wolf, from lupus wolf (see
wolf (n.)).


lupus (n.)

late 14c., used of several diseases that cause ulcerations of the skin, from Medieval Latin lupus,
from Latin lupus wolf (see wolf (n.)), apparently because it devours the affected part.


lurch (n.1)

sudden pitch to one side, 1784, from earlier lee-larches (1765), a nautical term for the sudden roll
which a ship makes to lee-ward in a high sea, when a large wave strikes her, and bears her weather-
side violently up, which depresses the other in proportion [Complete Dictionary of Arts and
Sciences, London 1765]; perhaps from French lacher to let go, from Latin laxus (see lax).    When a
Ship is brought by the Lee, it is commonly occa&#383;sioned by a large Sea, and by the Neglect of
the Helm's-man. When the Wind is two or three Points on the Quarter, the Ship taking a Lurch, brings
the Wind on the other Side, and lays the Sails all dead to the Ma&#383;t; as the Yards are braced
up, &#383;he then having no Way, and the Helm being of no Service, I would therefore brace about the
Head &#383;ails &#383;harp the other Way .... [John Hamilton Moore, Practical Navigator, 8th ed.,
1784]


lurch (n.2)

predicament, 1580s, from Middle English lurch (v.) to beat in a game of skill (often by a great many
points), mid-14c., probably literally to make a complete victory in lorche, a game akin to
backgammon, from Old French lourche. The game name is perhaps related to Middle English lurken,
lorken to lie hidden, lie in ambush, or it may be adopted into French from Middle High German lurz
left, also wrong.


lurch (v.)

1821, from lurch (n.1). Related: Lurched; lurching.


lure (n.)

early 14c., something which allures or entices, an attraction (a figurative use), also bait for
recalling hawks, from Anglo-French lure, Old French loirre device used to recall hawks, lure, from
Frankish *lo&thorn;r or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *lothran to call (cognates:
Middle High German luoder, Middle Low German loder lure, bait, German Luder lure, deceit, bait; also
Old English la&thorn;ian to call, invite, German laden).    Originally a bunch of feathers on a long
cord, from which the hawk is fed during its training. Used of means of alluring other animals
(especially fish) from c.1700. Technically, bait is something the animal can eat; lure is a more
general term. Also in 15c. a collective word for a group of young women.


lure (v.)

late 14c., of hawks, also of persons, from lure (n.). Related: Lured; luring.


lurid (adj.)

1650s, pale, from Latin luridus pale yellow, ghastly, of uncertain origin, perhaps cognate with
Greek khloros (see Chloe). Meaning glowing in the darkness is from 1727. The figurative sense of
sensational is first attested 1850. Related: Luridly.


lurk (v.)

c.1300, lurken to hide, lie hidden, probably from Scandinavian (compare dialectal Norwegian lurka to
sneak away, dialectal Swedish lurka to be slow in one's work), perhaps ultimately related to Middle
English luren to frown, lurk (see lower (v.2)). Related: Lurked; lurking.


lurker (n.)

one who lurks, early 14c., agent noun from lurk (v.).


luscious (adj.)

late 15c., perhaps a variant (with form perhaps influenced by Old French luxure, lusure) of Middle
English licius delicious (c.1400), which is perhaps a shortening of delicious, but OED is against
this. Related: Lusciously; lusciousness.


lush (adj.)

mid-15c., lax, flaccid, soft, tender, from Old French lasche soft, succulent, from laschier loosen,
from Late Latin laxicare become shaky, related to Latin laxare loosen, from laxus loose (see lax).
Sense of luxuriant in growth is first attested c.1600, in Shakespeare. Applied to colors since 1744.
Related: Lushly; lushness.


lush (n.)

drunkard, 1890, from earlier (1790) slang meaning liquor (especially in phrase lush ken alehouse);
perhaps a humorous use of lush (adj.) or from Romany or Shelta (tinkers' jargon).    LUSHEY. Drunk.
The rolling kiddeys  had a spree, and got bloody lushey; the dashing lads went on a party of
pleasure, and got very drunk. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket
Eloquence, London, 1811]


Lusitania

Latin name of a region roughly corresponding to modern Portugal; in modern use, allusive or poetic
for Portugal. The Cunard ocean liner (sister ship of the Mauretania and Aquitania, also named after
Roman Atlantic coastal provinces) was launched in 1906, torpedoed and sunk by German submarine U-20
on May 7, 1915.


lusory (adj.)

1650s, from Latin lusorius belonging to a player, from lusor player, from stem of ludere to play
(see ludicrous). Related: Lusorious.


lust (n.)

Old English lust desire, appetite, pleasure, from Proto-Germanic *lustuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Dutch, German lust, Old Norse lyst, Gothic lustus pleasure, desire, lust), from PIE *las-
to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Latin lascivus wanton, playful, lustful; see lascivious).
In Middle English, any source of pleasure or delight, also an appetite, also a liking for a person,
also fertility (of soil). Sense of sinful sexual desire, degrading animal passion (now the main
meaning) developed in late Old English from the word's use in Bible translations (such as lusts of
the flesh to render Latin concupiscentia carnis [I John ii:16]); the cognate words in other Germanic
languages tend still to mean simply pleasure.


lust (v.)

c.1200, to wish, to desire, from lust (n.) and Old English lystan (see list (v.4)). Sense of to have
a strong sexual desire (for or after) is first attested 1520s in biblical use. Related: Lusted;
lusting.


luster (n.1)

gloss, radiance, 1520s, from Middle French lustre gloss, radiance (14c.), common Romanic (cognates:
Spanish and Portuguese lustre, Rumanian lustru, Italian lustro splendor, brilliancy), from Latin
lustrare spread light over, brighten, illumine, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)).


luster (n.2)

one who lusts, 1590s, agent noun from lust (v.).


lustful (adj.)

Old English lustfull wishful, desirous, having an eager desire; see lust (n.) + -ful. Specifically
of sexual desire from 1570s. Related: Lustfully; lustfulness. Middle English also had lustsome,
which was used in a sense of voluptuous, lustful from c.1400. Old English had lustb&#230;re
desirable, pleasant, cheerful, joyous.


lustgarden (n.)

1580s, translation or partial translation of German Lust-garten, Dutch lustgaard pleasure garden;
see lust (n.) + garden (n.).


lustily (adv.)

early 13c., lustliche, willingly, eagerly, readily; see lusty + -ly (2). Meaning with pleasure,
voluptuously is c.1300; meaning vigorously, energetically is c.1400.


lustral (adj.)

pertaining to purification, 1530s, from Latin lustralis, from lustrum (see lustrum). Hence, also,
every five years (1781).


lustre (n.)

gloss, radiance; see luster (n.1).


lustrous

c.1600, from luster + -ous. Related: Lustrously; lustrousness.


lustrum (n.)

(plural lustra), purification of the Roman people every five years, 1580s, from Latin lustrum,
perhaps from root of luere to wash, related to lavere (see lave). Or [Watkins, Klein] from PIE
*leuk-stro-, from base *leuk- light, brightness.


lusty (adj.)

early 13c., joyful, merry, from lust + -y (2). It largely has escaped the Christianization and
denigration of its root word. The sense of full of healthy vigor is from late 14c.; that of full of
desire is attested from c.1400. Related: Lustily; lustiness.


lute (n.)

stringed musical instrument, late 13c., from Old French lut, leut, from Old Proven&ccedil;al laut,
from Arabic al-'ud, the Arabian lute, literally the wood (source of Spanish laud, Portuguese alaude,
Italian liuto), where al is the definite article. A player is a lutist (1620s) or a lutanist
(c.1600, from Medieval Latin hybrid lutanista).


luteal (adj.)

pertaining to the corpus luteum, 1906, from Latin luteus yellow (see luteous). Luteal phase is
attested by 1932.


luteous (adj.)

orange-yellow, 1650s, from Latin luteus golden-yellow, orange-yellow, from lutum, the name of a
plant used in dying yellow, of unknown origin.


Lutheran

1521, from name of German religious reformer Martin Luther (1483-1546); used by Catholics 16c. in
reference to all Protestants, regardless of sect. Related: Lutheranism.


luthier (n.)

lute-maker, 1879, from French luthier, from luth (see lute).


lutz (n.)

type of skating jump, 1932, from the name Alois Lutz, an obscure Austrian skater of the 1920s [James
R. Hines, Historical Dictionary of Figure Skating, 2011], who is said to have first performed it in
1913.


luv

affectionate, dialectal, or colloquial spelling of love, attested from 1825.


lux (n.)

unit of illumination, 1889, from Latin lux light (see light (n.)).


luxe

luxury, elegance, 1550s, from French luxe luxury, sumptuousness, profusion, from Latin luxus (see
luxury).


Luxembourg

European state, from Germanic lutilla little + burg fort, castle. Related: Luxembourgeois;
Luxembourger. Hence also lushburg (mid-14c.), Middle English word for a base coin made in imitation
of the sterling or silver penny and imported from Luxemburg in the reign of Edward III [OED].


Luxor

place in Egypt, from Arabic al-Kusur, literally the palaces, from plural of kasr, which is from
Latin castrum fortified camp (see castle). There are remains of Roman camps nearby.


luxuriance (n.)

1650s; see luxuriant + -ance. Related: Luxuriancy (1640s).


luxuriant (adj.)

1530s, from Middle French luxuriant and directly from Latin luxuriantem (nominative luxurians),
present participle of luxuriare have to excess, grow profusely (see luxuriate). Related:
Luxuriantly.


luxuriate (v.)

1620s, to indulge in luxury, from Latin luxuriatus, past participle of luxuriare have to excess,
figuratively run riot, be dissolute, indulge to excess, from luxuria excess, rankness, luxuriance
(see luxury). Related: Luxuriated; luxuriating.


luxurious (adj.)

c.1300, lascivious, lecherous, unchaste, from Old French luxurios lustful, lascivious (Modern French
luxurieux), from Latin luxuriosus, from luxuria (see luxury). Meaning given to luxury, voluptuous
(of persons) is from c.1600. Of things, meaning characterized by luxury is attested from c.1650.
Related: Luxuriously; luxuriousness.


luxury (n.)

c.1300, sexual intercourse; mid-14c., lasciviousness, sinful self-indulgence, from Old French
luxurie debauchery, dissoluteness, lust (Modern French luxure), from Latin luxuria excess, luxury,
extravagance, profusion; delicacy (source also of Spanish lujuria, Italian lussuria), from luxus
excess, extravagance, magnificence, probably a figurative use of luxus (adj.) dislocated, which is
related to luctari wrestle, strain (see reluctance).    Meaning sensual pleasure is late 14c. Lost
its pejorative taint 17c. Meaning habit of indulgence in what is choice or costly is from 1630s;
that of sumptuous surroundings is from 1704; that of something enjoyable or comfortable beyond
life's necessities is from 1780. Used as an adjective from 1916.


lycanthrope (n.)

1620s in the classical sense; 1825 in the modern sense, from Modern Latin lycanthropus, from Greek
lykanthropos wolf-man (see lycanthropy).


lycanthropy (n.)

1580s, a form of madness (described by ancient writers) in which the afflicted thought he was a
wolf, from Greek lykanthropia, from lykanthropos wolf-man, from lykos wolf (see wolf (n.)) +
anthropos man (see anthropo-). Originally a form of madness (described by ancient writers) in which
the afflicted thought he was a wolf; applied to actual transformations of persons (especially
witches) into wolves since 1830 (see werewolf).


lyceum (n.)

1580s, Latin form of Greek lykeion, name of a grove or garden with covered walks near Athens where
Aristotle taught, from neuter of Lykeios wolf-slayer, an epithet of Apollo, whose temple was nearby,
from lykos wolf. Hence lyc&eacute;e, name given in France to state-run secondary schools. In
England, early 19c., lyceum was the name taken by a number of literary societies; in U.S., after
c.1820, it was the name of institutes that sponsored popular lectures in science and literature.


Lycra

elastic polyurethane fiber, 1955, proprietary name (registered by E.I. DuPont de Nemours and
Company, Wilmington, Delaware, U.S.) of an elastic polyurethane fiber.


lye (n.)

Old English l&aelig;g, leag lye, from Proto-Germanic *laugo (cognates: Middle Dutch loghe, Dutch
loog, Old High German louga, German Lauge lye), from PIE root *leue- to wash (see lave). The
substance was formerly used in place of soap, hence Old High German luhhen to wash, Old Norse laug
hot bath, hot spring, Danish l&oslash;rdag, Swedish l&ouml;rdag Saturday, literally washing-day.
Chamber-lye in early Modern English was the name for urine used as a detergent.


lying (n.1)

early 13c., action of lie (v.2) to recline. Lying-in being in childbed is attested from mid-15c.


lying (n.2)

c.1300 (n.), action of lie (v.1) to tell an untruth. As a past participle adjective, from 1530s.


lymph (n.)

1725 in physiology sense, colorless fluid found in the body, from French lymphe, from Latin lympha
water, clear water, a goddess of water, variant of lump&aelig; waters, altered by influence of Greek
nymphe goddess of a spring, nymph. The word was used earlier in English in the classical sense pure
water, water (1620s), also (1670s) with reference to colorless fluids in plants. Also see lymphatic.
Lymph node is attested from 1892.


lymphadenopathy (n.)

1899, from lymph + adenopathy, from comb. form of Greek aden (genitive adenos) gland (see inguinal)
+ -pathy.


lymphatic (adj.)

1640s, from Latin lymphaticus, from lympha (see lymph). Also sometimes used in the classical Latin
sense mad, frenzied, which was the primary sense of lymphaticus in Latin: OED reports this difficult
to account for, but perhaps due to association of lympha with nymphe; compare Greek nymphian to be
frenzy-stricken.


lymphocyte (n.)

cell found in the lymph, 1890, from Latin lympho- (see lymph) + -cyte (see cyto-).


lymphoma (n.)

plural lymphomata, 1867, from lymph + -oma.


lynch (v.)

1835, from earlier Lynch law (1811), likely named after William Lynch (1742-1820) of Pittsylvania,
Virginia, who c.1780 led a vigilance committee to keep order there during the Revolution. Other
sources trace the name to Charles Lynch (1736-1796) a Virginia magistrate who fined and imprisoned
Tories in his district c.1782, but the connection to him is less likely. Originally any sort of
summary justice, especially by flogging; narrowing of focus to extralegal execution by hanging is
20c. Lynch mob is attested from 1838. The surname is perhaps from Irish Loingseach sailor. Compare
earlier Lydford law, from a place in Dartmoor, England, where was held a Stannaries Court of summary
jurisdiction [Weekley], hence:   Lydford law: is to hang men first, and indite them afterwards.
[Thomas Blount, Glossographia, 1656]    Related: Lynched; lynching.


lynx (n.)

mid-14c., from Latin lynx (source of Spanish, Portuguese, Italian lince), from Greek lyngz, perhaps
from PIE *leuk- light (see light (n.)), in reference to its gleaming eyes or its ability to see in
the dark.    If that men hadden eyghen of a beeste that highte lynx, so that the lokynge of folk
myghte percen thurw the thynges that withstonden it. [Chaucer's Boethius, c.1380]    Compare
Lithuanian luzzis, Old High German luhs, German luchs, Old English lox, Dutch los, Swedish lo lynx.


Lyons

city in France at the confluence of the Rhone and the Sa&#244;ne, from Gallo-Latin Lugudunum,
literally fort of Lug. The adjectival form is Lyonnaise.


lyre (n.)

harp-like instrument, c.1200, from Old French lire lyre, from Latin lyra, from Greek lyra, a foreign
word of uncertain origin.


lyric (n.)

a lyric poem, 1580s, from Middle French lyrique short poem expressing personal emotion, from Latin
lyricus of or for the lyre, from Greek lyrikos singing to the lyre, from lyra (see lyre). Meaning
words of a popular song is first recorded 1876. Related: lyrics.


lyrical (adj.)

1580s, from lyric (n.) + -al (1). Related: Lyrically.


lyricism (n.)

1760, from lyric + -ism.


lyricist (n.)

1832, one skilled in lyric composition; from lyric + -ist. Meaning one who writes lyrics is from
1908.


Lysander

masc. proper name, from Greek Lysandros, literally releasing men, from comb. form of lyein to
release (see lose) + -andros man (see anthropo-).


lyse (v.)

1927, back-formation from lysis.


lysergic (adj.)

1934, from -lys- in hydrolysis + first syllable of ergot + -ic.


lysis (n.)

dissolution of cells, bacteria, etc., 1902, from Latin lysis, from Greek lysis a loosening, from
lyein to unfasten, loose, loosen, untie (see lose).


lyso-

word-forming element indicating loosening, dissolving, freeing, before vowels lys-, from comb. form
of Greek lysis a loosening (see lyse).


lysol (n.)

brown oily coal-tar solution used as a disinfectant, 1890, coined, perhaps in German, from Greek
lysis dissolution (see lysis) + -ol, element indicating oil.


lysosome (n.)

1955, from lyso- + -some (3).


lysozyme

1922, from lyso- + suffix from enzyme.


lytic (adj.)

pertaining to lysis, 1889, from Greek lytikos able to loose, loosing, from lytos loosed, verbal
adjective of lyein to unfasten, loose, loosen, untie (see lose). Related: Lytically.


