-machy

word-forming element meaning battle, war, contest, from Greek -makhia, from makhe a battle, fight,
related to makhesthai to fight, from PIE root *magh- (2) to fight.


-mancy

word-forming element meaning divination by means of, from Old French -mancie, from Late Latin
-mantia, from Greek manteia oracle, divination, from mantis seer, prophet, soothsayer, related to
mania madness, frenzy (see mania).


-ment

suffix forming nouns, originally from French and representing Latin -mentum, which was added to verb
stems sometimes to represent the result or product of the action. French inserts an -e- between the
verbal root and the suffix (as in commenc-e-ment from commenc-er; with verbs in ir, -i- is inserted
instead (as in sent-i-ment from sentir). Used with English verb stems from 16c. (for example
merriment, which also illustrates the habit of turning -y to -i- before this suffix).


-meter

word-forming element meaning device or instrument for measuring; commonly -ometer, occasionally
-imeter; from French -m&egrave;tre, from Greek metron a measure (see meter (n.2)).


-metric

word-forming element from -metry + -ic.


-metry

word-forming element meaning process of measuring, Middle English -metrie, from Middle French
-metrie, from Latin -metria, from Greek -metria a measuring of, from -metros measurer of, from
metron measure (see meter (n.2)).


-most

superlative suffix of adjectives and adverbs, Middle English alteration (by influence of unrelated
most) of Old English -mest, a double superlative, from -mo, -ma (cognate with Latin -mus; compare
Old English forma first, meduma midmost) + -est.


M

13th letter, from Greek mu, from Semitic mem. The Roman symbol for 1,000; sometimes used in this
sense in English 15c.-16c.; but in late 20c. newspaper headlines it stands for million. As a
thickness of type, from 1680s.


M.A.S.H.

1950, U.S. military acronym for Mobile Army Surgical Hospital.


M.D.

1755, abbreviation of Latin Medicin&aelig; Doctor doctor of medicine.


M.E.

abbreviation of Middle English, attested by 1874.


M.F.N.

initialism (acronym) of most favored nation, attested from 1942.


M.P.

1917, abbreviation of military police, which is recorded from 1827.


ma

1823, childish or colloquial shortening of mamma.


ma&#039;am

also maam, 1660s, colloquial shortening of madam (q.v.). At one time the ordinary respectful form of
address to a married woman; later restricted to the queen and royal princesses or used by servants
to their mistresses.


Maat

Egyptian goddess, literally (in Egyptian) truth.


Mabel

fem. proper name, shortening of Amabel. Enjoyed its greatest popularity as a given name for girl
babies in U.S. from c.1884-1895.


Mac

casual, generic term of address for a man, 1928, from Irish and Gaelic mac, a common element in
Scottish and Irish names (literally son of; see Mac-); hence used generally from early 19c. for a
Celtic Irishman.


Mac-

common element in Scottish and Irish names, from Old Celtic *makko-s son. Cognate root *makwos son
produced Old Welsh map, Welsh mab, ap son; also probably cognate with Old English mago son,
attendant, servant, Old Norse m&ouml;gr son, Gothic magus boy, servant, Old English m&aelig;g&eth;
maid (see maiden).


macabre (adj.)

early 15c., originally in reference to a kind of morality show or allegorical representation of
death and his victims, from Old French (danse) Macabr&eacute; (dance) of Death (1376), of uncertain
origin, probably a translation of Medieval Latin (Chorea) Machab&aelig;orum, literally dance of the
Maccabees (leaders of the Jewish revolt against Syro-Hellenes; see Maccabees). The association with
the dance of death seems to be from vivid descriptions of the martyrdom of the Maccabees in the
Apocryphal books. The abstracted sense of gruesome is first attested 1842 in French, 1889 in
English.    The typical form which the allegory takes is that of a series of pictures, sculptured or
painted, in which Death appears, either as a dancing skeleton or as a shrunken corpse wrapped in
grave-clothes to persons representing every age and condition of life, and leads them all in a dance
to the grave. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed., 1911]


Macaca

monkey genus, Modern Latin, from Portuguese macaca, fem. of macaco, a name from an African language
of the Congo.


macadam (n.)

1824, named for inventor, Scottish civil engineer John L. McAdam (1756-1836), who developed a method
of levelling roads and paving them with gravel and outlined the process in his pamphlet Remarks on
the Present System of Road-Making (1822). Originally, road material consisting of a solid mass of
stones of nearly uniform size laid down in layers; he did not approve of the use of binding
materials or rollers. The idea of mixing tar with the gravel began 1880s.


macadamia (n.)

Australian evergreen tree, 1904, from Modern Latin (1858), named for Scotland-born chemist Dr. John
Macadam (1827-1865), secretary of the Victoria Philosophical Institute, Australia.


macadamization (n.)

1824, from macadam + -ization.


macadamize (v.)

1826, from macadam + -ize. Related: Macadamized; macadamizing.


macaque (n.)

East Indian monkey, 1757, from French macaque, from Portuguese macaco monkey, a Bantu word brought
from Africa to Brazil (where it was applied 17c. to a type of monkey there). Introduced as a genus
name 1840.


macaroni (n.)

tube-shaped food made of dried wheaten paste [Klein], 1590s, from southern Italian dialectal
maccaroni (Italian maccheroni), plural of maccarone, name for a kind of pasty food, possibly from
maccare bruise, batter, crush, of unknown origin, or from late Greek makaria food made from barley.
Used after c.1764 to mean a fop, a dandy; typical of elegant young men (as in Yankee Doodle) because
it was an exotic dish at a time when certain young men who had traveled the continent were affecting
French and Italian fashions and accents. There is said to have been a Macaroni Club in Britain,
which was the immediate source of this usage in English.


macaronic (adj.)

1610s, in reference to a form of verse consisting of vernacular words in a Latin context with Latin
endings; applied loosely to verse in which two or more languages are jumbled together; from Modern
Latin macaronicus (coined 1517 by Teofilo Folengo), from dialectal Italian maccarone (see macaroni),
in reference to the mixture of words in the verse: quoddam pulmentum farina, caseo, botiro
compaginatum, grossum, rude, et rusticanum [Folengo].


macaroon (n.)

1610s, small sweet cake consisting largely of ground almonds, from French macaron (16c.), from
dialectal Italian maccarone (see macaroni). French meaning said to have been invented 1552 by
Rabelais. The -oon ending was conventional in 15c.-17c. English to add emphasis to borrowings of
French nouns ending in stressed -on.


Macassar

especially in Macassar oil (1809), hair tonic originally advertised as made from materials obtained
from Macassar (1660s), name of a district on the island of Celebes (modern Sulawesi); from native
Mangkasara.


Macau

from Portuguese corruption of southern Chinese ama (name of a patron goddess of sailors) + ngao bay,
port.


macaw (n.)

species of large, long-tailed birds, 1660s, from Portuguese macau, from a word in a Brazilian
language, perhaps Tupi macavuana, which may be the name of a type of palm tree the fruit of which
the birds eat.


Macbeth

masc. proper name, Gaelic, literally son of life. The first reference to bad luck associated with
Shakespeare's Macbeth, and to avoidance of naming it, is from 1896, alludes to an incident of 1885,
and says the tradition goes back so far as modern memory can recall. The original superstition seems
to have pertained particularly to the witches' scenes, which were played up dramatically in 19c.
productions, and especially to Matthew Locke's 17c. music to accompany the witches' song, which was
regularly played through the 19th century.    It is strange how the effect of this music has exerted
such a long surviving influence on members of the dramatic profession. It is still considered most
unlucky to sing, hum, or whistle the witch airs in the theatre except in the ways of business.
[Young-Stewart, The Three Witches, in The Shakespearean, Sept. 15, 1896]   <hr />   If you number an
actor or actress among your friends, and desire to retain his or her friendship, there are three
things you positively must not do, especially if the actor is of the old school. Do not whistle in
the theatre, do not look over his shoulder into the glass while he is making up, and do not hum the
witch's song from Macbeth. ... [O]lder actors would almost prefer to lose their salary than go on in
Macbeth on account of this song. They believe that it casts spells upon the members of the company.
[Some Odd Superstitions of the Stage, Theatre magazine, July 1909]


Maccabees

late 14c., from Late Latin Maccab&aelig;us, surname given to Judas, third son of Mattathias the
Hasmonean, leader of the religious revolt against Antiochus IV, 175-166 B.C.E. Usually connected
with Hebrew maqqabh hammer, but Klein thinks it an inexact transliteration of Hebrew matzbi general,
commander of an army. Related: Maccabean.


Macduff

Gaelic Mac Dhuibh son of Dubh, literally black.


mace (n.1)

heavy metal weapon, often with a spiked head, late 13c., from Old French mace a club, scepter
(Modern French masse), from Vulgar Latin *mattea (source also of Italian mazza, Spanish maza mace),
from Latin mateola (in Late Latin also matteola) a kind of mallet. The Latin word perhaps is cognate
with Sanskrit matyam harrow, club, Old Church Slavonic motyka mattock, Old High German medela plow
[Klein]. As a symbol of authority or office from mid-15c.


mace (n.2)

spice made from dry outer husk of nutmeg, late 14c., from Old French macis (in English taken as a
plural and stripped of its -s), of uncertain origin, sometimes said to be a scribal error for Latin
macir, the name of a red spicy bark from India, but OED finds this etymology unlikely.


Mace (n.3)

chemical spray originally used in riot control, 1966, technically Chemical Mace, a proprietary name
(General Ordnance Equipment Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa.), probably so called for its use as a weapon, in
reference to mace (1). The verb is first attested 1968. Related: Maced; macing.


Macedonia

c. 1300, Macedone, from Latin Macedonius Macedonian, from Greek Makedones the Macedonians, literally
highlanders or the tall ones, related to makednos long, tall, makros long, large (see macro-).
French Mac&#233;doine mixed cut fruit or vegetables is early 19c., said to be a reference to the
diversity of people in Alexander's empire.


Macedonian

c.1300, from Latin Macedonius (see Macedonia) + -an.


macerate (v.)

late 15c., a back-formation from maceration or else from Latin maceratus, past participle of
macerare soften, make soft, soak, steep, related to maceria garden wall, originally of kneaded clay,
from PIE *mak-ero-, suffixed form of root *mag- to knead (cognates: Greek magis kneaded mass, cake,
mageus one who kneads, baker; Old Church Slavonic mazo to anoint, smear; Breton meza to knead;
Middle Irish maistir to churn), also to fashion, fit (compare make (v.)). Related: Macerated;
macerating.


maceration (n.)

late 15c., from Latin macerationem (nominative maceratio), noun of action from past participle stem
of macerare (see macerate).


Mach

measure of speed relative to the speed of sound (technically Mach number), 1937, named in honor of
Austrian physicist Ernst Mach (1838-1916).


machete (n.)

1590s (in pseudo-Spanish form macheto), from Spanish machete, probably a diminutive of macho sledge
hammer, alteration of mazo club, which is probably [Barnhart] a dialectal variant of maza mallet,
from Vulgar Latin *mattea war club (see mace (n.1)). An alternative explanation traces macho to
Latin marculus a small hammer, diminutive of marcus hammer, from a base parallel to that of Latin
malleus (see mallet).


Machiavelli

see Machiavellian. His name was Englished 16c.-18c. as Machiavel.


Machiavellian (adj.)

cunning, deceitful, unscrupulous, 1570s, from Niccolo Machiavelli (1469-1527), Florentine statesman
and author of Del Principe, a work advising rulers to place advantage above morality. A word of
abuse in English well before his works were translated (The Discourses 1636, The Prince 1640), in
part because his books were Indexed by the Church, in part because of French attacks on him (such as
Gentillet's, translated into English 1602).


machinable (adj.)

1896, from machine (v.) + -able. Related: Machinability.


machinate (v.)

lay plots, intrigue, c.1600, a back-formation from machination, or else from Latin machinatus, past
participle of machinari (see machination). Related: Machinated; machinating; machinator.


machination (n.)

late 15c., a plotting, intrigue, from Old French machinacion plot, conspiracy, scheming, intrigue,
from Latin machinationem (nominative machinatio) device, contrivance, machination, noun of action
from past participle stem of machinari contrive skillfully, to design; to scheme, to plot, from
machina (see machine (n.)). Related: Machinations.


machinator (n.)

1610s, from Latin machinator, agent noun from past participle stem of machinari design, contrive,
plot (see machine (n.)).


machine (n.)

1540s, structure of any kind, from Middle French machine device, contrivance, from Latin machina
machine, engine, military machine; device, trick; instrument (source also of Spanish maquina,
Italian macchina), from Greek makhana, Doric variant of mekhane device, means, related to mekhos
means, expedient, contrivance, from PIE *maghana- that which enables, from root *magh- (1) to be
able, have power (cognates: Old Church Slavonic mogo be able, Old English m&aelig;g I can; see may
(v.)).    Main modern sense of device made of moving parts for applying mechanical power (1670s)
probably grew out of mid-17c. senses of apparatus, appliance and military siege-tower. In late 19c.
slang the word was used for both penis and vagina, one of the few so honored. Political sense is
U.S. slang, first recorded 1876. Machine age is attested by 1851:    The idea of remodelling society
at public meetings is one of the least reasonable which ever entered the mind of an agitator: and
the notion that the relations of the sexes can be re-arranged and finally disposed of by preamble
and resolution, is one of the latest, as it should have been the last, vagary of a machine age. [The
Literary World, Nov. 1, 1851]   Machine for living (in) house translates Le Corbusier's machine
&agrave; habiter (1923).


machine (v.)

mid-15c., decide, resolve, from Old French and Latin usages (see machine (n.)). Related: Machined;
machining. Meaning to make or form on a machine is from 1878. Related: Machined; machining.


machine-gun (n.)

1870, from machine (n.) + gun (n.). As a verb from 1915. Related: Machine-gunned; machine-gunning.


machinery (n.)

1680s; from machine (n.) + -ery. Originally theatrical, devices for creating stage effects (which
also was a sense of Greek mekhane); meaning machines collectively is attested from 1731. Middle
English had machinament a contrivance (early 15c.).


machinist (n.)

1706, engineer, mechanical inventor, a hybrid from machine (n.) + -ist. Meaning machine operator is
attested from 1879.


machismo (n.)

1940, from American Spanish machismo, from Spanish macho male (see macho) + ismo (see -ism).


macho

1928 (n.) tough guy, from Spanish macho male animal, noun use of adjective meaning masculine,
virile, from Latin masculus (see masculine). As an adjective, first attested in English 1959.


machree

Irish expression, 1829, from Irish-Gaelic mo chroidhe (of) my heart, hence my dear!


Machu Picchu

from Quechua (Inca) machu old man + pikchu peak.


Mack

proprietary name for a brand of heavy automobile trucks, named for brothers John M., Augustus F.,
and William C. Mack, who established Mack Brothers Company, N.Y., N.Y., in 1902. Their trucks
formally known as Mack Trucks from 1910.


Mackenzie

river in Canada, named for Scottish fur trader and explorer Sir Alexander Mackenzie (1764-1820) who
discovered and explored it 1789.


mackerel (n.)

edible fish, c.1300, from Old French maquerel mackerel (Modern French maquereau), of unknown origin
but apparently identical with Old French maquerel pimp, procurer, broker, agent, intermediary, a
word from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch makelaer broker, from Old Frisian mek marriage,
from maken to make). The connection is obscure, but medieval people had imaginative notions about
the erotic habits of beasts. The fish approach the shore in shoals in summertime to spawn.
Exclamation holy mackerel is attested from 1876.


Mackinaw

type of boat used on the Great Lakes, 1812, from Mackinac, name of a port and island in Michigan,
from Ojibway (Algonquian) mitchimakinak many turtles, from mishiin- be many + mikinaak snapping
turtle. As a type of heavy blanket given to the Indians by the U.S. government, it is attested from
1822.


mackintosh (n.)

waterproof outer coat, 1836, named for Charles Macintosh (1766-1843), inventor of a waterproofing
process (patent #4804, June 17, 1823). The surname is from Gaelic Mac an toisich Son of the
chieftain.


macrame (n.)

1869, from French macram&eacute;, from Turkish maqrama towel, napkin, from Arabic miqramah
embroidered veil.


macro (n.)

1959 in computing sense, shortened from macro-instruction.


macro-

word-forming element meaning long, abnormally large, on a large scale, taken into English via Middle
French and Medieval Latin from Greek makros long, large, from PIE root *mak- long, thin (cognates:
Latin macer lean, thin; Old Norse magr, Old English m&aelig;ger lean, thin; Greek mekos length).


macrobiotic (adj.)

also macro-biotic, inclined to prolong life, 1797, from Greek makrobiotikos long-lived, from makros
long (see macro-) + bios life (see bio-). The specific reference to a Zen Buddhist dietary system
dates from 1936.


macrocephalic (adj.)

1851, from Greek makrokephalos; see macro-. Second element is from Greek kephale head (see
cephalo-). Related: Macrocephalous; macrocephaly.


macrocosm (n.)

c.1600, the great world (the universe, as distinct from the little world of man), from Old French
macrocosme (c.1300) and directly from Medieval Latin macrocosmus, from Greek makros large, long (see
macro-) + kosmos (see cosmos).


macroeconomic (adj.)

also macro-economic, 1938, from macro- + economic.


macroeconomics (n.)

also macro-economics, 1948, from macroeconomic; also see -ics.


macroinstruction (n.)

also macro-instruction, 1959, from macro- + instruction.


macromolecule

1886, from macro- + molecule. Apparently coined in On Macro-molecules, with the Determinations of
the Form of Some of Them, by Anglo-Irish physicist G. Johnstone Stoney (1826â&euro;&ldquo;1911).
Originally of crystals. Meaning molecule composed of many atoms is from 1935, from German
makromolekul (1922). Related: Macromolecular.


macron (n.)

short horizontal line placed over a vowel to indicate length, 1827, from Greek makron, neuter of
makros long (see macro-).


macropaedia (n.)

1974, introduced with the 15th edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, from macro- + ending from
encyclopaedia.


macrophage (n.)

1890, from macro- + -phage.


macrophotography (n.)

1863, from macro- + photography.


macroscopic (adj.)

1872, from macro- + ending from microscopic. Related: Macroscopical; macroscopically.


macrospore (n.)

1859, from macro- + spore (n.).


macula (n.)

plural maculae, from Latin macula spot, stain, used of various spots (sunspots, markings on
minerals, etc.), of uncertain origin. Especially the macula lutea in the eye.


macular (adj.)

1822, from macula + -ar.


maculate (adj.)

spotted, late 15c., from Latin maculatus, past participle of maculare to make spotted, to speckle,
from macula spot, stain (see macula). Middle English also had maculation sexual defilement, sinning
(late 15c.).


maculate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin maculatus, past participle of maculare to make spotted, to speckle, from
macula spot, stain (see macula). Related: Maculated; maculating.


maculation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin maculationem (nominative maculatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of maculare (see maculate).


macule (n.)

blemish, spot, late 15c., from Latin macula (see macula), perhaps via French macule.


mad (adj.)

late 13c., from Old English gem&aelig;dde (plural) out of one's mind (usually implying also violent
excitement), also foolish, extremely stupid, earlier gem&aelig;ded rendered insane, past participle
of a lost verb *gem&aelig;dan to make insane or foolish, from Proto-Germanic *ga-maid-jan,
demonstrative form of *ga-maid-az changed (for the worse), abnormal (cognates: Old Saxon gimed
foolish, Old High German gimeit foolish, vain, boastful, Gothic gamai&thorn;s crippled, wounded, Old
Norse mei&eth;a to hurt, maim), from intensive prefix *ga- + PIE *moito-, past participle of root
*mei- (1) to change (cognates: Latin mutare to change, mutuus done in exchange, migrare to change
one's place of residence; see mutable).    Emerged in Middle English to replace the more usual Old
English word, wod (see wood (adj.)). Sense of beside oneself with excitement or enthusiasm is from
early 14c. Meaning beside oneself with anger is attested from early 14c., but deplored by Rev. John
Witherspoon (1781) as an Americanism. It now competes in American English with angry for this sense.
Of animals, affected with rabies, from late 13c. Phrase mad as a March hare is attested from 1520s,
via notion of breeding season; mad as a hatter is from 1829 as demented, 1837 as enraged, according
to a modern theory supposedly from erratic behavior caused by prolonged exposure to poison mercuric
nitrate, used in making felt hats. For mad as a wet hen see hen. Mad money is attested from 1922;
mad scientist is from 1891.


mad (adv.)

late 14c., from mad (adj.).


Madagascar

large island off the east coast of Africa, from Mogadishu, the name of the city in Somalia, due to
an error by Marco Polo in reading Arabic, whereby he thought the name was that of the island. There
is no indigenous name for the whole island. Related: Madagascan.


madam

c.1300, from Old French ma dame, literally my lady, from Latin mea domina (compare madonna). Meaning
female owner or manager of a brothel is first attested 1871.


madame

1590s, see madam, which is an earlier borrowing of the same French phrase. Originally a title of
respect for a woman of rank, now given to any married woman. OED recommends madam as an English
title, madame in reference to foreign women.


madarosis (n.)

loss of the eyelashes, 1690s, medical Latin, from Greek madarosis baldness. Related: Madarotic.


madcap

1580s, noun and adjective, from mad (adj.) + cap, used here figuratively for
â&euro;&oelig;head.â&euro;? Related: Madcappery.


madden (v.)

to drive to distraction, 1822; earlier to be mad (1735), from mad (adj.) + -en (1). Related:
Maddened; maddening. The earlier verb was simply mad (early 14c., intransitive; late 14c.,
transitive), from the adjective.


maddening (adj.)

1743, from present participle of madden. Related: Maddeningly.


madder (n.)

type of plant (in modern use Rubia tinctorum) used for making dyes, Old English m&aelig;dere, from
PIE *modhro- dye plant (cognates: Old Norse ma&eth;ra, Old High German matara madder, Polish modry,
Czech modry blue).


madding (adj.)

present participle adjective from obsolete verb mad to make insane; to become insane (see madden);
now principally in the phrase far from the madding crowd, title of a novel by Hardy (1874), who
lifted it from a line of Gray's Elegy (1749), which seems to echo a line from Drummond of
Hawthornden from 1614 (Farre from the madding Worldling's hoarse discords).


maddish (adj.)

1570s, from mad (adj.) + -ish.


made (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle English maked, from Old English macod made, past participle of macian to make
(see make). Made up invented is from 1789; of minds, settled, decided, from 1873. To be a made man
is in Marlowe's Faust (1590). To have it made (1955) is American English colloquial. Grose's
dictionary of slang and cant (1785) has for this word what might be the shortest and most cynical
definition ever penned: MADE. Stolen. Cant.


Madeira (n.)

white wine, 1540s, from island of Madeira in the Atlantic, from Portuguese madeira wood, because the
island formerly was thickly wooded, from Latin materia wood, matter (see matter).


Madeleine

fem. proper name, variation of Madeline. The kind of small, rich confection is attested from 1845,
said in OED to be named for Madeleine Paulmier, 19c. French pastry cook; any use with a sense of
small thing that evokes powerful nostalgia is due to Proust (1922).


Madeline

fem. proper name, from French Magdalene (q.v.). Compare also Madeleine.


mademoiselle

mid-15c., unmarried Frenchwoman, from French mademoiselle (12c.), from a compound of ma dameisele
(see damsel), literally young mistress.


Madge

pet form of fem. proper name Margaret.    MADGE. The private parts of a woman. [Grose, Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]


madhouse (n.)

1680s, from mad + house (n.). Figurative use by 1919.


Madison

surname attested from early 15c., probably in many cases a variant of Mathieson son of Matthew, but
in some cases perhaps son of Maddy, from the pet form of the fem. proper name Maud. The city in
Wisconsin, U.S., was named 1836 for U.S. President James Madison, who had died that year. As the
name of a popular dance of 1960, its signification is unknown; supposedly it originated in
Baltimore.


Madison Avenue

values and business of advertising and public relations, 1954, from the street in Manhattan, laid
out c.1836 and named for U.S. President James Madison. The concentration of advertising agencies
there seems to date from the 1940s.


madly (adv.)

early 13c., from mad (adj.) + -ly (2). Colloquial meaning passionately had emerged by 18c.


madman (n.)

early 14c., mad man, from mad (adj.) + man (n.). One-word form attested from c.1400, prevalent from
16c.


madness (n.)

late 14c., insanity, dementia; rash or irrational conduct, from mad (adj.) + -ness. Sense of
foolishness is from early 15c.


madonna (n.)

1580s, Italian lady, from Italian madonna, from Old Italian ma donna (Italian mia donna) my lady,
from ma my + donna lady, from Latin domina (see dame). Sense of picture or statue of the Virgin Mary
is from 1640s. The U.S. singer/dancer (full name Madonna Louise Ciccone, b.1958) attained to pop
stardom in fall 1984.


madras (adj.)

1833, in reference to the former Indian state of Madras (modern Chennai, a Tamil name), from which
this type of bright-colored muslin cloth was exported. The British fort there dates from 1639; the
name sometimes is said to be from Sanskrit mandra, a god of the underworld, but perhaps rather from
Arabic madrasa school or Portuguese Madre (de Deus).


madrasah (n.)

Islamic college, 1620s, from Arabic madrasah, literally a place of study, from locative prefix ma- +
stem of darasa he read repeatedly, he studied, which is related to Hebrew darash (compare midrash).


Madrid

Spanish capital, of unknown origin; first attested 932 as Majerit. Adjectival form is Madrilenian.
Noun meaning person or thing from Madrid is Madrile&#241;o, Madrile&#241;a.


madrigal (n.)

short love poem, also part-song for three or more voices, 1580s, from Italian madrigale, probably
from Venetian dialect madregal simple, ingenuous, from Late Latin matricalis invented, original,
literally of or from the womb, from matrix (genitive matricis) womb (see matrix).


Mae West

type of inflatable life jacket, 1940, military slang, in reference to the screen name of the buxom
U.S. film star (1892-1980).


Maecenas

a generous patron of literature or the arts, 1560s, from name of Gaius Clinius Maecenas (died 8
B.C.E.), Roman patron of Horace and Virgil.


maelstrom (n.)

1680s (Hakluyt, 1560s, has Malestrand), name of a famous whirlpool off the northwest coast of
Norway, from Danish malstr&oslash;m (1673), from older Dutch Maelstrom (modern maalstroom),
literally grinding-stream, from malen to grind (see meal) + stroom stream (see stream (n.)). The
name was used by Dutch cartographers (for example Mercator, 1595). OED says perhaps originally from
F&aelig;roic mal(u)streymur. Popularized as a synonym for whirlpool c.1841, the year of Poe's A
Descent into the Maelstrom.


maenad (n.)

Bacchante, 1570s, from Greek mainas (genitive mainados) priestess of Bacchus, literally madwoman,
from stem of mainesthai to rage, go mad (see mania).


maestro (n.)

master of music, great teacher or composer, 1797, from Italian maestro, literally master, from Latin
magisterium, accusative of magister (see master (n.)). Applied in Italian to eminent musical
composers. Meaning conductor, musical director is short for maestro di cappella (1724), literally
master of the chapel (compare German kapellmeister).


maffick (v.)

to celebrate boisterously, 1900, from Mafficking, a nonce-verb formed punningly from Mafeking,
British garrison town in South Africa whose relief on May 17, 1900, during the Boer War, was
celebrated wildly in London. OED reports the word confined to journalistic use. By now it might as
well write, confined to dictionaries. The place name (properly  Mafikeng) is from Tswana and is said
to mean place of rocks, from mafika, plural of lefika rock, cliff + -eng place of.


mafia (n.)

1875, from Italian Mafia Sicilian secret society of criminals (the prevailing sense outside Sicily),
earlier, spirit of hostility to the law and its ministers, from Italian (Sicilian) mafia boldness,
bravado, probably from Arabic mahjas aggressive, boasting, bragging. Or perhaps from Old French
mafler to gluttonize, devour. A member is a mafioso (1870), fem. mafiosa, plural mafiosi.


mag

car wheel made of magnesium alloy, 1969. As an abbreviation of magazine, it dates from 1801.


Mag

common pet form of the fem. proper name Margaret, attested since Middle English. Compare magpie.


magazine (n.)

1580s, place for storing goods, especially military ammunition, from Middle French magasin
warehouse, depot, store (15c.), from Italian magazzino, from Arabic makhazin, plural of makhzan
storehouse (source of Spanish almac&eacute;n warehouse, magazine), from khazana to store up. The
original sense is almost obsolete; meaning periodical journal dates from the publication of the
first one, Gentleman's Magazine, in 1731, which was so called from earlier use of the word for a
printed list of military stores and information, or in a figurative sense, from the publication
being a storehouse of information.


magdalen (n.)

reformed prostitute, 1690s, so called for Mary Magdalene, disciple of Christ (Luke viii:2), who
often is identified with the penitent woman in Luke vii:37-50. See Magdalene.


Magdalene

fem. proper name, from Latin (Maria) Magdalena, from Greek Magdalene, literally woman of Magdala,
from Aramaic Maghdela, place on the Sea of Galilee, literally tower. The vernacular form of the
name, via French, has come to English as maudlin.


mage (n.)

magician, c.1400, anglicized form of Latin magus magician (see magi). An archaic word by late 19c.
(OED), revived by fantasy games.


Magellan

anglicized name of Portuguese navigator Fern&atilde;o de Magalh&atilde;es (c.1470-1521).


Magellanic clouds

1680s, from Modern Latin Magellanicus, from Latinized name of Portuguese navigator Fern&atilde;o de
Magalh&atilde;es (c.1470-1521), the first European to round the tip of South America. He described
them c.1520, hence the name in Europe; but at least the larger of the two had been mentioned by
Anghiera in 1515. In English they were earlier the Cape Clouds, because they became prominent as
sailors neared the Cape of Good Hope; but after Magellan became noted and fully described them they
took and have retained his name. [Allen]    Coompasinge abowte the poynt thereof, they myght see
throughowte al the heaven about the same, certeyne shynynge whyte cloudes here and there amonge the
starres, like unto theym whiche are scene in the tracte of heaven cauled Lactea via, that is the
mylke whyte waye. [Richard Eden, translation of Decades of the New World, 1555]


magenta (n.)

1860, in honor of the Battle of Magenta in Italy, where the French and Sardinians defeated the
Austrians in 1859, which advanced the cause of Italian independence and fired the imagination of
European liberals. The brilliant crimson aniline dye was discovered shortly after the battle. The
town's name traces back to Roman general and emperor Marcus Aurelius Valerius Maxentius (d.312), who
supposedly had a headquarters here.


maggot (n.)

late 15c., probably an unexplained variant of Middle English ma&eth;ek, from Old English ma&eth;a
maggot, grub, from Proto-Germanic *mathon (cognates: Old Norse ma&eth;kr, Old Saxon matho, Middle
Dutch, Dutch made, Old High German mado, German Made, Gothic ma&thorn;a maggot). Figurative use
whim, fancy, crotchet is 1620s, from the notion of a maggot in the brain.


magi (n.)

c.1200, skilled magicians, astrologers, from Latin magi, plural of magus magician, learned magician,
from Greek magos, a word used for the Persian learned and priestly class as portrayed in the Bible
(said by ancient historians to have been originally the name of a Median tribe), from Old Persian
magush magician (see magic). Related: Magian.


magic (n.)

late 14c., art of influencing events and producing marvels using hidden natural forces, from Old
French magique magic, magical, from Late Latin magice sorcery, magic, from Greek magike (presumably
with tekhne art), fem. of magikos magical, from magos one of the members of the learned and priestly
class, from Old Persian magush, possibly from PIE *magh- (1) to be able, to have power (see
machine).  Transferred sense of legerdemain, optical illusion, etc. is from 1811. Displaced Old
English wiccecr&aelig;ft (see witch); also drycr&aelig;ft, from dry magician, from Irish drui
priest, magician (see druid).


magic (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French magique, from Latin magicus magic, magical, from Greek magikos, from
magike (see magic (n.)). Magic carpet first attested 1816. Magic Marker (1951) is a registered
trademark (U.S.) by Speedry Products, Inc., Richmond Hill, N.Y. Magic lantern optical instrument
whereby a magnified image is thrown upon a wall or screen is 1690s, from Modern Latin laterna
magica.


magic (v.)

1906, from magic (n.).


magical (adj.)

1550s, from magic (n.) + -al (1). Related: Magically.


magician (n.)

late 14c., from Old French magiciien magician, sorcerer, from magique (see magic (n.)).


Maginot Line

fortifications built along the north and east borders of France before World War II, in which the
French placed unreasonable confidence, named for Andr&eacute; Maginot (1877-1932), French Minister
of War in late 1920s, early 1930s.


magisterial (adj.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin magisterialis of or pertaining to the office of magistrate, director, or
teacher, from Late Latin magisterius having authority of a magistrate, from magister chief, director
(see master (n.)). Related: Magisterially.


magistral (adj.)

1570s, from Latin magistralis of a master, from magister chief, director (see master (n.)).


magistrate (n.)

late 14c., civil officer in charge of administering laws, from Old French magistrat, from Latin
magistratus a magistrate, public functionary, originally magisterial rank or office, from magistrare
serve as a magistrate, from magister chief, director (see master). Related: Magistracy.


maglev

1973, contraction of magnetic levitation.


magma (n.)

mid-15c., dregs, from Latin magma dregs of an ointment, from Greek magma thick unguent, ointment,
from root of  massein to knead, mold, from PIE *mag- to knead (see macerate). Geological meaning
molten rock is 1859. Related: Magmalic.


Magna Carta

also Magna Charta, 1560s, Medieval Latin, literally great charter (of English personal and political
liberty), attested in Anglo-Latin from 1279; obtained from King John, June 15, 1215. See magnate,
card (n.).


magna cum laude

1900, Latin, literally with great praise; from magna (see magnate) + cum laude.


magna mater

fertility goddess, 1728, Latin, literally great mother. See magnate + mother (n.1).


magnanimity (n.)

mid-14c., loftiness of thought or purpose, from Old French magnanimit&#233; high-mindedness,
generosity of spirit, from Latin magnanimitatem (nominative magnanimitas) greatness of soul, high-
mindedness, from magnanimus having a great soul, from magnus great (see magnate) + animus mind,
soul, spirit (see animus). Probably a loan-translation of Greek megalopsykhos high-souled, generous
(Aristotle) or megathymus great-hearted.


magnanimous (adj.)

1580s, a back-formation from magnanimity + -ous, or else from Latin magnanimus highminded, literally
great-souled (see magnanimity). Related: Magnanimously.


magnate (n.)

mid-15c., great man, noble, man of wealth, from Late Latin magnates, plural of magnas great person,
nobleman, from Latin magnus great, large, big (of size), abundant (of quantity), great, considerable
(of value), strong, powerful (of force); of persons, elder, aged, also, figuratively, great, mighty,
grand, important, from PIE *mag-no-, from root *meg- great (cognates: Sanskrit maha-, mahat- great;
Greek megas, fem. megale great, large; Gothic mikils, Old English micel great, big, many; see
mickle).


magnesia (n.)

late 14c., in alchemy, main ingredient of the philosopher's stone, from Medieval Latin magnesia,
from Greek (he) Magnesia (lithos) the lodestone, literally (the) Magnesian (stone), from Magnesia,
region in Thessaly, which is said to be named for the native people name Magnetes, which is of
unknown origin. The ancient word, in this sense, has evolved into magnet. But in ancient times the
same word, magnes, was used of lodestone as well as of a mineral commonly used in bleaching glass
(modern pyrolusite, or manganese dioxide).    In Middle Ages there was some attempt to distinguish
lodestone as magnes (masc.) and pyrolusite as  magnesia (fem.). Meanwhile, in 18c., a white powder
(magnesium carbonate) used as a cosmetic and toothpaste was sold in Rome as magnesia alba (white
magnesia). It was from this, in 1808, that Davy isolated magnesium. He wanted to call it magnium, to
stay as far as possible from the confused word magnesia, but the name was adopted in the form
magnesium. Meanwhile from 16c. the other name of pyrolusite had been corrupted to manganese, and
when, in 1774, a new element was isolated from it, it came to be called manganese.   Magnesia in its
main modern sense of magnesium oxide (1755) is perhaps an independent formation from Latin magnes
carneus flesh-magnet (c.1550), so called because it adheres strongly to the lips.


magnesium (n.)

silvery-white metallic element, 1808, coined by English chemist Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829) from
white magnesia (q.v.), in which it was found, + chemical ending -ium.


magnet (n.)

mid-15c. (earlier magnes, late 14c.), from Old French magnete magnetite, magnet, lodestone, and
directly from Latin magnetum (nominative magnes) lodestone, from Greek ho Magnes lithos the
Magnesian stone, from Magnesia, region in Thessaly where magnetized ore was obtained. Figurative use
from 1650s. It has spread from Latin to most Western European languages (German and Danish magnet,
Dutch magneet, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese magnete), but it was superseded in French by aimant.
Also see magnesia. Chick magnet attested from 1989.


magnetic (adj.)

1610s, literal; 1630s, figurative, from Modern Latin magneticus, from Latin magnes (see magnet).


magnetism (n.)

1610s, from Modern Latin magnetismus (see magnet + -ism). Figurative sense of personal charm is from
1650s; in the hypnotic sense it is from Mesmer (see mesmerize). Meaning science of magnetics is
recorded from early 19c.


magnetite (n.)

magnetic iron ore, 1840, from German magnetit; see magnet + -ite (2).


magnetization (n.)

1801, noun of action from magnetize.


magnetize (v.)

1799, from magnet + -ize. Related: Magnetized; magnetizing. From 1785 in now-obsolete sense of to
mesmerize.


magneto (n.)

1882, short for magneto-electric machine (see magneto-).


magneto-

word-forming element meaning magnetic, magnetism, from Greek magneto-, combining form of magnes (see
magnet).


magneto-electric (adj.)

also magnetoelectric, characterized by electricity produced by magnets, 1831, from magneto- +
electric.


magnetopause (n.)

1963, from magneto- in magnetosphere + pause (n.).


magnetosphere (n.)

1959, from magneto- + sphere. So called because in it the magnetic field of the earth plays a
dominant role in the motion of particles.


magni-

word-forming element meaning great, from Latin magni-, comb. form of magnus great (see magnate
(n.)).


Magnificat (n.)

c.1200, from Latin third person singular of magnificare (see magnificence), from first words of the
Virgin's hymn (Luke i:46, in Vulgate Magnificat anima mea dominum My soul doth magnify the Lord)
used as a canticle.


magnification (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin magnificationem (nominative magnificatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of magnificare (see magnify).


magnificence (n.)

mid-14c., great-mindedness, courage, from Old French magnificence splendor, nobility, grandeur, from
Latin magnificentia splendor, munificence, from stem of magnificus great, elevated, noble, eminent,
also splendid, rich, fine, costly, literally doing great deeds, from magnus great (see magnate) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Meaning greatness, grandeur, glory in English is from late
14c. That of beauty, splendor, wealth is 15c. As one of the Aristotelian and scholastic virtues, it
translates Greek megaloprepeia liberality of expenditure combined with good taste.


magnificent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French magnificent, a back-formation from Latin magnificentior, comparative of
magnificus great, elevated, noble, distinguished, literally doing great deeds (see magnificence).


magnificently (adv.)

in a splendid manner, early 15c.; see magnificent + -ly (2).


magnifier (n.)

1540s, agent noun from magnify.


magnify (v.)

late 14c., to speak or act for the glory or honor (of someone or something), from Old French
magnefiier glorify, magnify, from Latin magnificare esteem greatly, extol, make much of, from
magnificus great, elevated, noble (see magnificence). Meaning use a telescope or microscope is first
attested 1660s, said to be a unique development in English. Related: Magnified; magnifying.


magniloquence (n.)

1620s, from Latin magniloquentia elevated language, lofty style; see magniloquent + -ence.


magniloquent (adj.)

1650s, a back-formation from magniloquence, or else from Latin magniloquentia lofty style of
language, from magniloquus pompous in talk, vaunting, boastful, from comb. form of magnus great (see
magnate) + -loquus speaking, from loqui to speak (see locution).


magnitude (n.)

c.1400, greatness of size or character, from Latin magnitudo greatness, bulk, size, from magnus
great (see magnate) + -tudo, suffix forming abstract nouns from adjectives and participles (see
-tude). Meaning size, extent is from early 15c. Of stars, brightness, from 1640s.


magnitudinous (adj.)

1789; see magnitude + -ous.


magnolia (n.)

plant genus, 1748, from Magnolius, Latinized name of Pierre Magnol (1638-1715), French physician and
botanist, professor of botany at Montpellier. As the name of a color, by 1931.


magnum (n.)

1788, bottle containing two quarts of wine or spirits, from Latin magnum, neuter of magnus great in
size (see magnate). Registered 1935 by Smith &amp; Wesson Inc., of Springfield, Massachusetts, as
the name of a powerful type of handgun.


magnum opus

masterpiece, a person's greatest work, Latin, literally great work (see magnum + opus).


Magnus

Scandinavian masc. proper name, popular with early kings, the first to use it was Magnus I, king of
Norway and Denmark (d.1047), who evidently took it in emulation of Charlemagne (Latin Carolus
Magnus) under the impression that magnus (Latin, literally great; see magnate) was a personal name.


magpie (n.)

the common European bird, known for its chattering, c.1600, earlier simply pie (early 13c.); first
element from Mag, nickname for Margaret, long used in proverbial and slang English for qualities
associated generally with women, especially in this case idle chattering (as in Magge tales tall
tales, nonsense, early 15c.; also compare French margot magpie, from Margot, pet form of
Marguerite).    Second element, pie, is the earlier name of the bird, from Old French pie, from
Latin pica magpie, fem. of picus woodpecker, from PIE root *(s)peik- woodpecker, magpie (cognates:
Umbrian peica magpie, Sanskrit pikah Indian cuckoo, Old Norse sp&aelig;tr, German Specht
woodpecker); possibly from PIE root *pi-, denoting pointedness, of the beak, perhaps, but the magpie
also has a long, pointed tail. The birds are proverbial for pilfering and hoarding, can be taught to
speak, and have been regarded since the Middle Ages as ill omens.Whan pyes chatter vpon a house it
is a sygne of ryghte euyll tydynges. [1507]Divination by number of magpies is attested from c.1780
in Lincolnshire; the rhyme varies from place to place, the only consistency being that one is bad,
two are good.


Magrib

Barbary, from Arabic Maghrib, literally the west, from gharaba (the sun) has set.


maguey (n.)

agave, 1550s, from Spanish, from Taino, a native Haitian language.


Magus (n.)

member of the ancient Persian priestly caste, late 14c., singular of magi (q.v.).


Magyar

a Hungarian, 1797, the people's native name. As an adjective by 1828.


mah-jongg (n.)

1922, from dialectal Chinese (Shanghai) ma chiang, name of the game, literally sparrows, from ma
hemp + chiang little birds. The game so called from the design of the pieces. It had a vogue in
Europe and the U.S. in the 1920s and for a time threatened to supplant bridge in popularity.


maharajah (n.)

also maharaja, 1690s, from Hindi, great king, from Sanskrit maha great (from PIE root *meg- great;
see magnate) + rajan king (see rajah). The fem. equivalent is maharani (1855).


maharishi (n.)

Hindu sage or holy man, 1785, from Sanskrit, from maha great, from PIE root *meg- great (see
magnate) + rishi inspired sage. In general use, a title for a popular spiritual leader.


mahatma (n.)

1884, literally great-souled, from Sanskrit mahatman, from maha great, from PIE root *meg- great
(see magnate) + atman, soul, principle of life, properly breath (see atman). In esoteric Buddhism, a
person of supernatural powers. In common use, as a title, a mark of love and respect. Said to have
been applied to Gandhi (1869-1948) in 1915 by poet Rabrindranath Tagore.


Mahayana

type of Buddhism practiced in northern Asia, 1868, from Sanskrit, from maha great, from PIE root
*meg- great (see magnate) + yana vehicle, from PIE root *ei- to go (see ion).


Mahdi (n.)

1792, from Arabic mahdiy, literally he who is guided aright, past participle of hada to lead in the
right way. Spiritual and temporal leader expected by some Muslims. Applied c.1880 to insurrectionary
leaders in the Sudan who claimed to be him. Related: Mahdism.


mahogany (n.)

1670s, from Spanish mahogani, of unknown origin; perhaps from the tree's native name in Maya
(Honduras). As an adjective from 1730.


Mahomet

see Muhammad. Related: Mahometan.


Maia

Roman goddess of fertility, Latin Maia, literally she who brings increase, related to magnus great
(see magnate). Maia, one of the Pleiades, is from Greek Maia, daughter of Atlas, mother of Hermes,
literally mother, good mother, dame; foster-mother, nurse, midwife, said by Watkins to be from
infant babbling (see mamma).


maid (n.)

late 12c., a virgin, a young unmarried woman, shortening of maiden (n.). Like that word, used in
Middle English of unmarried men as well as women (as in maiden-man, c.1200, used of both sexes,
reflecting also the generic use of man). Domestic help sense is from c.1300. In reference to Joan of
Arc, attested from 1540s (French la Pucelle). Maid Marian, one of Robin Hood's companions, first
recorded 1520s, perhaps from French, where Robin et Marian have been stock names for country lovers
since 13c. Maid of Honor (1580s) originally was unmarried lady of noble birth who attends a queen or
princess; meaning principal bridesmaid is attested from 1895. Maydelond (translating Latin terra
feminarum) was the land of the Amazons.


maiden (n.)

Old English m&aelig;gden, m&aelig;den maiden, virgin, girl; maid, servant, diminutive of
m&aelig;g&eth;, m&aelig;ge&eth; virgin, girl; woman, wife, from Proto-Germanic *magadinom young
womanhood, sexually inexperienced female (cognates: Old Saxon magath, Old Frisian maged, Old High
German magad virgin, maid, German Magd maid, maidservant, German M&auml;dchen girl, maid, from
M&auml;gdchen little maid), fem. variant of PIE root *maghu- youngster of either sex, unmarried
person (cognates: Old English magu child, son, male descendant, Avestan magava- unmarried, Old Irish
maug slave).


maiden (adj.)

virgin, unmarried, c.1300, from maiden (n.). The figurative sense of new fresh, first (as in maiden
voyage) is first recorded 1550s. Maiden name is from 1680s.


maidenhead (n.)

c.1200, from maiden (n.) + -head (see godhead). Compare also maidehede (c.1200) celibacy, virginity
(of men or women).


maidenhood (n.)

Old English m&#230;gdenhad maidenhood; see maiden (n.) + -hood.


maidenly (adj.)

mid-15c., from maiden (n.) + -ly (1).


maidservant (n.)

1520s, from maid (n.) + servant.


mail (n.1)

post, letters, c.1200, a traveling bag, from Old French male wallet, bag, bundle, from Frankish
*malha or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *malho- (cognates: Old High German malaha
wallet, bag, Middle Dutch male bag), from PIE *molko- skin, bag. Sense extension to letters and
parcels (18c.) is via bag full of letter (1650s) or person or vehicle who carries postal matter
(1650s). In 19c. England, mail was letters going abroad, while home dispatches were post. Sense of
personal batch of letters is from 1844, originally American English.


mail (n.2)

metal ring armor, c.1300, from Old French maille link of mail, mesh of net, from Latin macula mesh
in a net, originally spot, blemish, on notion that the gaps in a net or mesh looked like spots.


mail (v.)

send by post, 1828, American English, from mail (n.1). Related: Mailed; mailing; mailable. Mailing
list attested from 1876.


mail (n.3)

rent, payment, from Old English mal (see blackmail (n.)).


mail-order (adj.)

1875, from mail (n.1) + order. Before television and the Internet, the bane of retailers and shop-
owners.    The origin, foundation and principle of mail order trading is universally recognized as
wrong. It was conceived in iniquity and brought forth in despair as the world's greatest destructive
medium. Mail Order Trading was born in the brain of knaves and thieves who fired their building for
insurance profits, then sold the salvaged and damaged stock to the unsuspecting sons of man in
distant territory. [Thomas J. Sullivan, Merchants and Manufacturers on Trial, Chicago, 1914]


mailbag (n.)

also mail-bag, 1794, from mail (n.1) + bag (n.).


mailbox (n.)

also mail-box, 1797, box for mailbags on a coach, from mail (n.1) + box (n.1). Meaning letterbox is
from 1853, American English.


mailed (adj.)

having mail armor, late 14c., from mail (n.2).


maillot (n.)

tight-fitting one-piece swimsuit, 1928, from French maillot swaddling clothes, from Old French
mailloel (13c.), probably an alteration of maille mesh (see mail (n.2)). Borrowed earlier by English
in the sense of tights (1888).


mailman (n.)

also mail-man, 1841, from mail (n.1) + man (n.).


maim (v.)

c.1300, maimen, from Old French mahaignier injure, wound, muitilate, cripple, disarm, possibly from
Vulgar Latin *mahanare (source also of Proven&ccedil;al mayanhar, Italian magagnare), of unknown
origin; or possibly from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *mait- (source of Old Norse
mei&eth;a to hurt, related to mad (adj.)), or from PIE root *mai- to cut. Related: Maimed; maiming.


main (n.)

Old English m&aelig;gen (n.) power, bodily strength, force, efficacy, from Proto-Germanic *maginam
power, suffixed form of PIE root *magh- (1) be able, have power (see may (v.)). Original sense
preserved in phrase with might and main. Meaning principal channel in a utility system is first
recorded 1727 in main drain; Used since 1540s for continuous stretch of land or water.  In Spanish
Main the word is short for mainland and refers to the coast between Panama and Orinoco.


main (adj.)

early 13c., large, bulky, strong, from Old English m&aelig;gen- power, strength, force, used in
compounds (such as m&aelig;gensibb great love, m&aelig;genbyr&#240;en heavy burden; see main (n.)),
probably also from or influenced by Old Norse megenn (adj.) strong, powerful. Sense of chief is
c.1400. Main course in the meal sense attested from 1829. Main man favorite male friend; hero is
from 1967, U.S. black slang.


main line (n.)

principal line of a railway, 1841; meaning affluent area of residence is by 1917, originally (with
capitals) that of Philadelphia, from the main line of the Pennsylvania Railroad which added local
stops to a string of backwater towns west of the city late 19c. that helped turn them into
fashionable suburbs.    The Main Line, Philadelphia's most famous suburban district, was
deliberately conceived in the 1870's and 1880's by the [Pennsylvania] Railroad, which built high-
toned housing developments, ran hotels, more or less forced its executives to plunk their estates
out there, and created a whole series of somewhat spurious Welsh towns along the railroad tracks.
... Now everybody assumes these all date from 1682, like the Robertses; but as Chestnut Hill people
like to say, nobody but Welsh peasants lived on the Main Line till the Railroad built it up.
[Nathaniel Burt, The Perennial Philadelphians, 1963]    The original station stops were, in order
out from the city, Overbrook, Merion, Narberth, Wynnewood, Ardmore, Haverford, Bryn Mawr, Paoli. The
train line for commuters along it is the Paoli Local.


Main Street (n.)

principal street of a (U.S.) town, 1810. Used allusively to indicate mediocrity, small-town
materialism from late 19c., especially since publication of Sinclair Lewis's novel Main Street
(1920).


Maine

U.S. state, probably ultimately from French Maine, region in France (named for the river that runs
through it, which has a name of Gaulish origin). The name was applied to that part of coastal North
America by French explorers.


mainframe (n.)

central processor of a computer system, 1964, from main (adj.) + frame (n.).


mainland (n.)

c.1400, from main (adj.) + land (n.). Usually referring to continuous bodies of land and not islands
or peninsulas. Related: Mainlander.


mainline (v.)

also main-line, 1934, from main line in American English slang sense principal vein into which drugs
can be injected (1933).


mainly (adv.)

late 13c., vigorously, from main (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning especially is from c.1400; that of for
the most part is from 1660s.


mainmast (n.)

16c., from main (adj.) + mast (n.1).


mainspring (n.)

1590s, of watches, clocks, etc., from main (adj.) + spring (n.3). Figurative use from 1690s.


mainstay (n.)

chief support, 1787, figurative use of a nautical noun meaning stay which extends from the main-top
to the foot of the foremast (late 15c.), from main (adj.) + stay (n.).


mainstream (n.)

also main-stream, main stream, principal current of a river, 1660s, from main (adj.) + stream (n.);
hence, prevailing direction in opinion, popular taste, etc., a figurative use first attested in
Carlyle (1831). Mainstream media attested by 1980 in language of U.S. leftists critical of coverage
of national affairs.


maintain (v.)

mid-13c., to practice habitually, from Anglo-French meintenir (Old French maintenir, 12c.) keep (a
wife), sustain; persevere in, practice continually, from Latin manu tenere hold in the hand, from
manu, ablative of manus hand (see manual) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning to carry on, keep up
is from mid-14c.; that of to keep oneself, to support is from late 14c. Sense of to defend in speech
is from mid-14c. Related: Maintained; maintaining; maintains.


maintainable (adj.)

mid-15c., from maintain + -able. Related: Maintainability.


maintenance (n.)

mid-14c., bearing, deportment, from Old French maintenance upkeep; shelter, protection,: from
maintenir (see maintain). Meaning action of upholding or keeping in being is from early 15c. Action
of providing a person with the necessities of life is from late 14c.


maisonette (n.)

1818, small house, from French maisonnette, diminutive of maison house (11c.), from Latin mansionem
(see mansion). Meaning a part of a building let separately is from 1912.


maitre d&#039;

also maitre d, 1943; see ma&icirc;tre d'h&ocirc;tel.


maitre d&#039;hotel

1530s, head domestic, from French ma&icirc;tre d'h&ocirc;tel, literally house-master, from Old
French maistre master; skilled worker, educator (12c.), from Latin magistrum (see magistrate). Sense
of hotel manager, manager of a dining room is from 1890. Shortened form ma&icirc;tre d' is attested
from 1942; simple maitre from 1899.


maize (n.)

1550s, from Cuban Spanish maiz, from Arawakan (Haiti) mahiz.


majestic (adj.)

c.1600, from majesty + -ic. Related: Majestical (1570s); majestically.


majesty (n.)

c.1300, greatness, glory, from Old French majeste grandeur, nobility (12c.), from Latin maiestatem
(nominative maiestas) greatness, dignity, elevation, honor, excellence, from stem of maior (neuter
maius), comparative of magnus great (see magnate). Earliest English us is with reference to God; as
a title, in reference to kings and queens (late 14c.), it is from Romance languages and descends
from the Roman Empire.


Majlis (n.)

Persian national assembly, 1821, from Arabic majlis assembly, literally session, from jalasa he sat
down.


majolica (n.)

Italian glazed pottery, 1550s, from Italian Majolica, 14c. name of island now known as Majorca in
the Balearics, from Latin maior (see major (adj.)); so called because it is the largest of the three
islands. The best pottery of this type was said to have been made there.


major (adj.)

c.1300, from Latin maior (earlier *magjos), irregular comparative of magnus large, great (see
magnate). Used in music (of modes, scales, or chords) since 1690s, on notion of an interval a half-
tone greater than the minor.


major (n.)

military rank, 1640s, from French major, short for sergent-major, originally a higher rank than at
present, from Medieval Latin major chief officer, magnate, superior person, from Latin maior an
elder, adult, noun use of the adjective (see major (adj.)). The musical sense attested by 1797.


major (v.)

focus (one's) studies, 1910, American English, from major (n.) in sense of subject of specialization
(1890). Related: Majored; majoring. Earlier as a verb, in Scottish, to prance about, or walk
backwards and forwards with a military air and step [Jamieson, 1825].


major-domo (n.)

1580s, via Italian maggiordomo or Spanish mayordomo, from Medieval Latin major domus chief of the
household, also mayor of the palace under the Merovingians, from Latin major greater (see major
(adj.)) + genitive of domus house (see domestic).


majorette (n.)

baton-twirler, 1941, short for drum-majorette (1938), fem. of drum-major (1590s).    The perfect
majorette is a pert, shapely, smiling extrovert, who loves big, noisy crowds and knows how to make
those crowds love her. [Life magazine, Oct. 10, 1938]    (The article notes that the activity has
been going on for about six years now).


majoritarian

1917 (adj.), from majority + -ian.


majority (n.)

1550s, condition of being greater, superiority, from Middle French majorit&eacute; (16c.), from
Medieval Latin majoritatem (nominative majoritas) majority, from Latin maior greater (see major
(adj.)). Sense of state of being of full age is attested from 1560s; meaning greater number or part
(of votes, etc.) first recorded 1690s. The majority the dead recorded from 1719.


majorly (adv.)

by 1887, from major (adj.) + -ly (2). Common in popular U.S. colloquial speech from c.1995.


majuscule

18c. (adj)., 1825 (n.), from French majuscule (16c.), from Latin maiuscula (littera), fem. of
maiusculus somewhat larger, somewhat greater, diminutive of maior (see major (adj.)).


make (v.)

Old English macian to make, form, construct, do; prepare, arrange, cause; behave, fare, transform,
from West Germanic *makon to fashion, fit (cognates: Old Saxon makon, Old Frisian makia to build,
make, Middle Dutch and Dutch maken, Old High German mahhon to construct, make, German machen to
make), from PIE *mag- to knead, mix; to fashion, fit (see macerate). If so, sense evolution perhaps
is via prehistoric houses built of mud. Gradually replaced the main Old English word, gewyrcan (see
work (v.)).    Meaning to arrive at (a place), first attested 1620s, originally was nautical.
Formerly used in many places where specific verbs now are used, such as to make Latin (c.1500) to
write Latin compositions. This broader usage survives in some phrases, such as to make water to
urinate, to make a book arrange a series of bets (1828), make hay to turn over mown grass to expose
it to sun. Make the grade is 1912, perhaps from the notion of railway engines going up an incline.
Read the valuable suggestions in Dr. C.V. Mosby's book -- be prepared to surmount obstacles before
you encounter them -- equipped with the power to make the grade in life's climb. [advertisement for
Making the Grade, December 1916]    But the phrase also was in use in a schoolwork context at the
time. Make do manage with what is available is attested from 1867. Make time go fast is 1849; make
tracks in this sense is from 1834. To make a federal case out of (something) popularized in 1959
movie Anatomy of a Murder; to make an offer (one) can't refuse is from Mario Puzo's 1969 novel The
Godfather. To make (one's) day is from 1909; menacing make my day is from 1971, popularized by Clint
Eastwood in film Sudden Impact (1983). Related: Made; making.


make (n.)

match, mate, companion (now archaic or dialectal), from Old English gemaca mate, equal; one of a
pair, comrade; consort, husband, wife, from Proto-Germanic *gamakon-, related to Old English
gem&aelig;cc well-matched, suitable, macian to make (see make (v.)). Meaning manner in which
something is made, design, construction is from c.1300. Phrase on the make intent on profit or
advancement is from 1869.


make out (v.)

c.1600, get along, from make (v.) + out (adv.). Sense of understand is from 1640s; sexual sense
first recorded 1939.


make up (v.)

end a quarrel, reconcile, 1660s, from make (v.) + up (adv.).


make-believe (n.)

pretence, 1811, from make (v.) + believe. As an adjective by 1824.


make-up (n.)

also makeup, manner in which something is put together, 1821, from make (v.) + up. Cosmetics sense
is from 1886; verbal phrase make up to apply cosmetics is from 1808.


make-work

1913 (adj.); 1937 (n.), busy-work, activity of no value, American English, from the verbal
expression to make work (see make (v.) + work (n.)).    A big fire devoured a street; It will make
work, I heard my father say; a ship was lost at sea laden with silk, and leather, and cloth; It will
make work, said my father; a reservoir broke jail, and swept the heart of the town away. It will
make work, my mother said; so all human calamities were softened blessings to me; they made work,
and work made wages, and wages made bread and potatoes, and clothes for me. [The Radical Review,
Chicago, Sept. 15, 1883]


makeless (adj.)

early 13c., peerless, without equal, from make (n.) + -less. Meaning mateless, widowed is from early
15c.


makeover (n.)

also make-over, by 1981, from phrase make over in sense to refashion (1690s); from make (v.) + over
(adv.).


maker (n.)

c.1300, one who makes, also God as creator, agent noun from make (v.). Specifically, manufacturer by
late 14c. To meet (one's) maker die is attested by 1814.


makeshift

also make-shift, 1560s, as a noun, shifty person, rogue, from make (v.) + shift (v.). Adjectival
sense of substitute is first recorded 1680s. Compare make-sport a laughing stock (1610s).


makeweight (n.)

also make-weight, 1690s, small quantity of something added to make the total reach a certain weight,
from make (v.) + weight.    MAKE WEIGHT. A small candle: a term applied to a little slender man.
[Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]


mako (n.)

large blue shark, listed as 1727 in OED, from The History of Japan, English translation of Engelbert
Kaempfer's German manuscript; however this is claimed by some to be an error, and some say
Kaempfer's word represents Japanese makk&ocirc;(-kujira) sperm whale. But the description in the
text fits neither the shark nor the whale. The word is ultimately from Maori mako shark, shark's
tooth, which is of uncertain etymology. If the 1727 citation is an error, the earliest attested use
is 1820, from a book on New Zealand languages.


mal du siecle (n.)

French, mal du s&#236;ecle, world-weariness.


mal-

word-forming element meaning bad, badly, ill, poorly, wrong, wrongly, from French mal (adv.), from
Old French mal (adj., adv.) evil, ill, wrong, wrongly (9c.), from Latin male (adv.) badly, or malus
(adj.) bad, evil (fem. mala, neuter malum), of unknown origin, perhaps related to Avestan mairiia
treacherous. Most Modern English words with this prefix are 19c. coinages.


malabsorption (n.)

1879, from mal- + absorption.


Malachi

masc. proper name, Old Testament name of the last in order of the Twelve Prophets, from Hebrew
Mal'akhi, literally my messenger, from mal'akh messenger, from Semitic base l-'-k (compare Arabic
la'aka he sent).


malachite (n.)

common green ore of copper, late 14c., from French, ultimately from Greek malachitis (lithos) mallow
(stone), from malakhe mallow (see mallow (n.)); the mineral traditionally so called from resemblance
of its color to that of the leaves of the mallow plant.


malacia (n.)

from Latin malacia a calm at sea, from Greek malakia softness, delicacy, effeminacy, from malakos
soft (see mallet).


maladaptation (n.)

1829, from mal- + adaptation.


maladaptive (adj.)

1912, from mal- + adaptive (see adapt).


maladjusted (adj.)

1846, from mal- + adjusted (see adjust).


maladjustment (n.)

1823, from mal- + adjustment.


maladministration (n.)

also mal-administration, 1640s, from mal- + administration.


maladroit (adj.)

1670s, from mal- + adroit. Related: Maladroitly; maladroitness.


malady (n.)

late 13c., from Old French maladie sickness, illness, disease (13c.), from malade ill (12c.), from
Latin male habitus doing poorly, feeling sick, literally ill-conditioned, from male badly (see mal-)
+ habitus, past participle of habere have, hold (see habit (n.)). Related: Maladies.


Malaga (n.)

c.1600, white wine exported from the Spanish port of Malaga, founded by the Phoenicians and probably
from Phoenician malha salt.


Malagasy

pertaining to Madagascar, large island off the coast of Africa, 1835, apparently a native alteration
of Madagascar.


malaise (n.)

c.1300, maleise pain, suffering; sorrow, anxiety, also, by late 14c., disease, sickness, from Old
French malaise difficulty, suffering, hardship, literally ill-ease, from mal bad (see mal-) + aise
ease (see ease (n.)). The current use is perhaps a mid-18c. reborrowing from Modern French. A Middle
English verbal form, malasen to trouble, distress (mid-15c.), from Old French malaisier, did not
endure.


malamute (n.)

also malemute, Eskimo dog, 1874, from name of Alaska Eskimo tribe in northwestern Alaska that
developed the breed. The native form is malimiut.


malapert (adj.)

impudent, early 15c., from Old French mal apert, literally ill-skilled, from mal- badly (see mal-) +
apert skillful, variant of espert experienced, skillful, clever (from Latin expertus; see expert).
Related: Malapertly; malapertness.


malaprop (n.)

1823, from name of theatrical character Mrs. Malaprop (see malapropism). Related: Malapropian.


malapropism (n.)

1826, from Mrs. Malaprop, character in Sheridan's play The Rivals (1775), noted for her ridiculous
misuse of large words (such as contagious countries for contiguous countries), her name coined from
malapropos.


malapropos (adv.)

1660s, from French mal &agrave; propos inopportunely, inappropriately, literally badly for the
purpose, from mal (see mal-) + proposer propose (see propose).


malaria (n.)

1740, from Italian mal'aria, from mala aria, literally bad air, from mala bad (fem. of malo, from
Latin malus; see mal-) + aria air (see air (n.1)). Probably first used by Italian physician
Francisco Torti (1658-1741). The disease, now known to be mosquito-borne, once was thought to be
caused by foul air in marshy districts. Replaced native ague.


malarial (adj.)

1830, from malaria + -al (1).


malarkey (n.)

also malarky, lies and exaggerations, 1924, American English, of unknown origin. It also is a
surname.


malassimilation (n.)

also mal-assimilation, 1840, from mal- + assimilation.


malaxation (n.)

softening, 1650s, from Late Latin malaxationem (nominative malaxatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of malaxare to soften, mollify, from Greek malassein to make soft, related to
malakos soft (see mallet).


Malay (n.)

1590s, from native name Malayu. As an adjective from 1779; earlier adjective form was Malayan
(1660s).


Malayalam

1837, Dravidian language of Malabar, from Dravidian Malayali, from mala mountain + al possess.


Malaysia

from Malay + Latinate ending -sia. Originally an early 19c. British geographers' name for the
Indonesian archipelago. Related: Malaysian.


Malcolm

masc. proper name, from Old Irish M&#225;el Coluim servant of (St.) Columba, from m&#225;el servant,
etymologically bald, shorn, hornless, from PIE base *mai- to cut (see maim).


malcontent

1580s, noun and adjective, from French malcontent; see mal- + content (adj.). Related: Malcontented;
malcontentedly; malcontentedness.


maldistribution (n.)

also mal-distribution, 1824, from mal- + distribution.


Maldives

probably from Sanskrit maladvipa garland of islands, from mala garland + dvipa island. Related:
Maldivian.


male (n.)

late 14c., male human being; male fish or land animal, from Old French masle (adj.) masculine, male,
adult, also used as a noun (12c., Modern French m&acirc;le), from Latin masculus masculine, male,
worthy of a man (source also of Proven&ccedil;al mascle, Spanish macho, Italian maschio), diminutive
of mas (genitive maris) male person or animal, male.


male (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French male, masle male, masculine; a male (see male (n.)). Mechanical sense of
part of an instrument that penetrates another part is from 1660s.


male chauvinism (n.)

1969; see chauvinism.


male chauvinist (adj.)

1969; see chauvinism.


malediction (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French maledicion a curse (15c.), from Latin maledictionem (nominative
maledictio) the action of speaking evil of, slander, in Late Latin a curse, noun of action from past
participle stem of maledicere to speak badly or evil of, slander, from male badly (see mal-) +
dicere to say (see diction).


maledictory (adj.)

1822, from Latin maledictus (from maledicere; see malediction) + -ory.


maleducation (n.)

also mal-education, 1840, from mal- + education.


malefaction (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin malefactionem (nominative malefactio), noun of action from past
participle stem of malefacere (see malefactor).


malefactor (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin malefactor, agent noun from past participle stem of malefacere to do evil, from
male badly (see mal-) + facere to perform (see factitious).


malefic (adj.)

1650s, from Latin maleficus wicked, vicious, criminal, from male ill (see mal-) + -ficus, from stem
of facere to make, do (see factitious).


maleficence (n.)

1590s, from Middle French maleficence or directly from Latin maleficentia evildoing,
mischievousness, injury, from maleficus wicked (see malefic). Now largely displaced by malfeasance.


maleficent (adj.)

1670s, from Latin maleficent-, altered stem of maleficus (see malefic).


maleness (n.)

1660s, from male (adj.) + -ness.


malevolence (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French malevolence and directly from Latin malevolentia ill-will, dislike,
hatred, from malevolentem (nominative malevolens) malevolent (see malevolent).


malevolent (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle French malivolent and directly from Latin malevolentem (nominative malevolens)
ill-disposed, spiteful, envious, from male badly (see mal-) + volentem (nominative volens), present
participle of velle to wish (see will (v.)). Related: Malevolently.


malfeasance (n.)

1690s, from French malfaisance wrongdoing, from malfaisant, from mal- badly (see mal-) + faisant,
present participle of faire to do, from Latin facere to do (see factitious). Malfeasor wrong-doer is
attested from early 14c. Related: Malfeasant.


malformation (n.)

also mal-formation, 1731, from mal- + formation.


malformed (adj.)

1801, from mal- + formed, past participle of form (v.).


malfunction (n.)

1827, from mal- bad, badly, wrong + function. As a verb, by 1888. Related: Malfunctioned;
malfunctioning.


Mali

modern African nation, known by that name from 1959, formerly French Sudan. The name is that of a
former African kingdom (13c.-14c.), perhaps from Malinke, name of an indigenous people of the
region.


malic (adj.)

1797, from French malique (18c.), from Latin malum apple (the acid, discovered 1785 by Scheele, was
obtained from unripe apples and other fruits), from Greek melon (Doric malon) apple, probably from a
pre-Greek Mediterranean language. The Latin and Greek words also meant fruit generally, especially
if exotic.


malice (n.)

c.1300, desire to hurt another, from Old French malice ill will, spite, sinfulness, wickedness
(12c.), from Latin malitia badness, ill will, spite, from malus bad (see mal-). In legal use,
wrongful intent generally (1540s).


malicious (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French malicios showing ill will, spiteful, wicked (Modern French malicieux),
from Latin malitiosus wicked, malicious, from malitia badness, ill will, spite, from malus bad (see
mal-). In legal use (early 14c., Anglo-French), it means characterized by malice prepense.


maliciously (adv.)

late 14c., from malicious + -ly (2).


maliciousness (n.)

mid-15c., from malicious + -ness.


malign (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French maligne having an evil nature, from Latin malignus wicked, bad-natured,
from male badly (see mal-) + -gnus born, from gignere to bear, beget, from PIE root *gn- to bear
(see genus).


malign (v.)

to slander, mid-15c., from earlier more literal sense of to plot, to contrive (early 15c.), from Old
French malignier to plot, deceive, pervert, from Late Latin malignare to do maliciously, from
malignus (see malign (adj.)). Related: Maligned; maligning.


malignancy (n.)

c.1600, malignant nature, from malignant + -cy. Of growths, tumors, from 1680s.


malignant (adj.)

1560s, in reference to diseases, from Middle French malignant and directly from Late Latin
malignantem (nominative malignans) acting from malice, present participle of malignare injure
maliciously (see malign (v.)). Earlier in the church malignant followers of the antichrist, from
Latin ecclesiam malignantum in early Church writing, applied by Protestant writers to the Church in
Rome (1540s). As an adjective, Middle English used simple malign (early 14c.). Related: Malignantly.


maligner (n.)

early 15c., agent noun from malign (v.).


malignity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French malignet&eacute;, from Latin malignitas ill-will, spite, from malignus
(see malign (adj.)).


malinger (v.)

1820, from French malingrer to suffer, perhaps also pretend to be ill, from malingre ailing, sickly
(13c.), of uncertain origin, possibly a blend of mingre sickly, miserable and malade ill. Mingre is
itself a blend of maigre meager + haingre sick, haggard, possibly from Germanic (compare Middle High
German hager thin). The sense evolution may be through notion of beggars with sham sores. Related:
Malingered; malingering; malingerer (1785).


malison (n.)

a curse, mid-13c., from Old French malei&ccedil;on curse, from Latin maledictionem (see
malediction).


malkin (n.)

also mawkin, a slattern; woman of the lower classes, late 13c., from fem. proper name Malkyn, a
diminutive of Mault Maud (see Matilda). Also attested from c.1200 as the proper name of a female
specter. Sense of untidy woman led to meaning mop, bundle of rags on a stick (used to clean ovens,
artillery pieces, etc.), c.1400.    MALKINTRASH. One in dismal garb. [Grose, Classical Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]    Attested as the name of a cat since 1670s (perhaps earlier as
Grimalkin, 16c.); compare Serbo-Croatian ma&#269;ka cat, originally a pet-name form of Maria. Also
used in Scotland and northern England as the name of a hare (1724).


mall (n.)

1737, shaded walk serving as a promenade, generalized from The Mall, name of a broad, tree-lined
promenade in St. James's Park, London (so called from 1670s, earlier Maill, 1640s), which was so
called because it formerly was an open alley that was used to play pall-mall, a croquet-like game
involving hitting a ball with a mallet through a ring, from French pallemaille, from Italian
pallamaglio, from palla ball (see balloon) + maglio mallet (see mallet). Modern sense of enclosed
shopping gallery is from 1963. Mall rat is from 1985.


mallard (n.)

c.1300, wild drake or duck, from Old French malart (12c.) or Medieval Latin mallardus, apparently
from male, from Latin masculus (see male), in which case the original sense probably was not of a
specific species but of any male wild duck, though the specific sense of male of the wild duck was
not attested in English until early 14c.


malleability (n.)

1680s, from malleable + -ity.


malleable (adj.)

late 14c., capable of being shaped by hammering, from Middle French malleable and directly from
Medieval Latin malleabilis, from malleare to beat with a hammer, from Latin malleus hammer (see
mallet). Figurative sense, of persons, capable of being adapted first recorded 1610s.


malleolus (n.)

bone knob at the ankle, 1690s, from Latin malleolus, diminutive of malleus a hammer (see mallet).
Anatomical use is said to date to Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564).


mallet (n.)

late 14c., from Old French maillet mallet, small wooden hammer, door-knocker, diminutive of mail,
from Latin malleus a hammer, from PIE *mal-ni-, from root *mel- (1) soft, with derivatives referring
to softened material and tools for grinding (cognates: Hittite mallanzi they grind; Armenian malem I
crush, bruise; Greek malakos soft, mylos millstone; Latin molere to grind, mola millstone, mill,
milium millet; Old English melu meal, flour; Albanian miel meal, flour; Old Church Slavonic meljo,
Lithuanian malu to grind; Old Church Slavonic mlatu, Russian molotu hammer).


malleus (n.)

ear bone, 1660s, from Latin malleus a hammer (see mallet). So called for its shape.


mallow (n.)

late 14c., from late Old English malwe, from Latin malva mallows, from a pre-Latin Mediterranean
language. The same lost word apparently yielded Greek malakhe mallow.


malmsey (n.)

c.1400, type of strong, sweet white wine, from Proven&ccedil;al malmesie or Middle Dutch malemesye,
both from Medieval Latin malmasia, from Medieval Greek Monembasia Monemvasia, a town in the southern
Peloponnesus that was an important center of wine production in the Middle Ages, literally only one
entrance, from monos alone, only (see mono-) + embasis entering into, from en- in + basis a going, a
stepping, a base (see basis).


malnourished (adj.)

1906, from mal- bad, badly + nourished (see nourish).


malnourishment (n.)

1899, see mal- + nourishment.


malnutrition (n.)

1843, from mal- + nutrition.


malocclusion (n.)

1864, from mal- + occlusion.


malodorous (adj.)

1832, from mal- bad + odorous. Related: Malodorously; malodorousness.


malpractice (n.)

1670s, hybrid coined from mal- + practice (n.). Also used in law for illegal action by which a
person seeks a benefit for himself while in a position of trust (1758).


malt (n.)

Old English malt (Anglian), mealt (West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *maltam (cognates: Old Norse
malt, Old Saxon malt, Middle Dutch, Dutch mout, Old High German malz, German Malz malt), from PIE
*meld- (see melt (v.)), extended form of root *mel- soft, probably via notion of softening the grain
by steeping it in water before brewing. Finnish mallas, Old Church Slavonic mlato are considered to
be borrowed from Germanic.


malt (v.)

mid-15c., to convert grain to malt, from malt (n.). Meaning + to make with malt is from c.1600.
Related: Malted; malting. Malt liquor (which is fermented, not brewed) first attested 1690s. Malted
a drink with malted milk is from 1945.


Malta

Mediterranean island, from Latin Melite, perhaps from Phoenician melita, literally place of refuge,
from malat he escaped.


Maltese

from Malta + -ese. Maltese cat is attested from 1830; Maltese cross is from 1754 (earlier Malta
cross, 1650s).


malthouse (n.)

late Old English mealthus; see malt (n.) + house (n.).


Malthusian (n.)

1812, from the teachings of English economist Thomas R. Malthus (1766-1835), especially with regard
to population increase. As an adjective by 1818. Related: Malthusianism.


maltreat (v.)

1708, from French maltraiter, or formed in English from mal- + treat (v.). Related: Maltreated;
maltreating.


maltreatment (n.)

1721, from French maltraitement or formed in English from mal- + treatment.


maltster (n.)

maker of malt, early 14c. (late 13c. as a surname), from malt + -ster.


malty (adj.)

1817, from malt (n.) + -y (2).


malversation (n.)

professional or official corruption, 1540s, from French malversation, from malverser, from Latin
male versari, from male wrongly, ill (see mal-) + versari to behave, conduct oneself, passive
frequentative of vertere to turn (see versus).


Malvinas

Argentine name for the Falkland Islands, from French Malouins, name for inhabitants of the French
city of St. Malo, who attempted a colony there in 1764 under Louis-Antoine de Bougainville.


malware (n.)

1997, from mal- + -ware, from software, etc.


mama

1707, spelling variant of mamma. Meaning sexually attractive woman first recorded 1925 in black
slang; mama's boy soft, effeminate male is from 1901.


mamba (n.)

large venomous African snake, 1862, from Zulu (i)mamba or Swahili mamba.


mambo (n.)

popular dance (like the rhumba but livelier), September 1948, from American Spanish mambo, said by
Webster to be from Haitian creole word for voodoo priestess.


Mameluke

Egyptian dynasty 1254-1517, originally a military unit comprised of Caucasian slaves, from Middle
French mameluk and directly from Arabic mamluk purchased slave, literally possessed, from past
participle of malaka he possessed (compare Arabic malik, Hebrew melekh king).


mamma (n.)

1570s, representing the native form of the reduplication of *ma- that is nearly universal among the
Indo-European languages (Greek mamme mother, grandmother, Latin mamma, Persian mama, Russian and
Lithuanian mama mother, German Muhme mother's sister, French maman, Welsh mam mother). Probably a
natural sound in baby-talk, perhaps imitative of sound made while sucking.    Its late appearance in
English is curious, but Middle English had mome (mid-13c.) an aunt; an old woman, also an
affectionate term of address for an older woman. In educated usage, the stress is always on the last
syllable. In terms of recorded usage of related words in English, mama is from 1707, mum is from
1823, mummy in this sense from 1839, mommy 1844, momma 1852, and mom 1867.


mammal (n.)

1826, anglicized form of Modern Latin Mammalia (1773), coined 1758 by Linnaeus for the class of
mammals, from neuter plural of Late Latin mammalis of the breast, from Latin mamma breast, perhaps
cognate with mamma.


Mammalia (n.)

1773, from Modern Latin (Linnaeus), from neuter plural of Late Latin mammalis, from mamma (see
mammal).


mammalian (adj.)

1813, from mammal + -ian. As a noun, from 1835.


mammary (adj.)

1680s, from French mammaire (18c.), from Latin mamma breast, probably from the child's word for
mother (see mamma).


mammo-

word-forming element meaning breast, from Latin mamma breast (see mammal).


mammogram (n.)

1937, from mammo- + -gram.


mammography (n.)

1937, from mammo- + -graphy.


Mammon (n.)

personification of wealth, mid-14c., from Late Latin mammona, from Greek mamonas, from Aramaic
mamona, mamon riches, gain; left untranslated in Greek New Testament (e.g. Matt. vi:24, Luke
xvi:9-13) retained in the Vulgate, and regarded mistakenly by medieval Christians as the name of a
demon.


mammoth (n.)

1706, from Russian mammot', probably from Ostyak, a Finno-Ugric language of northern Russia (compare
Finnish maa earth). Because the remains were dug from the earth, the animal was believed to root
like a mole. As an adjective, gigantic, from 1802; in this sense the word appears to be originally
American [Thornton, American Glossary], and its first uses are in derogatory accounts to the cheese
wheel, more than 4 feet in diameter, sent to President Jefferson by the ladies of the Baptist
congregation in Cheshire, Mass., as a present, engraved with the motto Rebellion to tyrants is
obedience to God. Federalist editors mocked the affair, and called up the word mammoth (known from
Peale's exhibition) to characterize it.


mammy (n.)

1520s, diminutive of mam (see mamma). Meaning black woman having the care of white children is by
1837, Southern U.S. dialect, variant of mamma.


mamzer (n.)

bastard, 1560s, from Late Latin mamzer, from Hebrew mamzer, left untranslated in Deut. xxiii:2 in
the Vulgate.


man (n.)

Old English man, mann human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero; servant, vassal, from
Proto-Germanic *manwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Swedish, Dutch, Old High German man, German Mann, Old
Norse ma&eth;r, Danish mand, Gothic manna man), from PIE root *man- (1) man (cognates: Sanskrit
manuh, Avestan manu-, Old Church Slavonic mozi, Russian muzh man, male).    Plural men (German
M&auml;nner) shows effects of i-mutation. Sometimes connected to root *men- to think (see mind),
which would make the ground sense of man one who has intelligence, but not all linguists accept
this. Liberman, for instance, writes, Most probably man 'human being' is a secularized divine name
from Mannus [Tacitus, Germania, chap. 2], believed to be the progenitor of the human race.    So I
am as he that seythe, `Come hyddr John, my man.' [1473]    Sense of adult male is late (c.1000); Old
English used wer and wif to distinguish the sexes, but wer began to disappear late 13c. and was
replaced by man. Universal sense of the word remains in mankind and manslaughter. Similarly, Latin
had homo human being and vir adult male human being, but they merged in Vulgar Latin, with homo
extended to both senses. A like evolution took place in Slavic languages, and in some of them the
word has narrowed to mean husband. PIE had two stems: *uiHro freeman (source of Sanskrit vira-,
Lithuanian vyras, Latin vir, Old Irish fer, Gothic wair) and *hner man, a title more of honor than
*uiHro (source of Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner, Greek aner).    MANTRAP, a woman's
commodity. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   Man also was in Old English as
an indefinite pronoun, one, people, they. The chess pieces so called from c.1400. As an interjection
of surprise or emphasis, first recorded c.1400, but especially popular from early 20c. Man-about-
town is from 1734; the Man the boss is from 1918. To be man or mouse be brave or be timid is from
1540s. Men's Liberation first attested 1970.At the kinges court, my brother, Ech man for himself.
[Chaucer, Knight's Tale, c.1386]


man (v.)

Old English mannian to furnish (a fort, ship, etc.) with a company of men, from man (n.). Meaning to
take up a designated position on a ship is first recorded 1690s. Meaning behave like a man, act with
courage is from c.1400. To man (something) out is from 1660s. Related: Manned; manning.


man-eater (n.)

also maneater, c.1600, cannibal, from man (n.) + eater (see eat). From 1837 in reference to animals
(sharks); 1862 of tigers; 1906 of women. Related: Man-eating.


man-hater (n.)

misanthrope, 1570s, from man (n.) + hater. Old English had mannhata man-hater.


man-like (adj.)

also manlike, mid-15c., from man (n.) + like (adj.).


man-of-war (n.)

late 14c., a soldier, from man (n.) + war. Meaning vessel equipped for warfare is from late 15c. Man
in the sense of a ship is attested from late 15c. in combinations (such as merchantman). The sea
creature known as the Portuguese man-of-war (1707) is so called for its sail-like crest.


mana (n.)

power, authority, supernatural power, 1843, from Maori, power, authority, supernatural power.


manacle (n.)

mid-14c., a fetter for the hand, from Old French manicle manacles, handcuffs; bracelet; armor for
the hands, from Latin manicula handle, literally little hand, diminutive of manicae long sleeves of
a tunic, gloves; armlets, gauntlets; handcuffs, manacles, from manus hand (see manual (adj.)).
Related: Manacles.    In every cry of every man,  In every infant's cry of fear,  In every voice, in
every ban,  The mind-forged manacles I hear  [Blake, Songs of Experience]


manacle (v.)

c.1300, to fetter with manacles, from manacle (n.). Related: Manacled; manacling.


manage (v.)

1560s, probably from Italian maneggiare to handle, especially to control a horse, ultimately from
Latin noun manus hand (see manual (adj.)). Influenced by French man&egrave;ge horsemanship (earliest
English sense was of handling horses), which also was from Italian. Extended to other objects or
business from 1570s. Slang sense of get by first recorded 1650s. Related: Managed; managing. Managed
economy was used by 1933.


manageability (n.)

1813, from manageable + -ity.


manageable (adj.)

1590s, from manage + -able. Related: Manageably.


management (n.)

1590s, act of managing, from manage + -ment. Meaning governing body (originally of a theater) is
from 1739.


manager (n.)

1580s, one who manages, agent noun from manage. Specific sense of one who conducts a house of
business or public institution is from 1705.


managerial (adj.)

1767, see manager + -al (1).


managery (n.)

domestic administration (obsolete), 1630s, from manager + -y (4); or perhaps from manage + -ery.


manana

from Spanish ma&ntilde;ana, tomorrow, from cras man&ntilde;ana, literally tomorrow early, from
Vulgar Latin *maneana early, from Latin mane in the morning, from PIE *ma- good, with notion of
occurring at a good time, timely, early (compare matins; and see mature (v.)).


manatee (n.)

1550s, from Spanish manati (1530s), from Carib manati breast, udder. Often associated with Latin
manatus having hands, because the flippers resemble hands.


Manchester

Mameceastre (1086), from Mamucio (4c.), the original Celtic name, perhaps from *mamm breast, breast-
like hill + Old English ceaster Roman town (see Chester). Adjective Mancunian is from the Medieval
Latin form of the place-name, Mancunium.


manchild (n.)

also man-child, male child, male infant, c.1400, from man (n.) + child.


Manchu

1650s, member of Tungusic race of Manchuria which conquered China in 1644 and remained its ruling
class until the Revolution of 1912. From Manchu, literally pure, name of the tribe descended from
the Nu-chen Tartars.


Manchuria

named for the Manchu (literally pure) people + -ia. Related: Manchurian. Manchurian Candidate is
1959 as a novel, 1962 as a film.


mancinism (n.)

left-handedness, 1890, from Italian mancinissmo, from mancino infirm (in the hand), from manco, from
Latin mancus maimed, infirm, crippled, lame-handed (see manque).


manciple (n.)

officer or servant who purchases provisions for a college, monastery, etc., early 13c., from Old
French mancipe servant, official, manciple, from Latin mancipium servant, slave, slave obtained by
legal transfer; the legal purchase of a thing, literally a taking in hand, from manus hand (see
manual (adj.)) + root of capere to take (see capable).


mandala (n.)

magic circle, 1859, from Sanskrit mandala disc, circle.


mandamus (n.)

1530s, writ from a superior court to an inferior one, specifying that something be done, (late 14c.
in Anglo-French), from Latin, literally we order, first person plural present indicative of mandare
to order (see mandate (n.)).


mandarin (n.)

Chinese official, 1580s, via Portuguese mandarim or older Dutch mandorijn from Malay mantri, from
Hindi mantri councilor, minister of state, from Sanskrit mantri, nominative of mantrin- advisor,
from mantra counsel, from PIE root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).    Form influenced in Portuguese
by mandar to command, order. Used generically for the several grades of Chinese officials; sense of
chief dialect of Chinese (spoken by officials and educated people) is from c.1600. Transferred sense
of important person attested by 1907. The type of small, deep-colored orange so called from 1771,
from resemblance of its color to that of robes worn by mandarins.


mandatary (n.)

person to whom a mandate has been given, 1610s, from Latin mandatarius one to whom a charge or
commission has been given, from mandatus, past participle of mandare (see mandate (n.)).


mandate (n.)

judicial or legal order, c.1500, from Middle French mandat (15c.) and directly from Latin mandatum
commission, command, order, noun use of neuter past participle of mandare to order, commit to one's
charge, literally to give into one's hand, probably from manus hand (see manual) + dare to give (see
date (n.1)). Political sense of approval supposedly conferred by voters to the policies or slogans
advocated by winners of an election is from 1796. League of Nations sense is from 1919.


mandate (v.)

1620s, to command, from mandate (n.). Meaning to delegate authority, permit to act on behalf of a
group is from 1958; used earlier in the context of the League of Nations, to authorize a power to
control a certain territory for some specified purpose (1919). Related: Mandated; mandating.


mandatory (adj.)

1570s, of the nature of a mandate, from Late Latin mandatorius pertaining to a mandator, from Latin
mandatus, past participle of mandare (see mandate (n.)). Sense of obligatory because commanded is
from 1818.


mandible (n.)

late 14c., jaw, jawbone, from Middle French mandible and directly from Late Latin mandibula jaw,
from Latin mandere to chew, from PIE root *mendh- to chew (cognates: Greek mastax the mouth, that
with which one chews; morsel, that which is chewed, masasthai to chew, mastikhan to gnash the
teeth). Of insect mouth parts from 1826.


mandibular (adj.)

1650s, from Latin mandibula (see mandible) + -ar.


Mandingo

people of the upper Niger region of West Africa, 1620s.


mandolin (n.)

1707, from French mandoline, from Italian mandolino, diminutive of mandola, a larger kind of
mandolin, altered from Late Latin pandura three-stringed lute, from Greek pandoura, which is of
unknown origin.


mandragora (n.)

see mandrake.


mandrake (n.)

narcotic plant, early 14c., mondrake, from Medieval Latin mandragora, from Latin mandragoras, from
Greek mandragoras, probably from a non-Indo-European word. The word was in late Old English in its
Latin form; folk etymology associated the second element with dragoun and substituted native drake
in its place. The forked root is thought to resemble a human body and is said to shriek when pulled
from the ground.


mandrel (n.)

miner's pick, 1510s, of unknown origin; perhaps borrowed from French mandrin, itself of unknown
origin. Also applied from 17c. to parts of a lathe or a circular saw.


mandrill (n.)

large baboon, 1744, perhaps ultimately from an African language, but formed into English components
man + drill (n.4) baboon, which is of W.African origin. The earliest reference reports the name is
what the animal was called by the white men in this country (Sierra Leone). French mandrill, Spanish
mandril seem to be from English.


mane (n.)

Old English manu mane, from Proto-Germanic *mano (cognates: Old Norse m&ouml;n, Old Frisian mana,
Middle Dutch mane, Dutch manen, Old High German mana, German M&auml;hne mane), from PIE *mon- neck,
nape of the neck (cognates: Sanskrit manya nape of the neck, Old English mene necklace, Latin monile
necklace, Welsh mwng mane, Old Church Slavonic monisto, Old Irish muin neck).


manege (n.)

1640s, riding school; 1776, horsemanship, movements proper to a trained horse, from French
man&#232;ge, from Italian maneggio, from maneggiare to control (a horse), (see manage (v.)).


Manes (pl.)

Gods of the Lower World, in Roman religion, from Latin manes departed spirit, ghost, shade of the
dead, deified spirits of the underworld, usually said to be from Latin manus good, thus properly the
good gods, a euphemistic word, but Tucker suggests a possible connection instead to macer, thus the
thin or unsubstantial ones.


maneuver (n.)

planned movement of troops or warship, 1758, from French manoeuvre manipulation, maneuver, from Old
French manovre manual labor 13c.), from Medieval Latin manuopera (source of Spanish maniobra,
Italian manovra), from manuoperare work with the hands, from Latin manu operari, from manu, ablative
of manus hand (see manual (adj.)) + operari to work, operate (see operation). The same word had been
borrowed from French into Middle English in a sense hand-labor (late 15c.). General meaning artful
plan, adroit movement is from 1774. Related: Maneuvers.


maneuver (v.)

1777, from maneuver (n.), or else from French man&#339;urvrer work, work with one's hands; carry
out, prepare (12c.), from Medieval Latin manuoperare. Originally in a military sense. Figurative use
from 1801. Related: Maneuvered; maneuvering.


maneuverability (n.)

1917, from maneuverable + -ity.


maneuverable (adj.)

1913, from maneuver + -able.


manful (adj.)

late 14c., courageous, brave, resolute, from man (n.) + -ful.


manfully (adv.)

c.1400, from manful + -ly (2). Old English had manlice manfully, nobly.


manga (n.)

Japanese comic books or graphic novels, c.1984, from Japanese, cartoon, caricature, literally
involuntary pictures. Term said to have been coined 1814 by artist Katsushika Hokusai to convey a
sense of free-flowing composition and quirky style. See anime.


manganese (n.)

1670s as the name of a mineral, oxide of manganese, from French mangan&egrave;se (16c.), from
Italian manganese, alteration or corruption of Medieval Latin magnesia (see magnesia). From 1783 in
English as the name of an element.


mange (n.)

skin disease of animals, early 15c., from Old French manjue the itch, also hunger, appetite;
itching, longing, literally the eating, verbal noun from a collateral form of Old French mangier to
eat (Modern French manger) to eat, from Late Latin manducare to chew, eat, from manducus glutton,
from Latin mandere to chew (see mandible).


manger (n.)

early 14c., from Old French mangeoire crib, manger, from mangier to eat (see mange) + -oire, common
suffix for implements and receptacles.


mangle (v.)

to mutilate, c.1400, from Anglo-French mangler, frequentative of Old French mangoner cut to pieces,
of uncertain origin, perhaps connected with Old French mahaignier to maim, mutilate, wound (see
maim). Meaning to mispronounce (words), garble is from 1530s. Related: Mangled; mangling.


mangle (n.)

clothes-pressing machine, 1774, from Dutch mangel, apparently short for mangelstok, from stem of
mangelen to mangle, from Middle Dutch mange, ultimately from root of mangonel.


mango (n.)

1580s, from Portuguese manga, from Malay mangga, from Tamil mankay, from man mango tree + kay fruit.
Mango trees were brought from Timor to British gardens in Jamaica and St. Vincent 1793 by Capt.
Bligh on his second voyage.


mangonel (n.)

military engine for hurling stones, mid-13c., from Old French mangonel catapult, war engine for
throwing stones, etc. (Modern French mangonneau), diminutive of Medieval Latin mangonum, from Vulgar
Latin *manganum machine, from Greek manganon any means of tricking or bewitching, from PIE *mang- to
embellish, dress, trim (cognates: Old Prussian manga whore, Middle Irish meng craft, deception).
Attested from c.1200 in Anglo-Latin.


mangrove (n.)

1610s, mangrow, probably from Spanish mangle, mangue (1530s), which is perhaps from Carib or
Arawakan. Modern spelling in English (1690s) is from influence of grove. A Malay origin also has
been proposed, but it is difficult to explain how it came to be used for an American plant.


mangy (adj.)

by 1745, from mange + -y (2).


manhandle (v.)

mid-15c., wield a tool, also, late 15c., to attack (an enemy), from man (n.) + handle (v.). Nautical
meaning to move by force of men (without levers or tackle) is attested from 1834, and is the source
of the slang meaning to handle roughly (1865).    [T]he two Canalers rushed into the uproar, and
sought to drag their man out of it toward the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined with them in
this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of harm's way, the valiant captain
danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious
scoundrel, and smoke him along to the quarter-deck. [Melville, The Town-Ho's Story, Harper's
magazine, October 1851]


Manhattan

main island of New York City, from Dutch, from a native name, perhaps representing a Delaware
(Algonquian) source akin to Munsee munahan island. Bright favors Munsee /e:nta menahahte:nk/ where
one gathers bows. As the name of a cocktail made of vermouth, whiskey, and a dash of bitters, it is
attested from 1890 (in Manhattan cocktail).


manhole (n.)

also man-hole, hole through which a person may pass, 1793, from man (n.) + hole (n.).


manhood (n.)

early 13c., state of being human, from man (n.) + -hood. Meanings state of being an adult male, also
manliness, are from late 14c. Similar words in Old English were less explicitly masculine: manscipe
humanity, courtesy, literally man-ship; mennisclicnes state of man, humanity, humaneness, human
nature. The more manly word was werhad male sex, virility, manhood (see first element in werewolf).


mania (n.)

late 14c., mental derangement characterized by excitement and delusion, from Late Latin mania
insanity, madness, from Greek mania madness, frenzy; enthusiasm, inspired frenzy; mad passion, fury,
related to mainesthai to rage, go mad, mantis seer, menos passion, spirit, all from PIE *men- to
think, to have one's mind aroused, rage, be furious (see mind (n.)). Sense of fad, craze is 1680s,
from French manie in this sense. Sometimes nativized in Middle English as manye. Used since 1500s
(in imitation of Greek) as the second element in compounds expressing particular types of madness
(such as nymphomania, 1775; kleptomania, 1830; megalomania, 1890).


maniac (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to mania; insane, from French maniaque (14c.), from Late Latin maniacus, from
Greek maniakos, from mania (see mania). Borrowed at first in French form; Latinized in English from
1727. The noun is attested from 1763, from the adjective.


maniacal (adj.)

1670s, from maniac (adj.) + -al (1). Related: Maniacally.


manic (adj.)

pertaining to or affected with mania, 1902, from mania + -ic. The clinical term manic depressive
also is from 1902; manic depression is first attested 1903.


Manichaean

also Manichean, 1550s (n.), 1630s (adj.), from Latin Manichaeus (see Manichaeism).


Manichaeism (n.)

1550s, the religion of the Manichees (late 14c.) a Gnostic Christian sect named for its founder,
Mani (Latin Manich&aelig;us), c.215-275, Syriac-speaking apostle from a Jesus cult in Mesopotamia in
240s, who taught a universal religion. Vegetarian and visionary, they saw particles of light and
goodness trapped in evil matter and regarded Satan as co-eternal with God. The universe was a scene
of struggle between good and evil. The sect was characterized by dualism and a double-standard of
perfectionist elects and a larger group of fellow travelers who would require several reincarnations
before their particles of light would be liberated.


manicure (n.)

1873, one who professionally treats hands and fingernails, from French manicure, literally the care
of the hands, from Latin manus hand (see manual) + cura care (see cure). Meaning treatment and care
of the hands and fingernails is attested from 1887.


manicure (v.)

1889, from manicure (n.). Related: Manicured; manicuring.


manicurist (n.)

1884, from manicure (n.) after its sense shifted + -ist.


manifest (adj.)

late 14c., clearly revealed, from Old French manifest evident, palpable, (12c.), or directly from
Latin manifestus plainly apprehensible, clear, apparent, evident; of offenses, proved by direct
evidence; of offenders, caught in the act, probably from manus hand (see manual) + -festus struck
(compare second element of infest).  Other nations have tried to check ... the fulfillment of our
manifest destiny to overspread the Continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our
yearly multiplying millions. [John O'Sullivan (1813-1895), U.S. Magazine &amp; Democratic Review,
July 1845]  The phrase apparently is O'Sullivan's coinage; the notion is as old as the republic.


manifest (v.)

late 14c., to spread (one's fame), to show plainly, from manifest (adj.) or else from Latin
manifestare to discover, disclose, betray (see manifest (adj.)). Meaning to display by actions is
from 1560s; reflexive sense, of diseases, etc., to reveal as in operation is from 1808. Related:
Manifested; manifesting.


manifest (n.)

ship's cargo, 1706; see manifest (adj.). Earlier, a public declaration (c.1600; compare manifesto),
from French manifeste, verbal noun from manifester. Earlier still in English as a manifestation
(1560s).


manifestation (n.)

early 15c., action of manifesting; exhibition, demonstration, from Late Latin manifestationem
(nominative manifestatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin manifestare (see
manifest (adj.)). Meaning an object, action, or presence by which something is made manifest is from
1785. The spiritualism sense is attested from 1853.


manifestly (adv.)

clearly, early 15c., from manifest (adj.) + -ly (2).


manifesto (n.)

public declaration, 1640s, from Italian manifesto public declaration explaining past actions and
announcing the motive for forthcoming ones, originally proof, from Latin manifestus (see manifest
(adj.)).


manifold (adj.)

Old English monigfald (Anglian), manigfeald (West Saxon), various, varied in appearance,
complicated; numerous, abundant, from manig (see many) + -feald (see -fold). A common Germanic
compound (Old Frisian manichfald, Middle Dutch menichvout, German mannigfalt, Swedish m&#229;ngfalt,
Gothic managfal&thorn;s), perhaps a loan-translation of Latin multiplex (see multiply). Retains the
original pronunciation of many. Old English also had a verbal form, manigfealdian to multiply,
abound, increase, extend.


manifold (adv.)

Old English manigfealdlic in various ways, manifoldly, from the source of manifold (adj.).


manifold (n.)

in mechanical sense, first as pipe or chamber with several outlets, 1884, see manifold (adj.);
originally as manifold pipe (1857), with reference to a type of musical instrument mentioned in the
Old Testament.


manikin (n.)

1560s, jointed figure used by artists, from Dutch manneken, literally little man, diminutive of
Middle Dutch man (see man (n.)). Sense and spelling often blended with mannequin.


Manila

1690s, capital of the Philippines, gave its name (with altered spelling) to manilla hemp (1814),
original source of manilla paper (1832). Said to be from Tagalog may there is + nila shrub of the
indigo family, but this would not be a native word.


manilla (1)

variant of Manila, especially in manilla paper (1832).


manilla (2)

ring, bracelet, from Spanish manilla, from Latin monilia, plural of monile collar, necklace (see
mane). Influenced in Spanish by Spanish mano hand.


manioc (n.)

1560s, from Tupi manioch, mandioca, name for the root of the cassava plant.


manipulable (adj.)

1859, from manipulate + -able. Related: Manipulability.


manipulate (v.)

1827, to handle skillfully by hand, a back-formation from manipulation. Of mental influence, from
1864. Financial sense is from 1870. In mid-20c., it served as a euphemism for masturbation. Related:
Manipulated; manipulating.


manipulation (n.)

c.1730, a method of digging ore, from French manipulation, from manipule handful (a pharmacists'
measure), from Latin manipulus handful, sheaf, bundle, from manus hand (see manual) + root of plere
to fill (see pleio-). Sense of skillful handling of objects is first recorded 1826; extended 1828 to
handling of persons as well as objects.


manipulative (adj.)

1816, in literal sense, from manipulate + -ive. Related: Manipulatively; manipulativeness.


manipulator (n.)

1804, from manipulate with Latin agent noun ending. Perhaps formed on model of French manipulateur
(1783).


Manitoba

Canadian province, named for the lake, which was named for an island in the lake; from Algonquian
manitou great spirit.


manitou (n.)

also manito, spirit, deity, supernatural being, 1690s, from a word found throughout the Algonquian
languages (Delaware manutoow, Ojibwa manidoo), first in English from Unami Delaware /manet:u/.


mankiller (n.)

also man-killer, early 15c., from man (n.) + killer. Old English words for this were manslaga,
manslieht.


mankind (n.)

the human race, c.1300, earlier man-kende (early 13c.), from man (n.) + kind (n.). Replaced Old
English mancynn human race. Also used occasionally in Middle English for male persons (late 14c.),
but otherwise preserving the original gender neutrality of man (n.). For menfolk, the male sex,
menkind (late 14c.) and menskind (1590s) have been used.


manliness (n.)

late 14c., from manly + -ness.


manly (adj.)

c.1200, human; characteristic of human beings, from man (n.) + -ly (1). Sense of possessing virtues
proper to a male person (resoluteness, steadfastness, reliability) is from early 13c. Meaning
masculine is attested from late 14c. Old English had werlic male, masculine, manly.


manmade (adj.)

also man-made, c.1718, from man (n.) + made. In early use typically of institutions, etc., and
opposed to what is natural or god-made. Of fibers, foodstuffs, etc., from mid-20c.


manna (n.)

Old English borrowing from Late Latin manna, from Greek manna, from Hebrew man, probably literally
substance exuded by the tamarisk tree, but used in Greek and Latin specifically with reference to
the substance miraculously supplied to the Children of Israel during their wandering in the
Wilderness (Ex. xvi:15). Meaning spiritual nourishment is attested from late 14c. Generalized sense
of something provided unexpectedly is from 1590s.


mannequin (n.)

1902, model to display clothes, from French mannequin (15c.), from Dutch manneken (see manikin). A
French form of the same word that yielded manikin, and sometimes mannequin was used in English in a
sense artificial man (especially in translations of Hugo). Originally of persons, in a sense where
we might use model.    A mannequin is a good-looking, admirably formed young lady, whose mission is
to dress herself in her employer's latest creations, and to impart to them the grace which only
perfect forms can give. Her grammar may be bad, and her temper worse, but she must have the chic the
Parisienne possesses, no matter whether she hails from the aristocratic Faubourg St. Germain or from
the Faubourg Montmartre. [The Bystander, Aug. 15, 1906]    Later (by 1939) of artificial model
figures to display clothing.


manner (n.)

c.1200, kind, sort, variety, from Anglo-French manere, Old French maniere fashion, method, manner,
way; appearance, bearing; custom (12c., Modern French mani&egrave;re), from Vulgar Latin *manaria
(source of Spanish manera, Portuguese maneira, Italian maniera), from fem. of Latin manuarius
belonging to the hand, from manus hand (see manual (adj.)). The French word also was borrowed by
Dutch (manier), German (manier), Swedish (maner).    Meaning customary practice is from c.1300.
Senses of way of doing something; a personal habit or way of doing; way of conducting oneself toward
others are from c.1300. Meaning specific nature, form, way something happens is mid-14c. Of
literature from 1660s. Most figurative meanings derive from the original sense method of handling
which was extended when the word was used to translate Latin modus method. Phrase manner of speaking
is recorded from 1530s. To the manner born (Hamlet I iv.15) generally is used incorrectly and means
destined by birth to be subject to the custom.


mannered (adj.)

mid-15c., having manners of one kind or another, from manner. Later, especially, well-mannered.
Compare mannerable well-mannered (late 15c.).


mannerism (n.)

excessive use of distinctive methods in art or literature, 1803, from manner + -ism. Meaning an
instance of mannerism, habitual peculiarity is from 1819. Related: Mannerisms.


mannerist (n.)

1690s in the artistic sense; see mannerism + -ist.


mannerly (adj.)

well-mannered, seemly, modest, late 14c., from manner (n.) + -ly (1). As an adverb, in accord with
custom; becomingly (mid-14c.); later in accord with good manners (c.1400). Related: Mannerliness.


manners (n.)

external behavior (especially polite behavior) in social intercourse, late 14c., plural of manner.
Under bad manners, as under graver faults, lies very commonly an overestimate of our special
individuality, as distinguished from our generic humanity. [Oliver W. Holmes, The Professor at the
Breakfast Table, 1858]  Earlier it meant moral character (early 13c.).


mannish (adj.)

Old English mennisc human, human-like, natural, from Proto-Germanic *manniska- (cognates: Old Saxon
mannisc, Old High German mennisc, Gothic mannisks), from *manna- (see man (n.)). In some cases a new
formation from man (n.) + -ish.    Sense of masculine is from late 14c.; in reference to women seen
as masculine, from late 14c. Of adult males (opposed to childish) from 1520s. Related: Mannishly;
mannishness. The Proto-Germanic adjective became, in some languages, a noun meaning human (such as
German Mensch), and in Old English mannish also was used as a noun mankind, folk, race, people.


mano a mano

1970s, Spanish, literally hand-to-hand.


manoeuvre

also manoeuver, alternative spelling of maneuver. Also see oe; -re. Related: manoeuvres; manoeuvred;
manoeuvring.


manometer (n.)

1730, from French manom&egrave;tre (1706), said to have been coined by French mathematician Pierre
Varignon (1654-1722) from Greek manos thin, rare; loose in texture, porous; scanty, few (see mono-)
+ -m&egrave;tre (see -meter). Related: Manometric.


manor (n.)

late 13c., mansion, habitation, country residence, principal house of an estate, from Anglo-French
maner, Old French manoir abode, home, dwelling place; manor (12c.), noun use of maneir to dwell,
from Latin manere to stay, abide, from PIE root *men- to remain (see mansion). As a unit of
territorial division in Britain and some American colonies (usually land held in demesne by a lord,
with tenants) it is attested from 1530s.


manorial (adj.)

1785, from manor + -al (1).


manpower (n.)

1855, from man (n.) + power (n.). Proposed in 1824 as a specific unit of measure of power.


manque (adj.)

1778, from French manqu&eacute; (fem. manqu&eacute;e), past participle of manquer to miss, be
lacking (16c.), from Italian mancare, from manco, from Latin mancus maimed, defective, from PIE
*man-ko- maimed in the hand, from root *man- hand (see manual (adj.)).


mansard

1734, from French mansarde, short for toit &agrave; la mansarde, a corrupt spelling, named for
French architect Nicholas Fran&ccedil;ois Mansart (1598-1666), who made use of them.


manse (n.)

late 15c., mansion house, from Medieval Latin mansus dwelling house; amount of land sufficient for a
family, noun use of masculine past participle of Latin manere to remain (see mansion).


manservant (n.)

also man-servant, 1550s, from man (n.) + servant.


mansion (n.)

mid-14c., chief residence of a lord, from Old French mansion stay, permanent abode, house,
habitation, home; mansion; state, situation (13c.), from Latin mansionem (nominative mansio) a
staying, a remaining, night quarters, station, noun of action from past participle stem of manere to
stay, abide, from PIE *men- to remain, wait for (cognates: Greek menein to remain, Persian mandan to
remain). Sense of any large and stately house is from 1510s. The word also was used in Middle
English as a stop or stage of a journey, hence probably astrological sense temporary home (late
14c.).


manslaughter (n.)

mid-14c.,  act, crime, or sin of killing another human being, in battle or not, from man (n.) +
slaughter (n.). Replaced Old English mannsl&aelig;ht (Anglian), mannslieht (West Saxon), from
sl&aelig;ht, slieht act of killing (see slay). Etymologically identical with homicide, but in legal
use usually distinguished from murder and restricted to simple homicide.


mansuetude (n.)

tameness, gentleness, mildness, late 14c., from Latin mansuetudo tameness, mildness, gentleness,
noun of state from past participle stem of mansuescere to tame, literally to accustom to the hand,
from manus hand (see manual (adj.)) + suescere to accustom, habituate, from PIE *swdh-sko-, from
*swedh- (see sodality), extended form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom).


manta (n.)

very large ray (also called devilfish), 1760, from Spanish manta blanket (which is attested in
English from 1748 in this sense, specifically in reference to a type of wrap or cloak worn by
Spaniards), from Late Latin mantum cloak, back-formation from Latin mantellum cloak (see mantle
(n.)). The ray so called for being broad and long like a quilt [Jorge Juan and Antonio de Ulloa, A
Voyage to South America].


manteau (n.)

cloak, mantle, 1670s, from French manteau, from Old French mantel (see mantle).


mantel (n.)

c.1200, short, loose, sleeveless cloak, variant of mantle (q.v.). Sense of movable shelter for
soldiers besieging a fort is from 1520s. Meaning timber or stone supporting masonry above a
fireplace first recorded 1510s, a shortened form of Middle English mantiltre mantletree (late 15c.).


mantelpiece (n.)

1680s, from mantel + piece (n.).


mantic (adj.)

1850, from Greek mantikos prophetic, oracular, of or for a soothsayer, from mantis prophet,
literally one touched by divine madness (see mantis). Related: Mantical (1580s).


manticore (n.)

fabulous monster with the body of a lion, head of a man, porcupine quills, and tail or sting of a
scorpion, c.1300, from Latin manticora, from Greek mantikhoras, corruption of martikhoras, perhaps
from Iranian compound *mar-tiya-khvara man-eater; first element represented by Old Persian maritya-
man (from PIE *mar-t-yo-, from *mer- to die, thus mortal, human; see mortal (adj.)); second element
by Old Persian kvar- to eat, from PIE root *swel- (1) to eat, drink (see swallow (v.)).


mantilla (n.)

type of large veil, 1717, from Spanish mantilla, diminutive of manta (see manta).


mantis (n.)

1650s, type of insect that holds its forelegs in a praying position (especially the praying mantis,
Mantis religiosa), Modern Latin, from Greek mantis, literally one who divines, a seer, prophet, from
mainesthai be inspired, related to menos passion, spirit (see mania). The insect so called for its
way of holding the forelimbs as if in prayer. Also used in Greek for some sort of grasshopper
(Theocritus).


mantissa (n.)

decimal part of a logarithm, 1865, from Latin mantisa a worthless addition, makeweight, perhaps a
Gaulish word introduced into Latin via Etruscan (compare Old Irish meit, Welsh maint size).


mantle (n.)

Old English mentel loose, sleeveless cloak, from Latin mantellum cloak (source of Italian mantello,
Old High German mantal, German Mantel, Old Norse m&#246;tull), perhaps from a Celtic source.
Reinforced and altered 12c. by cognate Old French mantel cloak, mantle; bedspread, cover (Modern
French manteau), also from the Latin source. Figurative sense that which enshrouds is from c.1300.
Allusive use for symbol of literary authority or artistic pre-eminence is from Elijah's mantle [2
Kings ii:13]. As a layer of the earth between the crust and core (though not originally
distinguished from the core) it is attested from 1940.


mantle (v.)

to wrap in a mantle, early 13c.; figurative use from mid-15c., from mantle (n.) or from Old French
manteler. Related: Mantled; mantling.


mantra (n.)

1808, that part of the Vedas which contains hymns, from Sanskrit mantra-s sacred message or text,
charm, spell, counsel, literally instrument of thought, related to manyate thinks, from PIE root
*men- to think (see mind (n.)). Sense of special word used for meditation is first recorded in
English 1956.


mantua (n.)

loose gown worn by women 17c.-18c., 1670s, from French manteau cloak, mantle, from Old French mantel
(see mantle); form influenced in English by Mantua, name of a city in Italy. Mantua-maker (1690s)
became the general early 19c. term for dressmaker.


manual (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin manualis of or belonging to the hand; that can be thrown by hand, from manus
hand, strength, power over; armed force; handwriting, from PIE *man- (2) hand (cognates: Old Norse
mund hand, Old English mund hand, protection, guardian, German Vormund guardian, Greek mane hand).


manual (n.)

early 15c., service book used by a priest, from Old French manuel handbook (also plow-handle), from
Late Latin manuale case or cover of a book, handbook, noun use of neuter of Latin manualis (see
manual (adj.)). Meaning a concise handbook of any sort is from 1530s.


manually (adv.)

late 15c., from manual (adj.) + -ly (2).


manubrium (n.)

handle-like process, 1848 in anatomy and zoology, from Latin manubrium handle, hilt, properly that
which is held in the hand, from manus hand (see manual (adj.)).


Manuel

masc. proper name, short for Emmanuel.


manufacture (n.)

1560s, something made by hand, from Middle French manufacture, from Medieval Latin *manufactura
(source of Italian manifattura, Spanish manufactura), from Latin manu, ablative of manus hand (see
manual (adj.)) + factura a working, from past participle stem of facere to perform (see factitious).
Sense of process of manufacturing first recorded c.1600. Related: Manufactures.


manufacture (v.)

1680s, from manufacture (n.). Related: Manufactured; manufacturing; manufacturable.


manufacturer (n.)

1719, worker in a manufacturing establishment, agent noun from manufacture (v.). Meaning one who
employs workers in manufacturing is from 1752.


manumission (n.)

c.1400, from Old French manumission freedom, emancipation, and directly from Latin manumissionem
(nominative manumissio) freeing of a slave, noun of action from past participle stem of manumittere
to set free, from the phrase manu mittere release from control, from manu, ablative of manus power
of a master, literally hand (see manual (adj.)) + mittere let go, release  (see mission).


manumit (v.)

early 15c., from Latin manumittere to release, set at liberty, emancipate, literally to send from
one's 'hand' (i.e. control); see manumission. Related: Manumitted; manumitting.


manure (v.)

c.1400, to cultivate land, also to hold property, from Anglo-French meynoverer, Old French manouvrer
to work with the hands, cultivate; carry out; make, produce, from Medieval Latin manuoperare (see
maneuver (n.)). Sense of work the earth led to put dung on the soil (1590s) and to the current noun
meaning dung spread as fertilizer, which is first attested 1540s. Until late 18c., however, the verb
still was used in a figurative sense of to cultivate the mind, train the mental powers.It is ... his
own painfull study ... that manures and improves his ministeriall gifts. [Milton, 1641]  Related:
Manured; manuring.


manure (n.)

dung or compost used as fertilizer, 1540s, see manure (v.).


manuscript (n.)

document or book written by hand, 1590s (adj.), c.1600 (n.), from Medieval Latin manuscriptum
document written by hand, from Latin manu scriptus written by hand, from manu, ablative of manus
hand (see manual (adj.)) + scriptus (neuter scriptum), past participle of scribere to write (see
script (n.)). Abbreviation is MS, plural MSS.


Manx

1798, earlier Manks (1620s), metathesized from Maniske (1570s) of the Isle of Man, from Old Norse
*manskr, from Man (from Old Irish Manu Isle of Man) + suffix -iskr ish. Manx cat, without a tail,
first attested 1843.


manxome

1871, a word invented by Lewis Carroll.


many (adj.)

Old English monig, manig many, many a, much, from Proto-Germanic *managaz (cognates: Old Saxon
manag, Swedish m&aring;ngen, Old Frisian manich, Dutch menig, Old High German manag, German manch,
Gothic manags), from PIE *menegh- copious (cognates: Old Church Slavonic munogu much, many, Old
Irish menicc, Welsh mynych frequent, Old Irish magham gift). Pronunciation altered by influence of
any (see manifold).


many (n.)

Old English menigu, from many (adj.). The many the multitude attested from 1520s. Compare also
Gothic managei multitude, crowd, Old High German managi large number, plurality, German Menge
multitude.


many-headed (adj.)

1580s; see many + head (n.).


Mao (adj.)

simple style of clothing based on dress in Communist China, 1967, from French, from name of Mao Tse-
tung (1893-1976), Chinese communist leader. Related: Maoism.


Maoist

1951 (adj.), 1963 (n.), in reference to the sort of Marxist-Leninist communist doctrines invented by
Chairman Mao Tse-tung of China.


Maori (n.)

Polynesian inhabitant of New Zealand, 1843, native name, said to mean of the usual kind.


map (n.)

1520s, shortening of Middle English mapemounde map of the world (late 14c.), and in part from Middle
French mappe, shortening of Old French mapemonde, both English and French words from Medieval Latin
mappa mundi map of the world; first element from Latin mappa napkin, cloth (on which maps were
drawn), tablecloth, signal-cloth, flag, said by Quintilian to be of Punic origin (compare Talmudic
Hebrew mappa, contraction of Mishnaic menaphah a fluttering banner, streaming cloth) + Latin mundi
of the world, from mundus universe, world (see mundane). Commonly used 17c. in a figurative sense of
epitome; detailed representation. To put (something) on the map bring it to wide attention is from
1913.


map (v.)

1580s, from map (n.). Related: Mapped, mapping. To map (something) out in the figurative sense is
from 1610s.


maple (n.)

c.1300, from Old English mapultreow maple tree, also mapolder, mapuldre, related to Old Norse
m&ouml;purr, Old Saxon mapulder, Middle Low German mapeldorn, from Proto-Germanic *maplo-. There
also was a Proto-Germanic *matlo- (cognates: Old High German mazzaltra, German maszholder), but the
connection and origins are mysterious. Formerly with adjectival form mapelin (early 15c.; Old
English mapuldern). Maple syrup attested from 1824, American English. The maple leaf is mentioned as
the emblem of Canada from 1850.


MapQuest

Internet mapping service, known by that name from 1996; acquired by AOL in 2000. As a verb, by 1997.


maquette (n.)

artist's preliminary model or sketch, 1903, from French maquette (18c.), from Italian macchietta
speck, diminutive of macchia spot, from macchiare to stain, from Latin maculare (see maculate). From
1893 as a French word in English.


maquis (n.)

1858, from French maquis undergrowth, shrub, especially in reference to the dense scrub of certain
Mediterranean coastal regions, long the haunts of outlaws and fugitives, from Corsican Italian
macchia spot, from Latin macula spot, stain; the landscapes so called from their mottled appearance.
Used figuratively of French resistance in World War II (1943). A member is a maquisard.


mar (v.)

Old English merran (Anglian), mierran (West Saxon) to waste, spoil, from Proto-Germanic *marzjan
(cognates: Old Frisian meria, Old High German marren to hinder, obstruct, Gothic marzjan to hinder,
offend), from PIE root *mers- to trouble, confuse (cognates: Sanskrit mrsyate forgets, neglects,
Lithuanian mirszati to forget). Related: Marred; marring.


maraca (n.)

gourd rattle used as a percussion instrument, 1813, from Portuguese, from Brazilian native name.


maracas

see maraca.


Maranatha

late 14c., a Bible word, from Greek maranatha, untranslated Semitic word in I Cor. xvi:22, where it
follows Greek anathema, and therefore has been taken as part of a phrase and used as a curse.
Usually assumed to be from Aramaic maran atha Our Lord has come, which would make the common usage
erroneous (see OED entry), but possibly it is a false transliteration of Hebrew mohoram atta you are
put under the ban, which would make more sense in the context. [Klein]


maraschino (n.)

1791, cherry liqueur, from Italian maraschino strong, sweet liqueur made from juice of the marasca
(a bitter black cherry), a shortening of amarasca, from amaro bitter, from Latin amarus sour, from
PIE root *om- raw, bitter. Maraschino cherry, one preserved in real or imitation maraschino, first
recorded 1820.


marasmus (n.)

wasting away of the body, 1650s, Modern Latin, from Greek marasmos a wasting away, withering, decay,
from marainein to quench, weaken, wither, from PIE root *mer- to rub away, harm (see morbid). Maras
(n.) evidently in the same sense is attested from mid-15c. Related: Marasmic.


Maratha

state in southwestern India, also in reference to the Scytho-Dravidian race living there, 1763
(Mharatta), from Marathi Maratha, corresponding to Sanskrit Maharastrah, literally great country,
from maha- great (from PIE root *meg- great; see magnate) + rastra kingdom, from raj to rule (see
rajah).


marathon (n.)

1896, marathon race, from story of Greek hero Pheidippides, who in 490 B.C.E. ran the 26 miles and
385 yards to Athens from the Plains of Marathon to tell of the allied Greek victory there over
Persian army. The original story (Herodotus) is that he ran from Athens to Sparta to seek aid, which
arrived too late to participate in the battle. Introduced as an athletic event in the 1896 revival
of the Olympic Games, based on a later, less likely story, and quickly extended to mean any very
long event or activity. Related: Marathoner (by 1912).


maraud (v.)

1690s, from French marauder (17c.), from Middle French maraud rascal (15c.), of unknown origin,
perhaps from French dialectal maraud tomcat, echoic of its cry. A word popularized in several
languages during the Thirty Years War (Spanish merodear, German marodiren, marodieren to maraud,
marodebruder straggler, deserter) by punning association with Count M&eacute;rode, imperialist
general. Related: Marauded; marauding.


marauder (n.)

1690s, agent noun from maraud (v.).


marble (n.)

type of stone much used in sculpture, monuments, etc., early 14c., by dissimilation from marbra
(mid-12c.), from Old French marbre (which itself underwent dissimilation of 2nd -r- to -l- in 14c.;
marbre persisted in English into early 15c.), from Latin marmor, from or cognate with Greek marmaros
marble, gleaming stone, of unknown origin, perhaps originally an adjective meaning sparkling, which
would connect it with marmairein to shine. The Latin word was taken directly into Old English as
marma. German Marmor is restored Latin from Old High German marmul. Meaning little balls of marble
used in a children's game is attested from 1690s.


marble (adj.)

late 14c., of marble, from marble (n.). Meaning mottled like marble is mid-15c. Marble cake is
attested from 1864.


marble (v.)

1590s (implied in marbled), to give (something) the appearance of marble, from marble (n.). Related:
Marbling.


marbles (n.)

children's game, from plural of marble (n.); first recorded by that name in 1709 but probably older
(it was known in 13c. German as tribekugeln) and originally played with small balls of polished
marble or alabaster, later clay; the modern glass ones with the colored swirl date from 1840s.
Meaning mental faculties, common sense is from 1927, American English slang, perhaps [OED] from
earlier slang marbles furniture, personal effects, 'the goods'  (1864, Hotten), a corrupt
translation of French meubles (plural) furniture (see furniture).


marcasite (n.)

crystalized pyrite, early 15c., from Medieval Latin marchasita, of obscure origin, perhaps via
Spanish, probably from Arabic, though OED doubts this. Perhaps ultimately from Persian marquashisha
[Klein]. This name has been used for a number of substances but mainly for iron pyrites and
especially for the crystalline forms used in the 18th century for ornaments. [Flood]


Marcella

fem. proper name, Latin, fem. of Marcellus.


Marcellus

masc. proper name, Latin, diminutive of Marcus.


marcescent (adj.)

withering, 1727, from Latin marcescentem (nominative marcescens), present participle of marcescere
to wither, languish, droop, decay, pine away, inchoative of marcere to wither, droop, be faint, from
PIE root *merk- to decay.


march (v.)

to walk with regular tread, early 15c., from Middle French marcher to march, walk, from Old French
marchier to stride, march, originally to trample, tread underfoot, perhaps from Frankish *markon or
some other Germanic source related to obsolete Middle English march (n.) borderland (see march
(n.2)). Or possibly from Gallo-Roman *marcare, from Latin marcus hammer, via notion of tramping the
feet. Meaning to cause to march is from 1590s. Related: Marched; marching. Marching band is attested
from 1852. Italian marciare, Spanish marchar are said to be from French.


march (n.2)

boundary, late 13c. (in reference to the borderlands beside Wales, rendering Old English Mercia),
from Old French marche boundary, frontier, from Frankish *marka or some other Germanic source
(compare Old High German marchon to mark out, delimit, German Mark boundary; see mark (n.1)). Now
obsolete. There was a verb in Middle English (c.1300), tohave a common boundary, from Old French
marchier border upon, lie alongside.


March

third month, c.1200, from Anglo-French marche, Old French marz, from Latin Martius (mensis) (month)
of Mars, from Mars (genitive Martis). Replaced Old English hre&eth;mona&thorn;, the first part of
which is of uncertain meaning, perhaps from hr&aelig;d quick, nimble, ready, active, alert, prompt.
For March hare, proverbial type of madness, see mad.


march (n.1)

act of marching, 1580s, from march (v.) or else from Middle French marche (n.), from marcher (v.).
The musical sense first attested 1570s, from notion of rhythmic drumbeat for marching. Transferred
sense of forward motion is from 1620s.


marchen (n.)

1871, German fairy or folk tale, from German M&auml;rchen, a story or tale, from Middle High German
merechyn short verse narrative, from Old High German mari news, tale, from Proto-Germanic
*m&aelig;rjo- renowned, famous, illustrious (source of Old English m&aelig;re) + diminutive suffix
-chen.


marchioness (n.)

16c., from Medieval Latin marchionissa, fem. of marchio marquis, from marca  (see marquis (n.)).


Marcia

fem. proper name, from Latin Marcia, fem. of Marcius, a Roman gens, related to Marcus (q.v.).


Marcionite (n.)

1540, early Christian sect, named for Gnostic Marcion of Sinope (c.140), who denied any connection
between the Old Testament and the New. They contrasted the barbaric and incompetent creator in the
Old Testament, who favored bandits and killers, with the higher god of Christ. They also emphasized
virginity and rejection of marriage. They flourished, especially in the East, until late 4c.


Marcomanni

name of a Teutonic tribe, from Latin Marcomanni, from a Germanic compound, literally men of the
border; first element cognate with Old High German mark, Old English mearc border (see march (n.2)).
For second element, see man (n.).


Marcus

masc. proper name, from Latin Marcus, Roman praenomen, traditionally said to be related to Mars,
Roman god of war.


Mardi Gras (n.)

1690s, from French, literally fat Tuesday, from mardi Tuesday (12c., from Latin Martis diem day of
the planet Mars; see Tuesday) + gras fat, from Latin crassus, thick. Day of eating and merrymaking
before the fasting season of Lent.


mare (n.1)

female horse, Old English mere (Mercian), myre (West Saxon), fem. of mearh horse, from Proto-
Germanic *markhjon- (cognates: Old Saxon meriha, Old Norse merr, Old Frisian merrie, Dutch merrie,
Old High German meriha, German M&auml;hre mare), said to be of Gaulish origin (compare Irish and
Gaelic marc, Welsh march, Breton marh horse). No known cognates beyond Germanic and Celtic. As the
name of a throw in wrestling, it is attested from c.1600. Mare's nest illusory discovery, excitement
over something which does not exist is from 1610s.


mare (n.2)

broad, dark areas of the moon, 1765, from Latin mare sea (see marine), applied to lunar features by
Galileo and used thus in 17c. Latin works. They originally were thought to be actual seas.


mare (n.3)

night-goblin, incubus, Old English mare incubus, nightmare, monster, from mera, m&aelig;re, from
Proto-Germanic *maron goblin (cognates: Middle Low German mar, Middle Dutch mare, Old High German
mara, German Mahr incubus, Old Norse mara nightmare, incubus), from PIE *mora- incubus (cognates:
first element in Old Irish Morrigain demoness of the corpses, literally queen of the nightmare, also
Bulgarian, Serbian mora, Czech mura, Polish zmora incubus; French cauchemar, with first element from
Old French caucher to trample), from root *mer- to rub away, harm (see morbid).


Margaret

fem. proper name (c.1300), from Old French Margaret (French Marguerite), from Late Latin Margarita,
female name, literally pearl, from Greek margarites (lithos) pearl, of unknown origin, probably
adopted from some Oriental language [OED]; compare Sanskrit manjari cluster of flowers, also said by
Indian linguists to mean pearl, cognate with manju beautiful. Arabic marjan probably is from Greek,
via Syraic marganitha. The word was widely perverted in Germanic languages by folk-etymology, for
example Old English meregrot, which has been altered to mean literally sea-pebble.


margaric (adj.)

1819, from French margarique (Chevreul), from Greek margaron pearl + -ic. Obsolete in science.


margarin (n.)

1836, from French margarine, a chemical term given to a fatty substance obtained from animal and
vegetable oil, coined by French chemist Michel Eug&egrave;ne Chevreul (1786-1889) in 1813 from
(acide) margarique margaric (acid); literally pearly, from Greek margarites pearl (see Margaret). So
called for the luster of the crystals. Now discarded in this sense as a chemical term, but preserved
in margarine.


margarine (n.)

butter substitute, 1873, from French margarine (see margarin). Invented 1869 by French scientist
Hippolyte M&egrave;ge-Mouries and made in part from edible fats and oils.    The enterprising
merchant of Paris, who sells Margarine as a substitute for Butter, and does not sell his customers
by selling it as Butter, and at Butter's value, has very likely found honesty to be the best policy.
That policy might perhaps be adopted with advantage by an enterprising British Cheesemonger. [Punch,
Feb. 21, 1874]


Margarita (n.)

cocktail made with tequila, 1963, from the fem. proper name, the Spanish form of Margaret. Earlier a
Spanish wine (1920).


margarite (n.)

a pearl, late Old English, from Late Latin margarita (see Margaret). Figuratively, that which is
precious or excellent, a priceless quality or attribute; also used as an epithet for Christ, Mary,
etc., late 13c. Also margerie (mid-14c.).


marge (n.)

edge, border, 1560s, now chiefly poetic, shortening of margin (n.).


Margery

fem. proper name, from Old French Margerie, related to Late Latin margarita pearl (see Margaret).


margin (n.)

mid-14c., edge of a sea or lake; late 14c., space between a block of text and the edge of a page,
from Latin marginem (nominative margo) edge, brink, border, margin, from PIE *merg- edge, border,
boundary (see mark (n.1)). General sense of boundary space; rim or edge of anything is from late
14c. Meaning comfort allowance, cushion is from 1851; margin of safety first recorded 1888. Stock
market sense of sum deposited with a broker to cover risk of loss is from 1848. Related: Margins.


margin (v.)

c.1600, to furnish with marginal notes, from margin (n.). From 1715 as to furnish with a margin.


marginal (adj.)

1570s, written on the margin, from Medieval Latin marginalis, from Latin margo (see  margin). Sense
of of little effect or importance first recorded 1887. Related: Marginally.


marginalia (n.)

1832, from Latin marginalia, neuter plural of adjective marginalis marginal, from marginis (see
margin).


marginalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of marginalize (q.v.); for suffix, see -ize. Related:
marginalisation; marginalised; marginalising.


marginality (n.)

1849, from marginal + -ity.


marginalization (n.)

1974, from marginalize + -ation.


marginalize (v.)

1832, to make marginal notes, from marginal + -ize. The meaning force into a position of
powerlessness attested by 1929. Related: Marginalized; marginalizing.


margrave (n.)

military governor of a German border province, 1550s, from Middle Dutch markgrave (Dutch markgraaf),
literally count of the border, from Old High German marcgravo; second element from graf count, earl
(Old High German gravo, gravjo), from West Germanic *grafa a designation of rank, possibly borrowed
from Greek grapheus scribe. For first element see mark (n.1). Later a hereditary title under the
Holy Roman Empire. His wife was a margravine.


marguerite (n.)

oxeye daisy, 1866, from French marguerite (see Margaret). According to French etymologists, this use
of F. marguerite is not from the personal name, but comes directly from the sense 'pearl.'  [OED] In
Middle English, margaret a daisy is attested from early 15c.


Maria

fem. proper name, from Late Latin; see Mary.


mariachi (n.)

Mexican strolling musical band, 1941, from Mexican Spanish, from French mariage marriage (see
marriage), so called because such bands performed at wedding celebrations. As an adjective by 1967.


Marian (adj.)

of Mary, 1701, referring to the Virgin; also (c.1600) in reference to the reign of Mary Queen of
England (1553-58); and (1902) to Mary Queen of Scots (1542-1587).


Marian

fem. proper name, collateral form of Marion, a diminutive of French Marie (see Mary), but often
taken for a compound of Mary and Anne.


Marianne

fem. proper name, from French, a variant of Marian; sometimes anglicized as Mary Anne. Name of a
republican secret society formed in France in 1851, hence personification of the French Republic.


Marie Antoinette

queen consort of Louis XVI (1755-1793); as a decorative style, from 1925.


marigold (n.)

late 14c., marygolde, from Mary (probably a reference to the Virgin) + gold, for color. The Old
English name for the flower was simply golde.


marijuana (n.)

1918, altered by influence of Spanish proper name Maria Juana Mary Jane from mariguan (1894), from
Mexican Spanish marihuana, of uncertain origin.Marijuana ... makes you sensitive. Courtesy has a
great deal to do with being sensitive. Unfortunately marijuana makes you the kind of sensitive where
you insist on everyone listening to the drum solo in Iron Butterfly's 'In-a-Gadda-Da-Vida' fifty or
sixty times. [P.J. O'Rourke, Modern Manners, 1983]


Marilyn

fem. proper name, a diminutive of Mary.


marimba (n.)

1704, from an African language, probably Bantu (compare Kimbundu and Swahili marimba, malimba, name
of a xylophone-like instrument).


marina (n.)

1805, a promenade by the sea, from Spanish or Italian marina shore, coast, from Latin marinus (see
marine (adj.)). Meaning dock or basin with moorings for yachts and small craft is 1935, American
English.


marinade (n.)

1704, from French marinade spiced vinegar or brine for pickling, from mariner to pickle (see
marinate). As a verb from 1680s. Related: Marinaded; marinading.


marinate (v.)

1640s, from French mariner to pickle in (sea) brine, from Old French marin (adj.) of the sea, from
Latin marinus (see marine (adj.)). Related: Marinated; marinating.


marine (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to the sea, from Middle French marin, from Old French marin of the sea,
maritime, from Latin marinus of the sea, from mare sea, the sea, seawater, from PIE *mori- body of
water, lake (see mere (n.)). The Old English word was s&aelig;lic.


marine (n.)

14c., seacoast; see marine (adj.). Meaning collective shipping of a country is from 1660s. Meaning
soldier who serves on a ship is from 1670s, a separate borrowing from French marine, from the French
adjective. Phrase tell that to the marines (1806) originally was the first half of a retort
expressing skepticism:    Upon my soul, sir, answered the lieutenant, when I thought she scorned my
passion, I wept like a child.    Belay there! cried the captain; you may tell that to the marines,
but I'll be d----d if the sailors will believe it. [John Moore, The Post-Captain; or, the Wooden
Walls Well Manned, 1805]    The book, a rollicking sea romance/adventure novel, was popular in its
day and the remark is a recurring punch line in it (repeated at least four times). It was written by
naval veteran John Davis (1774-1854) but published under the name John Moore. Walsh records that,
The marines are among the 'jolly' jack-tars a proverbially gullible lot, capable of swallowing any
yarn, in size varying from a yawl-boat to a full-rigged frigate.


mariner (n.)

mid-13c., from Anglo-French mariner, Old French marinier seaman, sailor (12c.), from Medieval Latin
marinarius sailor, from Latin marinus of the sea (see marine). Earlier and long more common than
sailor. A sailor also could be a brimgeist in Old English.


Mariolatry (n.)

worship of the Virgin Mary, 1610s, from Mary + -latry, with connective element -o-.


Marion

fem. proper name, French, a diminutive of Marie (see Mary).


marionette (n.)

puppet worked by strings, c.1620, literally little little Mary, from French marionette (16c.),
diminutive of Old French mariole figurine, idol, picture of the Virgin Mary, diminutive of Marie
(see Mary).


marish (n.)

a marsh, early 14c., mares, from Old French marois marshland, bog (12c., Modern French marais), from
Frankish *marisk or some other Germanic source akin to marsh.


marital (adj.)

c.1600, from French maritale and directly from Latin maritalis of or belonging to married people,
from maritus married man, husband (see marry).


maritime (adj.)

1540s, of or pertaining to the sea, from Middle French maritime (16c.) or directly from Latin
maritimus of the sea, near the sea, from mare (genitive maris) sea (see mere (n.)) + Latin ending
-timus, originally a superlative suffix (compare intimus inmost, ultimus last), here denoting close
association with. Maritimes seacoast regions of a country is from 1590s; specifically of the
southeasternmost provinces of Canada by 1926.


Marius

masc. proper name, from Latin Marius, name of a Roman gens.


marjoram (n.)

late 14c., from Old French majorane (13c., Modern French marjolaine), from Medieval Latin maiorana,
of uncertain origin, probably ultimately from India (compare Sanskrit maruva- marjoram), with form
influenced by Latin major greater.


mark (n.1)

trace, impression, Old English mearc (West Saxon), merc (Mercian) boundary, sign, limit, mark, from
Proto-Germanic *marko (cognates: Old Norse merki boundary, sign, m&ouml;rk forest, which often
marked a frontier; Old Frisian merke, Gothic marka boundary, frontier, Dutch merk mark, brand,
German Mark boundary, boundary land), from PIE *merg- edge, boundary, border (cognates: Latin margo
margin; Avestan mareza- border, Old Irish mruig, Irish bruig borderland, Welsh bro district).    The
primary sense is probably boundary, which had evolved by Old English through sign of a boundary,
through sign in general, then to impression or trace forming a sign. Meaning any visible trace or
impression first recorded c.1200. Sense of line drawn to indicate starting point of a race (as in on
your marks ...) first attested 1887. The Middle English sense of target (c.1200) is the notion in
marksman and slang sense victim of a swindle (1883). The notion of sign, token is behind the meaning
numerical award given by a teacher (1829). Influenced by Scandinavian cognates.


mark (v.)

to put a mark on, Old English mearcian (West Saxon), merciga (Anglian) to trace out boundaries, from
Proto-Germanic *markojan (cognates: Old Norse merkja, Old Saxon markon, Old Frisian merkia, Old High
German marchon, German merken to mark, note, Middle Dutch and Dutch merken), from the root of mark
(n.1).    Influenced by Scandinavian cognates. Meaning to have a mark is from c.1400; that of to
notice, observe is late 14c. Meaning to put a numerical price on an object for sale led to verbal
phrase mark down (1859). Mark time (1833) is from military drill. Related: Marked; marking. Old
French merchier to mark, note, stamp, brand is a Germanic loan-word.


mark (n.2)

unit of money or weight, late Old English marc, a unit of weight (chiefly for gold or silver) equal
to about eight ounces, probably from Old Norse m&ouml;rk unit of weight, cognate with German Mark,
probably ultimately a derivative of mark (n.1), perhaps in sense of imprinted weight or coin. Used
from 18c. in reference to various continental coinages, especially. the silver coin of Germany first
issued 1875.


Mark

masc. proper name, variant of Marcus (q.v.). Among the top 10 names given to boy babies born in the
U.S. between 1955 and 1970.


mark-down (n.)

1880, from expression mark down reduce in price (see mark (v.)).


marked (adj.)

having a mark, Old English gemearcodan (see mark (v.)). Meaning clearly defined (pronounced as two
syllables) is from 1795. Related: Markedly. Marked man one who is watched with hostile intent is
from 1769.


markedly (adv.)

1799, from marked + -ly (2). A favorite 19th c. adverb [OED].


marker (n.)

Old English mearcere writer, notary (glossing Latin notarius clerk), literally one who marks, agent
noun from mark (v). Not found again until late 15c., hence modern use is perhaps a separate
formation. Meaning monument stone is from 1888. Meaning felt-tipped marker pen is from 1951, so
called because their purpose was to highlight text.


market (n.)

early 12c., a meeting at a fixed time for buying and selling livestock and provisions, from Old
North French market marketplace, trade, commerce (Old French marchiet, Modern French march&eacute;),
from Latin mercatus trading, buying and selling, trade, market (source of Italian mercato, Spanish
mercado, Dutch markt, German Markt), from past participle of mercari to trade, deal in, buy, from
merx (genitive mercis) wares, merchandise, from Italic root *merk-, possibly from Etruscan,
referring to various aspects of economics. Meaning public building or space where markets are held
first attested mid-13c. Sense of sales, as controlled by supply and demand is from 1680s. Market
value (1690s) first attested in writings of John Locke. Market economy is from 1948; market research
is from 1921.


market (v.)

1630s, from market (n.). Related: Marketed; marketing.


marketable (adj.)

c.1600, from market (v.) + -able. Related: Marketably; marketability.


marketing (n.)

1560s, buying and selling, verbal noun from market (v.). Meaning produce bought at a market is from
1701. The business sense, process of moving goods from producer to consumer with emphasis on
advertising and sales, is attested by 1897.


marketplace (n.)

late 14c., place where a market is held, from market (n.) + place (n.). Figurative use is from 1942.


marking (n.)

Old English mearcung action of making marks, branding; mark, pattern of marks, characteristic;
constellation, verbal noun from mark (v.). Related: Markings.


marksman (n.)

1650s, from mark (n.1) in Middle English sense of target + man; with genitive -s. Earlier form was
markman (1570s).


marksmanship (n.)

1823, from marksman + -ship.


markup (n.)

also mark up, mark-up, amount added by a retailer to cover overhead and provide profit, 1899; see
mark (v.).


marl (n.)

clayey soil used for fertilizer, late 14c., from Old French marle (Modern French marne), from Late
Latin marglia, diminutive of Latin marga marl, which is said by Pliny to be a Gaulish word, but
modern Celtic cognates are considered to be borrowed from English or French. As a verb by late 14c.
Medieval Latin margila is the source of Dutch mergel, German Mergel.


marlin (n.)

large marine game-fish, 1917, shortening of marlinspike fish (1907), from marlinspike, name of a
pointed iron tool used by sailors (see marlinspike). The fish was so called from the shape of its
elongated upper jaw.


marlinspike (n.)

pointed iron tool used by sailors to separate strands of rope, 1620s, from spike (n.) + Middle Dutch
marlijn small cord, from marlen to fasten or secure (a sail), probably frequentative of Middle Dutch
maren to tie, moor (see moor (v.)). Influenced in Dutch by Dutch lijn line (n.).


marmalade (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French marmelade, from Portuguese marmelada quince jelly, marmalade, from
marmelo quince, by dissimilation from Latin melimelum sweet apple, originally fruit of an apple tree
grafted onto quince, from Greek melimelon, from meli honey (see Melissa) + melon apple (see malic).
Extended 17c. to preserve made from citrus fruit.


marmoreal (adj.)

resembling marble, 1798, from Latin marmoreus of marble, from marmor (see marble) + -al (1).


marmoset (n.)

small monkey, late 14c., from Old French marmoset grotesque figurine; fool, jester (late 13c.),
perhaps a variant of marmote long-tailed monkey, ape, then, as a term of endearment, little child;
said to be from marmonner, marmotter to mutter, mumble, probably of imitative origin. Some French
authorities suggest a derivation of marmoset from marmor marble, as if little marble figurine.


marmot (n.)

Alpine rodent, c.1600, from French marmotte, from Romansch (Swiss) murmont (assimilated to Old
French marmote monkey), from Latin murem montis mountain mouse.


Maronite

1510s, from Late Latin Maronita, from Maron, name of the founder. A sect of Syrian Christians (4c.),
originally Monothelites, subsequently (1216) united with the Catholic Church.


maroon (n.)

very dark reddish-brown color, 1791, from French couleur marron, the color of a marron chestnut, the
large sweet chestnut of southern Europe (maroon in that sense was used in English from 1590s), from
dialect of Lyons, ultimately from a word in a pre-Roman language, perhaps Ligurian; or from Greek
maraon sweet chestnut.


maroon (v.)

put ashore on a desolate island or coast, 1724 (implied in marooning), earlier to be lost in the
wild (1690s); from maron (n.) fugitive black slave in the jungles of W.Indies and Dutch Guyana
(1660s), earlier symeron (1620s), from French marron, said to be a corruption of Spanish cimmaron
wild, untamed, from Old Spanish cimarra thicket, probably from cima summit, top (from Latin cyma
sprout), with a notion of living wild in the mountains. Related: Marooned.


marque (n.)

seizure by way of reprisal, mid-15c., in letters of marque official permission to capture enemy
merchant ships, from Anglo-French mark (mid-14c.), via Old French from Old Proven&ccedil;al marca
reprisal, from marcar seize as a pledge, mark, probably from a Germanic source (compare Old High
German marchon delimit, mark; see mark (n.1)), but the sense evolution is difficult.


marquee (n.)

1680s, large tent, from French marquise (mistaken in English as a plural) linen canopy placed over
an officer's tent to distinguish it from others,'  fem. of marquis (see marquis), and perhaps
indicating a place suitable for a marquis. Sense of canopy over the entrance to a hotel or theater,
etc. first recorded 1912 in American English.


marquetry (n.)

1560s, from French marqueterie inlaid work, from marqueter to checker (14c.), frequentative of
marquer, from marque (see marque).


marquis (n.)

also marquess, c.1300, title of nobility, from Old French marchis, literally ruler of a border area,
from Old French marche frontier, from Medieval Latin marca frontier, frontier territory (see march
(n.1)). Originally the ruler of border territories in various European regions (such as Italian
marchese, Spanish marqu&eacute;s); later a mere title of rank, below duke and above count. Related:
Marquisate.


Marrano (n.)

Jew or Moor converted to Christianity, 1580s, from Spanish, probably literally pig, swine, an
expression of contempt, from Arabic muharram forbidden thing (eating of pork is forbidden by Muslim
and Jewish religious law), from haruma was forbidden (see harem).


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


marriageable (adj.)

1550s, from marriage + -able. Earlier was mariable (mid-15c.). Related: Marriageability.


married (adj.)

formally wedded, late 14c., from past participle of marry (v.).


marrow (n.)

late 14c., from Old English mearg marrow, earlier m&aelig;rh, from Proto-Germanic *mazga- (cognates:
Old Norse mergr, Old Saxon marg, Old Frisian merg, Middle Dutch march, Dutch merg, Old High German
marg, German Mark marrow), from PIE *mozgo- marrow (cognates: Sanskrit majjan-, Avestan mazga-
marrow, Old Church Slavonic mozgu, Lithuanian smagenes brain). Figurative sense of inmost or central
part is attested from c.1400.


marrowbone (n.)

late 14c., from marrow + bone (n.). A poetic Old English word for bone was mearhcofa marrow-chamber.


marrowsky (n.)

1863, said to derive from the proper name of a Polish count. A deformed language in which the
initial consonants of contiguous words are transposed [OED]. Compare spoonerism.


marry (v.)

c.1300, to give (offspring) in marriage, from Old French marier to get married; to marry off, give
in marriage; to bring together in marriage, from Latin maritare to wed, marry, give in marriage
(source of Italian maritare, Spanish and Portuguese maridar), from maritus (n.) married man,
husband, of uncertain origin, originally a past participle, perhaps ultimately from provided with a
*mari, a young woman, from PIE root *mari- young wife, young woman, akin to *meryo- young man
(source of Sanskrit marya- young man, suitor).    Meaning to get married, join (with someone) in
matrimony is early 14c. in English, as is that of to take in marriage. Said from 1520s of the
priest, etc., who performs the rite. Figurative use from early 15c. Related: Married; marrying.
Phrase the marrying kind, describing one inclined toward marriage and almost always used with a
negative, is attested by 1824, probably short for marrying kind of men, which is from a popular 1756
essay by Chesterfield.    In some Indo-European languages there were distinct marry verbs for men
and women, though some of these have become generalized. Compare Latin ducere uxorem (of men),
literally to lead a wife; nubere (of women), perhaps originally to veil [Buck]. Also compare Old
Norse kvangask (of men) from kvan wife (see quean), so, take a wife; giptask (of women), from gipta,
a specialized use of to give (see gift (n.)), so, to be given.


marry (interj.)

a common oath in the Middle Ages, mid-14c., now obsolete, a corruption of the name of the Virgin
Mary.


Mars

Roman god of war, also the name of the bright red planet, late 14c., from Latin Mars (stem
*Mawort-), the Roman god of war, of unknown origin, apparently from earlier Mavors, related to Oscan
Mamers. According to Watkins the Latin word is from *Mawort- name of an Italic deity who became the
god of war at Rome .... He also had agricultural attributes, and might ultimately have been a
Spring-Dionysus. The planet was so named by the Romans, no doubt for its blood-like color. The
Greeks also called the planet Pyroeis the fiery.


Marsala (n.)

kind of wine, 1806, named for seaport town on the west coast of Sicily, which is said to be from
Arabic Mirsa-llahi, literally the Port of God.


Marseilles

city in southern France, from French Marseille, ultimately from Greek Massilia, probably from a pre-
Latin language of Italy, perhaps Ligurian mas spring.


Marsellaise (n.)

French national republican song, 1826, from fem. of adjective Marseillais of Marseilles. The tune
originally was War Song for the Rhine Army, composed (for the Strasbourg volunteers) by royalist
officer Capt. Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle (1760-1836); current name is because it was sung
enthusiastically by soldiers from Marseilles advancing on the Tuileries, Aug. 10, 1792.


marsh (n.)

Old English mersc, merisc marsh, swamp, from Proto-Germanic *marisko (cognates: Old Frisian and Old
Saxon marsk marsh, Middle Dutch mersch, Dutch mars, German Marsch, Danish marsk), probably from
Proto-Germanic *mari- sea (see mere (n.)).


marshal (n.)

early 13c. as a surname; mid-13c. as high officer of the royal court; from Old French mareschal
commanding officer of an army; officer in charge of a household (Modern French mar&#233;chal),
originally stable officer, horse tender, groom (Frankish Latin mariscaluis) from Frankish *marhskalk
or a similar Germanic word, literally horse-servant (compare Old High German marahscalc groom,
Middle Dutch maerschalc), from Proto-Germanic *markhaz horse (see mare (n.1)) + *skalkaz servant
(source of Old English scealc servant, retainer, member of a crew, Dutch schalk rogue, wag, Gothic
skalks servant).    Cognate with Old English hors&thorn;egn. From c.1300 as stable officer; early
14c. as military commander, general in the army. For development history, compare constable. Also
from Germanic are Italian scalco steward, Spanish mariscal marshal.


marshal (v.)

early 15c., to tend (horses), from marshal (n.). Meaning to arrange, place in order is from mid-
15c.; that of to arrange for fighting is from mid-15c. Figurative use by 1690s. Related: Marshaled;
marshaling.


Marshall plan

1947, named for its initiator, George C. Marshall (1880-1959), U.S. Secretary of State 1947-49.


marshland (n.)

Old English mersclond; see marsh + land (n.).


marshmallow (n.)

Old English mersc-mealwe kind of mallow plant (Althea officinalis) which grows near salt marshes;
from marsh + mallow. The confection (so called from 1877) originally was made from paste from the
roots of this plant. The Greek word for the plant, althaea, is from althein to heal.


marshy (adj.)

late 14c., from marsh + -y (2). Related: Marshiness.


marsupial (adj.)

1690s, with -al (1) + Modern Latin marsupialis having a pouch, coined from Late Latin marsupium
pouch, purse (Classical Latin marsuppium), from Greek marsipion, diminutive of marsipos bag, pouch,
of foreign, possibly oriental, origin. As a noun from 1805.


mart (n.)

market, gathering for buying and selling, mid-15c., from Middle Dutch markt, from Latin mercatus
trade (see market).


marten (n.)

mid-13c., skin or fur of the marten, from Old French martrine marten fur, noun use of fem. adjective
martrin of or pertaining to the marten, from martre marten, from Frankish *martar or some other
Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *marthuz (cognates: Old Saxon marthrin of or pertaining to the
marten, Old Frisian merth, Middle Dutch maerter, Dutch marter, Old High German mardar, German
Marder, Old English mear&thorn;, Old Norse m&ouml;r&eth;r marten), probably from PIE *martu- bride,
perhaps on some fancied resemblance, or else a Germanic euphemism for the real name of the animal,
which might have been taboo.    In Middle English the animal itself typically was called marter,
directly from Old French martre, but marten took over this sense in English c.1400.


Martha

fem. proper name, from Aramaic Maretha, literally lady, mistress, fem. of mar, mara lord, master. As
the type name of one concerned with domestic affairs, it is from Luke x:40, 41. Martha's Vineyard
discovered 1602 by English explorer Gabriel Archer and apparently named by him, but the identity of
the Martha he had in mind is unknown now.


martial (adj.)

late 14c., warlike, from Latin martialis of Mars or war, from Mars (genitive Martis), Roman god of
war; see Mars. Related: Martially. Martial law, military rule over civilians, first recorded 1530s.


martial arts (n.)

1909, translating Japanese bujutsu; see martial.


Martian (adj.)

late 14c., marcien of the planet Mars (originally in reference to astrological influence), from
Latin Martius sacred to Mars; pertaining to the planet Mars, from Mars (genitive Martis). The noun
meaning an inhabitant of the planet Mars is attested from 1883.


martin (n.)

kind of swallow-like bird (Chelidon urbica), 1580s, from Scot. martoune (mid-15c.), from Middle
French martin, from the masc. proper name in some sense. Writers in 17c. said it was named for St.
Martin of Tours (d. 397 C.E.), whose festival day (Martinmas) is Nov. 11, about the time the birds
depart.


Martin

masc. proper name, from Latin Martinus, derivative of Mars (genitive Martis), Roman god of war (see
Mars).


martinet (n.)

1670s, system of strict discipline, from the name of Jean Martinet (killed at siege of Duisburg,
1672), lieutenant colonel in the R&#233;giment du Roi, who in 1668 was appointed inspector general
of the infantry. It was his responsibility to introduce and enforce the drill and strict discipline
of the French regiment of Guards across the whole infantry. [Olaf van Minwegen, The Dutch Army and
the Military Revolutions 1588-1688, 2006] The meaning an officer who is a stickler for strict
discipline is first attested 1779 in English. The surname is a diminutive of Latin Martinus (see
Martin).


martingale (n.)

1580s, from Middle French martingale (16c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Proven&ccedil;al
martegalo, fem. of martegal inhabitant of Martigue, making the etymological sense worn in the manner
of the people of Martigue; or perhaps from Spanish almartaga, word for a sort of halter or rein,
from Arabic almartak, in which case it might have been influenced in form by the Proven&#231;al
word.


martini (n.)

1891, short for Martini cocktail (1886), perhaps from Martini &amp; Rossi, Italian firm that makes
vermouth (an ingredient of the drink); the firm was in existence then by that name, but it is not
specified among the ingredients in the earliest recipes (such as Harry Johnson's Bartender's Manual,
1888). Another theory holds that it is a corruption of Martinez, California, town where the drink
was said to have originated. See discussion in Lowell Edmunds' book Martini, Straight Up (1998).


Martinmass

from St. Martin, 4c. bishop of Tours, whose feast was Nov. 11, + mass (n.2).


martyr (n.)

Old English martyr, from Late Latin martyr, from Doric Greek martyr, earlier martys (genitive
martyros), in Christian use martyr, literally witness, probably related to mermera care, trouble,
from mermairein be anxious or thoughtful, from PIE *(s)mrtu- (cognates: Sanskrit smarati remember,
Latin memor mindful; see memory).    Adopted directly into most Germanic languages, but Norse
substituted native formation pislarvattr, literally torture-witness. General sense of constant
sufferer is from 1550s. Martyr complex exaggerated desire for self-sacrifice is attested from 1920.


martyr (v.)

Old English martyrian, from martyr (see martyr (n.)). Middle English also had a verb martyrize.


martyrdom (n.)

Old English martyrdom; see martyr (n.) + -dom.


martyrology (n.)

1590s, a native formation from martyr (n.) + -ology, or else from Church Latin martyrologium, from
Ecclesiastical Greek martyrologicon.


marvel (n.)

c.1300, miracle, also wonderful story or legend, from Old French merveille a wonder, surprise,
miracle, from Vulgar Latin *miribilia (also source of Spanish maravilla, Portuguese maravilha,
Italian maraviglia), altered from Latin mirabilia wonderful things, from neuter plural of mirabilis
wonderful, marvelous, extraordinary; strange, singular, from mirari to wonder at, from mirus
wonderful (see smile). A neuter plural treated in Vulgar Latin as a feminine singular. Related:
Marvels.


marvel (v.)

c.1300, to be filled with wonder, from Old French merveillier to wonder at, be astonished, from
merveille (see marvel (n.)). Related: Marveled; marveling.


marvellous (adj.)

see marvelous.


marvelous (adj.)

c.1300, causing wonder, from Old French merveillos marvelous, wonderful (Modern French merveilleux),
from merveille (see marvel (n.)). Weakened sense of splendid, very nice is from 1924. Related:
Marvelously.


Marxism (n.)

1885, probably immediately from French marxisme; see Marxist + -ism. From 1884 as Karl Marxism.


Marxist (n.)

1886, devotee of the teachings of Marx, from French marxiste, from Karl Marx (1818-1883), German
political theorist. The adjective is attested from 1884. The adjectival form Marxian (1940)
sometimes is used (by Groucho, among others) to distinguish the U.S. vaudeville team from the German
communist.


Mary

fem. proper name, Old English Maria, Marie, mother of Jesus, from Latin Maria, from Greek Mariam,
Maria, from Aramaic Maryam, from Hebrew Miryam, sister of Moses (Ex. xv.), of unknown origin, said
to mean literally rebellion. Nursery rhyme Mary had a Little Lamb written early 1830 by Sarah
Josepha Hale of Boston; published Sept. 1830 in Juvenile Miscellany, a popular magazine for
children. Mary Jane is 1921 as the proprietary name of a kind of low-heeled shoe worn chiefly by
young girls, 1928 as slang for marijuana.


Maryland

U.S. state, named for Henrietta Maria (1609-1669), wife of English King Charles I. Related:
Marylander.


marzipan (n.)

1901 (in modern use; earlier march payne, late 15c., from French or Dutch), from German Marzipan,
from Italian marzapane candy box, from Medieval Latin matapanus small box, earlier, coin bearing
image of seated Christ (altered in Italian by folk etymology as though from Latin Marci panis bread
of Mark), of uncertain origin. One suggestion is that this is from Arabic mawthaban king who sits
still. Nobody seems to quite accept this, but nobody has a better idea. The Medieval Latin word also
is the source of Spanish marzapan, French massepain.


mascara (n.)

cosmetic for coloring eyelashes, 1883, mascaro (modern form from 1922), from Spanish mascara a
stain, a mask, from same source as Italian maschera mask (see mask (v.)).


mascot (n.)

talisman, charm, 1881, from provincial French mascotte sorcerer's charm, 'faerie friend,' good luck
piece (19c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from or related to Proven&ccedil;al mascoto sorcery,
fetish (a Narbonnese manuscript of 1233 has mascotto procuress, enchantment, bewitchment in
gambling), from masco witch, from Old Proven&ccedil;al masca, itself of unknown origin, perhaps from
Medieval Latin masca mask, specter, nightmare (see mask (n.)). Popularized by French composer Edmond
Audran's 1880 comic operetta La Mascotte, about a household fairy who gives luck to an Italian
peasant, performed in a toned-down translation in England from fall 1881.


masculate (v.)

to make masculine, 1620s, from Latin masculatus, from masculus (see masculine). Related: Masculated;
masculating. Also in same sense is masculinize (1912).


masculine (adj.)

mid-14c., belonging to the male grammatical gender; late 14c., of men, male, from Old French
masculin of the male sex (12c.), from Latin masculinus male, of masculine gender, from masculus
male, masculine; worthy of a man, diminutive of mas (genitive maris) male person, male, of unknown
origin. Meaning having the appropriate qualities of the male sex, manly, virile, powerful is first
attested 1620s. As a noun from mid-15c.


masculinity (n.)

1748; see masculine + -ity. Earlier in same sense was masculineness (1660s).


maser (n.)

1955, acronym from microwave amplification (by) stimulated emission (of) radiation.


mash (n.)

soft mixture, late Old English *masc (in masc-wyrt mash-wort, infused malt), from Proto-Germanic
*maisk- (cognates: Swedish m&auml;sk grains for pigs, German Maisch crushed grapes, infused malt,
Old English meox dung, filth), from PIE *meik- to mix (see mix (v.)). Originally a word in brewing;
general sense of anything reduced to a soft pulpy consistency is recorded from 1590s, as is the
figurative sense confused mixture, muddle. Short for mashed potatoes it is attested from 1904.


mash (v.)

Old English m&aelig;scan, to mix with hot water, from same root as mash (n.). Meaning to beat into a
soft mass is mid-13c. Related: Mashed; mashing. For romantic sense, see masher.


masher (n.)

thing that mashes, c.1500, agent noun from mash (v.). Meaning would-be lady-killer is from 1875,
American English, perhaps in use from 1860, probably from mash (v.) on notion either of pressing
one's attentions, or of crushing someone else's emotions (compare crush).    He was, to use a
Western expression, a 'regular heart-smasher among the women; and it may not be improper to state,
just here, that no one had a more exalted opinion of his capabilities in that line than the
aforesaid 'Jo' himself. [Harper's New Monthly Magazine, March 1861]   <hr />   He had a weakness to
be considered a regular masher of female hearts and a very wicked young man with the fair sex
generally, but there was not a well-authenticated instance of his ever having broken a heart in his
life, nor likely to be one. [Gilbert A. Pierce, Zachariah, The Congressman, Chicago, 1880]    Also
in use late 19c were mash (n.) a romantic fixation, crush (1884); mash (v.) excite sentimental
admiration (1882); mash-note love letter (1890).


mashie (n.)

five iron, 1881, from Scottish, probably from French massue club, from Vulgar Latin *mattiuca, from
Latin mateola a tool for digging (see mace (n.1)). Related: Mashie-niblick (1903).


masjid (n.)

see mosque.


mask (n.)

1530s, from Middle French masque covering to hide or guard the face (16c.), from Italian maschera,
from Medieval Latin masca mask, specter, nightmare, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Arabic
maskharah buffoon, mockery, from sakhira be mocked, ridiculed. Or via Proven&ccedil;al mascarar,
Catalan mascarar, Old French mascurer to black (the face), perhaps from a Germanic source akin to
English mesh (q.v.). But compare Occitan mascara to blacken, darken, derived from mask- black, which
is held to be from a pre-Indo-European language, and Old Occitan masco witch, surviving in dialects;
in Beziers it means dark cloud before the rain comes. [See Walther von Wartburg, Franz&ouml;sisches
Etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch: Eine Darstellung galloromanischen sprachschatzes]. Figurative use by
1570s.


mask (v.)

1560s, take part in a masquerade; 1570s, to disguise; 1580s, to wear a mask, from mask (n.).
Figurative use by 1580s. Extended sense of to disguise is attested from 1847. Related: Masked;
masking. Masking tape recorded from 1927; so called because it is used to block out certain surfaces
before painting.


masochism (n.)

sexual pleasure in being hurt or abused, 1892, from German Masochismus, coined 1883 by German
neurologist Richard von Krafft-Ebing (1840-1902), from name of Leopold von Sacher-Masoch
(1836-1895), Austrian utopian socialist novelist who enshrined his submissive sexuality in Venus in
Furs (1869, German title Venus im Pelz).


masochist (n.)

1895, from masochism + -ist.


masochistic (adj.)

1894, from masochist + -ic.


mason (n.)

c.1200, stoneworker (as a surname, early 12c.), from Old French masson, ma&#231;on stone mason (Old
North French machun), probaby from Frankish *makjo or some other Germanic source (compare Old High
German steinmezzo stone mason, Modern German Steinmetz, second element related to mahhon to make;
see make (v.)). But it also might be from, or influenced by, Medieval Latin machio, matio (7c.)
which is said by Isidore to be derived from machina (see machine). The medieval word also might be
from the root of Latin maceria wall. Meaning a Freemason is attested from early 15c. in Anglo-
French.


Mason jar

1885, named for John Latin Mason of New York, who patented it in 1858.


Mason-Dixon Line

1779, named for Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon, English astronomers who surveyed (1763-7) the
disputed boundary between the colonial holdings of the Penns (Pennsylvania) and the Calverts
(Maryland). It became the technical boundary between free and slave states after 1804, when the last
slaveholding state above it (New Jersey) passed its abolition act. As the line between the North and
the South in U.S. culture, it is attested by 1834.


masonic (adj.)

1797, pertaining to freemasons; 1810, pertaining to stone masons; see mason + -ic.


Masonite

1926, proprietary name of a type of fiberboard, by Mason Fibre Company, Laurel, Mississippi, U.S. As
a word in mineralogy for a type of chloritoid, it honors Owen Mason of Providence, R.I.


masonry (n.)

stonework, mid-14c., from Old French ma&ccedil;onerie (14c.), from ma&ccedil;on (see mason).


masque (n.)

masquerade, masked ball, 1510s, from Middle French masque; see mask (n.), with which it was
originally identical. It developed a special sense of amateur theatrical performance (1560s) in
Elizabethan times, when such entertainments (originally performed in masks) were popular among the
nobility.


masquerade (n.)

1590s, assembly of people wearing masks and disguises, from French mascarade or Spanish mascarada
masked party or dance, from Italian mascarata a ball at which masks are worn, variant of mascherata
masquerade, from maschera (see mask (n.)). Figurative sense of false outward show is from 1670s.


masquerade (v.)

1650s, from masquerade (n.). Related: Masqueraded; masquerading.


mass (v.)

to gather in a mass (intransitive), 1560s, from mass (n.1) or from French masser. Transitive sense
by c.1600. Related: Massed; massing.


mass (n.1)

lump, quantity, size, late 14c., from Old French masse lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot,
bar (11c.), and directly from Latin massa kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like
dough, probably from Greek maza barley cake, lump, mass, ball, related to massein to knead, from PIE
root *mag- to knead (source of Lithuanian minkyti to knead, see macerate). Sense extended in English
1580s to a large quantity, amount, or number. Strict sense in physics is from 1704.    As an
adjective from 1733, first attested in mass meeting in American English. mass culture is from 1916
in sociology (earlier in biology); mass hysteria is from 1914; mass media is from 1923; mass
movement is from 1897; mass production is from 1920; mass grave is from 1918; mass murder from 1880.


mass (n.2)

Eucharistic service, Old English m&aelig;sse, from Vulgar Latin *messa eucharistic service,
literally dismissal, from Late Latin missa dismissal, fem. past participle of mittere to let go,
send  (see mission); probably so called from the concluding words of the service, Ite, missa est,
Go, (the prayer) has been sent, or Go, it is the dismissal. Sometimes glossed in Old English as
sendnes send-ness.


mass-produce (v.)

1921, from mass (n.1) + produce (v.). Related: Mass-produced; mass-producing.


Massa

supposedly representing the colloquial black English pronunciation of master (n.), from 1774.


Massachusetts

plural, originally (1614) a name for the Algonquian native people who lived around the bay, from
Algonquian Massachusett at the large hill, in reference to Great Blue Hill, southwest of Boston.


massacre (v.)

1580s, from Middle French massacrer to slaughter (16c.), from massacre (n.) wholesale slaughter,
carnage (see massacre (n.)). Related: Massacred; massacring.


massacre (n.)

1580s, from Middle French massacre wholesale slaughter, carnage, from Old French macacre, macecle
slaughterhouse, butchery, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Latin macellum provisions store,
butcher shop.


massage (v.)

1874, from massage (n.). Related: Massaged; massaging.


massage (n.)

1874, from French massage friction of kneading, from masser to massage, possibly from Arabic massa
to touch, feel, handle; if so, probably picked up in Egypt during the Napoleonic campaign there.
Other possibility is that French got it in colonial India from Portuguese amassar knead, a verb from
Latin massa mass, dough (see mass (n.1)). Massage parlor first attested 1894, from the start a
euphemism for house of prostitution.


masses (n.)

people of the lower class, 1836; plural of mass (n.1).


masseur (n.)

man who works giving massages, 1876, from French masseur, masc. agent noun from masser (see
massage). Native massagist (1889), massager (1921) have not displaced it, though the latter is used
in purely mechanical and figurative senses.


masseuse (n.)

woman who works giving massages, 1876, from French masseuse, fem. agent noun from masser (see
massage).


massif (n.)

cluster of hills, 1520s, from French massif (see massive), also used as a noun in French, as in
Massif Central, name of the plateau in the middle of southern France.


massive (adj.)

c.1400, from Middle French massif bulky, solid, from Old French masse lump (see mass (n.1)).
Related: Massively; massiveness. U.S. Cold War strategy of massive retaliation was introduced by
J.F. Dulles in early 1954.


massy (adj.)

late 14c., from mass (n.1) + -y (2).


mast (n.1)

long pole on a ship to support the sail, Old English m&aelig;st, from Proto-Germanic *mastaz
(cognates: Old Norse mastr, Middle Dutch maste, Dutch, Danish mast, German Mast), from PIE *mazdo- a
pole, rod (cognates: Latin malus mast, Old Irish matan club, Irish maide a stick, Old Church
Slavonic mostu bridge). The single mast of an old ship was the boundary between quarters of officers
and crew, hence before the mast in the title of Dana's book, etc.


mast (n.2)

fallen nuts; food for swine, Old English m&aelig;st, from Proto-Germanic *masto (cognates: Dutch,
Old High German, German mast mast; Old English verb m&aelig;sten to fatten, feed), perhaps from PIE
*mad-sta-, from root *mad- moist, wet, also used of various qualities of food (cognates: Sanskrit
madati it bubbles, gladdens, medah fat, marrow; Latin madere be sodden, be drunk; Middle Persian
mast drunk; Old English mete food, Old High German muos meal, mushlike food, Gothic mats food).


mastectomy (n.)

surgical removal of a breast, 1909, from Greek mastos woman's breast (see masto-) + -ectomy.


master (n.)

late Old English m&aelig;gester one having control or authority, from Latin magister (n.) chief,
head, director, teacher (source of Old French maistre, French ma&icirc;tre, Spanish and Italian
maestro, Portuguese mestre, Dutch meester, German Meister), contrastive adjective (he who is
greater) from magis (adv.) more, from PIE *mag-yos-, comparative of root *meg- great (see mickle).
Form influenced in Middle English by Old French cognate maistre. Meaning original of a recording is
from 1904. In academic senses (from Medieval Latin magister) it is attested from late 14c.,
originally a degree conveying authority to teach in the universities. As an adjective from late 12c.


master (v.)

early 13c., to get the better of, from master (n.) and also from Old French maistrier, from Medieval
Latin magistrare. Meaning to reduce to subjugation is early 15c.; that of to acquire complete
knowledge is from 1740s. Related: Mastered; mastering.


master&#039;s degree (n.)

late 14c., originally a degree giving one authority to teach in a university; from master (n.) in
its general sense of man of learning (early 13c.), a teacher (c.1200).


master-stroke (n.)

masterly line or touch (especially in painting), 1670s, from master (n.) + stroke (n.). Probably
based on a Dutch or German model.


master-work (n.)

c.1600, from master (n.) + work (n.). Probably based on a Dutch or German model.


masterful (adj.)

c.1300, fond of being a master, from master (n.) + -ful. Sense evolved through having capabilities
to command (c.1400) to characterized by a master's skill (1610s). Related: Masterfully.


masterly (adj.)

1530s, overbearing; 1660s, skillful, from master (n.) + -ly.


mastermind (n.)

1720, an outstanding intellect, from master (n.) + mind (n.). Meaning head of a criminal enterprise
is first attested 1872. As a verb from 1940. Related: Masterminded; masterminding.


masterpiece (n.)

c.1600, from master (n.) + piece (n.). A loan-translation of Dutch meesterstuk work by which a
craftsman attains the rank of master (or its German cognate Meisterst&uuml;ck).


mastery (n.)

early 13c., mesterie, condition of being a master, also superiority, victory; from Old French
maistrie, from maistre master (see master (n.)). Meaning intellectual command (of a topic, etc.) is
from 1660s.


masthead (n.)

1748, top of a ship's mast (the place for the display of flags), hence, from 1838, top of a
newspaper; from mast (n.1) + head (n.).


mastic (n.)

resin obtained from certain trees, late 14c., from Old French mastic (13c.) and directly from Late
Latin mastichum, from Latin mastiche, from Greek mastikhe, of uncertain origin, probably related to
masasthai to chew (see mastication). The substance is used as a chewing gum in the East.


masticable (adj.)

1802; see masticate + -able.


masticate (v.)

1640s, back-formation from mastication, or else from Late Latin masticatus, past participle of
masticare to chew. Related: Masticated; masticating.


mastication (n.)

early 15c., from Old French masticacion and directly from Latin masticationem (nominative
masticatio), noun of action from masticare to chew (source of Old French maschier, French
m&acirc;cher), probably from a Greek source related to mastikhan to gnash the teeth, from PIE
*mendh- to chew (see mandible).


mastiff (n.)

large, powerful breed of dog, early 14c., from Old French mastin great cur, mastiff (Modern French
m&#226;tin) or Proven&ccedil;al mastis, both from Vulgar Latin *mansuetinus domesticated, tame, from
Latin mansuetus tame, gentle (see mansuetude). Probably originally meaning a dog that stays in the
house, thus a guard-dog or watchdog. Form in English perhaps influenced by Old French mestif
mongrel.


mastitis (n.)

1842, medical Latin, from Greek mastos (see masto-) + -itis.


masto-

before vowels mast-, word-forming element meaning breast, from comb. form of Greek mastos woman's
breast, from madan to be wet, to flow, from PIE *mad- wet, moist, dripping (cognates: Latin madere
be moist; Albanian mend suckle; see mast (n.2)).


mastodon (n.)

1813, from Modern Latin genus name Mastodon (1806), coined by French naturalist Georges
L&eacute;opole Chr&eacute;tien Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Dagobert, Baron Cuvier (1769-1832) from Greek
mastos breast (see masto-) + -odon tooth (see tooth); so called from the nipple-like projections on
the crowns of the extinct mammal's fossil molars. Related: Mastodontic.


mastoid (adj.)

breast-shaped, resembling a breast or nipple, 1732, from Greek mastoeides resembling a breast, from
mastos (woman's) breast (see masto-) + -oeides like, from eidos form, shape (see -oid). As a noun,
1800, from the adjective.


masturbate (v.)

1839, back-formation from masturbation, or else from Latin masturbatus, past participle of
masturbari. Related: Masturbated; masturbating.


masturbation (n.)

1711 (earlier as mastupration, 1620s), from French masturbation and directly from Modern Latin
masturbationem (nominative masturbatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
masturbari to masturbate. The long-standing speculation is that this Latin word is altered (probably
by influence of turbare to stir up) from *manstuprare, from manu, ablative of manus hand (see
manual) + stuprare defile (oneself), from stuprum defilement, dishonor, related to stupere to be
stunned, stupefied (see stupid). But perhaps the first element represents an unattested *mazdo-
penis [OED]. An earlier technical word for this was Onanism. Related: Masturbational.


masturbator (n.)

1818, agent noun from Latin source of masturbate (q.v.). Related: Masturbatory.


mat (n.1)

loosely joined natural materials used as bedding, etc., Old English matte, from Late Latin matta mat
made of rushes (4c.), probably from Punic or Phoenician matta (compare Hebrew mittah bed, couch).
Meaning tangled mass is from 1835. That of piece of padded flooring used in gymnastics or wrestling
is attested from 1892; hence figurative phrase go to the mat do battle (1910). The Latin word also
is the source of German Matte, matze; Dutch mat, Italian matta. French natte mat, matting is from
Late Latin secondary form natta (compare napkin).


mat (adj.)

1640s, lusterless, dull (of a color or surface), from French mat dull, dead surface, from Old French
mat beaten down, withered, afflicted, dejected; dull, which is perhaps from Latin mattus maudlin
with drink, from madere to be wet or sodden, be drunk, from PIE root *mad- to be wet, drip (see mast
(n.2)). Or the French word might represent a transferred use from chess of mater to checkmate,
defeat, from Arabic (see mate (v.2)).


mat (n.2)

sheet of backing material, 1845, from French mat dull surface or finish (15c.), noun use of Old
French mat (adj.); see mat (adj.).


mat (v.)

early 15c., to make mats, from mat (n.1). From 1540s as to provide with mats, to cover with mats;
meaning to become tangled is from 1570s. Related: Matted; matting.


Mata Hari

stage name taken by exotic dancer Margaretha Gertruida Zelle (1876-1917), from Malay mata eye + hari
day, dawn.


matador (n.)

man who kills the bull in a bullfight, 1670s, from Spanish matador, literally killer, from matar to
kill or wound, probably from Arabic mata he died, from Persian (see second element in checkmate).
Fem. form is matadora.


match (n.1)

stick for striking fire, late 14c., macche, wick of a candle or lamp, from Old French meiche wick of
a candle, from Vulgar Latin *micca/*miccia (source also of Catalan metxa, Spanish mecha, Italian
miccia), probably ultimately from Latin myxa, from Greek myxa lamp wick, originally mucus, based on
notion of wick dangling from the spout of a lamp like snot from a nostril, from PIE root *meug-
slimy, slippery (see mucus). Modern spelling is from mid-15c. (English snot also had a secondary
sense of snuff of a candle, burnt part of a wick from late 14c., surviving at least to late 19c. in
northern dialects.)    Meaning piece of cord or splinter of wood soaked in sulfur, used for lighting
fires, lamps, candles, etc. is from 1530. First used 1831 for the modern type of wooden friction
match, and competed with lucifer for much of 19c. as the name for this invention.


match (n.2)

one of a pair, an equal, Old English m&aelig;cca, companion, mate, one of a pair, wife, husband, one
suited to another, an equal, from gem&aelig;cca, from Proto-Germanic *gamakon fitting well together
(cognates: Old Saxon gimaco fellow, equal, Old High German gimah comfort, ease, Middle High German
gemach comfortable, quiet, German gemach easy, leisurely), from PIE root *mak-/*mag- to fit (see
make (v.)). Middle English sense of matching adversary, person able to contend with another (c.1300)
led to sporting meaning contest, first attested 1540s.


match (v.)

to join one to another (originally especially in marriage), late 14c., from match (n.2). Meaning to
place (one) in conflict with (another) is from c.1400. That of to pair with a view to fitness is
from 1520s; that of to be equal to is from 1590s. Related: Matched; matching.


match-girl (n.)

1765, from match (n.1) + girl. The tragic story of The Little Match-Girl (Danish title Den lille
pige med svovlstikkerne) by H.C. Andersen was published first in 1845, translated into English by
1847.


match-head (n.)

1860, from match (n.1) + head (n.).


matchbook (n.)

also match-book, in reference to a folder holding fire-starting devices, 1913, from match (n.1) +
book (n.).


matchbox (n.)

also match-box, 1786, from match (n.1) + box (n.).


matchcoat (n.)

fur-skinned mantle worn by Native Americans, 1640s, originally matchco, probably a native word
(compare Ojibwa majigoode petticoat, woman's dress), altered by influence of coat (n.).


matchless (adj.)

peerless, 1520s, from match (n.2) + -less. Related: Matchlessly; matchlessness.


matchlock (n.)

1690s, from match (n.1), in reference to the firing mechanism, + lock (n.1) in the firearm sense
(1540s); probably so called for its resemblance to a door-latching device.


matchmaker (n.)

also match-maker, marriage-broker, 1630s, from match (n.2) + maker. Related: Match-making.


mate (n.1)

associate, fellow, comrade, mid-14c., also companion (late 14c.), from Middle Low German mate,
gemate one eating at the same table, messmate, from Proto-Germanic *ga-maton having food (*matiz)
together (*ga-), which is etymologically identical with companion. Cognate with Danish and Swedish
mat, German Maat mate, Dutch maat, from German. Meaning one of a wedded pair is attested from 1540s.
Used as a form of address by sailors, laborers, etc., since at least mid-15c. Meaning officer on a
merchant vessel is from late 15c.


mate (v.1)

c.1500, to equal, rival, 1590s as to match, couple, marry, join in marriage, from mate (n.1). Also,
of animals, to pair for the purpose of breeding. Related: Mated; mating.


mate (v.2)

checkmate, c.1300, from Old French mater to checkmate, defeat, overcome, from mat checkmated (see
checkmate (v.)).


mate (n.2)

in chess, a condition of checkmate, c.1300, mat, from Middle French mat, from Old French mater (see
mate (v.2)).


mater-

comb. form meaning mother, from Latin mater (see mother (n.)).


materia medica (n.)

substances used in medicine, Latin, literally medical matter.


material (adj.)

mid-14c., real, ordinary; earthly, drawn from the material world; a term in scholastic philosophy
and theology, from Old French material, materiel (14c.) and directly from Late Latin materialis
(adj.) of or belonging to matter, from Latin materia matter, stuff, wood, timber (see matter). From
late 14c. as made of matter, having material existence; material, physical, substantial; from late
15c. as important, relevant.


material (n.)

late 14c., substance, matter from which a thing is made, from material (adj.).


materialism (n.)

1748, philosophy that nothing exists except matter (from French mat&#233;rialisme); 1851 as a way of
life based entirely on consumer goods. From material + ism.


materialist (n.)

1660s and after in various philosophical and theological senses, on model of French
mat&#233;rialiste, from material (n.) + -ist. Also see materialism.


materialistic (adj.)

1829, from materialist + -ic. Related: Materialistically.


materiality (n.)

1520s, that which is the matter of something, from Modern Latin materialitas, from materialis (see
material (adj.)). From 1560s as quality of being material; 1640s as quality of being important to
matters at hand.


materialization (n.)

1822, noun of action from materialize.


materialize (v.)

1710, represent as material, from material (adj.) + -ize. Meaning â&euro;&oelig;appear in bodily
formâ&euro;? is 1880, in spiritualism. Related: Materialized; materializing.


materially (adv.)

late 14c., from material (adj.) + -ly (2).


materiel (n.)

1814, from French mat&eacute;riel material, noun use of adj. mat&#233;riel (see material (adj.)). A
later borrowing of the same word that became material (n.).


maternal (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French maternel (14c.), from Vulgar Latin *maternalis, from Latin maternus
maternal, of a mother, from mater mother (see mother (n.1)).


maternity (n.)

1610s, quality or condition of being a mother, from French maternit&eacute; motherhood (15c.), from
Medieval Latin maternitatem (nominative maternitas) motherhood, from Latin maternus (see maternal).
Used from 1893 as a quasi-adjective in reference to garments designed for pregnant women.


matey (n.)

1833, diminutive of mate (n.) in its male friend sense + -y (3).


math (n.1)

American English shortening of mathematics, 1890; the British preference, maths, is attested from
1911.


math (n.2)

a mowing, Old English m&aelig;&eth; mowing, cutting of grass, from Proto-Germanic *mediz (cognates:
Old Frisian meth, Old High German mad, German Mahd mowing, hay crop), from PIE *me- (4) to cut grass
(see mow (v.)).


mathematic (n.)

late 14c. as singular noun, replaced by early 17c. by mathematics, from Latin mathematica (plural),
from Greek mathematike tekhne mathematical science, feminine singular of mathematikos (adj.)
relating to mathematics, scientific, astronomical; disposed to learn, from mathema (genitive
mathematos) science, knowledge, mathematical knowledge; a lesson, literally that which is learnt;
related to manthanein to learn, from PIE root *mendh- to learn (cognates: Greek menthere to care,
Lithuanian mandras wide-awake, Old Church Slavonic madru wise, sage, Gothic mundonsis to look at,
German munter awake, lively). As an adjective, 1540s, from French math&#233;matique or directly from
Latin mathematicus.


mathematical (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin mathematicus (see mathematic) + -al (1). Related: Mathematically.


mathematician (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French mathematicien, from mathematique, from Latin mathematicus (see
mathematic).


mathematics (n.)

1580s; see mathematic + -ics. Originally denoting the mathematical sciences collectively, including
geometry, astronomy, optics.


maths (n.)

see math.


Matilda

fem. proper name, from French Mathilde, of Germanic origin, literally mighty in battle; compare Old
High German Mahthilda, from mahti might, power + hildi battle, from Proto-Germanic *hildiz battle,
from PIE *kel- (1) to strike, cut. The name also was late 19c. Australian slang for a traveller's
bundle or swag, hence the expression waltzing Matilda to travel on foot (by 1889).    In my
electorate nearly every man you meet who is not waltzing Matilda rides a bicycle. [Parliamentary
Debates, Australia, 1907]    The lyrics of the song of that name, sometimes called the unofficial
Australian national anthem, are said to date to 1893.


matin (n.)

see matins.


matinee (n.)

afternoon performance, 1848, from French matin&eacute;e (musicale), from  matin&eacute;e morning
(with a sense here of daytime), from matin morning, from Old French matines (see matins). Originally
as a French word in English; it lost its foreignness by late 19c.


matins (n.)

canonical hour, mid-13c., from Old French matines (12c.), from Late Latin matutinas (nominative
matutin&aelig;) morning prayers, originally matutinas vigilias morning watches, from Latin matutinus
of or in the morning, associated with Matuta, Roman dawn goddess (see manana). The Old English word
was uht-sang, from uhte daybreak.


matri-

word-forming element meaning mother, from comb. form of Latin mater (genitive matris) mother (see
mother (n.1)).


matriarch (n.)

mother who heads a family or tribe, c.1600, from matri- + -arch, abstracted from patriarch.


matriarchal (adj.)

1780 (in reference to bee colonies); see matriarch + -al (1); patterned after patriarchy [Barnhart].
Related: Matriarchally.


matriarchy (n.)

formed in English 1881 from matriarch + -y (4).


matricide (n.)

1590s, action of killing one's mother, from French matricide, from Latin matricida mother-killer,
and matricidium mother-killing, from comb. form of mater mother (see mother (n.1)) + -cida killer,
and -cidium a killing, from caedere to slay (see -cide). Meaning one who kills his mother is 1630s.
Related: Matricidal (adj.). Old English had mo&#240;orslaga matricide, mother-slayer.


matriculate (v.)

1570s, to admit a student to a college by enrolling his name on the register, from Late Latin
matriculatus, past participle of matriculare to register, from Latin matricula public register,
diminutive of matrix (genitive matricis) list, roll, also sources, womb (see matrix).    The
connection of senses in the Latin word seems to be via confusion of Greek metra womb (from meter
mother; see mother (n.1)) and an identical but different Greek word metra meaning register, lot (see
meter (n.2)). Evidently Latin matrix was used to translate both, though it originally shared meaning
with only one. Related: Matriculated; matriculating.


matriculation (n.)

1580s, noun of action from matriculate (v.).


matrifocal (adj.)

1952, a term from sociology, from matri- + focal.


matrilineal (adj.)

pertaining to or descended from the mother's side, 1897, from matri- +  lineal. Related:
Matrilineage; matrilineally.


matrilocal (adj.)

1897, from matri- + local.


matrimonial (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French matrimonial (14c.) and directly from Late Latin matrimonialis, from
Latin matrimonium (see matrimony). Earlier as a noun meaning a marriage (late 15c.). Related:
Matrimonially.


matrimony (n.)

c.1300, from Old French matremoine matrimony, marriage and directly from Latin matrimonium wedlock,
marriage, from matrem (nominative mater) mother (see mother (n.1)) + -monium, suffix signifying
action, state, condition.


matrix (n.)

late 14c., uterus, womb, from Old French matrice womb, uterus, from Latin matrix (genitive matricis)
pregnant animal, in Late Latin womb, also source, origin, from mater (genitive matris) mother (see
mother (n.1)). Sense of place or medium where something is developed is first recorded 1550s; sense
of embedding or enclosing mass first recorded 1640s. Logical sense of array of possible combinations
of truth-values is attested from 1914. As a verb from 1951.


matroclinous (adj.)

resembling the mother rather than the father, 1911, from matri- + Greek klinein to lean (see lean
(v.)).


matron (n.)

late 14c., married woman (usually one of rank), from Old French matrone married woman; elderly lady;
patroness; midwife, and directly from Latin matrona married woman, wife, matron, from mater
(genitive matris) mother (see mother (n.1)). Sense of female manager of a school, hospital, etc.
first recorded 1550s.


matronly

1580s (adv.), 1650s (adj.), from matron + -ly (2). An earlier adjective was matron-like (1570s).


matronymic (n.)

1794, a hybrid from Latin mater (see mother (n.1)) + Greek-based ending from patronymic. As an
adjective from 1874.


matte (n.)

backing for a picture, 1845, from French; see mat (n.2).


matte (n.)

variant of mat (n.2).


matted (adj.)

tangled and lying flat (of hair, etc.), 1610s, past participle adjective from  mat (v.).


matter (n.)

c.1200, materie, subject of thought, speech, or expression, from Anglo-French matere, Old French
matere subject, theme, topic; substance, content, material; character, education (12c., Modern
French mati&#232;re), from Latin materia substance from which something is made, also hard inner
wood of a tree (source also of Portuguese madeira wood), from mater origin, source, mother (see
mother (n.1)). Or, on another theory, it represents *dmateria, from PIE root *dem-/*dom- (source of
Latin domus house, English timber). With sense development in Latin influenced by Greek hyle, of
which it was the equivalent in philosophy.    Meaning physical substance generally, matter, material
is early 14c.; that of substance of which some specific object is made or consists of is attested
from late 14c. That of piece of business, affair, activity, situation, circumstance is from late
14c. From mid-14c. as subject of a literary work, content of what is written, main theme. Also in
Middle English as cause, reasons, ground; essential character; field of investigation.   Matter of
course something expected attested from 1739. For that matter attested from 1670s. What is the
matter what concerns (someone), the cause of the difficulty is attested from mid-15c. To make no
matter be no difference to also is mid-15c.


matter (v.)

to be of importance or consequence, 1580s, from matter (n.). Related: Mattered; mattering.


matter-of-fact

also matter of fact, 1570s as a noun, originally a legal term (translating Latin res facti), that
portion of an enquiry concerned with the truth or falsehood of alleged facts, opposed to matter of
law. As an adjective from 1712. Meaning prosaic, unimaginative is from 1787. Related: Matter-of-
factly; matter-of-factness. German Tatsache is said to be a loan-translation of the English word.


Matterhorn

Alpine mountain, from German Matte meadow, pastureland (see mead (n.2)) + Horn (see horn (n.)). So
called for its horn-like shape.


matterless (adj.)

late 14c., insubstantial, immaterial, without physical substance, from matter (n.) + -less. From
1610s as devoid of sense or meaning.


matters (n.)

events, affairs of a particular sort, 1560s, from plural of matter (n.).


Matthew

masc. proper name, introduced in England by the Normans, from Old French Mathieu, from Late Latin
Matthaeus, from Greek Matthaios, contraction of Mattathias, from Hebrew Mattathyah gift of Jehovah,
from mattath gift. Variant Matthias is from the Greek version.


Matthias

masc. proper name, from Late Latin Matthias, from Greek Matthaios (see Matthew).


matting (n.1)

process of making mats, 1720, from mat (n.1). Meaning coarse fabric for mats is from 1748.


matting (n.2)

ornamental border of a picture, 1864 from verbal derivative of mat (n.2).


mattock (n.)

Old English m&aelig;ttoc, probably from Vulgar Latin *matteuca club, related to Latin mateola, a
kind of mallet (see mace (n.1)), but this is not certain, and synonymous Russian motyka, Lithuanian
matikkas suggest other possibilities. OED says similar words in Welsh and Gaelic are from English.


mattress (n.)

late 13c., from Old French materas (12c., Modern French matelas), from Italian materasso and
directly from Medieval Latin matracium, borrowed in Sicily from Arabic al-matrah the cushion (also
source of Spanish almadraque mattress, Proven&ccedil;al almatrac), literally the thing thrown down,
from taraha he threw (down).


maturate (v.)

1540s, back-formation from maturation. Related: Maturated; maturating.


maturation (n.)

early 15c., the coming to a head of a boil, etc.; a state of producing pus, from Middle French
maturation and directly from Latin maturationem (nominative maturatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of maturare to ripen, make ripe (see mature (v.)).


mature (v.)

late 14c., encourage suppuration; mid-15c. bring to maturity, from Latin maturare to ripen, bring to
maturity, from maturus ripe, timely, early, related to manus good and mane early, of the morning,
from PIE root *ma- good, with derivatives meaning occurring at a good moment, timely, seasonable,
early. Meaning come or bring to maturity is from 1620s. The financial sense of reach the time for
payment is from 1861. Related: Matured; maturing.


mature (adj.)

mid-15c., ripe, also careful, well-considered, from Latin maturus ripe, timely, early (see mature
(v.)).


maturely (adv.)

1530s, promptly, from mature (adj.) + -ly (2). Sense of with deliberation is from 1590s; that of in
a way indicative of maturity is from 1841.


maturescent (adj.)

1727, grown ripe, from Latin maturescentem (nominative maturescens), present participle of
maturescere be ripe, ripen, from maturus ripe (see mature (v.)) + inchoative suffix -escere.


maturity (n.)

early 15c., maturity of character; mid-15c., ripeness, from Middle French maturit&#233; and directly
from Latin maturitatem (nominative maturitas) ripeness, from maturus ripe (see mature (v.)).
Financial sense state of being due for payment is from 1815.


matutinal (adj.)

1650s, from Latin matutinalis pertaining to morning, from matutinus of or pertaining to the morning,
from Matuta, name of the Roman goddess of dawn, related to maturus â&euro;&oelig;earlyâ&euro;?
(see mature (v.)). Earlier in same sense was matutine (mid-15c.). Related: Matutinally.


matzah (n.)

also matza; see matzoh.


matzoh (n.)

also matzo, flat piece of unleavened bread eaten by Jews during the Passover, 1846, from Hebrew
matztzah (plural matztzoth) unleavened bread, literally juiceless, from stem of matzatz he sucked
out, drained out.


Mau Mau (n.)

African secret society devoted to ending European rule, 1950, from the Kikuyu language of Kenya.


Maud

fem. proper name, from Old French Mahaut, from Medieval Latin Matilda from Germanic (compare Old
High German Mahthilda; see Matilda).


maudlin (adj.)

c.1600, tearful, from Middle English fem. proper name Maudelen (early 14c.), from Magdalene (Old
French Madelaine), woman's name, originally surname of Mary the repentant sinner forgiven by Jesus
in Luke vii:37 (see Magdalene). In paintings, she often was shown weeping as a sign of repentance.
Meaning characterized by tearful sentimentality is recorded by 1630s.


maul (v.)

mid-13c., meallen strike with a heavy weapon, from Middle English mealle (mid-13c.) mace, wooden
club, heavy hammer (see maul (n.). The meaning damage seriously, mangle is first recorded 1690s.
Related: Mauled; mauling.


maul (n.)

c.1200, mealle, hammer, usually a heavy one; sledgehammer, from Old French mail hammer, from Latin
malleus hammer (see mallet).


maulstick (n.)

light stick used by painters to support the painting hand, 1650s, from Dutch maalstok, literally
painting stick, from mallen to paint, from Proto-Germanic *mal- (cognates: Old Norse m&#230;la, Old
High German malon trace, draw, paint, German malen to paint), from mal spot, mark, stain, perhaps
from the same root as Greek melas black (see melanin), but the original sense is not color but
marking. With stock stick (see stock (n.1)).


maunder (v.)

to wander about aimlessly, c.1746, earlier to mumble, grumble (1620s), both senses perhaps from
frequentative of maund to beg (1560s), which is possibly from French mendier to beg, from Latin
mendicare (see mendicant). Related: Maundered; maundering.


Maundy Thursday

Thursday before Easter, mid-15c., from Middle English maunde the Last Supper, also ceremony of
washing the feet, from Old French mand&eacute;, from Latin mandatum commandment (see mandate); said
to be so called in reference to the opening words of the church service for this day, Mandatum novum
do vobis A new commandment I give unto you (John xiii:34), words supposedly spoken by Jesus to the
Apostles after washing their feet at the Last Supper.


Maurice

masc. proper name, from French Maurice, from Late Latin Mauritius, from Latin Maurus inhabitant of
Mauretania, Moor (see Moor).


Mauser

1880, German army rifle, introduced 1871, invented by brothers Peter Paul (1838-1914) and Wilhelm
(1834-1882) Mauser.


mausoleum (n.)

magnificent tomb, 1540s, from Latin mausoleum, from Greek Mausoleion, name of the massive marble
tomb built 353 B.C.E. at Halicarnassus (Greek city in Asia Minor) for Mausolos, Persian satrap who
made himself king of Caria. It was built by his wife (and sister), Artemisia. Counted among the
Seven Wonders of the ancient world, it was destroyed by an earthquake in the Middle Ages. General
sense of any stately burial-place is from c.1600.


mauvais

in French terms in English, false, worthless, from French mauvais (fem. mauvaise) bad, 12c., from
Vulgar Latin malifatius, literally one who has a bad lot, from Latin malum bad (see mal-) + fatum
fate (see fate (n.)).


mauve (n.)

purple dye, 1859, from French mauve, from Old French mauve mallow (13c.), from Latin malva mallow;
the dye so called from the color of the mallow plant. Related: Mauvish.


maven (n.)

1965, from Yiddish meyvn, from Hebrew mebhin, literally one who understands. Plural is mayvinim.


maverick (n.)

1867, calf or yearling found without an owner's brand, so called for Samuel A. Maverick (1803-1870),
Texas cattle owner who was negligent in branding his calves. Sense of individualist, unconventional
person is first recorded 1886, via notion of masterless.


mavis (n.)

song thrush, c.1400, mavys, from Old French mauvis, of unknown origin; related to Spanish malvis.
Breton milfid is a French loan word.


maw (n.)

Old English maga stomach (of men and animals; in Modern English only of animals unless insultingly),
from Proto-Germanic *magon bag, stomach (cognates: Old Frisian maga, Old Norse magi, Danish mave,
Middle Dutch maghe, Dutch maag, Old High German mago, German Magen stomach), from PIE *mak- leather
bag (cognates: Welsh megin bellows, Lithuanian makas, Old Church Slavonic mo&#353;ina bag, pouch).
Meaning throat, gullet is from 1520s. Metaphoric of voracity from late 14c.


mawkish (adj.)

1660s, sickly, nauseated, from Middle English mawke maggot (see maggot). Sense of sickly sentimental
is first recorded 1702. Related: Mawkishly; mawkishness.


mawworm (n.)

worm infesting the stomach, c.1600, from maw (n.) + worm (n).


max (v.)

to reach the maximum level, by 1986, colloquial, from maximize or related words. Related: Maxed;
maxing.


maxi-

word-forming element meaning maximum, very large, very long, from comb. form of maximum.


maxilla (n.)

jaw, jawbone, 1670s, from Latin maxilla upper jaw, diminutive of mala jaw, cheekbone. Maxilla stands
to mala as axilla, 'armpit,' stands to ala 'wing' [Klein]. Related: Maxillar; maxilliform.


maxillary (adj.)

1620s, from Latin maxilla (see maxilla) + -ary.


maxim (n.)

precept, principle, early 15c., from Middle French maxime, from Late Latin maxima, shortened from
phrases such as maxima propositio, maxima sententarium axiom, literally greatest premise, greatest
among propositions (one which is general and absolute), from fem. of maximus greatest (see maximum).


Maxim

single-barreled water-cooled machine gun, 1885, named for inventor, U.S.-born British engineer Sir
Hiram S. Maxim (1840-1916).


maximal (adj.)

1872, from Latin maximus (see maximum (n.)) + -al (1). Related: Maximally.


maximalist (n.)

extreme radical in the Russian Socialist Revolutionary Party, early 20c., from maximal + -ist;
denoting one who insists on all his demands. Related: Maximalism.


Maximilian

masc. proper name, from Latin Maximus and Aemilianus, both proper names. According to Camden, Holy
Roman Emperor Frederick III (1415-1493) coined the name and gave it to his son in hopes the boy
would grow up to have the virtues of Fabius Maximus and Scipio Aemilianus.


maximise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of maximize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Maximised; maximising.


maximization (n.)

1802, noun of action from maximize.


maximize (v.)

1802, formed in English from maximum + -ize; first attested in Bentham, who used it often. Related:
Maximized; maximizing.


maximum (n.)

1740, from French maximum and directly from Latin maximum (plural maxima), neuter of maximus
greatest, which is superlative of magnus great, large (see magnum).


maximum (adj.)

1834, from maximum (n.).


may (v.1)

Old English m&aelig;g am able (infinitive magan, past tense meahte, mihte), from Proto-Germanic root
*mag-, infinitive *maganan (Old Frisian mei/muga/machte have power, may; Old Saxon mag/mugan/mahte;
Middle Dutch mach/moghen/mohte; Dutch mag/mogen/mocht; Old High German mag/magan/mahta; German
mag/m&#246;gen/mochte; Old Norse ma/mega/matte; Gothic mag/magan/mahte to be able), from PIE *magh-
(1) to be able, have power (cognates: Greek mekhos, makhos means, instrument, Old Church Slavonic
mogo to be able, mosti power, force, Sanskrit mahan great). Also used in Old English as a auxiliary
of prediction.


May

fifth month, early 12c., from Old French mai and directly from Latin Majus, Maius mensis month of
May, possibly from Maja, Maia, a Roman earth goddess (wife of Vulcan) whose name is of unknown
origin; possibly from PIE *mag-ya she who is great, fem. suffixed form of root *meg- great (cognate
with Latin magnus). Replaced Old English &thorn;rimilce, month in which cows can be milked three
times a day. May marriages have been considered unlucky at least since Ovid's day. May-apple
attested from 1733, American English.


may (v.2)

to take part in May Day festivities, late 15c., from May. Related: Mayed; maying.


May Day

first of May, mid-15c. Accounts of merrymaking on this date are attested from mid-13c. Synonymous
with communist procession from at least 1906. The May Queen seems to be a Victorian re-invented
tradition.


Maya

1822, from the native name. Related: Mayan (1831).


maybe (adv.)

early 15c., from (it) may be; see may (v.1) + be (v.). Still sometimes written as two words early
19c.


mayday

distress call, 1923, apparently an Englished spelling of French m'aider, shortening of venez m'aider
come help me! But possibly a random coinage with coincidental resemblance:    May Day Is Airplane
SOS  ENGLISH aviators who use radio telephone transmitting sets on their planes, instead of
telegraph sets, have been puzzling over the problem of choosing a distress call for transmission by
voice. The letters SOS wouldn't do, and just plain help! was not liked, and so May Day was chosen.
This was thought particularly fitting since it sounds very much like the French m'aidez, which means
help me. [The Wireless Age, June 1923]


Mayfair

fashionable district of London, developed 18c., built on Brook fields, where an annual May fair had
been held 17c.


mayflower (n.)

by 1620s; from May + flower (n.). Used locally for the cowslip, the lady's smock, and other plants
that bloom in May.


mayhap

1530s, from phrase (it) may hap.


mayhem (n.)

late 15c., from Anglo-French maihem (13c.), from Old French mahaigne injury, wrong, a hurt, harm,
damage; related to mahaignier to injure, wound, mutilate, cripple (see maim). Originally, in law,
the crime of maiming a person to make him less able to defend himself or annoy his adversary [OED].


mayo (n.)

shortened form of mayonnaise, first attested c.1930.


mayonnaise (n.)

sauce made from egg yolks, oil, and vinegar, 1815, from French sauce mayonnaise (1806), said by
French sources to be corrupted from mahonnaise and to have been named in recognition of Mahon,
seaport capital of island of Minorca, captured by France 1756 after the defeat of the British
defending fleet in the Seven Years' War; the sauce having been introduced either in commemoration of
the victory, which was led by Armand de Vignerot du Plessis, duc de Richelieu
(1696â&euro;&ldquo;1788), or because it was brought to France from there by him. But unless there
is a gap in the record, the late date of appearance of the word make this seem doubtful.


mayor (n.)

c.1300, from Old French maire head of a city or town government (13c.), originally greater, superior
(adj.), from Latin maior, major, comparative of magnus great (see magnum).


mayoral (adj.)

1690s, from mayor + -al (1).


mayoralty (n.)

late 14c., mairaltee office of a mayor (mid-15c. as tenure of a mayor), from Middle French
mairalt&#233;, from maire (see mayor) + -alte, as in principalte, reformed in English as -alty.


mayorship (n.)

late 15c., from mayor + -ship.


maypole (n.)

high striped pole decorated with flowers and ribbons for May Day merrymakers to dance around,
attested from 1550s but certainly much older, as the first mention of it is in an ordinance banning
them, and there are references to such erections, though not by this name, from a mid-14c. Welsh
poem. See May Day.


maze (n.)

c.1300, delusion, bewilderment (also as a verb, stupefy, daze), possibly from Old English
*m&aelig;s, which is suggested by the compound amasod amazed and verb amasian to confound, confuse
(see amaze). Perhaps related to Norwegian dialectal mas exhausting labor, Swedish masa to be slow or
sluggish. Meaning labyrinth first recorded late 14c.


mazel tov

1862, from modern Hebrew mazzal tob good luck, from Hebrew mazzaloth (plural) constellations.


mazuma (n.)

slang for money, 1894, from Yiddish, from Mishnaic Hebrew mezumman designated, fixed, appointed,
used in Medieval Hebrew in sense of cash (compare slang the needful money), from Akkad. simanu
appointed time. It figured in People v. Stokes, case argued before Supreme Court of California
(1894), which cites newspaper coverage of an earlier trial mentioning Colonel Mazuma:    It appears
that the term Colonel Mazuma not only does not indicate some gentleman with a military title, but it
does not even refer to a person at all. We fail to find the term mentioned by our lexicographers,
but understand it to be a modern provincialism, probably emanating from the daily press, and used
when referring to the corrupt application of money in the accomplishment of certain ends. If these
jurors understood this term with the signification thus attached to it, it of itself furnished ample
material to demand a retrial of the case. [Pacific Reporter, vol. 37]


mazurka (n.)

lively dance, also mazourka, 1818, from Russian mazurka, from Polish mazurek dance of the Mazur, a
reference to inhabitants of Mazowsze (Medieval Latin Mazovia), ancient region in central Poland. The
Polish accusative in ta&#324;czy&#263; mazurka to dance the mazurek was interpreted in Russian as a
feminine affix, hence the -ka ending.


mazy (adj.)

1570s, from maze (n.) + -y (2).


McCarthyism

1950, with -ism + name of U.S. Sen. Joseph R. McCarthy (1908-1957), leader of U.S. anti-Communist
agitation. The term is said to have been coined by Washington Post political cartoonist Herbert
Block (Herblock). The surname is from Irish Mac Carthaigh son of Carthach (Welsh Caradawc), an
ancient Celtic name, also known in its Latinized form, Caractacus (last of the British leaders to
resist Rome, captured 51 C.E.)


McConnell

Irish surname, from Irish mac son of + Conall, from Celt. kunovalos high-powerful.


McCoy

as in the real McCoy, 1881, said to be from Scottish the real Mackay (1883), of uncertain origin,
though there are many candidates, including whiskey distilled by A. and M. Mackay of Glasgow (the
phrase the real McCoy became popular during Prohibition to describe liquor); Charles S. Kid McCoy
(1872-1940), former welterweight boxing champ; and a claimant for chief of the northern branch of
the clan Mackay.    By jingo! yes; so it will be. It's the 'real McCoy,' as Jim Hicks says. Nobody
but a devil can find us there. [James S. Bond, The Rise and Fall of the Union Club, Yorkville,
Canada, 1881]


McFarland

Irish surname, from Gaelic Mac Pharlain son of Parlan, from Old Irish Parthalon Bartholomew.


McGuffey&#039;s

children's reader, first published 1836, created by Ohio educator and linguist William Holmes
McGuffey (1800-1873).


McIntosh

kind of red apples, 1874, from John McIntosh (b.1777), Ontario farmer who found them in 1796 while
clearing woodland on his farm and began to cultivate them. The surname is Gaelic Mac an toisich son
of the chieftain.


McMillan

Irish surname, from Gaelic Mac Mhaolain son of the tonsured one.


McQueen

Irish surname, from Gaelic Mac Shuibhne son of Suibhne, literally pleasant.


me (pron.)

Old English me (dative), me, mec (accusative); oblique cases of I, from Proto-Germanic *meke
(accusative), *mes (dative), cognates: Old Frisian mi/mir, Old Saxon mi, Middle Dutch mi, Dutch mij,
Old High German mih/mir, German mich/mir, Old Norse mik/mer, Gothic mik/mis; from PIE root *me-,
oblique form of the personal pronoun of the first person singular (nominative *eg; see I); cognates:
Sanskrit, Avestan mam, Greek eme, Latin me, mihi, Old Irish me, Welsh mi me, Old Church Slavonic me,
Hittite ammuk.    Erroneous or vulgar use for nominative (such as it is me) attested from c.1500.
Dative preserved in obsolete meseems, methinks and expressions such as sing me a song (dative of
interest). Reflexively, myself, for myself, to myself from late Old English.


mea culpa

Latin, literally I am to blame, a phrase from the prayer of confession in the Latin liturgy.


mead (n.1)

fermented honey drink, Old English medu, from Proto-Germanic *meduz (cognates: Old Norse
mj&ouml;&eth;r, Danish mj&oslash;d, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch mede, Old High German metu, German
Met mead), from PIE root *medhu- honey, sweet drink (cognates: Sanskrit madhu sweet, sweet drink,
wine, honey, Greek methy wine, Old Church Slavonic medu, Lithuanian medus honey, Old Irish mid,
Welsh medd, Breton mez mead). Synonymous but unrelated early Middle English me&thorn;eglin yielded
Chaucer's meeth.


mead (n.2)

meadow, Old English m&aelig;d, Anglian med meadow, pasture, from Proto-Germanic *medwo (cognates:
Old Frisian mede, Dutch made, German Matte meadow, Old English m&aelig;&thorn; harvest, crop), from
PIE *metwa- a mown field, from root *me- (4) mow, cut down grass or grain (see mow (v.)). Now only
archaic or poetic.


meadow (n.)

Old English m&aelig;dwe meadow, pasture, originally land covered in grass which is mown for hay;
oblique case of m&aelig;d (see mead (n.2)).


meadowy (adj.)

1590s, from meadow + -y (2).


meager (adj.)

late 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), lean, thin, emaciated (of persons or animals), from Old French
megre, maigre thin (12c.), from Latin macrum (nominative macer) lean, thin (source of Spanish,
Portuguese, and Italian magro), from PIE *makro- (see macro-). Of material things (land, food, etc.)
from early 15c. Cognate Germanic words (Old Norse magr thin, Old High German magar, German mager,
Middle Dutch magher, Dutch mager, Old English m&#230;ger) come directly from the PIE root via Proto-
Germanic *magras and are not from Latin.


meagerly (adv.)

also meagrely, 1580s, from meager + -ly (2).


meagerness (n.)

also meagreness, early 15c., from meager + -ness.


meagre (adj.)

chiefly British English spelling of meager (q.v.); for spelling, see -re.


meal (n.1)

food; time for eating, c.1200 (perhaps late Old English), mel appointed time for eating, also a
meal, feast, from Old English m&aelig;l fixed time, occasion, a meal, from Proto-Germanic
*m&aelig;la- (cognates: Old Frisian mel time; Middle Dutch mael, Dutch maal time, meal; Old Norse
mal measure, time, meal; German Mal time, Mahl meal; Gothic mel time, hour), from PIE *me-lo-, from
root *me- to measure (see meter (n.2)). Original sense of time is preserved in piecemeal. Meals-on-
wheels attested from 1961. Meal ticket first attested 1870 in literal sense of ticket of admission
to a dining hall; figurative sense of source of income or livelihood is from 1899.


meal (n.2)

edible ground grain, Old English melu meal, flour, from Proto-Germanic *melwan grind (cognates: Old
Frisian mele meal, Old Saxon melo, Middle Dutch mele, Dutch meel, Old High German melo, German Mehl,
Old Norse mj&#246;l meal; Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic malan to grind, German mahlen), from
PIE root *mel- (1) soft (see mallet).


mealtime (n.)

also meal-time, late 12c., from meal (n.1) + time (n.). Etymologically, a tautology.


mealy (adj.)

resembling or consisting of meal, 1530s, from meal (n.2) + -y (2). Related: Mealiness.


mealy-mouthed (adj.)

afraid to say what one really thinks, 1570s; first element perhaps from Old English milisc sweet,
from Proto-Germanic *meduz honey (see mead (n.1)), which suits the sense, but if the Old English
word did not survive long enough to be the source of this, perhaps the first element is from meal
(n.2) on notion of the softness of ground flour (compare Middle English melishe (adj.) friable,
loose, used of soils).


mean (v.1)

intend, have in mind, Old English m&aelig;nan to mean, intend, signify; tell, say; complain, lament,
from West Germanic *mainijan (cognates: Old Frisian mena to signify, Old Saxon menian to intend,
signify, make known, Dutch menen, German meinen think, suppose, be of the opinion), from PIE *meino-
opinion, intent (cognates: Old Church Slavonic meniti to think, have an opinion, Old Irish mian
wish, desire, Welsh mwyn enjoyment), perhaps from root *men- think (see mind (n.)). Conversational
question you know what I mean? attested by 1834.


mean (adj.1)

low-quality, c.1200, shared by all, from imene, from Old English gem&aelig;ne common, public,
general, universal, shared by all, from Proto-Germanic *ga-mainiz possessed jointly (cognates: Old
Frisian mene, Old Saxon gimeni, Middle Low German gemeine, Middle Dutch gemene, Dutch gemeen, German
gemein, Gothic gamains common), from PIE *ko-moin-i- held in common, a compound adjective formed
from collective prefix *ko- together (Proto-Germanic *ga-) + *moi-n-, suffixed form of PIE root
*mei- (1) to change, exchange (see mutable). Compare second element in common (adj.), a word with a
sense evolution parallel to that of this word.  Of things, inferior, second-rate, from late 14c. (a
secondary sense in Old English was false, wicked). Notion of so-so, mediocre led to confusion with
mean (n.). Meaning inferior in rank or status (of persons) emerged early 14c.; that of ordinary from
late 14c.; that of stingy, nasty first recorded 1660s; weaker sense of disobliging, pettily
offensive is from 1839, originally American English slang. Inverted sense of remarkably good (i.e.
plays a mean saxophone) first recorded c.1900, perhaps from phrase no mean _______ not inferior
(1590s, also, not average, reflecting further confusion with mean (n.)).


mean (n.)

that which is halfway between extremes, early 14c., from Old French meien middle, means,
intermediary, noun use of adjective from Latin medianus of or that is in the middle (see mean
(adj.2)). Oldest sense is musical; mathematical sense is from c.1500. Some senes reflect confusion
with mean (adj.1). This is the mean in by no means (late 15c.).


mean (v.2)

calculate an arithemtical mean, 1882, from mean (n.).


mean (adj.2)

occupying a middle or intermediate place, mid-14c., from Anglo-French meines (plural), Old French
meien, variant of moiien mid-, medium, common, middle-class (12c., Modern French moyen), from Late
Latin medianus of the middle, from Latin medius in the middle (see medial (adj.)). Meaning
intermediate in time is from mid-15c. Mathematical sense is from late 14c.


mean-spirited (adj.)

also meanspirited, 1690s, from mean (adj.1) + spirited. Ancient Greek had the same image in
mikropsykhos.


meander (n.)

1570s, confusion, intricacies, from Latin meander a winding course, from Greek Maiandros, name of a
river in Caria noted for its winding course (the Greeks used the name figuratively for winding
patterns). In reference to river courses, in English, from 1590s. Adjectival forms are meandrine
(1846); meandrous (1650s).


meander (v.)

flow in a winding course (of rivers), 1610s, from meander (n.). Of a person, to wander aimlessly
(1831), originally of persons traveling on a river (1821), perhaps influenced by confusion with
maunder [OED]. Related: Meandered; meandering.


meanie (n.)

also meany, cruel person, 1927, from mean (adj.) + -y (3).


meaning (n.)

sense, import, intent, c.1300, from mean (v.).


meaningful (adj.)

1827, from meaning (n.) + -ful. Related: Meaningfully.


meaningless (adj.)

1730, from meaning + -less. Related: Meaninglessly; meaninglessness.


meanly (adv.)

1580s, indifferently; 1590s, basely; c.1600, illiberally;   from mean (adj.1) + -ly (2).


meanness (n.)

1550s, weakness, from mean (adj.) + -ness. Sense of baseness, poverty is from 1650s; that of
stinginess from 1755.


means (n.)

course of action, late 14c., from mean (n.); sense of wealth is first recorded c.1600. Compare
French moyens, German Mittel. Phrase by no means attested from late 15c.; means-test is from 1930.


meant

past participle of mean (v.).


meantime (n.)

also mean time, mid-14c., from mean (adj.2) middle, intermediate + time (n.). Late 14c. as an
adverb. In the mean space meanwhile was in use 16c.-18c.


meanwhile (n.)

also mean while, mid-14c., from mean (adj.2) middle, intermediate + while (n.). Late 14c. as an
adverb.


meany

see meanie.


measles (n.)

infectious disease, early 14c., plural of Middle English masel, perhaps from Middle Dutch masel
blemish (in plural measles) or Middle Low German masele, from Proto-Germanic *mas- spot, blemish
(cognates: Old High German masla blood-blister, German Masern measles).    There might have been an
Old English cognate, but if so it has not been recorded. Form probably influenced by Middle English
mesel leprous (late 13c.).


measly (adj.)

affected with measles, 1680s, from measle (see measles) + -y (2); sense of meager and contemptible
first recorded 1864 in British slang.


measurability (n.)

1690s; see measurable + -ity.


measurable (adj.)

c.1300, moderate, from Old French mesurable restrained, moderate, sensible; restricted, from Late
Latin mensurabilis, from mensurare (see measure (v.)). Meaning that can be measured is from mid-14c.
Related: Measurably.


measure (v.)

c.1300, to deal out by measure, from Old French mesurer measure; moderate, curb (12c.), from Late
Latin mensurare to measure, from Latin mensura a measuring, a measurement; thing to measure by, from
mensus, past participle of metiri to measure, from PIE *me- (2) to measure (see meter (n.2)).
Replaced Old English cognate m&aelig;&eth; measure. Meaning to ascertain spatial dimensions of is
mid-14c. To measure up have the necessary abilities is 1910, American English. Related: Measured;
measuring.


measure (n.)

c.1200, moderation, temperance, abstemiousness; c.1300, instrument for measuring, from Old French
mesure limit, boundary; quantity, dimension; occasion, time (12c.), from Latin mensura measure (see
measure (v.)). Meaning size or quantity as ascertained by measuring is from early 14c. Meaning
action of measuring; standard measure of quantity; system of measuring; appointed or alloted amount
of anything is late 14c. Also from late 14c. are senses proper proportion, balance. Sense of that to
which something is compared to determine its quantity is from 1570s. Meaning rhythmic pattern in
music is late 14c.; from mid-15c. in poetry, c.1500 in dance. Meaning treatment 'meted out' to
someone is from 1590s; that of plan or course of action intended to obtain some goal is from 1690s;
sense of legislative enactment is from 1759. Phrase for good measure (late 14c.) is literally ample
in quantity, in goods sold by measure.


measured (adj.)

late 14c., deliberate, restrained, adjective from past participle of measure (v.). Meaning uniform,
regular is from c.1400.


measurement (n.)

1751, act of measuring, from measure (v.) + -ment. Related: Measurements. Meaning dimension obtained
by measuring is from 1756.


meat (n.)

Old English mete food, item of food (paired with drink), from Proto-Germanic *mati (cognates: Old
Frisian mete, Old Saxon meti, Old Norse matr, Old High German maz, Gothic mats food, Middle Dutch,
Dutch metworst, German Mettwurst type of sausage), from PIE *mad-i-, from root *mad- moist, wet,
also with reference to food qualities, (cognates: Sanskrit medas- fat (n.), Old Irish mat pig; see
mast (n.2)).  Narrower sense of flesh used as food is first attested c.1300; similar sense evolution
in French viande meat, originally food. Figurative sense of essential part is from 1901. Dark meat,
white meat popularized 19c., supposedly as euphemisms for leg and breast, but earliest sources use
both terms without apparent embarrassment.    The choicest parts of a turkey are the side bones, the
breast, and the thigh bones. The breast and wings are called light meat; the thigh-bones and side-
bones dark meat. When a person declines expressing a preference, it is polite to help to both kinds.
[Lydia Maria Child, The American Frugal Housewife, Boston, 1835]    First record of meat loaf is
from 1876. Meat market place where one looks for sex partners is from 1896 (meat in various sexual
senses of penis, vagina, body regarded as a sex object, prostitute are attested from 1590s); meat
wagon ambulance is from 1920, American English slang, said to date from World War I (in a literal
sense by 1857). Meat-grinder in the figurative sense attested by 1951. Meat-hook in colloquial
transferred sense arm attested by 1919.


meatball (n.)

1801, from meat + ball (n.1). As an insult to a person, by 1941.


Meath

county in Ireland, from Irish An Mhi, literally the middle.


meathead (n.)

stupid person, 1945, from meat + head (n.).


meatless (adj.)

Old English meteleas without food, without eating, see meat + -less. Meaning without meat is from
mid-14c.


meaty (adj.)

full of meat, 1787, from meat (n.) + -y (2). Figurative sense full of substance is from 1881.
Related: Meatiness.


Mecca

Arabic Makkah, sacred city of Islam, birthplace of Muhammad, which every Muslim must visit at least
once. Origins have been proposed in Phoenician maqaq ruined or Arabic mahrab sanctuary. Figurative
sense of any place one holds supremely sacred (usually with lower-case m-) is in English from 1850.
Related: Meccan.


mechanic (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to or involving mechanical labor (now usually mechanical), also having to do
with tools, from Latin mechanicus, from Greek mekhanikos full of resources, inventive, ingenious,
literally mechanical, pertaining to machines, from mekhane (see machine (n.)). Meaning of the nature
of or pertaining to machines is from 1620s.


mechanic (n.)

manual laborer, late 14c., from Latin mechanicus, from Greek mekhanikos an engineer, noun use of
adjective meaning full of resources, inventive, ingenious (see mechanic (adj.)). Sense of one who is
employed in manual labor, a handicraft worker, an artisan (chief sense through early 19c.) is
attested from 1560s. Sense of skilled workman who is concerned with making or repair of machinery is
from 1660s, but not the main sense until the rise of the automobile.


mechanical (adj.)

early 15c., of or pertaining to machines, from mechanic (adj.) + -al (1); of persons or human
actions, resembling machines, automatic it is from c.1600. Related: Mechanically. Mechanical-minded
is recorded from 1820.


mechanics (n.)

1640s, based on Late Latin mechanica, from Greek mekhanike, mekhanika (see mechanic (adj.)); also
see -ics.


mechanism (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin mechanismus, from Greek mekhane machine, instrument (see machine (n.)).


mechanization (n.)

1834, from mechanize + -ation.    In our country, the ancient languages are studied, to a sad
extent, as a mere exercise in the technics of etymology, syntax and prosody; and when thus pursued,
there can be no good reason for so great a sacrifice of time and labor, or for that mechanization
(if we may make a term) of mind which is the natural result. [American Annals of Education and
Instruction, December 1834]


mechanize (v.)

1670s; see mechanic (adj.) + -ize. Related: Mechanized; mechanizing.


mechanized (adj.)

in the military sense of equipped with or using mechanical vehicles and weapons, 1928, from past
participle of mechanize (v.).


mechano-

word-forming element meaning mechanics, mechanism, from Greek mekhano-, comb. form of mekhane (see
machine (n.)).


meconic (adj.)

in reference to an acid obtained from opium, 1819, from Greek mekonikos of or pertaining to the
poppy, from mekon poppy (see meconium). Related: Meconine (n.).


meconium (n.)

fecal discharge from a newborn infant, 1706, from Latin meconium excrement of a newborn child,
literally poppy juice, from Greek mekonion poppy-juice, opium, diminutive of mekon poppy (perhaps
cognate with Old Church Slavonic maku, German Mohn poppy). So called by classical physicians for its
resemblance. Related: Meconial.


med (n.)

colloquial abbreviation of medicine, 1942. With a capital M and short for Mediterranean, by 1948.


medal (v.)

1845, stamped onto a medal, from medal (n.). From 1857 as to award (someone or something) a medal;
intransitive sense is 20c. Related: Medaled; medalled; medaling; medalling.


medal (n.)

1580s, from Middle French m&eacute;daille (15c.), from Italian medaglia a medal, according to OED
from Vulgar Latin *metallea (moneta) metal (coin), from Latin metallum (see metal). The other theory
[Klein, Barnhart, Watkins] is that medaglia originally meant coin worth half a denarius, and is from
Vulgar Latin *medalia, from Late Latin medialia little halves, neuter plural of medialis of the
middle (see medial (adj.)). Originally a trinket or charm; as a reward for merit, proficiency, etc.,
attested from 1751.


medalist (n.)

1680s, one skilled in medals, from medal (n.) + -ist. Meaning medal-maker is from 1756; that of
recipient of a medal is from 1797.


medallion (n.)

1650s, from French m&eacute;daillon (17c.), from Italian medaglione large medal, augmentative of
medaglia (see medal).


meddle (v.)

early 14c., to mingle, blend, mix, from Old North French medler (Old French mesler, 12c., Modern
French m&#234;ler) to mix, mingle, to meddle, from Vulgar Latin *misculare (source of
Proven&ccedil;al mesclar, Spanish mezclar, Italian mescolare, meschiare), from Latin miscere to mix
(see mix (v.)). From late 14c. as busy oneself, be concerned with, engage in; also disparagingly
interfere, be officious, make a nuisance of oneself (the notion is of meddling too much). From mid-
14c. to 1700, it also was a euphemism for have sexual intercourse. Related: Meddled; meddling.


meddler (n.)

late 14c., practitioner, agent noun from meddle (v.). Meaning one who interferes, a nuisance is mid-
15c.


meddlesome (adj.)

1610s, from meddle + -some (1). Earlier was medlous quarrelsome, meddlesome (mid-15c.). Related:
Meddlesomely. Character name Meddlesome Mattie attested from 1814.


meddling (n.)

action of blending, mid-14c., from present participle of meddle (v.). Meaning action of taking part,
interference is late 14c. As a past participle adjective, from 1520s. Related: Meddlingly.


Mede

inhabitant of ancient Media, late 14c., from Latin Medus, from Greek Medos Mede, from the indigenous
people-name Medes, said to be from the name of their first king (Medos).


Medea

famous sorceress, daughter of the king of Colchis, from Latin Medea, from Greek Medeia, literally
cunning, related to medos counsel, plan, device, cunning, medein to protect, rule over, from PIE
root *med- to measure, limit, consider (see meditation).


medevac

1966, U.S. military, formed from elements of medical evacuation.


media (n.)

newspapers, radio, TV, etc. 1927, perhaps abstracted from mass media (1923, a technical term in
advertising), plural of medium, on notion of intermediate agency, a sense found in that word in
English from c.1600.


mediaeval

see medieval.


medial (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to a mathematical mean, from Late Latin medialis of the middle, from Latin medius
in the middle, from PIE *medhyo- middle (cognates: Sanskrit madhyah, Avestan madiya- middle, Greek
mesos, Gothic midjis, Old English midd middle, Old Church Slavonic medzu between, Armenian mej
middle); perhaps related to PIE root *me- between. Meaning occupying a middle position is attested
from 1721.


medial (n.)

a medial letter, 1776, from medial (adj.).


medially (adv.)

1804, from medial (adj.) + -ly (2).


median (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French m&eacute;dian (15c.) and directly from Latin medianus of the middle, from
medius in the middle (see medial (adj.)). Originally anatomical, of veins, arteries, nerves. Median
strip strip between lanes of traffic is from 1954.


median (n.)

a median part, 1540s, from Latin medianus (see median (adj.)). Meaning middle number of a series is
from 1883.


mediant (n.)

third note of the diatonic scale, 1753, from Italian mediante, from Late Latin mediantem (nominative
medians) dividing in the middle, present participle of mediare to be in the middle (see medial
(adj.)). So called from being midway between the tonic and the dominant.


mediate (v.)

1540s, divide in two equal parts, probably a back-formation from mediation or mediator, or else from
Latin mediatus, past participle of mediare. Meaning act as a mediator is from 1610s; that of settle
by mediation is from 1560s. Related: Mediated, mediates, mediating.


mediation (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin mediationem (nominative mediatio) a division in the middle, noun of
action from past participle stem of mediare (see mediator). Related: Mediational.


mediator (n.)

mid-14c., from Late Latin mediatorem (nominative mediator) one who mediates, agent noun from past
participle stem of mediari to intervene, mediate, also to be or divide in the middle, from Latin
medius in the middle (see medial (adj.)). Originally applied to Christ, who in Christian theology
mediates between God and man. Meaning one who intervenes between two disputing parties is first
attested late 14c. Feminine form mediatrix (originally of the Virgin Mary) from c.1400. Related:
Mediatorial; mediatory.


medic (n.)

1650s, physician, medical student, from Latin medicus physician (see medical (adj.)); modern sense
of serviceman in a military medical corps first recorded 1925.


medicable (adj.)

1610s, from Latin medicabilis curable, from medicare (see medical).


Medicaid

1966, U.S. medical assistance program set up by Title XIX of the Social Security Act of 1965. See
medical + aid (n.).


medical (adj.)

1640s, from French m&eacute;dical, from Late Latin medicalis of a physician, from Latin medicus
physician, surgeon, medical man (n.); healing, madicinal (adj.), from mederi to heal, give medical
attention to, cure, originally know the best course for, from an early specialization of the PIE
root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take appropriate measures (cognates: Greek medomai
be mindful of, medein to rule;  Avestan vi-mad- physician; Latin meditari think or reflect on,
consider; Irish miduir judge; Old English metan to measure out); also see meditation. The earlier
adjective in English in this sense was medicinal. Related: Medically.


medical (n.)

1917, short for medical examination.


medicament (n.)

mid-15c., medical skill; a medicinal compound, from Middle French m&eacute;dicament (15c.), from
Latin medicamentum drug, remedy, literally means of healing, from medicare to heal, cure (see
medication).


Medicare

name for a state-run health insurance system, 1962, originally in a Canadian context, from medical +
care. U.S. use is from 1965.


medicaster (n.)

quack, c.1600, from Latin *medicaster (source also of Italian medicastro, French m&#233;dicastre,
16c.), from medicus (see medical (adj.)). The feminine form is medicastra. Compare also -aster.


medicate (v.)

to treat medicinally, 1620s, a back-formation from medication, or else from Late Latin medicatus,
past participle of medicare. Related: Medicated; medicating. The earlier verb in English was simply
medicin (late 14c.).


medication (n.)

early 15c., medical treatment of a disease or wound, from Middle French m&eacute;dication and
directly from Latin medicationem (nominative medicatio) healing, cure, from past participle stem of
medicare, medicari to medicate, heal, cure (poetic and Late Latin) from medicus physician, healing
(see medical (adj.)).


medicinal (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French medicinal and directly from Latin medicinalis pertaining to medicine,
from medicina (see medicine). Related: Medicinally.


medicine (n.)

c.1200, medical treatment, cure, remedy, also used figuratively, of spiritual remedies, from Old
French medecine (Modern French m&#233;dicine) medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, potion,
from Latin medicina the healing art, medicine; a remedy, also used figuratively, perhaps originally
ars medicina the medical art, from fem. of medicinus (adj.) of a doctor, from medicus a physician
(see medical); though OED finds evidence for this is wanting. Meaning a medicinal potion or plaster
in English is mid-14c.    To take (one's) medicine submit to something disagreeable is first
recorded 1865. North American Indian medicine-man shaman is first attested 1801, from American
Indian adoption of the word medicine in sense of magical influence. The U.S.-Canadian boundary they
called Medicine Line (first attested 1910), because it conferred a kind of magic protection:
punishment for crimes committed on one side of it could be avoided by crossing over to the other.
Medicine show traveling show meant to attract a crowd so patent medicine can be sold to them is
American English, 1938. Medicine ball stuffed leather ball used for exercise is from 1889.    It is
called a medicine ball and it got that title from Prof. Roberts, now of Springfield, whose fame is
widespread, and whose bright and peculiar dictionary of terms for his prescription department in
physical culture is taught in every first-class conducted Y.M.C.A. gymnasium in America. Prof.
Roberts calls it a medicine ball because playful exercise with it invigorates the body, promotes
digestion, and restores and preserves one's health. [Scientific American Supplement, March 16, 1889]


medico (n.)

medical practitioner, 1680s, from Spanish m&#233;dico or Italian medico, from Latin medicus (see
medical (adj.)).


medico-

used as a comb. form of Latin medicus (see medical (adj.)).


medico-legal (adj.)

1835, from medico- + legal.


medieval (adj.)

1827, pertaining to or suggestive of the Middle Ages, coined in English from Latin medium the middle
(see medium (n.)) + aevum age (see eon).


medievalism (n.)

1846, from medieval + -ism.


medievalist (n.)

1847, proponent of medieval styles, from medieval + -ist. From 1882 as one versed in the history of
the Middle Ages.


medievally (adv.)

1844, from medieval + -ly (2).


medio-

word-forming element from comb. form of Latin medius middle (see medial (adj.)).


mediocre (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French m&eacute;diocre (16c.), from Latin mediocris of middling height or state,
moderate, ordinary, figuratively mediocre, mean, inferior, originally halfway up a mountain, from
medius middle (see medial (adj.)) + ocris jagged mountain (cognate with Greek okris peak, point,
Welsh ochr corner, border, Latin acer sharp; see acrid). As a noun, medicore thing or person, by
1834.


mediocritization (n.)

1917 (Will Durant), noun of state or action from mediocritize.


mediocritize (v.)

1854 (implied in mediocritizing); see mediocrity + -ize. Related: Mediocritized.


mediocrity (n.)

early 15c., moderation; intermediate state or amount, from Middle French m&#233;diocrit&#233; and
directly from Latin mediocritatem (nominative mediocritas) a middle state, middling condition,
medium, from mediocris (see mediocre). Neutral at first; disparaging sense began to predominate from
late 16c. The meaning person of mediocre abilities or attainments is from 1690s. Before the tinge of
disparagement crept in, another name for the Golden Mean was golden mediocrity.


meditate (v.)

1580s, to ponder, back-formation from meditation, or else from Latin meditatus, past participle of
meditari (see meditation). Related: Meditated; meditating.


meditation (n.)

c.1200, contemplation; devout preoccupation; devotions, prayer, from Old French meditacion thought,
reflection, study, and directly from Latin meditationem (nominative meditatio) a thinking over,
meditation, noun of action from past participle stem of meditari to meditate, think over, reflect,
consider, frequentative form from PIE root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take
appropriate measures (cognates: Greek medesthai think about, medon ruler; Latin modus measure,
manner, modestus moderate, modernus modern, mederi to heal, medicus physician; Sanskrit midiur I
judge, estimate; Welsh meddwl mind, thinking; Gothic miton, Old English metan to measure; also see
medical).    Meaning discourse on a subject is early 14c.; meaning act of meditating, continuous
calm thought upon some subject is from late 14c. The Latin verb also had stronger senses: plan,
devise, practice, rehearse, study.


meditative (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin meditativus, from meditat-, past participle stem of Latin meditari (see
meditation). Related: Meditatively; meditativeness.


Mediterranean

the sea between southern Europe and northern Africa, c.1400, from Late Latin Mediterraneum mare
Mediterranean Sea (7c.), from Latin mediterraneus midland; the original sense being of sea in the
middle of the earth, from medius middle (see medial (adj.)) + terra land, earth (see terrain). The
Old English name was Wendel-s&aelig;, so called for the Vandals, Germanic tribe that settled on the
southwest coast of it after the fall of Rome. The noun meaning a person of Mediterranean race is
from 1888.


medium (n.)

1580s, a middle ground, quality, or degree, from Latin medium the middle, midst, center; interval,
noun use of neuter of adjective medius (see medial (adj.)). Meaning intermediate agency, channel of
communication is from c.1600. That of person who conveys spiritual messages first recorded 1853,
from notion of substance through which something is conveyed. Artistic sense (oil, watercolors,
etc.) is from 1854. Happy medium is the golden mean, Horace's aurea mediocritas.


medium (adj.)

1660s, average, from medium (n.). The Latin adjective was medius. Meaning intermediate is from 1796.
As a size designation from 1711. as a designation of cooked meat, it is attested from 1931, short
for medium-rare (1881).


medlar (n.)

small fruit-bearing tree, mid-14c. (in reference to the fruit itself), from Old French medler,
variant of mesple, from Latin mespila fruit of the medlar, from Greek mespilion, a foreign word of
unknown origin. The Old English name was open&#230;rs, literally open-arse.


medley (n.)

c.1300, hand-to-hand combat, from Old French medlee, variant of meslee (see meddle). Meaning
combination, mixture is from mid-15c.; that of musical combination consisting of diverse parts is
from 1620s.


medulla (n.)

hindmost segment of the brain, 1650s, from Latin medulla, literally marrow, also pith of plants, of
unknown origin, perhaps related to or influenced by medius middle (but compare also Old Irish smiur,
Welsh mer marrow). The word was used in the Latin senses in Middle English. Related: Medular;
medullary.


medusa (n.)

jellyfish, 1758, as genus name, from the name of one of the three Gorgons with snakes for hair,
whose glance turned to stone him who looked upon it (attested in English from late 14c.). Her name
is from Greek Medousa, literally guardian, fem. present participle of the verb medein to protect,
rule over (see Medea). The zoological name was chosen by Linn&aelig;us, suggested by the creature's
long tentacles. Related: Medusoid.


meek (adj.)

c.1200, gentle, quiet, unaggressive; benevolent, kind; courteous, humble, unassuming; of a woman,
modest, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse mjukr soft, pliant, gentle, from Proto-Germanic
*meukaz (cognates: Gothic muka-modei humility, Dutch muik soft), of uncertain origin, perhaps from
PIE *meug- slippery, slimy. In the Bible, it translates Latin mansuetus from Vulgate (see
mansuetude). Sense of submissive is from mid-14c.


meek (n.)

those who are meek, c.1200, from meek (adj.).


meekly (adv.)

c.1200, from meek (adj.) + -ly (2).


meekness (n.)

c.1200, meknesse; see meek (adj.) + -ness.


meerkat (n.)

late 15c., monkey, from Dutch meerkat monkey (related to Old High German mericazza), apparently from
meer lake + kat cat. But compare Hindi markat, Sanskrit markata ape, which might serve as a source
of a Teutonic folk-etymology, even though the word was in Germanic before any known direct contact
with India. First applied to the small South African mammals in 1801.


meerschaum (n.)

type of soft white clay, 1784; from 1789 as tobacco pipe with a bowl made of meerschaum clay, from
German Meerschaum, literally sea-foam, so called from its frothy appearance; from Old High German
mari sea (see mere (n.)) + scum scum (see skim (v.)). A loan-translation of Latin spuma maris,
itself said to be a loan translation of Greek halos akhne, from Persian kaf-i-darya.


meet (v.)

Old English metan to find, find out; fall in with, encounter; obtain, from Proto-Germanic *motjan
(cognates: Old Norse m&aelig;ta, Old Frisian meta, Old Saxon motian to meet, Gothic gamotijan), from
PIE root *mod- to meet, assemble. Related to Old English gemot meeting. Meaning to assemble is from
1520s. Of things, to come into contact, c.1300. Related: Met; meeting. To meet (someone) halfway in
the figurative sense is from 1620s.


meet (adj.)

proper, fitting, Old English gem&aelig;te, Anglian *gemete, suitable, having the same dimensions,
from Proto-Germanic *ga-m&aelig;tijaz (cognates: Old Norse m&aelig;tr, Old High German gimagi,
German gem&auml;&szlig; suitable), from collective prefix *ga- + PIE *med- to measure (see medical
(adj.)). The basic formation is thus the same as that of commensurate.


meet (n.)

1831 in the sporting sense, originally of gatherings for hunting, from meet (v.).


meeting (n.)

action of coming together, Old English gemeting, verbal noun from meet (v.). Meaning gathering of
people for discussion, etc. is from 1510s. In 17c., it was applied generally to worship assemblies
of nonconformists, but this now is retained mostly by Quakers.


meeting-house (n.)

also meetinghouse, 1630s, from meeting (n.) + house (n.).


Meg

fem. proper name; before the late 20c. rise in popularity of Megan it typically was a pet form of
Margaret, and was used dial. to indicate a hoyden, coarse woman, etc. [OED]


mega-

before vowels meg-, word-forming element often meaning large, great, but in precise scientific
language one million (megaton, megawatt, etc.), from Greek megas great, large, vast, big, high,
tall; mighty, important (fem. megale), from PIE *meg- great (cognates: Latin magnus, Old English
micel; see mickle). Mega began to be used alone as an adjective by 1982.High-speed computer stores
2.5 megabits [headline in Electronics magazine, Oct. 1, 1957]


megabucks (n.)

1946, originally one million dollars, from mega- in the scientific sense + slang buck (n.) dollar. A
jocular coinage of U.S. scientists working on expensive atomic research.


megabyte (n.)

1972, from mega- + byte.    The Sussex team has run the Forrester/Meadows models more than 1000
times on the UK's most powerful computer (the giant two-megabyte IBM 370/165 at Harwell). [New
Scientist, May 4, 1972]


megacity (n.)

also mega-city, 1968, from mega- + city.


megacycle (n.)

1928, from mega- + cycle (n.).


megadeath (n.)

1953, from mega- in scientific sense (one million) + death (n.). The death of one million persons,
as a measure of the effectiveness of nuclear weapons. The resulting pile of dead bodies would be a
megacorpse, according to writings on the topic.


megahertz (n.)

1941, from mega- + Hertz.


megalith (n.)

huge prehistoric stone, 1853, back-formation from megalithic.


megalithic (adj.)

1836, from mega- large + lithos stone (see litho-) + -ic.


megalo-

word-forming element meaning large, great, exaggerated, from comb. form of Greek megas large, great
(stem megal-); see mickle.


megalocardia

1893, from megalo- + cardia heart (see cardiac).


megalomania (n.)

delusions of greatness, 1866, from French m&eacute;galomanie; see megalo- + mania madness.


megalomaniac

1882 (n.), 1883 (adj.), from megalomania (q.v.).  The megalomaniac differs from the narcissist by
the fact that he wishes to be powerful rather than charming, and seeks to be feared rather than
loved. To this type belong many lunatics and most of the great men of history. [Bertrand Russell,
The Conquest of Happiness]


megalomaniacal (adj.)

1884, from megalomaniac + -al (1).


megalopolis (n.)

1832, from comb. form of Greek megas (genitive megalou) great (see mickle) + polis city (see polis).
The word was used in classical times as an epithet of great cities (Athens, Syracuse, Alexandria),
and it also was the name of a former city in Arcadia.


megaphone (n.)

1878, coined (perhaps by Thomas Edison, who invented it) from Greek megas great (see mega-) + phone
voice (see fame (n.)). Related: Megaphonic. In Greek, megalophonia meant grandiloquence,
megalophonos loud-voiced.


megapixel (n.)

by 1977, from mega- + pixel.


megaspore (n.)

1857, from mega- + spore.


megaton (n.)

unit of explosive power equal to one million tons of TNT, 1952, from mega- + ton. Related:
Megatonnage.


megavolt (n.)

1868, from mega- + volt.


megawatt (v.)

1900, from mega- + watt.


megillah (n.)

long, tedious, complicated story, 1957, from Yiddish (as in a gantse Megillah a whole megillah),
literally roll, scroll, collective name of the five Old Testament books appointed to be read on
certain feast days, from Hebrew meghillah, from galal he rolled, unfolded. The slang use is in
reference to the length of the text.


megrim

see migraine.


meh

expression of apathy or indifference, by 2003 (perhaps from 1992).


Meiji

period of rule of emperor Mutsuhito (1868-1912), which was marked by modernization and
Westernization, 1873, from Japanese, literally enlightened government.


mein (n.)

Chinese wheat flour noodles (in lo mein, chow mein, etc.), 1934, from Chinese, literally wheat
flour.


meiosis (n.)

division of a cell nucleus, 1905, from Greek meiosis a lessening, from meioun to lessen, from meion
less, from PIE root *mei- (2) small (see minus).    Earlier (1580s) it was a rhetorical term, a
figure of speech weak or negative expression used for a positive and forcible one, so that it may be
made all the more emphatic, as when one says not bad meaning very good or don't mind if I do meaning
I really would like to, or this example from Mark Twain:    YOUNG AUTHOR. -- Yes Agassiz does
recommend authors to eat fish, because the phosphorus in it makes brains. So far you are correct.
But I cannot help you to a decision about the amount you need to eat,--at least, not with certainty.
If the specimen composition you send is about your fair usual average, I should judge that perhaps a
couple of whales would be all you would want for the present. Not the largest kind, but simply good,
middling-sized whales.    Related: meiotic; meiotically.


meistersinger (n.)

1845, from German Meistersinger, literally master singer; see master (adj.) + singer.


Mekong

river in Southeast Asia, Thai, from me mother + khong river, large stream.


melancholia (n.)

1690s, from Modern Latin melancholia (see melancholy).


melancholiac (n.)

1863, from melancholy. Earlier in same sense was melancholian (mid-14c.).


melancholic (adj.)

late 14c., from melancholy + -ic, or else from Late Latin melancholicus, from Greek melankholikos
choleric, from melankholia â&euro;&oelig;sadnessâ&euro;? (see melancholy). As a noun, from 1580s.
Earlier adjective formation was melancholian (mid-14c.), and melancholiac (mid-19c.) also was tried.


melancholy (n.)

c.1300, condition characterized by sullenness, gloom, irritability, from Old French melancolie black
bile, ill disposition, anger, annoyance (13c.), from Late Latin melancholia, from Greek melankholia
sadness, literally (excess of) black bile, from melas (genitive melanos) black (see melanin) + khole
bile (see Chloe). Medieval physiology attributed depression to excess of black bile, a secretion of
the spleen and one of the body's four humors.    The Latin word also is the source of Spanish
melancolia, Italian melancolia, German Melancholie, Danish melankoli, etc. Old French variant
malencolie (also in Middle English) is by false association with mal sickness.


melancholy (adj.)

late 14c., with or caused by black bile; sullen, gloomy, sad, from melancholy (n.); sense of
deplorable (of a fact or state of things) is from 1710.


Melanesia

one of three large divisions of Pacific islands, 1840, from a continental language, from melano- +
nesos island (see Chersonese) + -ia. Modeled after Polynesia and meant to signify the islands
inhabited by blacks.   La Melanesia comprende la grande isola Australia, e quelle degli arcipelaghi
di Salomone, di Lap&#232;rouse, di Quiros, e dei gruppi della Nuova Caledonia, di Norfolk, e della
Diemenin. A cagione dei Neri Oceanici, che, quasi esclusivamente, ne popolano le regioni, questa
parte della Oceania ebbe dai moderni geografi e viaggiatori (il Graberg, il Rienzi, il d'Urville,
ec.) il nome di Melanesia. [Corso di Geografia Universale, Firenze, 1839]


Melanesian (adj.)

1840, from Melanesia + -ian.


melange (n.)

1650s, from French m&eacute;lange (15c.), from m&ecirc;ler to mix, mingle, from Old French mesler
(see meddle).


melanin (n.)

dark brown or black pigment found in animal bodies, 1832, Modern Latin, with chemical suffix -in
(2); first element from Greek melas (genitive melanos) black, from PIE root *mel- (2) of darkish
color (cognates: Sanskrit malinah dirty, stained, black, Lithuanian melynas blue, Latin mulleus
reddish). Related: Melanism; melanistic.


melanism (n.)

1843, from melano- + -ism.


melano-

word-forming element meaning black, from Greek melano-, comb. form of melas (genitive melanos)
black, dark, murky (see melanin).


melanoma (n.)

tumor containing melanin, 1826, medical Latin, from Greek melas (genitive melanos) black (see
melanin) + -oma.


melanosis (n.)

1823, medical Latin, from Greek melanosis a becoming black, from melanoun to become black, from
melas (genitive melanos); see melanin. Related: Melanotic.


melatonin (n.)

1958, from Greek melas black, dark (see melanin) + ending from serotonin. So called because its
secretion is inhibited by sunlight.


Melba

in various food preparations, especially peach Melba (1905) and Melba toast (1925) is in honor of
Nellie Melba, stage name (based on Melbourne, Australia) of Australian-born operatic soprano Helen
Mitchell (1861-1931).


Melbourne

city in Australia, named 1837 for William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne (1779-1848) then British
Prime Minister; the title is from Melbourne Hall, Derbyshire. The place name is literally mill
stream, Old English Mileburne (1086).


Melchior

masc. proper name, literally king of light, from Hebrew melekh king + or light.


Melchizedek

name of a priest-king in the Old Testament, from Hebrew Malki-tzedeq, literally king of
righteousness, from melekh king; second element related to tzadaq he was righteous, tzaddiq just,
righteous.


meld (v.)

to blend together, merge, unite (intransitive), by 1910, of uncertain origin. OED suggests perh. a
blend of MELT v.1 and WELD v. Said elsewhere to be a verb use of melled mingled, blended, past
participle of dialectal mell to mingle, mix, combine, blend.    [T]he biplane grew smaller and
smaller, the stacatto clatter of the motor became once more a drone which imperceptibly became
melded with the waning murmur of country sounds .... [Aircraft magazine, October 1910]      But it
is perhaps an image from card-playing, where the verb meld is attested by 1907 in a sense of combine
two cards for a score:    Upon winning a trick, and before drawing from the stock, the player can
meld certain combinations of cards. [rules for two-hand pinochle in Hoyle's Games, 1907]    The rise
of the general sense of the word in English coincides with the craze for canasta, in which melding
figures. The card-playing sense is said to be apparently from German melden make known, announce,
from Old High German meldon, from Proto-Germanic *meldojan (source of Old English meldian to
declare, tell, display, proclaim), and the notion is of declaring the combination of cards. Related:
Melded; melding.


melee (n.)

1640s, from French m&ecirc;l&eacute;e, from Old French meslee brawl, confused fight; mixture, blend
(12c.), noun use of fem. past participle of mesler to mix, mingle (see meddle). See also medley.
Borrowed in Middle English as melle but lost and then reborrowed 17c.


meliorate (v.)

1550s, to make better, back-formation from melioration or else from Late Latin melioratus, past
participle of Latin meliorare improve, from melior better, used as comparative of bonus good, but
probably originally meaning stronger, from PIE root *mel- strong, great, numerous (see multi-).
Related: Meliorated; meliorating; melioration; meliorative.


melioration (n.)

c.1400, improvement, from Late Latin meliorationem (nominative melioratio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin meliorare (see meliorate).


meliorism (n.)

belief that the world tends to become better, 1868, from Latin melior (see meliorate) + -ism.
Related: Meliorist (1835).


melisma (n.)

1837, from Greek melisma a song, an air, a tune, melody, from melos music, song, melody; musical
phrase or member, literally limb, from PIE *mel- a limb. Related: Melismatic.


Melissa

fem. proper name, from Latin, from Greek (Ionic) melissa (Attic melitta) honeybee, also one of the
priestesses of Delphi, from PIE *melit-ya, suffixed form of *melit- honey (cognates: Greek meli,
Latin mel honey; sweetness; Albanian mjal' honey; Old Irish mil honey, Irish milis sweet; Old
English mildeaw nectar, milisc honeyed, sweet; Old High German milsken to sweeten; Gothic
mili&thorn; honey).


mell (v.)

to mix, meddle, c.1300, mellen, from Old French meller, variant of mesler (see meddle). Related:
Melled; melling.


mellifluent (adj.)

c.1600, from Middle French mellifluent and directly from Late Latin mellifluentem (nominative
mellifluens), related to mellifluus (see mellifluous).


mellifluous (adj.)

early 15c., sweet, pleasing (of an odor, a style of speaking or writing, etc.), from Late Latin
mellifluus flowing with (or as if with) honey, from Latin mel (genitive mellis) honey (related to
Greek meli honey; see Melissa) + -fluus flowing, from fluere to flow (see fluent). Related:
Melifluously; melifluousness.


Mellotron (n.)

type of electronic musical instrument, 1963, from mello(w) + (elec)tron(ic).


mellow (adj.)

mid-15c., melwe soft, sweet, juicy (of ripe fruit), perhaps related to melowe, variant of mele
ground grain (see meal (2)), influenced by Middle English merow soft, tender, from Old English
mearu. Meaning slightly drunk is from 1680s. Mellow yellow banana peel smoked in an effort to get
high is from 1967. Related: Mellowly; mellowness.


mellow (v.)

1570s, from mellow (adj.). Related: Mellowed; mellowing.


melodeon (n.)

1847, variant of melodion, from German Melopdoin, from Melodie, from Old French melodie (see
melody).


melodic (adj.)

1818, from French m&#233;lodique, from Late Latin melodicus, from Greek melodikos, from melodia (see
melody).


melodious (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French melodios melodious; delightful (French m&eacute;lodieux), from Medieval
Latin melodiosus, from Latin melodia (see melody). Related: Melodiously; melodiousness.


melodise (v.)

see melodize; also see -ize. Related: Melodised; melodising.


melodize

1660s, from melody + -ize. Related: Melodized; melodizing.


melodrama (n.)

1784 (1782 as melo drame), a stage-play in which songs were interspersed and music accompanied the
action, from French m&eacute;lodrame (18c.), from Greek melos song (see melody) + French drame drama
(see drama). Meaning a romantic and sensational dramatic piece with a happy ending is from 1883,
because this was often the form of the original melodramas. Also from French are Spanish melodrama,
Italian melodramma, German melodram. Related: Melodramatize.


melodramatic (adj.)

1776; from foreign source of melodrama on model of dramatic. Related: Melodramatically.


melody (n.)

late 13c., from Old French melodie music, song, tune (12c.), from Late Latin melodia, from Greek
meloidia a singing, a chanting, choral song, a tune for lyric poetry, from melos song, part of song
(see melisma) + oide song, ode (see ode).


melon (n.)

late 14c., from Old French melon (13c.), from Medieval Latin melonem (nominative melo), from Latin
melopeponem, a kind of pumpkin, from Greek melopepon gourd-apple (name for several kinds of gourds
bearing sweet fruit), from melon apple (see malic) + pepon, a kind of gourd, probably noun use of
pepon ripe (see pumpkin).    In Greek, melon  was used in a generic way for all foreign fruits
(compare similar use of apple). The Greek plural of melon was used from ancient times for a girl's
breasts.


Melpomene

Muse of tragedy, from Latin, from Greek Melpomene, literally songstress, from melpein to sing, of
unknown origin.


melt (v.)

Old English meltan become liquid, consume by fire, burn up (class III strong verb; past tense mealt,
past participle molten), from Proto-Germanic *meltanan; fused with Old English gem&aelig;ltan
(Anglian), gemyltan (West Saxon) make liquid, from Proto-Germanic *gamaltijan (cognates: Old Norse
melta to digest), both from PIE *meldh-, (cognates: Sanskrit mrduh soft, mild, Greek meldein to
melt, make liquid, Latin mollis soft, mild), from root *mel- soft, with derivatives referring to
soft or softened (especially ground) materials (see mild). Figurative use by c.1200. Related:
Melted; melting.    Of food, to melt in (one's) mouth is from 1690s. Melting pot is from 1540s;
figurative use from 1855; popularized with reference to America by play The Melting Pot by Israel
Zangwill (1908).


melt (n.)

1854, molten metal, from melt (v.). In reference to a type of sandwich topped by melted cheese,
1980, American English.


meltdown (n.)

by 1937 in the ice-cream industry; by 1956 in reference to a nuclear reactor, from verbal phrase,
from melt (v.) + down (adv.). Metaphoric extension since 1979.


Melvin

masc. proper name, from Old English M&#230;lwine, literally friend of the council, from m&#230;l
council, from Proto-Germanic *mathla- (see blackmail) + wine friend (related to winnan to strive,
struggle, fight; see win (v.)).


member (n.)

late 13c., sex organ (compare Latin membrum virile, but in English originally of women as well as
men), also, body part or organ (in plural, the body), from Old French membre part, portion; topic,
subject; limb, member of the body; member (of a group, etc.), 11c., from Latin membrum limb, member
of the body, part, probably from PIE *mems-ro, from root *mems- flesh, meat (cognates: Sanskrit
mamsam flesh; Greek meninx membrane, meros thigh (the fleshy part); Gothic mimz flesh). In English,
sense of person belonging to a group is first attested early 14c., from notion of constituent part
of a complex structure. Meaning one who has been elected to parliament is from early 15c.


membership (n.)

1640s, state of being a member, from member + -ship. Meaning number of members is from 1850.


membrane (n.)

early 15c., thin layer of skin or tissue, a term in anatomy, from Latin membrana a skin, membrane;
parchment (skin prepared for writing), from membrum limb, member of the body (see member). The
etymological sense is that which covers the members of the body.


membranous (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French membraneux (16c.), from membrane, from Latin membrana (see membrane).


meme (n.)

1976, introduced by evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins in The Selfish Gene, coined by him from
Greek sources, such as mimeisthai to imitate (see mime), and intended to echo gene.    We need a
name for the new replicator, a noun that conveys the idea of a unit of cultural transmission, or a
unit of imitation. 'Mimeme' comes from a suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds
a bit like 'gene'. I hope my classicist friends will forgive me if I abbreviate mimeme to meme. If
it is any consolation, it could alternatively be thought of as being related to 'memory', or to the
French word m&#234;me. It should be pronounced to rhyme with 'cream'. [Richard Dawkins, The Selfish
Gene, 1976]


memento (n.)

c.1400, Psalm cxxxi in the Canon of the Mass (which begins with the Latin word Memento and in which
the dead are commemorated), from Latin memento remember, imperative of meminisse to remember,
recollect, think of, bear in mind, a reduplicated form, related to mens mind (see mind (n.)).
Meaning reminder, object serving as a warning is from 1580s; sense of keepsake is first recorded
1768.


memento mori (n.)

reminder of death, 1590s, Latin, literally remember that you must die.


memo (n.)

1889, shortening of memorandum (q.v.).


memoir (n.)

early 15c., written record, from Anglo-French memorie note, memorandum, something written to be kept
in mind (early 15c., Old French memoire), from Latin memoria (see memory). Meaning person's written
account of his life is from 1670s.


memoirs (n.)

personal record of events, 1650s, plural of memoir.


memorabilia (n.)

things worth remembering, 1806, from Latin memorabilia notable achievements, noun use of neuter
plural of memorabilis worthy of being remembered (see memorable).


memorability (n.)

1660s, from memorable + -ity.


memorable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French m&eacute;morable, from Latin memorabilis that may be told; worthy of
being remembered, remarkable, from memorare to bring to mind, from memor mindful of (see memory).
Related: Memorably.


memorandum (n.)

early 15c., from Latin memorandum (thing) to be remembered, neuter singular of memorandus worthy of
remembrance, noteworthy, gerundive of memorare to call to mind, from memor mindful of (see memory).
Originally a word written at the top of a note, by 1540s it came to stand for the note itself. The
Latin plural is memoranda. Compare also agenda.


memorial (adj.)

late 14c., memorable, excellent; remembered, committed to memory, from Old French memorial mindful
of, remembering, from Latin memorialis (adj.) of or belonging to memory, from memoria memory (see
memory).


memorial (n.)

late 14c., fame, renown, reputation, also commemorative gesture, monument, or rite; in general,
something by which the memory of a person, thing, or event is preserved, from Old French memorial
record, report, and directly from Late Latin memoriale a memorial, noun use of neuter of Latin
memorialis (adj.) of or belonging to memory, from memoria memory (see memory). Meaning memorial act,
commemoration is from mid-15c.


Memorial Day

used in a general sense is from 1830s; as a specific holiday commemorating U.S. war dead (originally
Northern soldiers killed in the Civil War) it began informally in late 1860s. officially from 1869
among veterans' organizations.


memorialize (v.)

1798, from memorial + -ize. Related: Memorialized; memorializing. Earlier verb was simply memorial
(1731).


memorious (adj.)

1590s, from French memorieux or directly from Medieval Latin memoriosus, from Latin memoria (see
memory).


memorise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of memorize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Memorised; memorising;
memorisation.


memorization (n.)

1823 memorialization, 1857 as action of committing to memory; noun of action from memorize (v.).


memorize (v.)

1590s, commit to writing; see memory + -ize. The meaning commit to memory is from 1838. Related:
Memorized; memorizing.


memory (n.)

mid-13c., recollection (of someone or something); awareness, consciousness, also fame, renown,
reputation, from Anglo-French memorie (Old French memoire, 11c., mind, memory, remembrance;
memorial, record) and directly from Latin memoria memory, remembrance, faculty of remembering, noun
of quality from memor mindful, remembering, from PIE root *(s)mer- to remember (Sanskrit smarati
remembers, Avestan mimara mindful; Greek merimna care, thought, mermeros causing anxiety,
mischievous, baneful; Serbo-Croatian mariti to care for; Welsh marth sadness, anxiety; Old Norse
Mimir, name of the giant who guards the Well of Wisdom; Old English gemimor known, murnan mourn,
remember sorrowfully; Dutch mijmeren to ponder). Meaning faculty of remembering is late 14c. in
English.  I am grown old and my memory is not as active as it used to be. When I was younger I could
remember anything, whether it had happened or not; but my faculties are decaying now and soon I
shall be so I cannot remember any but the things that never happened.  It is sad to go to pieces
like this, but we all have to do it. [Mark Twain, Autobiography]  Computer sense, device which
stores information, is from 1946. Related: Memories.


Memphis

ancient city of Egypt, from Greek form of Egyptian Mennefer, literally his beauty, from men his +
nefer beauty (as in Queen Nefertiti, literally Beauty has Come). A reference to pharaoh Pepi I (24c.
B.C.E.). The city in Tennessee, U.S., was so named 1826 for obscure reasons. Related: Memphian
(1590s); Memphitic (1580s).


men (n.)

plural of man (n.). To separate the men from the boys in a figurative sense is from 1943; earliest
uses tend to credit it to U.S. aviators in World War II.    One of the most expressive G.I. terms to
come out of the late strife was that's where they separate the men from the boys -- so stated by
American aviators leaning from their cockpits to observe a beach-landing under fire on some Pacific
island far below. [Arts Magazine, 1947]


menace (n.)

c.1300, declaration of hostile intent, also act of threatening, from Old French menace menace,
threat (9c.), from Vulgar Latin minacia threat, menace (also source of Spanish amenaza, Italian
minaccia), singular of Latin minaci&aelig; threatening things, from minax (genitive minacis)
threatening, from minari threaten, jut, project, from min&aelig; threats, projecting points, from
PIE root *men- (2) to project. Applied to persons from 1936.


menace (v.)

c.1300, from Old French menacer threaten, urge (11c.), Anglo-French manasser, from Vulgar Latin
*minaciare to threaten, from minacia (see menace (n.)). Related: Menaced; menacing.


menacing (adj.)

1540s, present participle adjective from menace (v.). Related: Menacingly.


menage (n.)

1690s, management of a household, domestic establishment, from French m&eacute;nage, from Old French
manage household, family dwelling (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *mansionaticum household, that which
pertains to a house, from Latin mansionem dwelling (see mansion). Now generally used in suggestive
borrowed phrase m&eacute;nage &agrave; trois (1891), literally household of three. Borrowed earlier
as mayngnage, maynage and in the sense members of a household, a man's household (c.1300); but this
was obsolete by c.1500.


menage a trois (n.)

1891, see menage.


menagerie (n.)

collection of wild animals kept in captivity, 1712, from French m&eacute;nagerie housing for
domestic animals (16c.), from Old French manage (see menage).


menarche (n.)

1896, from German menarche (1895), from Greek men (genitive menos) month (see moon (n.)) + arkhe
beginning (see archon).


mend (v.)

c.1200, to repair, from a shortened form of Old French amender (see amend). Meaning to put right,
atone for, amend (one's life), repent is from c.1300; that of to regain health is from early 15c.
Related: Mended; mending.


mend (n.)

early 14c., recompense, reparation, from mend (v.). Meaning act of mending; a repaired hole or rip
in fabric is from 1888. Phrase on the mend attested from 1802.


mendable (adj.)

1530s, from mend (v.) + -able.


mendacious (adj.)

1610s, from Middle French mendacieux, from Latin mendacium a lie, untruth, falsehood, fiction, from
mendax (genitive mendacis) lying, deceitful, from menda fault, defect, carelessness in writing, from
PIE root *mend- physical defect, fault (see amend (v.)). The sense evolution of Latin mendax was
influenced by mentiri to speak falsely, lie, deceive. Related: Mendaciously; mendaciousness.


mendacity (n.)

tendency to lie, 1640s, from Middle French mendacit&eacute; and directly from Late Latin mendacitas
falsehood, mendacity, from Latin mendax lying; a liar (see mendacious).


mendelevium (n.)

1955, Modern Latin, in honor of Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev.


Mendelism (n.)

1903, in reference to the work of Gregor Johann Mendel (1822-1884), Austrian biologist who
enunciated the laws of heredity. Related: Mendelian.


mender (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from mend (v.).


mendicancy (n.)

state or condition of beggary, 1790, from mendicant + -cy. Also in this sense was mendicity
(c.1400), from Old French mendicit&eacute; begging, from Latin mendicitatem (nominative mendicitas)
beggary, mendicity.


mendicant (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin mendicantem (nominative mendicans) present participle of mendicare to beg, ask
alms, from mendicus beggar, originally cripple (connection via cripples who must beg), from menda
fault, physical defect (see mendacious). As an adjective from 1540s. Also in Middle English was
mendinant (mid-14c.), from Old French mendinant, present participle of mendiner to beg, from the
same Latin source.


mendicant (n.)

a beggar, mid-15c., from mendicant (adj.) or from Latin mendicantem (nominative mendicans), noun use
of present participle of mendicare.


Menelaeus

king of Sparta, husband of Helen, brother of Agamemnon, Latinized form of Greek Menelaos, literally
restraining the people, from menein to stay, abide, remain + laos people (see lay (adj.)).


menfolk (n.)

also men-folk the male sex, men generally, 1802, from men + folk (n.).


menhaden (n.)

kind of herring, 1792, from Algonquian (probably Narragansett) munnawhateaug (noted from 1643),
literally they fertilize, because the abundant little fishes were used by the Indians as fertilizer.


menhir (n.)

upright monumental stone, 1834, literally long stone, from French menhir (19c.), from Breton men
stone + hir long, from PIE *se-ro-, from root *se- long, late (see soiree). Cognate with Welsh maen
hir, Cornish medn hir.


menial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a household, from Anglo-French meignial, from Old French mesnie household,
earlier mesnede, from Vulgar Latin *mansionata, from Latin mansionem dwelling (see mansion). Sense
of lowly, humble, suited to a servant is recorded by 1670s.


menial (n.)

domestic servant, late 14c., meynyal; see menial (adj.).


meningeal (adj.)

1829, from Modern Latin meningeus, from meninx membrane of the brain (1610s; see meningitis) + -al
(1).


meninges (n.)

plural, 1610s, the three membranes enveloping the brain and spinal cord, from Middle French meninges
(1530s) or directly from medical Latin, plural of meninx, from Greek meninx (see meningitis).


meningitis (n.)

inflammation of the meninges, 1825, coined from Modern Latin meninga, from Greek meninx (genitive
meningos) membrane, in medical Latin especially that of the brain (see member) + -itis disease.
Related: Meningitic.


meniscus (n.)

crescent-shaped body, 1690s in reference to lenses, c.1812 in reference to liquid surfaces, Modern
Latin meniscus, from Greek meniskos lunar crescent, diminutive of mene moon (see moon (n.)).
Related: Meniscoid.


Mennonite (n.)

member of an Anabaptist sect, 1560s, from name of Menno Simons (1492-1559), founder of the sect in
Friesland, + -ite (1). As an adjective by 1727. Alternative form Mennonist (n.) attested from 1640s.


Menominee

also Menomini, Algonquian people of Wisconsin, from Ojibwa (Algonquian) Manoominii, literally wild
rice people, from manoomin wild rice. Not their name for themselves.


menopausal (adj.)

1879, from menopause + -al (1).


menopause (n.)

1852 (from 1845 as a French word in English), from French m&eacute;nopause, from medical Latin
menopausis, from Greek men (genitive menos) month (see moon (n.)) + pausis a cessation, a pause,
from pauein to cause to cease (see pause (n.)). Earlier it was change of life.


menorah (n.)

1886, from Hebrew menorah candlestick, from Semitic stem n-w-r to give light, shine (compare Arabic
nar fire, manarah candlestick, lighthouse, tower of a mosque, see minaret).


mens rea

Latin phrase meaning guilty mind.


mens sana in corpore sano

c.1600, Latin, literally a sound mind in a sound body, a line found in Juvenal, Satires, x.356.
Mens sana in corpore sano is a contradiction in terms, the fantasy of a Mr. Have-your-cake-and-eat-
it. No sane man can afford to dispense with debilitating pleasures; no ascetic can be considered
reliably sane. Hitler was the archetype of the abstemious man. When the other krauts saw him drink
water in the Beer Hall they should have known he was not to be trusted. [A.J. Liebling, Between
Meals, 1962]


mensa (n.)

altar top, 1848, Latin, literally table, also meal, supper, and altar, sacrificial table, hence used
in Church Latin for upper slab of a church altar (see mesa). With a capital M-, the name of an
organization for people of IQs of 148 or more founded in England in 1946, the name chosen, according
to the organization, to suggest a round table type group. The constellation was originally Mons
Mensae Table Mountain.    La Caille, who did so much for our knowledge of the southern heavens,
formed the figure from stars under the Greater Cloud, between the poles of the equator and the
ecliptic, just north of the polar Octans; the title being suggested by the fact that the Table
Mountain, back of Cape Town, which had witnessed his nightly vigils and daily toils, also was
frequently capped by a cloud. [Richard Hinckley Allen, Star Names and Their Meanings, London: 1899]


mensal (adj.1)

monthly, 1860, from Latin mensis month (see moon (n.)) + -al (1).


mensal (adj.2)

pertaining to or used at a table, mid-15c., from Late Latin mensalis, from Latin mensa table (see
mesa).


mensch (n.)

person of strength and honor, 1907, from Yiddish, from German Mensch, literally man, person, from
Old High German mennisco human, from Proto-Germanic adjective *manniska- human (see mannish).


menses (n.)

monthly discharge of blood from the uterus, 1590s, from Latin menses, plural of mensis month (see
moon (n.)).


Menshevik (adj.)

1907, from Russian men'shevik, from men'she lesser (comparative of malo little, from PIE root *mei-
(2) small; see minus) + -evik one that is. So called by Lenin because they were a minority in the
party. Earlier used in reference to the minority faction of the Social-Democratic Party, when it
split in 1903. As a noun from 1917. Russian plural mensheviki occasionally was used in English.


menstrual (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to menses, also (in astronomy) monthly, from Old French menstruel, from Latin
menstrualis monthly, especially of or having monthly courses, from menstruus of a month, every
month, monthly, pertaining to a month, from mensis month (see moon (n.)).


menstruate (v.)

1680s, probably a back-formation from menstruation, or else from Latin menstruatus, past participle
of menstruare. Related: Menstruated; menstruating.


menstruation (n.)

1680s, from Late Latin menstruare, from menstruus monthly (see menstrual) + -ation. Old English
equivalent was mona&eth;blot month-blood. Middle English had menstrue (n.), late 14c., from Old
French menstrue, from Latin menstruum.


menstruous (adj.)

1530s, from French menstrueus, from Latin *menstruosus, from menstruum, from menstruus (adj.)
monthly, from mensis month (see moon (n.)).


mensurable (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin mensurabilis that which can be measured, from mensurare to measure (see
measure (v.)). Related: Mensurably; mensurability.


mensural (adj.)

pertaining to measure, measurable, c.1600, from Medieval Latin mensuralis, from Latin mensura a
measuring, measurement (see measure (v.)).


mensuration (n.)

act of measuring, 1570s, from Middle French mensuration and directly from Late Latin mensurationem
(nominative mensuratio) a measuring, noun of action from past participle stem of mensurare to
measure (see measure (v.)).


mental (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to the mind, from Middle French mental, from Late Latin mentalis of the mind,
from Latin mens (genitive mentis) mind, from PIE root *men- to think (cognates: Sanskrit matih
thought, mind, Gothic gamunds, Old English gemynd memory, remembrance; see mind (n.)). Meaning
crazy, deranged is from 1927, probably from combinations such as mental hospital.


mentalist (n.)

1782, from mental + -ist. Originally in reference to artistic taste; philosophical sense (from
mentalism) is from 1900. Related: mentalistic.


mentality (n.)

1690s, from mental (adj.) + -ity.


mentally (adv.)

1660s, from mental + -ly (2).


mentation (n.)

mental function, 1850, from Latin ment- mind (see mental) + -ation.


menthol (n.)

white crystalline substance, 1862, from German Menthol, coined 1861 by Alphons Oppenheim from Latin
mentha mint (see mint (n.1)) + oleum oil (see oil (n.)). So called because it was first obtained
from oil of peppermint.


mentholated (adj.)

of cigarettes, 1933, from menthol + -ate (2).


mention (n.)

c.1300, a note, reference, from Old French mencion mention, memory, speech, from Latin mentionem
(nominative mentio) a calling to mind, a speaking of, a making mention, from root of Old Latin
minisci to think, related to mens (genitive mentis) mind, from PIE root *men- think (see mind (n.)).


mention (v.)

1520s, from mention (n.) or else from Middle French mentionner, from Old French mencion. Related:
Mentioned; mentioning; mentionable. Don't mention it as a conventional reply to expressions of
gratitude or apology is attested from 1840.


mentor (n.)

wise advisor, 1750, from Greek Mentor, friend of Odysseus and adviser of Telemachus (but often
actually Athene in disguise) in the Odyssey, perhaps ultimately meaning  adviser, because the name
appears to be an agent noun of mentos intent, purpose, spirit, passion from PIE *mon-eyo- (cognates:
Sanskrit man-tar- one who thinks, Latin mon-i-tor one who admonishes), causative form of root *men-
to think (see mind (n.)). The general use of the word probably is via later popular romances, in
which Mentor played a larger part than he does in Homer.


mentor (v.)

1888, from mentor (n.). Related: Mentored; mentoring.


menu (n.)

1837, from French menu de repas list of what is served at a meal, from Middle French menu (adj.)
small, detailed (11c.), from Latin minutus small, literally made smaller, past participle of minuere
to diminish, from root of minus to diminish (see minus). Computer usage is from 1967, from expanded
sense of any detailed list, first attested 1889.


meow (n.)

representation of cat sound, 1842, earlier miaow, miau, meaw (1630s). Of imitative origin, compare
French miaou, German miauen, Persian maw, Japanese nya nya, Arabic nau-nau, and Joyce's mrkgnao. In
Chinese, miau means cat. As a verb by 1630s, meaw, also meawle. Compare Old French miauer to meow,
caterwaul. Related: Meowed; meowing.


Mephisto

shortened form of Mephistopheles.


Mephistopheles

1590s, the evil spirit to whom Faust sold his soul in the German legend, from German (1587), of
unknown origin. According to the speculation of eminent G&ouml;the scholar K.J. Schr&ouml;er (1886)
it is a compound of Hebrew mephitz destroyer + tophel liar (short for tophel sheqer, literally
falsehood plasterer; see Job xiii:4). Klein writes that the names of devils in the Middle Ages are
in most cases derived from Hebrew.


mephitic (adj.)

1620s, of poisonous smell, from Late Latin mephiticus, from Latin mephitis, mefitis noxious vapor
(also personified as a goddess believed to have the power to avert it).


Mercalli

in reference to Mercalli scale, 1900, named for Italian geologist Giuseppe Mercalli (1850-1914), who
invented it (I Terremoti della Liguria e del Piemonte, Naples, 1897). It was a modification of the
Rossi-Forel scale (1883).


mercantile (adj.)

1640s, from French mercantile (17c.), from Italian mercantile, from Medieval Latin mercantile, from
Latin mercantem (nominative mercans) a merchant, also trading, present participle of mercari to
trade, from merx (see market (n.)). Mercantile system first appears in Adam Smith (1776).


mercantilism (n.)

1834, from French mercantilisme; see mercantile + -ism. Related: mercantilist.


Mercator

type of map projection, 1660s, invented by Flemish geographer Gerhard Kremer (1512-1594), who
Latinized his surname, which means dealer, tradesman, as Mercator (see merchant). He first used this
type of map projection in 1568.


Mercedes

fem. proper name, from Spanish, abbreviation of Maria de las Mercedes Mary of the Mercies, from
plural of merced mercy, grace, from Latin mercedem (nominative merces); see mercy.


Mercedes-Benz

motorcar brand first marketed 1926 after merger of two earlier companies. The firstg part of the
name, Mercedes, marketed as a car name from 1901, chosen by Austrian manufacturer Emil Jellinik for
his daughter, Mercedes. The Benz is from the other company, from name of Karl Benz, creator of the
Benz Patent Motorwagen (1886).


mercenary (n.)

late 14c., one who works only for hire, from Old French mercenaire mercenary, hireling (13c.) and
directly from Latin mercenarius one who does anything for pay, literally hired, paid, from merces
(genitive mercedis) pay, reward, wages, from merx (see market (n.)).


mercenary (adj.)

1530s, from mercenary (n.), or in part from Latin mercenarius hired, paid, serving for pay.


mercer (n.)

early 12c., dealer in textile, from Old French mercier shopkeeper, tradesman, from Vulgar Latin
*merciarius, from Latin merx (see market (n.)).


merchandise (n.)

mid-13c., trading, commerce; mid-14c., commodities of commerce, wares, articles for sale or trade,
from Anglo-French marchaundise, Old French marcheandise goods, merchandise; trade, business (12c.),
from marchaunt merchant (see merchant).


merchandise (v.)

also merchandize, to buy and sell; to market, late 14c.; see merchant + -ize. Meaning promote the
sale of goods is from 1926. Related: Merchandising; merchandizing.


merchandiser (n.)

1590s, agent noun from merchandise (v.).


merchandizing (n.)

late 14c., goods, commodities, from present participle of merchandize. Meaning trade, commerce is
from mid-15c. That of promotion of goods for sale is from 1922.


merchant (n.)

c.1200, from Anglo-French marchaunt merchant, shopkeeper (Old French marcheant, Modern French
marchand), from Vulgar Latin *mercatantem (nominative *mercatans) a buyer, present participle of
*mercatare, frequentative of Latin mercari to trade, traffic, deal in (see market). Meaning fellow,
chap is from 1540s; with a specific qualifier, and suggesting someone who deals in it (such as speed
merchant one who enjoys fast driving), from 1914.


merchant (adj.)

c.1400, from merchant (n.) and from Old French marcheant (adj.).


Mercia

Anglo-Saxon kingdom of the Midlands, Latinized from Old English Mierce men of the Marches, from
mearc (see march (n.2)). Related: Mercian.


merciful (adj.)

mid-14c.; see mercy + -ful. Related: Mercifully.


merciless (adj.)

late 14c., see mercy + -less. Related: Mercilessly.


mercurial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to the planet Mercury (see Mercury). Meaning sprightly, volatile, quick
(1590s) is from supposed qualities of those born under the planet Mercury (they also are the
qualities of the god Mercury), probably also partly by association with the qualities of
quicksilver. A variant in this sense was mercurious (1590s). Related: Mercurially; mercuriality.


mercuric (adj.)

1828, in chemistry, from mercury + -ic.


Mercury

the Roman god Mercury, mid-12c., from Latin Mercurius Mercury, originally a god of tradesmen and
thieves, from merx merchandise (see market (n.)); or perhaps [Klein, Tucker] from Etruscan and
influenced by merx. Later he was associated with Greek Hermes. The planet closest to the sun so
called in classical Latin (late 14c. in English). A hypothetical inhabitant of the planet was a
Mercurean (1855) or a Mercurian (1868). For the metallic element, see mercury.


mercury (n.)

silver-white fluid metallic element, late 14c., from Medieval Latin mercurius, from Latin Mercurius
(see Mercury). Prepared from cinnabar, it was one of the seven metals (bodies terrestrial) known to
the ancients, which were coupled in astrology and alchemy with the seven known heavenly bodies. This
one probably so associated for its mobility. The others were Sun/gold, Moon/silver, Mars/iron,
Saturn/lead, Jupiter/tin, Venus/copper. The Greek name for it was hydrargyros liquid silver, which
gives the element its symbol, Hg. Compare quicksilver.


mercy (n.)

late 12c., God's forgiveness of his creatures' offenses, from Old French mercit, merci (9c.) reward,
gift; kindness, grace, pity, from Latin mercedem (nominative merces) reward, wages, pay hire (in
Vulgar Latin favor, pity), from merx (genitive mercis) wares, merchandise (see market (n.)). In
Church Latin (6c.) applied to the heavenly reward of those who show kindness to the helpless.
Meaning disposition to forgive or show compassion is attested from early 13c. As an interjection,
attested from mid-13c. In French largely superseded by mis&eacute;ricorde except as a word of
thanks. Seat of mercy golden covering of the Ark of the Covenant (1530) is Tyndale's loan-
translation of Luther's gnadenstuhl, an inexact rendering of Hebrew kapporeth, literally
propitiatory.


merde (n.)

also merd, dung, late 15c., from French merde feces, excrement, dirt (13c.), from Latin merda dung,
ordure, excrement, of unknown origin. Naturalized in English through 17c., but subsequently lost and
since mid-19c. (and especially since World War I) generally treated as a French word when used in
English.


mere (adj.)

c.1400, unmixed, pure, from Old French mier pure (of gold), entire, total, complete, and directly
from Latin merus unmixed (of wine), pure; bare, naked; figuratively true, real, genuine, probably
originally clear, bright, from PIE *mer- to gleam, glimmer, sparkle (cognates: Old English amerian
to purify, Old Irish emer not clear, Sanskrit maricih ray, beam, Greek marmarein to gleam, glimmer).
Original sense of nothing less than, absolute (mid-15c., now only in vestiges such as mere folly)
existed for centuries alongside opposite sense of nothing more than (1580s, as in a mere dream).


mere (n.)

Old English mere sea, ocean; lake, pool, pond, cistern, from Proto-Germanic *mari (cognates: Old
Norse marr, Old Saxon meri sea, Middle Dutch maer, Dutch meer lake, sea, pool, Old High German mari,
German Meer sea, Gothic marei sea, mari-saiws lake), from PIE *mori- sea (cognates: Latin mare, Old
Church Slavonic morje, Russian more, Lithuanian mares, Old Irish muir, Welsh mor sea, Gaulish Are-
morici people living near the sea).


merely (adv.)

mid-15c., entirely, purely, from mere (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning and nothing more is from 1580s.


merengue (n.)

popular dance, 1936, from Dominican Creole m&eacute;ringue, from French m&eacute;ringue (see
meringue).    The Spanish word for this style of dance and music, merengue, literally means meringue
(the sweet dessert) -- although it is unclear exactly how the dance might have come to be called The
Meringue. [Spanish Word Histories and Mysteries, American Heritage Dictionaries, 2007]


merestone (n.)

stone serving as a landmark, Old English m&#230;rstan boundary stone, from m&#230;re boundary,
object indicating a boundary, from Proto-Germanic *mairjo- (cognates: Middle Dutch mere boundary
mark, stake, Old Norse -m&#230;ri boundary, border-land), related to Latin murus wall (see mural).
Hence also meresman man appointed to find boundaries (of a parish, etc.).


meretricious (adj.)

1620s, pertaining to harlots, from Latin meretricius of or pertaining to prostitutes, from meretrix
(genitive meretricis) prostitute, literally woman who earns money, from merere, mereri to earn, gain
(see merit (n.)). Meaning gaudily alluring is from 1630s. Related: Meretriciously; meretriciousness.


merganser (n.)

type of duck, 1752, coined in Modern Latin (1550s), from Latin mergus waterfowl, diver (from mergere
to dip, immerse; see merge (v.)) + anser goose (see goose (n.)).


merge (v.)

1630s, to plunge or sink in, from Latin mergere to dip, dip in, immerse, plunge, probably rhotacized
from *mezgo, from PIE *mezg- to dip, plunge (cognates: Sanskrit majjati dives under, Lithuanian
mazgoju to wash). Legal sense of absorb an estate, contract, etc. into another is from 1726.
Related: Merged; merging. As a noun, from 1805.


merger (n.)

1728 in legal sense, extinguishment by absorption,  from merge (v.), on analogy of French
infinitives used as nouns (see waiver). From 1889 in the business sense; not common until c.1926.
General meaning any act of merging is from 1881.


meridian (n.)

mid-14c., noon, from Old French meridien of the noon time, midday; the Meridian; southerner (12c.),
and directly from Latin meridianus of midday, of noon, southerly, to the south, from meridies noon,
south, from meridie at noon, altered by dissimilation from pre-Latin *medi die, locative of medius
mid- (see medial (adj.)) + dies day (see diurnal). Cartographic sense first recorded late 14c.
Figurative uses tend to suggest point of highest development or fullest power.    The city in
Mississippi, U.S., was settled 1854 (as Sowashee Station) at a railway junction and given its
current name in 1860, supposedly by people who thought meridian meant junction (they perhaps
confused the word with median).


meringue (n.)

whites of eggs mixed with sugar, 1706, from French m&eacute;ringue (18c.), of unknown origin.


merino (n.)

fine-wool breed of sheep, 1781, from Spanish merino, possibly from Arabic Merini, a Berber family or
tribe of sheep farmers in northwest Africa whose animals were imported into Spain 14c.-15c. to
improve local breeds. Or from or influenced by Latin majorinus, from major greater, either in
reference to size of the animals or from Spanish derivative merino (n.) overseer of cattle pastures,
also a title of judicial officers. Applied from early 19c. to the wool itself and to various
articles made from it.


merism (n.)

1894 in biological sense repetition of parts in living things; earlier in rhetoric, synecdoche in
which totality is expressed by contrasting parts (such as high and low, young and old); from Modern
Latin merismus, from Greek merismos a dividing, division, a partition, from merizein to divide, from
meros part, share (see merit (n.)). Related: Merismatic.


meristem (n.)

growing cellular tissues of plants, 1862, formed irregularly from Greek meristos divided, divisible
(from merizein to divide, distribute, from meros a part, a share; see merit (n.)) + ending from
xylem, etc.


merit (n.)

c.1200, spiritual credit (for good works, etc.); c.1300, spiritual reward, from Old French merite
wages, pay, reward; thanks; merit, moral worth, that which assures divine pity, and directly from
Latin meritum a merit, service, kindness, benefit, favor; worth, value, importance, neuter of
meritus, past participle of merere, meriri to earn, deserve, acquire, gain, from PIE root *(s)mer-
to allot, assign (cognates: Greek meros part, lot, moira share, fate, moros fate, destiny, doom,
Hittite mark to divide a sacrifice).    Sense of worthiness, excellence is from early 14c.; from
late 14c. as condition or conduct that deserves either reward or punishment; also a reward, benefit.
Related: Merits. Merit system attested from 1880. Merit-monger was in common use 16c.-17c. in a
sense roughly of do-gooder.


merit (v.)

late 15c., to be entitled to, from Middle French meriter (Modern French m&#233;riter), from merite
(n.), or directly from Latin meritare to earn, yield, frequentative of mereri to earn (money); also
to serve as a soldier (see merit (n.)). Related: Merited; meriting.


merited (adj.)

well-earned, c.1600, past participle adjective from merit (v.).


meritless (adj.)

1590s, from merit (n.) + -less. Related: Meritlessly; meritlessness.


meritocracy (n.)

coined 1958 by British sociologist Michael Young (1915-2002) and used in title of his book, The Rise
of the Meritocracy; from merit (n.) + -cracy. Related: Meritocratic.


meritorious (adj.)

early 15c., deserving of divine grace, from Latin meritorius that for which money is paid, that by
which money is earned, from meritus, past participle of merere to earn (see merit (n.)). Related:
Meritoriously; meritoriousness.


merkin (n.)

female pudenda, 1530s, apparently a variant of malkin in its sense of mop. Meaning artificial vagina
or 'counterfeit hair for a woman's privy parts'  is attested from 1610s. According to The Oxford
Companion to the Body, the custom of wearing merkins dates from mid-15c., was associated with
prostitutes, and was to disguise a want of pubic hair, shaved off either to exterminate body lice or
evidence of venereal disease.  This put a strange Whim in his Head; which was, to get the hairy
circle of [a prostitute's] Merkin .... This he dry'd well, and comb'd out, and then return'd to the
Cardinall, telling him, he had brought St. Peter's Beard. [Alexander Smith, A Complete History of
the Lives and Robberies of the most notorious Highwaymen, 1714]


merle (n.)

blackbird, late 15c., from Old French merle blackbird (12c.), from Latin merulus blackbird, from PIE
*ams- black, blackbird (source also of Old English osle blackbird; see ouzel). The word owes its
survival in modern times to its use by Scottish poets. The Latin word shows effects of rhotacism. It
also is the source of Proven&ccedil;al and Spanish merla, Portuguese merlo, and Italian merla.
Borrowed from French are Middle Dutch and German merle, Dutch meerle.


merlin (n.)

small, strong European falcon, early 14c., from Anglo-French merilun, a shortened form of Old French
esmerillon merlin, small hawk (12c., Modern French &eacute;merillon), from Frankish *smiril or some
other Germanic source (compare Old High German smerlo, German Schmerl merlin). Spanish esmerejon,
Italian smeriglio also are Germanic loan-words.


Merlin

sorcerer and soothsayer in Arthurian legends, from Old French form of Welsh Myrddhin, probably from
Old Celtic *Mori-dunon, literally of the sea-hill, from *mori sea (see mere (n.)) + dunom hill (see
dune).


merlon (n.)

solid part of a battlement, 1704, from French merlon (17c.), from Italian merlone, augmentative of
merlo battlement, perhaps a contraction of mergola, diminutive of Latin mergae two-pronged
pitchfork.


mermaid (n.)

mid-14c., mermayde, literally maid of the sea, from Middle English mere sea, lake (see mere (n.)) +
maid. Old English had equivalent merewif water-witch (see wife), meremenn mermaid, siren. Tail-less
in northern Europe; the fishy form is a medieval influence from classical sirens. A favorite sign of
taverns and inns since at least early 15c. (in reference to the inn on Bread Street, Cheapside,
London). Mermaid pie (1660s) was a sucking pig baked whole in a crust.


merman (n.)

c.1600, literally man of the sea, from first element in mermaid (q.v.) + man (n.).


mero-

before vowels mer-, word-forming element meaning part, partial, fraction, from comb. form of Greek
meros part, fraction (see merit (n.)).


Merovingian (adj.)

1690s, from French M&eacute;rovingien, from Medieval Latin Merovingi, descendants of Meroveus,
(mythical?) ancestor of the line of Frankish kings in Gaul (c.500-752) beginning with Clovis;
Merovingi is a Latinization of his Germanic name (compare Old High German Mar-wig famed-fight) with
the Germanic patronymic suffix -ing.


merrily (adv.)

Old English myriglice pleasantly, melodiously; see merry + -ly (2).


merriment (n.)

1570s, comedic entertainment, from merry + -ment. General sense of mirth is from 1580s.


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


merry man (n.)

companion in arms, follower of a knight, outlaw, etc., is attested from late 14c., from merry (adj.)
+ man (n.). Related: Merry men.


Merry Widow

1907, from the English title of Franz Lehar's operetta Die Lustige Witwe (1905). The Lusty Widow
would have been more etymological (see lust (n.)), but would have given the wrong impression in
English. Meaning a type of wide-brimmed hat (popularized in the play) is attested from 1908.


merry-andrew (n.)

a buffoon; a zany; a jack-pudding [Johnson], originally mountebank's assistant, 1670s, from merry +
masc. proper name Andrew, but there is no certain identification with an individual.


merry-go-round (n.)

1729, from merry (adj.) + go (v.) + round. Figurative use by 1838. Merry-totter (mid-15c.) was a
Middle English name for a swing or see-saw. Also compare merry-go-down strong ale (c.1500); merry-
go-sorry a mix of joy and sorrow (1590s).


merrymaking (n.)

also merry-making, 1714; see merry + make (v.). Related: Merry-maker (1827).


merrythought (n.)

wishbone, c.1600, from merry (adj.) + thought. Also see wishbone.


mesa (n.)

high table land, 1759, from Spanish mesa plateau, literally table, from Latin mensa table (source of
Rumanian masa, Old French moise table).


mesalliance (n.)

marriage with a person of lower social position, 1782, from French m&eacute;salliance, from
pejorative prefix mes- (from Latin mis-; see mis-) + alliance (see alliance).


mescal (n.)

plant of the genus Agave, found in deserts of Mexico and southwestern U.S., especially the American
aloe, or maguey plant, 1702, from Mexican Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) mexcalli fermented drink
made from agave, from metl agave + ixcalli stew. Meaning intoxicating liquor from fermented juice of
the agave is attested in English from 1828. Also the name of a small desert cactus (peyote) found in
northern Mexico and southern Texas (1885).


mescaline (n.)

crystalline alkaloid, 1896, from German mezcalin (1896), so called because it originally was found
in the buttons that grow atop the mescal cacti (see mescal). With chemical suffix -ine (2).


mesdames

plural of French madame (see madam).


meseems (v.)

late 14c., me semeth, from me (pron.) + seem (v.).


mesel

leprous (adj.); a leper (n.); both c.1300,  from Old French mesel wretched, leprous; a wretch, from
Latin misellus wretched, unfortunate, as a noun, a wretch, in Medieval Latin, a leper, diminutive of
miser wretched, unfortunate, miserable (see miser). Also from Latin misellus are Old Italian misello
sick, leprous, Catalan mesell sick.


mesenteritis (n.)

inflammation of the mesentery, 1802; see mesentery + -itis.


mesentery (n.)

fold of the peritoneum, early 15c., from medical Latin mesenterium middle of the intestine, from
medical Greek mesenterion, from mesos middle (see medial (adj.)) + enteron intestine (see enteric).
Related: Mesenteric.


mesh (n.)

late 14c., mesche, open space in a net, probably from late Old English max net, earlier
m&aelig;scre, from Proto-Germanic *mask- (cognates: Old Norse m&ouml;skvi, Danish maske, Swedish
maska, Old Saxon masca, Middle Dutch maessce, Dutch maas mesh, Old High German masca, German Masche
mesh), from PIE root *mezg- to knit, plait, twist (cognates: Lithuanian mezgu to knit, mazgas knot).


mesh (v.)

1530s, originally in the figurative sense of entangle, involve, from mesh (n.). Literal sense to
become enmeshed is from 1580s. Meaning to fit in, combine is from 1944. Related: Meshed; meshing.


meshuga (adj.)

mad, crazy, stupid, 1892, from Hebrew meshugga, part. of shagag to go astray, wander. The adjective
has forms meshugener, meshugenah before a noun.


mesial (adj.)

middle, median, 1803, an irregular formation from Greek mesos middle (see meso-) + -al (1). Related:
Mesially.


mesic (adj.)

1926, in ecology sense, from Greek mesos middle (see meso-) + -ic. From 1939 in physics (from
meson).


mesmeric (adj.)

pertaining to mesmerism, 1829; see mesmerism + -ic.


mesmerise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of mesmerize (v.); for suffix, see -ize. Related: Mesmerised;
mesmerising.


mesmerism (n.)

hypnotism, 1802, from French mesm&eacute;risme, named for Franz Anton Mesmer (1734-1815), Austrian
physician who developed a theory of animal magnetism and a mysterious body fluid which allows one
person to hypnotize another. Related: Mesmerist.


mesmerize (v.)

1829, back-formation from mesmerism. Transferred sense of enthrall is first attested 1862. Related:
Mesmerized; mesmerizing.


mesne (adj.)

mid-15c., mean; altered spelling (by French influence) of Anglo-French meen mean (Old French meien
middle; see mean (adj.); also see demesne).


meso-

word-forming element meaning middle, intermediate, halfway, sometimes mes- before vowels, comb. form
of Greek mesos middle, in the middle; middling, moderate; between (see medial (adj.)).


Mesoamerica (n.)

1948, from meso- + America.


mesocracy (n.)

government by the middle classes, 1858, from meso- + -cracy. Related: Mesocratic (1857).


mesoderm (n.)

1858, from French m&eacute;soderme or German Mesoderm, literally middle skin, coined by German
physician Robert Remak (1815-1865) from meso- + Greek derma (see -derm).


mesolithic (adj.)

1866 in archaeology (somewhat earlier in geology); see meso- + lithic.


mesomorph (n.)

1940, from meso- + Greek morphe form (see Morpheus). Coined by W.H. Shelton; the reference is to the
mesodermal layer of the embryo. Related: Mesomorphic (attested from 1923 in chemistry).


meson (n.)

subatomic particle, 1939, from Greek mesos middle (see medial (adj.)) + subatomic particle suffix
-on. Earlier mesotron (1938). So called for being intermediate in mass between protons and
electrons.


Mesopotamia

ancient name for the land that lies between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers (in modern Iraq), from
Greek mesopotamia (khora), literally a country between two rivers, from fem. of mesopotamos, from
mesos middle (see medial (adj.)) + potamos river (see potamo-).    In 19c. the word sometimes was
used in the sense of anything which gives irrational or inexplicable comfort to the hearer, based on
the story of the old woman who told her pastor that she found great support in that comfortable word
Mesopotamia [Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase &amp; Fable, 1870]. The place was called Mespot (1917) by
British soldiers serving there in World War I. Related: Mesopotamian.


mesosphere (n.)

1950, from meso- + second element in atmosphere.


Mesozoic (adj.)

1840, from Greek mesos middle (see meso-) + zoe life (see zoo) + -ic. Name coined by British
geologist John Phillips for the fossil era between the Paleozoic and the Cenozoic.


mesquite (n.)

type of North American shrub of the pea family, 1759, from Mexican Spanish mezquite, from Nahuatl
(Aztecan) mizquitl mesquite.


mess (n.)

c.1300, food for one meal, pottage, from Old French mes portion of food, course at dinner, from Late
Latin missus course at dinner, literally a placing, a putting (on a table, etc.), from past
participle of mittere to put, place, in classical Latin to send, let go (see mission).    Meaning
communal eating place (especially a military one) is first attested 1530s, from earlier sense of
company of persons eating together (early 15c.), originally a group of four. Sense of mixed food,
especially for animals, (1738) led to contemptuous use for jumble, mixed mass (1828) and figurative
sense of state of confusion (1834), as well as condition of untidiness (1851). General use for a
quantity of anything is attested by 1830. Meaning excrement (of animals) is from 1903.


mess (v.)

late 14c., serve up in portions, from mess (n.). Meaning take one's meals is from 1701; that of make
a mess is from 1853. Related: Messed; messing. To mess with interfere, get involved is from 1903;
mess up make a mistake, get in trouble is from 1933 (earlier make a mess of, 1909), both originally
American English colloquial.


message (n.)

c.1300, communication transmitted via a messenger, from Old French message message, news, tidings,
embassy (11c.), from Medieval Latin missaticum, from Latin missus a sending away, sending,
despatching; a throwing, hurling, noun use of past participle of mittere to send (see mission). The
Latin word is glossed in Old English by &aelig;rende. Specific religious sense of divinely inspired
communication via a prophet (1540s) led to transferred sense of the broad meaning (of something),
first attested 1828. To get the message understand is from 1960.


message (v.)

to send messages, 1580s, from message (n.). Related: Messaged; messaging.


messaging (n.)

1865, verbal noun from message (v.).


Messalina

scheming and licentious woman, 1887, in reference to Valeria Messalina, notorious third wife of
Roman emperor Claudius.


messenger (n.)

c.1200, messager, from Old French messagier messenger, envoy, ambassador, from message (see message
(n.)). With parasitic -n- inserted by c.1300 for no apparent reason except that people liked to say
it that way (compare passenger, harbinger, scavenger).


Messerschmitt (n.)

type of German warplane, 1940, from name of Willy Messerschmitt (1898-1978), German aircraft
designer. The surname is literally cutler, knife-maker.


messiah (n.)

c.1300, Messias, from Late Latin Messias, from Greek Messias, from Aramaic meshiha and Hebrew
mashiah the anointed (of the Lord), from mashah anoint. This is the word rendered in Septuagint as
Greek Khristos (see Christ). In Old Testament prophetic writing, it was used of an expected
deliverer of the Jewish nation. The modern English form represents an attempt to make the word look
more Hebrew, and dates from the Geneva Bible (1560). Transferred sense of an expected liberator or
savior of a captive people is attested from 1660s.


messianic (adj.)

1831, from Modern Latin messianicus, from Messias (see messiah).


Messier

in reference to a catalogue of about 100 nebulae, star clusters and galaxies begun in 1758 by French
astronomer and comet-hunter Charles Messier (1730-1817), who found his telescopic searches deceived
by fuzzy objects that resembled distant comets but turned out to be fixed.    What caused me to
undertake the catalog was the nebula I discovered above the southern horn of Taurus on September 12,
1758, whilst observing the comet of that year. This nebula had such a resemblance to a comet in its
form and brightness that I endeavored to find others, so that astronomers would no more confuse
these same nebulae with comets just beginning to appear. [Messier, 1800]    The first version of the
catalogue was published 1771, and the fuller version in 1781.


messmate (n.)

1746, from mess (n.) + mate (n.). Etymologically pleonastic.


messrs

abbreviation of messieurs (1620s), which is the plural of French monsieur (see monsieur).


messuage (n.)

legal term for dwelling, late 14c., (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Anglo-French messuage, which
probably is a clerical error for mesnage (see menage). Originally the portion of land set aside for
a dwelling-house and outbuildings, whether occupied by them or not; later chiefly in reference to
the house and buildings and the attached land.


messy (adj.)

1843, untidy, from mess (n.) + -y (2). Figurative use (unethical) by 1924. Related: Messily;
messiness.


mestizo (adj.)

1580s, from Spanish mestizo of mixed European and Amerindian parentage, from Late Latin mixticius
mixed, mongrel, from Latin mixtus mixed, past participle of miscere to mix, mingle (see mix (v.)).
Fem. form mestiza is attested from 1580s.


Met (n.)

1879 as colloquial shortening of Metropolitan (n.) member of the New York Metropolitan Base-Ball
Club.    THE baseball season has opened, and along with the twittering of the birds, the budding of
the trees, and the clattering of the truck, comes the news that the Mets were beaten yesterday 17 to
5. It is an infallible sign of spring when the Mets are beaten 17 to 5, and we invariably put on our
thinner clothing when we read that refreshing, though perennial news in the papers. [Life, May 12,
1887]    Used variously to abbreviate other proper names beginning with Metropolitan, such as
Metropolitan Museum of Art (N.Y.), by 1919; Metropolitan Railway (stock), by 1890; Metropolitan
Opera Company (N.Y.), by 1922. Related: Mets.


met (v.)

past tense and past participle of meet (v.).


meta-

word-forming element meaning 1. after, behind, 2. changed, altered, 3. higher, beyond; from Greek
meta (prep.) in the midst of, in common with, by means of, in pursuit or quest of, from PIE *me- in
the middle (cognates: German mit, Gothic mi&thorn;, Old English mi&eth; with, together with, among;
see mid). Notion of changing places with probably led to senses change of place, order, or nature,
which was a principal meaning of the Greek word when used as a prefix (but also denoting community,
participation; in common with; pursuing).    Third sense, higher than, transcending, overarching,
dealing with the most fundamental matters of, is due to misinterpretation of metaphysics as science
of that which transcends the physical. This has led to a prodigious erroneous extension in modern
usage, with meta- affixed to the names of other sciences and disciplines, especially in the academic
jargon of literary criticism, which affixes it to just about anything that moves and much that
doesn't.


metabolic (adj.)

1845 in biological sense, from German metabolisch (1839), from Greek metabolikos changeable, from
metabole a change, changing, a transition (see metabolism). Used earlier in a general sense of
involving change (1743). Related: Metabolically.


metabolism (n.)

in physiology sense, 1878, from French m&eacute;tabolisme, from Greek metabole a change, from
metaballein to change, from meta- over (see meta-) + ballein to throw (see ballistics).


metabolize (v.)

1887 (transitive), 1934 (intransitive), from Greek metabole a change (see metabolism) + -ize.
Related: Metabolized; metabolizing.


metacarpus (n.)

1650s, Modern Latin, from Greek metakarpion, from meta- (see meta-) + karpos wrist (see carpus).
Related: Metacarpal.


metacommunication (n.)

1951, from meta- + communication.


metal (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French metal metal; material, substance, stuff (12c.), from Latin metallum metal;
mine, quarry, mineral, what is got by mining, from Greek metallon metal, ore (senses only in post-
classical texts; originally mine, quarry, pit), probably from metalleuein to mine, to quarry, of
unknown origin, but related somehow to metallan to seek after. Compare Greek metalleutes a miner,
metalleia a searching for metals, mining.


metal (adj.)

late 14c., from metal (n.).


metallic (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French m&#233;tallique or directly from Latin metallicus, from Greek metallikos,
from metallon (see metal).


metallurgy (n.)

1704, from Modern Latin metallurgia, from Greek metallourgos worker in metal, from metallon metal
(see metal) + ergon work (see organ). Related: Metallurgical; metallurgist.


metamathematics (n.)

1890, from meta- + mathematics.


metamorphic (adj.)

1833 (Lyell) in the geological sense, in reference to rock whose form has been changed by heat or
pressure, from metamorphosis + -ic. Earlier (1816) in non-technical sense characterized by change.


metamorphism (n.)

1837, from metamorphic + -ism.


metamorphize (v.)

metamorphose, 1590s, from Greek meta (see meta-) + morphe (see Morpheus) + -ize. Related:
Metamorphized; metamorphizing. Alternative verbal form metamorphosize attested from 1841.


metamorphose (v.)

1570s, from Middle French m&eacute;tamorphoser (16c.), from m&eacute;tamorphose (n.), from Latin
metamorphosis (see metamorphosis). Related: Metamorphosed. The Greek verb was metamorphoun.


metamorphosis (n.)

1530s, change of form or shape, especially by witchcraft, from Latin metamorphosis, from Greek
metamorphosis a transforming, a transformation, from metamorphoun to transform, to be transfigured,
from meta- change (see meta-) + morphe form (see Morpheus). Biological sense is from 1660s. As the
title of Ovid's work, late 14c., Metamorphoseos, from Latin Metamorphoses (plural).


metanalysis (n.)

1914, from meta- + analysis. Coined by Danish philologist Otto Jespersen (1860-1943).


metanoia (n.)

1768, penitence, spiritual conversion, from Greek metanoia afterthought, repentance, from metanoein
to change one's mind or purpose, from meta- (see meta) + noein to have mental perception, from noos
mind, thought.


metaphor (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French metaphore (Old French metafore, 13c.), and directly from Latin
metaphora, from Greek metaphora a transfer, especially of the sense of one word to a different word,
literally a carrying over, from metapherein transfer, carry over; change, alter; to use a word in a
strange sense, from meta- over, across (see meta-) + pherein to carry, bear (see infer).


metaphoric (adj.)

1590s, from metaphor + -ic. Greek metaphorikos meant apt at metaphors.


metaphorical (adj.)

1550s, from metaphor + -ical. Related: metaphorically.


metaphrastic (adj.)

1778, from Greek metaphrastikos paraphrastic, from metaphrasis paraphrase, from metaphrazein to
paraphrase, translate, from meta- (see meta-) + phrazein to show, tell (see phrase (n.)). Related:
metaphrastically (1570s).


metaphysic (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin metaphysica (see metaphysics). The usual form of metaphysics until
16c.; somewhat revived 19c. under German influence.


metaphysical (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to metaphysics, from methaphesik (late 14c.) + -al, and in part from Medieval
Latin metaphysicalis, from Medieval Latin metaphysica (see metaphysics). It came to be used in the
sense of abstract, speculative (among others by Johnson, who applied it to certain 17c. poets,
notably Donne and Cowley, who used witty conceits and abstruse imagery). Related: Metaphysically.


metaphysician (n.)

1590s, from Middle French m&eacute;taphysicien (14c.); see metaphysics + -ian.


metaphysics (n.)

1560s, plural of Middle English metaphisik, methaphesik (late 14c.), branch of speculation which
deals with the first causes of things, from Medieval Latin metaphysica, neuter plural of Medieval
Greek (ta) metaphysika, from Greek ta meta ta physika the (works) after the Physics, title of the 13
treatises which traditionally were arranged after those on physics and natural sciences in
Aristotle's writings. The name was given c.70 B.C.E. by Andronicus of Rhodes, and was a reference to
the customary ordering of the books, but it was misinterpreted by Latin writers as meaning the
science of what is beyond the physical. See meta- + physics. The word originally was used in English
in the singular; plural form predominated after 17c., but singular made a comeback late 19c. in
certain usages under German influence.


metapolitics (n.)

1784, abstract political science; see meta- + politics. Related: metapolitical, attested from 1670s
in sense outside the realm of politics.


metastasis (n.)

1570s, originally in rhetoric, from Late Latin metastasis transition, from Greek metastasis a
removing, removal; migration; a changing; change, revolution, from methistanai to remove, change,
from meta- over, across (see meta-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root *sta- to
stand (see stet). A rhetorical term in Late Latin for a sudden transition in subjects, medical use
for shift of disease from one part of the body to another dates from 1660s in English. Related:
Metastatic.


metastasise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of metastasize.  Related: Metastasised; metastasising.


metastasize

1826, from metastasis + -ize. Related: Metastasized; metastasizing.


metatarsal (adj.)

1739, from metatarsus (1670s), from Modern Latin metatarsus, from meta- (see meta-) + tarsus (see
tarsus). As a noun from 1854.


metathesis (n.)

1570s, transposition of letters in a word; c.1600, rhetorical transposition of words, from Late
Latin metathesis, from Greek metathesis change of position, transposition, change of opinion, from
stem of metatithenai to transpose, from meta- to change (see meta-) + tithenai to place, set (see
theme). Plural is metatheses. Related: Metathetic.


metathesize (v.)

1893, from metathesis + -ize. Related: Metathesized; metathesizing.


mete (v.)

to allot, Old English metan to measure, mete out; compare, estimate (class V strong verb; past tense
m&aelig;t, past participle meten), from Proto-Germanic *metan (cognates: Old Saxon metan, Old
Frisian, Old Norse meta, Dutch meten, Old High German mezzan, German messen, Gothic mitan to
measure), from PIE *med- to take appropriate measures (see medical). Used now only with out.
Related: Meted; meting.


mete (n.)

boundary, now only in phrase metes and bounds, late 15c., from Old French mete limit, bounds,
frontier, from Latin meta goal, boundary, post, pillar.


metempsychosis (n.)

1580s, passing of the soul at death into another body, from Late Latin metempsychosis, from Greek
metempsychosis, from  meta change (see meta-) + empsykhoun to put a soul into, from en in + psyche
soul (see psyche). Pythagorean word for transmigration of souls at death. Related: Metempsychose
(v.), 1590s.


meteor (n.)

late 15c., any atmospheric phenomenon, from Middle French meteore (13c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin meteorum (nominative meteora), from Greek ta meteora the celestial phenomena, things in heaven
above, plural of meteoron, literally thing high up, noun use of neuter of meteoros (adj.) high up,
raised from the ground, hanging, from meta- over, beyond (see meta-) + -aoros lifted, hovering in
air, related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    Specific sense of fireball, shooting star is
attested from 1590s. Atmospheric phenomena were formerly classified as aerial meteors (wind),
aqueous meteors (rain, snow, hail), luminous meteors (aurora, rainbows), and igneous meteors
(lightning, shooting stars).


meteoric (adj.)

1812, pertaining to meteors; earlier dependent on atmospheric conditions (1789), from meteor + -ic.
Figurative sense of transiently brilliant is from 1836.


meteorite (n.)

rock that falls to earth, after streaking across the sky as a meteor, 1818, from meteor + -ite.


meteoroid (n.)

rock floating in space, which becomes a meteor when it enters Earth's atmosphere, formed in English,
1865, from meteor + -oid.


meteorological (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French m&#233;t&#233;orologique or Greek meteorologikos; see meteorology + -ical.
Related: Meteorologically.


meteorologist (n.)

1620s, from meteorology + -ist. Earlier was meteorologician (1570s). Greek meteorologos meant one
who deals with celestial phenomena, astronomer.


meteorology (n.)

science of the atmosphere, weather forecasting, 1610s, from French m&eacute;t&eacute;orologie and
directly from Greek meteorologia treatise on celestial phenomena, discussion of high things, from
meteoron, literally thing high up (see meteor), + -logia treatment of (see -logy).


meter (n.1)

also metre, poetic measure, Old English meter meter, versification, from Latin metrum, from Greek
metron meter, a verse; that by which anything is measured; measure, length, size, limit, proportion,
from PIE root *me- (2) to measure (see meter (n.2)). Possibly reborrowed early 14c. (after a
300-year gap in recorded use) from Old French metre, with specific sense of metrical scheme in
verse, from Latin metrum.


meter (n.2)

also metre, unit of length, 1797, from French m&egrave;tre (18c.), from Greek metron measure, from
PIE root *me- (2) to measure (cognates: Greek metra lot, portion, Sanskrit mati measures, matra
measure, Avestan, Old Persian ma-, Latin metri to measure). Developed by French Academy of Sciences
for system of weights and measures based on a decimal system originated 1670 by French clergyman
Gabriel Mouton. Originally intended to be one ten-millionth of the length of a quadrant of the
meridian.


meter (n.3)

device for measuring, abstracted 1832 from gas-meter, etc., from French -m&egrave;tre, used in
combinations (in English from 1790), from Latin metrum measure or cognate Greek metron measure (see
meter (n.2)). Influenced by English meter person who measures (late 14c., agent noun from mete
(v.)). As short for parking meter from 1960. Meter maid first recorded 1957; meter reader 1963.


meter (v.)

to measure by means of a meter, 1884, from meter (n.3). Meaning install parking meters is from 1957.


meth (n.)

colloquial abbreviation of methedrine, attested from 1967.


methadone (n.)

1947, generic designation for 6-dimethylamino-4, 4-diphenyl-3-heptanone. For origins of the
syllables, see methyl + amino + di- + -one.


methamphetamine (n.)

1949, from methyl + amphetamine; so called because it was a methyl derivative of amphetamine.


methane (n.)

inflammable colorless and odorless gas, marsh gas, 1867, coined from chemical suffix -ane + syllable
abstracted from methyl.


methanol (n.)

methyl alcohol, 1892 (adopted that year by the international scientific community), from methyl +
-ol, suffix denoting alcohol.


methaqualone (n.)

hypnotic sedative drug, 1961, from meth(o)- + connecting particle -a- + qu(in)a(zo)lone.


Methedrine (n.)

1939, proprietary name of a brand of methamphetamine (by Wellcome Ltd.); slang abbreviation meth is
attested from 1967.


methinks (v.)

Old English me &thorn;ync&eth; it seems to me, from me (pron.), dative of I, + &thorn;ync&eth;,
third person singular of &thorn;yncan to seem, reflecting the Old English distinction between
&thorn;yncan to seem and related &thorn;encan to think, which bedevils modern students of the
language (see think). The two thinks were constantly confused, then finally merged, in Middle
English. Related: Methought.


method (n.)

early 15c., regular, systematic treatment of disease, from Latin methodus way of teaching or going,
from Greek methodos scientific inquiry, method of inquiry, investigation, originally pursuit, a
following after, from meta- after (see meta-) + hodos a traveling, way (see cede). Meaning way of
doing anything is from 1580s; that of orderliness, regularity is from 1610s. In reference to a
theory of acting associated with Russian director Konstantin Stanislavsky, it is attested from 1923.


methodical (adj.)

1560s, with -al (1) and methodic (1540s), from Middle French methodique, from Late Latin methodicus,
from Greek methodikos, from methodos (see method). Related: Methodically.


Methodist (n.)

One of a new kind of puritans lately arisen, so called from their profession to live by rules and in
constant method [Johnson]. Protestant religious sect founded 1729 at Oxford University by John and
Charles Wesley, took that name almost from inception, but it had been used since at least 1686 for
various new methods of worship. Related: Methodism.


methodize (v.)

to make methodical, 1580s, from method + -ize. Related: Methodized; methodizing.


methodological (adj.)

1828, from methodology + -ical. Related: Methodologically.


methodology (n.)

1800, from French m&eacute;thodologie or directly from Modern Latin methodologia; see method +
-ology.


Methusela

also Methuselah, son of Enoch in the Old Testament, he was said to have lived 969 years, the oldest
lifespan recorded in Old Testament. Used from late 14c. as the type of a very long life or long-
lived person. The name is Hebrew Methushelah, which appears to be man of the dart, from singular of
methim man + shelah dart.


methyl (n.)

univalent hydrocarbon radical, 1840, from German methyl (1840) or directly from French
m&eacute;thyle, back-formation from French m&eacute;thyl&egrave;ne (see methylene).


methylene (n.)

1835, from French m&eacute;thyl&egrave;ne (1834), coined by Jean-Baptiste-Andr&eacute; Dumas
(1800-1884) and Eug&egrave;ne-Melchior P&#233;ligot (1811-1890) from Greek methy wine (see mead
(n.1)) + hyle wood + Greek name-forming element -ene. So called because detected in wood alcohol.
The breakdown of methylene into methyl and -ene, and the identification of the last syllable of
methyl with the general suffix -ly, led to the use of meth- as a separate combining-element, as, for
example, in methane, methacrylic [Flood].


metic (n.)

resident alien in an ancient Greek state, 1808, from Late Latin metycus, from Greek metoikos,
literally one who has changed his residence, from meta- change (see meta-) + -oikos dwelling, from
oikein to dwell (see villa).


meticulous (adj.)

1530s, fearful, timid, from Latin meticulosus fearful, timid, literally full of fear, from metus
fear, dread, apprehension, anxiety, of unknown origin. Sense of fussy about details is first
recorded in English 1827, from French m&eacute;ticuleux timorously fussy. Related: Meticulosity.


meticulously (adv.)

1680s, from meticulous + -ly (2).


meticulousness (n.)

1862, from meticulous + -ness. Earlier in the same sense was meticulosity (1650s).


metier (n.)

skill, talent, calling, 1792, from French m&eacute;tier trade, profession, from Old French mestier
task, affair, service, function, duty, from Gallo-Roman *misterium, from Latin ministerium office,
service, from minister servant (see minister (n.)).


Metis

first wife of Zeus, from Greek Metis, literally advice, wisdom, counsel; cunning, skill, craft, from
PIE root *me- to measure (see meter (n.2)).


metis (n.)

person of mixed parentage, especially French Canadian and North American Indian, from French
m&eacute;tis, from Late Latin mixticus of mixed race, from Latin mixtus mixed, past participle of
miscere to mix, mingle (see mix (v.)). Compare mestizo.


metonym (n.)

1788; see metonymy.


metonymy (n.)

1560s, from French m&eacute;tonymie (16c.) and directly from Late Latin metonymia, from Greek
metonymia, literally a change of name, related to metonomazein to call by a new name; to take a new
name, from meta- change (see meta-) + onyma, dialectal form of onoma name (see name (n.)). Figure in
which the name of one thing is used in place of another that is  suggested by or associated with it
(such as the Kremlin for the Russian government). Related: Metonymic; metonymical.


metre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of meter (n.); for spelling, see -re.


metric (adj.)

pertaining to the system of measures based on the meter, 1855, from French m&eacute;trique, from
m&egrave;ter (see meter (n.2)). In this sense, metrical is attested from 1797.


metric (n.)

science of versification, 1760, from Greek he metrike prosody, plural of metron meter, a verse; that
by which anything is measured; measure, length, size, limit, proportion (see meter (n.2)).


metrical (adj.)

pertaining to versification, early 15c., from Latin metricus metrical, from Greek metrikos of or for
meter, metrical, from metron poetic meter (see meter (n.2)). Old English had meterlic in this sense.


metricize (v.)

convert to the metric system, 1873, from metric (adj.) + -ize. Related: Metricized; metricizing.
Earlier, to convert to poetic meter (1850; see metric (n.)).


metrics (n.)

study of meter, 1892, variant of metric (n.); also see -ics.


Metro (n.)

Paris underground, 1904, from French abbreviation of Chemin de Fer M&eacute;tropolitain Metropolitan
Railway (see metropolitan (adj.)). French chemin de fer railroad is literally iron road.


Metroliner (n.)

U.S. high-speed inter-city train, 1969, from metropolitan + liner.


metronome (n.)

mechanical musical time-keeper, 1815, coined in English from comb. form of Greek metron measure (see
meter (n.2)) + -nomos regulating, verbal adjective of nemein to regulate (see numismatic). The
device invented 1815 by Johann Maelzel (1772-1838), German civil engineer and showman. Related:
Metronomic.


metronymic (adj.)

derived from the name of a mother or maternal ancestor, 1881, from Late Greek metronymikos named for
one's mother, from meter (genitive metros) mother (see mother (n.1)) + onyma (see name (n.)).
Related: Metronymically (1822).


metropolis (n.)

seat of a metropolitan bishop, 1530s, from Late Latin metropolis; see metropolitan. Meaning chief
town or capital city of a province is first attested 1580s, earlier metropol (late 14c.).


metropolitan (n.)

early 15c., bishop having oversight of other bishops, from Late Latin metropolitanus, from Greek
metropolis mother city (from which others have been colonized), also capital city, from meter mother
(see mother (n.1)) + polis city (see polis).    In Greek, parent state of a colony; later, see of a
metropolitan bishop. In the West, the position now roughly corresponds to archbishop, but in the
Greek church it ranks above it.


metropolitan (adj.)

1540s, belonging to an ecclesiastical metropolis, from Late Latin metropolitanus, from Greek
metropolites resident of a city, from metropolis (see metropolitan (n.)). Meaning belonging to a
chief or capital city is from 1550s. In reference to underground city railways, it is attested from
1867.


metropolitanism (n.)

1855, from metropolitan (adj.) + -ism.


metrosexual (adj.)

by 2001, from metropolitan + -sexual, ending abstracted from homosexual, heterosexual.


mettle (n.)

1580s, variant spelling of metal, both forms used interchangeably (by Shakespeare and others) in the
literal sense and in the figurative one of stuff of which a person is made (1550s) until the
spellings and senses diverged early 18c.


mettlesome (adj.)

1660s, from mettle + -some (1).


mew (v.)

make a sound like a cat, early 14c., mewen, of imitative origin (compare German miauen, French
miauler, Italian miagolare, Spanish maullar, and see meow). Related: Mewed; mewing. As a noun from
1590s.


mew (n.1)

seagull, Old English m&aelig;w, from Proto-Germanic *maigwis (cognates: Old Saxon mew, Frisian meau,
Middle Dutch and Middle Low German mewe, Dutch meeuw gull), imitative of its cry. Old French moue
(Modern French mouette) and Lithuanian mevas are Germanic loan-words.


mew (n.2)

cage, c.1300, from Old French mue cage for hawks, especially when molting, from muer to molt, from
Latin mutare to change (see mutable).


mewl (v.)

to cry feebly, c.1600, imitative. Related: Mewled; mewling.


mews (n.)

stables grouped around an open yard, 1630s, from Mewes, name of the royal stables at Charing Cross,
built 1534 on the site of the former royal mews (attested from late 14c.), where the king's hawks
were kept (see mew (n.2)). Extended by 1805 to street of former stables converted to human
habitations.


Mexican

c.1600 (n.); by 1640s (adj.), from Mexico + -an.


Mexico

from Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) mexihco, the name of the ancient Aztec capital.  The etymology
of this is opaque. Because of the difference in vowel length, it cannot be derived from ME-TL
'maguey.' The sequence XIH also differs in vowel length from XIC-TLI 'navel,' which has been
proposed as a component element. The final element is locative -C(O). [Kartunnen]


mezuzah (n.)

1640s, from Hebrew, literally doorpost.


mezzanine (n.)

1711, a low story between two tall ones in a building, from French mezzanine (17c.), from Italian
mezzanino, from mezzano middle, from Latin medianus of the middle, from medius (see medial (adj.)).
Sense of lowest balcony in a theater first recorded 1927.


mezzo (adj.)

half, moderate, Italian mezzo, literally middle, from Latin medius (see medial (adj.)). Also used in
combinations such as mezzo-soprano (1753) and mezzotint (1738).


mezzo-soprano (n.)

1753; see mezzo + soprano.


mezzotint (n.)

1738; see mezzo + tint. As a verb, from 1827.


MGM

abbreviation of Metro Goldwyn-Mayer, attested from 1933.


MI5

1939, from abbreviation of Military Intelligence, followed by the department number.


MIA

also m.i.a., initialism (acronym) of missing in action, attested from 1919 (see missing).


Miami

place name in U.S.; the one in Florida is of unknown origin, attested in Spanish as Maymi (1566),
Mayaimi (1575). The one in Ohio is from the Miami, native people there, attested from 18c.,
apparently from a native word /myaamiwa downstream person.


miasma (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin miasma noxious vapors, from Greek miasma (genitive miasmatos) stain,
pollution, defilement, taint of guilt, from stem of miainein to pollute, from possible PIE root
*mai- to stain, soil, defile (source of Old English mal stain, mark, see mole (n.1)). Earlier form
was miasm (1640s), from French miasme. Related: Miasmatic; miasmal.


mic (n.)

shortened form of microphone, first attested 1961.


mica (n.)

1706, from specialized use of Latin mica crumb, bit, morsel, grain, originally *smika (form probably
influenced by Latin micare to flash, glitter), from PIE *smik- small (cognates: Greek smikros, Attic
mikros small; Old High German smahi littleness). Related: Micaceous containing mica.


micacious (adj.)

sparkling, 1836, from Late Latin micare to shine, sparkle, flash, glitter.


Micah

masc. proper name, sixth of the Old Testament prophets, from Hebrew Mikhah, short for Mikhayah,
literally who is like the Lord? First element identical to that in Michael, for second element, see
Jah.


Micawber (n.)

as a type of a childishly impractical man living in optimistic fantasy, from the character of
Wilkins Micawber in Dickens' David Copperfield (1850).    I am at present, my dear Copperfield,
engaged in the sale of corn upon commission. It is not an avocation of a remunerative description --
in other words it does not pay -- and some temporary embarrassments of a pecuniary nature have been
the consequence. I am however delighted to add that I have now an immediate prospect of something
turning up ....


Michael

masc. proper name, name of an archangel, from Late Latin Michael (source of French Michel, Spanish
Miguel), from Greek Mikhael, from Hebrew Mikha-el, literally Who is like God?


Michaelmas

early 12c., Sanct Micheles m&aelig;sse, the feast of St. Michael (Sept. 29, an English quarter-day),
from Michael + mass (n.2). Goose is the day's traditional fare since at least 15c.


Michelin

type of tires, 1902, from French motor vehicle manufacturers Andr&eacute; (1853-1931) and
&Eacute;douard (1859-1940) Michelin, who first made the tires.


Michigan

name originally applied to the lake, perhaps from Old Ojibwa (Algonquian) *meshi-gami big lake. The
spelling is French. Organized as a U.S. territory 1805, admitted as a state 1837. A resident might
be a Michigander (1848) or a Michiganian (1813).


mick (n.)

derogatory slang for Irishman, 1856, from nickname of common Irish name Michael (q.v.).


mickey (n.)

short for Mickey Finn, 1938.


Mickey Finn

strong drink, drink laced with chloral hydrate, by 1928 (perhaps 1890s), of unknown origin.
Presumably named after someone, but the various stories about the name cannot be substantiated.


Mickey Mouse

cartoon mouse character created 1928 by U.S. animator Walt Disney (1901-1966). As an adjective
meaning small and worthless it dates from 1936, originally used especially of mediocre dance-band
music, a put-down based on the type of tunes played as background in cartoon films.


mickle (adj.)

dialectal survival of Old English micel, mycel great, intense, big, long, much, many, from Proto-
Germanic *mekilaz (cognates: Old Saxon mikil, Old Norse mikill, Old High German mihhil, Gothic
mikils), from PIE root *meg- great, large (cognates: Armenian mets great; Sanskrit mahat- great,
mazah- greatness; Avestan mazant- great; Hittite mekkish great, large; Greek megas great, large;
Latin magnus great, large, much, abundant, major greater, maximus greatest; Middle Irish mag,
maignech great, large; M.Welsh meith long, great). Its main modern form is much (q.v.). Related:
Mickleness.


Micmac

Algonquian tribe of the Canadian Maritimes and Newfoundland, by 1776, from mi:kemaw, a native name
said to mean literally allies.


micro-

word-forming element meaning small, microscopic; magnifying; one millionth, from Latinized comb.
form of Greek mikros small, little, petty, trivial, slight (see mica).


micro-organism (n.)

also microorganism, 1855, from micro- + organism.


microbe (n.)

popular name for a bacterium, 1878, from French microbe, badly coined ... by S&eacute;dillot
[Weekley] in 1878 from Greek mikros small (see mica) + bios life (see bio-). It is an incorrect use
of bios; in Greek the word would mean literally short-lived.


microbial (adj.)

1879, from Modern Latin microbion (see microbe) + -al (1).


microbiologist (n.)

1882, from microbiology + -ist.


microbiology (n.)

1880, coined in English from micro- + biology. Related: Microbiological.


microcephalic (adj.)

small-headed, 1845, from French microc&eacute;phalique, from Modern Latin microcephalus, from Greek
mikros small (see mica) + kephale head (see cephalo-). Related: Microcephalism; microcephalous
(1840); microcephaly (n.).


microchip (n.)

integrated circuit, 1975, from micro- + chip (n.1).


microcircuit (n.)

1959, from micro- + circuit (n.). Related: Microcircuitry.


microclimate (n.)

1918, from micro- + climate. Related: Microclimatology.


microcomputer (n.)

1971, from micro- + computer.


microcosm (n.)

c.1200, mycrocossmos (modern form from early 15c.), human nature, man viewed as the epitome of
creation, literally miniature world, from Middle French microcosme and in earliest use directly from
Medieval Latin microcosmus, from Greek mikros small (see mica) + kosmos world (see cosmos). General
sense of a community constituting a world unto itself is attested from 1560s. Related: Microcosmic.
A native expression in the same sense was petty world (c.1600).


microeconomics (n.)

1948, from micro- + economics. Related: Microeconomic.


microelectronics (n.)

1960, from micro- + electronics.


microfiche (n.)

1950, from French microfiche, from micro- + French fiche slip of paper (see fiche).


microfilm (n.)

1927, coined from micro- + film (n.). The verb is first recorded 1940, from the noun. Related:
Microfilmed; microfilming.


micrography (n.)

1650s, description of microscopic objects, from micro- + -graphy. From 1899 as art of writing in
very small letters.


microinstruction (n.)

1959, from micro- + instruction.


micrology (n.)

hair splitting, exaggerated attention to petty things, 1650s, from Greek mikrologia pettiness, care
for trifles, from micros (see micro-) + -logia (see -logy).


micromanage (v.)

by 1982, from micro- + manage (v.). Related: Micromanagement; micromanaged; micromanaging.


micromania (n.)

1879, a form of mania in which the patient thinks himself, or some part of himself, to be reduced in
size, from Greek mikros small (see mica) + mania. Also used in reference to insane self-belittling.


micrometer (n.)

1660s, from micro- + -meter. Originally a telescope attachment; from 1884 as a craftsman's fine
measuring tool. Related: Micrometry; micrometric.


micron (n.)

one millionth of a meter, 1892, coined 1880 in French from Greek mikron, neuter of mikros small (see
mica).


Micronesia

1840, from Italian, literally the region of small islands, Modern Latin, formed on model of
Polynesia from micro- small (see micro-) + Greek nesos island (see Chersonese). Related:
Micronesian.


microphone (n.)

1680s, ear trumpet for the hard-of-hearing, coined from Greek mikros small (see mica) + phone sound
(see fame (n.)). Modern meaning dates from 1929, from use in radio broadcasting and movie recording.
Earlier, amplifying telephone transmitter (1878). Of the two spellings of the short form of the
word, mike (1927) is older than mic (1961).


microprocessor (n.)

1970, from micro- + processor.


microscope (n.)

1650s, from Modern Latin microscopium, literally an instrument for viewing what is small, from Greek
micro- (see micro-) + -skopion, from skopein to look, see (see -scope).


microscopic (adj.)

1732, like a microscope; see microscope + -ic. Meaning of minute size is from 1760s. Related:
Microscopical; microscopically.


microscopy (n.)

1660s, from microscope + -y (4).


microsecond (n.)

1906, from micro- + second (n.).


Microsoft

computer software company, founded 1975.


microspore (n.)

1856, from micro- + spore.


microsurgery (n.)

1927, from micro- + surgery.


microtia (n.)

abnormal smallness of the ear, 1881, Medical Latin, from micro- + Greek ous (genitive otos) ear (see
ear (n.)).


microwavable (adj.)

by 1982, from microwave + -able.


microwave (n.)

type of electromagnetic wave, 1931, coined in English from micro- + wave (n.). First record of
microwave oven is from 1961; microwave as short for this is attested from 1974; as a verb, from
1976.


micturate (v.)

urinate, by 1842, from micturition; malformed and with an erroneous sense; condemned from its birth.


micturition (n.)

1725, the need very badly to urinate, from Latin micturitum, from past participle of micturire to
desire to urinate, desiderative of mingere to urinate, from PIE *meigh- to urinate (cognates:
Sanskrit mehati urinates; Avestan maezaiti urinates; Greek omeikhein to urinate; Armenian mizem
urinate; Lithuanian min&#382;u urinate; Old English migan to urinate, micga urine, meox dung,
filth). As during the final 20 minutes of a 4-hour film after drinking a 32-ounce Mountain Dew from
the snack bar and the movie ends with a drawn-out farewell scene while Frodo is standing on the pier
and wavelets lap audibly on the dock the whole time as if the director was a sadist set on
compounding your torment.


mid (prep., adj.)

Old English mid with, in conjunction with, in company with, together with, among, from Proto-
Germanic *medjaz (cognates: Old Norse mi&eth;r, Old Saxon middi, Old Frisian midde, Old High German
mitti, Gothic midjis mid, middle), from PIE *medhyo- middle (see medial (adj.)). Now surviving in
English only as a prefix (mid-air, midstream, etc.); as a preposition it often is a shortened form
of amid (compare midshipman).


Mid East

Middle East, attested from 1944. Loosely defined.


mid-air (n.)

also midair, 1660s, from mid + air (n.1). Lit. the part of the air between the clouds and the air
near the ground.


mid-course

1560s, from mid + course (n.).


Midas

king of Phrygia whose touched turned everything to gold (including his food), 1560s. Some usages
refer to the unrelated story of the ass's ears given him by Apollo for being dull to the charms of
his lyre. The name is of Phrygian origin.


midday (n.)

Old English midd&aelig;g midday, noon, contracted from midne d&aelig;g; see mid + day. Similar
formation in Old High German mittitag, German mittag, Old Norse mi&eth;dagr.


midden (n.)

mid-14c., dung hill, of Scandinavian origin; compare Danish m&oslash;dding, from m&oslash;g muck
(see muck (n.)) + dynge heap of dung (see dung). Modern archaeological sense of kitchen midden is
from Danish excavations.


middle (adj.)

Old English middel, from West Germanic *middila (cognates: Old Frisian middel, Old Saxon middil,
Middle Low German, Dutch middel, Old High German mittil, German mittel), from Proto-Germanic *medjaz
(see mid). Middle name attested from 1815; as one's outstanding characteristic, colloquial, from
1911, American English.    According to Mr. H.A. Hamilton, in his Quarter Sessions from Queen
Elizabeth, the practice of giving children two Christian names was unknown in England before the
period of the Stuarts, was rarely adopted down to the time of the Revolution, and never became
common until after the Hanoverian family was seated on the throne. In looking through so many
volumes of county records, he says, I have, of course, seen many thousands and tens of thousands of
proper names, belonging to men of all ranks and degrees,--to noblemen, justices, jurymen, witnesses,
sureties, innkeepers, hawkers, paupers, vagrants, criminals, and others,--and in no single instance,
down to the end of the reign of Anne, have I noticed any person bearing more than one Christian name
.... [Walsh]   Middle school attested from 1838, originally middle-class school, school for middle-
class children; the sense in reference to a school for grades between elementary and high school is
from 1960. Middle management is 1957. Middle-of-the-road in the figurative sense is attested from
1894; edges of a dirt road can be washed out and thus less safe. Middle finger so called from
c.1000.


middle (n.)

Old English middel, from middle (adj.).


middle age (n.)

period between youth and old age, late 14c.; middle-aged (adj.) first recorded c.1600.


Middle Ages (n.)

period between ancient and modern times (formerly roughly 500-1500 C.E., now more usually
1000-1500), attested from 1610s, translating Latin medium aevum (compare German mittelalter, French
moyen &acirc;ge).


middle class (n.)

1766; as an adjective, characteristic of the middle class (depreciative) it dates from 1893.


Middle East (n.)

1899; never defined in a generally accepted way. Early use with reference to British India. Hence
Middle-Eastern (1903).


middle passage (n.)

1788, in reference to the trans-Atlantic slave trade.


middlebrow

1911 (adj.), 1912 (n.), from middle + brow (compare highbrow, lowbrow).    [T]here is an alarmingly
wide chasm, I might almost say a vacuum, between the high-brow, who considers reading either as a
trade or as a form of intellectual wrestling, and the low-brow, who is merely seeking for gross
thrills. It is to be hoped that culture will soon be democratized through some less conventional
system of education, giving rise to a new type that might be called the middle-brow, who will
consider books as a source of intellectual enjoyment. [The Nation, Jan, 25, 1912]


middleman (n.)

in the trading sense, 1795, from middle + man. From mid-15c. as the name of some type of workman in
wire-making. From 1741 as one who takes a middle course.


middlemost (adj.)

early 14c., middle; the middle one of three, from middle + -most.


Middlesex

literally (land of the) Middle Saxons (those between Essex and Wessex); originally a much larger
region. See middle + Saxon.


Middletown

typical U.S. middle class community, 1929. The U.S. Geological Survey lists 40 towns by that name,
not counting variant spellings.


middleweight (n.)

also middle weight, 1842, from middle + weight.


middling (adj.)

1540s, from Scottish mydlyn (mid-15c.), from middle + suffix -ing. Used to designate the second of
three grades of goods. As an adverb by 1719.


middy (n.)

colloquial abbreviation of midshipman, by 1818. As loose, long type of women's blouse, 1911, from
resemblance to shirts worn by midshipmen.


Midgard

in Germanic cosmology, world inhabited by men (opposed to Asgard, the abode of the gods), 1882, from
Old Norse mi&eth;gar&eth;r, from mi&eth; mid (see mid) + Proto-Germanic *gardoz enclosure, tract
(see yard (n.1)). The Old English cognate was middangeard, which later was folk-etymologized as
middle earth (late 13c.).


midge (n.)

Old English mygg, mycg gnat, from Proto-Germanic *mugjon (cognates: Swedish mygga, Old Saxon muggia,
Middle Dutch mugghe, Dutch mug, Old High German mucka, German M&uuml;cke midge, gnat). No certain
cognates beyond Germanic, unless doubtful Armenian mun gnat and Albanian mize gnat are counted. But
Watkins, Klein and others suggest an imitative root used for various humming insects and a
relationship to Latin musca (see mosquito). Meaning diminutive person is from 1796.


midget (n.)

as a type of tiny biting insect, 1839, American English, from midge, perhaps with diminutive suffix
-et.    Dr. Webster is in error in saying the word midge is not in use at the present day. In the
neighboring Green mountain districts, one or more most annoying species of Simulium that there
abound, are daily designated in common conversation as the midges, or, as the name is often
corrupted, the midgets. From Dr. Harris' treatise it appears that the same name is in popular use
for the same insects in Maine. The term is limited in this country, we believe, exclusively to those
minute insects, smaller than the musketoe, which suck the blood of other animals. [Transactions of
the New-York State Agricultural Society, vol. VI, Albany, 1847]    Transferred sense of very small
person is attested by 1854. It is also noted mid-19c. as a pet form of Margaret.


Midi

southern France, 1883, from French midi south, literally midday (12c.), from mi middle (from Latin
medius middle; see medial (adj.)) + di day (from Latin dies; see diurnal). Also compare meridian.


MIDI

1983, acronym for Musical Instrument Digital Interface.


midland (adj.)

early 15c., mydlonde; mid + land (n.). As a noun from 1550s, first of the Midlands of England.


midlife (n.)

also mid-life, 1837, from mid + life. Midlife crisis attested from 1965.


midmost (adj.)

Old English midmest; see mid + -most.


midnight (n.)

Old English mid-niht, or middre niht (with dative). See mid + night. Midnight oil symbolizing late
night work is attested from 1630s.


midpoint (n.)

late 14c., from mid + point (n.).


midriff (n.)

Old English midhrif, from mid mid (see mid) + hrif belly, from Proto-Germanic *hrefiz- (cognates:
Old High German href, Old Frisian hrif belly), from PIE *kwrep- body, form, appearance (see
corporeal). More or less obsolete after 18c. except in phrase to tickle (one's) midriff to cause
laughter, the word revived 1941 in fashion usage for portion of a woman's garment that covers the
belly, as a euphemistic avoidance of belly; sense inverted and extended 1970 to a belly-baring style
of women's top.


midshipman (n.)

c.1600, so called because he was stationed amidships when on duty (see amid).


midst (n.)

c.1400, from Middle English middes (mid-14c.), from mid + adverbial genitive -s. The parasitic -t is
perhaps on model of superlatives (compare against).


midstream (n.)

also mid-stream, Old English midstream; see mid + stream (n.).


midsummer (n.)

Old English midsumor, from mid + sumor summer (see summer (n.1)). Midsummer Day, as an English
quarter-day, was June 24. Astronomically June 21, but traditionally reckoned in Europe on the night
of June 23-24.


midway (n.)

Old English mid-weg the middle of a way or distance; see mid + way (n.). Meaning central avenue of a
fairground is first recorded 1893, American English, in reference to the Midway Plaisance of the
Worlds Columbian Exposition held that year in Chicago. The Pacific island group so called for being
midway between America and Asia. As an adverb from late Old English.


Midwest (n.)

1926, in U.S. geographical sense, from earlier Midwestern (1889) in reference to a group of states
originally listed as W.Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri, Kansas, and Arkansas; now generally
meaning states somewhat further northwest. Related: Midwesterner.


midwife (n.)

c.1300, woman assisting, literally woman who is 'with'  (the mother at birth), from Middle English
mid with (see mid) + wif woman (see wife). Cognate with German Beifrau.


midwifery (n.)

late 15c.; a hybrid from midwife + -ery.


midwinter (n.)

also mid-winter, Old English midwinter, also midde winter; see mid + winter (n.). The middle of
winter, especially the period around the winter solstice (Dec. 21). As an adjective from mid-12c.


mien (n.)

facial expression, 1510s, probably a shortening of Middle English demean bearing, demeanor (see
demeanor) and influenced by Middle French mine appearance, facial expression, which is of unknown
origin, possibly Celtic (compare Breton min beak, muzzle, nose, Irish men mouth).


miff (n.)

1620s, fit of ill humor, perhaps imitative of an exclamation of disgust (compare German muffen to
sulk).


miff (v.)

1797, to take offense at; 1811, to put out of humor, from miff (n.). Related: miffed; miffing.


miffed (adj.)

1824, past participle adjective from miff (v.). Sir Walter Scott calls it a women's phrase.


miffy (adj.)

liable to 'take a miff,'  1810, from miff (n.) + -y (2). Related: Miffiness.


MiG

in name of various Russian fighter planes, so called in honor of aircraft designers Mikoyan and
(Russian i) Gurevitch.


might (v.)

Old English mihte, meahte, originally the past tense of may (Old English magen to be able), thus
*may-ed. See may (v.). The first record of might-have-been is from 1848.


might (n.)

Old English miht, earlier m&aelig;ht might, bodily strength, power, authority, ability, from Proto-
Germanic *makhti- (cognates: Old Norse mattr, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, Dutch macht, Old High
German maht, German Macht, Gothic mahts), Germanic suffixed form of PIE root *magh- (1) be able,
have power (see may (v.)).


mightily (adv.)

Old English mihtiglice; see mighty + -ly (2).


mightiness (n.)

Old English mihtinesse; see mighty + -ness.


mighty (adj.)

Old English mihtig, earlier m&aelig;htig, from miht (see might (n.)). Similar formation in Old
Frisian mechtig, Old Saxon mahtig, Dutch machtig, German m&#228;chtig. As an adverb, it is attested
from c.1300, though now considered colloquial.


mignon (adj.)

delicately formed, 1550s, French, literally delicate, charming, pretty; see minion. As a noun,
pretty child, from 1827.


migraine (n.)

late 14c., megrim, from Old French migraigne (13c.), from vulgar pronunciation of Late Latin
hemicrania pain in one side of the head, headache, from Greek hemikrania, from hemi- half + kranion
skull (see cranium). The Middle English form was re-spelled 1777 on the French model. Related:
Migrainous.


migrant (adj.)

1670s, from Latin migrantem (nominative migrans), present participle of migrare to remove, depart,
to move from one place to another (see migration).


migrant (n.)

person who migrates, 1760, from migrant (adj.).


migrate (v.)

1690s, from Latin migratus, past participle of migrare to move from one place to another (see
migration). Related: Migrated; migrating.


migration (n.)

1610s, of persons, 1640s of animals, from Latin migrationem (nominative migratio) a removal, change
of abode, migration, noun of action from past participle stem of migrare to move from one place to
another, probably originally *migwros, from PIE *meigw- (source of Greek ameibein to change), from
root *mei- (1) to change, go, move (see mutable). Related: Migrational.    That European birds
migrate across the seas or to Asia was understood in the Middle Ages, but subsequently forgotten.
Dr. Johnson held that swallows slept all winter in the beds of rivers, while the naturalist Morton
(1703) stated that they migrated to the moon. As late as 1837 the Kendal Mercury detailed the
circumstance of a person having observed several Swallows emerging from Grasmere Lake, in the spring
of that year, in the form of 'bell-shaped bubbles,' from each of which a Swallow burst forth ....


migratory (adj.)

1753, from Latin migrat-, past participle stem of migrare to movefrom one place to another (see
migration) + -ory.


mikado (n.)

1727, former title of the emperor of Japan, from mi honorable + kado gate, portal. Similar to
Sublime Porte, old title of the Ottoman emperor/government, and Pharaoh, which literally means great
house.


mil (n.)

1721, in per mil per thousand, from Latin mille thousand (see million); compare percent. As a unit
of length for diameter of wire, it is attested from 1891; as a unit of angular measure it is first
recorded 1907.


Milan

city in northern Italy, Roman Mediolanum, from Gaulish medios middle + lanu plain, in reference to
its situation in the Po Valley. Related: Milanese.


milch (adj.)

giving milk, from Old English -milce milking, from West Germanic *melik- milk (see milk (n)).


mild (adj.)

Old English milde gentle, merciful, from Proto-Germanic *milthjaz- (cognates: Old Norse mildr, Old
Saxon mildi, Old Frisian milde, Middle Dutch milde, Dutch mild, Old High German milti, German milde
mild, Gothic mildi&thorn;a kindness), from PIE *meldh-, from root *mel- soft, with derivatives
referring to soft or softened materials (cognates: Greek malthon weakling, myle mill; Latin molere
to grind; Old Irish meldach tender; Sanskrit mrdh to neglect, also to be moist). Originally of
persons and powers; of the weather from c.1400, of disease from 1744. Also in Old English as an
adverb, mercifully, graciously.


mildew (n.)

mid-13c., mildeu honeydew, nectar, from Old English meledeaw honeydew (sticky stuff exuded by
aphids), from Proto-Germanic compound of *melith honey (see Melissa) + *dawwaz dew (see dew).
Similar formation in Old Saxon milidou, Dutch meeldauw, German Meltau mildew.    First element in
many cases assimilated to forms of meal (n.2) ground grain. As a kind of fungus it is first recorded
mid-14c., so called from its being sticky and originally growing in plants. As a verb from 1550s.
Related: Mildewed.


mildly (adv.)

Old English mildelice graciously, affably, kindly; see mild + -ly (2). Phrase to put it mildly is
attested from 1929.


mildness (n.)

Old English mildnes mildness, mercy, from mild (adj.) + -ness.


Mildred

fem. proper name, Old English Mild&eth;ry&eth;, from milde mild (see mild) + &eth;ry&eth; power,
strength. A popular name in the Middle Ages through fame of St. Mildred (obit c. 700), abbess,
daughter of a Mercian king and a Kentish princess. Among the 10 most popular names for girls born in
the U.S. between 1903 and 1926, it hasn't been in the top 1,000 since 1983.


mile (n.)

Old English mil, from West Germanic *milja (cognates: Middle Dutch mile, Dutch mijl, Old High German
mila, German meile), from Latin milia thousands, plural of mille a thousand (neuter plural was
mistaken in Germanic as a fem. singular), of unknown origin.    The Latin word also is the source of
French mille, Italian miglio, Spanish milla. The Scandinavian words (Old Norse mila, etc.) are from
English. An ancient Roman mile was 1,000 double paces (one step with each foot), for about 4,860
feet, but there were many local variants and a modern statute mile is about 400 feet longer. In
Germany, Holland, and Scandinavia in the Middle Ages, the Latin word was applied arbitrarily to the
ancient Germanic rasta, a measure of from 3.25 to 6 English miles. Mile-a-minute (adj.) very fast is
attested from 1957.


mileage (n.)

1754, fixed rate per mile, from mile + -age. Meaning a total number of miles is from 1861.


milestone (n.)

1746, from mile + stone (n.).


MILF (n.)

by 1999, acronym of Mother I'd Like to Fuck or some such thing.


Milicent

fem. proper name, earlier Malasintha, from shortened form of Old High German Amalswind, literally
strong in work, from amal work + *swind strong (related to Old English swi&eth; strong, gesund
healthy).


milieu (n.)

surroundings, 1877, from French milieu, middle, medium, mean, literally middle place (12c.), from mi
middle (from Latin medius; see medial (adj.)) + lieu place (see lieu).


militancy (n.)

1640s, from militant + -cy.


militant (adj.)

early 15c., fighting, engaged in warfare, from Middle French militant fighting, from Latin
militantem (nominative militans), present participle of militare serve as a soldier (see militate),
originally especially in Church militant. Related: Militantly.


militant (n.)

one engaged in war or strife, c.1600, from militant (adj.); in a political sense, it is attested by
1907.


militarism (n.)

1864, from French militarisme, from militaire military (see military).


militarist (n.)

c.1600, a soldier, from military + -ist. As one devoted to militarism from 1884.


militaristic (adj.)

1883; see militarist + -ic.


military (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French militaire (14c.), from Latin militaris of soldiers or war, of military
service, warlike, from miles (genitive militis) soldier, of unknown origin, perhaps ultimately from
Etruscan, or else meaning one who marches in a troop, and thus connected to Sanskrit melah assembly,
Greek homilos assembled crowd, throng. Related: Militarily. Old English had militisc, from Latin.
Military-industrial complex coined 1961 in farewell speech of U.S. president Dwight D. Eisenhower.


military (n.)

soldiers generally, 1757, from military (adj.). Earlier, a military man (1736).


militate (v.)

1620s, to serve as a soldier (now rare), from Latin militatum, past participle of militare serve as
a soldier, from miles soldier (see military (adj.)). Sense developed via conflict with, to be
evidence for or against (1640s). Related: Militated; militating.


militia (n.)

1580s, system of military discipline, from Latin militia military service, warfare, from miles
soldier (see military). Sense of citizen army (as distinct from professional soldiers) is first
recorded 1690s, perhaps from a sense in French cognate milice. In U.S. history, the whole body of
men declared by law amenable to military service, without enlistment, whether armed and drilled or
not (1777).


militiaman (n.)

1780, from militia + man (n.).


milk (n.)

Old English meoluc (West Saxon), milc (Anglian), from Proto-Germanic *meluks milk (cognates: Old
Norse mjolk, Old Frisian melok, Old Saxon miluk, Dutch melk, Old High German miluh, German Milch,
Gothic miluks), from *melk- to milk, from PIE root *melg- to wipe, to rub off, also to stroke; to
milk, in reference to the hand motion involved in milking an animal (cognates: Greek amelgein, Latin
mulgere, Old Church Slavonic mlesti, Lithuanian mel&#382;u to milk, Old Irish melg milk, Sanskrit
marjati wipes off). Old Church Slavonic noun meleko (Russian moloko, Czech mleko) is considered to
be adopted from Germanic.    Of milk-like plant juices from late 14c. Milk chocolate is first
recorded 1723; milk shake is first recorded 1889, for a variety of creations, but the modern version
is only from the 1930s. Milk tooth (1727) uses the word in its figurative sense period of infancy,
attested from 17c. To cry over spilt milk is first attested 1836 in writing of Canadian humorist
Thomas C. Haliburton. Milk and honey is from the Old Testament phrase describing the richness of the
Promised Land (Num. xvi:13, Old English meolc and hunie). Milk of human kindness is from Macbeth
(1605).


milk (v.)

Old English melcan, milcian, meolcian to milk, give milk, suckle, from Proto-Germanic *melk- to milk
(cognates: Dutch melken, Old High German melchan, German melken), from PIE root *melg- (see milk
(n.)). Figurative sense of exploit for profit is first found 1520s. Related: Milked; milking.


milk of magnesia (n.)

1880, proprietary name for white suspension of magnesium hydroxide in water, taken as an antacid,
invented by U.S. chemist Charles Henry Phillips. Herbal or culinary preparations resembling milk had
been similarly named (for example milk of almond) since early 15c.


milkmaid (n.)

1550s, from milk (n.) + maid.


milkman (n.)

1580s, from milk (n.) + man (n.).


milksop (n.)

effeminate spiritless man, late 14c., attested as a (fictional) surname mid-13c.; also applied in
Middle English to the infant Christ. Literal sense piece of bread soaked in milk attested late 15c.;
see milk (n.) + sop (n.).


milktoast (n.)

also milk-toast, toast softened in milk, 1831, from milk (n.) + toast (n.). Figurative of softness
or innocence by 1859.


milkweed (n.)

1590s, from milk (n.) + weed (n.); used in reference to various plants whose juice resembles milk.


milky (adj.)

late 14c., from milk (n.) + -y (2). Related: Milkily; milkiness.


milky way (n.)

late 14c., loan-translation of Latin via lactea. See also galaxy.


mill (n.1)

building fitted to grind grain, Old English mylen a mill (10c.), an early Germanic borrowing from
Late Latin molina, molinum mill (source of French moulin, Spanish molino), originally fem. and
neuter of molinus pertaining to a mill, from Latin mola mill, millstone, related to molere to grind,
from PIE *mel- (1) soft, with derivatives referring to ground material and tools for grinding
(source also of Greek myle mill; see mallet).    Also from Late Latin molina, directly or
indirectly, are German M&uuml;hle, Old Saxon mulin, Old Norse mylna, Danish m&oslash;lle, Old Church
Slavonic mulinu. Broader sense of grinding machine is attested from 1550s. Other types of
manufacturing machines driven by wind or water, whether for grinding or not, began to be called
mills by early 15c. Sense of building fitted with industrial machinery is from c.1500.


mill (n.2)

one-tenth cent, 1786, an original U.S. currency unit but now used only for tax calculation purposes,
shortening of Latin millesimum one-thousandth, from mille a thousand (see million). Formed on the
analogy of cent, which is short for Latin centesimus one hundredth (of a dollar).


mill (v.2)

to keep moving round and round in a mass, 1874 (implied in milling), originally of cattle, from mill
(n.1) on resemblance to the action of a mill wheel. Related: Milled.


mill (v.1)

to grind, 1550s, from mill (n.1). Related: milled; milling.


mill-race (n.)

late 15c., from mill (n.1) + race (n.1) in the current sense.


mill-wheel (n.)

Old English mylnn-hweol; see mill (n.1) + wheel (n.).


millage (n.)

1871, from mill (n.2) + -age.


millenarian (n.)

1550s, one who believes in the coming of the (Christian) millennium, from Latin millenarius (see
millennium) + -ian. As an adjective, pertaining to the millennium, from 1630s. Related:
Millennarianism.


millenary (adj.)

consisting of a thousand, 1570s, from Latin millenarius (see millennium).


millennia (n.)

plural of millennium.


millennial (adj.)

1660s, pertaining to the millennium, from stem of millennium + -al (1). Meaning pertaining to a
period of 1,000 years is from 1807. As a noun from 1896, originally thousandth anniversary. From
1992 as a generational name for those born in the mid-1980s and thus coming of age around the year
2000.


millennialism (n.)

1906, from millennial + -ism.


millennium (n.)

1630s, from Modern Latin millennium, from Latin mille thousand (see million) + annus year (see
annual); formed on analogy of biennium, triennium, etc. For vowel change, see biennial. First in
English in sense of 1,000-year period of Christ's anticipated rule on Earth (Rev. xx:1-5). Sense of
any 1,000-year period first recorded 1711. Meaning the year 2000 attested from 1970.


miller (n.)

mid-14c. (attested as a surname by early 14c.), agent noun from mill (v.1). The Old English word was
mylnweard, literally mill-keeper (preserved in surname Millward, attested from late 13c.).


millet (n.)

cereal grain, c.1400, from Middle French millet, diminutive of mil millet, from Latin milium millet
(see mallet). Cognate with Greek meline, Lithuanian malnus (plural) millet.


milli-

word-forming element meaning thousandth part of a metric unit, from comb. form of Latin mille
thousand (see million).


milliard (n.)

one thousand million, 1793, from French milliard (16c.), from million (see million) with change of
suffix. A word made necessary by the double meaning of billion.


milligram (n.)

also milligramme, 1802, from French milligramme; see milli- + gram.


milliliter (n.)

also millilitre, 1802, from French millilitre; see milli- + liter.


millimeter (n.)

also millimetre, 1802, from French millimetre; see milli- + meter (n.2).


milliner (n.)

mid-15c., vendor of fancy wares, especially those made in Milan, Italian city, famous for straw
works, fancy goods, ribbons, bonnets, and cutlery. Meaning one who sells women's hats may be from
1520s, certainly by 18c. (it is difficult in early references to know whether the word means a type
of merchant or a resident of Milan who is selling certain wares).


millinery (n.)

1670s; see milliner + -y (1).


milling (n.)

act or business of grinding in a mill, mid-15c., verbal noun   from mill (v.1).


million (n.)

late 14c., from Old French million (late 13c.), from Italian millione (now milione), literally a
great thousand, augmentative of mille thousand, from Latin mille, which is of uncertain origin. Used
mainly by mathematicians until 16c. India, with its love of large numbers, had names before 3c. for
numbers well beyond a billion. The ancient Greeks had no name for a number greater than ten
thousand, the Romans for none higher than a hundred thousand. A million in Latin would have been
decies centena milia, literally ten hundred thousand. Million to one as a type of long odds is
attested from 1761. Related: Millions.


millionaire (n.)

1821, from French millionnaire (1762); see million. The first in America is said to have been John
Jacob Astor (1763-1848).


millionfold

1721, from million + -fold.


millionth (adj.)

1670s, from million + -th (1).


millipede (n.)

also millepede, c.1600, from Latin millepeda wood louse, a type of crawling insect, from mille
thousand (see million) + pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)). Probably a loan-translation of
Greek chiliopous.


millisecond (n.)

one thousandth of a second, 1922, from milli- + second (n.).


millstone (n.)

Old English mylenstan, from mill (n.1) + stone (n.). Figurative sense of a burden (1720) is from
Matt. xviii:6.


millstream (n.)

Old English mylestream; see mill (n.1) + stream (n.).


millwork (n.)

1770, from mill (n.1) + work (n.).


millwright (n.)

late 15c., from mill (n.1) + wright.


milquetoast (n.)

timid, meek person, 1938, from Caspar Milquetoast, character created by U.S. newspaper cartoonist
H.T. Webster (1885-1952) in the strip The Timid Soul, which ran from 1924 in the New York World and
later the Herald Tribune. By 1930 the name was being referenced as a type of the meek man. The form
seems to be milktoast with an added French twist; also see milksop.


milt (n.)

Old English milte spleen, from Proto-Germanic *miltjo- (cognates: Old Frisian milte, Middle Dutch
milte, Dutch milt spleen, milt of fish, Old High German milzi, German milz, Old Norse milti).
Meaning fish sperm is late 15c.


mime (n.)

c.1600, a buffoon who practices gesticulations [Johnson], from French mime (16c.) and directly from
Latin mimus, from Greek mimos imitator, mimic, actor, mime, buffoon, of unknown origin. In reference
to a performance, 1640s in a classical context; 1932 as a pantomime.


mime (v.)

1610s, to act without words, from mime (n.). The transferred sense of to imitate is from 1733 (Greek
mimeisthai meant to imitate). Meaning to pretend to be singing a pre-recorded song is from 1965.
Related: mimed; miming.


mimeograph (n.)

1889, copying machine (invented by Edison), from Greek mimeisthai to mimic, represent, imitate,
portray, in art, to express by means of imitation, from mimos mime (see mime (n.)) + -graphos, from
graphein to write (see -graphy). A proprietary name from 1903 to 1948. The verb meaning to reproduce
by means of a mimeograph is first attested 1895. Related: Mimeographed; mimeographing.


mimesis (n.)

1540s, in rhetoric, from Greek mimesis imitation, representation, representation by art, from
mimeisthai to imitate (see mimeograph).


mimetic (adj.)

1630s, having an aptitude for mimicry, from Greek mimetikos imitative, good at imitating, from
mimetos, verbal adjective of mimeisthai to imitate. Originally of persons, attested of animals or
plants from 1851. Related: Mimetical (1610s); mimetically.


mimic (n.)

1580s, a mime, from Latin mimicus, from Greek mimikos of or pertaining to mimes, from mimos mime.


mimic (v.)

1680s, from mimic (n.). Related: Mimicked; mimicking.


mimic (adj.)

1590s, from Latin mimicus, from Greek mimikos of or pertaining to mimes, verbal adjective from
mimeisthai to mimic, imitate, portray by means of imitation (see mimeograph).


mimicry (n.)

1680s, from mimic + -ry. Zoological sense is from 1861.


mimosa (n.)

genus of leguminous shrubs, 1731, coined in Modern Latin (1619) from Latin mimus mime (see mime
(n.)) + -osa, adjectival suffix (fem. of -osus). So called because some species (including the
common Sensitive Plant) fold leaves when touched, seeming to mimic animal behavior. The alcoholic
drink (by 1977) is so called from its yellowish color, which resembles that of the mimosa flower.


mina (n.)

talking starling of India, see mynah.


minacious (adj.)

threatening, 1650s, from Latin minaci-, stem of minax threatening, menacing (from minari; see menace
(n.)) + -ous. Related: Minaciously.


minaret (n.)

1680s, from French minaret, from Turkish minare a minaret, from Arabic manarah, manarat lamp,
lighthouse, minaret, related to manar candlestick, derivative of nar fire; compare Hebrew ner lamp
(see menorah).


minatory (adj.)

expressing a threat, 1530s, from Middle French minatoire, from Late Latin minatorius, from minat-,
stem of minari to threaten (see menace (n.)).


mince (v.)

late 14c., to chop in little pieces, from Old French mincier make into small pieces, from Vulgar
Latin *minutiare make small, from Late Latin minuti&aelig; small bits, from Latin minutus small (see
minute (adj.)). Of speech, to clip affectedly in imitation of elegance, 1540s; of words or language,
to restrain in the interest of decorum, 1590s. Meaning to walk with short or precise steps is from
1560s. Related: Minced; mincing.


mince (n.)

minced meat, 1850; see mincemeat.


mincemeat (n.)

1660s, originally in the figurative sense of what someone plans to make of his enemy, an alteration
of earlier minced meat (1570s); from mince (v.) + meat (n.). Mince-pie is attested from c.1600; as
rhyming slang for eye it is attested from 1857.


mincing (adj.)

affectedly dainty, 1520s, probably originally in reference to speech, when words were clipped to
affect elegance; or in reference to walking with short steps; present participle adjective from
mince (v.).


mind (n.)

late 12c., from Old English gemynd memory, remembrance, state of being remembered; thought, purpose;
conscious mind, intellect, intention, Proto-Germanic *ga-mundiz (cognates: Gothic muns thought,
munan to think; Old Norse minni mind; German Minne (archaic) love, originally memory, loving
memory), from PIE root *men- think, remember, have one's mind aroused, with derivatives referring to
qualities of mind or states of thought (cognates: Sanskrit matih thought, munih sage, seer; Greek
memona I yearn, mania madness, mantis one who divines, prophet, seer; Latin mens mind,
understanding, reason, memini I remember, mentio remembrance; Lithuanian mintis thought, idea, Old
Church Slavonic mineti to believe, think, Russian pamjat memory).    Meaning mental faculty is mid-
14c. Memory, one of the oldest senses, now is almost obsolete except in old expressions such as bear
in mind, call to mind. Mind's eye remembrance is early 15c. Phrase time out of mind is attested from
early 15c. To pay no mind disregard is recorded from 1916, American English dialect. To have half a
mind to to have one's mind half made up to (do something) is recorded from 1726. Mind-reading is
from 1882.


mind (v.)

mid-14c., to remember, take care to remember, also to remind, from mind (n.). Meaning perceive,
notice is from late 15c.; that of to give heed to is from 1550s; that of be careful about is from
1737. Sense of object to, dislike is from c.1600; negative use (with not) to care for, to trouble
oneself with is attested from c.1600. Meaning to take care of, look after is from 1690s. Related:
Minded; minding. Meiotic expression don't mind if I do attested from 1847.


mind-boggling (adj.)

1964; see mind (n.) + present participle of boggle.


minded (adj.)

c.1500, having a mind (to do); having a mind (of a certain type), from mind (n.).


mindful (adj.)

mid-14c., from mind (n.) + -ful. Related: Mindfully; mindfulness. Old English myndful meant of good
memory. Old English also had myndig (adj.) mindful, recollecting; thoughtful, which if it had lived
might have yielded a modern *mindy.


mindless (adj.)

c.1400, unmindful, heedless, negligent, from mind (n.) + -less. Related: Mindlessly; mindlessness.
Old English had myndleas foolish, senseless.


mindset (n.)

also mind-set, habits of mind formed by previous experience, 1920, in educators' jargon, from mind
(n.) + set (v.).


mine (pron.)

Old English min mine, my, (pronoun and adjective), from Proto-Germanic *minaz (cognates: Old
Frisian, Old Saxon Old High German min, Middle Dutch, Dutch mijn, German mein, Old Norse minn,
Gothic meins my, mine), from the base of me. Superseded as adjective beginning 13c. by my.


mine (n.1)

pit or tunnel in the earth for obtaining metals and minerals, c.1300, from Old French mine vein,
lode; tunnel, shaft; mineral ore; mine (for coal, tin, etc,), of uncertain origin, probably from a
Celtic source (compare Welsh mwyn, Irish mein ore, mine), from Old Celtic *meini-. Italy and Greece
were relatively poor in minerals, thus they did not contribute a word for this to English, but there
was extensive mining from an early date in Celtic lands (Cornwall, etc.). From c.1400 as a tunnel
under fortifications to overthrow them.


mine (v.2)

lay explosives, 1620s, in reference to old tactic of tunneling under enemy fortifications to blow
them up; a specialized sense of mine (v.1) via a sense of dig under foundations to undermine them
(late 14c.), and miner in this sense is attested from late 13c. Related: Mined; mining.


mine (v.1)

to dig, c.1300, to tunnel under fortifications to overthrow them, from mine (n.1) or from Old French
miner to dig, mine; exterminate. From mid-14c. as to dig in the earth (for treasure, etc.).
Figurative use from mid-14c. Related: Mined; mining.


mine (n.2)

explosive device, by 1850, from mine (v.2).


mine-sweeper (n.)

1905, from mine (n.2) + agent noun from sweep (v.).


minefield (n.)

1877, from mine (n.2) + field (n.). Figurative use by 1947.


miner (n.)

late 13c., from Old French minour (13c.), from miner to mine (see mine (n.1)).


mineral (n.)

late 14c., substance obtained by mining, from Medieval Latin minerale something mined, noun use of
neuter of mineralis pertaining to mines, from minera mine. Meaning material substance that is
neither animal nor vegetable is first recorded c.1600. Modern scientific sense is from 1813.


mineral (adj.)

early 15c., neither animal nor vegetable, from Old French mineral and directly from Medieval Latin
mineralis (see mineral (n.)). Mineral water (early 15c.) originally was water found in nature with
some mineral substance dissolved in it.


mineralogy (n.)

1680s, a hybrid from mineral (n.) + -logy or else from French min&#233;ralogie (1640s). Related:
Mineralogist; mineralogical.


Minerva

ancient Roman goddess of arts, crafts, and sciences; wisdom, sense, and reflection (later identified
with Greek Athene), late 14c., mynerfe, from Latin Minerva, from Old Latin Menerva, from *menes-wa,
from PIE root *men- mind, understanding, reason (see mind (n.)). Compare Sanskrit Manasvini, name of
the mother of the Moon, manasvin full of mind or sense. Related: Minerval.


minestrone (n.)

Italian vegetable soup, 1871, from Italian minestrone, with augmentative suffix -one + minestra
soup, pottage, literally that which is served, from minestrare to serve, to prepare (soup, etc.),
from Latin ministrare (see minister (v.)).


Ming

1670s, dynasty which ruled China from 1368-1644, from Chinese, literally bright, clear. In reference
to the porcelain of the Ming period, attested from 1892.


minge (n.)

female pudendum, 1903, of unknown origin.


mingle (v.)

mid-15c., to bring together, frequentative of Middle English myngen to mix, from Old English mengan
(related to second element in among), from Proto-Germanic *mangjan to knead together (cognates: Old
Saxon mengian, Old Norse menga, Old Frisian mendza, German mengen), from PIE *mag- to knead,
fashion, fit (see macerate). The formation may have been suggested by cognate Middle Dutch mengelen.
Of persons, to join with others, be sociable (intransitive), from c.1600. Related: Mingled;
mingling.


mini (n.)

1961, abbreviation of mini-car, a small car made by British Leyland (formerly British Motor Corp.).
As an abbreviation of miniskirt, it is attested from 1966. The vogue for mini- as a prefix in
English word coinage dates from c.1960.


mini-

word-forming element meaning miniature, minor, abstracted from miniature, with sense perhaps
influenced by minimum.


mini-series

also miniseries television series of short duration, on a single theme, 1971, from mini- + series.


miniature (n.)

1580s, a reduced image, from Italian miniatura manuscript illumination or small picture, from past
participle of miniare to illuminate a manuscript, from Latin miniare to paint red, from minium red
lead, used in ancient times to make red ink, a word said to be of Iberian origin. Sense development
is because pictures in medieval manuscripts were small, but no doubt there was influence as well
from the similar-sounding Latin words that express smallness: minor, minimus, minutus, etc.


miniature (adj.)

small, 1714, from minature (n.). Of dog breeds, from 1889. Of golf, from 1893.


miniaturist (n.)

maker of miniatures, 1800, from miniature (n.) + -ist.


miniaturization (n.)

1947, from miniaturize + -ation. Minification in this sense attested from 1904, on analogy of
magnification.


miniaturize (v.)

1946, from miniature (adj.) + -ize. Minify in same sense is from 1670s, on analogy of magnify.
Related: Miniaturized; miniaturizing.


minie ball (n.)

kind of rifle bullet, 1853, named for its inventor, French army officer Claude-&Eacute;tienne
Mini&eacute; (1814-1879), who designed it 1847-8.


minim (n.)

mid-15c., in music, from Latin minimus smallest, least; minute, trifling, insignificant; of time,
least, shortest, very short; of age, youngest; as a noun, least price, lowest price (see minimum).
Calligraphy sense is from c.1600.


minimal (adj.)

smallest, least, 1660s, from Latin minimus (see minim) + -al (1).


minimalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of minimalize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Minimalised;
minimalising.


minimalist (n.)

1907; see minimal + -ist. Originally an Englishing of Menshevik (q.v.); in sense of practitioner of
minimal art it is first recorded 1967; the term minimal art is from 1965. As an adjective from 1917
in the Russian political sense; 1969 in reference to art. Related: Minimalistic; Minimalism.


minimalize (v.)

1914, see minimal + -ize. Related: Minimalized; minimalizing.


minimally (adv.)

1894, from minimal + -ly (2).


minimise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of minimize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Minimised; minimising.


minimization (n.)

1802, from minimize + -ation.


minimize (v.)

1802, first recorded in Bentham; see minimum + -ize.


minimum (n.)

1660s, smallest portion into which matter is divisible, from Latin minimum smallest (thing), neuter
of minimus smallest, least, superlative of minor smaller (see minor). Meaning least amount
attainable is from 1670s.


minimum (adj.)

1810, from minimum (n.).


minimus (n.)

1580s, from Latin minimus (plural minimi); see minim.


mining (n.)

1520s, verbal noun from mine (v.1).


minion (n.)

c.1500, a favorite; a darling; a low dependant; one who pleases rather than benefits [Johnson], from
Middle French mignon a favorite, darling (n.), also a term of (probably homosexual) abuse; as an
adjective, dainty, pleasing, favorite, from Old French mignot pretty, attractive, dainty, gracious,
affectionate, perhaps of Celtic origin (compare Old Irish min tender, soft), or from Old High German
minnja, minna love, memory (see mind (n.)). Used  16c.-17c. without disparaging overtones.


miniscule

common misspelling of minuscule.


miniskirt (n.)

also mini-skirt, 1965, from mini- + skirt (n.); reputedly the invention of French fashion designer
Andr&eacute; Courr&egrave;ges (b.1923).The miniskirt enables young ladies to run faster, and because
of it, they may have to. [John V. Lindsay, New York Times, Jan. 13, 1967]Related: Miniskirted.


minister (v.)

early 14c., to perform religious rites, provide religious services; mid-14c., to serve (food or
drink); late 14c. render service or aid, from Old French menistrer to serve, be of service,
administer, attend, wait on, and directly from Latin ministrare to serve, attend, wait upon (see
minister (n.)). Related: Ministered; ministering.


minister (n.)

c.1300, one who acts upon the authority of another, from Old French menistre servant, valet, member
of a household staff, administrator, musician, minstrel (12c.), from Latin minister (genitive
ministri) inferior, servant, priest's assistant (in Medieval Latin, priest), from minus, minor less,
hence subordinate, (see minus) + comparative suffix *-teros. Formed on model of magister. Meaning
priest is attested in English from early 14c. Political sense of high officer of the state is
attested from 1620s, from notion of service to the crown.


ministerial (adj.)

1560s, of religion; 1650s, of state; in some uses from Middle French minist&eacute;riel and directly
from Medieval Latin ministerialis pertaining to service, of a minister, from Latin ministerium (see
ministry); in some cases probably directly from minister or ministry.


ministerium (n.)

ordained ministers of a church district, 1881, from Latin ministerium (see ministry).


ministration (n.)

mid-14c., the action of ministering or serving, from Old French ministration or directly from Latin
ministrationem (nominative ministratio), noun of action from past participle stem of ministrare to
serve (see minister (v.)).


ministry (n.)

late 14c., function of a priest, from Old French menistere service, ministry; position, post,
employment, and directly from Latin ministerium office, service, attendance, ministry, from minister
(see minister (n.)). Began to be used 1916 as name of certain departments in British government.


miniver (n.)

fur lining and trimming in a garment, c.1300, from Old French menu vair minor fur; see menu + vair.


mink (n.)

early 15c., skin or fur of the mink, from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish menk a stinking
animal in Finland). Applied in English to the animal itself from 1620s.


minke (n.)

type of small whale (Balaenoptera acutorostrata), 1939, supposedly from the Norwegian surname
Meincke.    The name minke is said to have derived from one of Svend Foyn's crew by the name of
Meincke, who mistook a school of these whales for blue whales. Whalers all over the world considered
this incident so amusing that they used his name as a household word to describe this species. [J.N.
T&#248;nnessen &amp; A.O. Johnsen, The History of Modern Whaling (transl. R.I. Christophersen),
1982]    Also known in English as the lesser rorqual and little piked whale.


minnesinger (n.)

one of a class of medieval German poets who imitated the troubadours, 1825, from German minnesinger,
from minne love, especially sexual love (from Old High German minna loving memory, originally
memory; see mind (n.)) + singer (see singer). German minne by c.1500 no longer was considered
decent, and it became a taboo word until revived 18c. in poetic language.


Minnesota

originally the name of the river, from Dakota (Siouan) mnisota, literally cloudy water, milky water,
from mni river, stream + sota slightly clouded. As the name of a U.S. territory from 1849 (admitted
as a state 1858). Related: Minnesotan.


minnow (n.)

small freshwater fish, early 15c., probably related to Old English myne, earlier *mynwe, a name for
some kind of fish, from Proto-Germanic *muniwon (cognates: Middle Low German m&ouml;ne, Dutch meun,
Old High German muniwa, German M&uuml;nne), of unknown origin, perhaps from PIE *men- small. Perhaps
influenced in Middle English by French menu small.


Minoan (adj.)

1894, from Minos, famous king of Crete; applied by British archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans to the
civilization that flourished there c.3000-1400 B.C.E.


minor (n.)

early 14c., a Franciscan, from Latin Fratres Minores lesser brethren, name chosen by St. Francis,
who founded the order, for the sake of humility; see minor (adj.). From c.1400 as minor premise of a
syllogism. From 1610s as person under legal age (Latin used minores (plural) for the young). Musical
sense is from 1797. Meaning secondary subject of study, subject of study with fewer credits than a
major is from 1890; as a verb in this sense from 1934.


minor (adj.)

early 13c., menour Franciscan (see minor (n.)), from Latin minor less, lesser, smaller, junior,
figuratively inferior, less important, formed as a masculine/feminine form of minus on the mistaken
assumption that minus was a neuter comparative, from PIE root *mei- (2) small (see minus).    Some
English usages are via Old French menor less, smaller, lower; underage, younger, from Latin minor.
Meaning underage is from 1570s. Meaning lesser in English is from early 15c.; that of less important
is from 1620s. The musical sense is from 1690s. In the baseball sense, minor league is from 1884;
the figurative extension is first recorded 1926.


minority (n.)

1530s, condition of being smaller, from Middle French minorit&#233; (15c.), or directly from
Medieval Latin minoritatem (nominative minoritas), from Latin minor (see minor (adj.)). Meaning
state of being under legal age is from 1540s; that of smaller number or part is from 1736. The
meaning group of people separated from the rest of a community by race, religion, language, etc. is
from 1919, originally in an Eastern European context.


Minotaur (n.)

late 14c., from Greek minotauros, from Minos, king of Crete + tauros bull (see Taurus). A flesh-
eating monster, half man half bull, son of Pasiphae (wife of Minos) by a bull.


minster (n.)

Old English mynster the church of a monastery (8c.), from Late Latin monasterium (see monastery).
Compare Old French moustier, French mo&#251;tier, Old Irish manister.


minstrel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French menestrel entertainer, poet, musician; servant, workman; good-for-
nothing, rogue, from Medieval Latin ministralis servant, jester, singer, from Late Latin
ministerialem (nominative ministerialis) imperial household officer, one having an official duty,
from ministerialis (adj.) ministerial, from Latin ministerium (see ministry). The connecting notion
is via the jester, etc., as a court position.    Specific sense of musician developed in Old French,
but in English until 16c. the word was used of anyone (singers, storytellers, jugglers, buffoons)
whose profession was to entertain patrons. Only in 18c. was the word limited, in a historical sense,
to medieval singer of heroic or lyric poetry who accompanied himself on a stringed instrument.
Reference to blackface music acts in U.S. is from 1843.


minstrelsy (n.)

c.1300, menstracie, music as produced on an instrument; action of making music for entertainment;
musicians or entertainers generally, from Anglo-French menestralsie, from Old French menestrel (see
minstrel).


mint (n.1)

aromatic herb, Old English minte (8c.), from West Germanic *minta (cognates: Old Saxon minta, Middle
Dutch mente, Old High German minza, German Minze), a borrowing from Latin menta, mentha mint, from
Greek minthe, personified as a nymph transformed into an herb by Proserpine, probably a loan-word
from a lost Mediterranean language.


mint (n.2)

place where money is coined, early 15c., from Old English mynet coin, coinage, money (8c.), from
West Germanic *munita (cognates: Old Saxon munita, Old Frisian menote, Middle Dutch munte, Old High
German munizza, German m&uuml;nze), from Latin moneta mint (see money). Earlier word for place where
money is coined was minter (early 12c.). General sense of a vast sum of money is from 1650s.


mint (v.)

to stamp metal to make coins, 1540s, from mint (n.2). Related: Minted; minting. Minter one who
stamps coins to create money is from early 12c.


mint (adj.)

perfect (like a freshly minted coin), 1887 (in mint condition), from mint (n.2).


minty (adj.)

1867, from mint (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Mintiness.


minuend (n.)

number from which another number is to be subtracted, 1706, from Latin minuendus (numerus),
gerundive past participle of minuere to reduce, diminish, make small (see minus).


minuet (n.)

slow dance in triple measure, 1670s, from French menuet, from Old French menuet (adj.) small, fine,
delicate, narrow, from menu small, from Latin minutus small, minute (see minute (adj.)). So called
from the short steps taken in the dance. Spelling influenced in English by Italian minuetto.


minus (prep.)

late 15c., with subtraction of, from Latin minus less, neuter of minor smaller, from PIE *mi-nu-,
suffixed form of root *mei- (2) small (cognates: Latin minuere to diminish, reduce, lessen, Greek
meion less, smaller, Old English minsian to diminish, Sanskrit miyate diminishes, declines, Russian
men'she less).    Mathematical use in expressions of calculation did not exist in the word in
classical Latin and is probably from North Sea medieval commercial usage of Latin plus and minus to
indicate surplus or deficiency of weight or measure. Origin of the minus sign is disputed.


minus (n.)

1650s, from minus (prep.).


minuscule (n.)

1705, small (not capital) letter; as an adjective, small, from 1727 (in printing; general sense of
extremely small by 1893), from French minuscule (17c.), from Latin minuscula, in minuscula littera
slightly smaller letter, fem. of minusculus rather less, rather small, diminutive of minus less (see
minus). Related: Minuscular.


minute (n.)

sixtieth part of an hour or degree, late 14c., from Old French minut (13c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin minuta minute, short note, from Latin minuta, noun use of fem. of minutus small,
minute (see minute (adj.)). In Medieval Latin, pars minuta prima first small part was used by
mathematician Ptolemy for one-sixtieth of a circle, later of an hour (next in order was secunda
minuta, which became second (n.)). German Minute, Dutch minuut also are from French. Used vaguely
for short time from late 14c. As a measure expressing distance (travel time) by 1886. Minute hand is
attested from 1726.


minute (adj.)

early 15c., chopped small, from Latin minutus little, small, minute, past participle of minuere to
lessen, diminish (see minus). Meaning very small in size or degree is attested from 1620s. Related:
Minutely; minuteness.


minuteman (n.)

U.S. history, one of a class of militia available for immediate service (i.e. ready in a matter of
minutes), 1774. As the name of a type of ICBM, from 1961, so called because they could be launched
with very little preparation.


minutes (n.)

record of proceedings, c.1710, perhaps from Latin minuta scriptura rough notes, literally small
writing; see minute (adj.). Minute rough draft is attested from c.1500.


minutia (n.)

1751, plural minutiae, from Latin minutia smallness (plural minutiae, in Late Latin trifles), from
minutus small (see minute (adj.)).


minutiae (n.)

1751, plural of Latin minutia smallness (see minutia); hence, in plural, trifles.


minx (n.)

1540s, mynx pet dog, later a young, pert, wanton girl [Johnson] (1590s), of uncertain origin,
perhaps a shortening of minikin girl, woman, from Middle Dutch minnekijn darling, beloved, from
minne love (see minnesinger) + -kijn, diminutive suffix. Klein's sources suggest the word is from
Low German minsk a man, also an impudent woman, related to German Mensch (see mensch), which also
has a sense in vulgar use of wench, hussy, slut.


Miocene (adj.)

pertaining to the geological period between the Oligocene and Pliocene, 1831, irregular formation
from Greek meion less + -cene.  A typical example of the monstrosities with which scientific men in
want of a label for something, and indifferent to all beyond their own province, defile the
language. The elements of the word are Greek, but not the way they are put together, nor the meaning
demanded of the compound. [Fowler]


miosis (n.)

1819, from Greek myein to shut (the eyes) + -osis. Greek myein is perhaps originally to close the
lips, from PIE *meue- to be silent (see mute (adj.)). Related: Miotic.


Mir

late 20c. space station, from Russian, literally peace, world, also village, community, from Old
Church Slavonic miru peace, from Proto-Slavic *miru commune, joy, peace (possibly borrowed from
Iranian [Watkins]), from PIE root *mei- to bind (see mitre). Old Church Slavonic miru was used in
Christian terminology as a collective 'community of peace'  [Buck], translating Greek kosmos. Hence,
the known world, mankind.


mirabile dictu

1831, Latin, literally wonderful to relate. Found in Virgil.


miracle (n.)

mid-12c., a wondrous work of God, from Old French miracle (11c.) miracle, story of a miracle,
miracle play, from Latin miraculum object of wonder (in Church Latin, marvelous event caused by
God), from mirari to wonder at, marvel, be astonished, figuratively to regard, esteem, from mirus
wonderful, astonishing, amazing, earlier *smeiros, from PIE *smei- to smile, laugh (cognates:
Sanskrit smerah smiling, Greek meidan to smile, Old Church Slavonic smejo to laugh; see smile (v.)).
From mid-13c. as extraordinary or remarkable feat, without regard to deity. Replaced Old English
wundortacen, wundorweorc. The Greek words rendered as miracle in the English bibles were semeion
sign, teras wonder, and dynamis power, in Vulgate translated respectively as signum, prodigium, and
virtus. The Latin word is the source of Spanish milagro, Italian miracolo.


miraculous (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French miraculeux, from Medieval Latin miraculosus, from Latin miraculum
miracle, marvel, wonder (see miracle). Related:  Miraculously (early 15c.); miraculousness.


mirage (n.)

optical illusion of water in sandy deserts, 1812, from French mirage, from se mirer to be reflected,
from Latin mirare (see mirror). Or the French word is from Latin mirus wonderful (see miracle).


Miranda (1)

fem. proper name, fem. of Latin mirandus worthy to be admired, gerundive of mirari to admire (see
miracle).


Miranda (2)

criminal suspects' arrest rights in U.S., 1967, in reference to Fifth Amendment cases ruled on by
U.S. Supreme Court June 13, 1966, under heading Ernesto A. Miranda v. the State of Arizona.


mire (n.)

c.1300, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse myrr bog, swamp, from Proto-Germanic *miuzja-
(source of Old English mos bog, marsh), from PIE *meus- damp (see moss).


mire (v.)

c.1400, in figurative sense of to involve in difficulties, from mire (n.). Literal sense is from
1550s. Related: Mired; miring.


mirepoix (n.)

in cookery, 1815, from French, evidently named for Charles Pierre Gaston Fran&#231;ois, duc de
Mirepoix (1699-1757), French diplomat. The concoction supposedly created by his head chef and named
in his honor during the reign of Louis XV, one of the grand epochs of French cookery, when it was
the style of the aristocracy to have dishes named in their honor.    MIREPOIX.--It is probable that
one of these days the common sense of mankind will rise in rebellion against this word and abolish
it. What is the Duke of Mirepoix to us because his wife was amiable to Louis XV.?    If she be not
fair to me,  What care I how fair she be?    The Duke of Mirepoix made himself convenient to the
king, and his name is now convenient to the people--the convenient name for the faggot of vegetables
that flavours a stew or a sauce. [Kettner's Book of the Table, London, 1877]


Miriam

fem. proper name, biblical sister of Moses and Aaron (Ex. xv:20), from Hebrew Miryam (see Mary).


mirror (n.)

early 13c., from Old French mireoir a reflecting glass, looking glass; observation, model, example,
earlier miradoir (11c.), from mirer look at (oneself in a mirror), observe, watch, contemplate, from
Vulgar Latin *mirare to look at, variant of Latin mirari to wonder at, admire (see miracle).
Figurative usage is attested from c.1300. Used in divination since classical and biblical times;
mirrors in modern England are the subject of at least 14 known superstitions, according to
folklorists. Belief that breaking one brings bad luck is attested from 1777. The Spanish cognate,
mirador (from mirar to look, look at, behold), has come to mean watch tower. Mirror ball attested
from 1968.


mirror (v.)

to reflect, 1590s, from mirror (n.). Related: Mirrored; mirroring. The Middle English verb mirouren
(early 15c.) meant to be a model (for conduct, behavior, etc.), while miren (mid-14c., from Old
French mirer) meant to look in a mirror.


mirth (n.)

Old English myrg&eth; joy, pleasure, from Proto-Germanic *murgitha (cognates: Middle Dutch merchte),
noun of quality from *murgjo- (see merry; also see -th (2)). Mirthquake entertainment that excites
convulsive laughter first attested 1928, in reference to Harold Lloyd movies.


mirthful (adj.)

c.1300, from mirth + -ful. Related: Mirthfully; mirthfulness.


mirthless (adj.)

late 14c., from mirth + -less. Related: Mirthlessly.


miry (adj.)

late 14c., from mire (n.) + -y (2).


miryachit (n.)

nervous disorder peculiar to Siberia, in which the patient mimics everything said or done by
another, from Russian, literally to be epileptic.


mis- (1)

prefix meaning bad, wrong, from Old English mis-, from Proto-Germanic *missa- divergent, astray
(cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon mis-, Middle Dutch misse-, Old High German missa-, German
mi&szlig;-, Old Norse mis-, Gothic missa-), perhaps literally in a changed manner, and with a root
sense of difference, change (compare Gothic misso mutually), and thus from PIE *mit-to-, from root
*mei- (1) to change (see mutable); see Watkins.    Others [Barnhart] see in Proto-Germanic *missa-
the stem of an ancient past participle, related to Old English missan fail to hit (see miss (v.)),
which is from the same PIE root.    Productive as word-forming element in Old English (as in
misl&#230;ran to give bad advice, teach amiss). In 14c.-16c. in a few verbs its sense began to be
felt as unfavorably and was used as an intensive prefix with verbs already expressing negative
feeling (as in misdoubt). Practically a separate word in Old and early Middle English (and often
written as such). Old English also had an adjective (mislic diverse, unlike, various) and an adverb
(mislice in various directions, wrongly, astray) derived from it, corresponding to German misslich
(adj.).


mis- (2)

in mischief, miscreant, etc., represents Old French mes- bad, badly, wrong, wrongly, from Vulgar
Latin minus-, from Latin minus less (see minus), which was not used as a prefix. Perhaps influenced
in Old French by *miss-, the Frankish equivalent of mis- (1).


misadventure (n.)

late 13c., misaventure, from Old French mesaventure (12c.) accident, mishap, from mesavenir to turn
out badly; see mis- (2) + adventure (n.).


misaligned (adj.)

1903, from mis- (1) + past participle of align.


misalignment (n.)

1891, from mis- (1) + alignment.


misandry (n.)

1878, from miso- hatred + andros of man, male human being (see anthropo-). Related: Misandrist.


misanthrope (n.)

one who hates mankind, 1560s, from Greek misanthropos hating mankind, from misein to hate (see
miso-) + anthropos man (see anthropo-). Alternative form misanthropist is attested from 1650s.


misanthropic (adj.)

1762, from misanthrope + -ic. Earlier was misanthropical (1620s).


misanthropy (n.)

1650s, from Greek misanthropia hatred of mankind, from misanthropos (see misanthrope).


misapplication (n.)

c.1600, from mis- (1) + application.


misapprehend (v.)

1640s, from mis- (1) + apprehend. Related: Misapprehended; misapprehending.


misapprehension (n.)

1620s; from mis- (1) + apprehension. Related: Misapprehensive.


misappropriate (v.)

1803, from mis- (1) + appropriate (v.). Related: Misappropriated; misappropriating.


misappropriation (n.)

1746; from mis- (1) + appropriation.


misattribution (n.)

1865, from mis- (1) + attribution.


misbefall (v.)

suffer harm, come to grief, mid-13c., from mis- (1) + befall. Related: Misbefell; misbefalling.


misbegotten (adj.)

bastard, illegitimate, 1550s, past participle adjective from obsolete misbeget (c.1300); see mis-
(1) + beget.


misbehave (v.)

conduct oneself improperly, late 15c.; see mis- (1) + behave. Related: Misbehaved; misbehaving.


misbehavior (n.)

also misbehaviour, late 15c., from mis- (1) + behavior.


misbetide (v.)

have bad fortune, experience defeat, c.1400, from mis- (1) + betide.


misborn (adj.)

abortive, premature, mis-shapen from birth, late Old English misboren abortive, degenerate, from
mis- (1) + born. From 1580s as born of an unlawful union.


miscalculate (v.)

1705; from mis- (1) + calculate. Related: Miscalculated; miscalculating.


miscalculation (n.)

1720, from mis- (1) + calculation.


miscall (v.)

mid-15c., from mis- (1) + call (v.). Related: Miscalled; miscalling.


miscarriage (n.)

1580s, mistake, error; 1610s, misbehavior; see miscarry + -age. Meaning untimely delivery is from
1660s. Miscarriage of justice is from 1875.


miscarry (v.)

c.1300, go astray; mid-14c., come to harm, perish; of persons, to die, of objects, to be lost or
destroyed, from mis- (1) wrongly + caryen to carry (see carry (v.)). Meaning deliver unviable fetus
first recorded 1520s; that of fail, come to naught (of plans or designs) is from c.1600. Related:
Miscarried; miscarrying.


miscast (v.)

late 14c., to cast (a glance, an 'eye') with evil intent  see mis- (1) + cast (v.). Theatrical sense
of to place an actor in an unsuitable roll is first recorded 1927. Related: Miscasting.


miscegenate (v.)

1864; see miscegenation. Related: Miscegenated; miscegenating.


miscegenation (n.)

interbreeding of races, 1864, coined irregularly in American English from Latin miscere to mix (see
mix (v.)) + genus race (see genus).


miscellaneous (adj.)

1630s, from Latin miscellaneus mixed, miscellaneous, from miscellus mixed, from miscere to mix (see
mix (v.)). Related: Miscellaneously.


miscellany (n.)

a mixture, medley, 1590s, from Latin miscellanea a writing on miscellaneous subjects, originally
meat hash, hodge-podge (food for gladiators), neuter plural of miscellaneus (see miscellaneous).


mischance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French mescheance misfortune, mishap, accident; wickedness, malice, from Vulgar
Latin *minuscadentiam; see mis- (2) + chance (n.). Now usually bad luck; formerly much stronger:
calamity, disaster.


mischance (v.)

1540s, from mis- (1) + chance (v.). Related: Mischanced; mischancing.


mischief (n.)

c.1300, evil condition, misfortune, need, want, from Old French meschief misfortune, harm, trouble;
annoyance, vexation (12c., Modern French m&eacute;chef), verbal noun from meschever come or bring to
grief, be unfortunate (opposite of achieve), from mes- badly (see mis- (2)) + chever happen, come to
a head, from Vulgar Latin *capare head, from Latin caput head (see capitulum). Meaning harm or evil
considered as the work of some agent or due to some cause is from late 15c. Sense of playful malice
first recorded 1784.   Mischief Night in 19c. England was the eve of May Day and of Nov. 5, both
major holidays, and perhaps the original point was pilfering for the next day's celebration and
bonfire; but in Yorkshire, Scotland, and Ireland the night was Halloween. The useful Middle English
verb mischieve (early 14c.) has, for some reason, fallen from currency.


mischievous (adj.)

early 14c., unfortunate, disastrous, probably from mischief + -ous. Sense of playfully malicious or
annoying first recorded 1670s. Related: Mischievously; mischievousness.


miscible (adj.)

1560s, from Medieval Latin miscibilis mixable, from Latin miscere to mix (see mix (v.)).


miscommunication (n.)

by 1959, from mis- (1) + communication. Related: Miscommunicate; miscommunicated.


misconceive (v.)

late 14c., to have a wrong notion of; see mis- (1) + conceive. Related: Misconceived; misconceiving.


misconception (n.)

1660s, from mis- (1) + conception. Related: Misconceptions.


misconduct (n.)

1710, bad management, neglect; see mis- (1) + conduct (n.). Meaning wrong conduct is attested from
1729.


misconstrue (v.)

late 14c., to put a wrong construction on (words or deeds), from mis- (1) + construe. Related:
Misconstrued; misconstruing.


miscount (v.)

late 14c., from Old French mesconter give a false statement; miscalculate, be wrong in reckoning;
see mis- (2) + count (v). Related: Miscounted; miscounting.


miscount (n.)

1580s, from mis- (1) + count (n.).


miscreant (adj.)

c.1300, non-Christian, pagan, infidel; early 15c., heretical, unbelieving, from Old French mescreant
disbelieving (Modern French m&#233;cr&#233;ant), from mes- wrongly (see mis- (2)) + creant, present
participle of creire believe, from Latin credere (see credo). Meaning villainous is from 1590s.


miscreant (n.)

late 14c., heathen, Saracen, from miscreant (adj.) or from Old French mescreant, which also had a
noun sense of infidel, pagan, heretic. Sense of villain first recorded 1590 in Spenser.


miscredit (v.)

1550s, from mis- (1) + credit (v.). Related: Miscredited; miscrediting.


miscue (n.)

1873, in billiards, failure to strike the ball properly with the cue from mis- (1) or perhaps miss
(v.) + cue (2). General sense is attested from 1883.


misdate (v.)

1580s, from mis- (1) + date (v.1). Related: Misdated; misdating.


misdeal (v.)

1746, to make an error in dealing (cards); from mis- (1) + deal (v.). The noun in this sense is
attested from 1850. The original verbal sense (late 15c.) was to distribute unfairly.


misdeed (n.)

Old English misd&aelig;d misdeed, evil deed, sin, common Germanic compound (compare Old Saxon
misdad, Old Frisian misdede, Middle Dutch misdaet, German Missetat, Gothic missade&thorn;s; see mis-
(1) + deed (n.).


misdemeanor (n.)

also misdemeanour, legal class of indictable offenses, late 15c.; from mis- (1) wrong + Middle
English demenure (see demeanor). Related: Misdemeanors; misdemeanours.


misdiagnose (v.)

1897, from mis- (1) + diagnose. Related: Misdiagnosed; misdiagnosing.


misdiagnosis (n.)

1880, from mis- (1) + diagnosis.


misdial (v.)

to dial a wrong number on a telephone, 1964; see mis- (1) + dial (v.). Related: Misdialed;
misdialing.


misdirect (v.)

c.1600, give wrong directions to; see mis- (1) + direct (v.). Related: Misdirected; misdirecting.


misdirection (n.)

1768, from mis- (1) + direction. Meaning action of a conjurer, thief, etc. to distract someone is
from 1943.


misdivision (n.)

1835, from mis- (1) + division.


misdo (v.)

Old English misdon, to do evil or wrong, transgress, err, common Germanic compound (compare Old
Frisian misdua, Middle Dutch misdoen, Old High German missituon, German misstun); see mis- (1) + do
(v.). Meaning to do (work, etc.) improperly is from 1840. Related: Misdone; misdoing.


misdoubt (v.)

to have doubts (of the reality of something), 1540s; see mis- (1) + doubt (v.). Related: Misdoubted;
misdoubting.


mise en scene

1833, from French mise en sc&egrave;ne, literally setting on the stage, from mise (13c.), literally
a putting, placing, noun use of fem. past participle of mettre to put, place, from Latin mittere to
send (see mission).


miseducate (v.)

1790, from mis- (1) + educate (v.). Related: Miseducated; miseducating.


miseducation (n.)

wrong or faulty education, 1620s, from mis- (1) + education.


miser (n.)

1540s, miserable person, wretch, from Latin miser (adj.) unhappy, wretched, pitiable, in distress,
of unknown origin. Original sense now obsolete; main modern meaning of money-hoarding person
recorded 1560s, from presumed unhappiness of such people.    Besides general wretchedness, the Latin
word connoted also intense erotic love (compare slang got it bad deeply infatuated) and hence was a
favorite word of Catullus. In Greek a miser was kyminopristes, literally a cumin seed splitter. In
Modern Greek, he might be called hekentabelones, literally one who has sixty needles. The German
word, filz, literally felt, preserves the image of the felt slippers which the miser often wore in
caricatures. Lettish mantrausis miser is literally money-raker.


miserable (adj.)

early 15c., full of misery, causing wretchedness (of conditions), from Old French miserable prone to
pity, merciful, and directly from Latin miserabilis pitiable, miserable, deplorable, lamentable,
from miserari to pity, lament, deplore, from miser wretched (see miser). Of persons, existing in a
state of misery it is attested from 1520s.


miserably (adv.)

c.1400; see miserable + -ly (2).


Miserere (n.)

51st Psalm (one of the Penitential Psalms), 13c., from Miserere mei Deus Have mercy upon me, O God,
opening line, from Latin miserere feel pity, have compassion, commiserate, imperative of misereri to
have mercy, from miser (see miser). From 15c.-17c. used as an informal measure of time, the time it
takes to recite the Miserere. Also in miserere mei kind of severe colic ('iliac passion')
accompanied by excruciating cramps and vomiting of excrement (1610s), literally have mercy on me.


miserly (adj.)

1590s, from miser + -ly (1). Related: Miserliness.


misery (n.)

late 14c., condition of external unhappiness, from Old French misere miserable situation,
misfortune, distress (12c.), from Latin miseria wretchedness, from miser (see miser). Meaning
condition of one in great sorrow or mental distress is from 1530s. Meaning bodily pain is 1825,
American English.


misestimate (v.)

1778, from mis- (1) + estimate (v.). Related: Misestimated; misestimating.


misfeasance (n.)

wrongful exercise of lawful authority or improper performance of a lawful act, 1590s, from Middle
French mesfaisance, from mesfaisant, present participle of Old French mesfaire to misdo, from mes-
wrongly (see mis- (2)) + faire to do, from Latin facere to perform (see factitious).


misfield (v.)

1870, from mis- (1) + field (v.) in the sporting sense. Related: Misfielded; misfielding.


misfire (v.)

1752, of a gun, 1905, of an internal combustion engine; see mis- (1) + fire (v.). Related: Misfired;
misfiring. The noun is attested from 1839.


misfit (n.)

1823, garment which does not fit the person for whom it was intended; see mis- (1) + fit (n.1).
Meaning person who does not fit his environment is attested from 1880.


misfortune (n.)

mid-15c., from mis- (1) + fortune. Related: Misfortunate.


misgiving (n.)

c.1600, feeling of mistrust or sudden apprehension, verbal noun from misgive cause to feel doubt
(1510s), usually said of one's heart or mind, from mis- (1) + give in its secondary Middle English
sense of suggest. Related: Misgivings.


misgovern (v.)

c.1400, from mis- (1) + govern. Related: Misgoverned; misgoverning.


misgovernance (n.)

late 14c., from mis- (1) + governance.


misgovernment (n.)

late 14c., from mis- (1) + government.


misguidance (n.)

1630s, from mis- (1) + guidance.


misguide (v.)

late 14c., to go astray; see mis- (1) + guide (v.). Transitive sense of to guide in the wrong
direction is first attested c.1500. Related: Misguided; misguiding.


misguided (adj.)

erring in purpose or action, 1650s, past participle adjective from misguide (v.). Earlier, ill-
behaved (late 15c.). Related: Misguidedly; misguidedness.


mishandle (v.)

c.1500, from mis- (1) + handle (v.). Related: Mishandled; mishandling.


mishap (n.)

early 14c., bad luck, unlucky accident, from mis- (1) bad + hap luck. Probably on analogy of Old
French meschance (see mischance (n.)).


mishappen (v.)

early 14c., from mis- (1) + happen. Related: Mishappened; mishappening.


mishear (v.)

Old English mishieran, mishyran to disobey; see mis- (1) + hear. Sense of to hear incorrectly first
recorded early 13c. Related: Misheard; mishearing.


mishmash (n.)

also mish-mash, mid-15c., mysse-masche, probably an imitative reduplication of mash (n.).


Mishnaic (adj.)

1718, of or belonging to the Mishnah, the collection of oral law which forms the basis of the
Talmud, from Hebrew, literally repetition, instruction, from shanah to repeat, in post-Biblical
Hebrew to teach or learn (oral tradition).


misidentification (n.)

1858, from mis- (1) + identification.


misidentify (v.)

1895, from mis- (1) + identify. Related: Misidentified; misidentifying.


misinform (v.)

late 14c.; see mis- (1) + inform. Related: Misinformed; misinforming.


misinformation (n.)

mid-15c., from mis- (1) + information.


misinformed (adj.)

mid-15c., past participle adjective from misinform.


misinterpret (v.)

1580s, from mis- (1) + interpret. Related: Misinterpreted; misinterpreting.


misinterpretation (n.)

1570s; see mis- (1) + interpretation.


misjudge (v.)

early 15c.; see mis- (1) + judge (v.). Related: Misjudged; misjudging.


misjudgement (n.)

see misjudgment.


misjudgment (n.)

1520s, from mis- (1) + judgment.


mislabel (v.)

1865, from mis- (1) + label (v.). Related: Mislabeled; mislabeling.


mislay (v.)

c.1400, from mis- (1) + lay (v.). Related: Mislaid; mislaying.


mislead (v.)

Old English misl&aelig;dan to mislead, common Germanic compound (compare Middle Low German, Middle
Dutch misleiden, Old High German misseleiten, German missleiten, Danish mislede); see mis- (1) +
lead (v.). Related: misleading; misled.


misleading (adj.)

1630s, present participle adjective from mislead.


mislike (v.)

Old English mislician to be displeasing; see mis- (1) + like (v.). Sense of to be displeased with is
attested from 1510s. Related: Misliked; misliking.


mismanage (v.)

1680s, from mis- (1) + manage. Related: Mismanaged; mismanaging.


mismanagement

1660s; see mis- (1) + management.


mismatch (v.)

1590s, from mis- (1) + match (v.). Related: Mismatched; mismatching.


mismatch (n.)

c.1600, from mis- (1) + match (n.2).


mismeasure (v.)

1742; see mis- (1) + measure (v.). Related: Mismeasured; mismeasuring.


misname (v.)

c.1500 to call (someone) a bad name; see mis- (1) + name (v.). Related: Misnamed; misnaming.


misnomer (n.)

mid-15c., mistaken identification of an accused or convicted person, from Anglo-French, Old French
mesnomer to misname, wrongly name, noun use of infinitive, from mes- wrongly (see mis- (2)) + nomer
to name, from Latin nominare nominate (see nominate). For noun use of French infinitives, see
waiver.


miso (n.)

type of paste used in Japanese cooking, 1727, from Japanese.


miso-

word-forming element meaning hater, hatred, before vowels, mis-, comb. form of Greek misos hatred,
misein to hate. Productive as a word-forming element in ancient Greek, for instance misoagathia
hatred of good or goodness; misoponein to hate work. Forming many compounds in English, most of them
obscure or recherche, but some perhaps useful, for example misocapnic (adj.) hating (tobacco) smoke,
misocyny hatred of dogs.


misogamist (n.)

a marriage-hater, 1706, from misogamy + -ist.


misogamy (n.)

hatred of marriage, 1650s, from Modern Latin misogamia, from Greek misogamos hating marriage; see
miso- + -gamy.


misogynism (n.)

1830, from misogyny + -ism.


misogynist (n.)

1610s, from Greek misogynes woman-hater (see misogyny).


misogynistic (adj.)

1821, from misogynist + -ic.


misogyny (n.)

1650s, from Modern Latin misogynia, from Greek misogynia, from misogynes woman-hater, from miso-
(see miso-) + gyne woman (see queen).


misoneism (n.)

hatred of novelty, 1886, from miso- + Greek neos new (see new) + -ism. Related: Misoneist.


misperception (n.)

1722; see mis- (1) + perception.


misplace (v.)

1550s, to assign a wrong position to; see mis- (1) + place (v.). Of affections, confidence, etc., to
give to a wrong object, it is recorded from 1630s. Related: Misplaced; misplacing.


misplay (n.)

1889 in baseball context, from mis- (1) + play (n.). As a verb from 1824 (originally in music; 1842
in games). Related: Misplayed; misplaying.


misprint (v.)

late 15c.; from mis- (1) + print (v.). Related: misprinted; misprinting. The noun is first attested
1818.


misprision (n.)

wrong action, a failure on the part of authority, early 15c., from Anglo-French mesprisioun mistake,
error, wrong action or speech, from Old French mesprision mistake, wrongdoing, fault, blame, crime,
from mespris, past participle of mesprendre to mistake, act wrongly, trespass, transgress, break a
law, from mes- wrongly (see mis- (2)) + prendre take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere seize (see prehensile).    In 16c., misprision of treason was used for lesser degrees of
guilt (those not subject to capital punishment), especially for knowing of treasonable actions or
plots but not informing the authorities. This led to the common supposition in legal writers that
the word means failure to denounce a crime.


mispronounce (v.)

1590s, from mis- (1) + pronounce. Related: Mispronounced; mispronouncing.


mispronunciation (n.)

1520s; see mis- (1) + pronunciation.


misquote (v.)

1590s; see mis- (1) + quote (v.). First recorded in Shakespeare.Looke how we can, or sad or merrily,
Interpretation will misquote our lookes. [I Hen. IV, v.ii.13]  Related: Misquoted; misquoting. As a
noun from 1855.


misread (v.)

1809, from mis- (1) + read (v.). Related: Misreading.


misremember (v.)

1530s, from mis- (1) + remember. Related: Misremembered; misremembering.


misreport (v.)

c.1400, from mis- (1) + report (v.). Related: Misreported; misreporting.


misrepresent (v.)

1640s, from mis- (1) + represent. Related: Misrepresented; misrepresenting.


misrepresentation (n.)

1640s, from mis- (1) + representation.


misrule (n.)

late 14c., bad government of a state; see mis- (1) + rule (n.). Meaning disorderly conduct or living
is from c.1400, obsolete except in Lord of Misrule, one chosen to preside over Christmas games in a
great house (late 15c.).


misrule (v.)

late 14c., from mis- (1) + rule (v.). Related: Misruled; misruling.


miss (v.)

Old English missan fail to hit, miss (a mark); fail in what was aimed at; escape (someone's notice),
influenced by Old Norse missa to miss, to lack; both from Proto-Germanic *missjan to go wrong
(cognates: Old Frisian missa, Middle Dutch, Dutch missen, German missen to miss, fail), from *missa-
in a changed manner, hence abnormally, wrongly, from PIE root *mei- (1) to change (root of mis- (1);
see mutable). Related: Missed; missing.    Meaning to fail to get what one wanted is from mid-13c.
Sense of to escape, avoid is from 1520s; that of to perceive with regret the absence or loss of
(something or someone) is from late 15c. Sense of to not be on time for is from 1823; to miss the
boat in the figurative sense of be too late for is from 1929, originally nautical slang.  To miss
out (on) fail to get is from 1929.


miss (n.2)

the term of honour to a young girl [Johnson], originally (c.1600) a shortened form of mistress. By
1640s as prostitute, concubine; sense of title for a young unmarried woman, girl first recorded
1660s. In the 1811 reprint of the slang dictionary, Miss Laycock is given as an underworld euphemism
for the monosyllable. Miss America is from 1922 as the title bestowed on the winner of an annual
nationwide U.S. beauty/talent contest. Earlier it meant young American women generally or the United
States personified as a young woman, and it also was the name of a fast motor boat.


miss (n.1)

late 12c., loss, lack;  c. 1200, regret occasioned by loss or absence, from Old English miss
absence, loss, from source of missan to miss (see miss (v.)). Meaning an act or fact of missing; a
being without is from late 15c.; meaning a failure to hit or attain is 1550s. To give something a
miss to abstain from, avoid is from 1919. Phrase a miss is as good as a mile was originally, an
inch, in a miss, is as good as an ell (see ell).


missal (n.)

c.1300, from Old French messel book of the Mass (12c.) an ddirectly from Medieval Latin missale,
neuter of adjective missalis pertaining to the Mass, from Late Latin missa Mass (see mass (2)).


missel (n.)

Old English mistel basil, mistletoe, from Proto-Germanic *mikhstilaz (cognates: Old Saxon mistil,
Dutch mistel, Old High German mistil, German Mistel, Swedish mistel), of unknown origin.


misshapen (adj.)

having a bad or ugly shape, crippled, deformed, monstrous, also degraded, perverted, late 14c., from
mis- (1) + old alternative past participle of shape (v.).


missile (n.)

thing thrown or discharged as a weapon, is 1650s, from missile (adj.), 1610s, capable of being
thrown, chiefly in phrase missile weapon, from French missile and directly from Latin missilis that
may be thrown or hurled (also, in plural, as a noun, weapons that can be thrown, darts, javelins),
from missus a throwing, hurling, past participle of mittere to send (see mission). Sense of self-
propelled rocket or bomb is first recorded 1738; the modern remote guidance projectile so called
from 1945.


missing (adj.)

not present, absent, 1520s, from present participle of miss (v.). Military sense of not present
after a battle but not known to have been killed or captured is from 1845. Missing link first
attested 1851 in Lyell. Missing person is from 1876.


mission (n.)

1590s, a sending abroad, originally of Jesuits, from Latin missionem (nominative missio) act of
sending, a despatching; a release, a setting at liberty; discharge from service, dismissal, noun of
action from past participle stem of mittere to send, oldest form probably *smittere, of unknown
origin.    Diplomatic sense of body of persons sent to a foreign land on commercial or political
business is from 1620s. In American English, sometimes an embassy (1805). Meaning dispatch of an
aircraft on a military operation (1929, American English) later extended to spacecraft flights
(1962), hence, mission control (1964). As a style of furniture, said to be imitative of furniture in
the buildings of original Spanish missions to North America, it is attested from 1900.


missionary (n.)

1650s, from missionary (adj.). Missionary position attested by 1963, said to have been coined by
Kinsey (1948), who identified its origin in work done by Polish anthropologist Bronis&#322;aw
Malinowski in Melanesia in the 1920s; allegedly from the term used by South Pacific peoples to
describe what Christian missionaries promoted to replace their local variations. By late 1960s it
became the general term for this type of sex, formerly also known as the English-American position.


missionary (adj.)

sent on a mission, 1640s, from Modern Latin missionarius pertaining to a mission, from Latin
missionem (see mission).


Mississippi

originally as the name of the river, from French, from Algonquian (French missionaries first
penetrated the river valley in its upper reaches), literally big river; compare Ojibwa mshi- big,
ziibi river. Organized as a U.S. territory 1798; admitted as a state 1817. Related: Mississippian.


missive (n.)

mid-15c., commandment, noun use of adjective (mid-15c.) meaning sent by superior authority, from
Medieval Latin missivus for sending, sent, especially in littera missiva letters sent, from Latin
missus, past participle of mittere to send (see mission).


Missouri

originally a name for a group of native peoples among Chiwere (Siouan) tribes, from an Algonquian
word recorded c.1700, literally people of the big canoes. The expression I'm from Missouri, you'll
have to show me is attested from at least c.1880. Related: Missourian.


misspeak (v.)

late 14c., to say amiss, also to speak insultingly, from mis- (1) + speak (v.). Related:
Misspeaking; misspoken. Old English missprecan meant to grumble, murmur.


misspell (v.)

1650s, from mis- (1) + spell (v.1). Related: Misspelled; misspelling.


misspend (v.)

also mis-spend, to spend amiss or wastefully, late 14c.; see mis- (1) + spend. Related: Misspent,
frequently coupled with youth; misspending.


misstate (v.)

also mis-state, 1640s, from mis- (1) + state (v.). Related: Misstated; misstating.


misstatement (n.)

1790, from misstate + -ment.


misstep (v.)

also mis-step, c.1300; see mis- (1) + step (v.). The noun in the figurative sense of faux pas is
first recorded c.1800; literal sense is from 1837.


missus (n.)

corruption of mistress; as oral form of Mrs., from 1790; the missus the wife attested by 1833.


missy (n.)

young girl, 1670s, playful form of miss (n.2), chiefly among servants at first.


mist (n.)

Old English mist dimness (of eyesight), mist (earliest in compounds, such as misthleo&eth;u misty
cliffs, w&aelig;lmist mist of death), from Proto-Germanic *mikhstaz (cognates: Middle Low German
mist, Dutch mist, Icelandic mistur, Norwegian and Swedish mist), perhaps from PIE *meigh- to urinate
(cognates: Greek omikhle, Old Church Slavonic migla, Sanskrit mih, megha cloud, mist; see
micturition).Sometimes distinguished from fog, either as being less opaque or as consisting of drops
large enough to have a perceptible downward motion. [OED]Also in Old English in sense of dimness of
the eyes, either by illness or tears, and in figurative sense of things that obscure mental vision.


mist (v.)

Old English mistian to become misty, to be or grow misty; see mist (n.). Meaning To cover with mist
is early 15c. Related: Misted; misting.


mistake (v.)

early 14c., to commit an offense; late 14c., to misunderstand, misinterpret, from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse mistaka take in error, miscarry, from mis- wrongly (see mis- (1)) + taka
take (see take (v.)). Related: Mistook; mistaking.


mistake (n.)

1630s, from mistake (v.). Meaning unintended pregnancy is from 1957.


mistaken (adj.)

c.1600, under misapprehension, past participle adjective from mistake (v.). Related: Mistakenly.
Mistaken identity attested from 1865.


mister

as a title of courtesy before a man's Christian name, mid-15c., unaccented variant of master. As a
form of address, without a name and with a tinge of rudeness, from 1760.


misthink (v.)

Old English mis&#240;yncan to be mistaken; see mis- (1) + think (v.). From early 13c. as to have
sinful thoughts; from 1590s as to think ill of.


mistime (v.)

late Old English mistimian to happen amiss (of an event); see mis- (1) + time (v.). Meaning not to
time properly is first recorded late 14c. Related: Mistimed; mistiming.


mistletoe (n.)

Old English mistiltan, from mistel mistletoe (see missel) + tan twig. Similar formation in Old Norse
mistilteinn, Norwegian misteltein, Danish mistelten. The second element is cognate with Old Saxon
and Old Frisian ten, Old Norse teinn, Dutch teen, Old High German zein, Gothic tains twig. Venerated
by the Druids; the custom of hanging it at Christmas and kissing under it is mentioned by Washington
Irving.


mistral (n.)

cold northerly wind on the Mediterranean coast of France, c.1600, from French, from Proven&ccedil;al
mistral, literally the dominant wind, from mistral (adj.) dominant, from Latin magistralis dominant,
from magister master (see master (n.)).


mistranslate (v.)

1530s, from mis- (1) + translate. Related: Mistranslated; mistranslating.


mistranslation (n.)

1690s, from mis- (1) + translation.


mistreat (v.)

mid-15c.; see mis- (1) + treat (v.). Related: Mistreated; mistreating.


mistreatment (n.)

1716, from mistreat + -ment.


mistress (n.)

early 14c., female teacher, governess, from Old French maistresse mistress (lover); housekeeper;
governess, female teacher (Modern French ma&#238;tresse), fem. of maistre master (see master (n.)).
Sense of a woman who employs others or has authority over servants is from early 15c. Sense of kept
woman of a married man is from early 15c.


mistrial (n.)

1620s; see mis- (1) + trial (n.).


mistrust (n.)

late 14c.; see mis- (1) + trust (n.).


mistrust (v.)

late 14c., from mis- (1) + trust (v.). Related: Mistrusted; mistrusting.


misty (adj.)

Old English mistig; see mist (n.) + -y (2). Related: Mistily; mistiness.


misunderstand (v.)

c.1200; see mis- (1) + understand. Related: Misunderstood; misunderstanding.


misunderstanding (n.)

want of understanding, mid-15c., from present participle of misunderstand.    When misunderstanding
serves others as an advantage, one is helpless to make oneself understood. [Lionel Trilling]
Meaning dissention, disagreement is first recorded 1640s.


misunderstood (adj.)

1590s, past participle adjective from misunderstand.


misuse (v.)

late 14c., to use improperly; see mis- (1) + use (v.). Meaning to subject to ill-treatment is
attested from 1530s. Related: Misused; misusing.


misuse (n.)

late 14c., from mis- (1) + use (n.). It aligns with the older sense of the verb misuse.


MIT

originally M.I.T., abbreviation of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, attested from 1892.


mite (n.1)

tiny animal, minute arachnid, Old English mite, from Proto-Germanic *miton (cognates: Middle Dutch
mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) originally meaning perhaps the cutter, in
reference to its bite, from Proto-Germanic *mait- (cognates: Gothic maitan, Old High German meizen
to cut), from PIE root *mai- to cut (see maim). Or else its original sense is something small, and
it is from PIE *mei- (2) small, in reference to size (see minus).


mite (n.2)

little bit, mid-14c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German mite tiny animal, from Proto-Germanic
*miton-, from PIE *mei- (2) small (see minus), and thus probably identical with mite (n.1). Also the
name of a medieval Flemish copper coin of very small value, proverbial in English for a very small
unit of money, hence used since Wyclif to translate Latin minutum from Vulgate in Mark xii:43,
itself a translation of Greek lepton. French mite (14c.) is a loan-word from Dutch.


miter (n.2)

in the carpentry sense of joint at a 45 degree angle, 1670s, perhaps from mitre, via notion of
joining of the two peaks of the folded cap. As a verb from 1731.


miter (n.1)

alternative spelling of mitre (see -re).


Mithras

Persian god of light, 1550s, from Latin, from Greek Mithras, from Avestan Mithra-, from Indo-Iranian
*mitram contract, whence *mitras contractual partner, friend, conceptualized as a god, or, according
to Kent, first the epithet of a divinity and eventually his name; from PIE root *mei- to bind (see
mitre). Related to Sanskrit Mitrah, a Vedic deity associated with Varuna. His name is one of the
earliest Indic words we possess, being found in clay tablets from Anatolia dating to about 1500 B.C.
[Calvert Watkins, Dictionary of Indo-European Roots, 2000]. Related: Mithraic; Mithraism.


mithridate (n.)

antidote against poison, from Medieval Latin mithridatum, from Late Latin mithridatium, neuter of
Mithridatius pertaining to Mithridates, king of Pontus, who made himself poison-proof.


mithril (n.)

1954, an invented word by English author J.R.R. Tolkien (1892-1973).


mitigant (adj.)

1540s, from Latin mitigantem, present participle of mitigare (see mitigate). As a noun from 1865.


mitigate (v.)

early 15c., relieve (pain), from Latin mitigatus, past participle of mitigare soften, make tender,
ripen, mellow, tame, figuratively, make mild or gentle, pacify, soothe, ultimately from mitis
gentle, soft (from PIE *mei- mild) + root of agere do, make, act (see act). First element is from
PIE root *mei- soft, mild. Related: Mitigated; mitigating; mitigates.


mitigating (adj,.)

extenuating, 1610s, present participle adjective from mitigate.


mitigation (n.)

mid-14c., from Latin mitigationem (nominative mitigatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of mitigare (see mitigate).


mitochondria (n.)

1901, from German, coined 1898 by microbiologist Carl Benda (1857-1933), from Greek mitos thread
(see mitre) + khondrion little granule, diminutive of khondros granule, lump of salt (see grind
(v.)).


mitochondrion (n.)

singular of mitochondria.


mitosis (n.)

1887, coined in German from Greek mitos warp thread (see mitre) + Modern Latin -osis act, process.
Term introduced by German anatomist Walther Fleming (1843-1905) in 1882. So called because chromatin
of the cell nucleus appears as long threads in the first stages.


mitrailleuse (n.)

kind of machine gun, from French mitrailleuse (19c.), from Old French mitaille (14c.) small coins,
hence old iron, scrap iron, then grapeshot; originally a diminutive of mite a small coin (see mite
(n.2)). For sense development it should be borne in mind that orig. guns used to be loaded with
scrap iron [Klein].


mitral (adj.)

c.1600, resembling a mitre, from French mitral, from Modern Latin mitralis, from Latin mitra (see
mitre). Mitral valve is attested from 1705.


mitre (n.)

bishop's tall hat, late 14c., from Old French mitre, from Latin mitra headband, turban, from Greek
mitra headband, turban, earlier a belt or cloth worn under armor about the waist, from PIE root
*mei- to tie (cognates: Sanskrit Mitrah, Old Persian Mithra-, god names; Russian mir world, peace,
Greek mitos a warp thread). In Latin, a kind of headdress common among Asiatics, the wearing of
which by men was regarded in Rome as a mark of effeminacy [OED]. But the word was used in Vulgate to
translate Hebrew micnepheth headdress of a priest.


mitt (n.)

1765, shortened form of mitten (q.v.). Baseball sense is from 1902. Slang sense of hand is from
1896.


mitten (n.)

late 14c., from Old French mitaine mitten, half-glove (12c.), from Old French mite mitten, and from
Medieval Latin mitta, which are perhaps from Middle High German mittemo, Old High German mittamo
middle, midmost (reflecting notion of half-glove), or from Vulgar Latin *medietana divided in the
middle, from Latin medius (see medial (adj.)).


Mitty

adventurous daydreamer, 1950, from title character in The Secret Life of Walter Mitty, short story
by U.S. author James Thurber (1894-1961) first published in the New Yorker March 18, 1939.


mitzvah (n.)

Jewish rabbinical commandment, 1640s, from Hebrew mitzwah commandment, precept, from base of tziwwah
he commanded, related to Arabic wasa he bound, united.


mix (v.)

1530s, back-formation from Middle English myxte (early 15c.) composed of more than one element, of
mixed nature, from Anglo-French mixte, from Latin mixtus, past participle of miscere to mix, mingle,
blend; fraternize with; throw into confusion, from PIE *meik- to mix (cognates: Sanskrit misrah
mixed, Greek misgein, mignynai to mix, mix up, mingle; to join, bring together; join (battle); make
acquainted with, Old Church Slavonic me&#353;o, mesiti to mix, Russian meshat, Lithuanian
mai&#353;au to mix, mingle, Welsh mysgu). Also borrowed in Old English as miscian. Related: Mixed;
mixing.


mix (n.)

1580s, act of mixing, from mix (v.).


mix-up (n.)

confusion, 1841, from mix (v.) + up.


mixed (adj.)

mid-15c., from past participle of mix (v.). Mixed blessing from 1933. Mixed marriage is from 1690s
(originally in a religious context; racial sense was in use by 1942 in U.S., though mixed breed in
reference to mulattoes is found by 1775). Mixed bag heterogeneous collection is from 1936. Mixed up
is from 1884 as confused, from 1862 as involved.   Mixed drink in the modern liquor sense is
recorded by 1868; the thing itself is older; Bartlett (1859) lists sixty names given to the various
compounds or mixtures of spirituous liquors and wines served up in fashionable bar rooms in the
United States, all from a single advertisement. The list includes Tippe na Pecco, Moral suasion, Vox
populi, Jewett's fancy, Ne plus ultra, Shambro, Virginia fancy, Stone wall, Smasher, Slingflip, Pig
and whistle, Cocktail, Phlegm-cutter, Switchel flip, Tip and Ty, Ching-ching, Fiscal agent, Slip
ticket, Epicure's punch.


mixer (n.)

1610s, worker who mixes, agent noun from mix (v.). As a type of machine, from 1876. Meaning
troublemaker attested by 1938; sense of social gathering to mingle and get acquainted dates from
1916.


mixo-

word-forming element meaning mixed, from Greek mixo-, from mixis a mixing, mingling, intercourse,
from root of mignynai to mix, mix up, mingle (see mix (v.)). E.g. Mixolydian.


mixologist (n.)

bartender, 1856, jocular slang formation from mix (v.) + ending from the sciences.


mixture (n.)

early 15c., from Old French misture and directly from Latin mixtura a mixing, from mixtus (see mix
(v.)).


miz

1907 as graphing of U.S. Southern pronunciation of Mrs. or Miss; 1972 as standard pronunciation of
Ms.


mizzen (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French misaine foresail, foremast, altered (by influence of Italian mezzana
mizzen) from Old French migenne, from Catalan mitjana, from Latin medianus of the middle (see
median). Klein suggests the French word is from Arabic, via Italian.


mnemonic (adj.)

aiding the memory, 1753, back-formation from mnemonics, or from Greek mnemonikos of or pertaining to
memory, from mnemon (genitive mnemonos) remembering, mindful, from memne memory, a remembrance,
record, an epitaph; memory as a mental faculty, from base of mnasthai remember, from PIE root *men-
to think (see mind (n.)). The noun meaning mnemonic device is from 1858. Related: Mnemonical
(1660s).


mnemonics (n.)

art of developing memory, 1721; see mnemonic; also see -ics.


Mnemosyne

titaness, mother of the Muses, from Greek mnemosyne, literally memory, remembrance, from mneme
memory (see mnemonic).


mnesic (adj.)

pertaining to memory, from Greek mnesikos of memory, from mnesis memory (see mnemonic).


mnestic (adj.)

pertaining to memory, from Greek mnestis remembrance, related to mnesis memory (see mnemonic) + -ic.


mo (1)

colloquial shortening of momentum, by 1896.


mo (2)

representing U.S. black pronunciation of more, by 1902; it was an acceptable variant form of more in
the Middle Ages and has roots in Old English; see more.


moa (n.)

extinct, flightless bird of New Zealand, 1842, native Maori name.


moan (n.)

c.1200, lamentation, mourning, weeping; complaining, the expressing of complaints; a complaint;
lover's complaint; accusation, charge, probably from an unrecorded Old English *man complaint,
related to Old English m&aelig;nan complain, moan, also tell, intend, signify (see mean (v.1)); but
OED discounts this connection. Meaning long, low inarticulate murmur from some prolonged pain is
first recorded 1670s, with onomatopoeic suggestion [OED].


moan (v.)

mid-13c., mourn (someone); regret, bewail; c.1300, to lament, grieve; utter moans; probably from Old
English *manan, related to m&#230;nan to lament (see moan (n.)). From 1724 as to make a low,
mournful sound. Related: Moaned; moaning.


moat (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French mote mound, hillock, embankment; castle built on a hill (12c.; Modern
French motte), from Medieval Latin mota mound, fortified height, of unknown origin, perhaps from
Gaulish mutt, mutta. Sense shifted in Norman French from the castle mound to the ditch dug around
it. As a verb, to surround with a moat, early 15c.


mob (v.)

to attack in a mob, 1709, from mob (n.). Meaning to form into a mob is from 1711. Related: Mobbed;
mobbing.


mob (n.)

1680s, disorderly part of the population, rabble, slang shortening of mobile, mobility common
people, populace, rabble (1670s, probably with a conscious play on nobility), from Latin mobile
vulgus fickle common people (the phrase attested c.1600 in English), from mobile, neuter of mobilis
fickle, movable, mobile (see mobile (adj.)). In Australia and New Zealand, used without
disparagement for a crowd. Meaning gang of criminals working together is from 1839, originally of
thieves or pick-pockets; American English sense of organized crime in general is from 1927.    The
Mob was not a synonym for the Mafia. It was an alliance of Jews, Italians, and a few Irishmen, some
of them brilliant, who organized the supply, and often the production, of liquor during the thirteen
years, ten months, and nineteen days of Prohibition. ... Their alliance -- sometimes called the
Combination but never the Mafia -- was part of the urgent process of Americanizing crime. [Pete
Hamill, Why Sinatra Matters, 1998]   Mob scene crowded place first recorded 1922.


mob-cap (n.)

a type of woman's indoor cap, 1795 (as simply mob, 1748), from cap (n.) + obsolete mob (n.)
negligent attire (1660s), earlier a strumpet (earlier form mab, 1550s), related to obsolete verb mob
to tousle the hair, to dress untidily (1660s), and perhaps ultimately from mop, but influenced by
Mab as a female name. Dutch has a similar compound, mopmuts, but the relationship between it and the
English word is uncertain.


mobile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French mobile (14c.), from Latin mobilis movable, easy to move; loose, not
firm, figuratively, pliable, flexible, susceptible, nimble, quick; changeable, inconstant, fickle,
contraction of *movibilis, from movere to move (see move (v.)). Sociology sense from 1927. Mobile
home first recorded 1940.


Mobile

city in Alabama, U.S., attested c.1540 in Spanish as Mauvila, referring to an Indian group and
perhaps from Choctaw (Muskogean) moeli to paddle. Related: Mobilian.


mobile (n.)

early 15c. in astronomy, outer sphere of the universe, from mobile (adj.); the artistic sense is
first recorded 1949 as a shortening of mobile sculpture (1936). Now-obsolete sense of the common
people, the rabble (1670s) led to mob (n.).


mobilisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of mobilization. For spelling, see -ize.


mobilise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of mobilize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Mobilised; mobilising.


mobility (n.)

early 15c., capacity for motion, from Old French mobilit&eacute; changeableness, inconsistency,
fickleness, from Latin mobilitatem (nominative mobilitas) activity, speed, figuratively
changeableness, fickleness, inconstancy, from mobilis (see mobile (adj.)). Socio-economics sense is
from 1900 and writers in sociology.


mobilization (n.)

1799, a rendering movable, from French mobilisation, from mobiliser (see mobilize). Military sense
is from 1866.


mobilize (v.)

1833 in the military sense; 1838 as render capable of movement, bring into circulation, from French
mobiliser, from mobile movable (see mobile). Related: Mobilized; mobilizing.


Mobius

also Moebius, 1904 in reference to the Mobius strip (earlier Moebius unilateral paper strip, 1899),
named for German mathematician August Ferdinand M&ouml;bius (1790-1868), professor at Leipzig, who
devised it and described it in 1865 (Ã¼ber die Bestimmung des Inhalts eines Polyeders, Nov. 27,
1865).


Mobius strip (n.)

one-sided object, 1904, see Mobius.


mobocracy (n.)

mob rule, 1754, a hybrid from mob (n.) + -cracy. Related: Mobocrat; mobocratic.


mobster (n.)

1916, from mob (n.) in the criminal sense + -ster.


moccasin (n.)

North American Indian shoe (made of deerskin or soft leather), 1610s, from an Algonquian language of
Virginia, probably Powhatan makasin shoe, from Central Atlantic Coast Algonquian *mockasin, similar
to Southern New England Algonquian *makkusin, Munsee Delaware mahkusin, Ojibwa  makizin. The
venomous snake of southern U.S. (1784) is perhaps a different word, but Bright regards them as
identical.


mocha (n.)

1733, fine coffee, from Mocha, Red Sea port of Yemen, from which coffee was exported. Meaning
mixture of coffee and chocolate first recorded 1849. As a shade of dark brown, it is attested from
1895.


mock (v.)

early 15c., to deceive; mid-15c. make fun of, from Old French mocquer deride, jeer, of unknown
origin, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *muccare to blow the nose (as a derisive gesture), from Latin
mucus; or possibly from Middle Dutch mocken to mumble or Middle Low German mucken grumble. Or
perhaps simply imitative of such speech. Related: Mocked; mocking; mockingly. Replaced Old English
bysmerian. Sense of imitating, as in mockingbird and mock turtle (1763), is from notion of derisive
imitation.


mock (adj.)

1540s, from mock, verb and noun. Mock-heroic is attested from 1711, describing a satirical use of a
serious form; mock-turtle calf's head dressed to resemble a turtle, is from 1763; as a kind of soup
from 1783.


mock (n.)

derisive action or speech, early 15c., from mock (v.).


mocker (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from mock (v.).


mockery (n.)

early 15c., from Old French moquerie sneering, mockery, sarcasm (13c.), from moquer (see mock (v.)).


mockingbird (n.)

also mocking-bird, 1670s, from mocking (adj.), 1520s, from present participle of mock (v.) + bird
(n.1). Earlier form was mock-bird (1640s).


mockup (n.)

also mock-up, model, simulation 1919, perhaps World War I, from mock (v.) + up (adv.). The verbal
phrase mock up is attested from 1911.


mod (n.1)

tidy, sophisticated teen (usually contrasted with rocker), 1960, slang shortening of modern.


mod (n.2)

short for modification, c.1920, originally among aviators.


modal (adj.)

1560s, term in logic, from Middle French modal and directly from Medieval Latin modalis of or
pertaining to a mode, from Latin modus measure, manner, mode (see mode (n.1)). Musical sense is from
1590s.


modality (n.)

1610s, from Old French modalit&#233; or directly from Medieval Latin modalitatem (nominative
modalitas) a being modal, from modalis (see modal). Related: Modalities.


mode (n.1)

manner, late 14c., kind of musical scale, from Latin modus measure, extent, quantity; proper
measure, rhythm, song; a way, manner, fashion, style (in Late Latin also mood in grammar and logic),
from PIE root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take appropriate measures (see medical).
Meaning manner in which a thing is done first recorded 1660s.


mode (n.2)

current fashion, 1640s, from French mode manner, fashion, style (15c.), from Latin modus manner (see
mode (n.1)).


model (n.)

1570s, likeness made to scale; architect's set of designs, from Middle French modelle (16c., Modern
French mod&egrave;le), from Italian modello a model, mold, from Vulgar Latin *modellus, from Latin
modulus a small measure, standard, diminutive of modus manner, measure (see mode (n.1)).    Sense of
thing or person to be imitated is 1630s. Meaning motor vehicle of a particular design is from 1900
(such as Model T, 1908; Ford's other early models included C, F, and B). Sense of artist's model is
first recorded 1690s; that of fashion model is from 1904. German, Swedish modell, Dutch, Danish
model are from French or Italian.


model (v.)

1660s, fashion in clay or wax, from model (n.). Earlier was modelize (c.1600). From 1915 in the
sense to act as a fashion model, to display (clothes). Related: Modeled; modeling; modelled;
modelling.


model (adj.)

1844, from model (n.).


modeling (n.)

also modelling, 1650s, action of bringing into desired condition, verbal noun from model (v.).
Meaning action of making models (in clay, wax, etc.) is from 1799. Meaning work of a fashion model
is from 1941.


modem (n.)

device to convert digital signals to analog and vice versa, 1958, coined from first elements of
modulator + demodulator.


Modena

Italian city, the name probably is from a pre-Latin language, but folk etymology connects it with
Mutina, epithet of the nymph Lara who was stricken dumb by Zeus in punishment for her loquacity,
from Latin mutus. Related: Modenese.


moderate (adj.)

late 14c., originally of weather and other physical conditions, from Latin moderatus within bounds,
observing moderation; figuratively modest, restrained, past participle of moderari to regulate,
mitigate, restrain, temper, set a measure, keep (something) within measure, related to modus
measure, from PIE *med-es-, from base *med- (see medical (adj.)). The notion is keeping within due
measure. In English, of persons from early 15c.; of opinions from 1640s; of prices from 1904.
Related: Moderateness.


moderate (v.)

early 15c., to abate excessiveness; from Latin moderatus, past participle of moderari (see moderate
(adj.)). Meaning to preside over a debate is first attested 1570s. Related: Moderated; moderating.


moderate (n.)

one who holds moderate opinions on controversial subjects, 1794, from moderate (adj.). Related:
Moderatism; -moderantism.


moderately (adv.)

late 14c., from moderate (adj.) + -ly (2).


moderation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French moderacion (14c.) alteration, modification; mitigation, alleviation,
from Latin moderationem (nominative moderatio) a controlling, guidance, government, regulation;
moderation, temperateness, self-control, noun of action from moderatus (see moderate (adj.)).


moderator (n.)

late 14c., ruler, governor, from Latin moderator manager, ruler, director, literally he who
moderates, from moderatus (see moderate (adj.)). Meaning one who acts as an umpire is from 1560s.
Fem. form moderatrix attested from 1530s.


modern (adj.)

c.1500, now existing; 1580s, of or pertaining to present or recent times; from Middle French moderne
(15c.) and directly from Late Latin modernus modern (Priscian, Cassiodorus), from Latin modo just
now, in a (certain) manner, from modo (adv.) to the measure, ablative of modus manner, measure (see
mode (n.1)). Extended form modern-day attested from 1909.    In Shakespeare, often with a sense of
every-day, ordinary, commonplace. Slang abbreviation mod first attested 1960. Modern art is from
1807 (by contrast to ancient); modern dance first attested 1912; first record of modern jazz is from
1954. Modern conveniences first recorded 1926.


modern (n.)

1580s, person of the present time (contrasted to ancient, from modern (adj.). From 1897 as one who
is up to date.


modernism (n.)

1737, deviation from the ancient and classical manner [Johnson, who calls it a word invented by
Swift], from modern + -ism. From 1830 as modern ways and styles. Used in theology since 1901. As a
movement in the arts (away from classical or traditional modes), from 1929.


modernist (n.)

1580s, a modern person, from modern + -ist. Later, a supporter of the modern (as opposed to the
classical), c.1700. As a follower of a movement in the arts (modernism), attested from 1927.


modernistic (adj.)

1878, from modernist + -ic.


modernity (n.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin modernitatem, noun of quality from modernus (see modern).


modernization (n.)

1770, from modernize + -ation.


modernize (v.)

1748, from modern + -ize, or from French moderniser. Related: Modernized; modernizing; modernizer.


modest (adj.)

1560s, having moderate self-regard, from Middle French modeste (14c.), from Latin modestus keeping
due measure (see modesty). Of women, not improper or lewd, 1590s; of female attire, 1610s. Of
demands, etc., c.1600. Related: Modestly.


modesty (n.)

1530s, freedom from exaggeration, self-control, from Middle French modestie or directly from Latin
modestia moderation, sense of honor, correctness of conduct, from modestus moderate, keeping
measure, sober, gentle, temperate, from modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)). Meaning quality of
having a moderate opinion of oneself is from 1550s; that of womanly propriety is from 1560s.   La
pudeur donne des plaisirs bien flatteurs &#224; l'amant: elle lui fait sentir quelles lois l'on
transgresse pour lui;  (Modesty both pleases and flatters a lover, for it lays stress on the laws
which are being transgressed for his sake.) [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]


modicum (n.)

small quantity or portion, late 15c., Scottish, from Latin modicum a little, noun use of neuter of
modicus moderate, having a proper measure; ordinary, scanty, small, few, from modus measure, manner
(see mode (n.1)).


modification (n.)

c.1500, in philosophy, from Middle French modification (14c.) and directly from Latin modificationem
(nominative modificatio) a measuring, noun of action from past participle stem of modificare (see
modify). Meaning alteration to an object to bring it up to date is from 1774. Biological sense is
attested by 1896.


modifier (n.)

1580s, agent noun of modify. Grammatical sense is from 1865.


modify (v.)

late 14c., from Old French modifier (14c.), from Latin modificare to limit, measure off, restrain,
from modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Related:
Modified; modifying.


modish (adj.)

1650s, from mode (n.2) + -ish. Very common in 17-18 c.; now somewhat arch[aic]. [OED].


modist (n.)

follower of fashion, 1837, from mode (n.2) + -ist.


modular (adj.)

1798, as a term in mathematics, from French modulaire or directly from Modern Latin modularis, from
Latin modulus a small measure (see module). Meaning composed of interchangeable units first recorded
1936.


modularity (n.)

1909, from modular + -ity.


modulate (v.)

1610s, in music, back-formation from modulation, or else from Latin modulatus, past participle of
modulari. General sense from 1620s. In telecommunications from 1908. Related: Modulated; modulating.


modulation (n.)

late 14c., act of singing or making music, from Old French modulation act of making music (14c.), or
directly from Latin modulationem (nominative modulatio) rhythmical measure, singing and playing,
melody, noun of action from past participle stem of modulari regulate, measure off properly, measure
rhythmically; play, play upon, from modulus (see module). Meaning act of regulating according to
measure or proportion is from 1530s. Musical sense of action of process of changing key is first
recorded 1690s.


modulator (n.)

c.1500, from Latin modulator, literally one who modulates in various senses (such as musical
director), agent noun from past participle stem of modulari (see modulation). Meaning device that
produces modulation of a wave is from 1919.


module (n.)

1580s, allotted measure, from Middle French module (1540s) or directly from Latin modulus small
measure, diminutive of modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)). Meaning interchangeable part first
recorded 1955; that of separate section of a spacecraft is from 1961.


modus (n.)

way in which anything is done, 1640s, from Latin modus (plural modi), literally a measure, extent,
quantity; manner (see mode (n.1)). Especially in modus operandi and modus vivendi.


modus operandi (n.)

way of doing or accomplishing, 1650s, Latin, literally mode of operating (see modus). Abbreviation
m.o. is attested from 1955.


modus vivendi (n.)

1879, Latin, literally way of living or getting along (see modus).   Modus vivendi is any temporary
compromise that enables parties to carry on pending settlement of a dispute that would otherwise
paralyse their activities. [Fowler]


mody (adj.)

fashionable, 1701, from mode (n.2) + -y (2).


Moeris

former large lake of northern Egypt, from Egyptian mer-ur big lake, from mer lake + ur big.


Mogadishu

city in Somalia, from Arabic mukaddas holy.


Mogen David

1904, star of David, six-pointed star, symbol of Judaism or Zionism, from Hebrew maghen Dawidh
shield of David, king of Judah and Israel, died c.973 B.C.E.


mogul (n.1)

powerful person, 1670s, from Great Mogul, Mongol emperor of India after the conquest of 1520s, from
Persian and Arabic mughal, mughul, alteration of Mongol (q.v.), the Asiatic people.


mogul (n.2)

elevation on a ski slope, 1961, probably [Barnhart] from Scandinavian (compare dialectal Norwegian
mugje, fem. muga, a heap, a mound), or [OED] from southern German dialect mugel in the same sense.


mohair (n.)

1610s, earlier mocayre, 1560s, fine hair of the Angora goat, also a fabric made from this, from
Middle French mocayart (16c.), Italian mocaiarro, both from Arabic mukhayyar cloth of goat hair,
literally selected, choice, from khayyara he chose. Spelling influenced in English by association
with hair. Moire watered silk (1650s) probably represents English mohair borrowed into French and
back into English.


Mohammed

former common English transliteration of Muhammad.    The worst of letting the learned gentry bully
us out of our traditional Mahometan &amp; Mahomet ... is this: no sooner have we tried to be good
&amp; learnt to say, or at least write, Mohammed than they are fired with zeal to get us a step or
two further on the path of truth, which at present seems likely to end in Muhammad with a dot under
the h .... [H.W. Fowler, A Dictionary of Modern English Usage, 1926]


Mohammedan

see Mohammed. Related: Mohammedanism.


Mohawk

North American Indian tribe name, Iroquoian, 1630s, Mohowawogs (plural), said to mean they eat
living things in a southern New England Algonquian tongue, probably a reference to cannibalism.
Compare Unami Delaware /muhuwe:yck/ cannibal monsters. The people's name for themselves is
kanye'keha:ka. Meaning haircut style favored by punk rockers is c.1975, from fancied resemblance to
hair style of the Indians in old illustrations. The style of cut earlier was called a Mohican
(1960). Mohoc, Mohock, variant form of the word, was the name given 1711 to gangs of aristocratic
London ruffians.


Mohican

from Mahican (Algonquian) ma:hi:kan people of the tidal estuary. Spelling with -o- popularized by
James Fenimore Cooper's novel.


moiety (n.)

an equal half, mid-15c., from Old French moite, earlier meitiet (12c., Modern French moiti&#233;)
half; middle; portion, piece, from Latin meditatem (nominative medietas) half, originally middle
point, from medius middle (see medial (adj.)).


moil (v.)

to labour in the mire [Johnson], c.1400, from Old French moillier to wet, moisten (12c., Modern
French mouiller), from Vulgar Latin *molliare, from Latin mollis soft, from PIE *mel- soft  (see
mild). Related: Moiled; moiling.


moil (n.)

toil, labor, 1612, from moil (v.).


Moira

fem. proper name, one of the Fates, from Greek Moira, literally share, fate, related to moros fate,
destiny, doom, meros part, lot, meiresthai to receive one's share (see merit (n.)).


moire (n.)

watered silk, 1650s, from French moire (17c.); see mohair. As an adjective, moir&eacute; having the
appearance of watered silk, it is attested from 1823.


moist (adj.)

late 14c., moist, wet; well-irrigated, from Old French moiste damp, wet, soaked (13c., Modern French
moite), from Vulgar Latin *muscidus moldy, also wet, from Latin mucidus slimy, moldy, musty, from
mucus slime (see mucus). Alternative etymology [Diez] is from Latin musteus fresh, green, new,
literally like new wine, from musteum new wine (see must (n.1)). If this wasn't the source, it
influenced the form of the other word in Old French. Related: Moistly; moistness.


moisten (v.)

1570s, from moist + -en (1). Related: Moistened; moistening. The earlier verb was simply moist
(early 14c.), from Old French moistir.


moistener (n.)

1610s, agent noun from moisten (v.).


moisture (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French moistour moisture, dampness, wetness (13c., Modern French moiteur), from
moiste (see moist).


moisturize (v.)

1945, from moisture + -ize. Related: Moisturized; moisturizing.


moisturizer (n.)

1915, from moisture; attested earlier than moisturize.


Mojave

also Mohave, 1831, from native (Yuman) name, hamakhaav, perhaps containing aha water.


mojo (n.)

magic, 1920s, probably of Creole origin, compare Gullah moco witchcraft, Fula moco'o medicine man.


moke (n.)

dolt, 1855, originally (16c.) donkey; of unknown origin, perhaps originally a personal name. In
U.S., black person, from 1856.


mola (n.1)

type of fish, 1670s, from Latin mola, literally millstone  (see molar). So called because of the
fish's shape and rough skin.


mola (n.2)

false conception, c.1600, from Latin mola false conception, from earlier sense salt cake; literally
millstone (see molar).


molar (n.)

grinding tooth, mid-14c., from Latin molaris dens grinding tooth, from mola millstone, from PIE root
*mel- to rub, grind (see mill (n.1)). As an adjective in this sense from 1620s. In Old English they
were cweornte&eth; quern-teeth.


molar (adj.)

in chemistry, pertaining to one mole, 1902, from mole (4) + -ar.


molasses (n.)

1580s, from Portuguese mela&ccedil;o, from Late Latin mellaceum new wine, properly neuter of
mellaceus resembling honey, from Latin mel (genitive mellis) honey (see Melissa). Adopted in English
in plural form, but regarded as a singular noun.


mold (n.1)

also mould, hollow shape, c.1200, originally fashion, form; nature, native constitution, character,
metathesized from Old French modle model, plan, copy; way, manner (12c., Modern French moule), from
Latin modulum (nominative modulus) measure, model, diminutive of modus manner (see mode (1)). From
c.1300 as pattern or model by which something is shaped or made. To break the mold render impossible
the creation of another is from 1560s.


mold (n.2)

also mould, furry fungus, early 15c., probably from moulde, past participle of moulen to grow moldy
(early 13c.), related to Old Norse mygla grow moldy, possibly from Proto-Germanic *(s)muk-
indicating wetness, slipperiness, from PIE *meug- (see mucus). Or it might have evolved from (or
been influenced by) Old English molde loose earth (see mold (n.3)).


mold (n.3)

also mould, loose earth, Old English molde earth, sand, dust, soil; land, country, world, from
Proto-Germanic *mulda (cognates: Old Frisian molde earth, soil, Old Norse mold earth, Middle Dutch
moude, Dutch moude, Old High German molta dust, earth, Gothic mulda dust), from PIE root *mele- to
rub, grind (see meal (n.2)). Specifically, since late (Christian) Old English, the earth of the
grave.


mold (v.)

also mould, mid-14c., to mix, blend; late 14c. to knead, shape, from mold (n.1). Figurative sense
(of character, etc.) is from c.1600. Related: Molded; molding.


moldable (adj.)

also mouldable, 1620s, from mold (v.) + -able. Related: Moldably; moldability.


Moldavia

Latinized form of Moldova.


Moldavian

c.1600 (n.); 1760 (adj.), from Moldavia + -ian.


molded (adj.)

also moulded, 1680s, past participle adjective from mold (v.).


molder (v.)

also moulder, to crumble away, 1530s, probably frequentative of mold (n.3) loose earth. Related:
Moldered; moldering.


molder (n.)

also moulder, mid-15c., one who molds or forms, agent noun from mold (v.). From late 13c. as a
surname.


molding (n.)

also moulding, early 14c., act of kneading, from mold (n.1). Architectural sense is from mid-15c.;
carpentry sense is from 1670s.


Moldova

country in Eastern Europe, named for the river through it, probably from PIE root *mel- dark,
soiled, black.


moldwarp (n.)

also mouldwarp, early 14c., moldewarp, from Proto-Germanic *moldo-worpo(n)-, literally earth-
thrower, from to Old English molde earth, soil (see mole (n.2) + weorpan to throw (see warp (v.)).
Common Germanic, compare Old Saxon moldwerp, Dutch mulworp, Norwegian moldvarp, Danish muldvarp, Old
High German multwurf, German Maulwurf (influenced by Maul mouth).


moldy (adj.)

also mouldy, 1570s, earlier mowly (late 14c.), from mold (n.2) + -y (2). Related: Moldiness.


mole (n.1)

spot on skin, Old English mal spot, mark, blemish, especially on cloth or linen, from Proto-Germanic
*mailan spot, mark (cognates: Old High German meil, German Mal, Gothic mail wrinkle), from PIE root
*mai- to stain, defile (cognates: Greek miainein to stain, defile, see miasma). Specifically of dark
marks on human skin from late 14c.


mole (n.2)

type of small burrowing mammal (Talpa europea), mid-14c., probably from obsolete moldwarp, literally
earth-thrower. Spy sense first recorded 1974 in John le Carr&eacute; (but suggested from early
20c.), from notion of burrowing. Metaphoric use for one who works in darkness is from c.1600.


mole (n.3)

breakwater, 1540s, from Middle French m&ocirc;le breakwater (16c.), ultimately from Latin moles
mass, massive structure, barrier, from PIE root *mo- to exert oneself (cognates: Greek molos effort,
molis hardly, scarcely; German m&#252;hen to tire, m&#252;de weary, tired; Russian majat' to
fatigue, exhaust, maja hard work).


mole (n.4)

unit of molecular quantity, 1902, from German Mol coined 1900 by German chemist Wilhelm Ostwald
(1853-1912), short for Molek&uuml;l (see molecule).


molecular (adj.)

1823, from molecule + -ar or else from French mol&#233;culaire or Modern Latin molecularis.
Molecular biology first attested 1950.


molecule (n.)

1794, extremely minute particle, from French mol&eacute;cule (1670s), from Modern Latin molecula,
diminutive of Latin moles mass, barrier (see mole (3)). A vague meaning at first; the vogue for the
word (used until late 18c. only in Latin form) can be traced to the philosophy of Descartes. First
used of Modern Latin molecula in modern scientific sense by Amedeo Avogadro (1811).


molehill (n.)

also mole-hill, mid-15c., from mole (n.2) + hill (n.).  To much amplifying thinges yt. be but small,
makyng mountaines of Molehils. [John Foxe, Acts and Monuments, 1570]


moleskin (n.)

1660s, from mole (2) + skin (n.).


molest (v.)

late 14c., to cause trouble, grief, or vexation, from Old French molester to torment, trouble,
bother (12c.) and directly from Latin molestare to disturb, trouble, annoy, from molestus
troublesome, annoying, unmanageable, perhaps related to moles mass (see mole (n.3)) on notion of
either burden or barrier. Meaning sexually assault first attested 1950. Related: Molested;
molesting.


molestation (n.)

c.1400, action of annoying or vexing, from Old French molestacion vexation, harassing, and directly
from Medieval Latin molestationem (nominative molestatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of molestare (see molest). It meant the harassing of a person in his possession or occupation of
lands in Scottish law; in English common law it came to mean injury inflicted upon another.


molester (n.)

1570s, agent noun from molest.


Moll

female proper name, shortened form of Molly, itself familiar for Mary. Used from c.1600 for
prostitute; meaning companion of a thief is first recorded 1823. U.S. sense of a gangster's
girlfriend is from 1923.


mollification (n.)

late 14c., from Old French mollificacion (Modern French mollification), from Medieval Latin
mollificationem (nominative mollificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of mollificare
(see mollify).


mollified (adj.)

1620s, past participle adjective from mollify.


mollify (v.)

late 14c., to soften (a substance), from Old French mollifier or directly from Late Latin
mollificare make soft, mollify from mollificus softening, from Latin mollis soft (see melt (v.)) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Transferred sense of soften in temper, appease, pacify is
recorded from early 15c. Related: Mollified; mollifying.


mollusc (n.)

see mollusk.


Mollusca (n.)

1797, from Modern Latin mollusca, chosen by Linnaeus as the name of an invertebrate order (1758),
from neuter plural of Latin molluscus thin-shelled, from mollis soft (see melt (v.)). Linn&aelig;us
applied the word to a heterogeneous group of invertebrates, not originally including mollusks with
shells; the modern scientific use is after a classification proposed 1790s by French naturalist
Georges L&eacute;opole Chr&eacute;tien Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Dagobert, Baron Cuvier (1769-1832).


mollusk (n.)

1783, mollusque (modern spelling from 1839), from French mollusque, from Modern Latin Mollusca (see
Mollusca), the phylum name. Related: Molluscuous; molluscan.


molly (n.)

seabird, 1857, short for mollymawk, from Dutch mallemok, from mal foolish + mok gull.


Molly

fem. proper name, a familiar form of Mary.


Molly Maguire (n.)

secret society in the mining districts of Pennsylvania, 1867 (suppressed 1876); named for earlier
secret society formed in Ireland (1843) to resist payment of rents. From Molly (see Moll) + common
Irish surname Maguire. Memebers were said to sometimes wear women's clothing as disguise.


mollycoddle (v.)

also molly-coddle, 1870, from a noun (1833) meaning one who coddles himself, from Molly (pet name
formation from Mary), which had been used contemptuously since 1754 for a milksop, an effeminate
man, + coddle (q.v.). Related: Mollycoddled; mollycoddling.


Moloch

Canaanite god said to have been propitiated by sacrificing children (Lev. xviii:21), from Latin
Moloch, from Greek Molokh, from Hebrew molekh, from melekh king, altered by the Jews with the vowel
points from basheth shame to express their horror of the worship.


Molotov cocktail (n.)

1940, a term from Russo-Finnish War (used and satirically named by the Finns), from Molotov (from
Russian molot hammer) name taken by Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Skriabin (1890-1986), Soviet minister of
foreign affairs 1939-1949.


molt (v.)

also moult, mid-14c., mouten, of feathers, to be shed, from Old English *mutian to change (in
bemutian to exchange), from Latin mutare to change (see mutable). Transitive sense, of birds, to
shed feathers is first attested 1520s. With parasitic -l-, late 16c., on model of fault, etc.
Related: Molted, moulted; molting, moulting. As a noun from 1815.


molten (adj.)

late 13c., from archaic past participle of Old English meltian, a class III strong verb (see melt
(v.)).


moly (n.)

1570s, fabulous magical herb with white flowers and black root, given by Hermes to Odysseus as
protection against Circe's sorcery, of unknown origin.


molybdenum (n.)

metallic element, 1816, from molybdena, used generally for lead-like minerals, from Greek molybdos
lead, also black graphite, related to Latin plumbum lead (see plumb (n.)), and like it probably
borrowed from a lost Mediterranean language, perhaps Iberian. The element so called because of its
resemblance to lead ore.


mom (n.)

1867, American English, perhaps a shortening of mommy; also see mamma. Adjectival phrase mom and pop
dates from 1951.


moment (n.)

mid-14c., very brief portion of time, instant, in moment of time, from Old French moment (12c.)
moment, minute; importance, weight, value or directly from Latin momentum movement, motion; moving
power; alteration, change; also short time, instant (also source of Spanish, Italian momento),
contraction of *movimentum, from movere to move (see move (v.)). Some (but not OED) explain the
sense evolution of the Latin word by notion of a particle so small it would just move the pointer of
a scale, which led to the transferred sense of minute time division. Sense of importance, 'weight'
is attested in English from 1520s.    Phrase never a dull moment first recorded 1889 in Jerome K.
Jerome's Three Men in a Boat. Phrase moment of truth first recorded 1932 in Hemingway's Death in the
Afternoon, from Spanish el momento de la verdad, the final sword-thrust in a bull-fight.


momentarily (adv.)

1650s, for a moment, from momentary + -ly (2). Meaning at any moment is from 1928.


momentary (adj.)

lasting a moment, mid-15c., from Latin momentarius of brief duration, from momentum (see moment).


momently (adv.)

1670s, moment to moment, from moment + -ly (2). Meaning at any moment is from 1775.


momento (n.)

a misspelling, or perhaps variant, of memento.


momentous (adj.)

1650s, from moment + -ous to carry the sense of important while momentary kept the meaning of an
instant of time. Related: Momentously; momentousness.


momentum (n.)

1690s, scientific use in mechanics, quantity of motion of a moving body, from Latin momentum
movement, moving power (see moment). Figurative use dates from 1782.


momma (n.)

1884, American English variant of mamma (q.v.). As a biker's girlfriend or female passenger, from
1950s.


mommy (n.)

1844, U.S. variant of mamma. Variant spelling mommie attested by 1882. Mommy track first attested
1987. Related: Mommies; also see momma.


Momus (n.)

humorously disagreeable person, 1560s, from Latin, from Greek Momos, nme of the god of ridicule and
sarcasm (Greek momos, literally blame, ridicule, disgrace, of unknown origin); also used in English
as personification of fault-finding and captious criticism.


momzer (n.)

contemptible person, moocher, 1560s, from Hebrew, literally bastard (used in Vulgate), but modern
usage is a recent borrowing from Yiddish.


Mona

fem. proper name, from Irish Muadhnait, diminutive of muadh noble.


Mona Lisa

from 1923, in reference to an enigmatic smile or expression like that in Leonardo DaVinci's
painting. First attested in D.H. Lawrence.


monad (n.)

unity, arithmetical unit, 1610s, from Late Latin monas (genitive monadis), from Greek monas unit,
from monos alone (see mono-). In Leibnitz's philosophy, an ultimate unit of being (1748). Related:
Monadic.


monarch (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French monarque (14c.) or directly from Late Latin monarcha, from Greek
monarkhes one who rules alone (see monarchy). As a type of large butterfly, from 1890.


monarchic (adj.)

from Middle French monarchique, from Greek monarkhikos, from monarkhes (see monarch). Related:
Monarchical (1570s).


monarchism (n.)

from French monarchisme, from monarchie (see monarchy).


monarchist (n.)

1640s, from monarchy + -ist. Related: Monarchistic.


monarchy (n.)

state ruled by monarchical government, mid-14c.; rule by one person, late 14c.; from Old French
monarchie sovereignty, absolute power (13c.), from Late Latin monarchia, from Greek monarkhia
absolute rule, literally ruling of one, from monos alone (see mono-) + arkhein to rule (see archon).


monastery (n.)

c.1400, from Old French monastere monastery (14c.) and directly from Late Latin monasterium, from
Ecclesiastical Greek monasterion a monastery, from monazein to live alone, from monos alone (see
mono-). With suffix -terion place for (doing something). Originally applied to houses of any
religious order, male or female.


monastic (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French monastique monkish, monastic, or directly from Late Latin monasticus,
from Ecclesiastical Greek monastikos solitary, pertaining to a monk, from Greek monazein to live
alone (see monastery). Related: Monastical (c.1400).


monasticism (n.)

1795, from monastic + -ism.


Monday (n.)

second day of the week, Old English mond&aelig;g, monand&aelig;g Monday, literally day of the moon,
from mona (genitive monan; see moon (n.)) + d&aelig;g (see day). Common Germanic (Old Norse
manandagr, Old Frisian monendei, Dutch maandag, German Montag) loan-translation of Late Latin
Lun&aelig; dies, source of the day name in Romance languages (French lundi, Italian lunedi, Spanish
lunes), itself a loan-translation of Greek selenes hemera. The name for this day in Slavic tongues
generally means day after Sunday.    Phrase Monday morning quarterback is attested from 1932, Monday
being the first day back at work after the weekend, when school and college football games were
played. Black Monday (mid-14c.) is the Monday after Easter day, though how it got its reputation for
bad luck is a mystery. Saint Monday (1753) was used with reference to the practice among workmen of
being idle Monday, as a consequence of drunkenness on the Sunday before [OED]. Clergymen, meanwhile,
when indisposed complained of feeling Mondayish (1804) in reference to effects of Sunday's labors.


mondo (adj.)

very much, extreme, 1979, from Italian mondo world, from Mondo cane, 1961 film, literally world for
a dog (English title A Dog's Life), depicting eccentric human behavior; the word was abstracted from
the original title and taken as an intensifier.


monetarist (adj.)

1914, from monetary + -ist. Related Monetarism (1963).


monetary (adj.)

pertaining to money, 1802, from Late Latin monetarius pertaining to money, originally of a mint,
from Latin moneta mint, coinage (see money). Related: Monetarily.


monetise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of monetize; for suffix, see -ize. Related: Monetise; monetising.


monetization (n.)

1864; see monetize + -ation.


monetize (v.)

1880, put into circulation as money, from Latin moneta money (see money) + -ize. Related: Monetized;
monetizing.


money (n.)

mid-13c., coinage, metal currency, from Old French monoie money, coin, currency; change (Modern
French monnaie), from Latin moneta place for coining money, mint; coined money, money, coinage, from
Moneta, a title or surname of the Roman goddess Juno, in or near whose temple money was coined;
perhaps from monere advise, warn (see monitor (n.)), with the sense of admonishing goddess, which is
sensible, but the etymology is difficult. Extended early 19c. to include paper money.    It had been
justly stated by a British writer that the power to make a small piece of paper, not worth one cent,
by the inscribing of a few names, to be worth a thousand dollars, was a power too high to be
entrusted to the hands of mortal man. [John C. Calhoun, speech, U.S. Senate, Dec. 29, 1841]   <hr />
I am not interested in money but in the things of which money is the symbol. [Henry Ford]  To make
money earn pay is first attested mid-15c. Highwayman's threat your money or your life first attested
1841. Phrase in the money (1902) originally meant one who finishes among the prize-winners (in a
horse race, etc.). The challenge to put (one's) money where (one's) mouth is is first recorded 1942,
American English. money-grub one who is sordidly intent on amassing money is from 1768. The image of
money burning a hole in someone's pocket is attested from 1520s.


money-bag (n.)

1560s, from money + bag (n.). Meaning rich person is from 1818. Related: moneybags.


money-maker (n.)

c.1400, one who coins money, from money + maker. Meaning thing which yields profit is from 1899.


moneyed (adj.)

having money, mid-15c., from past participle of Middle English verb monien to supply with money (see
money (n.)).


moneyless (adj.)

mid-14c., from money + -less.


moneyocracy (n.)

1834, from money + -cracy.


mong (prep.)

c.1200, shortened form of among.


monger (n.)

Old English mangere merchant, trader, broker, from mangian to traffic, trade, from Proto-Germanic
*mangojan (cognates: Old Saxon mangon, Old Norse mangari monger, higgler), from Latin mango
(genitive mangonis) dealer, trader, slave-dealer, related to mangonium displaying of wares. Not in
Watkins, but Buck (with Tucker) describes it as one who adorns his wares to give them an appearance
of greater value and writes it is probably a loan-word based on Greek manganon means of charming or
bewitching. Used in comb. form in English since at least 12c.; since 16c. chiefly with overtones of
petty and disreputable.


monger (v.)

1928, from monger (n.). Not considered to be from Old English mangian. Related: Mongered; mongering
(1846).


Mongol

1738 (n.); 1763 (adj.), native name, said to be from mong brave.


Mongolian

1738 (adj.); 1846 (n.), from Mongol + -ian. As a classification for the Asiatic race, it is from
1868.


mongoloid

in reference to the genetic defect causing mental retardation (mongolism), 1899, from Mongoloid. So
called for facial appearance. See Down's Syndrome. Such people were called Mongolian from 1866.


Mongoloid

1868 as a racial designation, from Mongol + -oid.


mongoose (n.)

snake-killing ichneumon of India, 1690s, perhaps via Portuguese, from an Indic language (such as
Mahrathi mangus mongoose), probably ultimately from Dravidian (compare Telugu mangisu, Kanarese
mungisi, Tamil mangus). The form of the English word altered by folk-etymology.


mongrel (n.)

late 15c., mixed-breed dog, from obsolete mong mixture, from Old English gemong mingling (base of
among), from Proto-Germanic *mangjan to knead together (see mingle). With pejorative suffix -rel.
Meaning person not of pure race is from 1540s. As an adjective from 1570s.


monicker (n.)

see moniker.


monies (n.)

irregular plural of money that emerged mid-19c. in rivalry to earlier moneys (c.1300).


moniker (n.)

1849, said to be originally a hobo term (but attested in London underclass from 1851), of uncertain
origin; perhaps from monk (monks and nuns take new names with their vows, and early 19c. British
tramps referred to themselves as in the monkery). Its origins seem always to have been obscure:
Sir H. Rawlinson can decipher cuneiform, but can he tell us why moniker--the word has a certain
Coptic or Egyptian twang--means a name painted on a trunk? [The Saturday Review, Dec. 19, 1857]


monism (n.)

the philosophical doctrine that there is only one principle, 1862, from Modern Latin monismus, from
Greek monos alone (see mono-). First used in German by German philosopher Baron Christian von Wolff
(1679-1754).


monist (n.)

1836, from Greek monos single (see mono-) + -ist. Also see monism. Related: Monistic.


monition (n.)

warning, late 14c., from Old French monition (13c.) and directly from Latin monitionem (nominative
monitio) warning, admonition, reminding, noun of action from past participle stem of monere to warn
(see monitor (n.)).


monitor (n.)

1540s, senior pupil at a school charged with keeping order, etc., from Latin monitor one who
reminds, admonishes, or checks, also an overseer, instructor, guide, teacher, agent noun from monere
to admonish, warn, advise, related to memini I remember, I am mindful of, and to mens mind, from PIE
root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).    The type of lizard so called because it is supposed to give
warning of crocodiles (1826). Meaning squat, slow-moving type of ironclad warship (1862) so called
from name of the first vessel of this design, chosen by the inventor, Swedish-born U.S. engineer
John Ericsson (1803-1889), because it was meant to admonish the Confederate leaders in the U.S.
Civil War. Broadcasting sense of a device to continuously check on the technical quality of a
transmission (1931) led to special sense of a TV screen displaying the picture from a particular
camera.


monitor (v.)

1818, to guide; 1924, to check for quality (originally especially of radio signals), from monitor
(n.). General sense from 1944. Related: Monitored; monitoring.


monitory (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin monitorius admonishing, from monitus, past participle of monere (see monitor
(n.)).


monk (n.)

Old English munuc monk (used also of women), from Proto-Germanic *muniko- (cognates: Old Frisian
munek, Middle Dutch monic, Old High German munih, German M&ouml;nch), an early borrowing from Vulgar
Latin *monicus (source of French moine, Spanish monje, Italian monaco), from Late Latin monachus
monk, originally religious hermit, from Ecclesiastical Greek monakhos monk, noun use of a classical
Greek adjective meaning solitary, from monos alone (see mono-). For substitution of -o- for -u-, see
come. In England, before the Reformation, the term was not applied to the members of the mendicant
orders, who were always called friars. From the 16th c. to the 19th c., however, it was usual to
speak of the friars as a class of monks. In recent times the distinction between the terms has been
carefully observed by well-informed writers. In French and Ger. the equivalent of monk is applied
equally to 'monks' and 'friars.' [OED]


monkey (n.)

1520s, likely from an unrecorded Middle Low German *moneke or Middle Dutch *monnekijn, a colloquial
word for monkey, originally a diminutive of some Romanic word, compare French monne (16c.); Middle
Italian monnicchio, from Old Italian monna; Spanish mona ape, monkey. In a 1498 Low German version
of the popular medieval beast story Roman de Renart (Reynard the Fox), Moneke is the name given to
the son of Martin the Ape; transmission of the word to English might have been via itinerant
entertainers from the German states.    The Old French form of the name is Monequin (recorded as
Monnekin in a 14c. version from Hainault), which could be a diminutive of some personal name, or it
could be from the general Romanic word, which may be ultimately from Arabic maimun monkey, literally
auspicious, a euphemistic usage because the sight of apes was held by the Arabs to be unlucky
[Klein]. The word would have been influenced in Italian by folk etymology from monna woman, a
contraction of ma donna my lady.  Monkey has been used affectionately for child since c.1600. As a
type of modern popular dance, it is attested from 1964. Monkey business attested from 1883. Monkey
suit fancy uniform is from 1886. Monkey wrench is attested from 1858; its figurative sense of
something that obstructs operations is from the notion of one getting jammed in the gears of
machinery (compare spanner in the works). To make a monkey of someone is attested from 1900. To have
a monkey on one's back be addicted is 1930s narcotics slang, though the same phrase in the 1860s
meant to be angry. There is a story in the Sinbad cycle about a tormenting ape-like creature that
mounts a man's shoulders and won't get off, which may be the root of the term. In 1890s British
slang, to have a monkey up the chimney meant to have a mortgage on one's house. The three wise
monkeys (see no evil, etc.) are attested from 1926.


monkey (v.)

1859, to mock, mimic, from monkey (n.). Meaning play foolish tricks is from 1881. Related: Monkeyed;
monkeying.


monkey-shines (n.)

also monkeyshines, monkeyish behavior, tricks, antics, 1832 (in the Jim Crow song), from monkey (n.)
+ shine (n.) a caper, trick (1835), from an American English slang sense perhaps related to the
expression cut a shine make a fine impression (1819); see slang senses under shine (n.). For sense
of the whole word, compare Old French singerie disreputable behavior, from singe monkey, ape.


monkish (adj.)

pertaining to a monk, 1540s, from monk (n.) + -ish. Related: Monkishly; monkishness.


monkshood (n.)

also monk's-hood, 1570s, from monk (n.) + hood (n.1). So called for the shape of the flowers.


mono

1959 as a shortening of monophonic; earlier used among printers for monotype machine (c.1925) and
generally for monochrome (motorcar, etc.), 1940s. From 1964 as short for mononucleosis.


mono-

word-forming element meaning one, alone; containing one (atom, etc.), from Greek mono-, comb. form
of monos single, alone, from PIE root *men- small, isolated (cognates: Greek manos rare, sparse,
Armenian manr thin, slender, small, and perhaps English minnow).


monoceros (n.)

c.1300, the unicorn, from Old French monoceros unicorn, from Latin monoceros, from Greek monokeros,
from mono- single (see mono-) + keras horn (see kerato-).    This is a modern constellation,
generally supposed to have been first charted by Bartschius as Unicornu; but Olbers and Ideler say
that it was of much earlier formation, the latter quoting allusions to it, in the work of 1564, as
the other Horse south of the Twins and the Crab; and Scaliger found it on a Persian sphere. [Richard
Hinckley Allen, Star Names and Their Meanings, London: 1899]


monochromatic (adj.)

1807, from mono- + chromatic, or from monochrome + -atic. Related: Monochromatically (1784).


monochrome (n.)

1660s, painting or drawing done in different tints of a single color, from Greek monochromos of a
single color, from monos single, alone (see mono-) + khroma (genitive khromatos) color, complexion,
skin (see chroma). As an adjective from 1849. Photographic sense is recorded from 1940.


monocle (n.)

single eyeglass, 1886, from French monocle, noun use of adjective monocle one-eyed, blind in one eye
(13c.), from Late Latin monoculus one-eyed, from Greek monos single, alone (see mono-) + Latin
oculus eye (see eye (n.)).That this, a hybrid, a Gallicism, and a word with no obvious meaning to
the Englishman who hears it for the first time, should have ousted the entirely satisfactory
eyeglass is a melancholy illustration of the popular taste in language. [Fowler]


monocular (adj.)

1630s, from Late Latin monoculus one-eyed, from Greek monos alone, single (see mono-) + Latin oculus
eye (see eye (n.)).


monoculture (n.)

cultivation of a single crop when others are possible, 1915, from mono- single + culture (n.).


monogamous (adj.)

having but one wife or husband at a time, 1770, from Medieval Latin monogamus, from Greek monogamos
marrying only once (see monogamy).


monogamy (n.)

1610s, from French monogamie, from Late Latin monogamia, from Greek monogamia, from monogamos
marrying only once, from monos single, alone (see mono-) + gamos marriage (see gamete).


monogeny (n.)

theory that humankind originated from a single pair of ancestors, 1865; see mono- + -geny.


monogram (n.)

two or more letters intertwined, 1690s, from French monogramme or directly from Late Latin
monogramma (5c.), from Late Greek monogrammon a character formed of several letters in one design,
especially in reference to the signature of the Byzantine emperors, noun use of neuter of
monogrammos (adj.) consisting of a single letter, literally drawn with single lines, from Greek
monos single, alone (see mono-) + gramma letter, line (see grammar). Earlier it meant sketch or
picture drawn in lines only, without shading or color, a sense also found in Latin and probably in
Greek. Related: Monogrammatic.


monogram (v.)

1868, from monogram (n.). Related: Monogrammed; monogramming.


monograph (n.)

treatise on a single subject, 1821, from mono- + -graph something written. Earlier was monography
(1773).


monokini (n.)

1964, from mono- + bikini, on mistaken notion that the bi- element was the Greek prefix meaning two.


monolith (n.)

column consisting of a single large block of stone, 1848, from French monolithe (16c.), from Latin
monolithus (adj.) consisting of a single stone, from Greek monolithos made of one stone, from monos
single, alone (see mono-) + lithos stone. Transferred and figurative use is from 1934.


monolithic (adj.)

1825, formed of a single block, from monolith + -ic. Figurative use from 1920.


monologue (n.)

1660s, long speech by one person, from French monologue, from Late Greek monologos speaking alone,
from Greek monos single, alone (see mono-) + logos speech, word, from legein to speak (see lecture
(n.)).


monomania (n.)

insanity in regard to a single subect or class of subjects, 1820, probably on model of earlier
French monomanie, from Modern Latin monomania, from Greek monos single, alone (see mono-) + mania
(see mania).


monomaniac (n.)

1833; see monomania + maniac. Related: Monomaniacal.


monomer (n.)

1914, from mono- + Greek meros part (see merit (n.)). Related: Monomerous.


monometallic (adj.)

1877 in currency sense, from mono- + metallic.


mononuclear (adj.)

1886; see mono- + nuclear.


mononucleosis (n.)

1920, coined from mononuclear + Modern Latin -osis abnormal condition.


monophonic (adj.)

of recordings, broadcasts, etc., not stereo, having only one output signal, 1958, coined to be an
opposite of stereophonic; from mono- + -phonic, from Greek phone sound, voice (see fame (n.)).


Monophysite

1690s, from Church Latin Monophysita, from Greek monophysites, from monos single, alone (see mono-)
+ physis nature (see physics). Christian (regarded in the West as a heretic) who believes there is
only one nature in the person of Jesus Christ. Now comprising Coptic, Armenian, Abyssinian and
Jacobite churches.


monoplane (n.)

1907, a hybrid coined from mono- + second element of aeroplane. In old planes the wings formed a
single surface running across the fuselage.


monopolistic (adj.)

1858; see monopoly + -istic.


monopolize (v.)

1610s; see monopoly + -ize. Figurative use from 1620s. Related: Monopolized; monopolizing;
monopolization.


monopoly (n.)

exclusive control of a commodity or trade, 1530s, from Latin monopolium, from Greek monopolion right
of exclusive sale, from mono- + polein to sell, from PIE root *pel- (5) to sell (cognates: Sanskrit
panate barters, purchases, Lithuanian pelnas gain, Old Church Slavonic splenu, Russian polon prey,
booty, Old Norse falr, Dutch veil, German feil for sale, venal).    Alternative form monopole
(1540s, from the Old French form of the word) was common in 16c. The popular board game, invented by
Charles Darrow, is from 1935. Monopoly money unreal currency is attested from 1972, in reference to
the paper used in the game.


monopolylogue (n.)

entertainment in which one actor performs as many characters, 1824, from mono- + poly- + -logue.


monorail (n.)

1897, a hybrid coined from mono- + rail (n.1).


monosyllabic (adj.)

1824, of languages; 1828, of words; 1870, of persons, from monosyllable + -ic. Earlier form was
monosyllabical (1680s, of words). Related: Monosyllabically.


monosyllable (n.)

1530s, from Latin monosyllabus of one syllable, from Greek monosyllabos, from monos single, alone
(see mono-) + syllabe syllable (see syllable).


monotheism (n.)

belief that there is but one god, 1650s, from Greek mono-, comb. form of monos single, alone (see
mono-) + theos a god (see theo-).


monotheist (n.)

1670s, from monotheism + -ist.


monotheistic (adj.)

1846, from monotheist + -ic.


monotone (n.)

unvarying tone in music or speaking, 1640s; see monotony. OED says use of the word as a noun is
peculiar to Eng. Related: Monotonic; monotonically.


monotonous (adj.)

1750, of sound, from Greek monotonos of one tone (see monotony). Transferred and figurative use,
lacking in variety, uninteresting, is from 1783. Related: Monotonously.


monotony (n.)

1706, originally in transferred sense of wearisome, tiresome, from French monotonie (1670s), from
Greek monotonia sameness of tone, monotony, from monotonos monotonous, of one tone, from monos
single, alone (see mono-) + tonos tone (see tenet). Literal sense of sameness of tone or pitch in
English is from 1724.


monotype (n.)

1881 in biology; 1882 in printers' arts; 1893 as a brand name of typesetting machine; see mono- +
type.


monoxide (n.)

oxide with one oxygen atom in each molecule, 1869, from mono- + oxide.


Monroe Doctrine

1848, in reference to principles of policy contained in the message of U.S. President James Monroe
to Congress on Dec. 2, 1823.


mons (n.)

from Latin mons (plural montes) mountain (see mount (n.)); used in English in various anatomical
senses, especially mons Veneris mountains of Love, fleshy eminence atop the vaginal opening, 1690s;
often mons for short.


monseigneur (n.)

c.1600, from French monseigneur (12c.), title of honor equivalent to my lord, from mon my (from
Latin meum) + seigneur lord, from Latin seniorem, accusative of senior older (see senior (adj.)).
Plural messeigneurs.


monsieur (n.)

1510s, from French monsieur, from mon sieur my lord, from sieur lord, shortened form of seigneur
(see monseigneur) It was the historical title for the second son or next younger brother of the king
of France.


monsignor (n.)

title conferred on some prelates, 1640s, from Italian monsignore my lord, formed on model of French
monseigneur (see monseigneur) from equivalent elements in Italian.


monsoon (n.)

1580s, trade wind of the Indian Ocean, from Dutch monssoen, from Portuguese mon&ccedil;ao, from
Arabic mawsim time of year, appropriate season (for a voyage, pilgrimage, etc.), from wasama he
marked. When it blows from the southwest (April through October) it brings heavy rain, hence heavy
episode of rainfall during the rainy season (1747).


monster (n.)

early 14c., malformed animal or human, creature afflicted with a birth defect, from Old French
monstre, mostre monster, monstrosity (12c.), and directly from Latin monstrum divine omen, portent,
sign; abnormal shape; monster, monstrosity, figuratively repulsive character, object of dread, awful
deed, abomination, from root of monere warn (see monitor (n.)). Abnormal or prodigious animals were
regarded as signs or omens of impending evil. Extended by late 14c. to imaginary animals composed of
parts of creatures (centaur, griffin, etc.). Meaning animal of vast size is from 1520s; sense of
person of inhuman cruelty or wickedness is from 1550s. As an adjective, of extraordinary size, from
1837. In Old English, the monster Grendel was an agl&aelig;ca, a word related to agl&aelig;c
calamity, terror, distress, oppression.


monstrosity (n.)

1550s, abnormality of growth, from Late Latin monstrositas strangeness, from Latin monstrosus, a
collateral form of monstruosus (source of French monstruosit&eacute;); see monster. Earlier form was
monstruosity (c.1400). Sense of quality of being monstrous is first recorded 1650s. Meaning a
monster is attested from 1640s.


monstrous (adj.)

mid-15c., unnatural, deviating from the natural order, hideous, from Middle French monstrueux, from
Latin monstruosus strange, unnatural, monstrous, from monstrum (see monster). Meaning enormous is
from c.1500; that of outrageously wrong is from 1570s. Earlier form monstruous (late 14c., from Old
French monstruous) was very common in the 16th c. [OED].


montage (n.)

1929, from French montage a mounting, from Old French monter to go up, mount (see mount (v.)).
Originally a term in cinematography.


montagnard (n.)

mountaineer, highlander, 1842, from French montagnard, from montagne (12c., see mountain).


Montana

U.S. state, from Latinized form of Spanish monta&ntilde;a mountain, from Latin mont-, stem of mons
(see mountain). Proposed 1864 by U.S. Rep. James H. Ashley of Ohio when it was created as a
territory from Nebraska Territory, in reference to the Rocky Mountains, which however traverse only
one end of it. Admitted as a state 1889. Related: Montanan.


Montanist (n.)

mid-15c., millenarian and severely ascetic sect that believed in continual direct inspiration of the
spirit and offered prominent church roles to women, from Montanus, Christian-inspired prophet in the
wilds of Phrygia c.160 C.E. The heresy persisted into the 6c. and helped bring prophecy into
disrepute in the established Church. Related: Montanism.


monte (n.)

gambling card game, 1824, from Spanish monte mountain, from Latin montem (nominative mons), see
mount (n.). So called from the heap of cards left after dealing. A favorite in California during the
gold rush years. The three-card form (first attested 1877) is of Mexican origin.


Monte Carlo

Italian, literally Charles's Mountain, founded 1866 and named for Charles III of Monaco (1818-1889).
The car rally there dates to 1911.


Monte Carlo fallacy

1957, named for resort in Monaco famous for its gambling casinos. The fallacy of thinking that the
probability of a particular outcome rises with the successive number of opposite outcomes. Contrary
to the Monte Carlo fallacy, if the roulette wheel stops on black 99 times in a row, the chances that
the 100th spin will be red are still just under 50-50.


Montenegro

Adriatic coastal nation, from Venetian Italian (Tuscan monte nero), literally black mountain, a
loan-translation of the local Slavonic name, Crnagora. Related: Montenegrine.


Monterey

city in California, U.S., formerly the Spanish Pacific capital, named for the bay, which was named
1603 for Spanish colonist and viceroy of New Spain Conde de Monterrey. The Monterrey in Mexico also
is named for him.


Montessori

1912, in reference to the system of education through free but guided play, devised 1907 by Italian
educationist Maria Montessori (1870-1952).


Montezuma&#039;s revenge

severe intestinal infection, such as often suffered by non-natives in Mexico, 1962, in reference to
Montezuma II (1466-1520), Aztec ruler at the time of the Spanish conquest of Mexico.


month (n.)

Old English mona&eth;, from Proto-Germanic *menoth- (cognates: Old Saxon manoth, Old Frisian monath,
Middle Dutch manet, Dutch maand, Old High German manod, German Monat, Old Norse mana&eth;r, Gothic
meno&thorn;s month), related to *menon- moon (see moon (n.); the month was calculated from lunar
phases). Its cognates mean only month in the Romance languages, but in Germanic generally continue
to do double duty. Phrase a month of Sundays a very long time is from 1832 (roughly 7 and a half
months, but never used literally).


monthly (adv.)

1530s, from month + -ly (2). As an adjective from 1570s. Old English had mona&#254;lic, but the
modern words seem to be separate formations.


Montmartre

district in Paris, from Latin Mons Martyrum Martyrs' Mount, in reference to St. Denis, first bishop
of Paris, beheaded here with two companions in 258. The older name was Mons Mercurii.


Montreal

city in Canada, originally Ville Marie de Montr&#233;al, settled by the French 1642, named for the
hill on which it was built, Mont R&#233;al, in French literally royal mount; named 1534 by Jacques
Cartier in honor of Francis I. Related: Montrealer.


monument (n.)

late 13c., a sepulchre, from Old French monument grave, tomb, monument, and directly from Latin
monumentum a monument, memorial structure, statue; votive offering; tomb; memorial record, literally
something that reminds, from monere to remind, warn (see monitor (n.)). Sense of structure or
edifice to commemorate a notable person, action, or event first attested c.1600.


monumental (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to a monument, from Late Latin monumentalis pertaining to a monument, from
monumentum (see monument). From 1650s in the loose sense of vast, stupendous. Related: Monumentally.


monumentalize (v.)

1857, from monmental + -ize. Related: Monumentalized; monumentalizing.


moo (v.)

to make the characteristic sound of a cow, 1540s, of imitative origin. Related: Mooed; mooing. The
noun is from 1789. Baby-talk moo-cow (n.) attested from 1812.


mooch (v.)

mid-15c., pretend poverty, probably from Old French muchier, mucier to hide, sulk, conceal, hide
away, keep out of sight, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Celtic or Germanic (Liberman prefers the
latter, Klein the former). Or the word may be a variant of Middle English mucchen to hoard, be
stingy (c.1300), probably originally to keep coins in one's nightcap, from mucche nightcap, from
Middle Dutch muste cap, nightcap, ultimately from Medieval Latin almucia, of unknown origin. Sense
of sponge off others first recorded 1857.    Whatever the distant origin of mooch, the verb *mycan
and its cognates have been part of European slang for at least two millennia. [Liberman]    Related:
Mooched; mooching. As a noun meaning a moocher, from 1914.


moocher (n.)

beggar, scrounger, 1857, agent noun from mooch (v.).


mood (n.1)

emotional condition, frame of mind, Old English mod heart, frame of mind, spirit; courage,
arrogance, pride; power, violence, from Proto-Germanic *motha- (cognates: Old Saxon mod mind,
courage, Old Frisian mod intellect, mind, intention, Old Norse mo&eth;r wrath, anger, Middle Dutch
moet, Dutch moed, Old High German muot, German Mut courage, Gothic mo&thorn;s courage, anger), of
unknown origin.    A much more vigorous word in Anglo-Saxon than currently, and used widely in
compounds (such as modcr&aelig;ftig intelligent, modful proud). To be in the mood willing (to do
something) is from 1580s. First record of mood swings is from 1942.


mood (n.2)

grammatical form indicating the function of a verb, 1560s, an alteration of mode (n.1), but the
grammatical and musical (1590s) usages of it influenced the meaning of mood (n.1) in phrases such as
light-hearted mood.


moodiness (n.)

Old English modignes pride, passion, anger; see moody + -ness. Meaning condition of being moody is
from 1858.


moody (adj.)

Old English modig brave, proud, high-spirited, impetuous, arrogant, from Proto-Germanic *modago-
(cognates: Old Saxon modag, Dutch moedig, German mutig, Old Norse mo&#240;ugr); see mood (1) + -y
(2). Meaning subject to gloomy spells is first recorded 1590s (via a Middle English sense of angry).


Moog (n.)

1969, from R.A. Moog, U.S. engineer who invented it.


moolah (n.)

also moola, money, c.1920, American English slang, of unknown origin.


moon (n.)

Old English mona, from Proto-Germanic *menon- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German mano, Old
Frisian mona, Old Norse mani, Danish maane, Dutch maan, German Mond, Gothic mena moon), from PIE
*me(n)ses- moon, month (cognates: Sanskrit masah moon, month; Avestan ma, Persian mah, Armenian mis
month; Greek mene moon, men month; Latin mensis month; Old Church Slavonic meseci, Lithuanian
menesis moon, month; Old Irish mi, Welsh mis, Breton miz month), probably from root *me- to measure,
in reference to the moon's phases as the measure of time.    A masculine noun in Old English. In
Greek, Italic, Celtic, Armenian the cognate words now mean only month. Greek selene (Lesbian
selanna) is from selas light, brightness (of heavenly bodies). Old Norse also had tungl moon,
(replacing mani in prose - Buck), evidently an older Germanic word for heavenly body, cognate with
Gothic tuggl, Old English tungol heavenly body, constellation, of unknown origin or connection.
Hence Old Norse tunglfylling lunation, tungl&#339;rr lunatic (adj.).    Extended 1665 to satellites
of other planets. To shoot the moon leave without paying rent is British slang from c.1823; card-
playing sense perhaps influenced by gambler's shoot the works (1922) go for broke in shooting dice.
The moon race and the U.S. space program of the 1960s inspired a number of coinages, including, from
those skeptical of the benefits to be gained, moondoggle (based on boondoggle). The man in the moon
is mentioned since early 14c.; he carries a bundle of thorn-twigs and is accompanied by a dog. Some
Japanese, however, see a rice-cake-making rabbit in the moon.


moon (v.)

c.1600, to expose to moonlight; later idle about (1836), move listlessly (1848), probably on notion
of being moonstruck. The meaning to flash the buttocks is first recorded 1968, U.S. student slang,
from moon (n.) buttocks (1756), probably from the idea of pale circularity [Ayto]. See moon (n.).
Related: Mooned; mooning.


moon-calf (n.)

also mooncalf, abortive, shapeless, fleshy mass, 1560s, attributed to the influence of the moon;
from moon (n.) + calf (n.). In later 16c., deformed creature, monster.


moon-dog (n.)

one who bays at the moon, 1660s, from moon (n.) + dog (n.). Earlier in same sense was mooner
(1570s).


moon-shot (n.)

1958, from moon (n.) + shot (n.).


moon-up (n.)

moonrise, U.S. dialectal, 1907, from moon (n.) + rise (n.).


moonbeam (n.)

1580s, from moon (n.) + beam (n.).


moonglow (n.)

1926, from moon (n.) + glow (n.).


Moonie (n.)

1974, a member of the Unification Church, headed by Sun Myung Moon.


moonless (adj.)

c.1500, from moon (n.) + -less.


moonlight (v.)

hold a second job, especially at night, 1957 (implied in moonlighting), from moonlighter (1954),
from the notion of working by the light of the moon; see moonlight (n.). Related: Moonlighting.
Earlier the word had been used to mean commit crimes at night (1882).


moonlight (n.)

light of the moon, mid-14c., from moon (n.) + light (n.).


moonlit (adj.)

1830 (first attested in Tennyson), from moon (n.) + lit.


moonrace (n.)

also moon race, national rivalry to be first to send humans to the moon, 1963, from moon (n.) + race
(n.1).


moonraker (n.)

in England, a name traditionally given to Wiltshire people, attested from 1787, is from the stock
joke about fools who mistook the reflection of the moon in a pond for a cheese and tried to rake it
out. But as told in Wiltshire, the men were surprised trying to rake up kegs of smuggled brandy, and
put off the revenuers by acting foolish.


moonrise (n.)

1728, from moon (n.) + rise (n.).


moonscape (n.)

1926, from moon (n.) + scape (n.1).


moonshine (n.)

c.1500, moonlight, from moon (n.) + shine (n.). In figurative use, implying appearance without
substance, from late 15c.; perhaps connected in that sense with notion of moonshine in water (see
moonraker). Meaning illicit liquor is attested from 1785 (earliest reference is to that smuggled on
the coasts of Kent and Sussex); moonlight also occasionally was used in this sense early 19c. As a
verb from 1883. Related: Moonshiner (1860).


moonstruck (adj.)

1670s, from moon (n.) + struck (see strike (v.)). Compare Greek selenobletos. For sense, see moon
(v.). Perhaps coined by Milton.


moonwalk (n.)

a walking on the moon, 1966, from moon (n.) + walk (n.).


moony (adj.)

1580s, like the moon; 1848, dreamy, listless, from moon (n.) + -y (2). Also see moon (v.).


moor (v.)

to fasten (a vessel) by a cable, late 15c., probably related to Old English m&aelig;rels mooring
rope, via unrecorded *m&aelig;rian to moor, or possibly borrowed from Middle Low German moren or
Middle Dutch maren to moor, from West Germanic *mairojan. Related: Moored, mooring. French amarrer
is from Dutch.


moor (n.)

waste ground, Old English mor morass, swamp, from Proto-Germanic *mora- (cognates: Old Saxon, Middle
Dutch, Dutch meer swamp, Old High German muor swamp, also sea, German Moor moor, Old Norse m&ouml;rr
moorland, marr sea), perhaps related to mere (n.), or from root *mer- to die, hence dead land.
The basic sense in place names is 'marsh', a kind of low-lying wetland possibly regarded as less
fertile than mersc 'marsh.' The development of the senses 'dry heathland, barren upland' is not
fully accounted for but may be due to the idea of infertility. [Cambridge Dictionary of English
Place-Names]


Moor (n.)

North African, Berber, late 14c., from Old French More, from Medieval Latin Morus, from Latin Maurus
inhabitant of Mauritania (northwest Africa, a region now corresponding to northern Algeria and
Morocco), from Greek Mauros, perhaps a native name, or else cognate with mauros black (but this
adjective only appears in late Greek and may as well be from the people's name as the reverse).
Being a dark people in relation to Europeans, their name in the Middle Ages was a synonym for Negro;
later (16c.-17c.) used indiscriminately of Muslims (Persians, Arabs, etc.) but especially those in
India.


mooreeffoc (n.)

coffee-room, viewed from the inside through a glass door, as it was seen by Dickens on a dark London
day; ... used by Chesterton to denote the queerness of things that have become trite, when they are
seen suddenly from a new angle. [J.R.R. Tolkien]


mooring (n.)

place where a vessel can be moored, early 15c., process of making a ship secure, verbal noun from
moor (v.).


moorings (n.)

1744, ropes, etc., by which a floating thing is made fast, from mooring. Figurative sense is from
1851.


Moorish (adj.)

of or pertaining to Moors, mid-15c., from Moor + -ish.


moorland (n.)

Old English morlond; see moor (n.) + land (n.).


moose (n.)

1610s, from an Algonquian language, probably  Narragansett moos or Abenaki moz (compare Penobscot
muns, Ojibwa mooz, Unami Delaware /mo:s/), said by early sources to be from moosu he strips off, in
reference to the animals' stripping bark for food.


moot (n.)

assembly of freemen, mid-12c., from Old English gemot meeting (especially of freemen, to discuss
community affairs or mete justice), society, assembly, council, from Proto-Germanic *ga-motan
(compare Old Low Frankish muot encounter, Middle Dutch moet, Middle High German muoz), from
collective prefix *ga- + *motan (see meet (v.)).


moot (adj.)

debatable; not worth considering from moot case, earlier simply moot (n.) discussion of a
hypothetical law case (1530s), in law student jargon. The reference is to students gathering to test
their skills in mock cases.


moot (v.)

to debate, Old English motian to meet, talk, discuss, from mot (see moot (n.)). Related: Mooted;
mooting.


mop (n.)

late 15c., mappe bundle of yarn, etc., fastened to the end of a stick for cleaning or spreading
pitch on a ship's decks, from Walloon (French) mappe napkin, from Latin mappa napkin (see map (n.)).
Modern spelling by 1660s. Of hair, from 1847. Grose [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, Grose, 1788]
has mopsqueezer A maid servant, particularly a housemaid.


mop (v.)

1709, from mop (n.). Related: Mopped; mopping.


mope (v.)

1560s, to move and act unconsciously; 1580s, to be listless and apathetic, the sound of the word
perhaps somehow suggestive of low feelings (compare Low German mopen to sulk, Dutch moppen to
grumble, to grouse, Danish maabe, dialectal Swedish mopa to mope). Related: Moped; moping; mopey;
mopish.


moped (n.)

1956, from Swedish (c.1952), from (trampcykel med) mo(tor och) ped(aler) pedal cycle with engine and
pedals (the earliest versions had auxiliary pedals). Compare obsolete English mo-bike (1925), from
motor bicycle.


moppet (n.)

endearing term for a baby, a girl, etc., c.1600, from Middle English moppe little child, baby doll
(mid-15c.) + -et, diminutive suffix. The Middle English word also meant simpleton, fool, and may
have been cognate with Low German mop simpleton [Barnhart]. Or, if baby doll is the original sense
in Middle English, perhaps from Latin mappa napkin, tablecloth, hence rag doll.


mopstick (n.)

1710, from mop (n.) + stick (n.).


moraine (n.)

ridge of rock deposited by a glacier, 1789, from French moraine (18c.), from Savoy dialect morena
mound of earth, from Proven&ccedil;al morre snout, muzzle, from Vulgar Latin *murrum round object,
of unknown origin, perhaps from a pre-Latin Alpine language. Related: Morainal; morainic.


moral (adj.)

mid-14c., pertaining to character or temperament (good or bad), from Old French moral (14c.) and
directly from Latin moralis proper behavior of a person in society, literally pertaining to manners,
coined by Cicero (De Fato, II.i) to translate Greek ethikos (see ethics) from Latin mos (genitive
moris) one's disposition, in plural, mores, customs, manners, morals, of uncertain origin. Perhaps
sharing a PIE root with English mood (n.1).    Meaning morally good, conforming to moral rules, is
first recorded late 14c. of stories, 1630s of persons. Original value-neutral sense preserved in
moral support, moral victory (with sense of pertaining to character as opposed to physical action).
Related: Morally.


moral (n.)

moral exposition of a story, c.1500, from moral (adj.) and from French moral and Late Latin morale.


morale (n.)

1752, moral principles or practice, from French morale morality, good conduct, from fem. of Old
French moral moral (see moral (adj.)). Meaning confidence (especially in a military context) first
recorded 1831, from confusion with French moral (French distinguishes le moral temperament and la
morale morality).


moralist (n.)

moral person, 1620s; teacher of morals, 1630s, from moral (adj.) + -ist.


moralistic (adj.)

1845; from moralist + -ic. Related: Moralistically.


morality (n.)

late 14c., moral qualities, from Old French moralit&eacute; moral (of a story); moral instruction;
morals, moral character (13c.) and directly from Late Latin moralitatem (nominative moralitas)
manner, character, from Latin moralis (see moral (adj.)). Meaning goodness is attested from
1590s.Where there is no free agency, there can be no morality. Where there is no temptation, there
can be little claim to virtue.  Where the routine is rigorously proscribed by law, the law, and not
the man, must have the credit of the conduct. [William H. Prescott, History of the Conquest of Peru,
1847]


moralize (v.)

c.1400, expound or interpret spiritual or moral significance, from Old French moraliser and directly
from Late Latin moralizare, from moralis (see moral (adj.)). Related: Moralized; moralizing.


morals (n.)

a person's moral qualities, 1610s, plural of moral (n.).


morass (n.)

wet, swampy tract, 1650s, from Dutch moeras marsh, fen, from Middle Dutch marasch, from Old French
marais marsh, from Frankish, possibly from West Germanic *marisk, from Proto-Germanic *mariskaz like
a lake, from *mari sea (see mere (n.)). The word was influenced in Dutch by moer moor (see moor
(n.)). Figurative use is attested from 1867. Replaced earlier mareis (early 14c.; see marish).


moratoria (n.)

Latin plural of moratorium.


moratorium (n.)

1875, originally a legal term for authorization to a debtor to postpone payment, from neuter of Late
Latin moratorius tending to delay, from Latin morari to delay, from mora pause, delay, from PIE
*mere- to hinder, delay. The word didn't come out of italics until 1914. General sense of a
postponement, deliberate temporary suspension is first recorded 1932. Related: Moratorial.


Moravia

region in central Europe, Medieval Latin, named for River Morva (German March, Latin Marus), which
runs through it.


Moravian

1550s (n.); 1610s (adj.), from Moravia. From 1746, in reference to the Protestant sect founded in
the former German state of Moravia (now in Czech Republic). Related: Moravianism.


moray (n.)

1620s, from Portuguese moreia, from Latin muraena sea eel, lamprey, from Greek smyraina, from smyros
sea eel.


morbid (adj.)

1650s, of the nature of a disease, indicative of a disease, from Latin morbidus diseased, from
morbus sickness, disease, ailment, illness, from root of mori to die, which is possibly from PIE
root *mer- to rub, pound, wear away (cognates: Sanskrit mrnati crushes, bruises; Greek marainein to
consume, exhaust, put out, quench, marasmus consumption). Transferred use, of mental states, is from
1777. Related: Morbidly; morbidness.


morbidity (n.)

1721, from morbid + -ity.


mordacious (adj.)

given to biting, 1640s (originally figurative), from Latin mordac-, stem of mordax, from mordere to
bite, perhaps from PIE root mer- (2) to rub, harm (see smart (v.)). Related: Mordacity.


mordant (adj.)

late 15c., caustic (of words, speech), from Middle French mordant, literally biting, present
participle of mordre to bite, from Latin mordere to bite, bite into; nip, sting; figuratively to
pain, cause hurt, perhaps from PIE root mer- (2) to rub away, harm (see smart (v.)). Related:
Mordantly. The noun sense in dyeing is first recorded 1791; the adjective in this sense is from
1902. Related: Mordancy; mordantly.


Mordecai

masc. proper name, biblical cousin of Esther, from Hebrew Mordekhay, from Akkad. Marduk, chief god
of the city of Babylon.


more (adj.)

Old English mara greater, more, stronger, mightier, used as a comparative of micel great (see
mickle), from Proto-Germanic *maizon- (cognates: Old Saxon mera, Old Norse meiri, Old Frisian mara,
Middle Dutch mere, Old High German mero, German mehr), from PIE *meis- (cognates: Avestan mazja
greater, Old Irish mor great, Welsh mawr great, Greek -moros great, Oscan mais more), from root *me-
big. Sometimes used as an adverb in Old English (in addition), but Old English generally used
related ma more as adverb and noun. This became Middle English mo, but more in this sense began to
predominate in later Middle English.    Take some more tea, the March Hare said to Alice, very
earnestly.  I've had nothing yet, Alice replied in an offended tone, so I can't take more.  You mean
you can't take less, said the Hatter: it's very easy to take more than nothing.   More or less in a
greater or lesser degree is from early 13c.; appended to a statement to indicate approximation, from
1580s.


morel (n.)

type of edible mushroom, 1670s, from French morille (16c.), of uncertain origin, apparently from
Germanic; compare Old High German morhilo (German Morchel), diminutive of morha root of a tree or
plant, from Proto-Germanic *murhon- (source of Old English more, German m&ouml;hre carrot).


morello (n.)

kind of bitter cherry, 1640s, of uncertain origin, perhaps ultimately from Latin amarus bitter.
Earlier form was morell (1610s).


moreover (adv.)

late 14c., in phrase and yit more ouer there is more to say; from more (adv.) + over (adv.). Written
as one word from late 14c.


mores (n.)

customs, 1907, from Latin mores customs, manners, morals (see moral (adj.)).


Moresco (adj.)

1550s, from Italian moresco, from Moro (see Moor).


Morgan

surname, a very old Celtic name. As a type of horse, 1840, named for Justin Morgan (1747-1798),
Vermont horse-breeder and music teacher; the breed was developed from a stallion he owned.


morganatic (adj.)

1727, from French morganatique (18c.), from Medieval Latin matrimonium ad morganaticam marriage of
the morning, probably from Old High German *morgangeba (Middle High German morgengabe) morning gift,
corresponding to Old English morgengifu (see morn + gift). In an unequal marriage between a man of
royal blood and a common woman, this was a gift traditionally given to the wife on the morning after
consummation, representing the only share she and her children may claim in the husband's estate.
Also known as left-handed marriage, because the groom gives the bride his left hand instead of his
right, but sometimes this latter term is used of a class of marriage (especially in Germany) where
the spouse of inferior rank is not elevated, but the children inherit rights of succession. Related:
Morganatically.


morgen (n.)

old measure of land in Holland (hence also in South Africa and colonial New York and New Jersey),
roughly two acres, probably identical with Dutch morgen morning (see morn) and meaning the amount of
land one man can plow in a morning.


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


moribund (adj.)

1721, about to die, from Middle French moribund (16c.), from Latin moribundus dying, at the point of
death, from mori to die (see mortal (adj.)). Figurative sense of near an end is from 1837. Related:
Moribundity.


Morisco (adj.)

1550s, from Spanish morisco, from Moro (see Moor).


morituri te salutant

Latin, literally those about to die salute you, words addressed to emperor by gladiators upon
entering the arena. Third person singular is moriturus te salutat, first person singular is
moriturus te saluto.


Mormon (n.)

1830, coined by religion founder Joseph Smith (1805-1844) in Seneca County, N.Y., from Mormon,
supposed prophet and author of The Book of Mormon, explained by Smith as meaning more mon, from
English more + Egyptian mon good. As an adjective by 1842. Related: Mormonism.


morn (n.)

contracted from Middle English morwen, from Old English (Mercian) margen (dative marne), earlier
morgen (dative morgne) morning, forenoon, sunrise, from Proto-Germanic *murgana- morning (cognates:
Old Saxon morgan, Old Frisian morgen, Middle Dutch morghen, Dutch morgen, Old High German morgan,
German Morgen, Gothic maurgins), from PIE *merk-, perhaps from root *mer- to blink, twinkle (source
of Lithuanian mirgeti to blink).


morning (n.)

mid-13c., morn, morewen (see morn) + suffix -ing, on pattern of evening. Originally the time just
before sunrise. As an adjective from 1530s. Morning after in reference to a hangover is from 1884;
in reference to a type of contraception, attested from 1867. Morning sickness as a symptom of
pregnancy is from 1793 (Old English had morgenwl&aelig;tung). Morning glory is from 1814, in
reference to the time the flowers open. Morning star Venus in the east before sunrise is from 1530s
(Old English had morgensteorra morn-star). As a greeting, short for good morning, attested by 1895.


Moro

Muslim Malay of the Philippines, 1886, from Spanish Moro, literally Moor (see Moor).


morocco (n.)

kind of fine flexible leather, 1630s, earlier maroquin (16c.), via French; ultimately from Morocco,
the country in northwest Africa, where the tanned leather first was made.


Morocco

country in northwest Africa, from Italian, from Berber Marrakesh (properly the name of the city of
Marrakesh), from Arabic Maghrib-al-Aqsa Extreme West. Compare French Maroc, German Marokko. In
English, the first vowel has been altered, apparently by influence of Moor. Related: Moroccan.


moron (n.)

1910, medical Latin, from Greek (Attic) moron, neuter of moros foolish, dull, sluggish, stupid,
probably cognate with Sanskrit murah idiotic. Latin morus foolish is a loan-word from Greek. Adopted
by the American Association for the Study of the Feeble-minded with a technical definition adult
with a mental age between 8 and 12; used as an insult since 1922 and subsequently dropped from
technical use. Linn&aelig;us had introduced morisis idiocy.    The feeble-minded may be divided
into: (1) Those who are totally arrested before the age of three so that they show the attainment of
a two-year-old child or less; these are the idiots. (2) Those so retarded that they become
permanently arrested between the ages of three and seven; these are imbeciles. (3) Those so retarded
that they become arrested between the ages of seven and twelve; these were formerly called feeble-
minded, the same term that is applied to the whole group. We are now proposing to call them morons,
this word being the Greek for fool. The English word fool as formerly used describes exactly this
grade of child--one who is deficient in judgment or sense. [Henry H. Goddard, in Journal of
Proceedings and Addresses of the National Education Association of the United States, July 1910]


moronic (adj.)

1911, from moron + -ic. Related: Moronically.


morose (adj.)

1530s gloomy, from Latin morosus morose, peevish, hypercritical, fastidious, from mos (genitive
moris) habit, custom (see moral (adj.)). In English, manners by itself means (good) manners, but
here the implication in Latin is (bad) manners. Related: Morosity.


morosely (adv.)

1650s, from morose + -ly (2).


moroseness (n.)

1660s, from morose + -ness. Earlier in the same sense was morosity (1530s), from Middle French
morosit&#233;, from Latin morositas.


morph

as a noun, in biology, 1955; as a verb, in cinematic special effects, c.1987, short for
metamorphosis. Related: Morphed; morphing. Earlier it was a slang shortening of morphine (1912).


morpheme (n.)

smallest meaningful unit in a language, 1896, from German morpheme, coined 1895 by Polish-born
linguist Jan Baudouin de Courtenay (1845-1929), from Greek morphe form, shape (see Morpheus), on
analogy of phon&egrave;me.


Morpheus

name for the god of dreams in Ovid, son of Sleep, literally the maker of shapes, from Greek morphe
form, shape, figure, especially a fine figure, a beautiful form; beauty, fashion, outward
appearance, perhaps from PIE *merph-, a possible Greek root meaning form. Related: Morphean. Morpho
was an epithet of Aphrodite, literally shapely.


morphic (adj.)

1826, from Greek morphe form, shape (see Morpheus) + -ic.


morphine (n.)

chief alkaloid of opium, 1828, from French morphine or German Morphin (1816), name coined by German
apothecary Friedrich Sert&#252;rner (1783-1840) in reference to Latin Morpheus, Ovid's name for the
god of dreams, from Greek morphe form, shape, beauty, outward appearance, perhaps from PIE *merph-,
a possible Greek root meaning form, of unknown origin. So called because of the drug's sleep-
inducing properties.


morphinomania (n.)

mad craving for morphine, 1882; see morphine + mania.


morpho-

before vowels morph-, word-forming element meaning form, shape, from comb. form of Greek morphe
form, shape; beauty, outward appearance (see Morpheus).


morphodite (n.)

1839, colloquial mangling of hermaphrodite. An earlier mangling was mophrodite (1706); also see
dyke.


morphogenesis (n.)

1863 in biology; 1958 in geology; from morpho- + genesis. Related: Morphogenetic.


morphology (n.)

1824 in biology (from German Morphologie, 1817); 1869 in philology; from morpho- + -logy. Related:
Morphological; morphologist. Related: Morphologist.


morphosis (n.)

mode of formation, Modern Latin, from Greek morphosis a forming, shaping, from morphe form, shape;
outward appearance (see Morpheus).


Morris

surname and masc. proper name, in some cases representing Maurice (common form Morice, or a
nickname, Moorish, for onme who is swarthy. As a style of furniture, wallpaper, etc., 1880, in
reference to poet and craftsman William Morris (1834-1896).


morris dance (n.)

mid-15c., moreys daunce Moorish dance, from Flemish mooriske dans, from Old French morois Moorish,
Arab, black, from More Moor (see Moor). Unknown why the English dance was called this, unless in
reference to fantastic dancing or costumes (compare Italian Moresco, a related dance, literally
Moorish; German moriskentanz, French moresque).


morrow (n.)

mid-13c., morewe-; c.1300, morwe, shortened variation of morewen morrow (see morn).


Morse code (n.)

1867, earlier Morse key (1858), in honor of Samuel F.B. Morse (1791-1872), U.S. inventor who
produced a system of telegraphic communication 1836. He invented both the recording telegraph and
the alphabet of dots and dashes.


morsel (n.)

late 13c., a bite, mouthful; small piece, fragment, from Old French morsel (Modern French morceau)
small bite, portion, helping, diminutive of mors a bite, from Latin morsus biting, a bite, neuter
past participle of mordere to bite (see mordant).


mort (n.1)

girl, woman (especially one of loose morals), 1560s, canting jargon, of unknown origin.


mort (n.2)

note sounded on a horn at the death of the quarry, c.1500, from French mort dead, from Latin mortem
(source of Spanish muerte, Italian morte), accusative of mors death (see mortal (adj.)). Or from
French mort dead, from Vulgar Latin *mortus, from Latin mortuus.


mortal (adj.)

mid-14c., deadly, also doomed to die, from Old French mortel destined to die; deserving of death,
from Latin mortalis subject to death, mortal, of a mortal, human, from mors (genitive mortis) death,
from PIE base *mer- to die, with derivatives referring to death and human beings (cognates: Sanskrit
mrtih death, martah mortal man; Avestan miryeite dies, Old Persian martiya- man; Armenian meranim
die; Latin mori to die; Lithuanian mirtis mortal man; Greek brotos mortal (hence ambrotos immortal);
Old Church Slavonic mrutvu dead; Old Irish marb, Welsh marw died; Old English mor&thorn; murder).
The most widespread Indo-European root for to die, forming the common word for it except in Greek
and Germanic. Watkins says it is possibly the same as PIE *mer- rub, pound, wear away (see morbid).


mortal (n.)

mortal thing or substance, 1520s, from mortal (adj.). Latin mortalis also was used as a noun, a man,
mortal, human being.


mortality (n.)

mid-14c., condition of being mortal, from Old French mortalite massacre, slaughter; fatal illness;
poverty; destruction (12c.), from Latin mortalitem (nominative mortalitas) state of being mortal;
subjection to death, from mortalis (see mortal (adj.)). Meaning widespread death is from c.1400;
meaning number of deaths from some cause or in a given period is from 1640s.


mortally (adv.)

late 14c., to the death; resulting in death, also bitterly, intensely, from mortal (adj.) + -ly (2).


mortar (n.1)

mixture of cement, late 13c., from Old French mortier builder's mortar, plaster; bowl for mixing
(13c.), from Latin mortarium mortar, also crushed drugs, probably the same word as mortarium bowl
for mixing or pounding (see mortar (n.2)). Dutch mortel, German M&#246;rtel are from Latin or
French.


mortar (n.2)

bowl for pounding, c.1300, from Old French mortier bowl; builder's mortar, from Latin mortarium bowl
for mixing or pounding, also material prepared in it, of unknown origin and impossible now to
determine which sense was original (Watkins says probably from PIE root *mer- to rub away, harm; see
morbid). Late Old English had mortere, from the same Latin source, which might also be a source of
the modern word. German M&#246;rser also is from Latin.


mortar (n.3)

short cannon, 1550s, originally mortar-piece, from Middle French mortier short cannon, in Old
French, bowl for mixing or pounding (see mortar (n.2)). So called for its shape.


mortarboard (n.)

also mortar-board, academic cap, 1854, probably from mortar (1) + board (n.1); so called because it
resembles a mason's square board for carrying mortar.  Earlier it was called a mortar cap (1680s) or
simply morter (c.1600), from French mortier.


mortgage (n.)

late 14c., morgage, conveyance of property as security for a loan or agreement, from Old French
morgage (13c.), mort gaige, literally dead pledge (replaced in modern Frech by hypoth&egrave;que),
from mort dead (see mortal (adj.)) + gage pledge (see wage (n.)). So called because the deal dies
either when the debt is paid or when payment fails. Old French mort is from Vulgar Latin *mortus
dead, from Latin mortuus, past participle of mori to die (see mortal (adj.)). The -t- restored in
English based on Latin.


mortgage (v.)

late 15c., from mortgage (n.). Related: Mortgaged; mortgaging.


mortgagee (n.)

1580s, from mortgage (v.) + -ee.


mortgagor (n.)

1580s, agent noun in Latin form from mortgage (v.). Native form mortgager attested from 1630s.


mortician (n.)

1895, American English, coined from mortuary + -ician, as in physician.An undertaker will no longer
be known as an undertaker and embalmer. In the future he will be known as the mortician. This was
decided on at the second day's meeting of the Funeral Directors' Association of Kentucky, which was
held in Louisville. [The Medical Herald, July 1895]


mortification (n.)

late 14c., mortifying the flesh, suppression of bodily desires, from Late Latin mortificationem
(nominative mortificatio) a killing, putting to death, from past participle stem of mortificare (see
mortify). Sense of feeling of humiliation first recorded 1640s.


mortified (adj.)

deeply humiliated, 1717, past participle adjective from mortify.


mortify (v.)

late 14c., to kill, from Old French mortefiier destroy, overwhelm, punish, from Late Latin
mortificare cause death, kill, put to death, literally make dead, from mortificus producing death,
from Latin mors (genitive mortis) death (see mortal (adj.)) + root of facere to make (see
factitious). Religious sense of to subdue the flesh by abstinence and discipline first attested
early 15c. Sense of humiliate first recorded 1690s (compare mortification). Related: Mortified;
mortifying.


Mortimer

masc. proper name and surname, from Mortemer, name of a place in Normandy.


mortise (n.)

c.1400, hole or groove in which something is fitted to form a joint, from Old French mortaise
(13c.), possibly from Arabic murtazz fastened, past participle of razza cut a mortise in. Compare
Spanish mortaja.


mortise (v.)

mid-15c., from mortise (n.). Related: Mortised; mortising.


mortmain (n.)

inalienable ownership, mid-15c., from Anglo-French morte mayn, Old French mortemain, literally dead
hand, from Medieval Latin mortua manus; see mortal (adj.) + manual (adj.). Probably a metaphorical
expression.


Morton

surname, from the many Mortons on the map of England, literally moor or marsh settlement. Morton's
Fork (1759) is in reference to John Morton (c.1420-1500), archbishop of Canterbury, who levied
forced loans under Henry VII by arguing the obviously rich could afford to pay and the obviously
poor clearly were living frugally and thus had savings and could pay, too.


mortuary (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French mortuarie gift to a parish priest from a deceased parishioner, from
Medieval Latin mortuarium, noun use of neuter of Late Latin adjective mortuarius pertaining to the
dead, from Latin mortuus, past participle of mori to die (see mortal (adj.)). Meaning place where
bodies are kept temporarily first recorded 1865, a euphemism for earlier deadhouse.


mortuary (adj.)

1510s, pertaining to death, from Late Latin mortuarius of the dead, from Latin mortuus dead (see
mortuary (n.)).


Morus (n.)

genus of mulberry trees, from Latin morus mulberry tree.


mosaic (n.)

c.1400, from Old French mosaicq mosaic work, from Italian mosaico, from Medieval Latin musaicum
mosaic work, work of the Muses, noun use of neuter of musaicus of the Muses, from Latin Musa (see
muse). Medieval mosaics were often dedicated to the Muses. The word formed in Medieval Latin as
though from Greek, but the (late) Greek word for mosaic work was mouseion (Klein says this sense was
borrowed from Latin). Figurative use is from 1640s. As an adjective in English from 1580s. Related:
Mosaicist.


Mosaic (adj.)

pertaining to Moses, 1660s (earlier Mosaical, 1560s), from Modern Latin Mosaicus, from Moses.


mosasaurus (n.)

marine dinosaur, 1830, from Latin Mosa the river Meuse + -saurus. the fossils of the ancient reptile
were first discovered 1780 near Maastricht, on the Meuse.


Moscow

Russian capital, named for Moskva River, of unknown origin. Moscow mule, vodka cocktail, attested
from 1950.


Moselle

river in Western Europe, Latin Mosella, literally Little Meuse, in reference to the longer River
Meuse (Latin Mosa), into which it flows. From 1680s as wine from the valley of the river Moselle.


Moses

masc. proper name, name of Hebrew prophet and lawgiver, from Latin, from Greek Mouses, from Hebrew
Mosheh, of unknown origin.Most scholars see in it the Hebraization of Egyptian mes, mesu 'child,
son,' which is often used in theophorous names. According to this derivation the words of Pharaoh's
daughter in Ex. 2:10, 'For out of the water I drew him' are not the explanation of the Hebrew name
Mosheh, but express the idea that the Egyptian name given by Pharaoh's daughter resembles in sound,
and therefore, reminds us of, the Hebrew verb mashah 'he drew out,' which is suggestive of the words
spoken by Pharaoh's daughter. [Dr. Ernest Klein, A Comprehensive Etymological Dictionary of the
English Language]  As an expletive or oath, 1840.


mosey (v.)

1829, American English slang, of unknown origin, perhaps related to British dialectal mose about go
around in a dull, stupid way. Or perhaps from Spanish vamos (see vamoose). Related: Moseyed;
moseying.


mosh (v.)

to dance (with a certain amount of violence) to metal music in a tightly packed arena, 1987, perhaps
a variant of mash. Related: Mosh pit.


Moslem

see Muslim.


mosque (n.)

1717, earlier moseak (c.1400), also mosquee (16c.), probably in part from Middle French
mosqu&eacute;e, from Italian moschea, earlier moscheta, from Spanish mesquita (modern mezquita),
from Arabic masjid temple, place of worship, from sajada he worshipped + prefix ma- denoting place.
Mangled in Middle English as muskey, moseache, etc.


mosquito (n.)

1580s, from Spanish mosquito little gnat, diminutive of mosca fly, from Latin musca fly, from PIE
root *mu- gnat, fly, imitative of insect buzzing (compare Sanskrit maksa-, Greek myia, Old English
mycg, Modern English midge, Old Church Slavonic mucha), perhaps imitative of the sound of humming
insects.


moss (n.)

Old English meos moss, related to mos bog, from Proto-Germanic *musan (cognates: Old High German
mios, Danish mos, German Moos), also in part from Old Norse mosi moss, bog, and Medieval Latin mossa
moss, from the same Germanic source, from PIE *meus- damp, with derivatives referring to swamps and
swamp vegetation (cognates: Latin muscus moss, Lithuanian musai mold, mildew, Old Church Slavonic
muchu moss).   Selden Mose&thorn; &thorn;e Marbelston &thorn;at men ofte treden. [Piers Plowman,
1362]  All the Germanic languages have the word in both senses, which is natural because moss is the
characteristic plant of boggy places. It is impossible to say which sense is original. Scott (1805)
revived 17c. moss-trooper freebooter infesting Scottish border marshes.


mossback (n.)

conservative, 1874, especially of poor whites from Carolina, originally (1872) in reference to those
who hid out to avoid service in the Confederate army (and would have stayed out till the moss grew
on their backs); from moss + back (n.).


mossy (adj.)

1560s, from moss + -y (2).


most (adj.)

Old English mast greatest number, amount, extent, earlier m&aelig;st, from Proto-Germanic *maistaz
(cognates: Old Saxon mest, Old Frisian mast, Old Norse mestr, Dutch meest, German meist, Gothic
maists most), superlative form of Proto-Germanic *maiz, root of Old English ma, mara (see more).
Used in Old English as superlative of micel great, large (see mickle). Vowel influenced by more.
Original sense of greatest survives in phrase for the most part (c.1400). Slang meaning the best,
extremely good is attested from 1953. Also used as an adverb in Old English. Phrase make the most of
(something) is by 1520s. Related: Mostly. Double superlative mostest is 1885, from U.S. Southern and
Black English.


Mosul

city in northern Iraq, from Arabic al-Mawsul, literally the joined, a reference to the bridge and
ford over the Tigris here.


mot (n.)

a witty saying, 1580s, from French mot (12c.) remark, short speech, literally word, cognate of
Italian motto, from Latin mutum grunt, murmur (see mutter). Mot juste (1912) is French, literally
exact word, the precisely appropriate expression in some situation.The mot juste is an expression
which readers would like to buy of writers who use it, as one buys one's neighbour's bantam cock for
the sake of hearing its voice no more. [Fowler]


mote (n.)

particle of dust, Old English mot, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Dutch mot dust from turf,
sawdust, grit, Norwegian mutt speck, mote, splinter, chip. Many references are to Matt. vii:3.


motel (n.)

1925, coined from motor- + hotel. Originally a hotel for automobile travelers.The Milestone
Interstate Corporation ... proposes to build and operate a chain of motor hotels between San Diego
and Seattle, the hotels to have the name 'Motel.' [Hotel Monthly, March 1925]


motet (n.)

choral composition on a sacred text, late 14c., from Old French motet (13c.), diminutive of mot word
(see mot).


moth (n.)

Old English mo&eth;&eth;e (Northumbrian moh&eth;e), common Germanic (Old Norse motti, Middle Dutch
motte, Dutch mot, German Motte moth), perhaps related to Old English ma&eth;a maggot, or from the
root of midge (q.v.). Until 16c. used mostly of the larva and usually in reference to devouring
clothes (see Matt. vi:20).


mothball (n.)

also moth-ball, moth ball, naphthalene ball stored among fabrics to keep off moths, 1891, from moth
+ ball (n.1).


mothball (v.)

1902 in a literal sense (to store away with mothballs), from mothball (n.); figurative sense from
1901.


mother (n.1)

Old English modor female parent, from Proto-Germanic *moth&aelig;r (cognates: Old Saxon modar, Old
Frisian moder, Old Norse mo&#240;ir, Danish moder, Dutch moeder, Old High German muoter, German
Mutter), from PIE *mater- mother (cognates: Latin mater, Old Irish mathir, Lithuanian mote, Sanskrit
matar-, Greek meter, Old Church Slavonic mati), [b]ased ultimately on the baby-talk form *m&#257;-
(2); with the kinship term suffix *-ter- [Watkins]. Spelling with -th- dates from early 16c., though
that pronunciation is probably older (see father (n.)).   Mother nature first attested c.1600;
mother earth is from 1580s. Mother tongue one's native language first attested late 14c. Mother of
all ________ 1991, is Gulf War slang, from Saddam Hussein's use in reference to the coming battle;
it is an Arabic idiom (as well as an English one), for instance Ayesha, second wife of Muhammad, is
known as Mother of Believers. Mother Carey's chickens is late 18c. sailors' nickname for storm
petrels, or for snowflakes. Mother lode attested by c.1882, from mining [1849].


mother (v.)

1540s, to be the mother of, from mother (n.1). Meaning to take care of is from 1863. Related:
Mothered; mothering.


mother (n.2)

a thick substance concreting in liquors; the lees or scum concreted [Johnson], probably from Middle
Dutch modder filth, dregs, from PIE *meu- (see mud).


Mother Goose

probably a translation of mid-17c. French contes de ma m&egrave;re l'oye, which meant fairy tales.
The phrase appeared on the frontispiece of Charles Perrault's 1697 collection of eight fairy tales
(Contes du Temps Pass&eacute;), which was translated in English 1729 as Mother Goose's Tales, and a
very popular collection of traditional nursery rhymes published by John Newbery c.1765 was called
Mother Goose's Melody. Her own biographical story is no earlier than 1806.


Mother Hubbard

Old Mother Hubbard, nursery rhyme, was printed 1805, written by Sarah Catherine Martin (1768-1826)
but based on earlier material of unknown origin (the name is attested from 1591).


mother of pearl (n.)

c.1500, translating Medieval Latin mater perlarum, with the first element perhaps connected in
popular imagination with obsolete mother (n.2) dregs. Compare Italian madreperla, French m&#232;re-
perle, Dutch parelmoer, German Perlmutter, Danish perlemor.


mother-in-law (n.)

mid-15c., mother of one's spouse, from mother (n.1) + in-law. Also in early use, stepmother. In
British slang c.1884, mother-in-law was a mixture of ales old and bitter.


motherfucker (n.)

also mother-fucker, mother fucker, usually simply an intensive of fucker (see fuck), attested from
1956; implied in clipped form mother (with the context made clear) by 1928; motherfucking is from
1933.


motherhood (n.)

1590s, from mother (n.1) + -hood.


motherland (n.)

1711, from mother (n.1) + land (n.).


motherless (adj.)

Old English moderleas; see mother (n.) + -less.


motherly (adj.)

Old English modorlic pertaining to a mother; see mother (n.1) + -ly (1). Meaning befitting a mother
is from mid-13c. Related: Motherliness.


Mothers&#039; Day

the spelling used in the U.S. congressional resolution first recognizing it, May 9, 1908.


mothership (n.)

also mother-ship, 1890, from mother (n.1) + ship (n.).


motif (n.)

theme, predominant feature, 1848, from French motif dominant idea, theme (see motive).


motile (adj.)

capable of movement, 1831, back-formation from motility.


motility (n.)

capacity of movement, 1827, from French motilit&#233; (1827), from Latin mot-, stem of movere to
move (see move (v.)).


motion (n.)

late 14c., suggestion; process of moving, from Old French mocion movement, motion; change,
alteration (13c.), from Latin motionem (nominative motio) a moving, a motion; an emotion, from past
participle stem of movere to move (see move (v.)). Motion picture attested from 1896.


motion (v.)

late 15c., to request, petition (obsolete), from motion (n.). The sense in parliamentary procedure
first recorded 1747; with meaning to guide or direct by a sign, gesture, movement it is attested
from 1787. Related: Motioned; motioning.


motionless (adj.)

1590s, from motion (n.) + -less. Related: Motionlessly; motionlessness.


motivate (v.)

1863, to stimulate toward action, from motive + -ate (2); perhaps modeled on French motiver or
German motivieren. Related: Motivated; motivating.


motivation (n.)

1873, from motivate + -ion. Psychological use, inner or social stimulus for an action, is from 1904.


motivational (adj.)

1931, from motivation + -al (1).


motivator (n.)

1917, agent noun in Latin form from motivate (v.).


motive (n.)

mid-14c., something brought forward, from Old French motif will, drive, motivation, noun use of
adjective, literally moving, from Medieval Latin motivus moving, impelling, from Latin motus a
moving, motion, past participle of movere to move (see move (v.)). Meaning that which inwardly moves
a person to behave a certain way is from early 15c.


motive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French motif moving or directly from Medieval Latin motivus moving, impelling,
from past participle stem of movere to move (see move (v.)).


motiveless (adj.)

1817, from motive (n.) + -less.


motley (adj.)

late 14c., parti-colored (originally of fabric), from Anglo-French motteley, probably from Old
English mot speck (see mote). But Klein's sources say probably from Gaulish. Diversified in color,
especially of a fool's dress. Hence, allusively, a fool (1600). As a noun meaning cloth of mixed
color from late 14c.


moto-

word-forming element meaning motion, motor, from Latin motus, past participle of movere (see move
(v.)).


motocross

also moto-cross, by 1956, from motorcycle + cross-country.


motor (n.)

mid-15c., controller, prime mover, from Latin motor, literally mover, agent noun from past
participle stem of movere to move (see move (v.)). From 15c. as controller, prime mover (in
reference to God); sense of agent or force that produces mechanical motion is first recorded 1660s;
that of machine that supplies motive power is from 1856. First record of slang motor-mouth fast-
talking person is from 1970.


motor (v.)

1896, from motor (n.). Related: Motored; motoring.


motor-

element used extensively in 20c. word formation to indicate motorcar.


motor-boat (n.)

also motorboat, 1902, from motor (n.) + boat (n.).


motorcade (n.)

1909, from motor- +  suffix from cavalcade.


motorcar (n.)

also motor-car, 1895 from motor (n.) + car.


motorcycle (n.)

1895, a hybrid from motor + -cycle, from bicycle. Motocycle also was used late 19c.    The horse
follows the crooks of a country road, but then the training of the motorcycle (horrid name) will
inevitably straighten out the crooks in the country road, and afford long ranges of straight tracks.
[Payson Burleigh, The Age of Steel, Oct. 12, 1895]    Related: Motorcyclist.


motorist (n.)

motor-car driver, 1896, from motor- + -ist. Earlier as a name for electric railway drivers (1889).
Other early alternatives included motorneer.    Motorer we have given our reasons for rejecting, and
there only remains motorist or a compound like motor-man or motor-driver. Mr. C.P.G. Scott, the
etymologist of the Century Dictionary, strongly favors motor-man or motor-driver, though he would
not object to motorist and prefers it above any other single word.   [Electric Power, October 1889]


motorize (v.)

to furnish with a motor or motors, 1901, from motor (n.) + -ize. Related: Motorized; motorizing;
motorization.


motorway (n.)

1903, from motor- + way (n.).


Motown

recording label launched 1960 by Berry Gordy Jr., from Mo(tor) Town, perhaps based on Motor City, a
nickname for Detroit attested by 1911.


mottle (n.)

1670s, probably a back-formation from motley.


mottle (v.)

1670s; see mottle (n.). Related: Mottled; mottling.


mottled (adj.)

1670s, past participle adjective; see mottle (v.).


motto (n.)

1580s, from Italian motto a saying, legend attached to a heraldic design, from Late Latin muttum
grunt, word, from Latin muttire to mutter, mumble, murmur (see mutter).


moue (n.)

pout, 1850, from French moue mouth, lip, pout, from Old French moe, perhaps from Middle Dutch mouwe,
with the same senses, but this could as easily be from French. As a verb from 1909.


mould

chiefly British English spelling of mold in various senses. Related: Moulded; moulding.


moulder

see molder. Related: Mouldered; mouldering.


mouldy (adj.)

see moldy.


moult

see molt.


mound (n.)

1550s, hedge, fence, also embankment, dam (a sense probably influenced by mount (n.)). The
relationship between the noun and the verb is uncertain. Commonly supposed to be from Old English
mund hand, protection, guardianship (cognate with Latin manus), but this is not certain (OED
discounts it on grounds of sense). Perhaps a confusion of the native word and Middle Dutch mond
protection, used in military sense for fortifications of various types, including earthworks. From
1726 as artificial elevation (as over a grave); 1810 as natural low elevation. As the place where
the pitcher stands on a baseball field, from 1912.


mound (v.)

1510s, to enclose with a fence; c.1600 as to enclose with an embankment; see mound (n.). From 1859
as to heap up. Related: Mounded; mounding.


mount (v.)

c.1300, to mount a horse; mid-14c., to rise up, ascend; fly, from Old French monter to go up,
ascend, climb, mount, from Vulgar Latin *montare, from Latin mons (genitive montis) mountain (see
mount (n.)). Meaning to set or place in position first recorded 1530s. Sense of to get up on for
purposes of copulation is from 1590s. Related: Mounted; mounting.


mount (n.2)

that on which something is mounted, 1739, from mount (v.). The colloquial meaning a horse for riding
is first recorded 1856.


mount (n.1)

hill, mountain, mid-13c., from Anglo-French mount, Old French mont mountain; also perhaps partly
from Old English munt mountain; both the Old English and the French words from Latin montem
(nominative mons) mountain, from PIE root *men- to stand out, project (cognates: Latin eminere to
stand out; Sanskrit manya nape of the neck, Latin monile necklace; Old Irish muin neck, Welsh mwnwgl
neck, mwng mane; Welsh mynydd mountain).


mountain (n.)

c.1200, from Old French montaigne (Modern French montagne), from Vulgar Latin *montanea mountain,
mountain region, noun use of fem. of *montaneus of a mountain, mountainous, from Latin montanus
mountainous, of mountains, from mons (genitive montis) mountain (see mount (n.)).    Until 18c.,
applied to a fairly low elevation if it was prominent (such as Sussex Downs, the hills around
Paris). As an adjective from late 14c. Mountain dew raw and inferior whiskey first recorded 1839;
earlier a type of Scotch whiskey (1816); Jamieson's 1825 Supplement to his Scottish dictionary
defines it specifically as A cant term for Highland whisky that has paid no duty. Mountain-climber
recorded from 1839; mountain-climbing from 1836.


mountaineer (n.)

c.1600, dweller in mountains, from mountain + -eer. Verb meaning to be a mountain-climber is from
1803.


mountainous (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French montagneux, from Vulgar Latin *montaneosus mountainous, from *montanea
(see mountain).


mountebank (n.)

a doctor that mounts a bench in the market, and boasts his infallible remedies and cures [Johnson],
1570s, from Italian montambanco, contraction of monta in banco quack, juggler, literally mount on
bench (to be seen by crowd), from monta, imperative of montare to mount (see mount (v.)) + banco,
variant of banca bench (see bank (n.2)). Figurative and extended senses from 1580s.


mounted (adj.)

1580s, on horseback, past participle adjective from mount (v.). From 1854 as set up for display.


Mountie (n.)

1914, member of the Royal Canadian (originally North-west) Mounted Police, formed 1873 to keep order
in the former Hudson's Bay Company lands. Also see -ie.


mourn (v.)

Old English murnan to mourn, bemoan, long after, also be anxious about, be careful (class III strong
verb; past tense mearn, past participle murnen), from Proto-Germanic *murnan to remember sorrowfully
(cognates: Old Saxon mornon, Old High German mornen, Gothic maurnan to mourn, Old Norse morna to
pine away), probably from PIE root *(s)mer- to remember (see memory); or, if the Old Norse sense is
the base one, from *mer- to die, wither. Related: Mourned; mourning.


mourner (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from mourn (v.).


mournful (adj.)

early 15c., from mourn + -ful. Related: Mournfully; mournfulness.


mourning (n.)

Old English murnung complaint, grief, verbal noun from mourn (v.).


mouse (n.)

Old English mus small rodent, also muscle of the arm, from Proto-Germanic *mus (cognates: Old Norse,
Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, Danish, Swedish mus, Dutch muis, German Maus mouse), from PIE *mus-
(cognates: Sanskrit mus mouse, rat, Old Persian mush mouse, Old Church Slavonic mysu, Latin mus,
Lithuanian muse mouse, Greek mys mouse, muscle).    Plural form mice (Old English mys) shows effects
of i-mutation. Contrasted with man (n.) from 1620s. Meaning black eye (or other discolored lump) is
from 1842. Computer sense is from 1965, though applied to other things resembling a mouse in shape
since 1750, mainly nautical.   Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus [Horace]


mouse (v.)

to hunt mice, mid-13c., from mouse (n.). Related: Moused; mousing.


mouse-hole (n.)

early 15c., from mouse (n.) + hole (n.).


mouser (n.)

cat that hunts mice, c.1400, agent noun from mouse (v.).


mousetrap (n.)

late 15c., from mouse (n.) + trap (n.). Figurative use from 1570s. The thing is older than the word.
Old English had musfealle; Middle English had mouscacche (late 14c.).


mousse (n.)

1892, in cookery sense, from French mousse, from Old French mousse froth, scum, from Late Latin
mulsa mead, from Latin mulsum honey wine, mead, from neuter of mulsus mixed with honey, related to
mel honey (see Melissa). Meaning preparation for hair is from 1977. As a verb in this sense from
1984.


moustache (n.)

see mustache. Related: moustachial.


mousy (adj.)

1812 with reference to quietness; 1853, of color; from mouse + -y (2).


mouth (n.)

Old English mu&thorn; mouth, opening, door, gate, from Proto-Germanic *munthaz (cognates: Old Saxon,
Old Frisian muth, Old Norse munnr, Danish mund, Middle Dutch mont, Dutch mond, Old High German mund,
German Mund, Gothic mun&thorn;s mouth), with characteristic loss of nasal consonant in Old English
(compare tooth, goose), from PIE *mnto-s (cognates: Latin mentum chin). In the sense of outfall of a
river it is attested from late Old English; as the opening of anything with capacity (a bottle,
cave, etc.) it is recorded from c.1200. Mouth-organ attested from 1660s.


mouth (v.)

c.1300, to speak, from mouth (n.). Related: Mouthed; mouthing. Old English had mu&#240;ettan to
blab.


mouth-watering (adj.)

1822, from mouth (n.) + water (v.).


mouthful (n.)

1520s, as much as a mouth can hold, from mouth (n.) + -ful. Meaning a lot to say is from 1748.


mouthpiece (n.)

also mouth-piece, 1680s, casting fitted on an open end of a pipe, etc., from mouth (n.) + piece
(n.). Meaning piece of a musical instrument that goes in the mouth is from 1776. Sense of one who
speaks on behalf of others is from 1805; in the specific sense of lawyer it is first found 1857.


mouthwash (n.)

also mouth-wash, 1840, from mouth (n.) + wash (n.).


mouthy (adj.)

1580s, from mouth (n.) + -y (2).


mouton enrage (n.)

1932, from French mouton enrag&#233;, literally angry sheep. A normally calm person who has become
suddenly enraged or violent [OED].


movable (adj.)

also moveable, late 14c., disposed to movement; c.1400, capable of being moved, from Old French
movable, from moveir (see move (v.)). A moveable feast (early 15c.) is one in the Church calendar
which, though always on the same day of the week, varies its date from year to year. Related:
Movability.


move (v.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French mover, Old French movoir to move, get moving, set out; set in motion;
introduce (Modern French mouvoir), from Latin movere move, set in motion; remove; disturb (past
participle motus, frequentative motare), from PIE root *meue- to push away (cognates: Sanskrit kama-
muta moved by love and probably mivati pushes, moves; Lithuanian mauti push on; Greek ameusasthai to
surpass, amyno push away).    Intransitive sense developed in Old French and came thence to English,
though it now is rare in French. Meaning to affect with emotion is from c.1300; that of to prompt or
impel toward some action is from late 14c. Sense of to change one's place of residence is from 1707.
Meaning to propose (something) in an assembly, etc., is first attested mid-15c.  Related: Moved;
moving.


move (n.)

mid-15c., proposal, from move (v.). From 1650s in the gaming sense. Meaning act of moving is from
1827. Phrase on the move in the process of going from one place to another is from 1796; get a move
on hurry up is Americal English colloquial from 1888 (also, and perhaps originally, get a move on
you).


movement (n.)

late 14c., from Old French movement movement, exercise; start, instigation (Modern French
mouvement), from Medieval Latin movimentum, from Latin movere (see move (v.)). In the musical sense
of major division of a piece it is attested from 1776; in the political/social sense, from 1828.
Related: Movements.


mover (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from move (v.). Originally of God. Meaning one who moves goods as a profession
is from 1838.


movie (n.)

1912 (perhaps 1908), shortened form of moving picture in the cinematographic sense (1896). As an
adjective from 1913. Movie star attested from 1913. Another early name for it was photoplay.


movies (n.)

moving pictures, 1912, see movie.


mow (v.)

Old English mawan to mow (class VII strong verb; past tense meow, past participle mawen), from
Proto-Germanic *m&aelig;anan (cognates: Middle Low German maeyen, Dutch maaien, Old High German
maen, German m&auml;hen to mow, Old English m&aelig;d meadow), from PIE root *me- (4) to mow, to cut
grass or grain (cognates: poetic Greek amao, Latin metere to reap, mow, crop, Italian mietere, Old
Irish meithleorai reapers, Welsh medi). Related: Mowed; mown; mowing.


mow (n.)

stack of hay, Old English muga, muwa a heap, swath of corn, crowd of people, earlier muha, from
Proto-Germanic *mugon (cognates: Old Norse mugr a heap, mostr crowd), of uncertain origin.


mower (n.)

early 14c., agent noun from mow (v.). Mechanical sense is from 1852.


moxie (n.)

courage, 1930, from Moxie, brand name of a bitter, non-alcoholic drink, 1885, perhaps as far back as
1876 as the name of a patent medicine advertised to build up your nerve; despite legendary origin
stories put out by the company that made it, it is perhaps ultimately from a New England Indian word
(it figures in river and lake names in Maine, where it is apparently from Abenaki and means dark
water). Much-imitated in its day; in 1917 the Moxie Company won an infringement suit against a
competitor's beverage marketed as Proxie.


Mozarab (n.)

assimilated Christian in Moorish Spain, one who was allowed to continue practicing his religion in
exchange for political allegiance, from Spanish Mozarabe would-be Arab, from Arabic mostarib, from a
desiderative verbal form of Arab.


mozzarella (n.)

1911, Italian cheese originally made in Naples area, from Italian mozzarella, diminutive of mozza, a
kind of cheese, from mozzare to cut off, from mozzo blunt, from Vulgar Latin *mutius cut off,
blunted.


mpg

originally m.p.g., abbreviation of miles per gallon, attested from 1912.


mph

also m.p.h., abbreviation of miles per hour, attested from 1887.


Mr.

mid-15c., abbreviation of master (n.); also see mister. Used from 1814 with a following noun or
adjective, to denote the exemplar or embodiment of that quality (as in Mr. Right the only man a
woman wishes to marry, 1826; Mr. Fix-It, 1912; Mr. Big, 1940). The plural Messrs. (1779) is an
abbreviation of French messieurs, plural of monsieur, used in English to supply the plural of Mr.,
which is lacking.


Mrs.

1580s, abbreviation of mistress (q.v.), originally in all uses of that word. The plural Mmes. is an
abbreviation of French mesdames, plural of madame, used in English to serve as the plural of Mrs.,
which is lacking. Pronunciation missis was considered vulgar at least into 18c. (cf missus). The
Mrs. one's wife is from 1920.


Ms.

(plural Mses.), 1949, considered a blend of Miss and Mrs.


MS.

abbreviation of Latin manu scriptum (see manuscript); the plural is MSS, after the custom in Modern
Latin.


Mstislav

Slavic masc. proper name, literally vengeful fame, from Russian mstit' to take revenge, from Proto-
Slavic *misti revenge, *mistiti to take revenge, from PIE *mit-ti-, extended form of root *mei- (1)
to change, go, move (see mutable); for second element, see Slav.


much (adj.)

c.1200, worn down by loss of unaccented last syllable from Middle English muchel large, much, from
Old English micel great in amount or extent, from Proto-Germanic *mekilaz, from PIE *meg- great (see
mickle). As a noun and an adverb, from c.1200. For vowel evolution, see bury.


muchly (adv.)

mid-12c., from much + -ly. Middle English used simply much as an adverb.


muchness (n.)

late 14c., from much + -ness. Earlier was Middle English muchelnesse (c.1200).


mucilage (n.)

late 14c., mussillage, viscous substance found in vegetable material, from Old French mucilage
(14c.), from Late Latin mucilago musty or moldy juice (4c.), from Latin mucere be musty or moldy,
from mucus mucus  (see mucus). Meaning adhesive is first attested 1859.


mucilaginous (adj.)

early 15c., viscous, sticky, from Medieval Latin muscilaginosus, from Late Latin mucilaginosus, from
mucillago (see mucilage). Related: Mucilaginously.


muck (n.)

mid-13c., cow dung and vegetable matter spread as manure, from a Scandinavian source such as Old
Norse myki, mykr cow dung, Danish m&#248;g; from Proto-Germanic *muk-, *meuk- soft. Meaning unclean
matter generally is from c.1300. Muck-sweat first attested 1690s.


muck (v.)

late 14c., to dig in the ground, also to remove manure, early 15c., to spread manure, cover with
muck, from muck (n.). Meaning to make dirty is from 1832; in the figurative sense, to make a mess
of, it is from 1886; to muck about mess around is from 1856. Related: Mucked; mucking.


muck-a-muck (n.)

(self-)important person, 1912, from Chinook jargon, literally to eat; food. Also mucky-muck;
muckety-muck.


muckluck (n.)

also mukluk, 1868, sealskin, sealskin boots from Eskimo maklak large seal, sealskin. Meaning canvas
boots that resemble Eskimo ones is from 1962.


muckraker (n.)

c.1600, one who rakes muck, from muck (n.) + agent noun from rake (v.). Meaning one who inquires
into and publishes scandal and allegations of corruption among political and business leaders,
popularized 1906 in speech by President Theodore Roosevelt, in reference to man ... with a Muckrake
in his hand in Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1684) who seeks worldly gain by raking filth.The men
with the muck-rakes are often indispensable to the well-being of society, but only if they know when
to stop raking the muck. [T. Roosevelt, quoted in Cincinnati Enquirer, April 15, 1906.] Muckrake in
sense person who hunts scandal is attested from 1872. To muckrake (v.) in the literal sense is from
1879; figuratively from 1910. Related: Muckraking.


mucose (adj.)

1731, from Latin mucosus (see mucous).


mucous (adj.)

1640s (replacing mucilaginous), from Latin mucosus slimy, mucous, from mucus (see mucus). Related:
mucosity.


mucus (n.)

1660s (replacing Middle English mucilage), from Latin mucus slime, mold, mucus of the nose, snot,
from PIE root *meug- slippery, slimy, with derivatives referring to wet or slimy substances or
conditions (cognates: Latin emungere to sneeze out, blow one's nose, mucere be moldy or musty, Greek
myssesthai to blow the nose, myxa mucus, mykes fungus, Sanskrit muncati he releases). Old English
had horh, which may be imitative.


mud (n.)

mid-14c., cognate with and probably from Middle Low German mudde, Middle Dutch modde thick mud, from
Proto-Germanic *mud- from PIE *(s)meu-/*mu- [Buck], found in many words denoting wet or dirty
(cognates: Greek mydos damp, moisture, Old Irish muad cloud, Polish mu&#322; slime, Sanskrit mutra-
urine, Avestan muthra- excrement, filth); related to German Schmutz dirt, which also is used for mud
in roads, etc., to avoid dreck, which originally meant excrement. Welsh mwd is from English.
Replaced native fen.    Meaning lowest or worst of anything is from 1580s. As a word for coffee, it
is hobo slang from 1925; as a word for opium from 1922. To throw or hurl mud make disgraceful
accusations is from 1762. To say (one's) name is mud and mean (one) is discredited is first recorded
1823, from mud in obsolete sense of a stupid twaddling fellow (1708). Mud in your eye as a toast
recorded from 1912, American English. Mud puppy salamander is from 1889, American English; mud bath
is from 1798; mud pie is from 1788.


mud-flap (n.)

1903, from mud (n.) + flap (n.).


mudder (n.)

horse that runs well in muddy conditions, 1903, from mud (n.).


muddle (v.)

1590s, destroy the clarity of (a transferred sense); literal sense (to bathe in mud) is from c.1600;
perhaps frequentative formation from mud, or from Dutch moddelen to make (water) muddy, from the
same Proto-Germanic source. Sense of to make muddy is from 1670s; that of make confused first
recorded 1680s. Meaning to bungle is from 1885. Related: Muddled; muddling.


muddle (n.)

1818, from muddle (v.).


muddy (adj.)

late 13c., from mud + -y (2). Big Muddy in reference to the Missouri or Mississippi rivers is first
recorded 1825.


muddy (v.)

to make muddy, c.1600, from muddy (adj.). Related: Muddied; muddying.


mudhole (n.)

1780, from mud (n.) + hole (n.).


mudsill (n.)

1680s, lowest sill of a house, from mud + sill. The word entered U.S. political history in a speech
by James M. Hammond of South Carolina, March 4, 1858, in U.S. Senate, alluding scornfully to the
very mudsills of society, and the term subsequently was embraced by Northern workers in the pre-
Civil War sectional rivalry.


muenster (n.)

type of cheese, 1902, from M&uuml;nster, mountain valley in Alsace, where it is made; the place name
is German, literally minster.


muesli (n.)

breakfast dish of oats, fruit, milk, 1926, from Swiss-German, from Old High German muos meal, mush-
like food, from Proto-Germanic *mod-sa-, from PIE root *mad- moist, wet, with derivatives referring
to various qualities of food (see mast (n.2)).


muezzin (n.)

official who calls Muslims to prayer from the minaret of a mosque, 1580s, from Arabic muadhdhin,
properly active participle of adhdhana, frequentative of adhanna he proclaimed, from uthn ear.
Compare Hebrew he'ezin he gave ear, heard, from ozen ear. English spelling is from dialectal use of
-z- for -dh-.


muff (n.)

warm covering for the hands, 1590s, from Dutch mof a muff, shortened from Middle Dutch moffel
mitten, muff, from Middle French moufle mitten, from Old French mofle thick glove, large mitten,
handcuffs (9c.), from Medieval Latin muffula a muff, of unknown origin. In 17c.-18c. also worn by
men. Meaning vulva and pubic hair is from 1690s; muff-diver one who performs cunnilingus is from
1935.


muff (v.)

to bungle, 1827, pugilism slang, probably related to muff (n.) awkward person (1837), perhaps from
muff (n.) on notion of someone clumsy because his hands are in a muff. Related: Muffed; muffing.


muffin (n.)

light, small cake made with eggs, 1703, moofin, possibly from Low German muffen, plural of muffe
small cake; or somehow connected with Old French moflet soft, tender (said of bread). Muffin top in
reference to waistline bulge over tight, low jeans is attested by 2005, from resemblance to baked
muffins from a tin.


muffle (v.)

early 15c., to cover or wrap (something) to conceal or protect, perhaps from Middle French mofler to
stuff, from Old French moufle thick glove, muff (compare Old French enmoufle wrapped up); see muff
(n.). Meaning wrap something up to deaden sound first recorded 1761. Related: Muffled; muffling.


muffle (n.)

thing that muffles, 1560s, from muffle (v.).


muffler (n.)

1530s as a kind of wrap for the throat, agent noun from muffle (v.); as an automobile exhaust system
silencer, it is attested from 1895.


mufti (n.)

1580s, muphtie official head of the state religion in Turkey, from Arabic mufti judge, active
participle of afta to give, conjugated form of fata he gave a (legal) decision (compare fatwa).
Sense of ordinary clothes (not in uniform) is from 1816, of unknown origin, perhaps from mufti's
costume of robes and slippers in stage plays, which was felt to resemble plain clothes.


mug (n.1)

drinking vessel, 1560s, bowl, pot, jug, of unknown origin, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare
Swedish mugg mug, jug, Norwegian mugge pitcher, open can for warm drinks), or Low German mokke,
mukke mug, also of unknown origin.


mug (n.2)

a person's face, 1708, possibly from mug (n.1), on notion of drinking mugs shaped like grotesque
faces. Sense of portrait or photograph in police records (as in mug shot, 1950) had emerged by 1887.
Hence, also, a person (especially a criminal), 1890.


mug (v.1)

to beat up, 1818, originally to strike the face (in pugilism), from mug (n.2). The general meaning
attack is first attested 1846, and attack to rob is from 1864. Perhaps influenced by thieves' slang
mug dupe, fool, sucker (1851). Related: Mugged; mugging.


mug (v.2)

make exaggerated facial expressions, 1855, originally theatrical slang, from mug (n.2). Related:
Mugged; mugging.


mugger (n.)

1865, agent noun from mug (v.1).


mugging (n.)

violent physical attack, 1846, verbal noun from mug (v.1). As grimmacing, making faces, 1937, from
mug (v.2).


muggins (n.)

fool, simpleton, 1855, apparently from the surname, perhaps influenced by slang mug dupe, fool
(1859; see mug (n.2)).


muggle (n.)

marijuana, a joint, 1926, apparently originally a New Orleans word, of unknown origin.


Muggletonian (n.)

1660s, member of the sect founded by English tailor Lodowicke Muggleton (1609-1698).


muggy (adj.)

1731, from mugen to drizzle (late 14c.), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse mugga
drizzling mist, possibly from PIE *meug- slimy, slippery (see mucus).


Mughal

variant transliteration of mogul (n.1).


mugshot (n.)

also mug shot, 1950; see mug (n.2) + shot (n.) in the photographic sense.


mugwort (n.)

Old English mugcwyrt, literally midge wort, from West Germanic *muggiwurti, from *muggjo- fly (see
midge) + root of wort.


mugwump (n.)

1832, jocular for great man, boss, important person, American English, from Algonquian (Natick)
mugquomp important person (derived from mugumquomp war leader); used from 1884 of Republicans who
refused to support James G. Blaine's presidential candidacy, hence one who holds himself aloof from
party politics.


Muhammad

1610s, Mohammed, Arabic masc. proper name, literally the Praiseworthy, name of the prophet of Islam
(c.570-632). The earliest forms of his name in English were Mahum, Mahimet (c.1200); originally also
used confusedly for an idol. Wyclif has Macamethe (c.1380), and Makomete also turns up in 14c.
documents. Mahomet was common until 19c.; see Mohammed.


mujahidin (n.)

also mujahideen, 1958, in a Pakistani context, from Persian and Arabic, plural of mujahid one who
fights in a jihad (q.v.); in modern use, Muslim guerilla insurgent.


mulatto (n.)

1590s, offspring of a European and a black African, from Spanish or Portuguese mulato of mixed
breed, literally young mule, from mulo mule, from Latin mulus (fem. mula) mule (see mule (n.1));
possibly in reference to hybrid origin of mules. As an adjective from 1670s. Fem. mulatta is
attested from 1620s; mulattress from 1805.    American culture, even in its most rigidly segregated
precincts, is patently and irrevocably composite. It is, regardless of all the hysterical
protestations of those who would have it otherwise, incontestibly mulatto. Indeed, for all their
traditional antagonisms and obvious differences, the so-called black and so-called white people of
the United States resemble nobody else in the world so much as they resemble each other. [Albert
Murray, The Omni-Americans: Black Experience &amp; American Culture, 1970]    Old English had
sunderboren born of disparate parents.


mulberry (n.)

late 14c., developed from 13c. morberie, or cognate  Middle High German mul-beri (alteration by
dissimilation of Old High German mur-beri, Modern German Maulbeere); both from Latin morum mulberry,
blackberry, + Old English berie, Old High German beri berry. The Latin word probably is from Greek
moron mulberry, from PIE *moro- blackberry, mulberry (cognates: Armenian mor blackberry, Middle
Irish merenn, Welsh merwydden mulberry). Children's singing game with a chorus beginning Here we go
round the mulberry bush is attested from 1820s, first in Scotland.


mulch (n.)

1650s, probably from a noun use of Middle English molsh (adj.) soft, moist (early 15c.), from Old
English melsc, milisc mellow, sweet, from Proto-Germanic *mil-sk- (cognates: Dutch mals soft, ripe,
Old High German molawen to become soft, German mollig soft), from PIE root *mel- soft (see mild).


mulch (v.)

1802, from mulch (n.). Related: Mulched; mulching.


mulct (v.)

late 15c., to punish by a fine, from Middle French mulcter to fine, punish (15c.), from Latin
mulctare, altered (Barnhart calls it false archaism) from multare punish, to fine, from multa
penalty, fine, perhaps from Oscan or Samnite [Klein]. Sense of defraud is first recorded 1748.
Related: Mulcted; mulcting.


mule (n.1)

offspring of donkey and horse, from Old English mul, Old French mul mule, hinny (12c., fem. mule),
both from Latin mulus (fem. mula) a mule, probably from a pre-Latin Mediterranean language.The mule
combines the strength of the horse with the endurance and surefootedness of the ass, and is
extensively bred for certain employments for which it is more suited than either; it is ordinarily
incapable of procreation. With no good grounds, the mule is a proverbial type of obstinacy.
[OED]Properly, the offspring of a he-ass and a mare; that of a she-ass and a stallion is technically
a hinny. Used allusively of hybrids and things of mixed nature. As a type of spinning machine,
attested from 1797 (so called because a hybrid of distinct warp and woof machines). Meaning
obstinate, stupid, or stubborn person is from 1470s; that of narcotics smuggler or courier first
attested 1935.


mule (n.2)

loose slipper, 1560s, from Middle French mule, from Latin mulleus calceus red high-soled shoe, worn
by Roman patricians, from mullus red (see mullet (n.1)). Related: Mules.


muleteer (n.)

mule driver, 1530s, from Middle French muletier, from mulet mule, a diminutive formation replacing
Old French mul as the word for mule in French (see mule (n.1)).


mulish (adj.)

1751, from mule (n.1) + -ish. Related: Mulishly; mulishness.


mull (v.1)

ponder, 1873, perhaps from a figurative use of Middle English mullyn grind to powder, pulverize,
from molle dust, ashes, rubbish (c.1300), probably from Middle Dutch mul grit, loose earth, related
to mill (n.1). But Webster's (1879) defined it as to work steadily without accomplishing much, which
may connect it to earlier identical word in athletics sense of to botch, muff (1862). Related:
Mulled; mulling.


mull (v.2)

sweeten, spice and heat a drink, c.1600, of unknown origin, perhaps from Dutch mol, a kind of white,
sweet beer, or from Flemish molle a kind of beer, and related to words for to soften. Related:
Mulled; mulling.


mull (n.)

promontory (in Scottish place names), late 14c., perhaps from Old Norse muli a jutting crag,
projecting ridge (between two valleys), which probably is identical with muli snout, muzzle. The
Norse word is related to Old Frisian mula, Middle Dutch mule, muul, Old High German mula, German
Maul muzzle, mouth.  Alternative etymology traces it to Gaelic maol brow of a hill or rock, also
bald, from Old Celtic *mailo-s (cognates: Irish maol, Old Irish m&aacute;el, m&aacute;il, Welsh
moel).


mullah (n.)

title given in Muslim lands to one learned in theology and sacred law, 1610s, from Turkish molla,
Persian and Urdu mulla, from Arabic mawla master, from waliya reigned, governed.


mullein (n.)

tall plant of the figwort family, mid-15c., from Anglo-French moleine (French moulaine), perhaps
literally the soft-leaved plant, from French mol soft, from Latin mollis (see melt (v.))


mullet (n.1)

edible type of spiny-finned fish, mid-15c., from Anglo-French molett (late 14c.), Old French mulet,
from Medieval Latin muletus, from Latin mulettus, from mullus red mullet, from Greek myllos a marine
fish, related to melos black, from PIE *mel- of darkish color (see melanin).


mullet (n.2)

hairstyle short on top and long in back, 1996, perhaps from mullet-head stupid, dull person (1857).
Also the name of a type of North American freshwater fish with a large, flat head (1866). The term
in reference to the haircut seems to have emerged into pop culture with the Beastie Boys song Mullet
Head.#1 on the side and don't touch the back#6 on the top and don't cut it wack, Jack[Beastie Boys,
Mullet Head]As a surname, Mullet is attested from late 13c., thought to be a diminutive of Old
French mul mule. Compare also mallet-headed, in reference to the flat tops of chisels meant to be
struck with a mallet.


Mulligan (n.)

surname, from Gaelic Maolagan, Old Irish Maelecan, a double diminutive of mael bald, hence the
little bald (or shaven) one, probably often a reference to a monk or disciple. As stew made with
whatever's available, 1904, hobo slang, probably from a proper name. The golf sense of extra stroke
after a poor shot (1949) is sometimes said to be from the name of a Canadian golfer in the 1920s
whose friends gave him an extra shot in gratitude for driving them over rough roads to their weekly
foursome at St. Lambert Country Club near Montreal.


mulligrubs (n.)

fit of the blues, also colic, 1590s, mulliegrums, fanciful formation.


mullion (n.)

vertical column between the lights of a window, 1560s, metathesis of Middle English moyniel (early
14c.), from Anglo-French moinel, noun use of moienel (adj.) middle, from Old French meien
intermediate, mean (see mean (adj.)). Related: Mullioned.


multi-

before vowels mult-, word-forming element meaning many, many times, much, from comb. form of Latin
multus much, many, from PIE *ml-to-, from root *mel- strong, great, numerous (cognates: Latin melior
better, Greek mala very, very much). Many words that use it (multinational, etc.) are 20c. coinages.


multi-millionaire (n.)

also multimillionaire, 1858, from multi- + millionaire.


multi-ply (adj.)

1950, from multi- + ply (n.).


multi-use (adj.)

1952, from multi- + use (n.).


multicellular (adj.)

also multi-cellular, 1857, from multi- + cellular.


multicolored (adj.)

also multi-colored, multi-coloured, 1845, from multi- + colored.


multicultural (adj.)

also multi-cultural, 1941, from multi- + cultural. At first often in a Canadian context. Picked up
by U.S. education writers 1980s; widespread popular use from c.1990.


multiculturalism (n.)

1965, from multicultural + -ism.


multidimensional (adj.)

also multi-dimensional, 1884, from multi- + dimensional (see dimension).


multidisciplinary (adj.)

also multi-disciplinary, 1949, from multi- + disciplinary.


multifaceted (adj.)

also multi-faceted, 1870, from multi- + faceted (see facet).


multifactorial (adj.)

also multi-factorial, 1920, from multi- + factorial.


multifarious (adj.)

1590s, from Latin multifarius manifold, from multifariam (adv.) on many sides; in many places or
parts, perhaps originally that which can be expressed in many ways, from multi- many (see multi-) +
-fariam, adverbial suffix (compare bifariam in two places), from PIE *dwi-dhe- making two. Related:
Multifariously; multifariousness. Earlier forms of the word in English were multiphary (adv.);
multipharie (adj.), both mid-15c.


multiflora (n.)

1829, from Latin multiflora (rosa), from fem. of multiflorus, from multi- (see multi-) + flor-, stem
of flos (see florid).


multifloral (adj.)

1875, from Late Latin multiflorus (see multiflora) + -al (1).


multiform (adj.)

also multi-form, c.1600, from French multiforme or Latin multiformis many-shaped, manifold, from
multus much, many (see multi-) + forma shape  (see form (n.)).


multiformity (n.)

1580s, from Late Latin multiformitas, from multiformis; see multi- + form (n.).


multilateral (adj.)

also multi-lateral, 1690s, in geometry, having many sides, from multi- + Latin latus (genitive
lateris) side (see oblate (n.)). Figurative use by 1748. Meaning pertaining to three or more
countries is from 1802. Related: Multilaterally.


multilateralism (n.)

1928, from multilateral + -ism.


multilayer (adj.)

also multi-layer, 1923, from multi- + layer (n.).


multilevel (adj.)

also multi-level, 1952, from multi- + level.


multilineal (adj.)

also multi-lineal, 1800, from multi- + lineal.


multilingual (adj.)

also multi-lingual, 1838, from multi- + Latin lingua language, literally tongue (see lingual).
Related: Multilingually; multilingualism.


multimedia (adj.)

also multi-media, 1962, from multi- + media.


multimodal (adj.)

1899, from multi- + modal.


multinational (adj.)

also multi-national, by 1921, from multi- + national. Originally with reference to states; later (by
1960) to corporations and organizations. As a noun, short for multinational corporation, attested by
1971.


multiparous (adj.)

bringing forth many young at a birth, 1640s, from Modern Latin multiparus, from multi- + stem of
parere to bring forth (see pare).


multipartite (adj.)

also multi-partite, 1721, from Latin multipartitus divided into many parts, from multi- (see multi-)
+ partitus, past participle of partire to divide (see partition).


multiphase (adj.)

also multi-phase, 1890, from multi- + phase (n.).


multiple (adj.)

1640s, involving many parts, from French multiple (14c.), from Late Latin multiplus manifold, from
Latin multi- many, much (see multi-) + -plus -fold (see -plus). The noun is from 1680s, in
mathematics, from the adjective. Multiple choice as a type of question attested from 1828. Multiple
exposure first recorded 1923.


multiple sclerosis (n.)

first attested 1877; so called because it occurs in patches.


multiplex

1550s (adj.), 1560s (n.), in mathematics, from Latin multiplex having many folds; many times as
great in number; of many parts (see multiply).


multiplicable (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin multiplicabilis manifold, from multiplicare (see multiply). Alternative
multipliable is recorded from 1620s.


multiplicand (n.)

number to be multiplied by another number, 1590s, from Latin multiplicandus to be multiplied,
gerundive of multiplicare (see multiply).


multiplication (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French multiplicacion (12c.) multiplication, duplication; multiplicity,
diversity, from Latin multiplicationem (nominative multiplicatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of multiplicare (see multiply). Mathematical sense is attested from late 14c.


multiplicative (adj.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin multiplicativus, from multiplicat-, past participle stem of multiplicare
(see multiply).


multiplicity (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French multiplicit&#233;, from Late Latin multiplicitas manifoldness,
multiplicity, from Latin multiplic- (see multiple). Related: Multiplicitous.


multiplier (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from multiply.


multiply (v.)

mid-12c., multeplier, to cause to become many, from Old French multiplier, mouteplier (12c.)
increase, get bigger; flourish; breed; extend, enrich, from Latin multiplicare to increase, from
multiplex (genitive multiplicis) having many folds, many times as great in number, from comb. form
of multus (see multi-) + -plex -fold, from PIE *plek- to plait (see ply (v.1.)). Mathematical sense
is attested from late 14c. Related: Multiplied; multiplying.


multipolar (adj.)

also multi-polar, 1859, from multi- + polar. Related: Multipolarity.


multiprocessor (n.)

also multi-processor, 1961, from multi- + processor.


multipurpose (adj.)

also multi-purpose, 1935, from multi- + purpose (n.).


multiracial (adj.)

also multi-racial, 1923, from multi- + racial.


multistory (adj.)

also multi-story, multi-storey, 1918, from multi- + story (2).


multitasking (n.)

also multi-tasking, 1966, originally in computing, from multi- + tasking (see task). Of humans, by
1998. Related: Multitask (v.). As an adjective, multi-task is recorded from 1954 in a non-computer
mechanical context.


multitude (n.)

early 14c., from Old French multitude (12c.) and directly from Latin multitudinem (nominative
multitudo) a great number, a crowd; the crowd, the common people, from multus many, much (see
multi-) + suffix -tudo (see -tude). Related: Multitudes.


multitudinous (adj.)

c.1600, first in Shakespeare, from Latin multitudin-, stem of multitudo (see multitude) + -ous.
Related: Multitudinously; multitudinousness.


multivalent (adj.)

1874, from multi- + -valent, from Latin valentem, present participle of valere be worth (see
valiant).


multivariate (adj.)

1928, from multi- + -variate, from Latin variatio (see variation).


multiverse (n.)

1895, William James's coinage, an alternative to universe meant to convey absence of order and
unity.    But those times are past; and we of the nineteenth century, with our evolutionary theories
and our mechanical philosophies, already know nature too impartially and too well to worship
unreservedly any god of whose character she can be an adequate expression. Truly all we know of good
and beauty proceeds from nature, but none the less so all we know of evil. Visible nature is all
plasticity and indifference, a moral multiverse, as one might call it, and not a moral universe.
[William James, Is Life Worth Living? address to the Young Men's Christian Association of Harvard
University, May 1895]


mum (interj.)

be silent, 1560s, from Middle English mum, mom (late 14c.), inarticulate closed-mouth sound,
indicative of unwillingness or inability to speak. As an adjective meaning secret from 1520s. Phrase
mum's the word is first recorded 1704.


mum (n.1)

abbreviation of chrysanthemum, first attested 1915 in the jargon of gardeners.


mum (n.2)

pet word for mother, 1823, short for mummy (see mamma). In British sociology, used from 1957 in
reference to the working class mother as an influence in the lives of her children. Also sometimes a
vulgar corruption of madam.


mumble (v.)

early 14c., momelen, to eat in a slow, ineffective manner (perhaps to talk with one's mouth full),
probably frequentative of interjection mum. The -b- is excrescent. Meaning to speak indistinctly is
from mid-14c. Related: Mumbled; mumbling.


mumble (n.)

1902, from mumble (v.).


mumblety-peg (n.)

boys' knife-throwing game, 1650s, originally mumble-the-peg (1620s), of unknown signification and
origin.


mumbo jumbo (n.)

1738, name of an idol supposedly worshipped by certain tribes in Africa; said to be a corruption of
words in Mandingo (one reconstructed version is Mama Dyumbo), but no likely source has been found in
the languages of the Niger region, to which the original accounts relate. Meaning big, empty talk is
attested from 1896.


mummer (n.)

one who performs in a mumming, actor in a dumb show, early 15c., probably a fusion of Middle French
momeur mummer (from Old French momer mask oneself, from momon mask) and Middle English mommen to
mutter, be silent, related to mum (interjection).


mummery (n.)

1520s, performance of mumming, from Old French mommerie, from momer (see mummer). Transferred sense
of ridiculous ceremony or ritual is from 1540s.


mummification (n.)

1800, from mummy + -fication.


mummify (v.)

1620s, from French momifier, from momie mummy, from Medieval Latin mumia (see mummy) + -fier to make
into (see -fy). Related: Mummified; mummifying.


mummy (n.1)

c.1400, medicine prepared from mummy tissue, from Medieval Latin mumia, from Arabic mumiyah embalmed
body, from Persian mumiya asphalt, from mum wax. Sense of embalmed body first recorded in English
1610s. Mummy wheat (1842) was said to be cultivated from grains found in mummy-cases.


mummy (n.2)

1784, childish alteration of mammy. Alternative form mumsy attested by 1876.


mumps (n.)

type of contagious disease, c.1600, from plural of mump a grimace (1590s), originally a verb, to
whine like a beggar (1580s), from Dutch mompen to cheat, deceive, originally probably to mumble,
whine, of imitative origin. The infectious disease probably so called in reference to swelling of
the salivary glands of the face and/or to painful difficulty swallowing. Mumps also was used from
17c. to mean a fit of melancholy.


mun (v.)

auxiliary verb, now archaic or dialectal, must, c.1200, from Old Norse monu, a future tense
auxiliary verb ultimately meaning to intend and from the PIE root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).


munch (v.)

late 14c., mocchen, imitative (compare crunch), or perhaps from Old French mangier to eat, bite,
from Latin manducare to chew. Related: Munched; munching.


Munchausen

in reference to unbelievable stories (1850) is in reference to Baron Karl Friedrich Hieronymus von
M&uuml;nchhausen (1720-1797), German adventurer who served in the Russian army against the Turks;
wildly exaggerated exploits attributed to him are told in the 1785 English book Baron Munchausen,
Narrative of his Marvellous Travels, written by Rudolph Erich Raspe (1734-1794). As a syndrome
involving feigned dramatic illness, it is attested from 1951.


munchies (n.)

food or snack, 1959, plural of munchie (1917), from munch (v.); sense of craving for food after
smoking marijuana is first attested 1971.


Munchkin (n.)

1900, coined by U.S. author L. Frank Baum (1856-1919) in The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. He never
explained how he got the word. The word most like it is perhaps mutchkin, an old Scottish measure of
capacity for liquids, which was used by Scott. (It comes from Middle Dutch mutseken, originally a
little cap, from mutse cap, earlier almutse amice, hood, headdress, from Latin amictus mantle,
cloak, noun use of past participle of amicire to wrap, throw around, a compound from ambi- (see
ambi-) + iacere (see jet (v.).)


mundane (adj.)

mid-15c., of this world, from Old French mondain of this world, worldly, earthly, secular; also
pure, clean; noble, generous (12c.), from Late Latin mundanus belonging to the world (as distinct
from the Church), in classical Latin a citizen of the world, cosmopolite, from mundus universe,
world, literally clean, elegant; used as a translation of Greek khosmos (see cosmos) in its
Pythagorean sense of the physical universe (the original sense of the Greek word was orderly
arrangement). Latin mundus also was used of a woman's ornaments, dress, and is related to the
adjective mundus clean, elegant (used of women's dress, etc.). Related: Mundanely.


mundanity (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French mondanit&#233; or directly from Medieval Latin mundanitatem (nominative
mundanitas), from Late Latin mundanus belonging to the world (see mundane).


mundungus (n.)

tobacco with an offensive odor, 1640s, from Spanish mondongo paunch, tripe, intestines, related to
modejo paunch, belly (of a pig).


Munich

Bavarian capital, German M&uuml;nchen, from root of M&ouml;nch monk (see monk); founded 1158 as a
market town by Benedictine monks. In allusions to appeasement it is from the meeting of German,
British, French and Italian representatives there in Sept. 29, 1938, which resulted in the cession
of Sudetenland to Germany in exchange for Hitler's pledges.    During the flight Daladier sat silent
and morose, worried about the reception he would receive at Le Bourget, about how the French would
react to his having betrayed Czechoslovakia and France's promises. As the plane circled for landing,
he and others saw a massive crowd awaiting them. Expecting jeers, hisses, rotten fruit, and maybe
worse, Daladier declared stolidly: 'They are going to mob me, I suppose. ... I appreciate their
feelings,' and insisted on absorbing their wrath by being the first off the plane. But as he stood
dumbfounded on the gangplank, thousands surged forward carrying flags and flowers, shouting 'Hurrah
for France! Hurrah for England! Hurrah for peace!' Daladier turned back to L&eacute;ger and cursed,
'The God-damned fools!' [Benjamin F. Martin, France in 1938]


municipal (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French municipal, from Latin municipalis of a citizen of a free town, of a free
town, also of a petty town, provincial, from municipium free town, city whose citizens have the
privileges of Roman citizens but are governed by their own laws, from municeps citizen, inhabitant
of a free town. Second element is root of capere assume, take (see capable). First element is from
munus (plural munia) service performed for the community, duty, work, also public spectacle paid for
by the magistrate, (gladiatorial) entertainment, gift, from Old Latin moenus service, duty, burden,
from PIE *moi-n-es-, generally taken as a suffixed form of root *mei- (1) to change, go, move
(Watkins; see mutable); but Tucker says more probably from the other PIE root   *mei- meaning bind,
so that munia = obligations and communis = bound together.


municipality (n.)

1789, from French municipalit&eacute;, from municipal (see municipal).


munificence (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French munificence, from Latin munificentia bountifulness, liberality,
generosity, from stem of munificus generous, bountiful, liberal, literally present-making, from
munus gift or service, duty, office (see municipal) + unstressed stem of facere to do (see
factitious).


munificent (adj.)

1580s, back-formation from munificence, or else from Latin munificent-, stem of munificus bountiful,
liberal, generous (see munificence).


munition (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French municion fortification, defense, defensive wall (14c.), from Latin
munitionem (nominative munitio) a defending, fortification, protecting, noun of action from past
participle stem of munire to fortify, from moenia defensive walls, related to murus wall (see
mural). By 1530s the sense had passed through military stores to become ammunition.


Munsell

system of color classification, 1905, named for U.S. painter and professor Albert H. Munsell
(1858-1918), who developed it.


Munster

type of cheese; see Muenster.


Muppet (n.)

Trademark (U.S.) Sept. 26, 1972, claiming use from 1971, but in print from Sept. 1970. Name coined
by creator Jim Henson (1936-1990), who said, despite the resemblance to marionette and puppet (they
have qualities of both), it has no etymology; he just liked the sound.


mural (n.)

painting on a wall, 1921, short for mural painting (1850), from mural (adj.) pertaining to walls
(mid-15c.), from Latin muralis of a wall, from murus wall (Old Latin moiros, moerus), from PIE *mei-
to fix; to build fences or fortifications (cognates: Old English m&#230;re boundary, border,
landmark; Old Norse -m&#230;ri boundary, border-land; Latin munire to fortify, protect).


murder (n.)

c.1300, murdre, from Old English mor&eth;or (plural mor&thorn;ras) secret killing of a person,
unlawful killing, also mortal sin, crime; punishment, torment, misery, from Proto-Germanic *murthra-
(cognates: Goth maur&thorn;r, and, from a variant form of the same root, Old Saxon morth, Old
Frisian morth, Old Norse mor&eth;, Middle Dutch moort, Dutch moord, German Mord murder), from PIE
*mrtro-, from root *mer- to die (see mortal (adj.)). The spelling with -d- probably reflects
influence of Anglo-French murdre, from Old French mordre, from Medieval Latin murdrum, from the
Germanic root.    Viking custom, typical of Germanic, distinguished mor&eth; (Old Norse) secret
slaughter, from vig (Old Norse) slaying. The former involved concealment, or slaying a man by night
or when asleep, and was a heinous crime. The latter was not a disgrace, if the killer acknowledged
his deed, but he was subject to vengeance or demand for compensation.Mordre wol out that se we day
by day. [Chaucer, Nun's Priest's Tale, c.1386]Weakened sense of very unpleasant situation is from
1878.


murder (v.)

Old English myr&eth;rian, from Proto-Germanic *murthjan (cognates: Old High German murdran, German
m&#246;rdren, Gothic maur&#254;jan; see murder (n.)). Related: Murdered; murdering.


murderer (n.)

mid-14c., alteration of murtherer (c.1300), agent noun from murder (v.); in part from Old French
mordrere, from Medieval Latin murdrarius, from Germanic. Old English words for this included
mor&#240;orcwalu, mor&#240;orslaga, mor&#240;orwyrhta, literally murder-wright. The original
murderer's row was in New York City's Tombs prison; figurative use in baseball dates to 1858, though
the quintessential one was the 1927 New York Yankees. Fem. form murderess attested from late 14c.
Murderee (1920) never caught on.


murderous (adj.)

1530s, a hybrid from murder + -ous. An Old English word for it was mor&#240;orhycgende. Related:
Murderously; murderousness.


murex (n.)

kind of shellfish which yields a purple dye, 1580s, from Latin murex (plural murices) purple fish,
purple dye, probably cognate with Greek myax sea mussel, of unknown origin, perhaps related to mys
mouse (see muscle (n.) and mussel).


Muriel

fem. proper name, probably Celtic and meaning literally sea bright; compare Welsh Meriel, Meryl,
Irish Muirgheal, earlier Muirgel, from muir sea (see mere (n.)) + geal bright.


murine (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin murinus, from mus mouse (see mouse (n.)).


murk (n)

c.1300, myrke, from Old Norse myrkr darkness, from Proto-Germanic *merkwjo- (cognates: Old English
mirce murky, black, dark; murkiness, darkness, Danish m&#511;rk darkness, Old Saxon mirki dark);
cognate with Old Church Slavonic mraku, Serbo-Croatian mrak, Russian mrak darkness; Lithuanian
merkti shut the eyes, blink, from PIE *mer- to flicker (see morn). Murk Monday was long the name in
Scotland for the great solar eclipse of March 29, 1652 (April 8, New Style).


murky (adj.)

mid-14c., from murk + -y (2). Rare before 17c. Related: Murkily; murkiness.


murmur (n.)

late 14c., expression of discontent by grumbling, from Old French murmure murmur, sound of human
voices; trouble, argument (12c.), noun of action from murmurer to murmur, from Latin murmurare to
murmur, mutter, from murmur (n.) a hum, muttering, rushing, probably from a PIE reduplicative base
*mor-mor, of imitative origin (cognates: Sanskrit murmurah crackling fire, Greek mormyrein to roar,
boil, Lithuanian murmlenti to murmur). Meaning softly spoken words is from 1670s.


murmur (v.)

late 14c., from Old French murmurer murmur, grouse, grumble (12c.), from murmur rumbling noise (see
murmur (n.)). Related: Murmured; murmuring.


murmuring (n.)

late 14c., verbal noun from murmur (v.).


Murphy

Gaelic Murchadh sea-warrior. The Celtic sea element is also in names Muriel (q.v.), Murdoch (Old
Irish Muireadhach, Old Welsh Mordoc mariner), etc. Murphy bed (1925) is named for U.S. inventor
William Lawrence Murphy (1876-1959). By happy coincidence, Murphy was an illiterate 18c.-19c.
perversion of Morpheus, god of sleep.


Murphy&#039;s law

1958, used of various pessimistic aphorisms. If there ever was a real Murphy his identity is lost to
history. Said to be military originally, and probably pre-dates the earliest printed example (the
1958 citation calls it an old military maxim).


murrain (n.)

cattle plague, early 14c., from Anglo-French moryn, Old French moraine pestilence (12c.), probably
from mourir to die, from Latin mori (see mortal (adj.)).


muscat (n.)

type of wine, 1570s, from French, from Italian moscato, literally musky-flavored, from Vulgar Latin
*muscatus, from Latin muscus (see musk).


Muscat

capital of Oman, from Arabic Masqat, said to mean hidden (it is isolated from the interior by
hills).


muscatel (n.)

1530s, variant of muskadell (c.1400), from Old French muscadel, from Old Proven&ccedil;al *muscadel,
diminutive of muscat (grape) with the fragrance of musk (see muscat).


muscle (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French muscle muscle, sinew (14c.) and directly from Latin musculus a muscle,
literally little mouse, diminutive of mus mouse (see mouse (n.)).    So called because the shape and
movement of some muscles (notably biceps) were thought to resemble mice. The analogy was made in
Greek, too, where mys is both mouse and muscle, and its comb. form gives the medical prefix myo-.
Compare also Old Church Slavonic mysi mouse, mysica arm; German Maus mouse; muscle, Arabic 'adalah
muscle, 'adal field mouse. In Middle English, lacerte, from the Latin word for lizard, also was used
as a word for a muscle.    Musclez &amp; lacertez bene one selfe &thorn;ing, Bot &thorn;e muscle is
said to &thorn;e fourme of mouse &amp; lacert to &thorn;e fourme of a lizard. [Guy de Chauliac,
Grande Chirurgie, c.1425]    Hence muscular and mousy are relatives, and a Middle English word for
muscular was lacertous, lizardy. Figurative sense of force, violence, threat of violence is 1930,
American English. Muscle car hot rod is from 1969.


muscle (v.)

1913, to accomplish by strength, from muscle (n.). Related: Muscled; muscling. To muscle in is 1929
in underworld slang.


muscle-bound (adj.)

1879, from muscle (n.) + bound, past participle of bind (v.).


muscle-man (n.)

1929, originally an underworld enforcer; sense of strong man first attested 1952; from muscle (n.) +
man (n.).


muscled (adj.)

having muscles (of a particular type), 1640s, from muscle (n.).


Muscovy

from French Moscovie, from Modern Latin Moscovia, old name of Russia, from Russian Moskova
(Principality of) Moscow. In Muscovy duck (1650s) and certain other uses it is a corruption of musk.
Related: Muscovite.


muscular (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to muscles, from Latin musculus (see muscle (n.)) + -ar. Earlier in same sense was
musculous (early 15c.). Meaning having well-developed muscles is from 1736. Muscular Christianity
(1857) is originally in reference to philosophy of Anglican clergyman and novelist Charles Kingsley
(1819-1875). Muscular dystrophy attested from 1886.


muscularity (n.)

1680s, from Modern Latin muscularis (from Latin musculus; see muscle (n.)) + -ity.


musculature (n.)

system of muscles, 1875, from French musculature, from Latin musculus (see muscle (n.)).


musculo-

word-forming element meaning involving or pertaining to muscles, from comb. form of Latin musculus
muscle (see muscle (n.)).


musculoskeletal (adj.)

1944, from musculo- + skeletal.


muse (v.)

to reflect, to be absorbed in thought, mid-14c., from Old French muser (12c.) to ponder, dream,
wonder; loiter, waste time, literally to stand with one's nose in the air (or, possibly, to sniff
about like a dog who has lost the scent), from muse muzzle, from Gallo-Roman *musa snout, of unknown
origin. Probably influenced in sense by muse (n.). Related: Mused; musing.


muse (n.)

late 14c., protectors of the arts, from Old French Muse and directly from Latin Musa, from Greek
Mousa, the Muse, also music, song, from PIE root *men- to think, remember (see mind (n.)). Meaning
inspiring goddess of a particular poet is from late 14c. The traditional names and specialties of
the nine Muses, daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne, are: Calliope (epic poetry), Clio (history), Erato
(love poetry, lyric art), Euterpe (music, especially flute), Melpomene (tragedy), Polymnia (hymns),
Terpsichore (dance), Thalia (comedy), Urania (astronomy).


musette (n.)

small bagpipe, late 14c., from Old French musette bagpipe (13c.), from muser to play the bagpipe,
make music, from mus mouth, muzzle, from Medieval Latin musum (see muzzle (n.)). As a composition
for a musette from 1811, from French.


museum (n.)

1610s, the university building in Alexandria, from Latin museum library, study, from Greek mouseion
place of study, library or museum, school of art or poetry, originally a seat or shrine of the
Muses, from Mousa Muse (see muse (n.)). Earliest use in reference to English institutions was of
libraries (such as the British Museum); sense of building to display objects first recorded 1680s.


mush (n.)

kind of porridge, 1670s, in the American colonies, variant of mash (n.) soft mixture. Meaning
anything soft and thick is attested from 1824.


mush (interj.)

command to sled dogs, first recorded 1862, as mouche, perhaps altered from French marchons! advance!
(imperative of marcher to march; see march (v.)).


mush (v.)

to pound to a pulp, 1781, from mush (n.). Related: Mushed; mushing.


mushiness (n.)

1890, from mushy + -ness. Figurative sense of sentimentality attested from 1946.


mushroom (n.)

mid-15c., muscheron, musseroun (attested 1327 as a surname, John Mussheron), from Anglo-French
musherun, Old French meisseron (11c., Modern French mousseron), perhaps from Late Latin mussirionem
(nominative mussirio), though this might as well be borrowed from French. Barnhart says of uncertain
origin. Klein calls it a word of pre-Latin origin, used in the North of France; OED says it usually
is held to be a derivative of French mousse moss (from Germanic), and Weekley agrees, saying it is
properly applied to variety which grows in moss, but Klein says they have nothing in common. For the
final -m Weekley refers to grogram, vellum, venom. Modern spelling is from 1560s.    Used
figuratively for something or someone that makes a sudden appearance in full form from 1590s. In
reference to the shape of clouds after explosions, etc., it is attested from 1916, though the actual
phrase mushroom cloud does not appear until 1955.


mushroom (v.)

expand or increase rapidly, 1741, from mushroom (n.). Related: Mushroomed; mushrooming.


mushy (adj.)

soft, pulpy, 1839; sentimental, 1870; from mush (n.) + -y (2). Mush (n.) in a transferred sense of
sentimentality is attested from 1908.


music (n.)

mid-13c., musike, from Old French musique (12c.) and directly from Latin musica the art of music,
also including poetry (also source of Spanish musica, Italian musica, Old High German mosica, German
Musik, Dutch muziek, Danish musik), from Greek mousike (techne) (art) of the Muses, from fem. of
mousikos pertaining to the Muses, from Mousa Muse (see muse (n.)). Modern spelling from 1630s. In
classical Greece, any art in which the Muses presided, but especially music and lyric poetry.    The
use of letters to denote music pitch probably is at least as old as ancient Greece, as their
numbering system was ill-suited to the job. Natural scales begin at C (not A) because in ancient
times the minor mode was more often used than the major one, and the natural minor scale begins at
A.   Music box is from 1773, originally barrel organ; music hall is from 1842, especially hall
licensed for musical entertainment (1857). To face the music accept the consequences is from 1850;
the exact image is uncertain, one theory ties it to stage performers, another to cavalry horses
having to be taught to stay calm while the regimental band plays. To make (beautiful) music with
someone have sexual intercourse is from 1967.


musical (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to music; tuneful, harmonious; adept at making music, from Middle French
musical (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin musicalis, from Latin musica (see music). Musical
box is from 1829. Children's game musical chairs is attested from 1877, hence use of musical as a
modifier meaning changing rapidly from one to another possessor (1924). Related: Musically.


musical (n.)

theatrical piece in which music figures prominently, 1937, from musical (adj.) in musical play.
Earlier as a noun it meant musical instrument (c.1500), musical performance (1570s); musical party
(1823, a sense now in musicale).


musicale (n.)

musical party, 1872, from French musicale, short for soir&eacute;e musicale musical evening (party);
see musical (adj.).


musicality (n.)

1812, from musical (adj.) + -ity.


musician (n.)

late 14c., one skilled in music, from Old French musicien (14c.), or a native formation from music +
-ian. Sense of professional musical performer first recorded mid-15c.


musicianship (n.)

1828, from musician + -ship.


musico-

word-forming element from comb. form of Latin musicus (see music).


musicology (n.)

the study of the science of music, 1909, from music + -ology. Related: Musicological; musicologist.


musing (n.)

late 14c., complaint, verbal noun from muse (v.). Meaning pondering is from mid-15c. Related:
Musingly; musings.


musk (n.)

late 14c., from Old French musc (13c.) and directly from Late Latin muscus, from Late Greek moskhos,
from Persian mushk, from Sanskrit muska-s testicle, from mus mouse (so called, presumably, for
resemblance; see muscle). The deer gland was thought to resemble a scrotum. German has moschos, from
a Medieval Latin form of the Late Greek word. Spanish has almizcle, from Arabic al misk the musk,
from Persian. Applied to various plants and animals of similar smell (such as musk-ox, 1744).


muskeg (n.)

kind of moss bog, 1865, from a Cree Indian word.


muskellunge (n.)

large North American pike, 1789, from Algonquian (Ojibwa) maashkinoozhe; the second element kinoozhe
pike; the first either mac great, maazh- similar to, or maazh- ugly. Altered by French folk
etymology as masque allong&eacute; long mask. Called muskie for short (1894).


musket (n.)

firearm for infantry (later replaced by the rifle), 1580s, from Middle French mousquette, also the
name of a kind of sparrow-hawk, diminutive of mosca a fly, from Latin musca (see midge). The hawk so
called either for its size or because it looks speckled when in flight. Early firearms often were
given names of beasts (compare dragoon), and the equivalent word in Italian was used to mean an
arrow for a crossbow. The French word was borrowed earlier into English (early 15c.) in its literal
sense of sparrow-hawk.


musketeer (n.)

soldier armed with a musket, 1580s, from musket + -eer, or else from French mousquetaire, from
mousquette (see musket).


musketry (n.)

1640s, from French mousqueterie, from mousquet musket (see musket), on analogy of Italian
moschetteria.


Muskoegan

North American Indian language family, 1891, from Creek maskoki.


muskrat (n.)

also musk-rat, 1610s, alteration (by association with musk and rat) of musquash, from Algonquian
(probably Powhatan) muscascus, literally it is red, so called for its colorings. From cognate
Abenaki muskwessu comes variant form musquash (1620s).


musky (adj.)

c.1600, from musk + -y (2). Related: Muskiness.


musky (n.)

late 19c., short for muskrat or muskellunge. Also   muskie.


Muslim

1610s (n.), 1777 (adj.), from Arabic muslim one who submits (to the faith), from root of aslama he
resigned. Related to Islam.


muslin (n.)

c.1600, delicately woven cotton fabric, from French mousseline (17c.), from Italian mussolina, from
Mussolo, Italian name of Mosul, city in northern Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) where muslin was made.
Like many fabric names, it has changed meaning over the years, in this case from luxurious to
commonplace. In 13c. French, mosulin meant cloth of silk and gold. The meaning everyday cotton
fabric for shirts, bedding, etc. is first attested 1872 in American English.


muss (v.)

to make untidy, 1837, probably a variant of mess in its sense of disorder. Earlier (1830) as a noun
meaning disturbance. Related: Mussed; mussing.


mussel (n.)

Old English muscle, musscel shellfish, mussel, from Late Latin muscula (source of Old French musle,
Modern French moule, Middle Dutch mosscele, Dutch mossel, Old High German muscula, German Muschel),
from Latin musculus mussel, literally little mouse, also muscle; like muscle, derived from mus mouse
on the perceived similarity of size and shape. The modern spelling, distinguishing the word from
muscle, first recorded c.1600, not fully established until 1870s.


Mussulman (n.)

a Muslim, 1560s, from Turkish musulman, from Persian musulman (adj.), from Arabic muslim (see
Muslim) + adjective suffix -an.


mussy (adj.)

rumpled, 1859, from muss + -y (2). Related: Mussiness.


must (v.)

Old English moste, past tense of motan have to, be able to, from Proto-Germanic *mot- ability,
leisure (to do something) (cognates: Old Saxon motan to be obliged to, have to, Old Frisian mota,
Middle Low German moten, Dutch moeten, German m&uuml;ssen to be obliged to, Gothic gamotan to have
room to, to be able to), perhaps from PIE root *med- to measure, to take appropriate measures (see
medical (adj.)). Used as present tense from c.1300, from the custom of using past subjunctive as a
moderate or polite form of the present.


must (n.1)

new wine, Old English must, from Latin mustum (also source of Old High German, German most, Old
French moust, Modern French mo&#251;t, Spanish, Italian mosto), short for vinum mustum fresh wine,
neuter of mustus fresh, new, newborn, perhaps literally wet, and from PIE *mus-to-, from root *meus-
damp (see moss).


must (n.2)

mold, c.1600, perhaps a back-formation of musty (q.v.).


must (n.3)

male elephant frenzy, 1871, from Urdu mast intoxicated, in rut, from Persian mast, literally
intoxicated, related to Sanskrit matta- drunk, intoxicated, past participle of madati boils,
bubbles, gets drunk, from PIE root *mad- wet, moist (see mast (n.2)).


must (n.4)

that which has to be done, seen, or experienced, 1892, from must (v.). As an adjective, obligatory,
indispensable, by 1912, from the noun; must-read is from 1959.


mustache (n.)

1580s, from French moustache (15c.), from Italian mostaccio, from Medieval Greek moustakion,
diminutive of Doric mystax (genitive mystakos) upper lip, mustache, related to mastax jaws, mouth,
literally that with which one chews, from PIE root *mendh- to chew (see mandible).    Borrowed
earlier (1550s) as mostacchi, from the Italian word or its Spanish derivative mostacho. The plural
form of this, mustachios, lingers in English. Slang shortening stache attested from 1985. Dutch
slang has a useful noun, de befborstel, to refer to the mustache specifically as a tool for
stimulating the clitoris; probably from beffen to stimulate the clitoris with the tongue.


mustachioed (adj.)

1817, from mustachio (1550s), from Spanish mostacho and directly from Italian mostaccio (see
mustache). The noun was superseded by mustache, but the adjective has endured.


mustang (n.)

small, half-wild horse of the American prairie, 1808, from Mexican Spanish mestengo animal that
strays (16c.), from Spanish mestengo wild, stray, ownerless, literally belonging to the mesta, an
association of cattle ranchers who divided stray or unclaimed animals that got mixed with the herds,
from Latin mixta mixed, fem. past participle of miscere to mix (see mix (v.)).    Said to be
influenced by the Spanish word mostrenco straying, wild, which is probably from mostrar, from Latin
monstrare to show.


mustard (n.)

late 13c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French mostarde mustard, mustard plant (Modern French
moutarde), from moust must, from Latin mustum new wine (see must (n.1)); so called because it was
originally prepared by adding must to the ground seeds of the plant to make a paste. As a color
name, it is attested from 1848.   Mustard gas, World War I poison (first used by the Germans at
Ypres, 1917), so called for its color and smell and burning effect on eyes and lungs; chemical name
is dichlordiethyl sulfide, it contains no mustard, and is an atomized liquid, not a gas. To cut the
mustard (1907, usually in negative) is probably from slang mustard genuine article, best thing
(1903) on notion of that which enhances flavor.I'm not headlined in the bills, but I'm the mustard
in the salad dressing just the same. [O.Henry, Cabbages and Kings, 1904]


mustee (n.)

octoroon, offspring of a white and a quadroon, also half-caste, 1690s, a corruption of Spanish
mestizo (q.v.).


mustelid (n.)

1910, from Modern Latin Mustelidae, taken as a genus name by Linnaeus (1758), from Latin mustela
weasel, possibly related to mus mouse (see mouse (n.)). Tucker tentatively suggests *mus-ters-la
mouse harrier and Klein notes that the weasel was identified in antiquity as the catcher of mice.


musteline (adj.)

weasel-like; pertaining to weasels, 1650s, from Latin mustela (see mustelid) + -ine (1).


muster (v.)

c.1300, to display, reveal, appear, from Old French mostrer appear, show, reveal, also in a military
sense (10c., Modern French montrer), from Latin monstrare to show, from monstrum omen, sign (see
monster). Meaning to collect, assemble is early 15c.; figurative use (of qualities, etc.) is from
1580s. To muster out gather to be discharged from military service is 1834, American English. To
muster up in the figurative and transferred sense of gather, summon, marshal is from 1620s. Related:
Mustered; mustering.


muster (n.)

late 14c., action of showing, manifestation, from Old French mostre illustration, proof;
examination, inspection (13c., Modern French montre), literally that which is shown, from mostrer
(see muster (v.)). Meaning act of gathering troops is from c.1400. To pass musters (1570s)
originally meant to undergo military review without censure.


mustn&#039;t

by mid-18c., contraction of must not; see must (v).


musty (adj.)

1520s, perhaps a variant of moisty moist, damp (see moist). Related: Mustiness.


mutability (n.)

late 14c., tendency to change, inconstancy, from Middle French mutabilit&#233;, from Latin
mutabilitas, from mutabilis (see mutable).


mutable (adj.)

late 14c., liable to change, from Latin mutabilis changeable, from mutare to change, from PIE root
*mei- (1) to change, go, move (cognates: Sanskrit methati changes, alternates, joins, meets; Avestan
mitho perverted, false; Hittite mutai- be changed into; Latin meare to go, pass, migrare to move
from one place to another; Old Church Slavonic mite alternately; Czech mijim to go by, pass by,
Polish mija&#263; avoid; Gothic maidjan to change); with derivatives referring to the exchange of
goods and services as regulated by custom or law (compare Latin mutuus done in exchange, munus
service performed for the community, duty, work).


mutagen (n.)

1946, from mutation + -gen thing that produces. Related: Mutagenic; mutagenesis; mutagenize.


mutant (n.)

1901, in the biological sense, from Latin mutantem (nominative mutans) changing, present participle
of mutare to change (see mutable). In the science fiction sense, it is attested from 1954. As an
adjective from 1903.


mutate (v.)

to change state or condition, 1818, back-formation from mutation. In genetic sense, 1913, from Latin
mutatus, past participle of mutare to change (see mutable). Related: Mutated; mutating.


mutation (n.)

late 14c., action of changing, from Old French mutacion (13c.), and directly from Latin mutationem
(nominative mutatio) a changing, alteration, a turn for the worse, noun of action from past
participle stem of mutare to change (see mutable). Genetic sense is from 1894.


mutatis mutandis

with the necessary changes, Latin, literally things being changed that have to be changed, from the
ablative plurals of, respectively, the past participle and gerundive of mutare to change (see
mutable).


mute (adj.)

late 14c., mewet silent, from Old French muet dumb, mute (12c.), diminutive of mut, mo, from Latin
mutus silent, speechless, dumb, probably from imitative base *meue- (cognates: Sanskrit mukah dumb,
Greek myein to be shut, of the mouth). Form assimilated in 16c. to Latin mutus.


mute (v.)

deaden the sound of, 1861, from mute (n.). Related: Muted; muting.


mute (n.)

1570s, stage actor in a dumb show; 1610s as person who does not speak, from mute (adj.). Musical
sense first recorded 1811 of stringed instruments, 1841, of horns.


muted (adj.)

1861, in reference to musical instruments, past participle adjective from mute (v.). Figuratively by
1879. Of colors by 1939. Related: mutedness.


mutely (adv.)

1620s, from mute (adj.) + -ly (2).


muteness (n.)

1580s, from mute (adj.) + -ness.


mutilate (v.)

1530s, of things; 1560s, of persons; from Latin mutilatus, past participle of mutilare to cut off,
lop off, cut short; maim, mutilate, from mutilus maimed (see mutilation). Technically, to deprive of
some principal part, especially by cutting off. Related: Mutilated; mutilating.


mutilation (n.)

1520s, in Scots law, act of disabling or wounding a limb, from Middle French mutilation and directly
from Late Latin mutilationem (nominative mutilatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin mutilare to cut or lop off, from mutilus maimed, which perhaps is cognate with Greek mytilos
hornless. Of things, a destroying of unity by damaging or removing a part, from 1630s.


mutineer (n.)

one guilty of mutiny, c.1600, from French mutinier (16c.), from Middle French meutin rebellious (see
mutiny (n.)). As a verb from 1680s.


mutinous (adj.)

1570s, from mutine (see mutiny) + -ous. Related: Mutinously; mutinousness.


mutiny (n.)

1560s, with noun suffix -y (4) + obsolete verb mutine revolt (1540s), from Middle French mutiner to
revolt, from meutin rebellious, from meute a revolt, movement, from Vulgar Latin *movita a military
uprising, from fem. past participle of Latin movere to move (see move (v.)).


mutiny (v.)

1580s, from mutiny (n.). Alternative mutine is recorded from 1550s. Related: Mutinied; mutinying.


mutism (n.)

state of being mute, 1824, from French mutisme (1741), from Latin mutus (see mute (adj.)).


mutt (n.)

1901, stupid or foolish person, probably a shortening of muttonhead (1803) in the same sense; see
mutton and compare meathead, etc. Mutt was used by 1898 of a dog, especially a stupid one, and
perhaps this is the same word formed independently (muttonhead also was used of stupid animals), or
else a separate word of unknown derivation. Wright's English Dialect Dictionary (1900) has Mutton!
used in scolding a dog, prob. in allusion to the offence of sheep-worrying.    That dog ain't no
mutt, McManus would say as he stood behind the bar opening oysters; no an he ain't no rube! Say!
he's in it all the time when Charley trims the steaks. [Robert W. Chambers, The Haunts of Men, 1898]
Used by 1910 in dog fancier publications to refer to a non-purebred animal.


Mutt and Jeff

comic strip characters Augustus Mutt and Jim Jeffries, in U.S. cartoonist Henry Conway (Bud)
Fisher's strip, which debuted in 1907. Used allusively from 1917 in reference to a pair of stupid
men, affable losers, or to one tall (Mutt) and one short (Jeff).


mutter (v.)

early 14c., moteren to mumble, from a common PIE imitative *mut- to grunt, mutter (cognates: Old
Norse mu&eth;la to murmur, Latin muttire to mutter, Old High German mutilon to murmur, mutter; to
drizzle), with frequentative suffix -er. Related: Muttered; muttering.


mutter (n.)

1630s, from mutter (v.).


mutton (n.)

flesh of sheep used as food, late 13c., from Old French moton mutton; ram, wether, sheep (12c.,
Modern French mouton), from Medieval Latin multonem (8c.), probably from Gallo-Roman *multo-s,
accusative of Celtic *multo sheep (cognates: Old Irish molt wether, Mid-Breton mout, Welsh mollt);
the same word also was borrowed into Italian as montone a sheep. Transferred slang sense of food for
lust, loose women, prostitutes (1510s) led to extensive British slang uses down to the present day
for woman variously regarded as seeking lovers or as lust objects. Mutton chop is from 1720; as a
style of side whiskers, from 1865.


mutual (adj.)

late 15c., originally of feelings, from Middle French mutuel (14c.), from Latin mutuus reciprocal,
done in exchange, from PIE root *mei- (1) to change, exchange (see mutable).    The essence of its
meaning is that it involves the relation x is or does to y as y to x; &amp; not the relation, x is
or does to z as y to z. [Fowler]   Mutual Admiration Society (1851) seems to have been coined by
Thoreau. Mutual fund is recorded from 1950. The Cold War's mutual assured destruction attested from
1966. (Assured destruction was an early 1960s term in U.S. military policy circles in reference to
nuclear weapons as a deterrent, popularized c.1964 by Robert McNamara, U.S. Secretary of Defense
under Lyndon Johnson, e.g. statement before House Armed Services Committee, Feb. 18, 1965; the
mutual perhaps first added by Donald Brennan, conservative defense analyst and a public critic of
the policy, who also noted the acronym MAD.)


mutual (n.)

short for mutual fund, 1971; see mutual.


mutualism (n.)

1849, in reference to the doctrine of French anarchist/socialist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809-1865),
from French mutuellisme. In biology, from 1876, from mutual + -ism.


mutualistic (adj.)

1885, from mutualist advocate of mutualism (1848); see mutualism.


mutuality (n.)

1580s, from mutual + -ity.


mutually (adv.)

1530s, from mutual + -ly (2). Mutually exclusive is recorded by 1650s.


muumuu (n.)

also muu-muu, 1923, from Hawaiian mu'u mu'u, literally cut off, name given to the local adaptation
of the dresses given to Island women by early 19c. Christian missionaries in the early days when a
few flowers sufficed for a garment [Don Blanding, Hula Moons, 1930]. So called because the native
style hangs from the shoulder and omits the high neck and the train.


Muzak (n.)

1935, proprietary name for piped music, supposedly a blend of music and Kodak, said to have been
coined c.1922 by Gen. George Squier, who developed the system of background music for workplaces.


muzzle (n.)

late 14c., device put over an animal's mouth to stop it from biting, eating, or rooting, from Old
French musel muzzle, also snout, nose (12c., Modern French museau), from muse muzzle, from Gallo-
Roman *musa snout (source also of Proven&ccedil;al mus, Old Spanish mus, Italian muso), of unknown
origin, possibly related to Latin morsus bite (but OED finds serious difficulties with this).
Meaning projecting part of the head of an animal is from early 15c. in English; sense of open end of
a firearm first recorded 1560s.


muzzle (v.)

to put a muzzle on, early 15c., from muzzle (n.). Figurative use from 1610s. Related: Muzzled;
muzzling.


muzzy (adj.)

confused, dazed, 1720s, perhaps from mossy, or from dialectal mosey (adj.) moldy, hazy; stupefied
with drink, dull, stupid.


mwah

sound indicative of a kiss or an air-kiss, 1994, imitative.


my (pron.)

c.1200, mi, reduced form of mine used before words beginning in consonants except h- (my father, but
mine enemy), and from 14c. before all nouns. As interjection, by 1825, probably a shortened form of
my God!


myalgia (n.)

muscular pain, 1827, coined in Modern Latin (on analogy of neuralgia) from myo- muscle + -algia
pain.


Myanmar

an old name for a part of Burma and a word for the country in native speech, officially chosen by
military rulers of Burma in 1989. Reasons given include casting off a relic of colonialism, or
downplaying of the connection to the Burman ethnic majority.    It should be pointed out that this
renaming has virtually no impact on Burmese citizens speaking in Burmese, who continue to refer to
both Myanma as well as Bama (this not unlike formal reference in the English language to 'The
Netherlands' while informally using 'Holland'). [Gustaaf Houtman, Mental Culture in Burmese Crisis
Politics, 1999]


myasthenia (n.)

muscular weakness, 1856, medical Latin; see myo- + asthenia.


Mycenaean

1590s, pertaining to Mycenae, the ancient city on the Argive plain, from Latin Mycenaeus, from Greek
Mykenaios of Mycenae, from Mykenai. In reference to the Aegean civilization that flourished
1500-1100 B.C.E. and was centered on Mycenae, it is from 1890s.


myco-

before vowels myc-, word-forming element meaning mushroom, fungus, formed irregularly from Greek
mykes fungus, mushroom, anything shaped like a mushroom, from PIE root *meug- slimy, slippery (see
mucus). The correct form is myceto- (mycet-).


mycology (n.)

1822, from myco- + -logy. Related: Mycological; mycologist.


mycosis (n.)

1876, medical Latin; see myco- + -osis. Related: Mycotic.


myelin (n.)

also myeline, soft material found in nerve tissues, 1867, from German Myelin (1854), from Greek
myelos marrow; the brain, innermost part, of unknown origin.


myelo-

before vowels myel-, word-forming element meaning marrow, spinal cord, from Greek myelos marrow; the
brain, of unknown origin.


myeloma (n.)

1857, from comb. form of Greek myelos marrow + -oma.


Mylar (n.)

proper name for a polyester film, 1954, trademarked by E.I. Du Pont de Nemours and Co., Wilmington,
Delaware, U.S.A. Like many Du Pont names, it doesn't mean anything, they just liked the sound.


mynah (n.)

type of passerine bird of India and the East, talking starling, 1769, from Hindi maina a starling,
from Sanskrit madana- delightful, joyful, related to madati it gladdens, literally it bubbles, from
PIE root *mad- moist, wet (see mast (n.2).


myo-

before vowels my-, word-forming element meaning muscle, from comb. form of Greek mys muscle,
literally mouse (see muscle (n.)).


myocardium (n.)

1866, from myo- + Latinized form of Greek kardia heart (see heart). Related: Myocardial;
myocarditis.


myology (n.)

1640s; see myo- + -logy. Related: Myologist.


myomancy (n.)

1725, divination by the movements of mice, from Greek myo-, comb. form of mys (see mouse (n.)) +
-mancy.


myope (n.)

short-sighted person, 1728, from French myope short-sighted (16c.), from Late Latin myop-, from
Greek myops short-sighted (see myopia).


myopia (n.)

short-sightedness, 1727, medical Latin, from Late Greek myopia near-sightedness, from myops near-
sighted, literally closing the eyes, from myein to shut (see mute (adj.)) + ops (genitive opos) eye
(see eye (n.)).


myopic (adj.)

short-sighted, 1800, from myopia + -ic. Figurative use from 1891. Related: Myopical (1748);
myopically.


myriad (n.)

1550s, from Middle French myriade and directly from Late Latin myrias (genitive myriadis) ten
thousand, from Greek myrias (genitive myriados) a number of ten thousand, countless numbers, from
myrios (plural myrioi) innumerable, countless, infinite; boundless, as a definite number, ten
thousand (the greatest number in Greek expressed by one word, Liddell &amp; Scott say), of unknown
origin; perhaps from PIE *meue- abundant (cognates: Hittite muri- cluster of grapes, Latin muto
penis, Middle Irish moth penis). Specific use is usually in translations from Greek or Latin.


myriad (adj.)

c.1800, from myriad (n.).


myrmidon (n.)

c.1400, from Latin Myrmidones (plural), from Greek Myrmidones, Thessalian tribe led by Achilles to
the Trojan War, fabled to have been ants changed into men, and often derived from Greek myrmex ant
(from PIE *morwi- (see Formica (2)), but Watkins does not connect them and Klein's sources suggest a
connection to Greek mormos dread, terror. Transferred sense of faithful follower is from c.1600.


myrrh (n.)

Old English myrre, from Latin myrrha (also source of Dutch mirre, German Myrrhe, French myrrhe,
Italian, Spanish mirra), from Greek myrrha, from a Semitic source (compare Akkadian murru, Hebrew
mor, Arabic murr myrrh), from a root meaning was bitter.


myrtle (n.)

c.1400, from Old French mirtile, from Medieval Latin myrtillus, diminutive of Latin myrtus myrtle
tree, from Greek myrtos the myrtle, a sprig of myrtle, from same Semitic source as Greek myrrha (see
myrrh).


myself (pron.)

c.1500, alteration of meself, from Old English phrase (ic) me self, where me is a kind of ethical
dative [OED], altered in Middle Ages from meself on analogy of herself, with her- felt as genitive;
though analogous hisself remains bad form.


mysophobia (n.)

dread of dirt or defilement, 1879, from Greek mysos uncleanliness, from PIE *meus- damp (see moss) +
-phobia.


MySpace

social networking Web site, founded in late 2003.


mystagogue (n.)

person who initiates into mysteries, 1550s, from Latin mystagogus a guide to the mysteries, from
Greek mystagogos, from mystes one initiated into the mysteries (see mystery (n.1)) + agogos leading,
a leader (see act (n.)). Related: Mystagogic; mystagogical; mystagogy; mystagoguery.


mysterious (adj.)

1610s, full of mystery, from Latin mysterium (see mystery (n.1)) + -ous. Related: Mysteriously;
mysteriousness. Earlier in same sense was mysterial (early 15c.), from Late Latin mysterialis.


mystery (n.1)

early 14c., in a theological sense, religious truth via divine revelation, hidden spiritual
significance, mystical truth, from Anglo-French *misterie, Old French mistere secret, mystery,
hidden meaning (Modern French myst&#232;re), from Latin mysterium secret rite, secret worship; a
secret thing, from Greek mysterion (usually in plural mysteria) secret rite or doctrine, from mystes
one who has been initiated, from myein to close, shut (see mute (adj.)); perhaps referring to the
lips (in secrecy) or to the eyes (only initiates were allowed to see the sacred rites).    The Greek
word was used in Septuagint for secret counsel of God, translated in Vulgate as sacramentum. Non-
theological use in English, a hidden or secret thing, is from late 14c. In reference to the ancient
rites of Greece, Egypt, etc. it is attested from 1640s. Meaning detective story first recorded in
English 1908.


mystery (n.2)

handicraft, trade, art (archaic), late 14c., from Medieval Latin misterium, alteration of Latin
ministerium service, occupation, office, ministry (see ministry), influenced in form by Medieval
Latin mysterium (see mystery (n.1)) and in sense by maistrie mastery. Now only in mystery play, in
reference to the medieval performances, which often were staged by members of craft guilds. The two
senses of mystery formed a common pun in (secular) Tudor theater.


mystic (adj.)

late 14c., spiritually allegorical, pertaining to mysteries of faith, from Old French mistique
mysterious, full of mystery (14c.), or directly from Latin mysticus mystical, mystic, of secret
rites (source also of Italian mistico, Spanish mistico), from Greek mystikos secret, mystic,
connected with the mysteries, from mystes one who has been initiated (see mystery (n.1)). Meaning
pertaining to occult practices or ancient religions first recorded 1610s.


mystic (n.)

exponent of mystical theology, 1670s, from mystic (adj.). In Middle English, the noun meant symbolic
meaning, interpretation (early 14c.).


Mystic

place name in Connecticut, U.S., deformed from Algonquian missituk great tidal river, from missi
large + -tuk tidal river.


mystical (adj.)

late 15c., enigmatic, obscure, symbolic, from mystic + -al (1). Related: Mystically. Meaning having
spiritual significance is from 1520s.


mysticism (n.)

1736, from mystic (adj.) + -ism.


mystification (n.)

1815, from French mystification, noun of action from mystifier (see mystify).


mystified (adj.)

bewildered, puzzled, 1863, past participle adjective from mystify.


mystify (v.)

1814, from French mystifier (1772), a verb formed irregularly from mystique a mystic (see mystic
(adj.)) + -fier (see -fy). Related: Mystified; mystifying.


mystique (n.)

1891, atmosphere of mystery, from French mystique a mystic; mystical, from Latin mysticus (see
mystic (adj.)).


myth (n.)

1830, from French Mythe (1818) and directly from Modern Latin mythus, from Greek mythos speech,
thought, story, myth, anything delivered by word of mouth, of unknown origin.Myths are stories about
divine beings, generally arranged in a coherent system; they are revered as true and sacred; they
are endorsed by rulers and priests; and closely linked to religion. Once this link is broken, and
the actors in the story are not regarded as gods but as human heroes, giants or fairies, it is no
longer a myth but a folktale. Where the central actor is divine but the story is trivial ... the
result is religious legend, not myth. [J. Simpson &amp; S. Roud, Dictionary of English Folklore,
Oxford, 2000, p.254]General sense of untrue story, rumor is from 1840.


mythic (adj.)

1660s, from Late Latin mythicus legendary, from Greek mythikos, from mythos (see myth).


mythical (adj.)

1670s; see mythic + -al (1).


mythological (adj.)

1610s, from Late Latin mythologicus, from Greek mythologikos versed in legendary lore, from
mythologia (see mythology). Related: Mythologically.


mythology (n.)

early 15c., exposition of myths, from Middle French mythologie and directly from Late Latin
mythologia, from Greek mythologia legendary lore, a telling of mythic legends; a legend, story,
tale, from mythos myth (of unknown origin) + -logy study. Meaning a body of myths first recorded
1781.


mythopoeic (adj.)

pertaining to the creation of myths, 1846, from Greek mytho-, comb. form of mythos (see myth) +
poiein to make, create (see poet).


myxo-

before vowels myx-, word-forming element meaning slime, mucus, from comb. form of Greek myxa mucus;
lamp wick (see mucus).


