-ness

word-forming element denoting action, quality, or state, attached to an adjective or past participle
to form an abstract noun, from Old English -nes(s), from Proto-Germanic *in-assu- (cognates: Old
Saxon -nissi, Middle Dutch -nisse, Dutch -nis, Old High German -nissa, German -nis, Gothic
-inassus), from *-in-, noun stem, + *-assu-, abstract noun suffix, probably from the same root as
Latin -tudo (see -tude).


-nik

as in beatnik, etc., suffix used in word formation from c.1945, from Yiddish -nik (as in nudnik a
bore), from Russian -nik, common personal suffix meaning person or thing associated with or involved
in (compare nudnik; kolkhoznik member of a kolkhoz). Rocketed to popularity with sputnik (q.v.).


N

in nickname, newt, and British dialectal naunt, the -n- belongs to a preceding indefinite article an
or possessive pronoun mine.    Other examples of this from Middle English manuscripts include a
neilond (an island, early 13c.), a narawe (an arrow, c.1400), a nox (an ox, c.1400), a noke (an oak,
early 15c.), a nappyle (an apple, early 15c.), a negge (an egg, 15c.). In 16c., an idiot sometimes
became a nidiot, which, with still-common casual pronunciation, became nidget, which, alas, has not
survived.    The process also worked in surnames, from oblique cases of Old English at by, near, as
in Nock/Nokes/Noaks from atten Oke by the oak; Nye from atten ye near the lowland; and see
Nashville.    But it is more common for an English word to lose an -n- to a preceding a: apron,
auger, adder, umpire, humble pie, etc. The mathematical use of n for an indefinite number is first
recorded 1852, in to the nth power.


n.b.

abbreviation of Latin nota bene note well.


n.g.

abbreviation of no good, attested from 1838; variant n.b.g. for no bloody good is first recorded
1903.


NAACP

abbreviation of National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, first attested 1910.
Organization founded Feb. 12, 1909, as National Negro Committee.


Naaman

masc. proper name, biblical name of Aramean general cured of leprosy by Elisha, from Hebrew Na'aman,
literally pleasantness, from stem of na'em was pleasant or lovely. Compare Naomi.


nab (v.)

to catch (someone), 1680s, probably a variant of dialectal nap to seize, catch, lay hold of (1670s,
now surviving only in kidnap), which possibly is from Scandinavian (compare Norwegian nappe, Swedish
nappa to catch, snatch; Danish nappe to pinch, pull); reinforced by Middle English napand grasping,
greedy. Related: Nabbed; nabbing.


nabob (n.)

1610s, deputy governor in Mogul Empire, Anglo-Indian, from Hindi nabab, from Arabic nuwwab,
honorific plural of na'ib viceroy, deputy, from base n-w-b to take someone's place. Also used of
Europeans who came home from India having made a fortune there, hence very rich man (1764).


nacelle (n.)

late 15c., small boat, from Old French nacele little boat, bark, skiff (12c., Modern French
nacelle), from Vulgar Latin *naucella, from Late Latin navicella a little ship, diminutive of navis
ship (see naval). Meaning gondola of an airship is from 1901; extended to cockpit of an aircraft by
1914; later transferred to other similar housings and structures.


nacho (n.)

according to The Dallas Morning News [Oct. 22, 1995] and other sources, named for restaurant cook
Ignacio Anaya, who invented the dish in the Mexican border town of Piedras Negras in 1943.


nachos (n.)

see nacho.


nacre (n.)

1590s, type of shellfish that yields mother-of-pearl, from Middle French nacre (14c.), from Italian
naccaro (now nacchera), possibly from Arabic naqur hunting horn (from nakara to hollow out), in
reference to the shape of the mollusk shell. Meaning mother-of-pearl is from 1718.


nacreous (adj.)

resembling nacre, 1807, from nacre + -ous.


nad (n.)

also nads, 1980s, student slang shortening of gonad.


nada (n.)

nothing, 1933, slang, introduced by Hemingway, from Spanish nada nothing, from Latin (res) nata
small, insignificant thing, literally (thing) born (see natal).


Naderism (n.)

1969, in reference to the methods of U.S. lawyer and consumer advocate Ralph Nader (b.1934) + -ism.


nadir (n.)

late 14c., in astronomical sense, from Medieval Latin nadir, from Arabic nazir opposite to, in nazir
as-samt, literally opposite direction, from nazir opposite + as-samt road, path (see zenith).
Transferred sense of lowest point (of anything) is first recorded 1793.


nae

northern England and Scottish variant of no.


naeve (n.)

spot, blemish, 1610s, from Latin naevus mole, birthmark, wart, from *gnaevus birthmark, literally
born in.


naff (v.)

British slang word with varied uses, not all certainly connected; see Partridge, who lists three
noun uses: 1. female pudenda (c.1845), which might be back-slang from fan, shortening of fanny (in
the British sense); 2. nothing, in prostitutes' slang from c.1940; 3. a euphemism for fuck (v.) in
oaths, imprecations, expletives (as in naff off), 1959, making it slightly less obvious than eff
[Partridge]; and an adjective naff vulgar, common, despicable, said to have been used in 1960s
British gay slang for unlovely and thence adopted into the slangs of the theater and the armed
forces.


NAFTA

acronym for North American Free Trade Agreement, negotiated from 1991, signed Dec. 17, 1992,
implemented 1994.


nag (v.)

annoy by scolding, 1828, originally a dialectal word meaning to gnaw (1825), probably ultimately
from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse gnaga to complain, literally to bite, gnaw, dialectal
Swedish and Norwegian nagga to gnaw), from Proto-Germanic *gnagan, related to Old English gnagan to
gnaw (see gnaw). Related: Nagged; nagger; nagging.


nag (n.)

old horse, c.1400, nagge small riding horse, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Dutch negge, neg
(but these are more recent than the English word), perhaps related in either case to imitative
neigh. Term of abuse is a transferred sense, first recorded 1590s.


naga (n.)

in Hindu mythology, race of serpent demons, offspring of Kaduru, guardians of the under-regions;
1785, from Sanskrit naga serpent, snake, of unknown origin.


Nagasaki

Japanese city, named for its situation, from naga long + saki headland, promontory.


nah

1920, reflecting a drawn-out American English pronunciation of no.


Nahuatl

1822, from Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) Nahuatl, the people's name, something that makes an
agreeable sound; someone who speaks well or speaks one's own language. As a language name, usually
in the compound form nahuatlahotol-li.


naiad (n.)

water nymph, c.1600, from Latin Nais, Naias (genitive naiadis), from Greek Naias (plural Naiades)
river nymph, from naiein to flow, from PIE *naw-yo-, suffixed form of root *(s)nau- to swim, flow,
let flow (see nutriment). Dryden used the Latin singular form Nais, and the plural Naiades is
attested in English from late 14c.


naif (adj.)

1590s, from French na&#239;f, literally naive (see naive). As a noun, first attested 1893, from
French, where Old French naif also meant native inhabitant; simpleton, natural fool.


nail (n.)

Old English negel metal pin, n&aelig;gl fingernail (handn&aelig;gl), toenail, from Proto-Germanic
*naglaz (cognates: Old Norse nagl fingernail, nagli metal nail; Old Saxon and Old High German nagel,
Old Frisian neil, Middle Dutch naghel, Dutch nagel, German Nagel fingernail, small metal spike),
from PIE root *(o)nogh nail (cognates: Greek onyx claw, fingernail; Latin unguis nail, claw; Old
Church Slavonic noga foot, noguti nail, claw; Lithuanian naga hoof, nagutis fingernail; Old Irish
ingen, Old Welsh eguin nail, claw).    The fingernail sense seems to be the original one. Nail
polish attested from 1891. To bite one's nails as a sign of anxiety is attested from 1570s. Nail-
biting is from 1805. Hard as nails is from 1828. To hit the nail on the head say or do just the
right thing is first recorded 1520s. Phrase on the nail on the spot, exactly is from 1590s, of
obscure origin; OED says it is not even certain it belongs to this sense of nail.


nail (v.)

Old English n&aelig;glian to fasten with nails, from Proto-Germanic *ganaglijan (cognates: Old Saxon
neglian, Old Norse negla, Old High German negilen, German nageln, Gothic ganagljan to nail), from
the root of nail (n.). Related: Nailed; nailing. Meaning to catch, seize is first recorded 1766,
probably from earlier sense to keep fixed in a certain position (1610s). Meaning to succeed in
hitting is from 1886. To nail down to fix down with nails is from 1660s.


nailery (n.)

workshop where nails are made, 1798, from nail (n.) + -ery.


naissance (n.)

birth, origin, late 15c., from Middle French naissance birth, parentage, place of origin (12c.),
present participle of na&icirc;tre, from Gallo-Roman *nascere, from Latin nasci be born (see genus).


naissant (adj.)

1570s, from French naissant, present participle of na&#238;tre (see naissance).


naive (adj.)

1650s, natural, simple, artless, from French na&#239;ve, fem. of na&#239;f, from Old French naif
naive, natural, genuine; just born; foolish, innocent; unspoiled, unworked (13c.), from Latin
nativus not artificial, also native, rustic, literally born, innate, natural (see native (adj.)).
Related: Naively.


naivete (n.)

1670s, from French na&#239;vet&eacute;, from Old French naivet&eacute; genuineness, authenticity,
literally native disposition (see naive). Englished form naivety is attested from 1708.


nake (v.)

to make naked, early 14c., from naked, perhaps with misapprehension of the -d as a past tense
suffix. Marked as Obs[olete] exc[ept] Sc[ottish] in OED. Earlier was naken to strip naked (mid-
13c.); a later generation coined nakedize (1858).


naked (adj.)

Old English nacod nude, bare; empty, also not fully clothed, from Proto-Germanic *nakwathaz
(cognates: Old Frisian nakad, Middle Dutch naket, Dutch naakt, Old High German nackot, German nackt,
Old Norse n&ouml;kkvi&eth;r, Old Swedish naku&thorn;er, Gothic naqa&thorn;s naked), from PIE root
*nogw- naked (cognates: Sanskrit nagna, Hittite nekumant-, Old Persian *nagna-, Greek gymnos, Latin
nudus, Lithuanian nuogas, Old Church Slavonic nagu-, Russian nagoi, Old Irish nocht, Welsh noeth
bare, naked). Related: Nakedly; nakedness. Applied to qualities, actions, etc., from late 14c.
(first in The Cloud of Unknowing); phrase naked truth is from 1585, in Alexander Montgomerie's The
Cherry and the Slae:    Which thou must (though it grieve thee) grant  I trumped never a man.  But
truely told the naked trueth,  To men that meld with mee,  For neither rigour, nor for rueth,  But
onely loath to lie.  [Montgomerie, 1585]    Phrase naked as a jaybird (1943) was earlier naked as a
robin (1879, in a Shropshire context); the earliest known comparative based on it was naked as a
needle (late 14c.). Naked eye is from 1660s, unnecessary in the world before telescopes and
microscopes.


Nam (n.)

colloquial shortening of Vietnam, 1969, originally among U.S. troops sent there.


namaste (n.)

salutatory gesture, 1948, from Hindi, from Sanskrit namas bowing + te, dative of tuam you
(singular). Used as a word of greeting from 1967.


namby-pamby (adj.)

weakly sentimental, insipidly pretty, 1745, from satiric nickname of English poet Ambrose Philips
(1674-1749) mocking his sentimental pastorals addressed to infant members of the nobility. Used
first in 1726 in a farce credited to Carey. Related: Namby-pambical.


name (n.)

Old English nama, noma name, reputation, from Proto-Germanic *namon (cognates: Old Saxon namo, Old
Frisian nama, Old High German namo, German Name, Middle Dutch name, Dutch naam, Old Norse nafn,
Gothic namo name), from PIE *nomn- (cognates: Sanskrit nama; Avestan nama; Greek onoma, onyma; Latin
nomen; Old Church Slavonic ime, genitive imene; Russian imya; Old Irish ainm; Old Welsh anu name).
Meaning famous person is from 1610s. Meaning one's reputation is from c.1300. As a modifier meaning
well-known, first attested 1938. Name brand is from 1944; name-calling attested from 1846; name-
dropper first recorded 1947. name-tag is from 1903; name-child attested from 1845. The name of the
game the essential thing or quality is from 1966; to have one's name in lights be a famous performer
is from 1929.    He who once a good name gets,  May piss a bed, and say he sweats.  [Dictionary of
Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]


name (v.)

Old English namian to name, call; nominate, appoint, from source of name (n.). Related: Named;
naming.


nameless (adj.)

early 14c., undistinguished, from name (n.) + -less. Meaning having no name is early 15c.; that of
too abominable to be named is from 1610s. Similar formation in Dutch naamloos, German namenlos.
Related: Namelessly; namelessness.


namely (adv.)

particularly, especially (i.e. by name), late 12c., from name (n.) + -ly (2).


nameplate (n.)

1882, from name (n.) + plate (n.).


namesake (n.)

person named for the sake of someone, 1640s, probably originally (for the) name's sake.


Nan

fem. proper name, usually a familiar form of Ann before the 20c. rise in popularity of Nancy. From
c.1700 as a characteristic name for a serving maid. As short for nanny, etc., from 1940.


nana

child's word for grandmother or, sometimes, nurse, first recorded c.1844 (see nanny).


nance (n.)

effeminate man, homosexual, 1904, from female name Nancy (q.v.), which was in use as an adjective
meaning effeminate (applied to men) from 1883, a shortening of earlier Miss Nancy.   <b>Nancy,
Miss,</b> an opprobrious epithet for an exceedingly effeminate, over-nice young man. The original
Miss Nancy, however, was a Mrs. Anna Old field, a celebrated actress, who died in 1730 and was
buried in Westminster Abbey. She was extremely vain and nice about her dress, and as she lay in
state, attended by two noblemen, she was attired, as she had directed shortly before her death, in a
very fine Brussels lace head-dress, a Holland shift with a tucker and double ruffles of the same
lace, a pair of new kid gloves, etc., a circumstance alluded to by Pope .... [William S. Walsh,
Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities, 1892]   Nancy boy effeminate male homosexual is attested by
1958.


Nancy

fem. proper name, probably a pet form of Ancy, diminutive of Middle English Annis Agnes (see Agnes).
As an adjective meaning effeminate (with reference to men) it is from 1904. Among the top 10 popular
names for girls born in U.S. between 1935 and 1955.


nankeen (n.)

kind of cotton cloth, 1755, from Nanking, China, where it originally was made.


Nanking

city in China, literally southern capital, from nan south + jing capital.


nanny (n.)

children's nurse, 1795, from widespread child's word for female adult other than mother (compare
Greek nanna aunt). The word also is a nickname form of the fem. proper name Ann, which probably is
the sense in nanny goat (1788, compare billy goat). Nanny-house brothel is slang from c.1700. Nanny
state, in reference to overintrusive government policies is attested by 1987, the term associated
with British political leader Margaret Thatcher, who criticized the tendency.


nanny (v.)

to be unduly protective, 1954, from nanny (n.). Related: Nannied; nannying.


nano-

introduced 1947 (at 14th conference of the Union Internationale de Chimie) as a prefix for units of
one thousand-millionth part, from Greek nanos a dwarf. According to Watkins, this is originally
little old man, from nannos uncle, masc. of nanna aunt (see nana). Earlier it was used as a prefix
to mean dwarf, dwarfish, and still in a non-scientific sense of very small.


nanometer (n.)

also nanometre, 1963, from nano- + meter (n.2).


nanosecond (n.)

1959, from nano- + second (n.).


nanotechnology (n.)

by 1974, from nano- + technology.


Nantucket

island off Massachusetts, early forms include Natocke, Nantican, Nautican; from an obscure southern
New England Algonquian word, perhaps meaning in the middle of waters. Related: Nantucketer.


Naomi

fem. proper name, biblical mother-in-law of Ruth, from Hebrew Na'omi, literally my delight, from
no'am pleasantness, delightfulness, from stem of na'em was pleasant, was lovely.


nap (n.1)

downy surface of cloth, mid-15c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German noppe nap, tuft of wool,
probably introduced by Flemish cloth-workers. Cognate with Old English hnoppian to pluck, ahneopan
pluck off, Old Swedish niupa to pinch, Gothic dis-hniupan to tear.


nap (v.1)

Old English hnappian to doze, sleep lightly, of unknown origin, apparently related to Old High
German hnaffezan, German dialectal nafzen, Norwegian napp. Related: Napped; napping.


nap (n.2)

short spell of sleep, c.1300, from nap (v.). With take (v.) from c.1400.


nap (v.2)

to furnish with a nap, raise the nap of, 1610s, from nap (n.1).


Napa

California county noted for wines, perhaps from a Southern Patwin (Wiuntun) word meaning homeland.


napalm (n.)

1942, from na(phthenic) palm(itic) acids, used in manufacture of the chemical that thickens
gasoline. The verb is 1950, from the noun. Related: Napalmed; napalming.


nape (n.)

back of the neck, c.1300, of unknown origin, perhaps from Old French hanap a goblet, in reference to
the hollow at the base of the skull. The entire absence of forms with initial k makes it difficult
to connect the word with the apparently synonymous OFris (hals) knap [OED].


naphtha (n.)

inflammable liquid distilled from petroleum, 1570s, from Latin, from Greek naphtha bitumen, perhaps
from Persian neft pitch, or Aramaic naphta, nephta, but these could as well be from Greek. In Middle
English as napte (late 14c.), from Old French napte, but the modern word is a re-introduction.


naphthalene (n.)

1821, coined by English chemist John Kidd (1775-1851), who first isolated and studied it, from
naphtha + chemical suffix -ine (2) + -l- for the sake of euphony.


napkin (n.)

early 15c., from Old French nape tablecloth, cloth cover, towel (from Latin mappa; see map (n.)) +
Middle English -kin little. No longer felt as a diminutive. The Old French diminutive was naperon
(see apron).


Naples

city in southern Italy, Italian Napoli, founded by Greek coloniests 5c. B.C.E., from Greek Neapolis,
literally New City, from nea, fem. of neos new (see neo-) + polis city (see polis).


Napoleon

used in reference to various qualities and things associated with 19c. French emperors of that name,
especially Napoleon I (Bonaparte) (1769-1821), such as a gold coin issued by his government and
worth 20 francs. As a 12-pound artillery piece, in use in U.S. military from 1857 (in this case,
from Napoleon III (1808-1873), under whose rule it was designed). As a type of boot, by 1860; as a
card game, by 1876; as a type of rich cake, from 1892; as a type of good brandy, from 1930. The name
also was applied by 1821 to anyone thought to have achieved domination in any field by ambition and
ruthlessness. Napoleon complex in reference to aggressiveness by short people is attested by 1930.
Related: Napoleonic.


napping (n.)

action of sleeping, Old English hneappunge, verbal noun from nap (v.).


nappy (adj.)

downy, late 15c., from nap (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning fuzzy, kinky, used in colloquial or derogatory
reference to the hair of black people, is from 1950.


narc (n.)

1967 (earlier narco, 1960), American English slang, shortened form of narcotics agent. Had been used
1955 for narcotics hospital, 1958 for narcotics addict. Sense and spelling tending to merge with
older but unrelated nark (q.v.).


narcissism (n.)

1905, from German Narzissismus, coined 1899 (in Die sexuellen Perversit&auml;ten), by German
psychiatrist Paul N&auml;cke (1851-1913), on a comparison suggested 1898 by Havelock Ellis, from
Greek Narkissos, name of a beautiful youth in mythology (Ovid, Metamorphoses, iii.370) who fell in
love with his own reflection in a spring and was turned to the flower narcissus (q.v.). Coleridge
used the word in a letter from 1822.    But already Krishna, enamoured of himself, had resolved to
experience lust for his own self; he manifested his own Nature in the cow-herd girls and enjoyed
them. [Karapatri, Lingopasana-rahasya, Siddhanta, II, 1941-2]    Sometimes erroneously as narcism.


narcissist (n.)

1930, from narcissism + -ist.


narcissistic (adj.)

1912, see narcissism + -istic. Sometimes erroneously as narcistic. Related: Narcissistically.


narcissus (n.)

type of bulbous flowering plant, 1540s, from Latin narcissus, from Greek narkissos the narcissus,
perhaps from a pre-Greek Aegean word, but associated with Greek narke numbness (see narcotic)
because of the sedative effect of the alkaloids in the plant.


narco-

word-forming element meaning stupor, narcosis, sleep, from Latinized form of Greek narko-, comb.
form of narke numbness (see narcotic (n.)).


narcolepsy (n.)

1880, from French narcolepsie, coined 1880 by French physician Jean-Baptiste-&Eacute;douard
G&eacute;lineau (1859-1928) from comb. form of Greek narke numbness, stupor (see narcotic) + lepsis
an attack, seizure, from leps-, future stem of lambanein take hold of, grasp (see analemma).
Related: Narcoleptic; narcolept.


narcomania (n.)

1887, from narco- + mania.


narcosis (n.)

1690s, state of unconsciousness caused by a narcotic, Modern Latin, from Greek narkosis, from
narkoun to benumb (see narcotic (n.)).


narcotic (n.)

late 14c., from Old French narcotique (early 14c.), noun use of adjective, and directly from
Medieval Latin narcoticum, from Greek narkotikon, neuter of narkotikos making stiff or numb, from
narkotos, verbal adjective of narcoun to benumb, make unconscious, from narke numbness, deadness,
stupor, cramp (also the electric ray), perhaps from PIE root *(s)nerq- to turn, twist. Sense of any
illegal drug first recorded 1926, American English. Related: Narcotics.


narcotic (adj.)

c.1600, from Middle French narcotique (14c.) or German narkotisch and directly from Medieval Latin
narcoticus, from Greek narkotikos (see narcotic (n.)). Related: Narcotical (1580s).


nard (n.)

late 14c., from Old French narde (Modern French nard), from Latin nardus, from Greek nardos, of
Eastern origin (compare Hebrew ner'd, plural n'radim; Arabic and Persian nardin, Sanskrit narada,
nalada, name of an aromatic balsam).


nare (n.)

nostril, late 14c., singular of nares.


nares (n.)

nostrils, 1690s, from Latin nares, plural of naris nostril, from PIE root *nas- (see nose (n.)).


narghile (n.)

oriental water pipe for smoking, 1839, from French narghileh, from Persian nargileh, from nargil
cocoa-nut, of which the bowl was originally made. The Persian word is probably from Sanskrit
narikerah, which may be from a Dravidian source.


nark

1859, to act as a police informer (v.); 1860, police informer (n.), probably from Romany nak nose,
from Hindi nak, from Sanskrit nakra, which probably is related to Sanskrit nasa nose (see nose
(n.)). Sense and spelling tending to merge with etymologically unrelated narc (q.v.).


Narragansett

1622, from southern New England Algonquian Naiaganset (people) of the small point of land,
containing nai- a point or angle. Originally in reference to the native people, later to the place
in Rhode Island.


narrate (v.)

1748, back-formation from narration or else from Latin narratus, past participle of narrare to tell,
relate, recount (see narration). Richardson and Johnson call it Scottish [OED], a stigma which kept
it from general use until 19c. A few mid-17c. instances are traceable to Spanish narrar. Related:
Narrated; narrating.


narration (n.)

early 15c., from Old French narracion account, statement, a relating, recounting, narrating,
narrative tale, and directly from Latin narrationem (nominative narratio) a relating, narrative,
noun of action from past participle stem of narrare to tell, relate, recount, explain, literally to
make acquainted with, from gnarus knowing, from PIE suffixed zero-grade *gne-ro-, from root *gno- to
know (see know).


narrative (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French narratif, from Late Latin narrativus suited to narration, from Latin
narrat-, stem of narrare (see narration).


narrative (n.)

a tale, story, 1560s, from Middle French narrative and from narrative (adj.).


narrator (n.)

1610s, from Latin narrator a relater, narrator, historian, agent noun from narrat-, stem of narrare
to tell, relate (see narration). In sense of a commentator in a radio program it is from 1941.


narrow (adj.)

Old English nearu narrow, constricted, limited; petty; causing difficulty, oppressive; strict,
severe, from West Germanic *narwaz narrowness (cognates: Frisian nar, Old Saxon naru, Middle Dutch
nare, Dutch naar); not found in other Germanic languages and of unknown origin. The narrow seas
(c.1400) were the waters between Great Britain and the continent and Ireland. Related: Narrowness.


narrow (n.)

c.1200, nearewe narrow part, place, or thing, from narrow (adj.). Old English nearu (n.) meant
danger, distress, difficulty, also prison, hiding place.


narrow (v.)

Old English nearwian to force in, cramp, confine; become smaller, shrink; see narrow (adj.).
Related: Narrowed; narrowing.


narrow-minded (adj.)

also narrow minded, 1620s, from narrow (adj.) + minded. Related: Narrow-mindedness. Middle English
had narrow-hearted mean, ungenerous, ignoble (c.1200).


narrowly (adv.)

Old English nearolice narrowly, closely, strictly; see narrow (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning only by a
little is attested from 1550s.


narrows (n.)

narrow place in a river, etc., 1630s, plural of narrow (n.).


narthex (n.)

porch at the west end of early churches (used by penitents not admitted to the body of the church),
1670s, from Late Greek narthex, in classical Greek giant fennel, of unknown origin. The
architectural feature allegedly so called from fancied resemblance of porch to a hollow stem. The
word also was used in Greek to mean a small case for unguents, etc. According to Hesiod (Theogeny),
Prometheus conveyed fire from Heaven to Earth in hollow fennel stalks. Related: Narthecal.


narwhal (n.)

1650s, from Danish and Norwegian narhval, probably a metathesis of Old Norse nahvalr, literally
corpse-whale, from na corpse + hvalr whale (see whale). So called from resemblance of its whitish
color to that of dead bodies. The first element is from PIE *nau- (1) death; to be exhausted
(cognates: Old English ne, neo, Gothic naus corpse, Old Cornish naun, Old Church Slavonic navi, Old
Prussian nowis corpse, Lettish nawe death, Lithuanian novyti to torture, kill).


nary (adj.)

1746, alteration of ne'er a, short for never a.


NASA

U.S. space agency, acronym of National Aeronautics and Space Administration, set up in 1958.


nasal (adj.)

1650s, of the nose, from French nasal, from Latin nasus nose, the nose, sense of smell, from PIE
*nas- (see nose (n.)). Of speech sounds, attested from 1660s. As a noun, nasal letter or sound, from
1660s. Related: Nasality; nasalization.


NASCAR

acronym for National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, U.S. auto racing promotion group founded
1948 in Daytona Beach, Florida. NASCAR dad in U.S. political parlance, small-town, often Southern
white man who abandons traditional Democratic leanings to vote Republican at least once every four
years coined 2003 by Democratic pollster Celinda Lake.


nascent (adj.)

1620s, from Latin nascentem (nominative nascens) arising young, immature, present participle of
nasci to be born (Old Latin gnasci; see genus). Related: Nascence (1560s); nascency.


NASDAQ

U.S. stock exchange, founded 1971, an acronym from National Association of Securities Dealers
Automated Quotations.


Nashville

capital of Tennessee, U.S., named for Gen. Francis Nash (1742-1777) of North Carolina, U.S.
Revolutionary War hero killed at the Battle of Germantown. The surname is attested from 1296 in
Sussex Subsidy Rolls, atten Eysse, atte Nasche (with assimilation of -n- from a preposition; see N),
meaning near an ash tree, or near a place called Ash. In reference to a type of country &amp;
western music that originated there, 1963.


nasopharynx (n.)

1877, from naso-, comb. form of Latin nasus nose (see nose (n.)) + pharynx.


Nassau

capital of the Bahamas, from a site name attested from 1690s, in honor of King William III of
England (1650-1702), of the House of Orange-Nassau, from the duchy of Nassau in western Germany,
named for a village in the Lahn valley, from Old High German nass wet. Related: Nassauvian.


nasturtium (n.)

mid-12c., plant of the mustard family, like watercress, from Latin nasturtium cress; the popular
etymology explanation of the name (Pliny) is that it is from Latin *nasitortium, literally nose-
twist, from nasus nose (see nose (n.)) + past participle of torquere to twist (see torque (n.)); the
plant so called for its pungent odor. Modern application to a South American trailing plant with
orange flowers first recorded 1704.


nasty (adj.)

c.1400, foul, filthy, dirty, unclean, of unknown origin; perhaps [Barnhart] from Old French nastre
miserly, envious, malicious, spiteful, shortened form of villenastre infamous, bad, from vilein
villain + -astre, pejorative suffix, from Latin -aster.    Alternative etymology [OED] is from Dutch
nestig dirty, literally like a bird's nest. Likely reinforced in either case by a Scandinavian
source (compare Swedish dialectal naskug dirty, nasty), which also might be the source of the Middle
English word. Of weather, from 1630s; of things generally, unpleasant, offensive, from 1705. Of
people, ill-tempered, from 1825. Noun meaning something nasty is from 1935. Related: Nastily;
nastiness.


natal (adj.)

late 14c., of or pertaining to birthdays, from Latin natalis pertaining to birth or origin, from
natus, past participle of nasci to be born (Old Latin gnasci; see genus).


Natalie

fem. proper name, from French Natalie, from Church Latin Natalia, from Latin (dies) natalis
birthday, in Church Latin, Christmas Day, so probably originally a name for one born on Christmas.


natality (n.)

late 15c., birth, from natal + -ity. Sense of birth rate is from 1884, from French natalit&eacute;,
used in the same sense.


natant (adj.)

1707, from Latin natantem, present participle of natare to swim, frequentative of nare to swim (see
natatorium).


Natasha

fem. proper name, from Russian pet form of Natalya (see Natalie).


natation (n.)

1650s, from Latin natationem (nominative natatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
natare to swim (see natant).


natatorial (adj.)

1816, from natatory (adj.), from Latin natatorius, from natator swimmer (see natatorium) + -al.


natatorium (n.)

1890, New Englandish word for swimming pool, from Latin natator swimmer (from nare to swim) + -ium,
neuter suffix. Latin nare is from PIE root *sna- to swim (cognates: Sanskrit snati bathes; Avestan
snayeite washes, cleans; Armenian nay wet, liquid, Greek notios wet, damp, nekhein to swim; Middle
Irish snaim I swim, snam a swimming). Middle English had natatorie a pool, bath, early 14c., from
Latin.


natch

colloquial shortening of naturally, jive talk, first recorded 1945.


Natchez

Indian people of the lower Mississippi valley, of unknown origin.


Nathan

masc. proper name, biblical prophet, from Hebrew Nathan, literally he has given, from verb nathan,
related to mattan gift.


Nathaniel

masc. proper name, from Late Latin Nathanael, from Greek Nathanael, from Hebrew Nethan'el, literally
God has given (see Nathan).


nation (n.)

c.1300, from Old French nacion birth, rank; descendants, relatives; country, homeland (12c.) and
directly from Latin nationem (nominative natio) birth, origin; breed, stock, kind, species; race of
people, tribe, literally that which has been born, from natus, past participle of nasci be born (Old
Latin gnasci; see genus). Political sense has gradually predominated, but earliest English examples
inclined toward the racial meaning large group of people with common ancestry. Older sense preserved
in application to North American Indian peoples (1640s). Nation-building first attested 1907
(implied in nation-builder).


national (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French national (from Old French nation), and also from nation + -al (1). As a
noun, citizen of a (particular) nation, from 1887. National anthem first recorded 1819, in Shelley.
Related: Nationally.


nationalism (n.)

1844, devotion to one's country; see nationalist + -ism; in some usages from French nationalisme.
Earlier it was used in a theological sense of the doctrine of divine election of nations (1836).
Later it was used in a sense of doctrine advocating nationalization of a country's industry (1892).


nationalist (n.)

one devoted to his nation, 1715, from national in a now obsolete sense of patriotic (1711) + -ist.
Related: Nationalistic; nationalistically.


nationality (n.)

1690s, national quality, from national + -ity (in some usages perhaps from French nationalit&#233;.
As fact of belonging to or being a citizen of a particular state, from 1828, gradually shading into
race, ethnicity. Meaning separate existence as a nation is recorded from 1832. Related:
Nationalities.    But I do love a country that loves itself. I love a country that insists on its
own nationality which is the same thing as a person's insisting on his own personality. [Robert
Frost, letter, April 21, 1919]


nationalization (n.)

1801, act of rendering national in character, from nationalize + -ation. Meaning act of bringing
(property) under control of the national government is from 1874.


nationalize (v.)

1800, invest with a national character, from national + -ize. Meaning bring under state control is
from 1869. Related: Nationalized; nationalizing.


nationhood (n.)

1840, from nation + -hood.


nationwide (adj.)

1915, from nation + wide.


native (adj.)

late 14c., natural, hereditary, connected with something in a natural way, from Old French natif
native, born in; raw, unspoiled (14c.) and directly from Latin nativus innate, produced by birth,
from natus, past participle of nasci (Old Latin gnasci) be born, related to gignere beget, from PIE
root *gene-/*gen- to give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to familial and tribal groups
(see genus). From late 15c. as born in a particular place. From early 15c. as of one's birth, also
used from mid-15c. in sense of bound; born in servitude or serfdom, also, as a noun a bondsman,
serf. Native American attested from 1956.


native (n.)

mid-15c., person born in bondage, from native (adj.), and in some usages from Medieval Latin
nativus, noun use of nativus (adj.). Compare Old French naif, also woman born in slavery. From 1530s
as person who has always lived in a place. Applied from mid-17c. to original inhabitants of non-
European nations where Europeans hold political power, for example American Indians (by 1630s);
hence, used contemptuously of the locals from 1800. Related: Natives.


nativism (n.)

U.S. anti-immigrant movement, 1845, from native (adj.) + -ism. Later used in other contexts.
Related: Nativist.


nativity (n.)

c.1200, from Old French nativit&eacute; birth (12c.), from Late Latin nativitatem (nominative
nativitas) birth, from Latin nativus born, native (see native (adj.)). Late Old English had
nativite&eth;, from earlier Old French nativited.


nativize (v.)

1933, in linguistics, from native (adj.) + -ize. Related: Nativized; nativizing.


NATO

acronym of North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which was set up in 1949.


natron (n.)

1680s, from French natron (1660s), which is said to be directly from Arabic natrun, itself from
Greek nitron, itself possibly of Eastern origin (see nitre). Medieval Latin and Paracelsus (16c.)
had a form anatron, from Arabic with the article assimilated (an-natron). It is the source of the
chemical symbol Na for sodium and the word-forming element natro-, used in the names of minerals to
indicate the presence of sodium.


natter (v.)

grumble, chatter aimlessly, nag, 1829, northern England dialect variant of gnatter to chatter,
grumble, earlier (18c.) to nibble away, probably of echoic origin. Related: Nattered; nattering. As
a noun, 1866, from the verb.


natterjack (n.)

1769, rare kind of British toad with a yellow stripe on its back; second element probably proper
name jack (q.v.); for first element, Weekley suggests connection with attor poison (see attercop).


natty (adj.)

1785, neat, smart, originally slang, perhaps an altered form of 16c. nettie neat, natty, from Middle
English net pure, fine, elegant (see neat). Related: Nattily.


natural (adj.)

c.1300, naturel, of one's inborn character; hereditary, by birth; early 14c. as of the world of
nature (especially as opposed to man), from Old French naturel of nature, conforming to nature; by
birth, and directly from Latin naturalis by birth, according to nature, from natura nature (see
nature).    From late 15c. as not miraculous, in conformity with nature. Meaning easy, free from
affectation is attested from c.1600. Of things, not artificially created, c.1600. As a euphemism for
illegitimate, bastard (of children), it is first recorded c.1400, on notion of blood kinship (but
not legal status).   Natural science is from late 14c.; natural law is from early 15c. Natural order
apparent order in nature is from 1690s. Natural childbirth first attested 1933. Natural life,
usually in reference to the duration of life, is from late 15c. Natural history is from 1560s (see
history). To die of natural causes is from 1570s.


natural (n.)

person with a natural gift or talent, 1925, originally in prizefighting, from natural (adj.). In
Middle English, the word as a noun meant natural capacity, physical ability or power (early 14c.),
and it was common in sense a native of a place in Shakespeare's day. Also in 17c., a mistress.


natural-born (adj.)

1580s, from natural (adj.) + born.


naturalism (n.)

1630s, action based on natural instincts, from natural + -ism. In philosophy, as a view of the world
and humanity's relationship to it, from 1750. As a tendency in art and literature, from 1850.


naturalist (n.)

student of plants and animals, c.1600, from French naturaliste, from natural (see natural (adj.)).
Earlier one who studies natural, rather than spiritual, things (1580s).


naturalistic (adj.)

1840, in reference to the doctrine of naturalism; from natural + -istic. From 1849 as aiming for
realism.


naturality (n.)

1530s, natural character, from French naturalit&#233;, from Late Latin naturalitatem (nominative
naturalitas), from Latin naturalis (see natural (adj.)). Meaning natural feeling is from 1620s.


naturalization (n.)

1570s, from Middle French naturalisation, from naturaliser (see naturalize).


naturalize (v.)

admit (an alien) to rights of a citizen, 1550s (implied in naturalized), from natural (adj.) in its
etymological sense of by birth + -ize; in some instances from Middle French naturaliser, from
natural. Of things, from 1620s; of plants or animals, from 1796. Related: Naturalizing.


naturally (adv.)

late 13c., inherently, intrinsically, characteristically, from natural + -ly (2). From late 14c. as
in accord with natural law; also normally; usually, expectedly; as a matter of course, consequently,
understandably. The notion is as a natural result. From early 15c. as without artificial assistance,
by a natural process.


naturalness (n.)

normality, early 15c., from natural (adj.) + -ness.


nature (n.)

late 13c., restorative powers of the body, bodily processes; powers of growth; from Old French
nature nature, being, principle of life; character, essence, from Latin natura course of things;
natural character, constitution, quality; the universe, literally birth, from natus born, past
participle of nasci to be born, from PIE *gene- to give birth, beget (see genus).    From late 14c.
as creation, the universe; also heredity, birth, hereditary circumstance; essential qualities,
innate disposition (as in human nature); nature personified, Mother Nature. Specifically as material
world beyond human civilization or society from 1660s. Nature and nurture have been contrasted since
1874.  Nature should be avoided in such vague expressions as 'a lover of nature,' 'poems about
nature.' Unless more specific statements follow, the reader cannot tell whether the poems have to do
with natural scenery, rural life, the sunset, the untouched wilderness, or the habits of squirrels.
[Strunk &amp; White, The Elements of Style, 3rd ed., 1979]


naturist (n.)

participant in the movement for communal nudity, 1929, from nature + -ist.


naturopathy (n.)

1901, a hybrid from comb. form of nature + -pathy. A correct formation from all-Greek elements would
be *physiopathy. Related: Naturopath.


naufragous (adj.)

causing shipwreck, 1610s, from naufrage shipwreck (late 15c.), from Middle French naufrage, from
Latin naufragium, from stems of navis ship (see naval) + frangere to break (see fraction)  + -ous.


Naugahyde

trademark name patented (U.S.) Dec. 7, 1937, by United States Rubber Products Inc., for an
artificial leather made from fabric base treated with rubber, etc. From Naugatuk, rubber-making town
in Connecticut, + hyde, an arbitrary variant of hide (n.). The town name is Southern New England
Algonquian *neguttuck one tree, from *negut- one + *-tugk tree.


naught (n.)

Old English nawiht nothing, lit no whit, from na no (from PIE root *ne- no, not; see un- (1)) + wiht
thing, creature, being (see wight). Cognate with Old Saxon neowiht nothing, Old High German niwiht,
Gothic ni waihts. It also developed an adjectival sense in Old English, good for nothing, which by
mid-16c. had focused to morally bad, wicked. In arithmetic, the figure zero from 1640s.


naughty (adj.)

late 14c., naugti needy, having nothing, from Old English nawiht (see naught) + -y (2). Sense of
wicked, evil, morally wrong is attested from 1520s; specific meaning sexually promiscuous is from
1869. The more tame main modern sense of disobedient (especially of children) is attested from
1630s. Related: Naughtily; naughtiness. A woman of bad character c.1530-1750 might be called a
naughty pack (also sometimes of men and later of children).


Nauru

of unknown origin; formerly known as Pleasant Island (1798). Related: Nauruan (1921).


nausea (n.)

early 15c., vomiting, from Latin nausea seasickness, from Ionic Greek nausia (Attic nautia)
seasickness, nausea, disgust, literally ship-sickness, from naus ship (see naval). Despite its
etymology, the word in English seems never to have been restricted to seasickness.


nauseant (n.)

1834, from Latin nauseant-, present participle stem of nauseare (see nauseate (v.)).


nauseate (v.)

1630s, to feel sick, to become affected with nausea, from nauseat- past participle stem of Latin
nauseare to feel seasick, to vomit, also to cause disgust, from nausea (see nausea). Related:
Nauseated; nauseating;  nauseatingly. In its early life it also had transitive senses of to reject
(food, etc.) with a feeling of nausea (1640s) and to create a loathing in, to cause nausea (1650s).
Careful writers use nauseated for sick at the stomach and reserve nauseous (q.v.) for sickening to
contemplate.


nauseous (adj.)

c.1600, inclined to nausea, easily made queasy (obsolete), from nausea + -ous. Sense of causing
nausea or squeamishness is attested from 1610s. For distinction from nauseated see nauseate.
Related: Nauseously; nauseousness.


nautical (adj.)

1550s, from -al (1) + nautic from Middle French nautique, from Latin nauticus pertaining to ships or
sailors, from Greek nautikos seafaring, naval, from nautes sailor, from naus ship, from PIE *nau-
(2) boat (see naval).


nautilus (n.)

marine cephalopod, c.1600, from Latin nautilus, in Pliny a kind of marine snail (including also
squid, cuttlefish, polyps, etc.), from Greek nautilos paper nautilus, literally sailor, from nautes
sailor, from naus ship (see naval). The cephalopod formerly was thought to use its webbed arms as
sails.


Navajo

Athabaskan people and language, 1780, from Spanish Apaches de Nabaju (1629), from Tewa (Tanoan)
Navahu, said to mean literally large field or large planted field, containing nava field and hu
valley. Spanish Navajo was used 17c. in reference to the area now in northwestern New Mexico.


naval (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French naval (14c.) and directly from Latin navalis pertaining to a ship or
ships, from navis ship, from PIE *nau- (2) boat (cognates: Sanskrit nauh, accusative navam ship,
boat; Armenian nav ship; Greek naus ship, nautes sailor; Old Irish nau ship; Welsh noe a flat
vessel; Old Norse nor ship). An Old English word for naval was scipherelic.


Navarre

a pre-Latin name, probably based on Basque nava plain, despite the region's mountainous topography.


nave (1)

main part of a church, 1670s, from Medieval Latin navem (nominative navis) nave of a church, from
Latin navis ship (see naval), on some fancied resemblance in shape.


nave (2)

hub of a wheel, Old English nafu, from Proto-Germanic *nabo- (cognates: Old Saxon naba, Old Norse
n&#246;f, Middle Dutch nave, Dutch naaf, Old High German naba, German Nabe), perhaps connected with
the root of navel on notion of centrality (compare Latin umbilicus navel, also the end of a roller
of a scroll, Greek omphalos navel, also the boss of a shield).


navel (n.)

Old English nafela, nabula, from Proto-Germanic *nabalan (cognates: Old Norse nafli, Danish and
Swedish navle, Old Frisian navla, Middle Dutch and Dutch navel, Old High German nabalo, German
Nabel), from PIE *(o)nobh- navel (cognates: Sanskrit nabhila navel, nave, relationship; Avestan nafa
navel, naba-nazdishta next of kin; Persian naf; Latin umbilicus navel; Old Prussian nabis navel;
Greek omphalos; Old Irish imbliu). For Romanic words, see umbilicus.    Navel words from other roots
include Lithuanian bamba, Sanskrit bimba- (also disk, sphere), Greek bembix, literally whirlpool.
Old Church Slavonic papuku, Lithuanian pumpuras are originally bud. Considered a feminine sexual
center since ancient times, and still in parts of the Middle East, India, and Japan. In medieval
Europe, it was averred that [t]he seat of wantonness in women is the navel. [Cambridge bestiary,
C.U.L. ii.4.26] Words for it in most languages have a secondary sense of center. Meaning center or
hub of a country is attested in English from late 14c. To contemplate (one's) navel meditate is from
1933; hence navel-gazer (1952); see also omphaloskepsis. Navel orange attested from 1888.


navicular (adj.)

boat-shaped, 1540s, from Late Latin navicularis pertaining to a boat, from navicula, diminutive of
navis ship (see naval).


navigable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French navigable (14c.) or directly from Latin navigabilis, from navigat-, past
participle stem of navigare (see navigation). Related: Navigability.


navigate (v.)

1580s, a back-formation from navigation, or else from Latin navigatus, past participle of navigare.
Extended to balloons (1784) and later to aircraft (1901). Related: Navigated; navigating.


navigation (n.)

1530s, from Middle French navigation (14c.) or directly from Latin navigationem (nominative
navigatio) a sailing, navigation, voyage, noun of action from past participle stem of navigare to
sail, sail over, go by sea, steer a ship, from navis ship (see naval) + root of agere to drive (see
act (n.)).


navigational (adj.)

1884, from navigation + -al.


navigator (n.)

1580s, one who navigates, from Latin navigator sailor, agent noun from navigat-, stem of navigare
(see navigation). Meaning laborer employed in excavating a canal is 1775, from sense in inland
navigation communication by canals and rivers (1727).


navvy (n.)

laborer on a canal or railroad, 1832, colloquial shortening of navigator (q.v.) in its sense of one
who digs navigation canals.


navy (n.)

early 14c., fleet of ships, especially for purposes of war, from Old French navie fleet, ship, from
Latin navigia, plural of navigium vessel, boat, from navis ship (see naval). Meaning a nation's
collective, organized sea power is from 1530s. The Old English words were sciphere (usually of
Viking invaders) and scipfierd (usually of the home defenses). Navy blue was the color of the
British naval uniform. Navy bean attested from 1856, so called because they were grown to be used by
the Navy.


nay

word of negation, late 12c., from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse nei, compound of ne not
(see un-) + ei ever (see aye (2)).


naysayer (n.)

1721, from verb naysay (implied from 1530s in naysaying); from nay + say (v.). Nay-say refusal is
from 1630s.


Nazarene (n.)

c.1200, holy man; early 13c., a native or resident of Nazareth, childhood home of Jesus, from Late
Latin Nazarenus, from Greek Nazarenos, from Hebrew Natzerath. As an adjective from late 13c. As a
follower of Jesus from late 14c. In Talmudic Hebrew notzri, literally of Nazareth, meant a
Christian; likewise Arabic Nasrani (plural Nasara). In Christian use, however, it can be a nickname
for Jesus, or refer to an early Jewish Christian sect (1680s in English), or, in modern use, to a
member of the Church of the Nazarene, a U.S.-based Protestant denomination (1898 in this sense).


Nazareth

town in Lower Galilee, childhood home of Jesus, from Hebrew Natzerath, of unknown origin, perhaps a
corruption of Gennesaret Sea of Galilee. An obscure village, not named in the Old Testament or
contemporary rabbinical texts.


Nazi

1930, noun and adjective, from German Nazi, abbreviation of German pronunciation of
Nationalsozialist (based on earlier German sozi, popular abbreviation of socialist), from
Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei National Socialist German Workers' Party, led by
Hitler from 1920.    The 24th edition of Etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch der deutschen Sprache (2002)
says the word Nazi was favored in southern Germany (supposedly from c.1924) among opponents of
National Socialism because the nickname Nazi, Naczi (from the masc. proper name Ignatz, German form
of Ignatius) was used colloquially to mean a foolish person, clumsy or awkward person. Ignatz was a
popular name in Catholic Austria, and according to one source in World War I Nazi was a generic name
in the German Empire for the soldiers of Austria-Hungary.    An older use of Nazi for national-
sozial is attested in German from 1903, but EWdS does not think it contributed to the word as
applied to Hitler and his followers. The NSDAP for a time attempted to adopt the Nazi designation as
what the Germans call a despite-word, but they gave this up, and the NSDAP is said to have generally
avoided the term. Before 1930, party members had been called in English National Socialists, which
dates from 1923. The use of Nazi Germany, Nazi regime, etc., was popularized by German exiles
abroad. From them, it spread into other languages, and eventually was brought back to Germany, after
the war. In the USSR, the terms national socialist and Nazi were said to have been forbidden after
1932, presumably to avoid any taint to the good word socialist. Soviet literature refers to
fascists.


Nazism (n.)

also Naziism, 1934, from Nazi + -ism. Perhaps based on French Nazisme (1930).


ne plus ultra

utmost limit to which one can go, Latin, literally no more beyond; the motto traditionally inscribed
on the Pillars of Hercules.


ne&#039;er

c.1200, contraction of never.


ne&#039;er-do-well (n.)

one who is good for nothing, 1737, Scottish and northern English dialect, from contraction of phrase
never do well. The adjective is first recorded 1773.


neal (v.)

1530s, shortened form of anneal. Related: Nealed; nealing.


Neanderthal (adj.)

1861, in reference to a type of extinct hominid, from German Neanderthal Neander Valley, name of a
gorge near D&uuml;sseldorf where humanoid fossils were identified in 1856. The place name is from
the Graecized form of Joachim Neumann (literally new man, Greek *neo-ander), 1650-1680, German
pastor, poet and hymn-writer, who made this a favorite spot in the 1670s. Adopting a classical form
of one's surname was a common practice among educated Germans in this era. As a noun, by 1915; as a
type f a big, brutish, stupid person from 1926.


neap (adj.)

Middle English, from Old English nepflod neap flood, the tide occurring at the end of the first and
third quarters of the lunar month, in which high waters are at their lowest, of unknown origin, with
no known cognates (Danish niptid probably is from English). Original sense perhaps is without power.
As a noun from 1580s.


Neapolitan (n.)

early 15c., native or resident of Naples, literally of Naples, from Latin Neapolitanus, from
Neapolis (see Naples); it preserves in English the Greek name of the city. As an adjective from
1590s. As a type of ice cream, from 1871; originally meaning both ice cream of three layers and
flavors and ice cream made with eggs added to the cream before freezing. In early 18c., Neapolitan
consolation meant syphilis.


near (adv.)

Old English near closer, nearer, comparative of neah, nehnigh. Influenced by Old Norse naer near, it
came to be used as a positive form mid-13c., and new comparative nearer developed 1500s (see nigh).
As an adjective from c.1300. Originally an adverb but now supplanted in most such senses by nearly;
it has in turn supplanted correct nigh as an adjective. Related: Nearness. In near and dear (1620s)
it refers to nearness of kinship. Near East first attested 1891, in Kipling. Near beer low-alcoholic
brew is from 1908.


near (v.)

to draw near, 1510s, from near (adv.). Related: Neared; nearing.


near-sighted (adj.)

also nearsighted, 1680s, from near + sight. Figurative use from 1856. Related: Nearsightedly;
nearsightedness.


nearby

close at hand, late 14c. (one-word form from 15c.), from near + by.


nearly (adv.)

1530s, carefully; sense of almost, all but is from 1680s; see near + -ly (2).


neat (adj.)

1540s, clean, free from dirt, from Anglo-French neit, Middle French net clear, pure (12c.), from
Latin nitidus well-favored, elegant, trim, literally gleaming, from nitere to shine, from PIE root
*nei- to shine (cognates: Middle Irish niam gleam, splendor, niamda shining; Old Irish noib holy,
niab strength; Welsh nwyfiant gleam, splendor).    Meaning inclined to be tidy is from 1570s. Of
liquor, straight, c.1800, from meaning unadulterated (of wine), which is first attested 1570s.
Informal sense of very good first recorded 1934 in American English; variant neato is teenager
slang, first recorded 1968. Related: Neatly; neatness.


neat (n.)

ox, bullock, cow, Old English neat ox, beast, animal, from Proto-Germanic *nautam thing of value,
possession (cognates: Old Frisian nat, Middle Dutch noot, Old High German noz, Old Norse naut), from
PIE root *neud- to make use of, enjoy.


neaten (v.)

1898, from neat (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Neatened; neatening.


neath

1787, poetic shortening of beneath (q.v.).


neatnik (n.)

excessively tidy person, 1959, from neat (adj.) with a punning play on beatnik.


neato (adj.)

by 1968, American English teenager slang variant of neat (adj.) in its slang sense.


neb (n.)

beak or bill of a bird, Old English nebb beak, nose; face, countenance; beak-shaped thing, common
Germanic (cognates: Old Norse nef beak, nose, Middle Dutch nebbe beak, Old High German snabul,
German Schnabel beak, Old Frisian snavel mouth), of uncertain origin.


nebbish (n.)

1905, nebbich, from Yiddish (used as a Yiddish word in American English from 1890s), from a Slavic
source akin to Czech neboh poor, unfortunate, literally un-endowed, from Proto-Slavic *ne-bogu-,
with negative prefix (see un- (1)) + PIE *bhag- to share out, apportion (see -phagous).


Nebraska

U.S. territory organized 1854, admitted as a state 1867, from a native Siouan name for the Platte
River, either Omaha ni braska or Oto ni brathge, both literally water flat. The modern river name is
from French rivi&egrave;re platte, which means flat river. Related: Nebraskan.   <b>Bug eaters</b>,
a term applied derisively to the inhabitants of Nebraska by travellers on account of the poverty-
stricken appearance of many parts of the State. If one living there were to refuse to eat bugs, he
would, like Polonius, soon be not where he eats but where he is eaten. [Walsh, 1892]


Nebuchadnezzar

king of Babylon (604-562 B.C.E.), from Hebrew Nebhukhadhnetztzar, from Babylonian Nabu-kudurri-usur,
probably literally Nebo, protect the boundary.


nebula (n.)

early 15c., nebule a cloud, mist, from Latin nebula mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation,
figuratively darkness, obscurity, from PIE *nebh- cloud (cognates: Sanskrit nabhas- vapor, cloud,
mists, fog, sky; Greek nephele, nephos cloud; German nebel fog; Old English nifol dark, gloomy;
Welsh niwl cloud, fog; Slavic nebo).    Re-borrowed from Latin 1660s in sense of cataracts in the
eye; astronomical meaning cloud-like patch in the night sky first recorded c.1730. As early as
Hershel (1802) astronomers realized that some nebulae were star clusters, but certain distinction of
relatively nearby cosmic gas clouds from distant galaxies was not made until 1920s, using the new
100-inch Mt. Wilson telescope.


nebular (adj.)

1821, pertaining to an (astronomical) nebula or nebulae, from nebula + -ar.


nebulizer (n.)

1865, agent noun from verb nebulize to reduce to a mist or spray (1865), from Latin nebula mist (see
nebula) + -ize. Related: Nebulization.


nebulosity (n.)

1738, from French n&#233;bulosit&#233;, from Late Latin nebulositatem (nominative nebulositas), from
Latin nebulosus, from nebula (see nebula).


nebulous (adj.)

late 14c., cloudy, misty, from Latin nebulosus cloudy, misty, foggy, full of vapor, from nebula (see
nebula). The figurative sense of hazy, vague, formless is first attested 1831. Astronomical sense is
from 1670s. Related: Nebulously; nebulousness.


necessarily (adv.)

mid-15c., inevitably, unavoidably, from necessary (adj.) + -ly (2).


necessary (adj.)

late 14c. needed, required, essential, indispensable, from Old French necessaire necessary, urgent,
compelling (13c.), and directly from Latin necessarius unavoidable, indispensable, necessary, from
necesse unavoidable, indispensable, originally no backing away, from ne- not + cedere to withdraw,
go away, yield (see cede). The root sense is of that from which there is no evasion, that which is
inevitable. Necessary house privy is from c.1600. Necessary evil is from 1540s (the original
reference was to woman).


necessary (n.)

mid-14c., needed, required, or useful things; the necessities of life; actions determined by right
or law, perhaps from Old French necessaire (n.) private parts, genitalia; lavatory, and directly
from Latin necessarius (n.), in classical Latin a relation, relative, kinsman; friend, client,
patron; see necessary (adj.).


necessitarian (n.)

1754, from necessity + -arian. As an adjective from 1739. Related: Necessitarianism.


necessitate (v.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin necessitatus, past participle of necessitare to render necessary, from
Latin necessitas (see necessity). Earlier verb in English was necessen (late 14c.). Related:
Necessitated; necessitates; necessitating.


necessitation (n.)

1650s, noun of action from necessitate.


necessity (n.)

late 14c., constraining power of circumstances, from Old French necessit&eacute; need, necessity;
privation, poverty; distress, torment; obligation, duty (12c.), from Latin necessitatem (nominative
necessitas) compulsion, need for attention, unavoidableness, destiny, from necesse (see necessary).
Meaning condition of being in need in English is from late 15c.    Necessity is the Mother of
Invention. [Richard Franck, c.1624-1708, English author and angler, Northern Memoirs, 1658]    To
maken vertu of necessite is in Chaucer. Related: Necessities.


neck (n.)

Old English hnecca neck, nape, back of the neck (a fairly rare word) from Proto-Germanic *hnekk- the
nape of the neck (cognates: Old Frisian hnekka, Middle Dutch necke, Dutch nek, Old Norse hnakkr, Old
High German hnach, German Nacken neck), with no certain cognates outside Germanic, though Klein's
sources suggest PIE *knok- high point, ridge (source of Old Irish cnocc, Welsh cnwch, Old Breton
cnoch hill).    The more usual Old English words were hals (the general Germanic word, cognate with
Gothic, Old Norse, Danish, Swedish, Dutch, German hals), cognate with Latin collum (see collar
(n.)); and sweora, swira neck, nape, probably also from a PIE root meaning column (cognate with Old
English swer column, Sanskrit svaru- post).    Transferred senses attested from c.1400. Phrase neck
of the woods (American English) is attested from 1780 in the sense of narrow stretch of woods; 1839
with meaning settlement in a wooded region. To stick one's neck out take a risk is first recorded
1919, American English. Horses running neck and neck is attested from 1799.


neck (v.)

to kiss, embrace, caress, 1825 (implied in necking) in northern England dialect, from neck (n.).
Compare Middle English halsen to embrace or caress affectionately, to fondle sexually, from hals
(n.) neck. Earlier, neck as a verb meant to kill by a strike on the neck (mid-15c.). Related:
Necked.


neckerchief (n.)

scarf for the neck, late 14c., from neck (n.) + kerchief, which is, etymologically a covering for
the head.


necking (n.)

1825; see neck (v.).


necklace (n.)

1590s, from neck (n.) + lace (n.) in the sense of cord, string. As the name of a South African form
of lynching, from 1985.


neckless (adj.)

c.1600, from neck (n.) + -less.


neckline (n.)

also neck-line, of a garment, 1900, from neck (n.) + line (n.).


necktie (n.)

1838, from neck (n.) + tie (n.). American English slang necktie party a lynching is recorded from
1871.


necro-

before vowels, necr-, word-forming element meaning death, corpse, dead tissue, from comb. form of
Greek nekros dead body, corpse, dead person, from PIE *nek- (1) death, natural death (cognates:
Sanskrit nasyati disappears, perishes, Avestan nasyeiti disappears, nasu- corpse, Old Persian vi-
nathayatiy he injures; Latin nex, genitive necis violent death, murder (as opposed to mors), nocere
to harm, hurt, noxius harmful; Greek nekus dead (adj.), nekros dead body, corpse; Old Irish ec,
Breton ankou, Welsh angeu death).


necrology (n.)

register of deaths, obituary, 1705, from necro- + -logy.


necromancer (n.)

c.1300, from Old French nigromansere, from nigromancie (see necromancy).


necromancy (n.)

c.1300, nygromauncy, divination by communication with the dead, from Old French nigromancie magic,
necromancy, witchcraft, sorcery, from Medieval Latin nigromantia (13c.), from Latin necromantia
divination from an exhumed corpse, from Greek nekromanteia, from nekros dead body (see necro-) +
manteia divination, oracle, from manteuesthai to prophesy, from mantis prophet (see mania). Spelling
influenced in Medieval Latin by niger black, on notion of black arts. Modern spelling is a mid-16c.
correction. Related: Necromantic.


necrophilia (n.)

1892, in Chaddock's translation of Krafft-Ebbing's Psychopathia Sexualis, from necro- + -philia.


necrophobia (n.)

abnormal fear of death or corpses, 1833, from necro- + -phobia fear. Related: Necrophobic.


necropolis (n.)

large cemetery of an ancient or modern city, 1803, from Late Latin, literally city of the dead, from
Greek Nekropolis, a burial place near Alexandria, from nekros (see necro-) + polis city (see polis).


necropsy (n.)

post-mortem examination, 1839, from necro- + opsis a sight (see eye (n.)). As a verb, recorded from
1889.


necrosis (n.)

death of bodily tissue, 1660s, from Greek nekrosis a becoming dead, state of death, from nekroun
make dead, from nekros dead body (see necro-). Related: Necrotic.


nectar (n.)

1550s, from Latin nectar, from Greek nektar, name of the drink of the gods, which is said to be a
compound of nek- death (see necro-) + -tar overcoming, from PIE *tere- (2) to cross over, pass
through, overcome (see through). Meaning sweet liquid in flowers first recorded c.1600.


nectarine (n.)

type of peach with smooth skin, 1660s, noun use of adjective meaning of or like nectar (1610s; see
nectar + -ine (1)). Probably inspired by German nektarpfirsich nectar-peach. Earlier in English as
nectrine.


Ned

masc. proper name, a familiar abbreviation of Edward. Related: Neddy.


nee

introducing the maiden name of a married woman, 1758, from French n&eacute;e, fem. past participle
of na&icirc;tre born, from Latin natus, past participle of nasci to be born (Old Latin gnasci; see
genus).


need (n.)

Old English nied (West Saxon), ned (Mercian) necessity, compulsion, duty; hardship, distress;
errand, business, originally violence, force, from Proto-Germanic *nauthis (cognates: Old Saxon nod,
Old Norse nau&eth;r, Old Frisian ned, Middle Dutch, Dutch nood, Old High German not, German Not,
Gothic nau&thorn;s need), probably cognate with Old Prussian nautin need, and perhaps with Old
Church Slavonic nazda, Russian nuzda, Polish n&#281;dza misery, distress, from PIE *nau- (1) death,
to be exhausted (see narwhal).    The more common Old English word for need, necessity, want was
&eth;earf, but they were connected via a notion of trouble, pain, and the two formed a compound,
nied&eth;earf need, necessity, compulsion, thing needed. Nied also might have been influenced by Old
English neod desire, longing, which often was spelled the same. Common in Old English compounds,
such as niedfaru compulsory journey, a euphemism for death; niedh&aelig;med rape, the second element
being an Old English word meaning sexual intercourse; niedling slave. Meaning extreme poverty,
destitution is from c.1200.


need (v.)

Old English neodian be necessary, be required (for some purpose); require, have need of, from the
same root as need (n.). Meaning to be under obligation (to do something) is from late 14c. Related:
Needed; needing. The adjectival phrase need-to-know is attested from 1952. Dismissive phrase who
needs it?, popular from c.1960, is a translated Yiddishism.


needful (adj.)

late 12c., niedfulle, needy, from need (n.) + -ful. Meaning characterized by need is from mid-13c.;
meaning indispensable is from mid-14c.; noun meaning what is necessary is from 1709. Colloquial
sense of cash is recorded from 1774 in phrase the needful money. Related: Needfully.


needle (n.)

Old English n&aelig;dl, from Proto-Germanic *n&aelig;thlo (cognates: Old Saxon nathla, Old Norse
nal, Old Frisian nedle, Old High German nadala, German Nadel, Gothic ne&thorn;la needle), literally
a tool for sewing, from PIE *net-la-, from root *(s)ne- to sew, to spin (cognates: Sanskrit snayati
wraps up, Greek nein to spin, Latin nere to spin, German n&#228;hen to sew, Old Church Slavonic niti
thread, Old Irish snathat needle, Welsh nyddu to sew, nodwydd needle) + instrumental suffix *-tla.To
seke out one lyne in all hys bookes wer to go looke a nedle in a meadow. [Thomas More,
c.1530]Meaning piece of magnetized steel in a compass is from late 14c. (on a dial or indicator from
1928); the surgical instrument so called from 1727; phonographic sense from 1902; sense of leaf of a
fir or pine tree first attested 1797. Needledom the world of sewing is from 1847. Needle's eye,
figurative of a minute opening, often is a reference to Matt. xix:24.


needle (v.)

1715, to sew or pierce with a needle, from needle (n.). Meaning goad, provoke (1881) probably is
from earlier meaning haggle in making a bargain (1812). Related: Needled; needling.


needlepoint (n.)

point of a needle, c.1700; point lace made with the needle, 1865, from needle (n.) + point (n.).


needless (adj.)

c.1300, not needed, unnecessary, from need (n) + -less. Related: Needlessly. Phrase needless to say
or speak is recorded from early 16c.


needlework (n.)

sewing, embroidery, etc., late 14c., from needle (n.) + work (n.).


needs (adv.)

of necessity, necessarily, in archaic constructions involving must (late 14c.) is from Old English
nede, instrumental and genitive singular of nied (see need), used as an adverb reinforcing must,
hence the genitive ending.


needways (adv.)

by necessity, c.1300, a northern and Scottish word, marked as obsolete in OED; from need (n.) + way
(n.), with adverbial genitive.


needy (adj.)

late 12c., neodi poor, indigent, from need (n.) + adjectival suffix -y (2). Similar formation in
Dutch noodig, German nothig, Old Norse nau&#240;igr. As a noun from mid-14c. Related: Needily;
neediness.


neep (n.)

a turnip, Scottish and dialectal, from Middle English nepe, from Old English n&aelig;p turnip, from
Latin napus (see turnip).


neese (v.)

also neeze sneeze, northern and Scottish, from Middle English nesen (mid-14c.), probably from Old
Norse hnjosa, of imitative origin (compare Old High German niosan, German niesen, Middle Dutch
niesen).


nefandous (adj.)

not to be spoken of, 1630s, from Latin nefandous unmentionable, impious, heinous, from ne-, negative
particle, + fandus to be spoken, gerundive of fari (see fame (n.)).


nefarious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin nefarius wicked, abominable, impious, from nefas crime, wrong, impiety, from ne-
not (see un-) + fas right, lawful, divinely spoken, related to fari to speak (see fame (n.)).
Related: Nefariously.


negate (v.)

1795 (with an isolated use from 1620s), back-formation from negation, or else from Latin negatus,
past participle of negare. Related: Negated; negates; negating.


negation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French negacion (12c.) and directly from Latin negationem (nominative negatio)
denial, noun of action from past participle stem of negare deny, say no (see deny).


negative (adj.)

c.1400, expressing denial, from Old French negatif (13c.) and directly from Latin negativus that
which denies, from negat-, past participle stem of negare deny, say no (see deny). Meaning
expressing negation is from c.1500; that of characterized by absence is from 1560s. Algebraic sense
is from 1670s. The electricity sense is from 1755.  Negative Capability, that is when a man is
capable of being in uncertainties, Mysteries, doubts without any irritable reaching after fact and
reason. [John Keats, letter, Dec. 21, 1817]  Related: Negatively.


negative (n.)

late 14c., a prohibition; absence, nonexistence; opposite, from Old French negatif and directly from
Latin negativus (see negative (adj.)). Meaning a negative statement is from 1560s. As a response, I
refuse, disagree, no, from 1945. Meaning a negative quality is from 1640s. In mathematics, a
negative number, from 1706. Photographic sense first recorded 1853.


negativism (n.)

1824, the policy of opposition; see negative + -ism. In a psychological sense, it is attested from
1892.


negativity (n.)

1842, from negative + -ity.


negatory (adj.)

expressing negation, 1570s, from Middle French negatoire or directly from Medieval Latin negatorius
negative, from Latin negatus, past participle of negare deny, say no, to refuse (see deny). In the
sense no it is U.S. Air Force slang from the early 1950s.


negentropy (n.)

1950, compounded from negative entropy.


neglect (v.)

1520s, from Latin neglectus, past participle of neglegere to make light of, disregard, be
indifferent to, not heed, not trouble oneself about, literally not to pick up, variant of neclegere,
from Old Latin nec not (see deny) + legere pick up, select (see lecture (n.)). Related: Neglected;
neglecting.


neglect (n.)

1580s, from neglect (v.) or from Latin neglectus a neglecting, noun use of past participle of
neglegere.


neglected (adj.)

not treated with proper attention, c.1600, past participle adjective from neglect (v.).


neglectful (adj.)

1640s, from neglect + -ful. Related: Neglectfully; neglectfulness. Earlier in same sense was
neglective (1610s).


neglection (n.)

1590s, soon obsolete, from Latin neglectionem (nominative neglectio) a neglecting, noun of action
from past participle stem of neglegere (see neglect (v.)).


negligee (n.)

1756, a kind of loose gown worn by women, from French n&eacute;glig&eacute;e, noun use of fem. past
participle of n&eacute;gligier to neglect (14c.), from Latin neglegere to disregard, not heed, not
trouble oneself about, also to make light of (see neglect (v.)). So called in comparison to the
elaborate costume of a fully dressed woman of the period. Grose [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue,
1788] reports it vulgarly termed a neggledigee. Borrowed again, 1835; the modern sense semi-
transparent, flimsy, lacy dressing gown is yet another revival, first recorded 1930. It also was
used in the U.S. funeral industry mid-20c. for shroud of a corpse.


negligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French negligence negligence, sloth; injury, injustice (12c.), and directly from
Latin neclegentia, neglegentia carelessness, heedlessness, neglect, from neglegentem (nominative
neglegens) heedless, careless, unconcerned, present participle of neglegere to neglect (see neglect
(v.)).


negligent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French negligent careless, negligent (13c.) or directly from Latin negligentem
heedless, careless, unconcerned (see negligence). Related: Negligently.


negligible (adj.)

capable of being neglected, 1819, from negligence + -ible. Related: Negligibly; negligibility.


negotiable (adj.)

1749, from negotiate + -able, or from French n&#233;gociable (17c.). Related: Negotiably;
negotiability.


negotiate (v.)

to communicate in search of mutual agreement, 1590s, back-formation from negotiation, or else from
Latin negotiatus, past participle of negotiari. In the sense of tackle successfully (1862), it at
first meant to clear on horseback a hedge, fence, or other obstacle and originated in the hunting-
field; those who hunt the fox like also to hunt jocular verbal novelties [Gowers, 1965]. Related:
Negotiated; negotiating.


negotiation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French negociacion business, trade, and directly from Latin negotiationem
(nominative negotiatio) business, traffic, noun of action from past participle stem of negotiari
carry on business, do business, act as a banker, from negotium a business, employment, occupation,
affair (public or private), also difficulty, pains, trouble, labor, literally lack of leisure, from
neg- not (see deny) + otium ease, leisure. The sense expansion from doing business to also include
bargaining about anything took place in Latin.


negotiator (n.)

1590s, businessman, from Latin negotiator one who carries on business by wholesale, from negotiatus,
past participle of negotiari (see negotiation). Meaning one who carries on negotiations is from
c.1600.


negress (n.)

1750, from French n&eacute;gresse, fem. of n&egrave;gre negro, which came to French via Spanish or
Portuguese (see Negro).


negrification (n.)

1929, in social context, from Negro on model of pacification, etc. Johnson (1755) has the word in
the literal sense act of making black.


negritic (adj.)

1878, from Negro + -itic.


negritude (n.)

1950, from French n&eacute;gritude; see negro + -tude. Supposedly coined by young authors in the
French colonies of Africa before World War II.


Negro (n.)

member of a black-skinned race of Africa, 1550s, from Spanish or Portuguese negro black, from Latin
nigrum (nominative niger) black, dark, sable, dusky, figuratively gloomy, unlucky, bad, wicked, of
unknown origin (perhaps from PIE *nekw-t- night; see Watkins). As an adjective from 1590s. Use with
a capital N- became general early 20c. (e.g. 1930 in New York Times stylebook) in reference to U.S.
citizens of African descent, but because of its perceived association with white-imposed attitudes
and roles the word was ousted late 1960s in this sense by Black (q.v.).Professor Booker T.
Washington, being politely interrogated ... as to whether negroes ought to be called 'negroes' or
'members of the colored race' has replied that it has long been his own practice to write and speak
of members of his race as negroes, and when using the term 'negro' as a race designation to employ
the capital 'N' [Harper's Weekly, June 2, 1906]  Meaning English language as spoken by U.S. blacks
is from 1704. French n&#232;gre is a 16c. borrowing from Spanish negro.


negroid (adj.)

1844, a hybrid, from Negro and Greek suffix -oeides like, resembling (see -oid). As a noun from
1859.


Negrophile

1803, from Negro + -phile.


Negrophobe (n.)

1864, from Negro + -phobe.


Negrophobia (n.)

1819, from Negro + -phobia.


Negus

title of the ruler of Abyssinia, 1590s, from Amharic negush king, from stem of nagasha he forced,
ruled.


Nehemiah

masc. proper name, Jewish leader under Persian king Artaxerxes, from Hebrew Nehemyah, literally the
Lord comforts.


Nehru

of a type of long, narrow jacket with a standing collar (popular in Western fashion late 1960s),
1967, a reference to Jawaharlal Nehru (1889-1964), first prime minister of independent India
(1947-1964), who often wore such a jacket in public appearances.


neigh (v.)

Old English hn&aelig;gan to neigh, probably of imitative origin (compare Old Norse gneggja, Middle
High German negen, French hennir, Japanese inanaki). Related: Neighed; neighing. As a noun from
1510s.


neighbor (n.)

Old English neahgebur (West Saxon), nehebur (Anglian) neighbor, from neah near (see nigh) + gebur
dweller, related to bur dwelling (see bower). Common Germanic compound (cognates: Old Saxon nabur,
Middle Dutch naghebuur, Dutch (na)bur, Old High German nahgibur, Middle High German nachgebur,
German Nachbar). Good neighbor policy attested by 1937, but good neighbor with reference to U.S.
policy toward Latin America was used by 1928 by Herbert Hoover.


neighbor (v.)

1580s, from neighbor (n.). Related: Neighbored; neighboring.


neighborhood (n.)

mid-15c., neighborly conduct, friendliness, from neighbor (n.) + -hood. Modern sense of community of
people who live close together is first recorded 1620s. Phrase in the neighborhood of meaning near,
somewhere about is first recorded 1857, American English. The Old English word for neighborhood was
neahd&aelig;l.


neighborly (adj.)

1550s, from neighbor (n.) + -ly (1). Earlier as an adverb (1520s), while an earlier adjective form
was neighborlike (late 15c.). Related: Neighborliness, which ousted earlier neighborship (mid-15c.).


neighbour

chiefly British English spelling of neighbor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


neighbourhood

chiefly British English spelling of neighborhood; for spelling, see -or.


Neil

surname and masc. proper name, from Gaelic/Old Irish Niall champion. Picked up by the Vikings in
Ireland (as Njall), brought by them to Iceland and Norway, thence to France, from which place it was
introduced in England at the Conquest. Incorrectly Latinized as Nigellus on mistaken association
with niger black, hence Nigel.


neither (conj.)

Old English naw&thorn;er, contraction of nahw&aelig;&thorn;er, literally not of two, from na no (see
no) + hw&aelig;&thorn;er which of two (see whether). Spelling altered c.1200 by association with
either. Paired with nor from c.1300; earlier with ne. Also used in Old English as a pronoun. As an
adjective, mid-14c.


nekton

1893, from German nekton (van Heusen, 1890), from Greek nekton, neuter of nektos swimming, from
nekhein to swim (see natatorium).


Nelly

fem. proper name, also Nellie, diminutive of Nell, a pet form of Ellen, Helen, or Eleanor. Meaning
weak-spirited person is first attested 1961.


nelson (n.)

type of wrestling hold, 1875, apparently from a proper or surname, but no one now knows whose.
Presently, Stubbs, the more skilful as well as the more powerful of the twain, seizes the luckless
Jumper in a terrible gripe, known to the initiated as the Full Nelson. [Lancashire Recreations, in
Chambers's Journal, April 24, 1875]


nem. con.

abbreviation of Latin phrase nemine contradicente no one dissenting, hence, without opposition.


nematocyst (n.)

1875, from nemato-, comb. form of Greek nema, nematos thread (genitive nematos), from stem of nein
to spin (see needle (n.)) + cyst.


Nematoda

a class of worms, Modern Latin compound of nemat- thread (from Greek nema, genitive nematos thread,
from stem of nein to spin; see needle (n.)) + -odes like, of the nature of (see -oid).


nematode (n.)

1865, from Modern Latin Nematoda, the class or phylum name.


Nembutal

type of barbiturate, 1930, proprietary name of pentobarbitone sodium, formed from letters and
syllables from N(a) sodium + full chemical name 5-ethyl-5-1-methylbutyl barbiturate.


Nemean (adj.)

1580s, pertaining to Nemea, a wooded valley in Argolis, especially in reference to the lion there,
said to have been killed by Herakles. The place name is from Greek nemos grove.


nemesis

1570s, Nemesis, Greek goddess of vengeance, personification of divine wrath, from Greek nemesis just
indignation, righteous anger, literally distribution (of what is due), related to nemein distribute,
allot, apportion one's due, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot, to take (cognates: Old
English, Gothic niman to take, German nehmen; see nimble). With a lower-case -n-, in the sense of
retributive justice, attested from 1590s. General sense of anything by which it seems one must be
defeated is 20c.


nemo (n.)

Latin, literally no man, no one, nobody.


neo-

word-forming element meaning new, recent, used in a seemingly endless number of adjectives and
nouns, mostly coined since c.1880, from Greek neo-, comb. form of neos new, young, youthful; fresh,
strange; lately, just now, from PIE root *newo- (see new).


neo-classical

also neoclassical, style of art, architecture, etc., influenced by classical patterns, 1859,
especially in reference to 18th century English literature; from neo- + classical. Related: Neo-
classicism/neoclassicism.


neo-conservative (n.)

also neoconservative; used in the modern sense by 1979:    My Republican vote [in the 1972
presidential election] produced little shock waves in the New York intellectual community. It didn't
take long - a year or two - for the socialist writer Michael Harrington to come up with the term
neoconservative to describe a renegade liberal like myself. To the chagrin of some of my friends, I
decided to accept that term; there was no point calling myself a liberal when no one else did.
[Irving Kristol, Forty Good Years, The Public Interest, Spring 2005]    The term is attested from
1960, but it originally often was applied to Russell Kirk and his followers, who would be
philosophically opposed to the later neocons. From neo- + conservative.


neo-liberal

also neoliberal, 1966, from neo- + liberal. Related: Neoliberalism.


neo-natal (adj.)

also neonatal, 1883, from neo- + natal.


neocolonialism (n.)

also neo-colonialism, 1955, from neo- + colonialism.


neocon (n.)

by 1987, abbreviation for neo-conservative in the U.S. political sense.  Neoconservatism is the
first variant of American conservatism in the past century that is in the 'American grain.' It is
hopeful, not lugubrious; forward-looking, not nostalgic; and its general tone is cheerful, not grim
or dyspeptic. Its 20th-century heroes tend to be TR, FDR, and Ronald Reagan. Such Republican and
conservative worthies as Calvin Coolidge, Herbert Hoover, Dwight Eisenhower, and Barry Goldwater are
politely overlooked. [Irving Kristol, The Neoconservative Persuasion, in The Weekly Standard, Aug.
25, 2003]


neolithic (adj.)

pertaining to the later Stone Age, 1865, coined by John Lubbock, later Baron Avebury, (1834-1913)
from neo- + -lith stone.


neolocal (adj.)

1949, from neo- + local (adj.).


neologism (n.)

practice of innovation in language, 1772 (in a translation from French), from French
n&eacute;ologisme, from neo- (see neo-) + Greek logos word (see lecture (n.)) + -ism. Meaning new
word or expression is from 1803. Neological is attested from 1754.


neon (n.)

1898, coined by its discoverers, Sir William Ramsay and Morris W. Travers, from Greek neon, neuter
of neos new (see new); so called because it was newly discovered. Neon sign is attested from 1927.


neonate (n.)

recently born infant, 1905, coined from neo- + Latin natus born, past participle of nasci be born
(Old Latin gnasci; see genus).


neonatology (n.)

branch of medicine concerned with newborn infants, 1960, from neonate recently born infant + -ology.


neophyte (n.)

new convert, 1550s, from Ecclesiastical Latin neophytus, from Greek neophytos a new convert, noun
use of adjective meaning newly initiated, newly converted, literally newly planted, from neos new
(see new) + phytos grown; planted, verbal adjective of phyein cause to grow, beget, plant (see
physic). Church sense is from I Tim. iii:6. Rare before 19c. General sense of one who is new to any
subject is first recorded 1590s.


neoplasia (n.)

1868, from neo- + -plasia.


neoplasm (n.)

1864, coined in German by Karl Friedrich Burdach (1776-1847) from neo- + Greek plasma formation (see
-plasm). Related: Neoplastic.


Neoplatonism (n.)

also Neo-platonism, 1827, a philosophical and religious system mixing Platonic ideas and oriental
mysticism, originating 3c. at Alexandria, especially in writings of Plotinus, Porphyry, and Proclus.
Neoplatonian is attested from 1831. Related: Neoplatonic; Neoplatonist.


neoteny (n.)

retention of juvenile characteristics in adult life, 1901, from German neotenie (1884), from Greek
neos young (see new) + teinein to extend (see tenet).


neoteric (adj.)

recent, new, 1590s, from Late Latin neotericus, from Greek neoterikos youthful, fresh, modern, from
neoteros, comp. of neos new (see new). Related: Neoterism.


Nepal

from Sanskrit Nepala, said to be from nipat to fly down (from ni down + pat to fly) + alaya abode,
house. If this is right, the reference would be to villages in mountain vales. Related: Nepalese.


nepenthe (n.)

1570s, nepenthes, from Greek nepenthes, from ne- no, not (see un-) + penthos pain, grief, from PIE
*kwent(h)- to suffer (see pathos). A drug of Egypt mentioned in the Odyssey as capable of banishing
grief or trouble from the mind. The -s is a proper part of the word, but likely was mistaken in
English as a plural affix and dropped.


nephew (n.)

c.1300, from Old French neveu (Old North French nevu) grandson, descendant, from Latin nepotem
(nominative nepos) sister's son, grandson, descendant, in post-Augustan Latin, nephew, from PIE
*nepot- grandchild, and in a general sense, male descendant other than son (cognates: Sanskrit napat
grandson, descendant; Old Persian napat- grandson; Old Lithuanian nepuotis grandson; Dutch neef;
German Neffe nephew; Old Irish nia, genitive niath son of a sister, Welsh nei). Used in English in
all the classical senses until meaning narrowed in 17c., and also as a euphemism for the
illegitimate son of an ecclesiastic (1580s). The Old English cognate, nefa nephew, stepson,
grandson, second cousin survived to 16c.


Nephilim

of uncertain etymology; much disputed.


nephrectomy (n.)

1880, from nephro- kidney + -ectomy a cutting out.


nephridium (n.)

(plural nephridia), 1877, Modern Latin, from Greek diminutive of nephros kidney (see nephron).


nephritis (n.)

1570s, from Late Latin nephritis, from Greek nephritis disease of the kidneys, from nephros kidney
(see nephron) + -itis inflammation. Related: Nephritic.


nephro-

before vowels nephr-, word-forming element meaning kidney, kidneys, from nephro-, comb. form of
Greek nephros kidney (see nephron).


nephrolithiasis (n.)

1837, probably from German, from nephro- + lithos stone (see litho-) + -iasis pathological or morbid
condition.


nephrology (n.)

1839, from nephro- + -ology. Related: Nephrologist.


nephron (n.)

1932, from German nephron (1924), from Greek nephros kidney, from PIE *negwhro- kidney (cognates:
Latin nefrones, Old Norse nyra, Dutch nier, German Niere kidney).


nepotism (n.)

favoritism shown to relatives, especially in appointment to high office, 1660s, from French
n&eacute;potisme (1650s), from Italian nepotismo, from nepote nephew, from Latin nepotem (nominative
nepos) grandson, nephew (see nephew). Originally, practice of granting privileges to a pope's nephew
which was a euphemism for his natural son.


Neptune

late 14c., god of the sea, from Latin Neptunus, son of Saturn, brother of Jupiter, the Roman god of
the sea (later identified with Greek Poseidon), probably from PIE root *nebh- cloud (source of Latin
nebula fog, mist, cloud; see nebula), via a sense of moist, wet. The planet so named was discovered
by Galle in 1846. Until the identification of Pluto in 1930, it was the most distant planet known.


Neptunian (adj.)

1650s as pertaining to the god Neptune; 1794 in the geological sense, referring to actions of water,
from Neptune + -ian. Usually opposed to volcanic or plutonic. As a noun meaning inhabitant of the
planet Neptune it is recorded from 1870.


neptunium (n.)

1941, from Neptune + element ending -ium. Named for its relative position in the periodic table,
next after Uranium, as the planet Neptune is one beyond Uranus. See also plutonium.


nerd (n.)

1951, U.S. student slang, probably an alteration of 1940s slang nert stupid or crazy person, itself
an alteration of nut. The word turns up in a Dr. Seuss book from 1950 (If I Ran the Zoo), which may
have contributed to its rise.


nerdy (adj.)

1978, from nerd + -y (2). Related: Nerdiness.


Nereid

sea-nymph, 1510s, from Greek Nereis (genitive Nereidos), daughter of the ancient sea-god Nereus,
whose name is related to naros flowing, liquid, I flow (see naiad).


nerf

1955, in nerf bars, hot-rodder slang for custom bumpers; from slang verb in auto racing (1953)
meaning to nudge something with a bumper in passing and knock it off course; ultimate origin and
signification unknown.    As a trademark name for toys made of foam-like material for indoor play,
introduced 1970 (Nerf ball). By 1995 this had yielded a verbal sense of to make less effective (as a
Nerf basketball is softer and lighter than the real thing).


neritic (adj.)

1891, from German neritisch (Haeckel, 1890), perhaps from Nerita, a genus of molluscs.


nertz (interj.)

1932, originally American English college slang, colloquial or euphemistic pronunciation of nuts as
a slang retort of defiance or dismissal (1931).


nerve (n.)

late 14c., nerf sinew, tendon, from Old French nerf and directly from Medieval Latin nervus nerve,
from Latin nervus sinew, tendon; cord, bowstring, metathesis of pre-Latin *neuros, from PIE *(s)neu-
tendon, sinew (cognates: Sanskrit snavan- band, sinew, Armenian neard sinew, Greek neuron sinew,
tendon, in Galen nerve). Sense of fibers that convey impulses between the brain and the body is from
c.1600.    Secondary senses developed from meaning strength, vigor, energy (c.1600), from the sinew
sense. Hence figurative sense of feeling, courage, first attested c.1600; that of courage, boldness
is from 1809; bad sense impudence, cheek is from 1887. Latin nervus also had a figurative sense of
vigor, force, power, strength, as did Greek neuron. From the neurological sense come Nerves
condition of nervousness, attested from 1792; to get on someone's nerves, from 1895. War of nerves
psychological warfare is from 1915.


nerve (v.)

c.1500, to ornament with threads; see nerve (n.). Meaning to give strength or vigor is from 1749.
Related: Nerved; nerving.


nerve-racking (adj.)

also nerveracking, 1812, from nerve + present participle of verbal sense of rack (n.1).


nerve-wracking (adj.)

also nervewracking, 1867, from nerve + present participle of wrack (v.).


nervous (adj.)

c.1400, affecting the sinews, from Latin nervosus sinewy, vigorous, from nervus sinew, nerve (see
nerve). Meaning of or belonging to the nerves in the modern sense is from 1660s. Meaning suffering
disorder of the nervous system is from 1734; illogical sense restless, agitated, lacking nerve is
1740. Widespread popular use as a euphemism for mental forced the medical community to coin
neurological to replace it in the older sense. Nervous wreck first attested 1862. Related:
Nervously; nervousness.


nervy (adj.)

full of courage, 1870, from nerve + -y (2). Sense of excitable is from 1891.


nescience (n.)

ignorance, 1610s, from Late Latin nescientia, from nesciens (see nescient).


nescient (adj.)

1620s, from Latin nescientem (nominative nesciens) ignorant, unaware, present participle of nescire
not to know, to be ignorant, from ne not + scire to know (see science).


nesh (adj.)

tender, delicate, weak, now a Northern England dialect word, from Old English hnesce soft in texture
(cognate with early modern Dutch nesch, Gothic hnasqus), of unknown origin.


ness (n.)

obsolete except in place names, Old English n&aelig;s a promontory, related to nasu nose (see nose
(n.)). Cognate with Old Norse nes, Danish n&#230;s, Swedish n&#228;s, Middle Dutch nesse.


Nessie

colloquial name of the Loch Ness monster, 1945. The loch is named for the river Ness, probably from
an Old Celtic word meaning roaring one.


nest (n.)

Old English nest bird's nest, snug retreat, also young bird, brood, from Proto-Germanic *nistaz
(cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch nest, German Nest), from PIE *nizdo- (cognates: Sanskrit
nidah resting place, nest, Latin nidus nest, Old Church Slavonic gnezdo, Old Irish net, Welsh nyth,
Breton nez nest), probably from *ni down + *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    Used since Middle
English in reference to various accumulations of things (such as a nest of drawers, early 18c.).
Nest egg retirement savings is from 1700, originally a real or artificial egg left in a nest to
induce the hen to go on laying there (c.1600).


nest (v.)

Old English nistan to build nests, from Proto-Germanic *nistijanan, from the source of nest (n.).
The modern verb is perhaps a new formation in Middle English from the noun. Related: Nested;
nesting.


nesting (adj.)

1650s, making or using a nest, past participle adjective from nest (v.). Of objects, fitted into one
another, from 1934.


nestle (v.)

Old English nestlian build a nest, from nest (see nest (n.)). Figurative sense of settle (oneself)
comfortably, snuggle is first recorded 1540s. Related: Nestled; nestling.


nestling (n.)

late 14c., bird too young to leave the nest, from nest (n.) + diminutive suffix -ling.


Nestor

name for old king renowned for wise counsel, 1580s, from Greek, name of the aged and wise hero in
the Iliad, king of Pylus, who outlived three generations. Klein says the name is literally one who
blesses, and is related to nostimos blessed; Watkins connects it with the root of the first element
in nostalgia.


Nestorian (n.)

in Church history (mid-15c.), a follower of Nestorius (Latinized form of Nestor), 5c. patriarch of
Constantinople, whose doctrine attributed distinct divine and human persons to Christ and was
condemned as heresy. As an adjective from 1560s. Related: Nestorianism.


net (n.)

Old English net netting, network, spider web, mesh used for capturing, also figuratively, moral or
mental snare or trap, from Proto-Germanic *natjan (cognates: Old Saxon net, Old Norse, Dutch net,
Swedish n&auml;t, Old High German nezzi, German Netz, Gothic nati net), originally something
knotted, from PIE *ned- to twist, knot (cognates: Sanskrit nahyati binds, ties, Latin nodus knot,
Old Irish nascim I bind, oblige).


net (adj.)

remaining after deductions, 1510s, from earlier sense of trim, elegant, clean, neat (c.1300), from
Old French net clean, pure, from Latin nitere to shine, look bright, glitter (see neat). Meaning
influenced by Italian netto remaining after deductions. As a noun, 1910.


net (v.2)

to gain as a net sum, 1758, from net (adj.). Related: Netted; netting.


net (v.1)

to capture in a net, early 15c., from net (n.). Related: Netted; netting.


nether (adj.)

Old English ni&thorn;era, neo&thorn;era down, downwards, below, beneath, from Proto-Germanic
*nitheraz (cognates: Old Saxon nithar, Old Norse ni&eth;r, Old Frisian nither, Dutch neder, German
nieder), from comparative of PIE *ni- down, below (cognates: Sanskrit ni down, nitaram downward,
Greek neiothen from below, Old Church Slavonic niz&#365; low, down). Has been replaced in most
senses by lower (adj.).


Netherlands

from Dutch Nederland, literally lower land (see nether); said to have been used by the Austrians
(who ruled much of the southern part of the Low Countries from 1713 to 1795), by way of contrast to
the mountains they knew, but the name is older than this. The Netherlands formerly included Flanders
and thus were equivalent geographically and etymologically to the Low Countries. Related:
Netherlander; Netherlandish (c.1600).


netherworld (n.)

also nether-world, 1630s, place beneath the earth, from nether + world.


netiquette (n.)

1993, coined punningly from net, short for Internet + etiquette.


netizen (n.)

1995, from net, short for Internet + citizen.


nettle (n.)

stinging plant, Old English netele, from Proto-Germanic *natilon (cognates: Old Saxon netila, Middle
Dutch netele, Dutch netel, German Nessel, M.Da. n&aelig;dl&aelig; nettle), diminutive of *naton,
perhaps from PIE root *ned- to twist, knot (see net (n.)). [N]ettles or plants of closely related
genera such as hemp were used as a source of fiber [Watkins].


nettle (v.)

c.1400, to beat with nettles, from nettle (n.). Figurative sense of irritate, provoke is from 1560s.
Related: Nettled; nettling.    Nettled. Teized, provoked, out of temper. He or she has pissed on a
nettle; said of one who is pevish or out of temper. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


nettled (adj.)

vexed, irritated, c.1400, figurative adjectival use of past participle of nettle (v.).


nettlesome (adj.)

1766, from nettle (n.) + -some (1).


network (v.)

1887, to cover with a network, from network (n.). From 1940 as to broadcast over a (radio) network;
1972 in reference to computers; 1980s in reference to persons. Related: Networked; networking.


network (n.)

net-like arrangement of threads, wires, etc., 1550s, from net (n.) + work (n.). Extended sense of
any complex, interlocking system is from 1839 (originally in reference to transport by rivers,
canals, and railways). Meaning broadcasting system of multiple transmitters is from 1914; sense of
interconnected group of people is from 1947.


Neufchatel

type of soft, white cheese, 1833, from Neufch&acirc;tel, small town in Normandy where it first was
made.


neural (adj.)

pertaining to a nerve or nerves, 1830, from Greek neuron nerve (see neuro-) + adjectival suffix -al
(1). Related: Neurally.


neuralgia (n.)

1807, from Greek neuron nerve (see neuro-) + -algia. Probably formed on model of French
n&eacute;vralgie (1801). Related: Neuralgic.


neurasthenia (n.)

nervous exhaustion, 1854, medical Latin, from neur- (form of neuro- before a vowel) + asthenia
weakness (see asthenia). Related: Neurasthenic.


neuritis (n.)

inflammation of a nerve or nerves, 1825, from Greek neuron nerve (see neuro-) + -itis. Related:
Neuritic.


neuro-

before vowels neur-, word-forming element meaning pertaining to a nerve or nerves or the nervous
system, from Greek neuro-, comb. form of neuron nerve, originally sinew, tendon, cord, bowstring,
also strength, vigor, from PIE *(s)neu- tendon, sinew (see nerve).


neuroglia (n.)

1867, medical Latin, coined 1853 by German pathologist Ludwig Karl Virchow (1821-1902) from neuro- +
Late Greek glia glue, frim PIE *glei- to stick together (see clay).


neurologist (n.)

1801, from neurology + -ist.


neurology (n.)

scientific study of the nervous system, 1680s, from Modern Latin neurologia, from Modern Greek
neurologia (1660s), from neuro- (see neuro-) + -logia study (see -logy). Related: Neurological.


neuron (n.)

a nerve cell with appendages, 1891, from German Neuron, from Greek neuron (see neuro-). Used earlier
(1884) for the spinal cord and brain.


neuropathy (n.)

1827, from neuro- + -pathy. Related: Neuropath; neuropathic; neuropathist.


neuroscience (n.)

1963, from neuro- + science.


neurosis (n.)

1776, functional derangement arising from disorders of the nervous system, coined by Scottish
physician William Cullen (1710-1790) from Greek neuron nerve (see neuro-) + Modern Latin -osis
abnormal condition. Used in a general psychological sense since 1871; clinical use in psychiatry
dates from 1923.


neurosurgeon (n.)

also neuro-surgeon, 1887, from neuro- + surgeon. Related: Neurosurgery; neurosurgical.


neurotic (adj.)

1775, acting upon or stimulating the nerves, from Greek neuron nerve (see neuro-) + -otic, as in
hypnotic. Sense of affected by neurosis is 1887. The noun meaning a neurotic person is from 1896.
Related: Neurotically.


neuroticism (n.)

1894, from neurotic + -ism.


neurotransmitter (n.)

1961, from neuro- + transmitter.


neuter (v.)

1903, from neuter (adj.). Originally in reference to pet cats. Related: Neutered; neutering.


neuter (adj.)

late 14c., of grammatical gender, neither masculine nor feminine, from Latin neuter of the neuter
gender, literally neither one nor the other, from ne- not, no (see un-) + uter either (of two) (see
whether). Probably a loan-translation of Greek oudeteros neither, neuter. In 16c., it had the sense
of taking neither side, neutral.


neutral (adj.)

late 15c., composed of contrasting elements which, in proper proportion, neutralize each other, from
Middle French neutral, from Latin neutralis of neuter gender, from neuter (see neuter (adj.)).
Chemistry sense is from 1660s. Sense of not taking sides in a fight (1540s) probably is from a
similar meaning in Medieval Latin. Of colors, from 1821. Neutral corner is from boxing (1908).


neutral (n.)

mid-15c., one who remains neutral, from Latin neutralis of neuter gender, (see neutral (adj.)).
Meaning disengaged position in gear mechanisms is from 1912.


neutrality (n.)

late 15c., the neutral party in any dispute, from Middle French neutralite (14c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin neutralitatem (nominative neutralitas), from Latin neutralis (see neutral). Meaning a
neutral attitude is from late 15c.


neutralization (n.)

1747, from neutralize + -ation.


neutralize (v.)

1734, to render neutral (in a chemical sense), from French neutraliser (17c.), from neutral (see
neutral (adj.)). Meaning to counterbalance, to kill by opposing is from 1795. Related: Neutralized;
neutralizing.


neutrino (n.)

neutral particle smaller than a neutron, 1934, from Italian neutrino, coined 1933 by Italian
physicist Enrico Fermi (1901-1954) from neutro neuter (see neuter (adj.)) + -ino, diminutive suffix.


neutron (n.)

electrically neuter particle of the atom, 1921, coined by U.S. chemist William D. Harkins
(1873-1951) from neutral (adj.) + -on. First record of neutron bomb is from 1960. Neutron star
attested from 1934, originally hypothetical; so called because it would be composed of neutrons.


Nevada

U.S. state (organized as a territory 1861, admitted 1864), named for Sierra Nevada mountain range on
its western boundary, literally snowy mountains, from fem. of Spanish nevado snowy (see neve).


neve (n.)

field of granular snow, firn, 1843, from French n&eacute;v&eacute; (19c.), probably from Savoyard
n&eacute;vi mass of snow, from Latin nivem (nominative nix) snow (source of French neige), from PIE
root *sneigwh- snow, to snow (see snow (n.)).


never (adv.)

Old English n&aelig;fre never, compound of ne not, no (from PIE root *ne- no, not; see un- (1)) +
&aelig;fre ever (see ever). Early used as an emphatic form of not (as still in never mind). Old
English, unlike its modern descendant, had the useful custom of attaching ne to words to create
their negatives, as in nabban for na habban not to have.    Italian giammai, French jamais, Spanish
jamas are from Latin iam already + magis more; thus literally at any time, ever, originally with a
negative, but this has been so thoroughly absorbed in sense as to be formally omitted.    Phrase
never say die don't despair is from 1818. Never Never Land is first attested in Australia as a name
for the uninhabited northern part of Queensland (1884), perhaps so called because anyone who had
gone there once never wished to return. Meaning imaginary, illusory or utopian place first attested
1900 in American English.


never-ending (adj.)

also neverending, 1660s, from never + present participle of end (v.).


never-was (n.)

person who never amounted to anything, 1911, from never + was; probably coined to go with used-to-
be.


nevermind (n.)

also never-mind difference, matter for attention, 1935, American English, from verbal expression
never mind forget it, originally never mind it attested by 1795; see never + mind (v.).


nevermore (adv.)

no longer, not any more, never again, early 12c., from never + more (adv.).


nevertheless (adv.)

c.1300, neuer &thorn;e lesse; as one word from early 14c., neuer&thorn;eles. The sense of never here
is not at all; none the, as in unmerged expressions such as never the wiser, never the worse. Middle
English also had neverthelater in same sense.


Nevin

surname and masc. proper name, from Irish/Gaelic Naomhin little saint.


new (adj.)

Old English neowe, niowe, earlier niwe new, fresh, recent, novel, unheard-of, different from the
old; untried, inexperienced, from Proto-Germanic *newjaz (cognates: Old Saxon niuwi, Old Frisian
nie, Middle Dutch nieuwe, Dutch nieuw, Old High German niuwl, German neu, Danish and Swedish ny,
Gothic niujis new), from PIE *newo- new (cognates: Sanskrit navah, Persian nau, Hittite newash,
Greek neos, Lithuanian naujas, Old Church Slavonic novu, Russian novyi, Latin novus, Old Irish nue,
Welsh newydd new).    The adverb is Old English niwe, from the adjective. New math in reference to a
system of teaching mathematics based on investigation and discovery is from 1958. New World (adj.)
to designate phenomena of the Western Hemisphere first attested 1823, in Lord Byron; the noun phrase
is recorded from 1550s. New Deal in the FDR sense attested by 1932. New school in reference to the
more advanced or liberal faction of something is from 1806. New Left (1960) was a coinage of U.S.
political sociologist C. Wright Mills (1916-1962). New light in reference to religions is from
1640s. New frontier, in U.S. politics, reform and social betterment, is from 1934 but associated
with John F. Kennedy's use of it in 1960.


New Age (adj.)

1971, in reference to a modern spiritual movement, from new + age. It had been used at various times
since at least the 1840s.


New England

1616, named by Capt. John Smith. As an adjective, New English (1630s) is older than New Englandish
(1863).


New Jersey

named 1664 by one of the proprietors, Sir George Carteret, for his home, the Channel island of
Jersey. Jersey girl attested from 1770.


New Orleans

founded 1718 as Nouvelle Orl&eacute;ans, in honor of French regent Philippe, duc
dâ&euro;&trade;Orl&eacute;ans (1674-1723); anglicized after purchase by the U.S. in 1803.


New Wave

1960, of cinema (from French Nouvelle Vague, late 1950s); 1976 as a name for the more restrained and
melodic alternative to punk rock.


New Year&#039;s Eve

c.1300; &thorn;er &thorn;ay dronken &amp; dalten ... on nwe gerez euen. The Julian calendar began on
January 1, but the Christian Church frowned on pagan celebrations of this and chose the Feast of the
Annunciation (March 25) as its New Year's Day. The civic year in England continued to begin January
1 until late 12c., and even though legal documents then shifted to March 25, popular calendars and
almanacs continued to begin on January 1. The calendar reform of 1751 restored the Julian New Year.
New Year's was the main midwinter festival in Scotland from 17c., when Protestant authorities banned
Christmas, and continued so after England reverted to Christmas, hence the Scottish flavor (Auld
Lang Syne, etc.). New Year's gathering in public places began 1878 in London, after new bells were
installed in St. Paul's.


New York

former New Amsterdam (city), New Netherlands (colony), renamed after British acquisition in 1664 in
honor of the Duke of York and Albany (1633-1701), the future James II, who had an interest in the
territory. See York. Related: New Yorker. New York minute very short time attested by 1976.


New Zealand

from Dutch Nieuw Zeeland, literally new sea land, but chiefly a reference to the Dutch province of
Zeeland. Discovered 1647 by Dutch explorer Abel Tasman and originally named Staaten Landt; the name
was changed the following year by Dutch authorities.


new-made (adj.)

c.1400, from new + made.


newbie (n.)

newcomer, new person to an existing situation, by 1969, from new with diminutive or derogatory
suffix. Perhaps originally U.S. military slang. Compare noob. Middle English had newing a new thing
(early 15c.); new was used as a noun meaning naval cadet during first training on a ship (1909); and
newie new thing is recorded from 1947.


newborn (adj.)

also new-born, c.1300, from new + born. As a noun from 1879.


newcomer (n.)

recent arrival, mid-15c., with agent noun ending from new-come (past participle adjective), c.1200,
from Old English niwe cumen. Old English also used niwcumen as a noun meaning newcomer, neophyte.


newel (n.)

mid-14c., pillar from which steps of a winding staircase radiate, from Old French noel, novel knob,
newel, kernel, stone (Modern French noyau), from Vulgar Latin *nodellus little knot, diminutive of
Latin nodulus, diminutive of nodus knot (see net (n.)). Klein's sources suggest the French word may
be from Gallo-Roman *nucale, from Latin nux nut. The meaning post at the top or bottom of a
staircase is from 1833.


newfangled (adj.)

late 15c., addicted to novelty, literally ready to grasp at all new things, from adj. newefangel
fond of novelty (late 14c.), from new + -fangel inclined to take, from root of Old English fon to
capture (see fang). Sense of lately come into fashion first recorded 1530s.


newfound (adj.)

also new-found, late 15c., from new + found (adj.) discovered.


Newfoundland

1585, from newfound + land (n.). In reference to a type of dog, from 1773. Related: Newfoundlander.
Colloquial shortening Newfie for the inhabitants or the place is recorded from 1942.


Newgate

1596, in reference to the famous London prison, which was torn down 1902-3.


newish (adj.)

1560s, from new + -ish.


newly (adv.)

Old English niwlice lately, recently; see new + -ly (2). Similar formation in German neulich, Danish
nylig, Swedish nyligen.


newlywed (n.)

also newly-wed, 1907, from newly + wed. Probably owes its origin to a then-popular newspaper comic
strip, The Newlyweds and Their Baby, about Mr. and Mrs. Newlywed, by George McManus in the New York
World. As an adjective, newly-wed is attested from 1833. An earlier adjective was new-married
(1530s). Ancient Greek had neo-zygos newly married, literally newly yoked.


newness (n.)

Old English neownysse; see new + -ness.


news (n.)

late 14c., new things, plural of new (n.) new thing, from new (adj.); after French nouvelles, used
in Bible translations to render Medieval Latin nova (neuter plural) news, literally new things.
Sometimes still regarded as plural, 17c.-19c. Meaning tidings is early 15c. Meaning radio or
television program presenting current events is from 1923. Bad news unpleasant person or situation
is from 1926. Expression no news, good news can be traced to 1640s. Expression news to me is from
1889.      The News in the Virginia city Newport News is said to derive from the name of one of its
founders, William Newce.


news (v.)

to tell as news, 1640s, from news (n.). Related: Newsed; newsing.


newsboy (n.)

also news-boy, 1764, from news (n.) + boy.


newscast (n.)

1930, from news + -cast, from broadcast.


newsgroup (n.)

by 1985, from news (n.) + group (n.).


newsie (n.)

1875, short for newsboy.


newsletter (n.)

also news-letter , 1670s, from news (n.) + letter (n.). It fell from use until it was revived 20c.


newspaper (n.)

1660s, though the thing itself is older (see gazette); from news (n.) + paper (n.).    [T]he
newspaper that drops on your doorstep is a partial, hasty, incomplete, inevitably somewhat flawed
and inaccurate rendering of some of the things we have heard about in the past twenty-four hours --
distorted, despite our best efforts to eliminate gross bias, by the very process of compression that
makes it possible for you to lift it from the doorstep and read it in about an hour. If we labeled
the product accurately, then we could immediately add: But it's the best we could do under the
circumstances, and we will be back tomorrow with a corrected and updated version. [David Broder,
Pulitzer Prize acceptance speech, 1973]


Newspeak (n.)

name of the artificial language of official communication in George Orwell's novel Nineteen Eighty-
Four, 1949, from new (adj.) + speak (n.). Frequently applied to what is perceived as propagandistic
warped English.


newsprint (n.)

cheap paper from pulp, used to print newspapers, 1909, from news (n.) + print.


newsreel (n.)

1916, from news (n.) + reel (n.).


newsstand (n.)

1872, from news (n.) + stand (n.).


newsworthy (adj.)

1932, from news + worthy.


newsy (adj.)

full of news, 1832 from news (n.) + -y (2). Related: Newsily; newsiness.


newt (n.)

early 15c., misdivision of an ewte (see N for other examples), from Middle English evete (see eft).


Newton (n.)

unit of force, 1904, named in honor of Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727).


next (adj.)

Old English niehsta, nyhsta (West Saxon), nesta (Anglian) nearest, closest, superlative of neah
(West Saxon), neh (Anglian) nigh; from Proto-Germanic *nekh- near + superlative suffix *-istaz.
Cognate with Old Norse n&aelig;str, Dutch naast next, Old High German nahisto neighbor, German
n&auml;chst next. Adverbial and prepositional use from c.1200. Phrase the next person a typical
person is from 1857.


next-door (adv.)

also nextdoor, 1570s, from noun phrase next door nearest house (late 15c.), from next + door. Noun
meaning the people living next door is from 1855.


nexus (n.)

1660s, bond, link, means of communication, from Latin nexus that which ties or binds together, past
participle of nectere to bind, from PIE root *ned- to bind, tie (see net (n.)).


Nez Perce

native people of Idaho and vicinity, and their language, from French Nez Perc&eacute;, literally
pierced nose. In reference to an early custom of the people of wearing shell ornaments in pierced
septums.


niacin (n.)

pellagra-preventing vitamin in enriched bread, 1942, coined from ni(cotinic) ac(id) + -in (2),
chemical suffix; suggested by the American Medical Association as a more commercially viable name
than nicotinic acid.The new name was found to be necessary because some anti-tobacco groups warned
against enriched bread because it would foster the cigarette habit. [Cooperative Consumer, Feb. 28,
1942]


Niagara

waterfall from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario, from a town name, perhaps from an Iroquoian language and
meaning a neck (between two bodies of water); general sense of a cataract, torrent is attested from
1841; meaning  'shower' of ringlets (true or false) in women's hair is from 1864, also known as
cataract curls.


nib (n.)

1580s, beak or bill of a bird, Scottish variant of Old English neb (see neb). Meaning point (of a
pen or quill) first recorded 1610s.


nibble (v.)

to bite gently, c.1500, perhaps from Low German nibbeln to nibble, gnaw, related to Middle Low
German nibbelen, Middle Dutch knibbelen to gnaw, source of Dutch knibbelen to cavail, squabble.
Related: Nibbled; nibbling.


nibble (n.)

1650s, act of nibbling, from nibble (v.). As a small bite, from 1838.


Nibelungenlied (n.)

German epic poem of 13c., literally song of the Nibelungs, a race of dwarves who lived in Norway and
owned a hoard of gold and a magic ring, literally children of the mist, related to Old High German
nebul mist, darkness, Old English nifol (see nebula).


niblick (n.)

golf club with a heavy head, of unknown origin.


nibs (n.)

especially in His Nibs boss, employer, self-important person, 1821, of unknown origin; perhaps a
variant of nob person of high position.


Nicaragua

visited 1522 by Spanish conquistador Gil Gonz&aacute;lez D&aacute;vila, who is said to have named it
for a local native chieftain, Nicarao.  Related: Nicaraguan.


nice (adj.)

late 13c., foolish, stupid, senseless, from Old French nice (12c.) careless, clumsy; weak; poor,
needy; simple, stupid, silly, foolish, from Latin nescius ignorant, unaware, literally not-knowing,
from ne- not (see un-) + stem of scire to know (see science). The sense development has been
extraordinary, even for an adj. [Weekley] -- from timid (pre-1300); to fussy, fastidious (late
14c.); to dainty, delicate (c.1400); to precise, careful (1500s, preserved in such terms as a nice
distinction and nice and early); to agreeable, delightful (1769); to kind, thoughtful (1830).    In
many examples from the 16th and 17th centuries it is difficult to say in what particular sense the
writer intended it to be taken. [OED]    By 1926, it was pronounced too great a favorite with the
ladies, who have charmed out of it all its individuality and converted it into a mere diffuser of
vague and mild agreeableness. [Fowler]I am sure, cried Catherine, I did not mean to say anything
wrong; but it is a nice book, and why should I not call it so?  Very true, said Henry, and this is a
very nice day, and we are taking a very nice walk; and you are two very nice young ladies. Oh! It is
a very nice word indeed! It does for everything. [Jane Austen, Northanger Abbey, 1803]


nicely (adv.)

early 14c., foolishly, from nice + -ly (2). From c.1600 as scrupulously; 1714 as in an agreeable
fashion.


Nicene (adj.)

early 15c., in reference to Nicaea (Greek Nikaia, modern Turkish Isnik), city in Bithynia where
ecclesiastical council of 325 C.E. dealt with the Arian schism and produced the Nicene Creed. A
second council held there (787) considered the question of images.


niceness (n.)

1520s, folly, foolish behavior, from nice + -ness. Meaning exactness is from 1670s; that of
pleasantness is from 1809.


nicety (n.)

mid-14c., folly, stupidity, from Old French nicet&eacute; foolishness, childishness, simplicity,
from nice silly (see nice). Underwent sense evolution parallel to nice, arriving at minute, subtle
point 1580s and exactitude in 1650s. Phrase to a nicety exactly is attested from 1795.


niche (n.)

1610s, shallow recess in a wall, from French niche recess (for a dog), kennel (14c.), perhaps from
Italian nicchia niche, nook, from nicchio seashell, said by Klein and Barnhart to be probably from
Latin mitulus mussel, but the change of -m- to -n- is not explained. Watkins suggests that the word
is from an Old French noun derived from nichier to nestle, nest, build a nest, via Gallo-Roman
*nidicare from Latin nidus nest; but that has difficulties, too. Figurative sense is first recorded
1725. Biological use dates from 1927.


Nicholas

masc. proper name, from French Nicolas, from Latin Nicholaus, Nicolaus, from Greek Nikholaos,
literally victory-people, from nike victory (see Nike) + laos people (see lay (adj.)). The saint
(obit. 326 C.E.) was a bishop of Myra in Lycia, patron of scholars, especially schoolboys. A popular
given name in England in Middle Ages, as was the fem. form Nicolaa, corresponding to French Nicole.
Colloquial Old Nick the devil is attested from 1640s, evidently from the proper name, but for no
certain reason.


nick (n.)

notch, groove, slit, late 15c., nyke, of unknown origin, possibly influenced by Middle French niche
(see niche), or from it. Nick of time is first attested 1640s (nick of opportunity is 1610s),
possibly from an old custom of recording time as it passed by making notches on a tally stick,
though nick in the general sense of critical moment is older (1570s, Hanmer, who adds as commonly we
say) than the phrase.


nick (v.)

1520s, to make a notch in, from nick (n.). Sense of to steal is from 1869, probably from earlier
slang sense of to catch, take unawares, arrest (1620s). The precise sense connection is unclear.
Related: Nicked; nicking.


Nick

masc. proper name, familiar form of Nicholas. As the devil by 1640s, but the reason for it is
obscure.


nickel (n.)

whitish metal element, 1755, coined in 1754 by Swedish mineralogist Axel von Cronstedt (1722-1765)
from shortening of Swedish kopparnickel copper-colored ore (from which it was first obtained), a
half-translation of German Kupfernickel, literally copper demon, from Kupfer (see copper) + Nickel
demon, goblin, rascal (a pet form of masc. proper name Nikolaus, compare English Old Nick the devil;
see Nicholas); the ore so called by miners because it looked like copper but yielded none.
Meaning coin made partly of nickel is from 1857, when the U.S. introduced one-cent coins made of
nickel to replace the old bulky copper pennies. Application to five-cent piece (originally one part
nickel, three parts copper) is from 1883, American English; in earlier circulation there were silver
half-dimes. To nickel-and-dime (someone) is from 1964 (nickels and dimes very small amounts of money
is attested from 1893).


nickelodeon (n.)

1888, motion picture theater, from nickel five-cent coin (the cost to view one) + -odeon, as in
Melodeon (1840) music hall, ultimately from Greek oideion building for musical performances (see
odeon). Meaning nickel jukebox is first attested 1938.


nicker (v.)

to neigh, 1774, of imitative origin (see neigh). Related: Nickered; nickering.


nickname (n.)

mid-15c., misdivision of ekename (c.1300), an eke name, literally an additional name, from Old
English eaca an increase, related to eacian to increase (see eke; also see N). As a verb from 1530s.
Related: Nicknamed; nicknaming.


nicky-tam (n.)

also nicky tam, garter worn over trousers, 1911, from Scottish, from shortened form of knickers +
Scottish &amp; northern English dialect taum, from Old Norse taumr cord, rein, line, cognate with
Old English team (see team). Originally a string tied by Scottish farmers around rolled-up trousers
to keep the legs of them out of the dirt.


nicotine (n.)

poisonous alkaloid found in tobacco leaves, 1819, from French nicotine, earlier nicotiane, from
Modern Latin Nicotiana, formal botanical name for the tobacco plant, named for Jean Nicot
(c.1530-1600), French ambassador to Portugal, who sent tobacco seeds and powdered leaves back to
France 1561. His name is a diminutive of Nicolas.


nicotinic (adj.)

1873, from nicotine + -ic.


nictitate (v.)

to wink, 1822, from Medieval Latin nictitatus, past participle of nictitare, frequentative of Latin
nictare wink, blink, related to nicere to beckon, from PIE root *kneigwh- to lean on, to bend (the
eyelids together). Related: Nictitated; nictitating (1713). Earlier form was nictate (v.), 1690s,
from Latin nictare.


nidicolous (adj.)

of birds, bearing young which are helpless at birth, 1920, from Modern Latin Nidicolae (1894), from
Latin nidus (see nest (n.)) + colere to inhabit (see colony). Contrasted to nidifugous birds (1902),
whose young are well-developed and leave the nest at birth (from Latin fugere to flee).


nidification (n.)

nest-building, 1650s, from nidify, from Latin nidus a nest (see nest (n.)) + -ify.


nidus (n.)

nest, breeding place, 1742, from Latin nidus a nest, from Old Latin *nizdus (see nest (n.)).
Figurative use by 1807. Classical plural is nidi.


niece (n.)

c.1300, from Old French niece niece, granddaughter (12c., Modern French ni&egrave;ce), earlier
niepce, from Latin neptia (also source of Portuguese neta, Spanish nieta), from neptis
granddaughter, in Late Latin niece, fem. of nepos grandson, nephew (see nephew). Replaced Old
English nift, from Proto-Germanic *neftiz, from the same PIE root (Old English also used
bro&#240;ordohter and nefene).    Until c.1600, it also commonly meant a granddaughter or any remote
female descendant. Cognate with Spanish nieta, Old Lithuanian nepte, Sanskrit naptih granddaughter;
Czech net, Old Irish necht, Welsh nith, German Nichte niece.


Nielsen

in reference to popularity ratings of TV and radio programs, 1951, named for U.S. market researcher
Arthur Clarke Nielsen (1897-1980), founder of A.C. Nielsen Co., which evaluates viewership based on
samplings of receiving sets.


Nietzschean (adj.)

1904, in reference to the ideas or followers of German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900).


nieve (n.)

clenched fist (northern and Scottish dialect), c.1300, from Old Norse hnefi (related to Norwegian
dialectal neve, Swedish n&auml;fve, Danish n&aelig;ve), not found in other Germanic languages.


nifty (adj.)

smart, stylish, 1868, of unknown origin, perhaps theatrical slang, first attested in a poem by Bret
Harte, who said it was a shortened, altered form of magnificat. Related: Niftily; niftiness.


nig (n.)

c.1300, niggardly person (see niggard). As an abbreviated form of nigger, attested by c.1832,
American English.


nig-nog (n.)

foolish person, 1953, OED suggests from earlier cant slang nigmenog a very silly fellow (1700). As a
term of abuse for a black person, a shortened and reduplicated form of nigger.


Nigel

masc. proper name; see Neil.


Niger

African nation, named for the river Niger, mentioned by that name 1520s (Leo Africanus), probably an
alteration (by influence of Latin niger black) of a local Tuareg name, egereou n-igereouen, from
egereou big river, sea + n-igereouen, plural of that word. Translated in Arabic as nahr al-anhur
river of rivers.


Nigeria

African nation, named for river Niger, which runs through it, + -ia. Related: Nigerian.


nigga (n.)

1925, also niggah, representing southern U.S. pronunciation of nigger (q.v.).


niggard (n.)

mean person, miser, late 14c., nygart, of uncertain origin. The suffix suggests French origin (see
-ard), but the root word is possibly from earlier nig stingy (c.1300), perhaps from a Scandinavian
source related to Old Norse hn&oslash;ggr stingy, from Proto-Germanic *khnauwjaz (source of Swedish
njugg close, careful, German genau precise, exact), and to Old English hneaw stingy, niggardly,
which did not survive in Middle English.


niggardly (adj.)

1560s, from niggard + -ly (1).    It was while giving a speech in Washington, to a very
international audience, about the British theft of the Elgin marbles from the Parthenon. I described
the attitude of the current British authorities as niggardly. Nobody said anything, but I privately
resolved -- having felt the word hanging in the air a bit -- to say parsimonious from then on.
[Christopher Hitchens, The Pernicious Effects of Banning Words, Slate.com, Dec. 4, 2006]    As an
adverb from 1520s. Related: Niggardliness.


nigger (n.)

1786, earlier neger (1568, Scottish and northern England dialect), from French n&egrave;gre, from
Spanish negro (see Negro). From the earliest usage it was the term that carries with it all the
obloquy and contempt and rejection which whites have inflicted on blacks [cited in Gowers, 1965,
probably Harold R. Isaacs]. But as black inferiority was at one time a near universal assumption in
English-speaking lands, the word in some cases could be used without deliberate insult. More
sympathetic writers late 18c. and early 19c. seem to have used black (n.) and, after the American
Civil War, colored person.  You're a fool nigger, and the worst day's work Pa ever did was to buy
you, said Scarlett slowly. ... There, she thought, I've said nigger and Mother wouldn't like that at
all. [Margaret Mitchell, Gone With the Wind, 1936]  Also applied by English settlers to dark-skinned
native peoples in India, Australia, Polynesia. The reclamation of the word as a neutral or positive
term in black culture (not universally regarded as a worthwhile enterprise), often with a suggestion
of soul or style, is attested first in the U.S. South, later (1968) in the Northern, urban-based
Black Power movement.    Used in combinations (such as nigger-brown) since 1840s for various dark
brown or black hues or objects; euphemistic substitutions (such as Zulu) began to appear in these
senses c.1917. Brazil nuts were called nigger toes by 1896. Variant niggah, attested from 1925
(without the -h, from 1969), is found usually in situations where blacks use the word. Nigra (1944),
on the other hand, in certain uses reflects a pronunciation of negro meant to suggest nigger, and is
thus deemed (according to a 1960 slang dictionary) even more derog[atory] than 'nigger.'  Slang
phrase nigger in the woodpile attested by 1800; A mode of accounting for the disappearance of fuel;
an unsolved mystery [R.H. Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]. Nigger heaven the top gallery in a
(segregated) theater first attested 1878 in reference to Troy, N.Y.


niggerhead (n.)

from nigger + head. A term used formerly in U.S. of various things, such as cheap tobacco (1843),
protruding root mass in a swamp (1859), a type of cactus (1877), and the black-eyed susan (1893).
Variant negro-head attested from 1781.


niggle (v.)

1590s (implied in niggling), possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian dialectal nigla
be busy with trifles), perhaps related to source of niggard. Related: Niggled; niggling; niggler.


nigh (adv.)

near, Old English neah (West Saxon), neh (Anglian), common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon nah, Old
Frisian nei, Middle Dutch, Dutch na, Old High German nah, German nah, Gothic nehwa), with no
cognates outside Germanic. The Old English progression was neah - near - niehsta, for nigh - near -
next. But the comparative near and the superlative nehst (see next) gradually evolved into separate
words not felt as related to nigh. New comparative and superlative forms nigher, nighest developed
14c. as phonetic changes obscured the original relationships. As an adjective from Middle English.


night (n.)

Old English niht (West Saxon neaht, Anglian n&aelig;ht, neht) night, darkness; the vowel indicating
that the modern word derives from oblique cases (genitive nihte, dative niht), from Proto-Germanic
*nakht- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German naht, Old Frisian and Dutch nacht, German Nacht,
Old Norse natt, Gothic nahts).    The Germanic words are from PIE *nekwt- night (cognates: Greek
nuks a night, Latin nox, Old Irish nochd, Sanskrit naktam at night, Lithuanian naktis night, Old
Church Slavonic nosti, Russian noch', Welsh henoid tonight), according to Watkins, probably from a
verbal root *neg- to be dark, be night. For spelling with -gh- see fight.The fact that the Aryans
have a common name for night, but not for day (q.v.), is due to the fact that they reckoned by
nights. [Weekley]Compare German Weihnachten Christmas. In early times, the day was held to begin at
sunset, so Old English monanniht Monday night was the night before Monday, or what we would call
Sunday night.    To work nights preserves the Old English genitive of time. Night shift is attested
from 1710 in the sense of garment worn by a woman at night (see shift (n.1)); meaning gang of
workers employed after dark is from 1839. Night soil excrement (1770) is so called because it was
removed (from cesspools, etc.) after dark. Night train attested from 1838. Night life habitual
nocturnal carousing attested from 1852.


night-hawk (n.)

from 1610s in reference to various birds, from night + hawk (n.). Figurative sense of one who stays
up and is active at night is from 1818.


night-light (n.)

1640s, faint light visible in the sky at night, from night + light (n.). As small light used in
rooms at night to keep them from total darkness from 1851.


night-night

nursery talk, good-night, 1896; form nighty-night is attested from 1876.


night-owl (n.)

owl which flies at night, 1590s; applied since 1846 (American English) to persons who are up or out
late at night. Compare night-hawk, also French hirondelle de nuit prostitute, literally night-
swallow.


night-watch (n.)

guard kept during the night, late Old English; see night + watch (n.).


night-work (n.)

1590s, from night + work (n.). Old English had nihtweorc.


nightcap (n.)

also night-cap, late 14c., covering for the head, worn in bed, from night + cap (n.). In the
alcoholic sense, it is attested from 1818. American English sense of final event in a sporting
contest (especially the second game of a baseball double-header) is from 1939.


nightclub (n.)

also night-club, club open at night, 1894, from night + club (n.) in the social sense.


nightfall (n.)

1700; see night + fall (n.).


nightgown (n.)

also night-gown, c.1400, from night + gown.


nightie (n.)

1871, short for nightgown; originally a children's word.


nightingale (n.)

Old English n&aelig;ctigal&aelig;, nihtegale, compound formed in Proto-Germanic (cognates: Dutch
nachtegaal, German Nachtigall) from *nakht- night (see night) + *galon to sing, related to Old
English giellan yell (see yell). With parasitic -n- that appeared mid-13c. Dutch nightingale frog is
attested from 1769. In Japanese, nightingale floor is said to be the term for boards that creak when
you walk on them.    French rossignol (Old French lousseignol) is, with Spanish ruise&#241;or,
Portuguese rouxinol, Italian rosignuolo, from Vulgar Latin *rosciniola, dissimilated from Latin
lusciniola nightingale, diminutive of luscinia nightingale.


nightjar (n.)

nocturnal bird, goatsucker, 1620s, from night + jar (v.). So called for the jarring sounds made by
the male when the female is brooding, which have been described as a churring trill that seems to
change direction as it rises and falls. An Old English word for it was nihthr&aelig;fn night raven.


nightlong (adj.)

Old English nihtlang; see night + -long.


nightly (adj.)

Old English nihtlic nocturnal, of the night, at night; see night + -ly (1). As an adverb, Middle
English nihtlich, from the adjective.


nightmare (n.)

late 13c., an evil female spirit afflicting sleepers with a feeling of suffocation, compounded from
night + mare (3) goblin that causes nightmares, incubus. Meaning shifted mid-16c. from the incubus
to the suffocating sensation it causes. Sense of any bad dream first recorded 1829; that of very
distressing experience is from 1831. Cognate with Middle Dutch nachtmare, German Nachtmahr.


nightmarish (adj.)

1834, from nightmare + -ish. Related: Nightmarishly; nightmarishness.


nightshade (n.)

Old English nihtscada, literally shade of night, perhaps in allusion to the poisonous berries. A
common Germanic compound, cognates: Dutch nachtschade, German Nachtschatten.


nightspot (n.)

also night spot, nightclub, 1936, from night (n.) + spot (n.) place.


nightstick (n.)

also night-stick, 1887, from night + stick (n.). So called because it was carried on night patrols.


nighttime (n.)

also night-time, c.1400, from night + time (n.).


nigra

see nigger.


nihil (n.)

Latin, literally nothing (see nil). Phrase nihil obstat nothing stands in the way printed on first
pages of a Catholic work indicates its official approval.


nihilism (n.)

1817, the doctrine of negation (in reference to religion or morals), from German Nihilismus, from
Latin nihil nothing at all (see nil), coined by German philosopher Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi
(1743-1819). In philosophy, an extreme form of skepticism (1836). The political sense was first used
by German journalist Joseph von G&ouml;rres (1776-1848). Turgenev used the Russian form of the word
(nigilizm) in Fathers and Children (1862) and claimed to have invented it. With a capital N-, it
refers to the Russian revolutionary anarchism of the period 1860-1917, supposedly so called because
nothing that then existed found favor in their eyes.


nihilist (n.)

1836 in the religious or philosophical sense, from French nihiliste, from Latin nihil (see
nihilism). In the Russian political sense, it is recorded from 1871. Related: Nihilistic.


nihility (n.)

1670s, from Medieval Latin nihilitas, from nihil nothing at all (see nil).


Nike

Greek goddess of victory (identified by the Romans with their Victoria), literally victory, probably
connected with neikos quarrel, strife, neikein to quarrel with. As a type of U.S. defensive surface-
to-air missiles, attested from 1952.


nil (n.)

nothing, 1833, from Latin nil, contraction of nihil, nihilum nothing, not at all; in vain, from ne-
not (see un-) + hilum small thing, trifle, of unknown origin.


Nile

one of the world's oldest surviving place names, from a Semitic root nahal river. Unnamed in Old
Testament, it is always merely the river (Hebrew yeor).


nill (v.)

Old English nylle, nelle to be unwilling, from ne no (see no) + will (v.). Often paired with will;
the construction in nill he, will he, once common, attested from c.1300, surviving principally in
willy-nilly, which, however, reverses the usual Middle English word order. Latin expressed a similar
idea in nolens volens.


Nilo-

used as a comb. form of Nile.


nim (v.)

to take, to steal (archaic), Old English niman to take, accept, receive, grasp, catch (cognates: Old
Frisian nima, Middle Dutch nemen, German nehmen, Gothic niman; see nimble). The native word,
replaced by Scandinavian-derived take (v.) and out of use from c.1500 except in slang sense of to
steal, which endured into 19c.


nimble (adj.)

agile, light-footed, c.1300, nemel, from Old English n&aelig;mel quick to grasp (attested but once),
related to niman to take, from Proto-Germanic *neman (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Dutch, Gothic niman,
Old Norse nema, Old Frisian nima, German nehmen to take), from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute,
allot, also to take (cognates: Greek nemein to deal out, nemesis just indignation, Latin numerus
number, Lithuanian nuoma rent, interest, Middle Irish nos custom, usage). With excrescent -b- from
c.1500 (compare limb (n.1)). Related: Nimbleness. In 17c., English had nimblechaps talkative fellow.


nimbly (adv.)

mid-14c., from nimble + -ly (adv.).


nimbostratus (n.)

1932 (earlier use from late 19c. refers to different cloud types), from Modern Latin nimbus (see
nimbus) + connecting element -o- + stratus (see stratus).


nimbus (n.)

1610s, bright cloud surrounding a god, from Latin nimbus cloud, perhaps related to nebula cloud,
mist (see nebula). Meaning halo is first recorded c.1730. Meteorological sense of a rain cloud is
from 1803.


nimby

acronym for not in my back yard, 1980, American English, supposedly coined by Walter Rodgers of the
American Nuclear Society.


nimiety (n.)

excess, redundancy, from Latin nimietas excessiveness, from nimius beyond measure, excessive, from
nimis (adv.) too much, beyond measure, excessively.


Nimrod

great hunter, 1712, a reference to the biblical son of Cush, referred to (Gen. x:8-9) as a mighty
hunter before the Lord. It came to mean geek, klutz by 1983 in teenager slang, for unknown reasons.
(Amateur theories include its occasional use in Bugs Bunny cartoon episodes featuring rabbit-hunting
Elmer Fudd as a foil; its possible ironic use, among hunters, for a clumsy member of their
fraternity; or a stereotype of deer hunters by the non-hunting population in the U.S.)


Nimzo-Indian (adj.)

type of defensive opening in chess, 1935, in reference to Aron Nimzowitsch (1886-1935), Latvian-born
Jewish chess genius who popularized it, a variation of the Indian defense (late 19c.) attributed to
Indian chess player Moheschunder Bannerjee.


Nina

fem. proper name; in a Russian context it is a shortening of Annina, diminutive of Greek Anna. In a
Spanish context, Ni&#241;a child, infant, a nursery word.


nincompoop (n.)

1670s, nicompoop. Despite similarity [noted by Johnson] to Latin legal phrase non compos mentis
insane, mentally incompetent (c.1600), the connection is denied by etymologists because the earliest
forms lack the second -n-. Weekley thinks first element may be a proper name, and cites Nicodemus,
which he says was used in French for a fool, or Nicholas. Klein says probably an invented word.


nine (n.)

Old English nigen, from Proto-Germanic *niwun (cognates: Old Saxon nigun, Old Frisian niugun, Old
Norse niu, Swedish nio, Middle Dutch neghen, Dutch negen, Old High German niun, German neun, Gothic
niun nine), from PIE newn nine (cognates: Sanskrit nava, Avestan nava, Greek ennea, Albanian nende,
Latin novem (with change of -n- to -m- by analogy of septem, decem), Lithuanian devnyi, Old Church
Slavonic deveti (the Balto-Slavic forms by dissimilation of -n- to -d-), Old Irish noin, Welsh naw).
Nine to five the average workday is attested from 1935. Nine days has been proverbial since 14c. for
the time which a wonder or novelty holds attention.


ninefold

Old English nigonfeald; see nine + -fold.


ninepins (n.)

1570s, from nine + plural of pin (n.). From the number of pins to be knocked down.


nines (n.)

in phrase to the nines to perfection (1787) first attested in Burns, apparently preserves the
ancient notion of the perfection of the number as three times three (such as the nine Muses).[T]he
Book of St. Albans, in the sections on blasonry, lays great stress on the nines in which all perfect
things (orders of angels, virtues, articles of chivalry, differences of coat armour, etc.) occur.
[Weekley]No one seems to consider that it might be a corruption and misdivision of to then anes,
literally for the one (purpose or occasion), a similar construction to the one that yielded nonce
(q.v.).


nineteen (n.)

late Old English nigontene (Anglian), nigontyne (West Saxon); see nine + -teen.


nineteenth (adj.)

late 14c., nyntenthe; from nineteen + -th (1); a replacement or modification of nigonteo&#254;a,
from Old English nigon-teo&#240;a. Nineteenth hole bar-room in a golf clubhouse is attested from
1901.


nineties (n.)

1857 as the years of someone's life between 90 and 99; from 1848 as the tenth decade of years in a
given century; 1849 with reference to Fahrenheit temperature. See ninety.    Many still live who
remember those days; if the old men cannot tell you the exact date, they will say: 'It were in the
nineties;' (etc.) [Chambers's Journal, Nov. 1, 1856]    In Britain, the naughty nineties was a
popular name 1920s-30s for the 1890s, based on the notion of a relaxing of morality and mood in
contrast to earlier Victorian times. In U.S., gay nineties in reference to the same decade is
attested from 1927, and was the title of a regular nostalgia feature in Life magazine about that
time.    The long, dreary blue-law Sunday afternoons were periods of the Nineties which no amount of
rosy retrospect will ever be able to recall as gay, especially to a normal healthy boy to whom all
activities were taboo except G. A. Henty and the bound volumes of Leslie's Weekly of the Civil War.
[Life, Sept. 1, 1927]


ninetieth

late 14c., nyntithe; see ninety + -th (1). Replaced Old English nigenteo&#254;an.


ninety (n.)

Old English nigontig, from nine + -tig group of ten (see -ty (1)). Cognate with Old Frisian
niontich, Middle Dutch negentich, Dutch negentig, German neunzig.


ninny (n.)

simpleton, fool, 1590s, perhaps a misdivision of an innocent (see N for other examples), or from the
pet form of the proper name Innocent, with sense influenced by the name's literal meaning. There may
be some influence in the word of Italian ninno baby, child.


ninnyhammer (n.)

also ninny-hammer, simpleton, 1590s, from ninny + hammer (n.), but the signification of the second
element is obscure.


ninth (adj.)

c.1300, modification (by influence of nine) of nigon&eth;e, from Old English nigo&eth;a, nigend.


Niobe

in Greek mythology, a queen of Thebes, daughter of Tantalus, changed to a stone while weeping for
her children (slain, after she boasted of them overmuch, by Artemis and Apollo); hence the name is
used figuratively for bereavement and woe. The name is said to mean literally snowy; snowy-bright.


niobium (n.)

named by German scientist Heinrich Rose, who discovered it in 1844 in a mineral then called
tantalum; so called because in Greek mythology Niobe was the daughter of Tantalus.


nip (n.2)

a pinch; a sharp bite, 1540s, from nip (v.). Meaning a chill in the weather is from 1610s, probably
so called for its effect on vegetation. Nip and tuck a close thing is recorded from 1832, perhaps
from sailing or tailoring.


nip (v.)

to pinch sharply; to bite suddenly, late 14c., related to Middle Low German nipen to nip, to pinch,
Middle Dutch nipen to pinch, Dutch nijpen, Old Norse hnippa to prod, but the exact evolution of the
stem is obscure. Related: Nipped; nipping. To nip (something) in the bud in the figurative sense is
first recorded c.1600.


nip (n.1)

small measure of spirits, 1796, shortening of nipperkin (1670s) quantity of liquor of a half pint or
less, possibly of Dutch or Low German origin and related to nip (v.). Reinforced by nip (n.2) on
notion of fragment or bit pinched off (c.1600).


nipper (n.)

small boy, 1859, originally (1530s) a pickpocket who pinched other people's property; see nip (v.).


nipple (n.)

1530s, nyppell, teat, duct-laden extremity of a mammalian breast, alteration of neble (1520s),
probably diminutive of neb bill, beak, snout (see neb), hence, literally a small projection. In
reference to an artificial device on an infant's bottle, from 1875. A 16c.-17c. slang term for a
woman's nipples was cherrilets.


Nipponese

Japanese, 1859, from Nippon, Japanese word for Japan, from ni(chi) the sun + pon, hon source, which
is said to be from Chinese for rising sun-place. Derisive slang shortening Nip attested from 1942.


nippy (adj.)

1898, in reference to a biting chill in the air, from nip (n.2) + -y (2). Related: Nippiness.


nirvana (n.)

1836, from Sanskrit nirvana-s extinction, disappearance (of the individual soul into the universal),
literally to blow out, a blowing out (not transitively, but as a fire ceases to draw; a literal
Latinization would be de-spiration), from nis-, nir- out + va- to blow (see wind (n.1)). Figurative
sense of perfect bliss is from 1895.


nisei (n.)

American born of Japanese parents, from Japanese ni- second + sei generation. Use limited to U.S.
West Coast until c.1942.


nit (n.)

Old English hnitu louse egg, nit, from Proto-Germanic *hnito- (cognates: Norwegian nit, Middle Dutch
nete, Dutch neet, Middle High German niz, German Ni&szlig;), from PIE root *knid- egg of a louse
(cognates: Russian, Polish gnida, Czech knida; Greek konidos, genitive konis egg of a louse).


nite (n.)

arbitrary respelling of night, attested from 1931.


niter

see nitre.


nitpick (v.)

seek petty faults, also nit-pick, 1962, back-formation from earlier nitpicker. Related: Nitpicking;
nitpicky.


nitpicker (n.)

pedantic critic, 1951; see nit (n.) + pick (v.).


nitrate (n.)

1794, from French nitrate (1787) or formed in English from nitre + -ate (3). Related: Nitrates.


nitre (n.)

c.1400, native sodium carbonate, from Old French nitre (13c.), from Latin nitrum, from Greek nitron,
which is possibly of Eastern origin (compare Hebrew nether carbonate of soda; Egyptian ntr).
Originally a word for native soda, but also associated from Middle Ages with saltpeter (potassium
nitrate) for obscure reasons; this became the predominant sense by late 16c.


nitric (adj.)

1794, originally in reference to acid obtained initially from distillation of saltpeter; see nitre +
-ic. Perhaps immediately from French nitrique. Known as aqua fortis, later acid spirit of nitre,
then nitric acid. (1787) under the system ordered by Lavoisier.


nitrification (n.)

1827, from French nitrification (1787, de Morveau), from nitrifier (1777), from nitre (see nitre).


nitro (n.)

abbreviation of nitroglycerine, 1935, slang.


nitro-

before vowels nitr-, word-forming element used scientifically and indicating nitrogen, nitrate or
nitric acid, from comb. form of Greek nitron (see nitre).


nitrogen (n.)

1794, from French nitrog&egrave;ne, coined 1790 by French chemist Jean Antoine Chaptal (1756-1832),
from comb. form of Greek nitron sodium carbonate (see nitro-) + French g&egrave;ne producing, from
Greek -gen giving birth to (see -gen). The gas was identified in part by analysis of nitre. Earlier
name (1772) was mephitic air, and Lavoisier called it azote (see azo-).


nitroglycerine (n.)

also nitroglycerin, explosive oily liquid, 1857, from nitro- + glycerin. So called either because it
was obtained by treating glycerine with nitric and sulfuric acids or because it is essentially a
nitrate (glyceryl trinitrate).


nitrous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin nitrosus, from nitrum (see nitre). Originally of nitre, pertaining to nitre; more
precise use in chemistry (designating a compound in which the nitrogen has a lower valence than the
corresponding nitric compound) is from 1780s. Nitrous oxide attested from 1800.


nitty (adj.)

full of nits, 1560s, from nit + -y (2).


nitty-gritty (n.)

basic facts, 1961, knitty-gritty, American English, said to have been chiefly used by black jazz
musicians, perhaps ultimately from nit and grits finely ground corn. As an adjective from 1966.


nitwit (n.)

stupid person, 1922, probably from nit nothing, from dialectal German or Yiddish, from Middle Low
German (see nix) + wit (n.).


nix (n.)

nothing, none, 1789, from German nix, dialectal variant of nichts nothing, from Middle High German
nihtes, from genitive of niht, nit nothing, from Old High German niwiht, from ni, ne no (see un-) +
wiht thing, creature (compare naught).


nix (v.)

cancel, refuse, forbid, 1903, from nix (n.). Related: Nixed; nixing.


nixie (n.)

water fairy, 1816 (introduced by Sir Walter Scott), from German Nixie, from Old High German nihhussa
water sprite, fem. of nihhus, from Proto-Germanic *nikwiz (cognates: Old Norse nykr, Old English
nicor water spirit, water monster, also used to gloss hippopotamus; Grendel's mother in Beowulf was
a nicor), perhaps from PIE *neigw- to wash (cognates: Sanskrit nenkti washes, Greek nizo I wash, Old
Irish nigid washes).


Nixon

surname, variant of Nickson, literally son of (a man named) Nick, English familiar form of Nicholas.


no

negative reply, early 13c., from Old English na (adv.) no, never, not at all, from ne not, no + a
ever. First element from Proto-Germanic *ne (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old High German ne,
Gothic ni not), from PIE root *ne no, not (see un-). Second element from PIE *aiw- vital force,
life, long life, eternity (see aye (adv.)).    As an adjective meaning not any (c.1200) it is
reduced from Old English nan (see none), the final -n omitted first before consonants and then
altogether. As a noun from c.1300. Phrase no can do it is not possible is attested from 1827, a
locution of English-speaking Chinese noted 19c. in China, Australia and West Coast of U.S.    We
repeated our advice again and again, but got no answer but a loud horse-laugh, and their national
maxim of No can do: Europe fashion no do in China. [Reminiscences of a Voyage to and from China, in
Paxton's Horticultural Register, London, 1836]    Construction no X, no Y attested from 1530s (in no
peny no pardon). No problem as an interjection of assurance first attested 1963. No way as an
expression meaning it can't be done is attested by 1968 (no way by no means is from c.1400).


no-account (adj.)

worthless, 1845, American English, literally of no account (see account (n.)). The phrase of non
acompte of no value or importance is from late 14c. Contracted form no'count is attested from 1853.


no-fault (adj.)

as a type of U.S. motor vehicle insurance, 1967, from no + fault (n.).


no-frills (adj.)

1957, from no + frills. The expression no thrills meaning without extra flourishes or ornamentation
is in use from 1870s; the original notion probably is of plain clothing.   <b>Man with no frills</b>
(American) a plain person, a man without culture or refinement. An amiable term to express a vulgar
fellow. [Albert Barrere and Charles G. Leland, A Dictionary of Slang, Jargon &amp; Cant, Ballantyne
Press, 1890]


no-go (adj.)

with sense where it is forbidden to go, 1971, from no + go (v.). Earlier it was a noun phrase for an
impracticable situation (1870).


no-good (adj.)

1908, from phrase no good good for nothing. As a noun, first recorded 1924; variant no-goodnik (see
-nik) first attested 1960.


no-hitter (n.)

baseball term for a baseball game in which one side fails to make a hit, 1939, from no + hit (n.).


no-man&#039;s-land (n.)

also no man's land, terrain between front lines of entrenched armies, 1908, popularized in World War
I; in use from at least early 14c. as Nonemanneslond, an unowned waste ground outside the north wall
of London, site for executions. No man (Old English nanne mon) was an old way of saying nobody.


no-name (adj.)

1978, not having made a name in one's profession, originally American English sporting jargon, from
no + name (n.).


no-no (n.)

1942, from reduplication of no.


no-nonsense (adj.)

not tolerating foolishness, businesslike, 1928, from phrase to stand no nonsense, which is attested
from 1821, originally in sporting slang.


no-parking (adj.)

1956, from the wording of the sign designating a place where vehicles may not be parked (1946); see
no + parking.


no-place (n.)

also noplace, place which does not exist, 1929, from no + place (n.).


no-show (n.)

also no show, someone who fails to keep an appointment, 1941, from no + show (v.), in the show up,
appear sense. Originally airline jargon.


no-smoking (adj.)

1905; the sign wording itself is attested by 1817.    Smoking is a vice to [sic] -- and a national
one, of such magnitude that railroad corporations throughout all their routes in the United States,
have a special command in large letters, conspicuously placed at depots and inside of the cars -- No
smoking allowed here. [The Sailor's Magazine, December 1840]


no-win (adj.)

1962, in reference to a situation where victory is impossible, from no + win.


No.

as an abbreviation meaning (and pronounced) number, 1660s, from Latin numero, ablative singular of
numerus (see number (n.)).


Noah

masc. proper name, from Hebrew Noah, literally rest. Phrase Noah's ark attested from 1610s. The
adjective Noachian, in reference to the flood legend, is from 1670s.


nob (n.)

head, c.1700, slang variant of knob (q.v.).


Nobel

1900, in reference to five prizes (in physics, chemistry, medicine, literature, and peace)
established in the will of Alfred Nobel (1833-1896), Swedish chemist and engineer, inventor of
dynamite. A sixth prize, in economics, was added in 1969. Related: Nobelist.


nobelium (n.)

1957, from Nobel + -ium.


nobility (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being excellent or rare, from Old French nobilite high rank; dignity, grace;
great deed (12c., Modern French nobilit&eacute;), and directly from Latin nobilitatem (nominative
nobilitas) celebrity, fame; high birth; excellence, superiority; the nobles, from nobilis well-
known, prominent (see noble (adj.)). Meaning quality of being of noble rank or birth is attested
from late 14c.; sense of noble class collectively is from 1520s.


noble (adj.)

c.1200, illustrious, distinguished; worthy of honor or respect, from Old French noble of noble
bearing or birth, from Latin nobilis well-known, famous, renowned; excellent, superior, splendid;
high-born, of superior birth, earlier *gnobilis, literally knowable, from gnoscere to come to know,
from PIE root *gno- to know (see know). The prominent Roman families, which were well known,
provided most of the Republic's public officials.    Meaning distinguished by rank, title, or birth
is first recorded late 13c. Sense of having lofty character, having high moral qualities is from
c.1600. A noble gas (1902) is so called for its inactivity or intertness; a use of the word that had
been applied in Middle English to precious stones, metals, etc., of similar quality (late 14c.),
from the sense of having admirable properties (c.1300).


noble (n.)

man of rank, c.1300, from noble (adj.). The same noun sense also is in Old French and Latin. Late
14c. as the name of an English coin first issued in reign of Edward III.


nobleman (n.)

c.1300, from noble (adj.) + man (n.). Noblewoman is from 1570s.


noblesse (n.)

early 13c., noble birth or condition, from Old French noblece noble birth, splendor, magnificence
(Modern French noblesse), from Vulgar Latin *nobilitia, from Latin nobilis (see noble (adj.)).
French phrase noblesse oblige privilege entails responsibility is attested in English first in 1837.


nobly (adv.)

c.1300, valorous, courageous, spirited, from noble (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning of or befitting noble
birth or descent, of high ancestry is from 1590s.


Nobodaddy (n.)

c.1793, William Blake's derisive name for the anthropomorphic God of Christianity.


nobody (n.)

mid-14c., no body no person noone, from Middle English no (adj.) not any + bodi (see body (n.)).
Written as two words 14c.-18c.; hyphenated 17c.-18c. Incorrect use with their is attested from
1540s. Meaning person of no importance is from 1580s.


nociceptive (adj.)

1904, from Latin noci-, comb. form of nocere to do harm (see innocuous) + second element from
receptive.


nock (n.)

notch on a bow, late 14c., of uncertain origin, probably from a Scandinavian source (such as Swedish
nock notch), but compare Low German nokk, Dutch nok tip of a sail. Perhaps connected to nook.


nock (v.)

fit (an arrow) to a bowstring, 1510s, from nock (n.). Related: Nocked; nocking.


nocturn (n.)

a division of the office of matins, early 13c., from Old French nocturne evening service; curfew,
from Medieval Latin nocturna, group of Psalms used in the nocturns, from Latin nocturnus (see
nocturnal).


nocturnal (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French nocturnal nightly, nocturnal, or directly from Late Latin nocturnalis,
from Latin nocturnus belonging to the night, from nox (genitive noctis) night, cognate with Old
English neaht (see night) + -urnus, suffix forming adjectives of time. Nocturnal emission
involuntary ejaculation during sleep first recorded 1813.


nocturne (n.)

1862, composition of a dreamy character, from French nocturne, literally composition appropriate to
the night, noun use of Old French nocturne nocturnal, from Latin nocturnus (see nocturnal). Said to
have been coined c.1814 by John Field, who wrote many of them, in a style that Chopin mastered in
his own works, which popularized the term.


nocuous (adj.)

1630s, noxious, harmful, from Latin nocuus harmful, from stem of nocere to hurt, injure, harm (see
innocuous).


nod (v.)

to quickly bow the head, late 14c., of unknown origin, probably an Old English word, but not
recorded; perhaps related to Old High German hnoton to shake, from Proto-Germanic *hnudan. Meaning
to drift in and out of consciousness while on drugs is attested from 1968. Related: Nodded; nodding.
A nodding acquaintance (1711) is one you know just well enough to greet with a nod.


nod (n.)

mid-15c., from nod (v.). Land of Nod sleep is a pun on the biblical place name (Gen. iv:16).


nodal (adj.)

1831, from node + -al (1). Related: Nodality.


node (n.)

early 15c., a knot or lump, from Latin nodus knot (see net (n.)). Originally borrowed c.1400 in
Latin form, meaning lump in the flesh. Meaning point of intersection (originally of planetary orbits
with the ecliptic) first recorded 1660s.


nodular (adj.)

1794, from nodule + -ar. Related: Nodularity.


nodule (n.)

early 15c., from Latin nodulus small knot, diminutive of nodus knot (see net (n.)). Related:
Nodulated; nodulous; nodulation.


Noel (n.)

late 14c., nowel feast of Christmas, from Old French noel the Christmas season, variant of nael,
from Latin natalis (dies) birth (day), in Church Latin in reference to the birthday of Christ, from
natus, past participle of nasci be born (Old Latin gnasci; see genus). The modern word in English,
with the sense a Christmas carol (1811) probably is a separate borrowing from French. As a masc.
proper name, from Old French, probably literally of or born on Christmas.


noesis (n.)

1820, from Greek noesis intelligence, thought, from noein to have mental perception, from noos mind,
thought.


noetic (adj.)

pertaining to the intellect, 1650s, from Greek noetikos intelligent, from noesis (see noesis).


nog (n.)

1690s, old, strong type of beer brewed in Norfolk, of unknown origin. Also see eggnog.


noggin (n.)

1620s, small cup, mug, later small drink (1690s), of unknown origin, possibly related to Norfolk
dialectal nog strong ale. Informal meaning head first attested 1866 in American English.


Noh

traditional Japanese masked drama, 1871, from Japanese, literally ability, talent, function.
Dramatic form also known as nogaku, with gaku music.


nohow (adv.)

not at all, 1775, American English, from no + how, on model of nowhere.


noise (n.)

early 13c., loud outcry, clamor, shouting, from Old French noise din, disturbance, uproar, brawl
(11c., in modern French only in phrase chercher noise to pick a quarrel), also rumor, report, news,
apparently from Latin nausea disgust, annoyance, discomfort, literally seasickness (see nausea).
Another theory traces the Old French word to Latin noxia hurting, injury, damage. OED considers that
the sense of the word is against both suggestions, but nausea could have developed a sense in Vulgar
Latin of unpleasant situation, noise, quarrel (compare Old Proven&ccedil;al nauza noise, quarrel).
Meaning loud or unpleasant sound is from c.1300. Replaced native gedyn (see din).


noise (v.)

late 14c., to praise; to talk loudly about, from noise (n.). Related: Noised; noising.


noiseless (adj.)

c.1600, from noise (n.) + -less. Related: Noiselessly; noiselessness.


noisome (adj.)

late 14c., harmful, noxious, from noye harm, misfortune, shortened form of anoi annoyance (from Old
French anoier, see annoy) + -some (1). Meaning bad-smelling first recorded 1570s. Related:
Noisomeness.


noisy (adj.)

1690s, making noise, also full of noise, from noise + -y (2). Earlier was noiseful (late 14c.).
Related: Noisily; noisiness.


noli me tangere

late 14c., type of facial ulcer, lupus, Latin, literally touch me not, from noli, imperative of
nolle to be unwilling + me (see me) + tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)). Used over the years of
various persons or things that must not be touched, especially picture of Jesus as he appeared to
Mary Magdalene (1670s, see John 20:17) and plant of the genus Impatiens (1560s, so called because
the ripe seed pods burst when touched).


noll (n.)

top of the head, Old English hnoll, cognate with Middle Dutch nolle, Old High German hnol back part
of the head.


nolle prosequi

formal notice to a plaintiff that the prosecutor will not continue a suit, Latin, literally to be
unwilling to pursue. The verb nolle-pross is attested from 1880.


nolo contendere

Latin, literally I do not wish to contend. A plea that admits no guilt but subjects the defendant to
judgment.


nom (n.)

French, name (9c.), from Latin nomen (see name (n.)). Used in various phrases, such as nom de guerre
(1670s), name used by a person engaged in some action, literally war name; nom de plume (1823),
literally pen name; nom de th&eacute;&acirc;tre (1874) stage name. Nom de plume is open to the
criticism that it is ridiculous for English writers to use a French phrase that does not come from
France [Fowler].


nomad (n.)

1550s, from Middle French nomade (16c.), from Latin Nomas (genitive Nomadis) wandering groups in
Arabia, from Greek nomas (genitive nomados, plural nomades) roaming, roving, wandering (to find
pastures for flocks or herds), related to nomos pasture, pasturage, grazing, literally land
allotted, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (see nemesis).


nomadic (adj.)

1800, from nomad + -ic.


Nome

city in Alaska, founded in the 1898 gold rush and originally Anvil City after the nearby Anvil
Creek, later renamed for nearby Cape Nome, which, according to one story is from a misreading of a
British cartographer's query, ?Name, written beside the peninsula on an 1849 map, and according to
another is from a supposed native no-me meaning I don't know, a plea of noncomprehension when asked
what the name of the place was.


nomenclature (n.)

c.1600, a name, from Middle French nomenclature (16c.), from Latin nomenclatura calling of names,
from nomenclator namer, from nomen name (see name (n.)) + calator caller, crier, from calare call
out (see claim (v.)).   Nomenclator in Rome was the title of a steward whose job was to announce
visitors, and also of a prompter who helped a stumping politician recall names and pet causes of his
constituents. Meaning list or catalogue of names first attested 1630s; that of system of naming is
from 1660s; sense of terminology of a science is from 1789.


nomenklatura (n.)

Russian, literally a listing of positions to be filled, from Latin nomenclatura (see nomenclature).


nomial (adj.)

1717, abstracted from binomial, etc.


nominal (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to nouns, from Latin nominalis pertaining to a name or names, from nomen
(genitive nominis) name, cognate with Old English nama (see name (n.)). Meaning of the nature of
names (in distinction to things) is from 1610s. Meaning being so in name only first recorded 1620s.


nominalism (n.)

1820, view that treats abstract concepts as names only, not realities, from French nominalisme
(1752), from nominal, from Latin nominalis (see nominal). Related: Nominalist.


nominally (adv.)

1660s, as regards a name, from nominal + -ly (2). Meaning in name only (as opposed to really) is
attested from 1748.


nominate (v.)

1540s, to call by name, back-formation from nomination or else from Latin nominatus, past participle
of nominare to name, call by name, give a name to, also name for office, from nomen name (see name
(n.)). Later to appoint to some office or duty (1560s); to formally enter (someone) as a candidate
for election (c.1600). It also occasionally was used from c.1600 with a sense give a name to.
Related: Nominated; nominating.


nomination (n.)

early 15c., act of mentioning by name, from Middle French nomination (14c.), and directly from Latin
nominationem (nominative nominatio) a naming, designation, from nominare to name (see nominate
(v.)). Meaning fact of being proposed as a candidate is attested from late 15c.


nominative (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to the grammatical case dealing with the subject of a verb, from Old French
nominatif, from Latin nominativus pertaining to naming, from nominatus, past participle of nominare
(see nominate). As a noun from 1620s.


nominator (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin nominator, from Latin nominat-, past participle stem of nominare (see
nominate).


nominee (n.)

1660s, person named for something; see nominate + -ee. Sense of person named as a candidate is
attested from 1680s.


nomothetic (adj.)

lawgiving, legislative; based on law, 1650s, from Greek nomothetikos relating to legislation,
legislative, from nomothetes lawgiving, from nomos usage, custom, law (see numismatics) + thetes one
who puts, places, or establishes. Related: Nomothetical (1610s.)


non compos mentis

Latin, literally not master of one's mind.


non sequitur

Latin, literally it does not follow.


non-

prefix meaning not, lack of, or sham, 14c., from Anglo-French noun-, from Old French non-, from
Latin non not, by no means, not at all, not a, from Old Latin noenum not one (*ne oinom, from PIE
*ne not + *oi-no-; see one). In some cases perhaps from Middle English non not (adj.), from Old
English nan (see not).


non-aggression (n.)

also nonaggression, 1759, absence of warlike intentions among nations, from non- + aggression.


non-aligned (adj.)

also nonaligned, 1960 in geopolitical sense, from non- + past participle of align. Non-alignment
(also nonalignment) in this sense is attested from 1934.


non-com

1747, short for non-commissioned officer.


non-combatant (n.)

also noncombatant, 1809, from non- + combatant. A word from the Napoleonic wars.


non-combustible (adj.)

also noncombustible, 1804, from non- + combustible.


non-committal (adj.)

also noncommittal, 1829, characterized by refusal to commit oneself, from non- + committal (see
commit).


non-compliance (n.)

also noncompliance, 1680s, from non- + compliance. Related: Noncompliant.


non-conforming (adj.)

also nonconforming, 1640s, from non- + conforming (see conform). Originally with reference to
churches.


non-conformist (n.)

also nonconformist, 1610s, originally one who adhered to Church of England doctrine but not its
practice, from non- + conformist. After their ejection under the Act of Uniformity (1662) the name
passed to the separate churches they joined or formed. In general use from 1670s as one who does not
participate in a practice or course of action.  As an adjective from 1640s.


non-conformity (n.)

also nonconformity, 1610s, coined in English from non- + conformity. Originally of Church of England
clergymen who refused to conform on certain ceremonies.


non-consensual (adj.)

also nonconsensual, by 1845, from non- + consensual. Earlier in same sense was non-consenting
(1670s).


non-denominational (adj.)

also nondenominational, 1893, from non- + denominational.


non-disjunction (n.)

also nondisjunction, 1913, from non- + disjunction. Related: Non-disjunctional.


non-entity (n.)

also nonentity, c.1600, something which does not exist, from non- + entity. Meaning a person or
thing of no importance is attested from 1710.


non-essential (adj.)

also nonessential, 1717, from non- + essential (adj.). Attested as a noun from 1806.


non-Euclidean

1874, from non- + Euclidean.


non-event (n.)

unimportant or disappointing event, 1962, from non- + event.


non-exclusive (adj.)

also nonexclusive, 1836, from non- + exclusive. Related: nonexclusively; nonexclusiveness.


non-existence (n.)

1640s; see non- + existence.


non-existent

also nonexistent, 1650s (n.), 1680s (adj.), from non- + existent.


non-fat (adj.)

also nonfat, 1945, from non- + fat.


non-fiction (adj.)

also nonfiction, 1909 (non-fictional is from 1903), from non- + fiction.


non-intervention (n.)

1831, from non- + intervention.


non-invasive (adj.)

also noninvasive, by 1850, from non- + invasive.


non-judgmental (adj.)

also nonjudgmental, 1965, from non- + judgmental.


non-linear (adj.)

also nonlinear, 1844, from non- + linear.


non-member (n.)

1640s, from non- + member.


non-metal

also nonmetal, 1866, from non- + metal. Related: Non-metallic (1815).


non-partisan (adj.)

also nonpartisan, 1872, American English, from non- + partisan.    FIRST POLITICIAN: Who's backing
this non-partisan candidate?  SECOND POLITICIAN: The non-partisan party.  [Life, Sept. 29, 1927]
As a noun from 1888.


non-perishable (adj.)

also nonperishable, 1887, from non- + perishable.


non-polar (adj.)

also nonpolar, 1892, from non- + polar.


non-political (adj.)

1860, from non- + political.


non-profit (adj.)

also nonprofit, 1922, from non- + profit (n.).


non-proliferation (n.)

also nonproliferation, 1965, from non- + proliferation; originally in reference to nuclear weapons.


non-renewable (adj.)

also nonrenewable, 1946, from non- + renewable.


non-residence (n.)

also nonresidence, late 14c., originally with reference to clergy, from non- + residence. Related:
Non-residency.


non-resident (n.)

also nonresident, early 15c., from non- + resident.


non-resistance (n.)

1640s, from non- + resistance.


non-returnable (adj.)

1903, from non- + returnable.


non-sectarian (adj.)

also nonsectarian, 1831, from non- + sectarian.


non-smoker (n.)

also nonsmoker, person who does not smoke, 1846, in reference to railways. Non-smoking (adj.) is
attested from 1891.


non-standard (adj.)

also nonstandard, 1926, from non- + standard. A linguist's value-neutral term for language formerly
stigmatized as bad or vulgar.


non-stop (adj.)

also nonstop, 1903, from non- + stop (v.); originally of railway trains. As an adverb from 1920.


non-toxic (adj.)

also nontoxic, 1892, from non- + toxic.


non-vascular (adj.)

also nonvascular, 1815, from non- + vascular.


non-verbal (adj.)

also nonverbal, 1927, from non- + verbal.


non-violence (n.)

also nonviolence, 1831, from non- + violence. Gandhi used it from 1920.


non-violent (adj.)

also nonviolent, 1896, from non- + violent. From 1920 in reference to principle or practice of
abstaining from violence, in writings of M.K. Gandhi.     It is better to be violent, if there is
violence in our hearts, than to put on the cloak of non-violence to cover impotence. [Gandhi, Non-
violence in Peace and War, 1948]


non-volatile (adj.)

also nonvolatile, 1837, from non- + volatile.


nona-

before vowels non-, word-forming element from comb. form of Latin nonus ninth (see nones).


nonage (n.)

late 14c., state of not being of age, from Old French nonage, from non- (see non-) + age (see age
(n.)).


nonagenarian (n.)

1776, coined in English with -an + Latin nonagenarius containing ninety (in Late Latin someone
ninety years old), from nonagen ninety each, related to nonaginta the number ninety, from nonus
ninth (see nones) + -genaria ten times, from PIE *dkm-ta-, from *dekm- ten (see ten). As an
adjective from 1893.


nonagon (n.)

plane figure with nine sides, 1680s, a hybrid from Latin nonus ninth (see nones) + ending from
pentagon, etc.


nonce (n.)

abstracted from phrase for &thorn;e naness (c.1200) for a special occasion, for a particular
purpose, itself a misdivision (see N for other examples) of for &thorn;an anes for the once, in
reference to a particular occasion or purpose, the &thorn;an being from Middle English dative
definite article &thorn;am (see the). The phrase used from early 14c. as an empty filler in metrical
composition. As an adjective from 1884.


nonce-word (n.)

word coined for a special occasion, 1922, from nonce + word (n.).


nonchalance (n.)

1670s, from French nonchalance (13c.), from nonchalant (see nonchalant).


nonchalant (adj.)

1734, from French nonchalant, present participle of nonchaloir be indifferent to, have no concern
for (13c.), from non- not (see non-) + chaloir have concern for, ultimately from Latin calere be hot
(see calorie). French chaland customer, client is of the same origin. Related: Nonchalantly.


nondescript (adj.)

1680s, not hitherto described, in scientific usage, coined from non- + Latin descriptus, past
participle of describere (see describe). General sense of not easily described or classified is from
1806.


none (n.)

Old English nan (pron.) not one, not any, from ne not (see no) + an one (see one). Cognate with Old
Saxon, Middle Low German nen, Old Norse neinn, Middle Dutch, Dutch neen, Old High German, German
nein no, and analogous to Latin non- (see non-). As an adverb from c.1200. As an adjective, since
c.1600 reduced to no except in a few archaic phrases, especially before vowels, such as none other,
none the worse.


nones (n.)

early 15c., in reference to the Roman calendar, ninth day (by inclusive reckoning) before the ides
of each month (7th of March, May, July, October, 5th of other months), from Latin non&aelig;
(accusative nonas), fem. plural of nonus ninth. Ecclesiastical sense of daily office said originally
at the ninth hour of the day is from 1709; originally fixed at ninth hour from sunrise, hence about
3 p.m. (now usually somewhat earlier), from Latin nona (hora) ninth (hour), from fem. plural of
nonus ninth, contracted from *novenos, from novem nine (see nine). Also used in a sense of midday
(see noon).


nonesuch

see nonsuch.


nonet

composition for nine instruments, 1865, from Italian nonetto, from nono ninth, from Latin nonus (see
nones).


nonetheless

1839, as phrase none the less; contracted into one word from c.1930.


nonfeasance (n.)

also non-feasance, failure to do what should be done, 1590s, from non- + feasance.


nonpareil (adj.)

late 15c., having no equal, from Middle French nonpareil unequalled, peerless, from non- not (see
non-) + pareil equal. The noun meaning an unequaled person or thing is from 1590s; first applied to
a kind of candy 1690s. As the name of a printing type (6 point size) it is attested from 1640s.


nonplus (v.)

to bring to a nonplus, to perplex, 1590s, from the noun (1580s), properly state where 'nothing more'
can be done or said, from Latin non plus no more, no further (see plus). Related: Nonplussed.


nonplussed (adj.)

c.1600, past participle adjective from nonplus.


nonsense (n.)

1610s, from non- + sense; perhaps influenced by French nonsens.


nonsensical (adj.)

1650s, from nonsense + -ical. Related: Nonsensically.


nonsuch (n.)

1580s, nonesuch unmatched or unrivaled thing, from none + such. As a type of decorated 16c. or 17c.
chest, it is in reference to Nonesuch Palace, in Surrey, which supposedly is represented in the
designs.


noob (n.)

c.2000 in gamer slang, variant of newbie; often used interchangeably with it, but also often with a
more derogatory shade of meaning; newbies owe their clueless behavior to lack of experience and can
improve, while the fundamental characteristic of noobs is incorrigible obnoxiousness or stupidity.


noodle (n.)

narrow strip of dried dough, 1779, from German Nudel, which is of unknown origin. West Flemish
noedel and French nouille are German loan-words. The older noun meaning simpleton, stupid person
(1753) probably is an unrelated word, as is the slang word for head (attested from 1914).


noodle (v.)

1937 (implied in noodling), from noun meaning improvised music, 1926, probably from noodle (n.), on
analogy of the suppleness of the food and that of the trills and improvised phrases in jazz
improvisations. Related: Noodled.


nook (n.)

c.1300, noke, of unknown origin. Possibly connected with Norwegian dialectal nokke hook, bent
figure, or Old English hnecca neck, but the sense evolution would be difficult.


nookie (n.)

sexual activity, 1928, perhaps from Dutch neuken to copulate with.


noon (n.)

mid-12c., non midday, 12 o'clock p.m., midday meal, from Old English non 3 o'clock p.m., the ninth
hour, also the canonical hour of nones, from Latin nona hora ninth hour of daylight, by Roman
reckoning about 3 p.m., from nona, fem. singular of nonus ninth (see nones). Sense shift from 3 p.m.
to 12 p.m. began during 12c., when time of Church prayers shifted from ninth hour to sixth hour, or
perhaps because the customary time of the midday meal shifted, or both. The shift was complete by
14c. (same evolution in Dutch noen).


noonday (n.)

middle of the day, first used by Coverdale (1535), from noon + day.


noose (n.)

mid-15c., perhaps from Old French nos or cognate Old Proven&ccedil;al nous knot, from Latin nodus
knot (see net (n.)). Rare before c.1600.


nopal (n.)

Mexican cactus, from American Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) nopalli.


nope (adv.)

1888, emphatic form of no, with emphasis on the closing of the lips.


nor (conj.)

c.1300, contraction of Middle English nauther (see neither). Influenced in form by or.


Nora

fem. proper name, Irish, shortened from Honora or Leonora.


Nordic (adj.)

1898, from French nordique (in J. Deniker's system of race classifications), literally of or
pertaining to the north, from nord north (a loan-word from Old English; see north). Perhaps
influenced by German Nordisch. As a noun, from 1901. Strictly, the blond peoples who inhabit
Scandinavia and the north of Britain. As a type of skiing competition, it is attested from 1954.


norepinephrine (n.)

1868, from normal (in reference to molecular structure) + epinephrine.


Norfolk

Nordfolc (1066) (Territory of the) Northern People (of the East Angles). The Norfolk pine (1778),
used as an ornamental tree, is from Norfolk Island in the South Pacific, northwest of New Zealand.


norm (n.)

standard, pattern, model, 1821, from French norme, from Latin norma carpenter's square, rule,
pattern, of unknown origin. Klein suggests a borrowing (via Etruscan) of Greek gnomon carpenter's
square. The Latin form of the word, norma, was used in English in the sense of carpenter's square
from 1670s.


Norma

fem. proper name, probably from Latin norma (see norm).


normal (adj.)

c.1500, typical, common; 1640s, standing at a right angle, from Late Latin normalis in conformity
with rule, normal, from Latin normalis made according to a carpenter's square, from norma rule,
pattern, literally carpenter's square (see norm). Meaning conforming to common standards, usual is
from 1828, but probably older than the record [Barnhart].    As a noun meaning usual state or
condition, from 1890. Sense of normal person or thing is from 1894. Normal school (1834) is from
French &eacute;cole normale (1794), a republican foundation. The city of Normal, Illinois, U.S., was
named 1857 for the normal school established there.


normalcy (n.)

1857, mathematical condition of being at right angles, from normal + -cy. Associated since c.1920
with U.S. president Warren G. Harding and derided as an example of his incompetent speaking style.
Previously used mostly in the mathematical sense. The word prefered by purists for a normal
situation is normality (1849).


normality (n.)

1849, from normal + -ity. Perhaps influenced by French normalit&#233; (1834).


normalization (n.)

1882, from normalize + -ation. International political sense recorded from 1938.


normalize (v.)

1865, from normal + -ize. Related: Normalized; normalizing.


normally (adv.)

1590s, regularly, from normal + -ly (2). Meaning under ordinary conditions is from 1853.


Norman (n.)

c.1200, one of the mixed Scandinavian-Frankish people who conquered England in 1066, from Old French
Normanz, plural of Normand, Normant, literally North man, from a Scandinavian word meaning northman
(see Norse), in reference to the Scandinavian people who overran and occupied Normandy 10c. Later
meaning one of the Norman French who conquered England in 1066. As an adjective from 1580s. As a
style of architecture, developed in Normandy and employed in England after the conquest, it is
attested from 1797. Norseman (1817) is not historical and appears to be due to Scott.


Normandy

literally region settled by Vikings; from Normand (see Norman).


normative (adj.)

1880, perhaps from French normatif, from Latin norma rule (see normal).


Norn (n.)

1770, from Old Norse norn (plural nornir), one of the female fates of Scandinavian mythology,
related to Swedish dialectal norna to warn, to communicate secretly, perhaps ultimately imitative of
low murmuring (compare Middle High German narren to growl, snarl).


Norse (n.)

1590s, a Norwegian, from obsolete Dutch Noorsch (adj.) Norwegian, from noordsch northern, nordic,
from noord north (see north). Also in some cases borrowed from cognate Danish or Norwegian norsk. As
a language, from 1680s. Old Norse attested from 1844. An Old English word for a Norwegian was
Nor&eth;man. As an adjective from 1768.    In Old French, Norois as a noun meant a Norse, Norseman,
also action worth of a man from the North (i.e. usually considered as deceitful) [Hindley, et. al.];
as an adjective it meant northern, Norse, Norwegian, also proud, fierce, fiery, strong.


north

Old English nor&eth; northern (adj.), northwards (adv.), from Proto-Germanic *nurtha- (cognates: Old
Norse nor&eth;r, Old Saxon north, Old Frisian north, Middle Dutch nort, Dutch noord, German nord),
possibly ultimately from PIE *ner- (1) left, also below, as north is to the left when one faces the
rising sun (cognates: Sanskrit narakah hell, Greek enerthen from beneath, Oscan-Umbrian nertrak
left). The same notion underlies Old Irish tuath left; northern; Arabic shamal left hand; north. The
usual word for north in the Romance languages ultimately is from English, for example Old French
north (Modern French nord), borrowed from Old English nor&eth;; Italian, Spanish norte are borrowed
from French.    Ask where's the North? At York 'tis on the Tweed;  In Scotland at the Orcades; and
there  At Greenland, Zembla, or the Lord knows where.  [Pope, Essay on Man]    As a noun, c.1200,
from the adverb. North Pole attested from mid-15c. (earlier the Arctic pole, late 14c.). North
American (n.) first used 1766, by Franklin; as an adjective, from 1770.


North Sea

Old English nor&eth;s&aelig;, usually meaning the Bristol Channel. The application to the body of
water presently so named (late 13c.) is from Dutch (Noordzee, Middle Dutch Noortzee); it lies to the
north of Holland, where it was contrasted with the inland Zuider Zee, literally Southern Sea). To
the Danes, it sometimes was Vesterhavet West Sea. In English, this had been typically called the
German Sea or German Ocean, which follows the Roman name for it, Oceanus Germanicus. German
persisted on some British maps at least into the 1830s.


North Star (n.)

Pole Star, Polaris, Middle English nor&thorn;e sterre (late 14c.); cognates: Middle Dutch
noirdstern, German nordstern.


north-bound (adj.)

1903, from north + bound (adj.2).


north-easter (n.)

sometimes nor'easter, wind blowing from the northeast, 1794, from northeast.


northeast

Old English nor&#240; east; see north + east. Related: Northeasterly (1743).


northerly (adj., adv.)

1550s, from northern + -ly (2) on pattern of easterly, westerly.


northern (adj.)

Old English nor&thorn;erna, nor&eth;erne northern, Northumbrian, Scandinavian, cognate with Old High
German nordroni, Old Norse norroenn (see north). With -erne, suffix denoting direction. Related:
Northernmost. Northerner in U.S. geo-political sense is attested from 1831. Northern lights aurora
borealis first recorded by that name 1721 (earlier north-light, 1706).


Northumbria

Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Nor&eth;hymbre, which lay north of the river Humber (Latin Humbri fluminis,
c.720), an ancient pre-English river name of unknown origin. Related: Northumbrian. The
Northumbrians seem at times to have referred to the Mercians as Southumbrians.


northward (adv.)

Old English nor&#240;weard; see north + -ward. Related: Northwards.


northwest

Old English nor&#240;west (adv.);   from north + west. As a noun from late 14c. Related:
Northwestern; northwesterly; northwestward. Northwest Passage first attested c.1600.


Norway

Old English Norweg, Nor&thorn;weg from Old Norse Norvegr north way, a way leading to the north (see
north + way (n.)); contrasted with suthrvegar south way, i.e. Germany, and austrvegr east way, the
Baltic lands.


Norwegian

c.1600 (n. and adj.), sometimes in early use Norvegian, from Medieval Latin Norvegia Norway, from
Old Norse Norvegr (see Norway) + -ian.


nose (v.)

perceive the smell of, 1570s; pry, search, 1640s, from nose (n.). Related: Nosed; nosing.


nose (n.)

Old English nosu, from Proto-Germanic *nusus (cognates: Old Norse n&ouml;s, Old Frisian nose, Dutch
neus, Old High German nasa, German Nase), from PIE *nas- nose (cognates: Sanskrit nasa, Old Persian
naham, Old Church Slavonic nasu, Lithuanian nosis, Latin nasus nose). Used of any prominent or
projecting part from 1530s. (nose cone in the space rocket sense is from 1949). Used to indicate
something obvious from 1590s. Meaning odor, scent is from 1894.  Kiv, It could bee no other then his
owne manne, that had thrust his nose so farre out of ioynte. [Barnabe Riche His Farewell to Military
Profession, 1581] Pay through the nose (1670s) seems to suggest bleed. Many extended meanings are
from the horse-racing sense of length of a horse's nose, as a measure of distance between two
finishers (1908). To turn up one's nose show disdain is from 1818 (earlier hold up one's nose,
1570s); similar notion in look down one's nose (1921). To say something is under (one's) nose in
plain view is from 1540s.


nose job (n.)

rhinoplasty, 1963, from nose (n.) + job (n.).


nose-bleed (n.)

1848, from nose (n.) + bleed (n.).


nose-dive (n.)

sudden large decrease, 1920, from airplane sense, first attested 1912, from nose (n.) + dive (n.).
As a verb from 1915.


nose-ring (n.)

1778 as something to lead an animal by, from nose (n.) + ring (n.1). As something to ornament a
person, from 1819.


nosegay (n.)

bunch of flowers, early 15c., from nose (n.) + gay in an obsolete noun sense of gay or bright thing.


nosey (adj.)

see nosy.


nosh (v.)

1957, from Yiddish nashn nibble, from Middle High German naschen, from Old High German hnascon,
nascon to nibble, from Proto-Germanic *(g)naskon. Related: Noshed; noshing. Earlier as a noun (1917)
meaning a restaurant, short for nosh-house.


noso-

word-forming element meaning disease, from comb. form of Greek nosos disease, sickness, malady, of
unknown origin.


nosocomial (adj.)

1855, from Latin nosocomium, from Greek nosokomeion, from nosos disease. Nosocome was a 17c. word
for hospital.


nosology (n.)

study of diseases, 1721, from Modern Latin nosologia (perhaps via French nosologie), from noso- +
-logy. Related: Nosological; nosologist.


nostalgia (n.)

1770, severe homesickness considered as a disease, Modern Latin, coined 1668 in a dissertation on
the topic at the University of Basel by scholar Johannes Hofer (1669-1752) as a rendering of German
heimweh (for which see home + woe). From Greek algos pain, grief, distress (see -algia) + nostos
homecoming, from PIE *nes- to return safely home (cognate with Old Norse nest food for a journey,
Sanskrit nasate approaches, joins, German genesen to recover, Gothic ganisan to heal, Old English
genesen to recover). French nostalgie is in French army medical manuals by 1754.    Originally in
reference to the Swiss and said to be peculiar to them and often fatal, whether by its own action or
in combination with wounds or disease. By 1830s the word was used of any intense homesickness: that
of sailors, convicts, African slaves. The bagpipes produced the same effects sometimes in the Scotch
regiments while serving abroad [Penny Magazine, Nov. 14, 1840]. It is listed among the endemic
diseases in the Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine [London, 1833, edited by three M.D.s], which
defines it as The concourse of depressing symptoms which sometimes arise in persons who are absent
from their native country, when they are seized with a longing desire of returning to their home and
friends and the scenes their youth .... It was a military medical diagnosis principally, and was
considered a serious medical problem by the North in the American Civil War:    In the first two
years of the war, there were reported 2588 cases of nostalgia, and 13 deaths from this cause. These
numbers scarcely express the real extent to which nostalgia influenced the sickness and mortality of
the army. To the depressing influence of home-sickness must be attributed the fatal result in many
cases which might otherwise have terminated favorably. [Sanitary Memoirs of the War, U.S. Sanitary
Commission, N.Y.: 1867]    Transferred sense (the main modern one) of wistful yearning for the past
first recorded 1920, perhaps from such use of nostalgie in French literature. The longing for a
distant place also necessarily involves a separation in time.


nostalgic (adj.)

1806, from nostalgia + -ic. Related: Nostalgically.


Nostradamus

a prophet, seer, a fortune-teller, 1660s, from Latinized name of Michel de Nostredame (1503-1566),
French physician and astrologer, who published a collection of predictions in 1555.


Nostratic (adj.)

1966 (Nostratian is from 1931), from Latin nostras our countrymen.


nostril (n.)

Old English nos&thorn;yrl, nos&eth;irl, literally the hole of the nose, from nosu nose (see nose
(n.)) + &thorn;yrel hole (see thrill (v.)).


nostrum (n.)

quack medicine, c.1600, from Latin nostrum remedium our remedy, presumably that prepared by the
person offering it, from Latin nostrum, neuter of noster our, from nos we, from PIE *nos (see us).


nosy (adj.)

also nosey, 1610s, having a prominent nose, from nose (n.) + -y (2). Earlier in this sense was nasee
(mid-14c.), from Anglo-French, from Old French nas&eacute;, ultimately from Latin nasus nose. Sense
of inquisitive first recorded 1882. Nosey Parker as a name for an inquisitive person is from 1907.


not

negative particle, mid-13c., unstressed variant of noht, naht in no way (see naught). As an
interjection to negate what was said before or reveal it as sarcasm, it is first attested 1900;
popularized 1989 by Wayne's World sketches on Saturday Night Live TV show. To not know X from Y
(one's ass from one's elbow, shit from Shinola, etc.) was a construction first attested c.1930.
Double negative construction not un- was derided by Orwell, but is persistent and ancient in
English, popular with Milton and the Anglo-Saxon poets.


nota bene

mark well, observe particularly, c.1721, from Latin nota, second person singular imperative of
notare to mark (see note (v.)) + bene well (see bene-). Often abbreviated N.B.


notabilia (n.)

notable things, from Latin notabilia, neuter plural of notabilis (see notable).


notability (n.)

late 14c., from Old French notabilite, from Medieval Latin *notabilitatem (nominative *notabilitas),
from Latin notabilis (see notable).


notable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French notable well-known, notable, remarkable (13c.) and directly from Latin
notabilis noteworthy, extraordinary, from notare to note (see note (v.)). The noun meaning a person
of distinction is first recorded 1815. Related: Notably; notableness.


notarize (v.)

1935, from notary + -ize. Related: Notarized; notarizing.


notary (n.)

c.1300, clerk, secretary, from Old French notarie scribe, clerk, secretary (12c.) and directly from
Latin notarius shorthand writer, clerk, secretary, from notare, to note, from nota shorthand
character, letter, note (see note (v.)). Meaning person authorized to attest contracts, etc. is from
mid-14c.; especially in notary public (late 15c.), which has the French order of subject-adjective.
Related: Notarial.


notate (v.)

1922, from Latin notatus, past participle of notare (see note (v.)). Related: Notated; notating.


notation (n.)

1560s, explanation of a term, from Middle French notation and directly from Latin notationem
(nominative notatio) a marking, notation, designation; etymology; shorthand; explanation, noun of
action from past participle stem of notare to note (see note (v.)). Meaning note, annotation is from
1580s. Meaning system of representing numbers or quantities by signs or symbols is attested from
1706. Related: Notational.


notch (n.)

1570s, probably a misdivision of an otch (see N for other examples), from Middle French oche notch,
from Old French ochier to notch, of unknown origin. Said to be unconnected to nock.


notch (v.)

1590s, from notch (n.). Earlier verb (before misdivision) was Middle English ochen to cut, slash
(c.1400). Related: Notched; notching.


note (v.)

c.1200, observe, take mental note of, mark carefully, from Old French noter indicate, designate;
take note of, write down, from Latin notare to mark, to note, to make a note, from nota mark, sign,
note, character, letter (see note (n.)). Meaning to set in writing is from early 14c. Related:
Noted; noting.


note (n.)

c.1300, a song, music, instrumental music; a musical note, from Latin nota letter, character, note,
originally a mark, sign, means of recognition, which is perhaps related to notus, past participle of
noscere (Old Latin *gnoscere) to know (see know). Meaning notice, attention, reputation is early
14c. Meaning brief writing is from 1540s.


note-paper (n.)

1848, from note (n.) + paper (n.).


notebook (n.)

1570s, from note + book (n.).


noted (adj.)

c.1300, observed, past participle adjective from note (v.). Meaning observed for some special
quality is from 1590s. Related: Notedness.


notepad (n.)

1907, from note (n.) + pad (n.).


noteworthy (adj.)

1550s, from note (v.) + worthy. Related: Noteworthiness.


nother

word formed from misdivision of another as a nother (see N for other examples), c.1300. From
14c.-16c. no nother is sometimes encountered as a misdivision of none other or perhaps as an
emphatic negative; Old English had no&eth;er as a contraction of ne o&eth;er no other.


nothing (n.)

Old English na&thorn;ing, na&eth;inc, from nan not one (see none) + &thorn;ing thing (see thing).
Meaning insignificant thing is from c.1600. As an adverb from c.1200. As an adjective from 1961.


nothingness (n.)

nonexistence, 1630s, from nothing + -ness.


notice (n.)

early 15c., information, intelligence, from Middle French notice (14c.), and directly from Latin
notitia a being known, celebrity, fame, knowledge, from notus known, past participle of (g)noscere
come to know, to get to know, get acquainted (with), from PIE *gno-sko-, a suffixed form of root
*gno- (see know). Sense of formal warning is attested from 1590s. Meaning a sign giving information
is from 1805.


notice (v.)

early 15c., to notify, from notice (n.). Sense of to point out is from 1620s. Meaning to take notice
of is attested from 1757, but was long execrated in England as an Americanism (occasionally as a
Scottishism, the two offenses not being clearly distinguished). Ben Franklin noted it as one of the
words (along with verbal uses of progress and advocate) that seemed to him to have become popular in
America while he was absent in France during the Revolution. Related: Noticed; noticing.


noticeable (adj.)

1796, worthy of notice, from notice (n.) + -able. Meaning capable of being noticed is from 1809.
Related: Noticeably.


notification (n.)

late 14c., from Old French notificacion (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin notificationem
(nominative notificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin notificare to make
known, notify (see notify).


notify (v.)

late 14c., from Old French notefiier make known, inform, apprise (13c.), from Latin notificare to
make known, notify, from Latin notus known (see notice (n.)) + root of facere make, do (see
factitious). Related: Notified; notifying.


notion (n.)

late 14c., from Latin notionem (nominative notio) concept, conception, idea, notice, noun of action
from past participle stem of noscere come to know (see know). Coined by Cicero as a loan-translation
of Greek ennoia act of thinking, notion, conception, or prolepsis previous notion, previous
conception.


notional (adj.)

pertaining to notions, 1590s, from notion + -al (earlier nocional, late 14c., from Medieval Latin
notionalis). Meaning full of whims is from 1791. Grammatical sense is from 1928 (Jespersen);
economics use is from 1958.


notions (n.)

miscellaneous articles, 1805, American English, from notion with the idea of clever invention.


notochord (n.)

1848, coined in English by English anatomist Sir Richard Owen (1804-1892) from chord + comb. form of
Greek noton back, from PIE *not- buttock, back (cognates: Latin natis buttock, sopurce of Italian,
Spanish nalga, Old French nache buttock, butt).


notoriety (n.)

1590s, from Middle French notori&eacute;t&eacute; or directly from Medieval Latin notorietatem
(nominative notorietas), from notorius well-known (see notorious).


notorious (adj.)

1540s, publicly known, from Medieval Latin notorius well-known, commonly known, from Latin notus
known, past participle of noscere come to know (see know). Negative connotation arose 17c. from
frequent association with derogatory nouns. Related: Notoriously.


notwithstanding (prep.)

late 14c., notwi&thorn;stondynge, from not + present participle of the verb withstand. A loan-
translation of Medieval Latin non obstante being no hindrance, from ablative of obstans, present
participle of obstare stand opposite to (see obstacle). As an adverb and as a conjunction from early
15c.


nougat (n.)

sweetmeat of almonds and other nuts, 1827, from French nougat (18c.), from Proven&ccedil;al nougat
cake made with almonds, from Old Proven&ccedil;al nogat nutcake, from noga, nuga nut, from Vulgar
Latin *nucatum (nominative *nuca), from Latin nux (genitive nucis) nut, from PIE *kneu- nut (see
nucleus).


nought (n.)

Old English nowiht nothing, variant of nawiht (see naught). Meaning zero, cipher is from early 15c.
Expression for nought in vain is late 13c. To come to nought is from 1590s.


noumenal (adj.)

1803, from noumenon + -al (1).


noumenon (n.)

1796, object of intellectual intuition (opposed to a phenomenon), term introduced by Kant, from
Greek noumenon that which is perceived, neuter passive present participle of noein to apprehend,
perceive by the mind (from noos mind). With passive suffix -menos.


noun (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French noun name, noun, from Old French nom, non (Modern French nom), from
Latin nomen name, noun (see name (n.)). Old English used name to mean noun. Related: Nounal.


nourish (v.)

late 13c., to bring up, nurture (a child, a feeling, etc.), from Old French norriss-, stem of norrir
raise, bring up, nurture, foster; maintain, provide for (12c., Modern French nourrir), from Latin
nutrire to feed, nurse, foster, support, preserve, from *nutri (older form of nutrix nurse),
literally she who gives suck, from PIE *nu- (from root *(s)nau- to swim, flow, let flow, hence to
suckle; see nutriment) + fem. agent suffix. Related: Nourished; nourishing.


nourishing (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from nourish (v.).


nourishment (n.)

early 15c., food, sustenance, from Old French norissement food, nourishment, from norrir (see
nourish). From c.1300 as fostering.


nous (n.)

slang for intelligence, common sense, 1706, from Greek nous, Attic form of noos mind, intellect,
which was taken in English in philosophy 1670s.


nouveau riche

1813, French, literally new rich. Opposite noveau pauvre is attested from 1965. Ancient Greek had
the same idea in neo-ploutos newly become rich.


nouvelle (n.)

short fictitious narrative dealing with a single situation or aspect of a character, 1670s, French
nouvelle (11c.), literally new (see novel (adj.)).


nouvelle cuisine

style of cooking emphasizing freshness and presentation, 1975, French, literally new cooking.


nova (n.)

1877, from Latin nova, fem. singular adjective of novus new (see new), used with stella star (a
feminine noun in Latin) to describe a new star not previously known. Classical plural is novae.


novate (v.)

to replace by something new, 1610s, from past participle stem of Latin novare to make new, from
novus new (see new).


novation (n.)

replacement of an old obligation by a new one, 1530s, from Latin novationem (nominative novatio) a
making new, renewal, noun of action from past participle stem of novare make new, from novus new
(see new).


novel (adj.)

new, strange, unusual, early 15c., but little used before 1600, from Old French novel, nouvel new,
young, fresh, recent; additional; early, soon (Modern French nouveau, fem. nouvelle), from Latin
novellus new, young, recent, diminutive of novus new (see new).


novel (n.)

fictitious narrative, 1560s, from Italian novella short story, originally new story, from Latin
novella new things (source of Middle French novelle, French nouvelle), neuter plural or fem. of
novellus (see novel (adj.)). Originally one of the tales or short stories in a collection
(especially Boccaccio's), later (1630s) long work of fiction, works which had before that been
called romances.    A novel is like a violin bow; the box which gives off the sounds is the soul of
the reader. [Stendhal, Life of Henri Brulard]


novelist (n.)

writer of novels, 1728, hybrid from novel (n.) + -ist. Influenced by Italian novellista. Earlier in
English, it meant an innovator (1580s).


novelize (v.)

1640s, to make new, from novel (adj.) + -ize. From 1828 as to make into a novel (from novel (n.)).
Related: Novelized; novelizing.


novella

1902; see novel (n.).


novelty (n.)

late 14c., quality of being new, also a new manner or fashion, an innovation; something new or
unusual, from Old French novelet&eacute; newness, innovation, change; news, new fashion (Modern
French nouveaut&eacute;), from novel new (see novel (adj.)). Meaning newness is attested from late
14c.; sense of useless but amusing object is attested from 1901 (as in novelty shop, 1973).


November

c.1200, from Old French novembre and directly from Latin November (also Novembris (mensis)), from
novem nine (see nine). The ninth month of the Roman calendar, which began in March. For -ber see
December. In Old English, it was Blotmona&eth; month of sacrifice, literally blood-month, the time
when the early Saxons prepared for winter by sacrificing animals, which they then butchered and
stored for food.


novena (n.)

1745, from Medieval Latin novena, fem. of Latin novenus ninefold, from novem nine (see nine).
Devotions consisting of special prayers or services on nine successive days.


novice (n.)

mid-14c., probationer in a religious order, from Old French novice beginner (12c.), from Medieval
Latin novicius, noun use of Latin novicius newly imported, newly arrived, inexperienced (of slaves),
from novus new (see new). Meaning inexperienced person is attested from early 15c.


novitiate (n.)

also noviciate, state of being a novice, c.1600, from Middle French noviciat or directly from
Medieval Latin novitiatus, from Late Latin novitius novice, from Latin adjective novicius (see
novice).


novocain (n.)

also novocaine, 1905, originally a trademark name for procaine (by Lucius &amp; Br&uuml;ning,
Hoechst am Main, Germany), from comb. form of Latin novus new (see new) + -caine, abstracted from
cocaine. As a local anaesthetic, it began as a substitute for cocaine.


Novus Ordo Seclorum

on the Great Seal of the United States of America, apparently an allusion to line 5 of Virgil's
Eclogue IV, in an 18c. edition: Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur ordo The great series of ages
begins anew. The seal's designer, Charles Thomson, wrote that the words signify the beginnings of
the New American Era. (see Annuit Coeptis).


now (adv.)

Old English nu now, at present, immediately; now that, also used as an interjection and as an
introductory word; common Germanic (Old Norse nu, Dutch nu, Old Frisian nu, German nun, Gothic nu
now), from PIE *nu now (cognates: Sanskrit and Avestan nu, Old Persian nuram, Hittite nuwa, Greek
nu, nun, Latin nunc, Old Church Slavonic nyne, Lithuanian nu, Old Irish nu-). Perhaps originally
newly, recently, and related to the root of new.    Often merely emphatic; non-temporal usage (as in
Now, then) was in Old English. The adjective meaning up to date first recorded 1967, but the word
was used also as an adjective in Middle English with the sense current from late 14c. Now and then
occasionally is from 1530s; now or never attested from 1550s.


nowadays (adv.)

late 14c., contracted from Middle English nou adayes (mid-14c.), from now + adayes during the day,
with adverbial genitive (see day).


nowhere (adv.)

Old English nahw&aelig;r nowhere, not at all; see no + where. Similar constructions were attempted
with nowhat (1520s) and nowhen (1764), but they failed to take hold and remain nonce words.


nowhither (adv.)

toward no place, Old English nahwi&eth;er; see no + whither.


noxious (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin noxius hurtful, injurious, from noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing liability
(related to nocere to hurt, and to nex slaughter), from PIE *nek-ro-, causative form of root *nek-
(1) death (see necro-).


nozzle (n.)

mid-15c., noselle socket on a candlestick, diminutive of nose (see nose (n.)). Meaning small spout
first recorded 1680s.


nth

1852, in phrase to the nth, figurative use of a mathematical term indicating indefinite number, in
which n is an abbreviation for number (n.).


nuance (n.)

1781, from French nuance slight difference, shade of color (17c.), from nuer to shade, from nue
cloud, from Gallo-Roman *nuba, from Latin nubes a cloud, mist, vapor, from PIE *sneudh- fog
(cognates: Avestan snaoda clouds, Latin obnubere to veil, Welsh nudd fog, Greek nython, in Hesychius
dark, dusky). According to Klein, a reference to the different colors of the clouds.


nuance (v.)

1886, from nuance (n.). Related: Nuanced.


nuanced (adj.)

1896, past participle adjective from verb nuance (q.v.).    The new co-operative history of English
literature which the University of Cambridge is now publishing prints genre without italics. And it
even permits one contributor--and a contributor who is discussing Shakespeare!--to say that
something is delicately nuanced. Is there now an English verb to nuance? It is terrible to think of
the bad language the scholars of the venerable English university might have used if nuanced had
been first discovered in the text of an American author. [Scribner's Magazine, January 1911]


nub (n.)

knob, lump, bump, 1590s, variant of dialectal knub, probably a variant of knob. Figurative meaning
point, gist first recorded 1834.


nubbin (n.)

stunted ear of corn, 1690s, American English diminutive of nub. General sense of small piece is from
1857.


nubby (adj.)

1876, from nub + -y (2).


Nubia

ultimately from a local word, said to be related to Coptic noubti to weave, or from Nubian nub gold.
In the fashion sense woman's light scarf it is from French, from Latin nubes cloud (see nuance).


Nubian

c.1400 (n.), c.1730 (adj.), from Medieval Latin Nubianus, from Nubia (see Nubia).


nubile (adj.)

1640s, marriageable (said of a woman), from French nubile (16c.) or directly from Latin nubilis
marriageable, from stem of nubere take as husband (see nuptial). In sense of young and sexually
attractive from 1973. Related: Nubility.


nuchal (adj.)

pertaining to the spinal cord, 1835, medical Latin, from nucha spinal cord (c.1400), from Medieval
Latin nucha, from Arabic nukha spinal marrow.


nuclear (adj.)

1846, of or like the nucleus of a cell, from nucleus + -ar, probably by influence of French
nucl&eacute;aire. Use in atomic physics is from 1914; of weapons, from 1945. Hence nuclear physics
(1933), nuclear energy (1941), nuclear war (1954). Nuclear winter coined by Richard Turco, but first
attested in article by Carl Sagan in Parade magazine, Oct. 30, 1983. General sense of central is
from 1912. Nuclear family, originally a sociologists' term, is first attested 1949 in Social
Structure, by American anthropologist G.P. Murdock (1897-1985). Alternative adjective nucleal is
recorded from 1840.


nucleation (n.)

1861, noun of action from nucleate (v.), from Latin nucleatus, past participle of nucleare, from
nucleus (see nucleus).


nucleic (adj.)

1892, in nucleic acid, translation of German Nukleins&auml;ure (1889), from Nuklein substance
obtained from a cell nucleus (see nucleus + -in (2)) + -ic.


nucleolus (n.)

1845, from Latin nucleolus, literally a little nut, diminutive of nucleus (see nucleus).


nucleotide (n.)

1908, from German nucleotid (1908), from nucleo-, modern comb. form of Latin nucleus (see nucleus) +
-ide, with -t- for the sake of euphony.


nucleus (n.)

1704, kernel of a nut, 1708, head of a comet, from Latin nucleus kernel, from nucula little nut,
diminutive of nux (genitive nucis) nut, from PIE *kneu- nut (cognates: Middle Irish cnu, Welsh
cneuen, Middle Breton knoen nut, Old Norse hnot, Old English hnutu nut). General sense of central
part or thing, about which others cluster is from 1762. Use in reference to cells first recorded
1831. Modern atomic meaning is 1912, first by Ernest Rutherford, though theoretical use for central
point of an atom is from 1844, in Faraday.


nuclide (n.)

1947, from nucleus + -ide.


nude (adj.)

1530s, a legal term, unsupported, not formally attested, from Latin nudus naked, bare, unclothed,
stripped (see naked). General sense of mere, plain, simple attested from 1550s. In reference to the
human body, meaning unclothed, it is an artistic euphemism for naked, dating from 1610s (implied in
nudity) but not in common use in this sense until mid-19c.


nude (n.)

nude figure in visual art, 1708, from French nud, obsolete variant of nu naked, nude, bare, from
Latin nudus (see nude (adj.)).


nudge (v.)

to push slightly with the elbow, 1670s, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Norwegian nugge, nyggje
to jostle, rub; Icelandic nugga to rub, massage). Related: Nudged; nudging.


nudge (n.1)

complainer, nagger, 1960s, from Yiddish, from Slavic words meaning fret, ache, realted to the root
of nudnik (q.v.).


nudge (n.2)

a slight push, 1836, from nudge (v.).


nudie (n.)

a nude show, 1935, from nude (adj.) -ie


nudism (n.)

1929, from French nudisme (see nude + -ism). Nudist one who practices nudism appeared at the same
time.  Made in Germany, imported to France, is the cult of Nudism, a mulligan stew of vegetarianism,
physical culture and pagan worship. [Time, July 1, 1929]


nudist

1929, adjective and noun, from French nudiste or formed in English from nude (adj.) + -ist; also see
nudism.


nudity (n.)

1610s, from nude (adj.) + -ity; or else from French nudit&eacute; nakedness (14c.) or directly from
Late Latin nuditatem (nominative nuditas) nakedness, from Latin nudus naked, bare (see naked).


nudnik (n.)

1947, from Yiddish, with agential suffix -nik + Polish nuda boredom or Russian nudnyi tedious,
boring, from Old Church Slavonic *nauda-, from PIE *neuti- need from root *nau- death, to be
exhausted (see need (n.)).


nuff

1840, American English, representing a casual or colloquial pronunciation of enough.


nugatory (adj.)

trifling, of no value, c.1600, from Latin nugatorius worthless, trifling, futile, from nugator
jester, trifler, braggart, from nugatus, past participle of nugari to trifle, jest, play the fool,
from nug&aelig; jokes, jests, trifles, of unknown origin.


nugget (n.)

1852, lump of gold, probably from southwestern England dialectal nug lump, of unknown origin [OED].
Another theory is that it is from a misdivision of an ingot. Transferred sense is from 1859.


nuisance (n.)

c.1400, injury, hurt, harm, from Anglo-French nusaunce, Old French nuisance harm, wrong, damage,
from past participle stem of nuire to harm, from Latin nocere to hurt (see noxious). Sense has
softened over time, to anything obnoxious to a community (bad smells, pests, eyesores), 1660s, then
source of annoyance, something personally disagreeable (1831). Applied to persons from 1690s.


nuke (n.)

short for nuclear weapon, 1959, U.S. military slang (see nuclear). The verb is attested from 1962;
the slang sense of to cook in a microwave oven is from 1987. Related: Nuked; nuking.


null (adj.)

void of legal force, 1560s, from Middle French nul, from Latin nullus not any, none, from ne- not,
no (see un-) + illus any, diminutive of unus one (see one).


nullification (n.)

in U.S. political sense of a state's refusing to allow a federal law to be enforced, 1798, in Thomas
Jefferson; from Late Latin nullificationem (nominative nullificatio) a making as nothing, from past
participle stem of nullificare (see nullify). Related: Nullificationist.


nullifidian (n.)

1560s, from Latin nulli-, comb. form of nullus no (see null) + fides faith (see faith).


nullify (v.)

1590s, from Late Latin nullificare to esteem lightly, despise, literally to make nothing, from Latin
nullus not any (see null) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Related: Nullified; nullifying.


nulliparous (adj.)

1859, from medical Latin nullipara female who has never given birth, from nulli-, stem of nullus no
(see null) + -para, fem. of parus, from parere to bring forth (see pare) + -ous.


nullity (n.)

1560s, from French nullit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin nullitalis, from Latin
nullus not any (see null).


numb (adj.)

c.1400, nome, deprived of motion or feeling, literally taken, seized, from past participle of nimen
to take, seize, from Old English niman to take, catch, grasp (see nimble). The extraneous -b (to
conform to comb, limb, etc.) appeared 17c. The notion is of being taken with palsy, shock, and
especially cold. Figurative use from 1560s.


numb (v.)

1550s, from numb (adj.). Related: Numbed; numbing.


number (n.)

c.1300, sum, aggregate of a collection, from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly
from Latin numerus a number, quantity, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (related to
Greek nemein to deal out; see nemesis). Meaning symbol or figure of arithmetic value is from late
14c. Meaning single (numbered) issue of a magazine is from 1795. Meaning dialing combination to
reach a particular telephone receiver is from 1879; hence wrong number (1886). The modern meaning
musical selection (1885) is from vaudeville theater programs, where acts were marked by a number.
Earlier numbers meant Harmony; proportion calculated by number, and Verses, poetry [Johnson].
Number one oneself is from 1704 (mock-Italian form numero uno attested from 1973); the biblical Book
of Numbers (c.1400, Latin Numeri, Greek Arithmoi) so called because it begins with a census of the
Israelites. Slang number one and number two for urination and defecation attested from 1902. Number
cruncher is 1966, of machines; 1971, of persons. To get or have (someone's) number have someone
figured out is attested from 1853. The numbers illegal lottery is from 1897, American English.


number (v.)

c.1300, to count, from Old French nombrer to count, reckon, from nombre (n.) number (see number
(n.)). Meaning to assign a number to is late 14c.; that of to ascertain the number of is from early
15c. Related: Numbered; numbering.


numbles (n.)

offal, from Old French nombles loin of veal, fillet of beef, haunch of venison, from Latin lumulus,
diminutive of lumbus loin (see lumbago).


numbness (n.)

1570s, from numb (adj.) + -ness.


numbnuts (n.)

stupid or ineffectual person, by 1971, U.S. slang, from numb (adj.) + nuts testicles; with
suggestion of impotence.


numbskull (n.)

1717, numskull, from num, old spelling of numb (adj.) + skull. Numskulled (adj.) is attested from
1706.


numen (n.)

divine spirit, presiding divinity, 1620s, from Latin numen divine will, divinity, literally a nod,
from nuere to nod (assent); see numinous.


numerable (adj.)

1570s, from Latin numerabilis that can be counted or numbered, from numerare to count, number, from
numerus a number (see number (n.)). Related: Numerably.


numeracy (n.)

1957, from numerate (adj.), from Latin numeratus counted out, from numerus a number (see number
(n.)) on model of literacy, etc.


numeral (n.)

1520s, word expressing a number, from Middle French num&eacute;ral (late 15c.), from Late Latin
numeralis of or belonging to a number, from Latin numerus a number (see number (n.)). Meaning figure
standing for a number is from 1680s. As an adjective, expressing number, from 1520s.


numerate (v.)

1721, to count, from Latin numeratus counted out, past participle of numerare to count, to number,
from numerus a number (see number). Related: Numerated; numerating.


numeration (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin numerationem (nominative numeratio), noun of action from past participle stem
of numerare to count, number, from numerus number (see number (n.)).


numerator (n.)

1540s, from Late Latin numerator counter, numberer, agent noun from numerat-, past participle stem
of numerare to count, number, from numerus a number (see number (n.)).


numerical (adj.)

1620s, from Latin numerus a number (see number (n.)) + suffix -ical. Perhaps by influence of French
num&eacute;rique of a number or numbers. Related: Numerically.


numerology (n.)

1911, study of the occult meaning of numbers, a hybrid from Latin numerus a number (see number (n.))
+ Greek -logia (see -logy). A correct formation would be arithmology, from Greek arithmos number.
Related: Numerological; numerologist.


numerous (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin numerosus numerous, from numerus a number (see number (n.)). Related:
Numerosity.


Numidia

ancient region in North Africa, roughly corresponding to modern Algeria, Latin, named for its
inhabitants, the Numidians, whose name is related to nomad (n.).


numinous (adj.)

divine, spiritual, 1640s, from Latin numen (genitive numinis) divine will, properly divine approval
expressed by nodding the head, from nuere to nod, from PIE *neu- to nod (cognates: Greek neuein to
nod) + -ous.


numismatic (adj.)

1765, pertaining to historical coins and coinage, from French numismatique (late 16c.), from Latin
numismat-, stem of numisma coin, currency, from Greek nomisma current coin, money, usage, literally
what has been sanctioned by custom or usage, from nomizein have in use, adopt a custom, from nomos
custom, law, usage, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (see nemesis). Related:
Numismatical (1716). Earlier in the same sense was nummary (1650s), from Latin nummarius, from
nummus a coin.


numismatics (n.)

study of coins, 1829, from numismatic. Also see -ics.


numismatist (n.)

student of coins and coinage, 1799, from French numismatiste, from Latin numismat-, stem of numisma
current coin (see numismatic).


nun (n.)

Old English nunne nun, vestal, pagan priestess, woman devoted to religious life under vows, from
Late Latin nonna nun, tutor, originally (along with masc. nonnus) a term of address to elderly
persons, perhaps from children's speech, reminiscent of nana (compare Sanskrit nona, Persian nana
mother, Greek nanna aunt, Serbo-Croatian nena mother, Italian nonna, Welsh nain grandmother; see
nanny).


nuncheon (n.)

mid-14c., slight refreshment, originally taken in the afternoon, from none noon (see noon) + shench
draught, cup, from Old English scenc, related to scencan to pour out, to give to drink, cognate with
Old Frisian skenka to give to drink, German, Dutch schenken to give. Compare luncheon.


nuncio (n.)

papal envoy, 1520s, from older Italian nuncio (now nunzio), from Latin nuntius messenger, from PIE
root *neu- to shout (cognates: Greek neuo to nod, beckon, Old Irish noid make known).


nunnery (n.)

late 13c., nunhood, from nun + -ery. Meaning convent of nuns is from c.1300. Meaning house of ill
fame is attested by 1590s.


nuptial (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French nuptial, or directly from Latin nuptialis pertaining to marriage, from
nuptiae wedding, from nupta, fem. past participle of nubere to marry, wed, take as a husband,
related to Greek nymphe bride, from PIE *sneubh- to marry, wed (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
snubiti to love, woo, Czech snoubiti to seek in marriage, Slovak zasnubit to betroth). Related:
Nuptially.


nuptials (n.)

marriage, wedding, 1550s, plural of nuptial.


Nuremberg

city in northern Bavaria, from German N&uuml;rnberg, Medieval Latin Norinberga. Second element is
Berg mountain, first element of unknown origin. Associated with the Nazis and site of mass party
rallies every September during the Third Reich. The Nuremberg Laws (1935) barred Jews from German
citizenship and forbid intermarriage with Aryans. The Nuremberg trials for war crimes and crimes
against humanity were held 1945-6.


nurse (n.1)

12c., nurrice wet-nurse, foster-mother to a young child (modern form from late 14c.), from Old
French norrice foster-mother, wet-nurse, nanny (source of proper name Norris), from Late Latin
*nutricia nurse, governess, tutoress, noun use of fem. of Latin nutricius that suckles, nourishes,
from nutrix (genitive nutricis) wet-nurse, from nutrire to suckle (see nourish). Meaning person who
takes care of sick in English first recorded 1580s.


nurse (n.2)

dogfish, shark, late 15c., of unknown origin.


nurse (v.)

1530s, to suckle (an infant); 1520s in the passive sense, to bring up (a child); alteration of
Middle English nurshen (13c.; see nourish), Sense of take care of (a sick person) is first recorded
1736. Related: Nursed; nursing.


nursery (n.)

c.1400, breeding, nursing, from Old French norture, norreture food, nourishment; education,
training, from Late Latin nutritia a nursing, suckling, from Latin nutrire to nourish, suckle (see
nourish). Meaning place or room for infants and young children and their nurse is from c.1300. As a
type of school, 1580s. Horticultural sense is from 1560s. Nursery rhyme is from 1832.


nursing (n.)

1530s, verbal noun from nurse (v.). Meaning profession of one who nurses the sick is from 1860.


nursling (n.)

also nurseling, object of a nurse's care, 1550s, from nurse (v.) + -ling.


nurturance (n.)

1938, from nurture + -ance. Related: Nurturant.


nurture (n.)

c.1300, breeding, upbringing, from Old French norture, nourreture food, nourishment; education,
training, from Late Latin nutritia (see nursery).


nurture (v.)

to feed or nourish, early 15c., from nurture (n.). Related: Nurtured; nurturing.


nut (n.)

hard seed, Old English hnutu, from Proto-Germanic *hnut- (cognates: Old Norse hnot, Dutch noot, Old
High German hnuz, German nu&szlig; nut), from PIE *kneu- nut (cognates: Latin nux; see nucleus).
Sense of testicle is attested from 1915. Nut-brown is from c.1300 of animals; c.1500 of complexions
of women.    Meaning crazy person, crank is attested from 1903 (British form nutter first attested
1958; nut-case is from 1959); see nuts. American English slang sense of amount of money required for
something is first recorded 1912. The nut that goes onto a bolt is first recorded 1610s (used of
other small mechanical pieces since early 15c.). Nuts and bolts fundamentals is from 1960.


nut-cracker (n.)

also nutcracker, 1540s, from nut (n.) + agent noun from crack (v.).


nutation (n.)

1610s, action of nodding, from Latin nutationem (nominative nutatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of nutare to nod, from PIE *neu- to nod (see numinous). Astronomical use is from
1715. Related: Nutational.


nuthatch (n.)

mid-14c., probably so called from its habit of breaking open and eating nuts; from nut + second
element related to hack (v.) and hatchet.


nutmeg (n.)

hard aromatic seed of the East Indies, c.1300, from Old North French or Anglo-French *noiz mugue,
from Old French nois muguete, unexplained alteration of nois muscade nut smelling like musk, from
nois nut (from Latin nux) + Latin muscada, fem. of muscat musky (see muscat). Probably influenced in
English by Medieval Latin nux maga (compare unaltered Dutch muskaatnoot, German muscatnu&szlig;,
Swedish muskotn&ouml;t).    American English colloquial wooden nutmeg anything false or fraudulent
is from 1830. Connecticut is called the Nutmeg State in allusion to the story that wooden nutmegs
are there manufactured for exportation. [John Russell Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1859]


nutria (n.)

1836, from Spanish nutria otter, also lutria, from Latin lutra (see otter).


nutrient (n.)

a nutritious substance, 1828, noun use of adjective (1640s) meaning providing nourishment, from
Latin nutrientem (nominative nutriens), present participle of nutrire to nourish, suckle, feed,
foster (see nourish).


nutriment (n.)

1540s, from Latin nutrimentum nourishment; support, from nutrire to nourish, suckle, feed, from PIE
*nu-tri-, from root *(s)nau- to swim, flow, let flow, hence to suckle (cognates: Sanskrit snauti she
drips, gives milk; Greek nan I flow), extended form of root *sna- to swim (see natatorium).


nutrition (n.)

early 15c., from Old French nutrition (14c.) and directly from Latin nutritionem (nominative
nutritio) a nourishing, noun of action from past participle stem of nutrire to nourish, suckle (see
nourish).


nutritionist (n.)

1926, from nutrition + -ist.


nutritious (adj.)

1660s, from Latin nutricius that which nourishes, nurses, from nutrix (genitive nutricis) a nurse,
from nutrire (see nourish). Related: Nutritiously.


nutritive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French nutritif and directly from Medieval Latin nutritivus nourishing, from
past participle stem of Latin nutrire to nourish (see nourish).


nuts (adj.)

crazy, 1846, from earlier be nutts upon be very fond of (1785), which is possibly from nuts (plural
noun) any source of pleasure (1610s), from nut (q.v.). Sense influenced probably by metaphoric
application of nut to head (1846, as in to be off one's nut be insane, 1860). Nuts as a derisive
retort is attested from 1931.    Connection with the slang testicle sense has tended to nudge it
toward taboo. On the N.B.C. network, it is forbidden to call any character a nut; you have to call
him a screwball. [New Yorker, Dec. 23, 1950] Please eliminate the expression 'nuts to you' from
Egbert's speech. [Request from the Hays Office regarding the script of The Bank Dick, 1940] This
desire for avoidance accounts for the euphemism nerts (c.1925).


nutshell (n.)

c.1200, nute-scalen; see nut + shell (n.). Figurative use with reference to great condensation
(1570s) supposedly originally is a reference to a copy of the Iliad, mentioned by Pliny, which was
so small it could fit into the shell of a nut.


nutter (n.)

one who gathers nuts, late 15c., from nut + -er (1). Meaning crazy person is British slang, 1958,
from nut + -er (3). Nuttery mental hospital is attested from 1931; earlier it meant place for
storing nuts (1881).


nutting (n.)

action of gathering nuts, 1723, from nut (n.).


nutty (adj.)

early 15c., nut-like, from nut + -y (2). Meaning crazy is from 1898 (see nuts); earlier amorous, in
love (with), 1821. Related: Nuttiness.


nuzzle (v.)

early 15c., to bring the nose to the ground, back-formation from noselyng on the nose, prostrate,
frequentative of nose (v.); meaning burrow with the nose is first attested 1520s; that of lie snug
is from 1590s, influenced by nestle, or by nursle, frequentative of nurse. Related: Nuzzled;
nuzzling.


nycto-

before vowels nyct-, word-forming element meaning night, from Latinized form of Greek nykto-, comb.
form of nyx night (see night).


nyctophobia (n.)

medical Latin, from nycto- night + -phobia fear. Related: Nyctophobic.


nylon (n.)

1938, coined, according to DuPont, from random generic syllable nyl- + -on, common ending in fiber
names (compare rayon), said to be ultimately from cotton. Use (in plural) for nylon stockings is
from 1940.


nylons (n.)

1940; see nylon.


nymph (n.)

late 14c., class of semi-divine female beings, from Old French nimphe (13c.), from Latin nympha
nymph, demi-goddess; bride, mistress, young woman, from Greek nymphe bride, young wife, later
beautiful young woman, then semi-divine being in the form of a beautiful maiden; related to Latin
nubere to marry, wed (see nuptial). Sub-groups include dryads, hamadryads, naiads, nereids, and
oreads. Sense in English of young woman, girl is attested from 1580s. Meaning insect stage between
larva and adult is recorded from 1570s. Related: Nymphal; nymphean.


nymphette (n.)

also nymphet, nymphete, sexually attractive young girl, 1955, introduced by Vladimir Nabokov
(1899-1977) in his novel Lolita to describe alluring (in the eyes of some men) girls age 9 to 14;
from nymph + diminutive suffix. Used from 17c. in sense a little nymph.


nympho (n.)

1935, short for nymphomaniac (see nymphomania).


nympholepsy (n.)

frenzy or rapture supposed to take hold of a man upon gazing on a nymph, 1775, coined by Richard
Chandler, in Travels in Greece, from nymph, on model of epilepsy, with second element from stem of
Greek lambanein to take. Especially an ecstasy or frenzy caused by desire for the unattainable.
Ancient Greek had nympholeptos caught by nymphs. Related: Nympholept; nympholeptic.


nymphomania (n.)

1775, in English translation of Nymphomania, or a Dissertation Concerning the Furor Uterinus, by
French doctor M.D.T. Bienville, coined from Greek nymphe bride (see nymph) + mania madness (see
mania). Perhaps influenced by earlier French nymphomanie. Defined as a female disease characterized
by morbid and uncontrollable sexual desire. Compare also nympholepsy.


nymphomaniac

1861 (adj.), 1867 (n.), from nymphomania.


nystagmus (n.)

medical Latin, from Greek nystagmos nodding, drowsiness, from nystazein to nod, be sleepy, from PIE
*sneud(h)- to be sleepy.


