-ocracy

word-forming element; -cracy with a connective -o-.


-oholic

word-forming element abstracted from alcoholic (q.v.); also see -aholic, which has tended to replace
it in word formation.


-oid

word-forming element meaning like, like that of, thing like a ______, from Latinized form of Greek
-oeides, from eidos form, related to idein to see, eidenai to know; literally to see, from PIE
*weid-es-, from root *weid- to see, to know (see vision). The -o- is connective or a stem vowel from
the previous element.


-oidal

word-forming element making adjectives from nouns in -oid; see -oid + -al (1).


-ol

word-forming element in chemistry, variously representing alcohol, phenol, or in some cases Latin
oleum oil (see oil (n.)).


-ola

commercial suffix, probably originally in pianola (q.v.).


-ologist

word-forming element; see -ology + -ist.


-ology

word-forming element indicating branch of knowledge, science, now the usual form of -logy.
Originally used c.1800 in nonce formations (commonsensology, etc.), it gained legitimacy by
influence of the proper formation in geology, mythology, etc., where the -o- is a stem vowel in the
previous element.


-oma

word-forming element, from Greek -oma, with lengthened stem vowel + -ma, suffix forming neuter nouns
and nouns that indicate result of verbal action (equivalent of Latin -men); especially taken in
medical use as morbid growth, tumor, based on sarcoma, carcinoma.


-on

subatomic particle suffix, from ion.


-one

chemical suffix, from Greek -one, female patronymic (as in anemone, daughter of the wind, from
anemos); in chemical use denoting a weaker derivative. Its use in forming acetone (1830s) gave rise
to the specialized chemical sense.


-oon

spelling conventional in 15c.-17c. English to add emphasis to borrowed French nouns ending in
stressed -on; also used to represent Italian -one, Spanish &#243;n; all from Latin -onem. Used in
rare cases to form English words, such as spittoon, octaroon.


-or

word-forming element making nouns of quality, state, or condition, from Middle English -our, from
Old French -our (Modern French -eur), from Latin -orem (nominative -or), a suffix added to pp.
verbal stems. Also in some cases from Latin -atorem (nominative -ator).    In U.S., via Noah
Webster, -or is nearly universal (but not in glamour, curious, generous), while in Britain -our is
used in most cases (but with many exceptions: author, error, senator, ancestor, horror etc.). The
-our form predominated after c.1300, but Mencken reports that the first three folios of
Shakespeare's plays used both spellings indiscriminately and with equal frequency; only in the
Fourth Folio of 1685 does -our become consistent.    A partial revival of -or on the Latin model
took place from 16c. (governour began to lose its -u- 16c. and it was gone by 19c.), and also among
phonetic spellers in both England and America (John Wesley wrote that -or was a fashionable
impropriety in England in 1791).    Webster criticized the habit of deleting -u- in -our words in
his first speller (A Grammatical Institute of the English Language, commonly called the Blue-Black
Speller) in 1783. His own deletion of the -u- began with the revision of 1804, and was enshrined in
the influential Comprehensive Dictionary of the English Language (1806), which also established in
the U.S. -ic for British -ick and -er for -re, along with many other attempts at reformed spelling
which never caught on (such as masheen for machine). His attempt to justify them on the grounds of
etymology and the custom of great writers does not hold up.    Fowler notes the British drop the -u-
when forming adjectives ending in -orous (humorous) and derivatives in -ation and -ize, in which
cases the Latin origin is respected (such as vaporize). When the Americans began to consistently
spell it one way, however, the British reflexively hardened their insistence on the other. The
American abolition of -our in such words as honour and favour has probably retarded rather than
quickened English progress in the same direction. [Fowler]


-ory

adjective and noun suffix, having to do with, characterized by, tending to, place for, from Middle
English -orie, from Old North French -ory, -orie (Old French -oir, -oire), from Latin -orius, -oria,
-orium.    Latin adjectives in -orius, according to An Etymological Dictionary of the French
Language, tended to indicate a quality proper to the action accomplished by the agent; as oratorius
from orator; laudatorius from laudator. The neuter of these adjectives was early employed as a
substantive, and usually denoted the place of residence of the agent or the instrument that he uses;
as praetorium from praetor; dormitorium from dormitor; auditorium, dolatorium.    These newer words,
already frequent under the Empire, became exceedingly numerous at a later time, especially in
ecclesiastical and scholastic Latin; as purgatorium, refectorium, laboratorium, observatorium,
&amp;c.; [transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]


-ose (2)

standard ending in chemical names of sugars, originally simply a noun-forming suffix, taken up by
French chemists mid-19c.; it has no etymological connection with sugar. It appears around the same
time in two chemical names, cellulose, which would owe it to the French suffix, and glucose, where
it would be a natural result from the Greek original. Flood favors origin from glucose.


-ose (1)

word-forming element used to make adjectives from nouns, with the meaning full of, abounding in,
having qualities of, from Latin -osus (see -ous).


-osis

word-forming element expressing state or condition, in medical terminology denoting a state of
disease, from Latin -osis and directly from Greek -osis, formed from the aorist of verbs ending in
-o. It corresponds to Latin -atio.


-osity

word-forming element making nouns from adjectives in -ous, -ose (1); from French -osit&#233;, from
Latin -ositatem (nominative -ositas), properly -ose + -ity.


-our

see -or.


-ous

word-forming element making adjectives from nouns, meaning having, full of, having to do with,
doing, inclined to, from Old French -ous, -eux, from Latin -osus (compare -ose (1)). In chemistry,
having a lower valence than forms expressed in -ic.


o

interjection of fear, surprise, admiration, etc.; see oh.


O

blood type, 1926, originally zero, denoting absence of A and B agglutinogens.


O&#039;

as a prefix in Irish names, from Irish &oacute;, ua (Old Irish au) descendant.


o&#039;clock (adj.)

c.1720, abbreviation of of the clock (1640s), from Middle English of the clokke (late 14c.). Use of
clock hand positions to describe vector directions or angles is from late 18c.


o&#039;er

poetic contraction of  over.


O.D.

abbreviation of overdose, attested from 1960.


oaf (n.)

1620s, auf, oph (modern form from 1630s), a changeling; a foolish child left by the fairies
[Johnson], from a Scandinavian source such as Norwegian alfr silly person, in Old Norse elf (see
elf). Hence, a misbegotten, deformed idiot. Until recently, some dictionaries still gave the plural
as oaves.


oafish (adj.)

1610s, from oaf + -ish. Related: Oafishly; oafishness.


oak (n.)

Old English ac oak tree, from Proto-Germanic *aiks (cognates: Old Norse eik, Old Saxon and Old
Frisian ek, Middle Dutch eike, Dutch eik, Old High German eih, German Eiche), of uncertain origin
with no certain cognates outside Germanic.    The usual Indo-European base for oak (*deru-) has
become Modern English tree (n.); likewise in Greek and Celtic words for oak are from the Indo-
European root for tree, probably reflecting the importance of the oak to ancient Indo-Europeans. The
Old Norse form was eik, but as there were no oaks in Iceland the word came to be used there for tree
in general. Used in Biblical translations to render Hebrew elah (probably usually terebinth tree)
and four other words.


oaken (adj.)

made of, or consisting of, oak, late 12c., from oak + -en (2).


oakum (n.)

loose fiber obtained from taking apart old hemp ropes, early 15c., from Old English acumba tow,
oakum, flax fibers separated by combing, literally what is combed out, from Proto-Germanic *us-
kambon (source of Old High German achambi); first element cognate with Old English a- away, out,
off; second element from stem of cemban to comb, from camb a comb; from PIE *gembh- tooth, nail (see
comb (n.)).


oar (n.)

Old English ar oar, from Proto-Germanic *airo (cognates: Old Norse ar, Danish aare, Swedish
&#229;ra), of unknown origin; perhaps related to Latin remus oar, Greek eretes rower, eretmos oar.


oarlock (n.)

mid-14c., from oar + lock (n.1).


oasis (n.)

1610s, from French oasis (18c.) and directly from Late Latin oasis, from Greek oasis, probably from
Hamitic (compare Coptic wahe, ouahe oasis, properly dwelling place, from ouih dwell). The same
Egyptian source produced Arabic wahah.


oat (n.)

Old English ate (plural atan) grain of the oat plant, wild oats, of uncertain origin, possibly from
Old Norse eitill nodule, denoting a single grain, of unknown origin. The English word has cognates
in Frisian and some Dutch dialects. Famously defined by Johnson as, A grain, which in England is
generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people.    The usual Germanic name is
derived from Proto-Germanic *khabran (cognates: Old Norse hafri, Dutch haver, source of haversack).
Wild oats, crop that one will regret sowing, is first attested 1560s, in reference to the folly of
sowing these instead of good grain.That wilfull and vnruly age, which lacketh rypenes and
discretion, and (as wee saye) hath not sowed all theyr wyeld Oates. [Thomas Newton, Lemnie's
Touchstone of complexions, 1576]   <hr />   Fred Sanford: I still want to sow some wild oats!
Lamont Sanford: At your age, you don't have no wild oats, you got shredded wheat.  [Sanford and Son]
Hence, to feel (one's) oats be lively, 1831, originally American English.


oater (n.)

Western film, horse opera, 1946, from oat, as the typical food of horses.


oath (n.)

Old English a&eth; oath, judicial swearing, solemn appeal to deity in witness of truth or a promise,
from Proto-Germanic *aithaz (cognates: Old Norse ei&eth;r, Swedish ed, Old Saxon, Old Frisian eth,
Middle Dutch eet, Dutch eed, German eid, Gothic ai&thorn;s oath), from PIE *oi-to- an oath
(cognates: Old Irish oeth oath). Common to Celtic and Germanic, possibly a loan-word from one to the
other, but the history is obscure. In reference to careless invocations of divinity, from late 12c.


oatmeal (n.)

late 14c., from oat + Middle English mele (see meal (n.2)).


ob-

prefix meaning toward, against, across, down, also used as an intensive, from Latin ob toward, to,
over against, in the way of, by reason of, about, before, in front of, from PIE root *epi, also *opi
near, against (see epi-).


Obadiah

masc. proper name, fourth of the Twelve Prophets of the Old Testament, from Hebrew Obhadyah,
literally servant of the Lord, from abhadh he served, worshipped, related to Arabic 'abada he
served, 'abd slave, worshipper.


obbligato (adj.)

musical instruction, 1724, from Italian obbligato, literally obligated, from Latin obligatus, past
participle of obligare to bind (see oblige). In reference to a necessary accompaniment by a single
instrument.


obduracy (n.)

stubbornness, 1590s, from obdurate + -cy.


obdurate (adj.)

mid-15c., stubborn; hardened, from Latin obduratus hardened, past participle of obdurare be hard,
hold out, persist, endure, from ob against (see ob-) + durare harden, render hard, from durus hard
(see endure). Related: Obdurately.


obduration (n.)

c.1400, hard-heartedness, from Latin obdurationem (nominative obduratio), noun of state from past
participle stem of obdurare (see obdurate).


obeah (n.)

sorcery, witchcraft among blacks in Africa and the W.Indies, 1760, from a West African word, such as
Efik (southern Nigeria) ubio a thing or mixture left as a charm to cause sickness or death, Twi
ebayifo witch, wizard, sorcerer.


obedience (n.)

c.1200, submission to a higher power or authority, from Old French obedience obedience, submission
(12c.) and directly from Latin oboedientia obedience, noun of quality from oboedientem (nominative
oboediens); see obedient. In reference to dog training from 1930.


obedient (adj.)

c.1200, from Old French obedient obedient (11c.), from Latin oboedientem (nominative oboediens),
present participle of oboedire to obey (see obey). Related: Obediently.


obeisance (n.)

late 14c., act or fact of obeying, from Old French obeissance obedience, service, feudal duty
(13c.), from obeissant, present participle of obeir obey, from Latin oboedire (see obey). Sense in
English altered late 14c. to bending or prostration of the body as a gesture of submission or
respect by confusion with abaisance. Related: Obeisant.


obelisk (n.)

rectangular stone column tapering at the top, 1560s, from Middle French ob&eacute;lisque (16c.) and
directly from Latin obeliscus obelisk, small spit, from Greek obeliskos small spit, obelisk, leg of
a compass, diminutive of obelos a spit, pointed pillar, needle. Related: Obeliskine.


Oberon

king of the faeries and husband of Titania in medieval lore, from French Ob&eacute;ron, from Old
French Auberon, perhaps from a Germanic source related to elf.


obese (adj.)

1650s, back-formation from obesity and in part from Latin obesus fat, stout, plump, past participle
of obedere that has eaten itself fat (see obesity). According to OED, Rare before 19th c. Related:
Obeseness. Latin obesus was translated in Old English as oferf&#230;t overfat.


obesity (n.)

1610s, from French ob&eacute;sit&eacute; and directly from Latin obesitas fatness, corpulence, from
obesus that has eaten itself fat, past participle of obdere to eat all over, devour, from ob over
(see ob-) + edere eat (see edible).


obey (v.)

late 13c., from Old French obeir obey, be obedient, do one's duty (12c.), from Latin obedire,
oboedire obey, be subject, serve; pay attention to, give ear, literally listen to, from ob to (see
ob-) + audire listen, hear (see audience). Same sense development is in cognate Old English
hiersumnian. Related: Obeyed; obeying.


obfuscate (v.)

1530s, from Latin obfuscatus, past participle of obfuscare to darken, from ob over (see ob-) +
fuscare to make dark, from fuscus dark (see dusk). Related: Obfuscated; obfuscating.


obfuscation (n.)

early 15c., originally medical, the darkening of a sore, from Latin obfuscationem (nominative
obfuscatio), noun of action from past participle stem of obfuscare (see obfuscate).


Obie

one of the annual awards given to off-Broadway theater, 1967, from O.B. as the abbreviation of Off-
Broadway.


obit (n.)

late 14c., death, from Middle French obit or directly from Latin obitus death, noun use of past
participle of obire to die, literally to go toward (see obituary). In modern usage (since 1874) it
is usually a clipped form of obituary, though it had the same meaning of published death notice
15c.-17c. The scholarly abbreviation ob. with date is from Latin obiit (he) died, third person
singular of obire.


obiter (adv.)

Latin, literally by the way, from ob to, toward (see ob-) + iter journey (see ion). Klein's sources,
however, say it is ob- with the suffix -iter in analogy of circiter about from circa. Also see
obituary.


obiter dictum

statement in passing, a judge's expression of opinion not regarded as binding or decisive, Latin,
literally something said incidentally; see obiter + dictum.


obituary (n.)

1706, register of deaths, from Medieval Latin obituarius a record of the death of a person,
literally pertaining to death, from Latin obitus departure, a going to meet, encounter (a euphemism
for death), from stem of obire go toward, go to meet (as in mortem obire meet death), from ob to,
toward (see ob-) + ire to go (see ion). Meaning record or announcement of a death, especially in a
newspaper, and including a brief biographical sketch is from 1738. As an adjective from 1828. A
similar euphemism is in Old English cognate for&eth;faran to die, literally to go forth; utsi&eth;
death, literally going out, departure.


object (n.)

late 14c., tangible thing, something perceived or presented to the senses, from Medieval Latin
objectum thing put before (the mind or sight), noun use of neuter of Latin obiectus lying before,
opposite (as a noun in classical Latin, charges, accusations), past participle of obicere to
present, oppose, cast in the way of, from ob against (see ob-) + iacere to throw (see jet (v.)).
Sense of thing aimed at is late 14c. No object not a thing regarded as important is from 1782. As an
adjective, presented to the senses, from late 14c. Object lesson instruction conveyed by examination
of a material object is from 1831.


object (v.)

c.1400, to bring forward in opposition, from Old French objecter and directly from Latin obiectus,
past participle of obiectare to cite as grounds for disapproval, set against, oppose, literally to
put or throw before or against, frequentative of obicere (see object (n.)). Related: Objected;
objecting.


objectification (n.)

1860, noun of action from objectify.


objectify (v.)

1838, from Medieval Latin objectum (see object (n.)) + -fy. Related: Objectified; objectifying.


objection (n.)

late 14c., from Old French objeccion reply, retort (12c.) and directly from Late Latin obiectionem
(nominative obiectio), a throwing or putting before, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin obicere to oppose (see object (n.)).


objectionable (adj.)

1781, from objection + -able. Related: Objectionably.


objective (adj.)

1610s, originally in the philosophical sense of considered in relation to its object (opposite of
subjective), formed on pattern of Medieval Latin objectivus, from objectum object (see object (n.))
+ -ive. Meaning impersonal, unbiased is first found 1855, influenced by German objektiv. Related:
Objectively.


objective (n.)

1738, something objective to the mind, from objective (adj.). Meaning goal, aim (1881) is from
military term objective point (1852), reflecting a sense evolution in French.


objectivism (n.)

1854 in philosophical sense, the doctrine that knowledge is based on objective reality, from
objective (adj.) + -ism.


objectivity (n.)

1803, from Medieval Latin objectivus, from Latin objectus (see object (n.)) + -ity.


objet (n.)

an object on display, an ornament, 1857, from French objet (14c.), especially in objet d'art (1865),
from Latin objectus (see object (n.)).


objurgate (v.)

1610s, from Latin obiurgatus, past participle of obiurgare to chide, rebuke, from ob- (see ob-) +
iurgare to quarrel, scold, from phrase iure agere to deal in a lawsuit, from ablative of ius right;
law; suit (see just (adj.)) + agere to do, act, set in motion (see act (n.)). Related: Objurgatory.


objurgation (n.)

1540s, from Latin obiurgationem (nominative obiurgatio) a chiding, reproving, reproof, noun of
action from past participle stem of obiurgare (see objurgate).


oblate (adj.)

flattened on the ends, 1705, from Medieval Latin oblatus flattened, from Latin ob toward (see ob-) +
latus, abstracted from its opposite, prolatus lengthened (see oblate (n.)).


oblate (n.)

person devoted to religious work, 1756, from Medieval Latin oblatus, noun use of Latin oblatus,
variant past participle of offerre to offer, to bring before, from ob- (see ob-) + latus carried,
borne (used as suppletive past participle of ferre to bear), from *tlatos, from PIE root *tele- to
bear, carry (see extol).


oblation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French oblacion offering, pious donation and directly from Latin oblationem
(nominative oblatio) an offering, presenting, gift, in Late Latin sacrifice, from Latin oblatus (see
oblate (n.)).


obligate (v.)

1540s, to bind, connect; 1660s, to put under moral obligation, back-formation from obligation, or
else from Latin obligatus, past participle of obligare (see oblige). Oblige, with which it has been
confused since late 17c., means to do one a favor. Related: Obligated; obligating.


obligation (n.)

c.1300, from Old French obligacion obligation, duty, responsibility (early 13c.) and directly from
Latin obligationem (nominative obligatio) an engaging or pledging, literally a binding (but rarely
used in this sense), noun of action from past participle stem of obligare (see oblige). The notion
is of binding with promises or by law or duty.


obligatory (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French obligatoire creating an obligation, obligatory, and directly from Late Latin
obligatorius binding, from obligat-, past participle stem of obligare (see oblige).


oblige (v.)

c.1300, to bind by oath, from Old French obligier engage one's faith, commit (oneself), pledge
(13c.), from Latin obligare to bind, bind up, bandage, figuratively put under obligation, from ob to
(see ob-) + ligare to bind, from PIE root *leig- to bind (see ligament). Main modern meaning to make
(someone) indebted by conferring a benefit or kindness is from 1560s. Related: obliged; obliging.


obliged (adj.)

c.1600, past participle adjective from oblige. To be obliged be bound by ties of gratitude is from
1540s.


obligee (n.)

person to whom another is bound by contract, 1570s, from oblige + -ee.


obliging (adj.)

willing to do service or favors, 1630s, present participle adjective from oblige. Related:
Obligingly.


obligor (n.)

person who binds himself to another by contract, 1540s, agent noun in Latin form from oblige.


oblique (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French oblique (14c.) and directly from Latin obliquus slanting, sidelong,
indirect, from ob against (see ob-) + root of licinus bent upward, from PIE root *lei- to bend, be
movable (see limb (n.1)). As a type of muscles, in reference to the axis of the body, 1610s (adj.),
1800 (n.). Related: Obliquely; obliqueness.


obliquity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French obliquit&eacute; (14c.), from Latin obliquitatem (nominative
obliquitas) slanting direction, obliquity, noun of quality from obliquus (see oblique).


obliterate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin obliteratus, past participle of obliterare cause to disappear, blot out, erase,
efface, figuratively cause to be forgotten, from ob against (see ob-) + littera (also litera)
letter, script (see letter (n.)); abstracted from phrase literas scribere write across letters,
strike out letters. Related: Obliterated; obliterating.


obliteration (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin obliterationem (nominative obliteratio), noun of action from past participle
stem of obliterare (see obliterate).


obliviate (v.)

1660s, from Latin oblivium (see oblivion). Related: Obliviated; obliviating.


oblivion (n.)

late 14c., state or fact of forgetting, from Old French oblivion (13c.) and directly from Latin
oblivionem (nominative oblivio) forgetfulness; a being forgotten, from oblivisci (past participle
oblitus) forget, originally even out, smooth over, efface, from ob over (see ob-) + root of levis
smooth, from PIE *lei-w-, from root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (see slime (n.)). Meaning state of
being forgotten is early 15c.


oblivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin obliviosus forgetful, that easily forgets; producing forgetfulness, from
oblivion (see oblivion). Meaning unaware, unconscious (of something) is from 1862, formerly regarded
as erroneous, this is now the general meaning and the word has lost its original sense of no longer
aware or mindful. Properly should be used with to, not of. Related: Obliviously; obliviousness.


oblong (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin oblongus more long than broad, originally somewhat long, from ob to, toward,
here perhaps intensive (see ob-) + longus long (see long (adj.)). As a noun from c.1600.


obloquy (n.)

mid-15c., evil speaking, from Late Latin obloquium speaking against, contradiction, from Latin
obloqui to speak against, contradict, from ob against (see ob-) + loqui to speak, from PIE *tolk(w)-
to speak (see locution). Related: Obloquious.


obnoxious (adj.)

1580s, subject to the authority of another, from Latin obnoxiosus hurtful, injurious, from obnoxius
subject, exposed to harm, from ob to, toward (see ob-) + noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing
liability (see noxious). Meaning subject to something harmful is 1590s; meaning offensive, hateful
is first recorded 1670s, influenced by noxious.Obnoxious has two very different senses, one of which
(exposed or open or liable to attack or injury) requires notice because its currency is now so
restricted that it is puzzling to the uninstructed. It is the word's rightful or de jure meaning,
and we may hope that scholarly writers will keep it alive. [Fowler]  Related: Obnoxiously;
obnoxiousness.


obnubilate (v.)

1580s, from Latin obnibulatus, past participle of obnubilare to cover with clouds or fog, from ob-
(see ob-) + verb from Latin nubes cloud (see nuance). Related: Obnubilated; obnubilating;
obnubilation.


obo

also o.b.o., abbreviation of or best offer, by 1969.


oboe (n.)

1724, from Italian oboe, from phonetic spelling of Middle French hautbois (itself borrowed in
English 16c. as hautboy), from haut high, loud, high-pitched (see haught) + bois wood (see bush
(n.)). So called because it had the highest register among woodwind instruments. Related: Oboist.


obol (n.)

ancient Greek small coin and weight, 1660s, from Latin obolus, from Greek obolos, identical with
obelos a spit, needle. From the original shape.


obscene (adj.)

1590s, offensive to the senses, or to taste and refinement, from Middle French obsc&#232;ne (16c.),
from Latin obscenus offensive, especially to modesty, originally boding ill, inauspicious, of
unknown origin; perhaps from ob onto (see ob-) + caenum filth. Meaning offensive to modesty or
decency is attested from 1590s. Legally, in U.S., it hinged on whether to the average person,
applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole
appeals to a prurient interest. [Justice William Brennan, Roth v. United States, June 24, 1957];
refined in 1973 by Miller v. California:    The basic guidelines for the trier of fact must be: (a)
whether 'the average person, applying contemporary community standards' would find that the work,
taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, (b) whether the work depicts or describes, in a
patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law; and (c)
whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value.    Related: Obscenely.


obscenity (n.)

1580s, obscene quality, from French obsc&#233;nit&#233;, from Latin obscenitatem (nominative
obscenitas) inauspiciousness, filthiness, from obscenus offensive (see obscene). Meaning a foul or
loathsome act is 1610s. Sense of an obscene utterance or word is attested by 1690. Related:
Obscenities.


obscurant (adj.)

1878, from Latin obscurantem (nominative obscurans), present participle of obscurare (see obscure
(v.)).


obscurantism (n.)

opposition to enlightenment, 1834, from German obscurantismus (18c.); see obscurant + -ism.


obscurantist (n.)

1841; see obscurantism + -ist.


obscuration (n.)

late 15c., from Latin obscurationem (nominative obscuratio) a darkening, obscuring, noun of action
from past participle stem of obscurare (see obscure (v.)).


obscure (adj.)

c.1400, dark, figuratively morally unenlightened; gloomy, from Old French obscur, oscur dark,
clouded, gloomy; dim, not clear (12c.) and directly from Latin obscurus dark, dusky, shady,
figuratively unknown; unintelligible; hard to discern; from insignificant ancestors, from ob over
(see ob-) + -scurus covered, from PIE *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see sky). Related: Obscurely.


obscure (v.)

early 15c., to cover (something), cloud over, from obscure (adj.) or else from Middle French
obscurer, from Latin obscurare to make dark, darken, obscure, from obscurus. Related: Obscured;
obscuring.


obscurity (n.)

late 15c., absence of light; 1610s with meaning condition of being unknown; from obscure (adj.) +
-ity; or else from Middle French obscurit&#233;, variant of Old French oscuret&#233; darkness,
gloom; vagueness, confusion; insignificance (14c.), from Latin obscuritatem (nominative obscuritas)
darkness, indistinctness, uncertainty, from obscurus.


obsecration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin obsecrationem (nominative obsecratio) a beseeching, imploring, supplication,
entreaty, noun of action from past participle stem of obsecrare to beseech, entreat (on religious
grounds), from ob- (see ob-) + sacrare to make or declare sacred (see sacred).


obsequies (n.)

funeral rites, plural of obsequy.


obsequious (adj.)

late 15c., prompt to serve, from Middle French obs&#233;quieux (15c.), from Latin obsequiosus
compliant, obedient, from obsequium compliance, dutiful service, from obsequi to accommodate oneself
to the will of another, from ob after (see ob-) + sequi to follow (see sequel). Pejorative sense of
fawning, sycophantic had emerged by 1590s. Related: Obsequiously; obsequiousness (mid-15c.).


obsequy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French obseque, osseque funeral rites, from Medieval Latin obsequiae, influenced
in sense by confusion of Latin obsequium compliance (see obsequious) with exsequiae funeral rites.
Now usually in plural, obsequies.


observable (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin observabilis remarkable, observable, from observare (see observe). Related:
Observably; observability.


observance (n.)

early 13c., act performed in accordance with prescribed usage, especially a religious or ceremonial
one, from Old French observance, osservance observance, discipline, or directly from Latin
observantia act of keeping customs, attention, respect, regard, reverence, from observantem
(nominative observans), present participle of observare (see observe). Observance is the attending
to and carrying out of a duty or rule. Observation is watching, noticing.


observant (adj.)

1590s, from observe + -ant, or else from French observant, past participle of observer (see
observance). In reference to Judaism, from 1902. As a noun from late 15c. Related: Observantly;
observantness.


observation (n.)

late 14c., performance of a religious rite, from Latin observationem (nominative observatio) a
watching over, observance, investigation, noun of action from past participle stem of observare (see
observe). Sense of act or fact of paying attention is from 1550s. Meaning a remark in reference to
something observed first recorded 1590s.


observative (adj.)

1610s, from Latin observat-, past participle stem of observare (see observe) + -ive.


observatory (n.)

building for observing astronomical phenomena, 1670s (in reference to Greenwich), from French
observatoire, from observer (v.); see observe.


observe (v.)

late 14c., to hold to (a manner of life or course of conduct), from Old French observer, osserver to
observe, watch over, follow (10c.), from Latin observare watch over, note, heed, look to, attend to,
guard, regard, comply with, from ob over (see ob-) + servare to watch, keep safe, from PIE root
*ser- (1) to protect. Meaning to attend to in practice, to keep, follow is attested from late 14c.
Sense of watch, perceive, notice is 1560s, via notion of see and note omens. Meaning to say by way
of remark is from c.1600. Related: Observed; observing.


observer (n.)

1550s, one who keeps a rule, custom, etc., agent noun from observe. Meaning one who watches and
takes notice is from 1580s; this is the sense of the word in many newspaper names.


obsess (v.)

c.1500, to besiege, from Latin obsessus, past participle of obsidere watch closely; besiege, occupy;
stay, remain, abide literally sit opposite to, from ob against (see ob-) + sedere sit (see
sedentary). Of evil spirits, to haunt, from 1530s. Psychological sense is 20c. Related: Obsessed;
obsessing.


obsessed (adj.)

mid-15c., tormented, obsessed, past participle adjective from obsess. Originally especially
possessed by a devil, etc.


obsession (n.)

1510s, action of besieging, from French obsession and directly from Latin obsessionem (nominative
obsessio) siege, blockade, a blocking up, noun of action from past participle stem of obsidere to
besiege (see obsess). Later (c.1600), hostile action of an evil spirit (like possession but without
the spirit actually inhabiting the body). Transferred sense of action of anything which engrosses
the mind is from 1670s. Psychological sense is from 1901.


obsessive (adj.)

1911, from obsess + -ive. Related: Obsessively. Obsessive-compulsive is attested from 1927.


obsidian (n.)

dark, hard volcanic rock, 1650s, from Latin obsidianus, misprint of Obsianus (lapis) (stone) of
Obsius, name of a Roman alleged by Pliny to have found this rock in Ethiopia.


obsolesce (v.)

1801, from Latin obsolescere to grow old, wear out, lose value, become obsolete, inchoative of
obsolere fall into disuse (see obsolete). Related: Obsolesced; obsolescing.


obsolescence (n.)

1809; see obsolescent + -ence. Phrase Planned obsolescence coined 1932, revived as a disparaging
term 1950s.


obsolescent (adj.)

1755, from Latin obsolescentum (nominative obsolescens), present participle of obsolescere fall into
disuse (see obsolete).


obsolete (adj.)

1570s, from Latin obsoletus grown old, worn out, past participle of obsolescere fall into disuse,
probably from ob away (see ob-) + an expanded form of solere to be used to, be accustomed (see
insolent).


obstacle (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French obstacle, ostacle opposition, obstruction, hindrance (13c.) or directly
from Latin obstaculum a hindrance, obstacle, with instrumental suffix *-tlom + obstare stand before,
stand opposite to, block, hinder, thwart, from ob against (see ob-) + stare to stand, from PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet).  The lover thinks more often of reaching his mistress than the husband of
guarding his wife; the prisoner thinks more often of escaping than the gaoler of shutting his door;
and so, whatever the obstacles may be, the lover and the prisoner ought to succeed. [Stendhal,
Charterhouse of Parma]Obstacle course is attested from 1891.


obstetric (adj.)

1742, from Modern Latin obstetricus pertaining to a midwife, from obstetrix (genitive obstetricis)
midwife, literally one who stands opposite (the woman giving birth), from obstare stand opposite to
(see obstacle). The true adjective would be obstetricic, but only pedantry would take exception to
obstetric at this stage of its career. [Fowler]. Related: Obstetrical.


obstetrician (n.)

1828, from Latin obstetricia midwifery, from obstetricus (see obstetric) on model of physician.


obstetrics (n.)

science of midwifery, 1819, from obstetric (adj.); also see -ics.


obstinacy (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin obstinatia, from obstinatus (see obstinate).


obstinance (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin obstinantia, from obstinantem, from obstinatus resolved, determined,
resolute (see obstinate).


obstinate (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin obstinatus resolute, resolved, determined, inflexible, stubborn, past
participle of obstinare persist, stand stubbornly, set one's mind on, from ob by (see ob-) + stinare
(related to stare stand) from PIE *ste-no-, from root *sta- to stand (see stet). Related:
Obstinately.


obstipation (n.)

1590s, from Latin obstipationem (nominative obstipatio), noun of action from *obstipare action of
blocking or stopping up, from ob- (see ob-) + stipare to press together, to pack (see stiff (adj.)).


obstreperous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin obstreperus clamorous, from obstrepere drown with noise, make a noise against,
oppose noisily, from ob against (see ob-) + strepere make a noise, from PIE *strep-, said to be
imitative (compare Latin stertare to snore, Old Norse &#254;rapt chattering, Old English
&#254;r&#230;ft quarrel). Related: Obstreperously; obstreperousness.


obstruct (v.)

1610s, a back-formation from obstruction or else from Latin obstructus, past participle of obstruere
to block, to stop up (see obstruction). Related: Obstructed; obstructing.


obstruction (n.)

1530s, from Latin obstructionem (nominative obstructio) an obstruction, barrier, a building up, noun
of action from past participle stem of obstruere build up, block, block up, build against, stop,
bar, hinder, from ob against (see ob-) + struere to pile, build (see structure (n.)).


obstructionism (n.)

1879, from obstruction + -ism.


obstructionist (n.)

1846, from obstruction + -ist.


obstructive (adj.)

1610s, from Latin obstruct-, past participle stem of obstruere (see obstruction) + -ive.


obtain (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French obtenir acquire, obtain (14c.), from Latin obtinere hold, hold fast,
take hold of, get possession of, acquire, from ob to (though perhaps intensive in this case; see
ob-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Related: Obtained; obtaining.


obtainable (adj.)

1610s, from obtain + -able. Related: Obtainability.


obtrude (v.)

1550s, from Latin obtrudere to thrust into, press upon, from ob toward (see ob-) + trudere to thrust
(see extrusion). Related: Obtruded; obtruding.


obtrusion (n.)

1570s, from Latin obtrusionem (nominative obtrusio), noun of action from past participle stem of
obtrudere (see obtrude).


obtrusive (adj.)

1660s, from Latin obtrus-, past participle stem of obtrudere (see obtrude) + -ive. Related:
Obtrusively; obtrusiveness.


obtund (v.)

c.1400, (transitive) to render dead, make dull, used occasionally in English, especially in medical
jargon; from Latin obtundere to blunt, make dull, weaken, exhaust, literally to beat against (see
obtuse). Related: Obtundation; obtunded.


obtuse (adj.)

early 15c., dull, blunted, from Middle French obtus (fem. obtuse), from Latin obtusus blunted, dull,
also used figuratively, past participle of obtundere to beat against, make dull, from ob against
(see ob-) + tundere to beat, from PIE *(s)tud-e- to beat, strike, push, thrust, from root *(s)teu-
to push, stick, knock, beat (cognates: Latin tudes hammer, Sanskrit tudati he thrusts). Sense of
stupid is first found c.1500. Related: Obtusely; obtuseness.


obverse (adj.)

turned toward the observer, frontal, 1650s, from Latin obversus turned against, directed toward,
past participle of obvertere to turn toward or against, from ob toward (see ob-) + vertere to turn
(see versus). According to OED, not in common use until the end of the 18th century. The noun, in
reference to coins, medals, etc. (opposite of reverse), is attested from 1650s. Related: Obversely.


obviate (v.)

1590s, to meet and do away with, from Late Latin obviatus, past participle of obviare act contrary
to, go against, from Latin obvius that is in the way, that moves against (see obvious). Related:
Obviated; obviating.


obviation (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin obviationem (nominative obviatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of obviare (see obviate).


obvious (adj.)

1580s, frequently met with, from Latin obvius that is in the way, presenting itself readily, open,
exposed, commonplace, from obviam (adv.) in the way, from ob against (see ob-) + viam, accusative of
via way (see via). Meaning plain to see, evident is first recorded 1630s. Related: Obviously;
obviousness.


oc-

assimilated form of ob- before -c-.


ocarina (n.)

1877, from Italian ocarina, diminutive of oca goose (so called for its shape), from Vulgar Latin
*auca, from Latin avicula small bird, diminutive of avis bird (see aviary).


Occam&#039;s razor

when two competing hypotheses explain the data equally well, choose the simpler. Or, as Sir William
Hamilton puts it, Neither more, nor more onerous, causes are to be assumed, than are necessary to
account for the phenomena. Named for English philosopher William of Ockham or Occam (c.1285-c.1349),
who expressed it with Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter ncccssitatem.    So called after William
of Occam (died about 1349): but, as a historical fact, Occam does not make much use of this
principle, which belongs rather to the contemporary nominalist William Durand de St. Pour&#231;ain
(died 1332). [Century Dictionary]


occasion (n.)

late 14c., opportunity; grounds for action, state of affairs that makes something else possible; a
happening, occurrence, from Old French ochaison, ocasion cause, reason, excuse, pretext; opportunity
(13c.) or directly from Latin occasionem (nominative occasio) opportunity, appropriate time, in Late
Latin cause, from occasum, occasus, past participle of occidere fall down, go down, from ob down,
away (see ob-) + cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). The notion is of a falling together, or juncture,
of circumstances.


occasion (v.)

mid-15c., to bring (something) about, from occasion (n.), or else from Old French occasionner to
cause, from Medieval Latin occasionare, from Latin occasionem (see occasion (n.)). Related:
Occasioned; occasioning.


occasional (adj.)

late 14c., occurring now and then, from occasion (n.) + -al (1). Meaning casual is 1560s. Meaning
happening on or pertaining to a particular occasion is from 1630s. Of furniture, etc., from 1749.


occasionally (adv.)

c.1400, happening on some particular occasion, also sometimes, happening as occasion presents
itself, without regularity, from occasional + -ly (2).


Occident (n.)

late 14c., western part (of the heavens or earth), from Old French occident (12c.) or directly from
Latin occidentem (nominative occidens) western sky, sunset, part of the sky in which the sun sets,
noun use of adjective meaning setting, from present participle of occidere fall down, go down (see
occasion (n.)).


occidental (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French occidental (14c.) and directly from Latin occidentalis western, from
occidentem (see occident). As a capitalized noun meaning a Western person (opposed to Oriental) from
1857.


occipital (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French occipital, from Medieval Latin occipitalis, from Latin occiput (genitive
occipitis) back of the skull, from ob against, behind (see ob-) + caput head (see capitulum).


Occitan (n.)

Old or modern Proven&ccedil;al; langue d'Oc, 1940, also the northern variant of modern
Proven&ccedil;al; from French oc  (see Languedoc).


occlude (v.)

1590s, from Latin occludere (past participle occlusus) shut up, close up, from ob against, up (see
ob-) + claudere to shut, close (see close (v.)). Of teeth, 1888 (also see occlusion). Related:
Occluded; occluding.


occlusion (n.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin occlusionem (nominative occlusio), noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin occludere (see occlude). Dentistry sense is from 1880.


occlusive (adj.)

1867, from Latin occlus-, past participle stem of occludere (see occlude) + -ive.


occult (adj.)

1530s, secret, not divulged, from Middle French occulte and directly from Latin occultus hidden,
concealed, secret, past participle of occulere cover over, conceal, from ob over (see ob-) + a verb
related to celare to hide, from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell). Meaning not
apprehended by the mind, beyond the range of understanding is from 1540s. The association with the
supernatural sciences (magic, alchemy, astrology, etc.) dates from 1630s.


occultation (n.)

early 15c., disguise or concealment of identity, from Latin occultationem (nominative occultatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of occultare to hide, conceal, frequentative of occulere
(see occult).


occultism (n.)

1870, from occult + -ism. Related: Occultist.


occupancy (n.)

1590s, condition of being an occupant; from occupant + -cy. Meaning fact of occupying is from 1833;
that of proportion of available space that is occupied is attested by 1974.


occupant (n.)

1590s, one who takes possession of something having no owner, from Middle French occupant (15c.) or
directly from Latin occupantem (nominative occupans), present participle of occupare to take
possession of (see occupy). Earlier noun form was ocupier (early 14c.).


occupation (n.)

early 14c., fact of holding or possessing; mid-14c., a being employed in something, also a
particular action, from Old French occupacion pursuit, work, employment; occupancy, occupation
(12c.), from Latin occupationem (nominative occupatio) a taking possession; business, employment,
noun of action from past participle stem of occupare (see occupy). Meaning employment, business in
which one engages is late 14c. That of condition of being held and ruled by troops of another
country is from 1940.


occupational (adj.)

1850, from occupation + -al (1). Occupational therapy is attested by 1918; occupational risk by
1951. Related: Occupationally.


occupied (adj.)

late 15c., past participle adjective from occupy (v.). Of countries overrun by others, from 1940,
originally with reference to France.


occupier (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from occupy.


occupy (v.)

mid-14c., to take possession of, also to take up space or time, employ (someone), irregularly
borrowed from Old French occuper occupy (a person or place), hold, seize (13c.) or directly from
Latin occupare take over, seize, take into possession, possess, occupy, from ob over (see ob-) +
intensive form of capere to grasp, seize (see capable). The final syllable of the English word is
difficult to explain, but it is as old as the record; perhaps from a modification made in Anglo-
French. During 16c.-17c. a common euphemism for have sexual intercourse with (sense attested from
early 15c.), which caused it to fall from polite usage.A captaine? Gods light these villaines wil
make the word as odious as the word occupy, which was an excellent good worde before it was il
sorted. [Doll Tearsheet in 2 Henry IV]  Related: Occupied; occupying.


occur (v.)

1520s, meet, meet in argument, from Middle French occurrer happen unexpectedly or directly from
Latin occurrere run to meet, run against, befall, present itself, from ob against, toward (see ob-)
+ currere to run (see current (adj.)). Sense development is from meet to present itself to appear to
happen (present itself in the course of events). Meaning to come into one's mind is from 1620s.
Related: Occurred; occurring.


occurrence (n.)

1530s, from Middle French occurrence unexpected happening or directly from Medieval Latin
occurrentia, from Latin occurentem (nominative occurens), present participle of occurrere (see
occur).


ocean (n.)

late 13c., from Old French occean ocean (12c., Modern French oc&#233;an), from Latin oceanus, from
Greek okeanos, the great river or sea surrounding the disk of the Earth (as opposed to the
Mediterranean), of unknown origin. Personified as Oceanus, son of Uranus and Gaia and husband of
Tethys. In early times, when the only known land masses were Eurasia and Africa, the ocean was an
endless river that flowed around them. Until c.1650, commonly ocean sea, translating Latin mare
oceanum. Application to individual bodies of water began 14c.; there are usually reckoned to be five
of them, but this is arbitrary; also occasionally applied to smaller subdivisions, such as German
Ocean North Sea.


Oceania

southern Pacific island and Australia, conceived as a continent, 1849, Modern Latin, from French
Oc&eacute;anie (c.1812). Apparently coined by Danish geographer Conrad Malte-Brun (1755-1826).
Earlier in English as Oceanica (1832). Oceania was the name of one of the superstates in Orwell's
Nineteen Eighty-Four. Oceanea, name of James Harrington's 17c. ideal state, later was applied to the
British empire.


oceanic (adj.)

1650s, probably from French oc&#233;anique, from oc&#233;an (see ocean).


oceanographer (n.)

1886, agent noun from oceanography.


oceanography (n.)

1859, coined in English from ocean + -graphy; on analogy of geography. French oc&#233;anographie is
attested from 1580s but is said to have been rare before 1876. Related: Oceanographic.


ocelot (n.)

large wildcat of Central and South America, 1775, from French ocelot, a word formed by French
naturalist Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon (1707-1788), from Nahuatl (Aztecan) ocelotl jaguar
(in full tlalocelotl, a compound formed with tlalli field).


ocher

see ochre.


ochlocracy (n.)

government by the rabble, 1580s, from French ochlocratie (1560s), from Greek okhlokratia (Polybius)
mob rule, the lowest grade of democracy, from kratos rule, power, strength (see -cracy) + okhlos
mob, populace, perhaps literally moving mass, from PIE *wogh-lo-, from root *wegh- to go, transport
in a vehicle (see weigh). For sense development, compare mob (n.). Related: Ochlocratic;
ochlocratical. Greek also had okhlagogos mob-leader, ochlagogue.


ochre (n.)

type of clayey soil (much used in pigments), late 14c., from Old French ocre (c.1300) and directly
from Late Latin ocra, from Latin ochra, from Greek ochra, from ochros pale yellow, of unknown
origin. As a color name, brownish-yellow, it is attested from mid-15c. Related: Ochreous.


octa-

before vowels oct-, word-forming element meaning eight, from Greek okta-, okt-, from PIE *okto(u)
eight (see eight). The variant form octo- often appears in words taken from Latin, but the Greek
form is said to be the more common in English.


octagon (n.)

1650s, from Latin octagonos, from Greek oktagononos, literally eight-angled, from okta- comb. form
of okto eight (see eight) + gonia angle, related to gony knee (see knee (n.)). Also octogon (1650s),
from French octogone.


octagonal (adj.)

1570s, from octagon + -al (1).


octahedron (n.)

1560s, from Greek oktahedron, neuter of oktahedros eight-sided, from okta- eight (see octa-) + hedra
seat (see sedentary). Related: Octahedral.


octane (n.)

hydrocarbon of the methane series, 1872, coined from octo- (see octa-) + -ane; so called because it
has eight carbon atoms. A fuel's octane rating, in reference to its anti-knocking quality, is
attested from 1932.


octant (n.)

instrument for making angular measurements in navigation or astronomy, 1731, from Late Latin octans
the eighth part, from octo eight (see octa-) on analogy of quadrant. In geometry, octant meant the
eighth part of a circle.


octave (n.)

c.1300, utaves (plural, via Anglo-French from popular Old French form oitieve, otaves), reformed in
early 15c., from Medieval Latin octava, from Latin octava dies eighth day, fem. of octavus eighth,
from octo (see eight). Originally period of eight days after a festival, also eighth day after a
festival (counting both days, by inclusive reckoning, thus if the festival was on a Sunday, the
octaves would be the following Sunday). Verse sense of stanza of eight lines is from 1580s; musical
sense of note eight diatonic degrees above (or below) a given note is first recorded 1650s, from
Latin octava (pars) eighth part. Formerly English eighth was used in this sense (mid-15c.)


Octavia

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of Octavius, literally the eighth (see Octavian).


Octavian

masc. proper name, from Latin, from Octavius, from octavus eighth, from octo (see eight).    But
although we find so marked differences in the use of the numerals as names, it is impossible to
believe that this use did not arise in the same way for all; that is, that they were at first used
to distinguish children by the order of birth. But when we find them as praenomina in historical
times it is evident that they no longer referred to order of birth. [George Davis Chase, The Origin
of Roman Praenomina, Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 1897]


octavo (n.)

1580s, printer's word for sheets folded to make eight leaves, from Latin in octavo in the eighth,
ablative of octavus eighth (see octave). Abbreviation is 8vo.


octo-

word-forming element, before vowels oct-, from comb. form of Latin octo eight (see octa-).


October

c.1050, from Latin October (mensis), from octo eight, from PIE root *octo(u)- eight (see eight).
Eighth month of the old Roman calendar (pre-46 B.C.E.), which began the year in March. For -ber see
December. Replaced Old English winterfylle&eth;. In Russian history, October Revolution (in which
the Bolsheviks overthrew the Provisional Government) happened Nov. 7, but because Russia had not at
that time adpoted the Gregorian calendar reform, this date was reckoned there (Old Style) as Oct.
25.


Octobrist (n.)

1., from Russian oktyabrist, member of the league formed October 1905 in response to imperial
policies; 2., from Russian Oktyabryonok, member of a Russian communist children's organization
founded 1925 and named in honor of the October Revolution.


octogenarian (n.)

1789, with -an + French octog&eacute;naire aged 80, from Latin octogenarius containing eighty, from
octogeni eighty each, related to octoginta eighty, from octo eight (see eight) + -genaria ten times,
from PIE *dkm-ta-, from *dekm- ten (see ten). As an adjective from 1784.


octopod

1826 (adj.); 1835 (n.), from Latinized form of Greek oktopod-, from stem of oktopous (see octopus).


octopus (n.)

1758, genus name of a type of eight-armed cephalopod mollusks, from Greek oktopous, literally eight-
footed, from okto eight (see eight) + pous foot (see foot (n.)). Proper plural is octopodes, though
octopuses probably works better in English. Octopi is from mistaken assumption that -us in this word
is the Latin noun ending that takes -i in plural.


octoroon (n.)

1861, irregular formation from Latin octo eight (see eight) + suffix abstracted from quadroon (in
which the suffix actually is -oon). Offspring of a quadroon and a white; so called for having one-
eighth Negro blood.


octuple (adj.)

eightfold, c.1600, from Latin octuplus eightfgold, from octo eight (see octo-) + -plus -fold (see
plus).


ocular (adj.)

c.1500, from Late Latin ocularis of the eyes, from Latin oculus an eye, from PIE root *okw- to see
(cognates: Gothic augo, Old English eage eye; see eye (n.)). As a noun, 1835, from the adjective.


oculist (n.)

eye doctor, 1610s, from French oculiste (16c.), from Latin oculus an eye (see eye (n.)).


oculus

an eye, plural oculi, 1857, from Latin oculus an eye (see eye (n.)).


oda (n.)

room in a harem, 1620s, from Turkish odah hall, chamber.


odalisque (n.)

female slave in a harem, 1680s, from French odalisque (1660s), from Turkish odaliq maidservant, from
odah room in a harem, literally chamber, hall, + -liq, suffix expressing function. In French, the
suffix was confused with Greek -isk(os) of the nature of, belonging to.


odd (adj.)

c.1300, constituting a unit in excess of an even number, from Old Norse oddi third or additional
number, as in odda-ma&eth;r third man, odd man (who gives the casting vote), odda-tala odd number.
The literal meaning of Old Norse oddi is point of land, angle (related via notion of triangle to
oddr point of a weapon); from Proto-Germanic *uzdaz pointed upward (cognates: Old English ord point
of a weapon, spear, source, beginning, Old Frisian ord point, place, Dutch oord place, region, Old
High German ort point, angle, German Ort place), from PIE *uzdho- (cognates: Lithuanian us-nis
thistle). None of the other languages, however, shows the Old Norse development from point to third
number. Used from late 14c. to indicate a surplus over any given sum.    Sense of strange, peculiar
first attested 1580s from notion of odd one out, unpaired one of three (attested earlier, c.1400, as
singular in a positive sense of renowned, rare, choice). Odd job (c.1770) is so called from notion
of not regular. Odd lot incomplete or random set is from 1897. The international order of Odd
Fellows began as local social clubs in England, late 18c., with Masonic-type trappings; formally
organized 1813 in Manchester.


oddball (n.)

eccentric or unconventional person, 1948, from odd + ball (n.1). Earlier (1946) as an adjective,
used by aviators.


odditorium (n.)

1914, from oddity + -orium (see -ory).


oddity (n.)

1713, odd characteristic or trait, a hybrid from odd + -ity. Meaning odd person is first recorded
1748.


oddly (adv.)

c.1300, from odd + -ly (2).


oddments (n.)

1780, a hybrid with a Latin suffix on a Germanic word, from odd (q.v.), on model of fragments.
Related: Oddment.


oddness (n.)

late 14c., from odd + -ness.


odds (n.)

in wagering sense, found first in Shakespeare (2 Henry IV, 1597), probably from earlier sense of
amount by which one thing exceeds or falls short of another (1540s), from odd (q.v.), though the
sense evolution is uncertain. Until 19c. treated as a singular, though obviously a plural (compare
news).


ode (n.)

1580s, from Middle French ode (c.1500), from Late Latin ode lyric song, from Greek oide, Attic
contraction of aoide song, ode; related to aeidein (Attic aidein) to sing; aoidos (Attic oidos) a
singer, singing; aude voice, tone, sound, probably from a PIE *e-weid-, perhaps from root *wed- to
speak. In classical use, a poem intended to be sung; in modern use usually a rhymed lyric, often an
address, usually dignified, rarely extending to 150 lines. Related: Odic.


odeon (n.)

1902, from Greek oideion building for musical performance.


odeum (n.)

concert hall, c.1600, from Latin odeum, from Greek odeion, the name of a public building in Athens
designed for musical performances, from oide song (see ode).


odiferous (adj.)

c.1500, odeferus, fragrant, shortened variant of odoriferous. Related: Odiferously; odiferousness.


Odin

chief Teutonic god, the All-Father, a 19c. revival in reference to Scandinavian neo-paganism, from
Danish, from Old Norse O&eth;inn, from Proto-Germanic *Wod-enaz-, name of the chief Germanic god
(source of Old English Woden, Old High German Wuotan), from PIE *wod-eno-, *wod-ono- raging, mad,
inspired, from root *wet- (1) to blow; inspire, spiritually arouse (see wood (adj.)).


odious (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French odious, from Old French odieus (late 14c., Modern French odieux) or
directly from Latin odiosus hateful, offensive, unpleasant, from odium hatred (see odium).


odium (n.)

c.1600, fact of being hated, from Latin odium ill-will, hatred, grudge, animosity; offense,
offensive conduct, related to odi I hate (infinitive odisse), from PIE root *od- to hate (cognates:
Armenian ateam I hate, Old Norse atall, Old English atol dire, horrid, loathsome). Meaning hatred,
detestation is from 1650s. Often in an extended form, such as odium theologicum hatred which is
proverbially characteristic of theological disputes (1670s).


odometer (n.)

1791, from French odom&egrave;tre (1724), from Greek hodos way (see cede) + -meter. First recorded
in writings of Thomas Jefferson.


odor (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French odour, from Old French odor smell, perfume, fragrance (12c., Modern French
odeur) and directly from Latin odor a smell, a scent (pleasant or disagreeable), from PIE *od- to
smell (cognates: Latin olere emit a smell, to smell of, with Sabine -l- for -d-; Greek ozein to
smell; Armenian hotim I smell; Lithuanian uodziu to smell).   Good or bad odor, in reference to
repute, estimation, is from 1835. Odor of sanctity (1756) is from French odeur de saintet&eacute;
(17c.) sweet or balsamic scent said to be exhaled by the bodies of eminent saints at death or upon
disinterment.


odoriferous (adj.)

early 15c., that has a scent, with -ous + Latin odorifer spreading odor, fragrant, literally bearing
odor, from odor (see odor) + ferre to bear, carry (see infer). Usually in a positive sense.


odorous (adj.)

fragrant, early 15c., from Medieval Latin odorosus, from Latin odorus having a smell, from odor (see
odor).


odour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of odor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


Odysseus

king of Ithaca, from Greek Odysseus (Latin Ulysses), of unknown origin, perhaps related to
odyssasthai to be grieved at, be angry at.


odyssey (n.)

c.1600, Odyssey, from Latin Odyssea, from Greek Odysseia, name of the Homeric epic poem of ancient
Greece, relating the ten-year wanderings of Odysseus, king of Ithaca, after the Trojan War.
Figurative sense of long, adventurous journey is first recorded 1889.


oe

found in Greek borrowings into Latin, representing Greek -oi-. Words with -oe- that came early into
English from Old French or Medieval Latin usually already had been levelled to -e- (economic, penal,
cemetery), but later borrowings directly from Latin or Greek tended to retain it at first (oestrus,
diarrhoea, amoeba) as did proper names (Oedipus, Phoebe, Phoenix) and purely technical terms.
British English tends to be more conservative with it than American, which has done away with it in
all but a few instances.    It also occurred in some native Latin words (foedus treaty, league,
foetere to stink, hence occasionally in English foetid, foederal, which was the form in the original
publications of the Federalist papers). In these it represents an ancient -oi- in Old Latin (for
example Old Latin oino, Classical Latin unus), which apparently passed through an -oe- form before
being leveled out but was preserved into Classical Latin in certain words, especially those
belonging to the realms of law (such as foedus) and religion, which, along with the vocabulary of
sailors, are the most conservative branches of any language in any time, through a need for
precision, immediate comprehension, demonstration of learning, or superstition. But in foetus it was
an unetymological spelling in Latin that was picked up in English and formed the predominant
spelling of fetus into the early 20c.


OED

initialism (acronym) of Oxford English Dictionary, attested from 1898, according to the Oxford
English Dictionary.


Oedipal (adj.)

1939, of or pertaining to desire felt for opposite-sex parent, from Oedipus complex (1910), coined
by Freud from Sophocles' play Oedipus Tyrannus, in which the title character, the Theban hero,
answers the Sphinx's riddle and unknowingly kills his father and marries his own mother; from Greek
Oedipus. The name was used figuratively in English from 1550s for one who is clever at guessing
riddles, which had adjectival form Oedipean (1620s).


Oedipus

son of Laius and Jocasta, the king and queen of Thebes, Greek, literally swollen-foot, from oidan to
swell (from PIE *oid-; see edema) + pous (genitive podos) foot (see foot (n.)). Oedipus complex
(1910) coined by Freud. In Latin, figurative references to Oedipus generally referred to solving
riddles. Oedipus effect (1957) is Karl Popper's term for the self-fulfilling nature of prophecies or
predictions.


oeillade (n.)

an oogling stare, an amorous gaze, 1590s, from French oeillide (15c.), from oeil eye (from Latin
oculus, see eye (n.)) + -ade.


oeno-

also oino-, word-forming element meaning pertaining to wine, from comb. form of Greek oinos wine
(see wine (n.)).


oenology (n.)

1827, from oeno- wine + -logy. Related: Oenological; oenologist.


oenophile (n.)

1930 (as an adjective 1900), probably from French oenophile, from Greek oinos wine (see wine (n.)) +
-phile.


oesophagus (n.)

alternative spelling of esophagus. See oe. Related: Oesophageal.


oestrogen (n.)

see estrogen.


oestrus (n.)

see estrus.


oeuvre (n.)

a work, especially a work of literature, also the body of work produced by an artist, 1875, from
French oeuvre work (12c.), from Latin opera (see opus).


of (prep.)

Old English of, unstressed form of &aelig;f (prep., adv.) away, away from, from Proto-Germanic *af
(cognates: Old Norse af, Old Frisian af, of of, Dutch af off, down, German ab off, from, down), from
PIE *apo- off, away (see apo-). Primary sense in Old English still was away, but shifted in Middle
English with use of the word to translate Latin de, ex, and especially Old French de, which had come
to be the substitute for the genitive case. Of shares with another word of the same length, as, the
evil glory of being accessory to more crimes against grammar than any other. [Fowler]    Also from
1837 a non-standard or dialectal representation of have as pronounced in unstressed positions (could
of, must of, etc.)


of-

assimilated form of ob- before -f-.


ofay (n.)

American English black slang, white person, 1925, of unknown origin. If, as is sometimes claimed, it
derives from an African word, none corresponding to it has been found. Perhaps the most plausible
speculation is Yoruba &oacute;f&eacute; to disappear (as from a powerful enemy), with the sense
transferred from the word of self-protection to the source of the threat. OED regards the main
alternative theory, that it is pig Latin for foe, to be no more than an implausible guess.


off (adv.)

by c.1200 as an emphatic form of Old English of (see of), employed in the adverbial use of that
word. The prepositional meaning away from and the adjectival sense of farther were not firmly fixed
in this variant until 17c., but once they were they left the original of with the transferred and
weakened senses of the word. Meaning not working is from 1861. Off the cuff (1938) is from the
notion of speaking from notes written in haste on one's shirt cuffs. Off the rack (adj.) is from
1963; off the record is from 1933; off the wall crazy is 1968, probably from the notion of a lunatic
bouncing off the walls or else in reference to carom shots in squash, handball, etc.


off (v.)

to kill, 1930, from off (adv.). Earlier verbal senses were to defer (1640s), to move off (1882).
Related: Offed.


off-and-on (adv.)

intermittently, 1530s; see off (adv.) + on. As an adjective from 1580s.


off-base (adv.)

unawares, 1936, American English, from off (adv.) + base (n.); a figurative extension from baseball
sense of not in the right position (1898), from notion of a baserunner being picked off while taking
a lead.


off-beat (adj.)

also offbeat, unusual, 1938, from off (adv.) + beat (n.). From earlier sense in reference to from
music rhythm (1927).


off-Broadway (adj.)

1953, experimental theater productions in New York City, from off (adv.) + Broadway. Even more
experimental off-off-Broadway is attested from 1967.


off-camera (adj.)

1944, from off (adv.) + camera.


off-chance (n.)

1861, from off (adv.) + chance (n.).


off-color (adj.)

1858, from off (adv.) + color (n.); originally used of gems; figurative extension to of questionable
taste, risqu&eacute; is American English, 1867.


off-colour (adj.)

see off-color.


off-duty (adj.)

1743, from off (adv.) + duty.


off-hand (adv.)

also offhand, 1690s, at once, straightway, from off (adv.) + hand (n.). Probably originally in
reference to shooting without a rest or support. Hence, of speech or action, unpremeditated (1719).
Related: Off-handed; off-handedly.


off-key (adj.)

1920, from off (adv.) + musical sense of key (n.1). Figurative sense is from 1943.


off-limits (adj.)

forbidden, by 1881, U.S. military academies jargon, from off (adv.) + limit (n.). Earlier (1857) it
was applied to cadets, etc., who were in violation of the limitations on their movement and
behavior.


off-line (adj.)

1926, of railroads; 1950, of computers; from off (adv.) + line (n.).


off-load (v.)

unload, 1850, from off (adv.) + load (v.). Originally S.African, on model of Dutch afladen.


off-peak (adj.)

1906, originally in reference to electrical systems, from off (adv.) + peak (n.).


off-putting

1570s, procrastinating, from off (adv.) + put (v.). Meaning creating an unfavorable impression is
first recorded 1894.


off-ramp (n.)

1954, from off (adv.) + ramp (n.).


off-road (adj.)

1949, from off (adv.) + road.


off-season (n.)

1848, a period when business is down, from off (adv.) + season (n.).


off-shore (adj.)

also off shore, 1720, from off + shore (n.). American English use for other than the U.S. is from
1948 and the Marshall Plan.


off-site (adj.)

1956, from off (adv.) + site (n.).


off-stage (adj.)

also offstage, 1915, from off (adv.) + stage (n.).


off-street (adj.)

1929, from off (adv.) + street.


off-white (n.)

white with a tinge of gray or yellow, 1927, from off (adv.) + white (n.).


offal (n.)

late 14c., waste parts, refuse, from off + fall (v.); the notion being that which falls off the
butcher's block; perhaps a translation of Middle Dutch afval.


offence (n.)

see offense.


offend (v.)

early 14c., to sin against (someone), from Old French ofendre transgress, antagonize, and directly
from Latin offendere to hit, strike against, figuratively to stumble, commit a fault, displease,
trespass against, provoke, from ob against (see ob-) + -fendere to strike (found only in compounds;
see defend).    Meaning to violate (a law), to make a moral false step, to commit a crime is from
late 14c. Meaning to wound the feelings is from late 14c. The literal sense of to attack, assail is
attested from late 14c.; this has been lost in Modern English, but is preserved in offense and
offensive. Related: Offended; offending.


offender (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from offend (v.). Earlier was offendour (early 15c.), from Anglo-French.


offense (n.)

late 14c., hurt, harm, injury, pain, from Old French ofense offense, insult, wrong (13c.) and
directly from Latin offensa an offense, injury, affront, crime, literally a striking against, noun
use of fem. past participle of offendere (see offend). Meaning action of attacking and feeling of
being hurt are both first recorded c.1400. Sense of breach of the law, transgression is first
recorded late 14c. Sporting sense first recorded 1894.


offensive (adj.)

attacking (1540s), insulting (1570s), both  from Middle French offensif (16c.) and directly from
Medieval Latin offensivus, from Latin offens-, past participle stem of offendere offend (see
offend). Related: Offensively; offensiveness.


offensive (n.)

condition of attacking, aggressive action, 1720, from offensive (adj.).


offer (v.)

Old English ofrian to offer, show, exhibit, sacrifice, bring an oblation, from Latin offerre to
present, bestow, bring before (in Late Latin to present in worship), from ob to (see ob-) + ferre to
bring, to carry (see infer). The Latin word was borrowed elsewhere in Germanic: Old Frisian offria,
Middle Dutch offeren, Old Norse offra. Non-religious sense reinforced by Old French offrir to offer,
from Latin offerre. Related: Offered; offering.


offer (n.)

early 15c., from Old French ofre act of offering; offer, proposition (12c.), verbal noun from offrir
(see offer (v.)). The native noun formation is offering.


offering (n.)

late Old English offrung the presenting of something to a deity; a thing so presented, verbal noun
from offrian (see offer (v.)). Of presentations to a person from mid-15c.; to the public from 1834.


offertory (n.)

the part of a Mass at which offerings are made, late 14c., from Medieval Latin offertorium place
where offerings are brought, from Vulgar Latin offertus, corresponding to Latin oblatus, past
participle of offerre (see offer (v.)). Meaning part of a religious service is first recorded 1530s;
sense of collection of money is from 1862.


office (n.)

mid-13c., a post, an employment to which certain duties are attached, from Anglo-French and Old
French ofice place or function; divine service (12c. in Old French) or directly from Latin officium
service, kindness, favor; official duty, function, business; ceremonial observance, (in
Ecclesiastical Latin, church service), literally work-doing, from ops (genitive opis) power, might,
abundance, means (related to opus work; see opus) + stem of facere do, perform (see factitious).
Meaning place for conducting business first recorded 1560s. Office hours attested from 1841.


officer (n.)

early 14c., one who holds an office (originally a high office), from Old French oficier officer,
official (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin officarius an officer, from Latin officium a service, a
duty (see office). The military sense is first recorded 1560s. Applied to petty officials of justice
from 16c.; U.S. use in reference to policemen is from 1880s.


official (n.)

early 14c., from Old French oficial law officer; bishop's representative (12c.) and directly from
Late Latin officialis attendant to a magistrate, public official, noun use of officialis (adj.) of
or belonging to duty, service, or office (see official (adj.)). Meaning person in charge of some
public work or duty first recorded 1550s.


official (adj.)

late 14c., performing a service; required by duty, from Old French oficial official; main, principal
(14c., Modern French officiel) or directly from Late Latin officialis of or belonging to duty,
service, or office, from Latin officium (see office). Meaning pertaining to an office or official
position is from c.1600.


officialese (n.)

language of officialdom, 1881, from official + -ese.


officiant (n.)

1844, from noun use of Medieval Latin officiantem (nominative officians), present participle of
officiare perform religious services, from Latin officium (see office).


officiate (v.)

1630s, to perform a duty, especially to perform the duty of a priest, from Medieval Latin
officiatum, from present participle of officiare perform religious services, from Latin officium
(see office). Related: Officiated; officiating.


officinal (adj.)

kept in stock by a druggist, c.1720, from French officinal, from Medieval Latin officinalis,
literally of or belonging in an officina, a storeroom (of a monastery) for medicines and
necessaries, in classical Latin workshop, manufactory, laboratory, contraction of *opificina, from
opifex (genitive opificis) worker, workman, maker, doer (from opus work; see opus) + -fex, -ficis
one who does, from facere do, perform (see factitious). Related: Officinally.


officious (adj.)

1560s, zealous, eager to serve, from Latin officiosus full of courtesy, dutiful, obliging, from
officium duty, service (see office). Sense of meddlesome, doing more than is asked or required had
emerged by 1600 (in officiously). An officious lie (1570s) is one told to do good to another person
(from Latin mendocium officiosum or French mensonge officieux). Related: Officiousness.


offing (n.)

in phrase in the offing, 1779, from nautical term offing the more distant part of the sea as seen
from the shore (1620s), from off (q.v.) + noun suffix -ing (1). Originally the phrase meant in the
distant future; modern sense of impending developed 1914.


offset (n.)

1550s, act of setting off (on a journey, etc.), from off + set (adj.). Meaning something 'set off'
against something else, a counterbalance is from 1769; the verb in this sense is from 1792. As a
type of printing, in which the inked impression is first made on a rubber roller then transferred to
paper, it is recorded from 1906.


offshoot (n.)

1670s, in figurative sense, of family trees; 1801 in general sense of a derivative; 1814 in literal
sense, in reference to plants. From off + shoot (n.).


offshoring (n.)

in the economic sense, as a form of outsourcing, attested by 1988, from offshore.


offside

also off-side, 1867, in various sporting senses, originally in English football; from off + side
(n.).


offspring (n.)

Old English ofspring children or young collectively, descendants, literally those who spring off
(someone,) from off + springan to spring (see spring (v.)). The figurative sense is first recorded
c.1600.


oft (adv.)

Old English oft often, frequently, from Proto-Germanic *ofta- frequently (cognates: Old Frisian
ofta, Danish ofte, Old High German ofto, German oft, Old Norse opt, Gothic ufta often), of unknown
origin. Archaic except in compounds (such as oft-told), and replaced by its derivative often.


often (adv.)

c.1300, extended form of oft, originally before vowels and h-, probably by influence of Middle
English selden seldom. In common use from 16c., replacing oft.


oftentimes

extended form of often, attested from early 15c.


ogee (n.)

S-shaped molding, 1670s, from French ogive diagonal rib of a vault, earlier augive, of unknown
origin. Related: ogival.


ogham (n.)

also ogam, ancient Irish form of writing, 1620s, from Irish ogham, from Old Irish ogam, said to be
from name of its inventor, Ogma Mac Eladan. But this appears to be from Celt. *Ogmios, perhaps from
PIE *og-mo- furrow, track, thus metaphorically incised line. This could be the source of the name of
the writing style, which looks like a series of cuts or incised lines, and the inventor's name thus
might be folk etymology. Related: Oghamic.


ogle (v.)

1680s, probably from Low German oeglen, frequentative of oegen look at, from oege eye, from Proto-
Germanic *augon-, from PIE *okw- to see (see eye (n.)). Related to Dutch ogen to look at, from oog
eye. Related: Ogled; ogling. The noun meaning an amorous glance is attested from 1711; earlier it
meant an eye (1700).


ogre (n.)

man-eating giant, 1713, hogre (in a translation of a French version of the Arabian Nights), from
French ogre, first used in Perrault's Contes, 1697, and perhaps formed by him from Italian orco
demon, monster, from Latin Orcus Hades, perhaps via an Italian dialect. In English, more literary
than colloquial. The conjecture that it is from Byzantine Ogur Hungarian or some other version of
that people's name (perhaps via confusion with the bloodthirsty Huns), lacks historical evidence.
Related: Ogrish; ogrishness.


Ogygian (adj.)

1843, of great antiquity or age, from Greek Ogygos, name of a mythical Attic or Boeotian king who
even in classical times was thought to have lived very long ago. Also sometimes with reference to a
famous flood said to have occurred in his day.


oh

1530s, interjection expressing various emotions, a common Indo-European word (Old French &ocirc;;,
oh; Latin o, oh; Greek o; Old Church Slavonic and Lithuanian o; Gothic, Dutch, German o; Old Irish
a; Sanskrit a), but not found in Old English, which translated Latin oh with la or eala.    The
present tendency is to restrict oh to places where it has a certain independence, &amp; prefer o
where it is proclitic or leans forward upon what follows .... [Fowler]    Often extended for
emphasis, as in Oh, baby, stock saying from c.1918; oh, boy (1910); oh, yeah (1924). Reduplicated
form oh-oh as an expression of alarm or dismay is attested from 1944. Oh-so so very (often sarcastic
or ironic) is from 1922. Oh yeah? really? Is that so? attested from 1930.


Ohio

originally used of the river, from Seneca (Iroquoian) ohi:yo', proper name from ohi:yo:h, literally
good river. The Seneca also used this of the Allegheny, which they considered the headwaters of the
Ohio. Related: Ohian (1819); Ohioan (1818).


ohm (n.)

unit of electrical resistance, 1867, in recognition of German physicist Georg S. Ohm (1789-1854),
who determined the law of the flow of electricity. Originally proposed as ohma (1861) as a unit of
voltage. Related: ohmage; ohmic; ohmeter.


oho (interj.)

14c., from oh + ho.


oi

1962, vulgar or working class pronunciation of hoy a call or shout to attract attention.


oil (n.)

late 12c., olive oil, from Anglo-French and Old North French olie, from Old French oile, uile oil
(12c., Modern French huile), from Latin oleum oil, olive oil (source of Spanish, Italian olio), from
Greek elaion olive tree, from elaia (see olive). Old English &aelig;le, Dutch olie, German &Ouml;l,
etc. all are from Latin. It meant olive oil exclusively till c.1300, when meaning began to be
extended to any fatty, greasy substance. Use for petroleum first recorded 1520s, but not common
until 19c. The artist's oils (1660s), short for oil-color (1530s), are paints made by grinding
pigment in oil.


oil (v.)

mid-15c., from oil (n.). Related: Oiled; oiling. An Old English verb in this sense was besmyrian.


oilcloth (n.)

1690s, cotton or a similar fabric waterproofed with oil, from oil (n.) + cloth. In reference to an
oil-treated canvas used as a cheap floor covering, 1796.


oily (adj.)

1520s, from oil (n.) +  -y (2). Figurative meaning smooth, unctuous is from 1590s. Related:
Oiliness.


oink (v.)

to make a noise like a pig, 1965, of imitative origin.


ointment (n.)

late 13c., from Old French oignement ointment, salve, unguent, from Vulgar Latin *unguimentum, from
Latin unguentum (see unguent). The first -t- emerged in Old French from oint, past participle of
verb oindre to anoint.


OJ

slang abbreviation of orange juice, attested by 1963.


Ojibwa

Algonquian people of North America living along the shores of Lake Superior, 1700, from Ojibwa
O'chepe'wag plaited shoes, in reference to their puckered moccasins, which were unlike those of
neighboring tribes. The older form in English is Chippewa, which is usually retained in U.S., but
since c.1850 Canadian English has taken up the more phonetically correct Ojibwa, and as a result the
two forms of the word have begun to be used in reference to slightly differing groups in the two
countries. Some modern Chippewas prefer anishinaabe, which means original people.


OK

1839, only survivor of a slang fad in Boston and New York c.1838-9 for abbreviations of common
phrases with deliberate, jocular misspellings (such as K.G. for no go, as if spelled know go; N.C.
for 'nuff ced; K.Y. for know yuse). In the case of O.K., the abbreviation is of oll korrect.
Probably further popularized by use as an election slogan by the O.K. Club, New York boosters of
Democratic president Martin Van Buren's 1840 re-election bid, in allusion to his nickname Old
Kinderhook, from his birth in the N.Y. village of Kinderhook. Van Buren lost, the word stuck, in
part because it filled a need for a quick way to write an approval on a document, bill, etc. Spelled
out as okeh, 1919, by Woodrow Wilson, on assumption that it represented Choctaw okeh it is so (a
theory which lacks historical documentation); this was ousted quickly by okay after the appearance
of that form in 1929. Greek immigrants to America who returned home early 20c. having picked up U.S.
speech mannerisms were known in Greece as okay-boys, among other things.    The noun is first
attested 1841; the verb 1888. Okey-doke is student slang first attested 1932.


okapi (n.)

short-necked giraffe of central Africa, 1900, from the animal's name in Mbuba (Congo). Reported by
English explorer Sir Harry Johnston (1858-1927).


okay

see OK.


oke

slang clipping of  OK, attested from 1929.


Okie

migrant agricultural worker, especially one driven from farms in Oklahoma during the Dust Bowl,
1938, short for U.S. state of Oklahoma.  Okie use' ta mean you was from Oklahoma. Now it means
you're a dirty son-of-a-bitch. [John Steinbeck, The Grapes of Wrath, 1939]


Okinawa

largest of the Ryuku island chain, Japanese, literally rope on the sea. Related: Okinawan.


Oklahoma

from Choctaw, literally red people, from okla nation, people + homma red. Coined by Choctaw scholar
Allen Wright, later principal chief of the Choctaw Nation, and first used in the Choctaw-Chickasaw
treaty of April 28, 1866. Organized as a U.S. territory 1889; admitted as a state 1907. Related:
Oklahoman.


okra (n.)

1670s, from a West African language (compare Akan nkruma okra).


Olaf

masc. proper name, from Old Norse An-leifr, literally ancestor's relic; first element related to Old
High German ano ancestor; second element related to Old English l&aelig;fan to leave (see leave
(v.)).


Olbers&#039; paradox

if stars are uniformly distributed through the sky, their number should counterbalance their
faintness and the night sky should be as bright as the day; named for German astronomer H.W.M.
Olbers (1758-1840), who propounded it in 1826.


old (adj.)

Old English ald (Anglian), eald (West Saxon) aged, antique, primeval; elder, experienced, from
Proto-Germanic *althas grown up, adult (cognates: Old Frisian ald, Gothic al&thorn;eis, Dutch oud,
German alt), originally a past participle stem of a verb meaning grow, nourish (compare Gothic alan
to grow up, Old Norse ala to nourish), from PIE root *al- to grow, nourish (cognates: Greek aldaino
make grow, strengthen, althein,  althainein to get well; Latin alere to feed, nourish, bring up,
increase, altus high, literally grown tall, almus nurturing, nourishing, alumnus fosterling, step-
child; Old Irish alim I nourish).    The usual PIE root is *sen- (see senior (adj.)). A few Indo-
European languages distinguish words for old (vs. young) from words for old (vs. new), and some have
separate words for aged persons as opposed to old things. Latin senex was used of aged living
things, mostly persons, while vetus (literally having many years) was used of inanimate things.
Greek geraios was used mostly of humans; Greek palaios was used mostly of things, of persons only in
a derogatory sense. Greek also had arkhaios, literally belonging to the beginning, which parallels
French ancien, used mostly with reference to things of former times.    Old English also had fyrn
ancient, related to Old English feor far, distant (see far, and compare Gothic fairneis, Old Norse
forn old, of old, of former times, Old High German firni old, experienced). The original Old English
vowel is preserved in Scots auld, also in alderman. The original comparative and superlative (elder,
eldest) are retained in particular uses.    First record of old-timer is from 1860. Expression old
as the hills first recorded 1819. The good old days dates from 1828. Of old of old times is from
late 14c. Old Glory for the American flag is first attested 1862. Old maid woman who remains single
well beyond the usual marrying age is from 1520s; the card game is attested by that name from 1844.
Old man man who has lived long is from c.1200; sense of husband, father, boss is from 1854, earlier
(1830) it was military slang for commanding officer; old lady wife, mother is attested from c.1775.
Old English is attested from 1701, originally as a type of font. Old boy originally was a former
pupil of one of the English public schools. Old Testament attested from mid-14c.


old hat (adj.)

out of date, first recorded 1911. As a noun phrase, however, it had different sense previously. The
Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue (1796) defines it as, a woman's privities, because
frequently felt.


Old World (adj.)

of or pertaining to Eurasia and Africa, as opposed to the Americas, 1877.


old-fashioned (adj.)

1590s, in an outdated style, from old + past participle of fashion (v.). As a type of cocktail,
attested from 1901, American English.   <b>Old Fashioned Tom Gin Cocktail</b> Mix same as Holland
Gin Old Fashioned Cocktail using Old Tom gin in place of Holland [George J. Kappeler, Modern
American Drinks, Akron, Ohio, 1900]


old-school (adj.)

in reference to a group of people noted for conservative views or principles on some professional or
political matter, 1749, from old + school (n.).


old-time (adj.)

1824, from old + time (n.). Related: Old-timey (1850).


olde

pseudo-archaic mock-antique variant of old, 1927.


olden (adj.)

early 15c., from old + -en (2).


oldie (n.)

an old person, 1874; an old tune or film, 1940, from old + -ie. Related: Oldies, which is attested
by 1961 as a radio format.


oldness (n.)

Old English ealdnysse; see old + -ness.


oldster (n.)

1818, colloquial, from old + -ster, on analogy of youngster.


ole

1922, from Spanish ol&eacute; bravo!


oleaginous (adj.)

1630s, from French ol&eacute;agineux (14c.), from Latin oleaginus of the olive, from olea olive,
alteration of oliva (see olive) by influence of oleum oil.


oleander (n.)

rose bay, a poisonous evergreen Mediterranean shrub, c.1400, from Medieval Latin oleander, probably
(by influence of Latin olea olive tree) from Late Latin lorandrum, from Latin rhododendron (see
rhododendron), itself altered by influence of Latin laurea laurel, on resemblance of leaves. This
round-about etymology is supported by the French word for it, laurier rose.


Oleg

masc. proper name; see Olga.


oleo (n.)

1884, commercial shortening of oleomargarine.


oleo-

word-forming element meaning oil or oleic, from Latin oleum (see oil (n.)).


oleomargarine (n.)

1873, butter substitute made from beef fat, from French ol&eacute;omargarine (1854), from
ol&eacute;ine (from Latin oleum oil + -ine, after glycerine) + margarine. It was regarded as a
chemical compound of olein and margarine.


olfaction (n.)

noun of action from Latin olfactus, past participle of olfacere to smell, get the smell of
(transitive), from olere to emit a smell (see odor) + facere to make (see factitious).


olfactory (adj.)

1650s, from Latin olfactorius, from olfact-, past participle stem of olfacere to get the smell of,
sniff, from olere emit a smell, give off a smell of (see odor) + facere make (see factitious).


Olga

fem. proper name, from Russian, probably from Norse Helga, literally holy, from Proto-Germanic
*haliaga, from PIE *kailo- (see health). The masc. form is Oleg.


oligarch (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French olygarche, oligarque, from Greek oligarkhes, related to oligarkhia (see
oligarchy).


oligarchic (adj.)

1640s, from Greek  oligarkhikos, from oligarkhos, related to oligarkhia (see oligarchy). Related:
Oligarchical.


oligarchy (n.)

1570s, from Middle French oligarchie (14c.), from Greek oligarkhia government by the few, from stem
of oligos few, small, little (see oligo-) + arkhein to rule (see archon).


oligo-

before vowels olig-, word-forming element meaning few, the few, from comb. form of Greek oligos few,
scanty, small, little, in plural, the few; of uncertain origin.


Oligocene (adj.)

1856, pertaining to the Tertiary period between the Eocene and the Miocene, coined in German (1854)
by Heinrich Ernst von Beyrich, from oligo- small, little, few + -cene. So called because few modern
fossils were found in Oligocene rocks.


oligopolistic (adj.)

1939, from oligo- little, small, in plural, few + -poly, from Greek polein to sell (see monopoly).


oligopoly (n.)

1887, from Medieval Latin oligopolium, from Greek oligos little, small, in plural, the few (see
oligo-) + polein to sell (see monopoly).


oligotrophy (n.)

1928, from oligo- small, little + -trophy food, nourishment. Related: Oligotrophic.


oliguria (n.)

1843, from oligo- small, little, + -uria, from Greek ouron urine (see urine).


olio (n.)

medley dish of Iberian origin, 1640s, from Spanish olla, Portuguese olha, both from Vulgar Latin
olla pot, jar. Sense transferred to any mixture or medley.


oliphant (n.)

obsolete form of elephant, c.1200; also used in Middle English with sense ivory horn.


olive (n.)

c.1200, olive tree, from Old French olive olive, olive tree (13c.) or directly from Latin oliva
olive, olive tree, from Greek elaia olive tree, olive, probably from the same Aegean language
(perhaps Cretan) as Armenian ewi oil. Applied to the fruit or berry of the tree in English from late
14c. As a color from 17c. Olive branch as a token of peace is from early 13c.


Oliver

masc. personal name, in medieval lore the name of one of Charlemagne's peers, friend of Roland, from
French Olivier, from Middle Low German Alfihar, literally elf-host, elf-army, from alf elf (see elf)
+ hari host, army (see harry (v.)). Cognate with Anglo-Saxon name &AElig;lfhere. Form influenced in
Old French by olivier olive tree.


Olivetti

brand of typewriters manufactured by company founded in 1908 near Turin, Italy; named for founder,
Camillo Olivetti.


Olivia

fem. proper name, from Italian Olivia, from Latin oliva olive (see olive).


Olmec

ancient people and civilization of Mexico, 1787, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) Olmecatl (plural Olmeca),
literally inhabitant of the rubber country.


Olympiad (n.)

late 14c., period of four years (between Olympic games), from Old French olimpiade period of four
years, from Latin Olympiadem, from Greek olympiados, genitive of Olympias (see Olympic). Used by
ancient Greeks as a unit in computing time. Revived in modern usage with revival of the games, 1896.


Olympian (adj.)

of or belonging to Olympus, c.1600; see Olympic + -ian. The noun meaning a great god of ancient
Greece is attested from 1843, from Late Latin Olympianus, from Greek Olympios pertaining to Olympus;
sense of one who competes in the (modern) Olympic Games is from 1976.


Olympic (adj.)

c.1600, of or in reference to Mount Olympos, also to Olympia (khora), town or district in Elis in
ancient Greece, where athletic contests in honor of Olympian Zeus were held 776 B.C.E. and every
four years thereafter; from Greek Olympikos, from Olympos, of unknown origin. The modern Olympic
Games are a revival, begun in 1896. Not the same place as Mount Olympus, abode of the gods, which
was in Thessaly.


Olympus

high mountain in Thessaly, abode of the gods, from Greek Olympos, of unknown origin.  The name was
given to several mountains, each seemingly the highest in its district.


om

mystical word in Hinduism, Buddhism; an utterance of assent, 1788.


Omaha

Siouan Indians of northeastern Nebraska, 1804, perhaps from Omaha umaha, perhaps literally upstream
(people), against the flow.


Oman

coastal nation in Arabia, supposedly named for its founder. Recorded from Roman times (Omana, in
Pliny). Related: Omani.


ombre (n.)

card game popular early 18c., from French hombre, from Spanish hombre man (see hombre). So called
from an expression (translatable as I am the man) spoken in the course of the game.


ombudsman (n.)

1959, from Swedish ombudsman, literally commission man (specifically in reference to the office of
justitieombudsmannen, which hears and investigates complaints by individuals against abuses of the
state); cognate with Old Norse umbo&eth;sma&eth;r, from umbo&eth; commission (from um- around, see
ambi-, + bo&eth; command, see bid (v.)) + ma&eth;r man (see man (n.)).


omega

c.1400, from Medieval Greek omega, from classical Greek o mega big 'o'  (in contrast to o micron
little 'o' ); so called because the vowel was long in ancient Greek. From mega (see mega-). The
final letter of the Greek alphabet, hence used figuratively for the last, final of anything (as in
Rev. i:8),


omelet (n.)

1610s, from French omelette (16c.), metathesis of alemette (14c.), from alemele omelet, literally
blade (of a knife or sword), probably a misdivision of la lemelle (mistaken as l'alemelle), from
Latin lamella thin, small plate, diminutive of lamina plate, layer (see laminate). The food so
called from its flat shape. The proverb you can't make an omelet without breaking eggs (1859)
translates French On ne saurait faire une omelette sans casser des oeufs. Middle English had hanonei
fried onions mixed with scrambled eggs (mid-15c.).


omen (n.)

1580s, from Latin omen foreboding, from Old Latin osmen, of unknown origin; perhaps connected with
the root of audire to hear [OED] or from PIE *o- to believe, hold as true (cognates: Greek oiomai I
suppose, think, believe).


omer (n.)

Hebrew measure of capacity (a little over 5 pints), from Hebrew 'omer.


omerta (n.)

1909, from dialectal form of Italian umilta humility, in reference to the code of submission of
individuals to the group interest, from Latin humilitas (see humility).


omg

Internet chat abbreviation of oh my God, by 1994. (Earlier in computerese it meant Object Management
Group, 1989, a consortium which helped pave the way for the modern Internet.)


omicron

15th letter of the Greek alphabet, literally small 'o,'  from Greek (s)mikros small, from PIE
*smik-. Because the vowel was short in ancient Greek. Compare Omega.


ominous (adj.)

1580s, from Latin ominosus full of foreboding, from omen (genitive ominis) foreboding (see omen).
Related: Ominousness.


ominously (adv.)

1590s, from ominous + -ly (2). In earliest use, of good omen, auspicious; meaning of evil omen first
attested 1640s, in Milton.


omission (n.)

late 14c., from Latin omissionem (nominative omissio) an omitting, noun of action from past
participle stem of omittere (see omit). Related: Omissible.


omit (v.)

early 15c., from Latin omittere let go, let fall, figuratively lay aside, disregard, from
assimilated form of ob (here perhaps intensive) + mittere let go, send (see mission). Related:
Omitted; omitting.


omittance (n.)

omission, c.1600, perhaps coined by Shakespeare, who used it in wordplay (Omittance is no
quittance), from omit + -ance.


omni-

word-forming element meaning all, from Latin omni-, combining form of omnis all, every, the whole,
of every kind, of unknown origin, perhaps literally abundant, from *op-ni-, from PIE root *op- (1)
to work, produce in abundance (see opus).


omnibus (n.)

1829, four-wheeled public vehicle with seats for passengers, from French (voiture) omnibus
(carriage) for all, common (conveyance), from Latin omnibus for all, dative plural of omnis all (see
omni-). Introduced by Jacques Lafitte in Paris in 1819 or '20, in London from 1829. In reference to
legislation, the word is recorded from 1842. Meaning man or boy who assists a waiter at a restaurant
is attested from 1888 (compare busboy). As an adjective in English from 1842.


omnidirectional (adj.)

1927, from omni- + directional (see direction).


omnifarious (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin omnifarius of all sorts, from Latin omnifariam on all places or parts, from
omnis all (see omni-) + -fariam parts (compare multifarious). Related: Omnifariously;
omnifariousness.


omnipotence (n.)

mid-15c., omnipotens, from Middle French omnipotence, from Late Latin omnipotentia almighty power,
from Latin omnipotentem omnipotent (see omnipotent). Related: Omnipotency (late 15c.).


omnipotent (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French omnipotent almighty, all-powerful (11c.) or directly from Latin
omnipotentem (nominative omnipotens) all-powerful, almighty, from omnis all (see omni-) + potens
(genitive potentis) powerful (see potent). Strictly only of God or a deity; general sense of having
absolute power or authority is attested from 1590s.


omnipresence (n.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin omnipraesentia, from omnipraesens, from Latin omnis all, every (see
omni-) + praesens present (see present (adj.)).


omnipresent (adj.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin omnipraesentem (nominative omnipraesens); see omnipresence. Related:
Omnipresently.


omniscience (n.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin omniscientia all-knowledge, from Latin omnis all (see omni-) + scientia
knowledge (see science).


omniscient (adj.)

c.1600, from Modern Latin omniscientem (nominative omnisciens), back-formation from Medieval Latin
omniscientia (see omniscience). Related: Omnisciently.


omnisexual (adj.)

by 1959, from omni- + sexual. Earliest application is to Walt Whitman.


omnium gatherum

1520s, miscellaneous collection, humorous coinage from Latin omnium of all (genitive plural of
omnis; see omni-) + Latinized form of English gather.


omnivore (n.)

1890, formed from omni- on model of carnivore (see omnivorous).


omnivorous (adj.)

1650s, from Latin omnivorus all-devouring, from omnis all (see omni-) + vorare devour, swallow (see
voracity). Related: Omnivorously; omnivorousness.


omo-

before vowels om-, word-forming element meaning raw, unripe, from Greek omo-, comb. form of omos
raw, from PIE root *om- raw, sharp-tasting (cognates: Sanskrit amah raw, uncooked, unripe, Old Irish
om, Welsh of).


omophagous (adj.)

1857, from omophagia (1706), from Greek, literally eating raw flesh, from omos raw (see omo-) +
phagein to eat (see -phagous).


omphalo-

before vowels omphal-, word-forming element meaning navel, from Greek omphalos (see omphalos).


omphalos

also omphalus, sacred stone, 1850, from Greek omphalos, literally navel, later also hub (as the
central point), from PIE *ombh-alo-, from root *nobh-/*ombh- navel (see navel). The name of the
rounded stone in the shrine at Delphi, regarded by the ancients as the center of the world. Related:
Omphalic.


omphaloskepsis (n.)

1925, from omphalo- + Greek -skepsis, from skeptesthai to reflect, look, view (see scope (n.1)).
Also omphaloscopy (1931), and used in the sense of navel-gazer were omphalopsychic (1892),
omphalopsychite (1882).


on (prep.)

Old English on, unstressed variant of an in, on, into, from Proto-Germanic *ana on (cognates: Dutch
aan, German an, Gothic ana on, upon), from PIE root *an- on (cognates: Avestan ana on, Greek ana on,
upon, Latin an-, Old Church Slavonic na, Lithuanian nuo down from). Also used in Old English in many
places where we would now use in. From 16c.-18c. (and still in northern England dialect) often
reduced to o'. Phrase on to aware is from 1877. On time is from 1890.


on-looker (n.)

spectator, c.1600, from on + agent noun from look (v.).


on-site (adj.)

also onsite, 1959, from on + site. Originally in reference to Cold War military inspections.


onager (n.)

Asiatic wild ass, mid-14c., from Latin onager, from Greek onagros, from onos ass (related to Latin
asinus, but the ultimate source is unknown) + agrios wild, literally living in the fields, from
agros field (see acre).


onanism (n.)

masturbation, also coitus interruptus, 1727, from Onan, son of Judah (Gen. xxxviii:9), who spilled
his seed on the ground rather than impregnate his dead brother's wife: And Onan knew that the seed
should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled it
on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother. The moral of this verse was redirected
by those who sought to suppress masturbation.


onboard (adj.)

1966 as one word, from on + board (n.2).


once (adv.)

c.1200, anes, from ane one (see one ) + adverbial genitive. Replaced Old English &aelig;ne. Spelling
changed as pronunciation shifted from two syllables to one after c.1300. Pronunciation change to
wuns parallels that of one. As an emphatic, meaning once and for all, it is attested from c.1300,
but this now is regarded as a Pennsylvania German dialect formation. Meaning in a past time (but not
necessarily just one time) is from mid-13c.   Once upon a time as the beginning of a story is
recorded from 1590s. At once originally (early 13c.) meant simultaneously, later in one company
(c.1300), and preserved the sense of one in the word; the phrase typically appeared as one word,
atones; the modern meaning immediately is attested from 1530s.


once-over (n.)

inspection, 1913, from once + over.


onco-

word-forming element meaning bulk, mass, especially in medical use, tumor, from Latinized form of
Greek onko-, comb. form of onkos bulk, size, mass, body.


oncogene (n.)

1969, from onco- + -gene, from root of Greek gignere (perf. genui) beget, from PIE *gen- produce
(see genus). Related: Oncogenesis (1832).


oncology (n.)

1857, coined in English from onco- tumor + -logy science or study of. Related: Oncologist;
oncological.


oncoming (adj.)

1844, from on + coming, present participle of come (v.).


one (n.)

c.1200, from Old English an (adjective, pronoun, noun) one, from Proto-Germanic *ainaz (cognates:
Old Norse einn, Danish een, Old Frisian an, Dutch een, German ein, Gothic ains), from PIE *oi-no-
one, unique (cognates: Greek oinos ace (on dice); Latin unus one; Old Persian aivam; Old Church
Slavonic -inu, ino-; Lithuanian vienas; Old Irish oin; Breton un one).    Originally pronounced as
it still is in only, and in dialectal good 'un, young 'un, etc.; the now-standard pronunciation wun
began c.14c. in southwest and west England (Tyndale, a Gloucester man, spells it won in his Bible
translation), and it began to be general 18c. Use as indefinite pronoun influenced by unrelated
French on and Latin homo.   One and only sweetheart is from 1906. One of those things unpredictable
occurrence is from 1934. Slang one-arm bandit a type of slot machine is recorded by 1938. One-night
stand is 1880 in performance sense; 1963 in sexual sense. One of the boys ordinary amiable fellow is
from 1893. One-track mind is from 1927. Drinking expression one for the road is from 1950 (as a song
title).


one-horse (adj.)

small-scale, petty 1853, American English, colloquial, in reference to towns so small they only had
one horse.


one-liner (n.)

short joke, witty remark, 1969, from one + line.


one-of-a-kind

adjectival phrase attested from 1961.


one-off (n.)

single example of a manufactured product, 1934, from one + off. Later given figurative extension.


one-shot (adj.)

1907, achieved in a single attempt (original reference is to golf), from one + shot (n.). Meaning
happening or of use only once is from 1937.


one-sided (adj.)

1833, dealing with one side of a question or dispute, from one + side (n.). Related: One-sidedly;
one-sidedness.


one-upsmanship (n.)

1952, from noun phrase one up scoring one more point than one's opponent (1919).


one-way (adj.)

1906, in reference to travel tickets; 1914 in reference to streets; 1940 in reference to windows,
mirrors, etc.; from one + way (n.).


Oneida

Iroquois tribe of upper N.Y. state, who later moved in part to Wisconsin, 1666, named for its
principal settlement, from Oneida onenyote', literally erected stone, containing -neny- stone and
-ot- to stand.


oneiric (adj.)

1859, from Greek oneiros a dream (see oneiro-) + -ic.


oneiro-

before vowels oneir-, word-forming element meaning dream, from Greek oneiros a dream, from PIE
*oner- dream.


oneirocritic (n.)

a judge or interpreter of dreams, 1650s from Greek oneirokritikos pertaining to the interpretation
of dreams, from oneirokrites interpreter of dreams, from oneiros a dream (see oneiro-) + krites
discerner, judge (see critic).


oneirocritical (adj.)

1580s, from oneiro- + critic + -al (1).


oneiromancy (n.)

1650s; see oneiro- + -mancy. Greek had oneiromantis an interpreter of dreams. Related: oneiromantic.


oneness (n.)

1590s, from one + -ness. A re-formation of Middle English onnesse, which vanished by 13c.


onerous (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French onereus, honereus (14c., Modern French on&eacute;reux) and directly from
Latin onerosus, from onus (genitive oneris) burden (see onus).


oneself

1540s, one's self. Hyphenated 18c.; written as one word from c.1827, on model of himself, itself,
etc.


ongoing (adj.)

also on-going, 1877, from on + going (see go).


onion (n.)

early 12c., from Anglo-French union, Old French oignon onion (formerly also oingnon), and directly
from Latin unionem (nominative unio), colloquial rustic Roman for a kind of onion, also pearl (via
notion of a string of onions), literally one, unity; sense connection is the successive layers of an
onion, in contrast with garlic or cloves.    Old English had ynne (in ynne-leac), from the same
Latin source, which also produced Irish inniun, Welsh wynwyn and similar words in Germanic. In
Dutch, the ending in -n was mistaken for a plural inflection and new singular ui formed. The usual
Indo-European name is represented by Greek kromion, Irish crem, Welsh craf, Old English hramsa,
Lithuanian kremuse.    The usual Latin word was cepa, a loan from an unknown language; it is the
source of Old French cive, Old English cipe, and, via Late Latin diminutive cepulla, Italian
cipolla, Spanish cebolla, Polish cebula. German Zwiebel also is from this source, but altered by
folk etymology in Old High German (zwibolla) from words for two and ball. Onion ring is attested
from 1952.   Onion dome attested from 1956; onion grass from 1883; onion skin as a type of paper
from 1892. Onions, the surname, is attested from mid-12c. (Ennian), from Old Welsh Enniaun,
ultimately from Latin Annianus, which was associated with Welsh einion anvil.


oniony (adj.)

1838, from onion + -y (2). Related: Onioniness.


online (adj.)

in reference to computers, directly connected to a peripheral device, 1950 (originally as on-line).


onlooker (n.)

c.1600, from on + agent noun from look (v.).


only (adj.)

Old English &aelig;nlic, anlic only, unique, solitary, literally one-like, from an one (see one) +
-lic -like (see -ly (1)). Use as an adverb and conjunction developed in Middle English. Distinction
of only and alone (now usually in reference to emotional states) is unusual; in many languages the
same word serves for both. German also has a distinction in allein/einzig. Phrase only-begotten
(mid-15c.) is biblical, translating Latin unigenitus, Greek monogenes. The Old English form was
ancenned.


onnagata (n.)

in Kabuki and similar drama, a man who plays female roles, 1901, from Japanese, from onna woman +
kata figure.


onomastic (adj.)

1716, from French onomastique (17c.), from Greek onomastikos of or belonging to naming, from
onomastos named, verbal adjective of onomazein to name, from onoma name (see name).


onomastics (n.)

scientific study of names and naming, 1936, from onomastic; also see -ics.


onomatopoeia (n.)

1570s, from Late Latin onomatopoeia, from Greek onomatopoiia the making of a name or word (in
imitation of a sound associated with the thing being named), from onomatopoios, from onoma (genitive
onomatos) word, name (see name (n.)) + a derivative of poiein compose, make (see poet). Related:
Onomatopoeic; onomatopoeial.


onomatopoeic (adj.)

1860, from French onomatopo&#233;ique or else from onomatopoeia + -ic.


Onondaga

tribe in the Iroquois Confederacy, 1684, named for its principal settlement, from Onondaga onontake,
literally on the hill.


onset (n.)

1530s, attack, assault, from on + set (n.); compare verbal phrase to set (something) on (someone).
Weaker sense of beginning, start first recorded 1560s. Figurative use in reference to a calamity,
disease, etc. is from 1580s.


onslaught (n.)

1620s, anslaight, somehow from or on analogy of Dutch aanslag attack, from Middle Dutch aenslach,
from aen on (see on) + slach blow, related to slaen slay. Spelling influenced by obsolete (since
c.1400) English slaught (n.) slaughter, from Old English sleaht (see slaughter (n.)). No record of
its use in 18c.; apparently revived by Scott.


Ontario

from Mohawk (Iroquoian) ontari:io beautiful lake or great lake, from /-qtar-/ lake, river. Related:
Ontarian.


ontic (adj.)

1949, from onto- + -ic.


onto (prep.)

1580s, as on to, from on + to. Appeared much later than parallel into. As a closed compound (on
analogy of into), first recorded 1715.


onto-

word-forming element meaning a being, individual; being, existence, from Greek onto-, from stem of
on (genitive ontos) being, neuter present participle of einai to be (see essence).


ontogeny (n.)

development of an individual, 1872, from onto- + -geny. Related: Ontogenic; ontogenesis.


ontological (adj.)

1782, from ontology + -ical. Related: Ontologically


ontology (n.)

metaphysical science or study of being, 1660s (Gideon Harvey), from Modern Latin ontologia (c.1600),
from onto- + -logy.


onus (n.)

1640s, from Latin onus load, burden, figuratively tax, expense; trouble, difficulty, from PIE *en-
es- burden (source of Sanskrit anah cart, wagon). Hence legal Latin onus probandi (1722), literally
burden of proving.


onward (adv.)

late 14c., from on + -ward. The form onwards, with adverbial genitive -s-, is attested from c.1600.


onwards (adv.)

see onward.


onymous (adj.)

1775, coined to provide an opposite to anonymous. Related: Onymously.


onyx (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French oniche onyx (12c.), and directly from Latin onyx (genitive onychis), from
Greek onyx onyx-stone, originally claw, fingernail (see nail (n.)). So called because the mineral's
color sometimes resembles that of a fingernail, pink with white streaks.


oo-

word-forming element meaning egg, eggs, from Greek oon egg, cognate with Latin ovum, Old Norse egg
(see egg (n.)).


oocyte (n.)

1895, from oo- + -cyte (see cyto-).


oodles (n.)

lots, 1869, American English (originally in a Texas context), perhaps from the caboodle in kit and
caboodle (see kit).


oogenesis (n.)

formation of the ovum, 1892, from oo- + genesis.


ooh

exclamation of pain, surprise, wonder, etc., 1916. Combined with aah from 1953. Ooh-la-la,
exclamation of surprise or appreciation, is attested 1924, from French and suggestive of the
supposed raciness of the French.


oolite (n.)

rock consisting of fine grains of carbonate of lime, 1785, from Modern Latin oolites, from oo-,
comb. form of Greek oon egg (cognate with Old English &aelig;g, see egg (n.)) + lithos stone (see
litho-). So called because the rock resembles the roe of fish.


oology (n.)

1823, from oo- + -logy. Related: Oological.


oolong (n.)

dark variety of Chinese tea, 1852, from Chinese wu-lung, literally black dragon.


oom-pah

1877, imitative of bass brass instruments.


oomph

sexual attractiveness, 1937, suggestive visceral physical sound. Ann Sheridan
(1915â&euro;&ldquo;1967) was the original Hollywood oomph girl (1939).


oops

a natural exclamation [OED] of surprise at doing something awkward, but attested only from 1933
(compare whoops).


Oort cloud (n.)

in reference to the hypothetical cloud of small objects beyond Pluto that become comets, proposed
1949 by Dutch astronomer Jan Hendrick Oort (1900-1992), and named for him by 1968.


ooze (v.)

late 14c., wosen, verbal derivative of Old English noun wos juice, sap, from Proto-Germanic *wosan
(source of Middle Low German wose scum), from same source as ooze (n.). Modern spelling from late
1500s. The Old English verb was wesan. Related: Oozed; oozing.


ooze (n.)

soft mud, Old English wase soft mud, mire, from Proto-Germanic *waison (cognates: Old Saxon waso wet
ground, mire, Old Norse veisa pond of stagnant water), from PIE *wes- (2) wet. Modern spelling is
mid-1500s.


oozy (adj.)

Old English wosig juicy, moist (see ooze (v.)). Related: Ooziness.


op-

assimilated form of ob- before -p-.


op-ed (adj.)

1970, in reference to the page of a newspaper opposite the editorial page, usually devoted to
personal opinion columns. The thing itself said to have been pioneered by the New York World.


op. cit.

abbreviation of Latin opus citatum, literally the work quoted.


opacity (n.)

1550s, darkness of meaning, obscurity, from French opacit&eacute;, from Latin opacitatem (nominative
opacitas) shade, shadiness, from opacus shaded, dark, opaque (see opaque). The literal sense
condition of being impervious to light first recorded 1630s.


opafication (n.)

1852, from French opafication; see opacity + -fication.


opal (n.)

1590s, from Middle French opalle (16c.), from Latin opalus (Pliny), supposedly from Greek opallios,
possibly ultimately from Sanskrit upala-s gem, precious stone. Used in Middle English in Latin form
(late 14c.).


opalescence (n.)

1792; see opalescent + -ence.


opalescent (adj.)

1813, from opal + -escent.


opaque (adj.)

early 15c., opake, from Latin opacus shaded, in the shade, shady, dark, darkened, obscure, of
unknown origin. Spelling influenced after c.1650 by French opaque (c.1500), from the Latin.
Figurative use from 1761. Related: Opaquely; opaqueness.


ope (adj.)

short for open (adj.), early 13c. not closed; not hidden; originally as awake is from awaken, etc.
As a verb from mid-15c. Middle English had ope-head bare-headed (c.1300).


OPEC

initialism (acronym) for Organization of Petroleum-Exporting Countries, founded 1960.


open (adj.)

Old English open not closed down, raised up (of gates, eyelids, etc.), also exposed, evident, well-
known, public, often in a bad sense, notorious, shameless; from Proto-Germanic *upana, literally put
or set up (cognates: Old Norse opinn, Swedish &ouml;ppen, Danish aaben, Old Saxon opan, Old Frisian
epen, Old High German offan, German offen open), from PIE *upo up from under, over (cognates: Latin
sub, Greek hypo; see sub-). Related to up, and throughout Germanic the word has the appearance of a
past participle of *up (v.), but no such verb has been found. The source of words for open in many
Indo-European languages seems to be an opposite of the word for closed, shut (such as Gothic
uslukan).    Of physical spaces, unobstructed, unencumbered, c.1200; of rooms with unclosed
entrances, c.1300; of wounds, late 14c. Transferred sense of frank, candid is attested from early
14c. Of shops, etc., available for business, it dates from 1824. Open-handed liberal, generous is
from c.1600. Open door in reference to international trading policies is attested from 1856. Open
season is first recorded 1896, of game; and figuratively 1914 of persons. Open book in the
figurative sense of person easy to understand is from 1853. Open house hospitality for all visitors
is first recorded 1824. Open-and-shut simple, straightforward first recorded 1841 in New Orleans.
Open marriage, one in which the partners sleep with whomever they please, is from 1972. Open road
(1817, American English) originally meant a public one; romanticized sense of traveling as an
expression of personal freedom first recorded 1856, in Whitman.


open (n.)

early 13c., an aperture or opening, from open (adj.). Meaning public knowledge (especially in out in
the open) is from 1942, but compare Middle English in open (late 14c.) manifestly, publicly. The
sense of an open competition is from 1926, originally in a golf context.


open (v.)

Old English openian to open, open up, disclose, reveal, also intransitive, become manifest, be open
to or exposed to, from Proto-Germanic *opanojan (cognates: Old Saxon opanon, Old Norse opna to open,
Middle Dutch, Dutch openen, Old High German offanon, German &#246;ffnen), from the source of open
(adj.), but etymology suggests the adjective is older. Open up cease to be secretive is from 1921.
Related: Opened; opening.


open-ended (adj.)

1825, from open (adj.) + end (n.).


open-minded (adj.)

also openminded, open minded, 1828, first recorded in Carlyle; from open (adj.) + minded. Figurative
use of open (adj.) with reference to hearts, hands, etc. is from early 15c. Related: Open-mindedly;
open-mindedness.


opener (n.)

one who opens, Old English openere, agent noun from open (v.).


opening (n.)

Old English openung act of opening (a door, mouth, etc.), disclosure, manifestation, verbal noun
from present participle of open (v.). Meaning vacant space, hole, aperture, doorway is attested from
c.1200. Meaning act of opening (a place, to the public) is from late 14c. Sense of action of
beginning (something) is from 1712; meaning first performance of a play is 1855; start of an art
exhibit is from 1905. Sense of opportunity, chance is from 1793.


openly (adv.)

Old English openlice manifestly, plainly, clearly, unreservedly; see open (adj.) + -ly (2).


openness (n.)

Old English opennes; see open (adj.) + -ness.


opera (n.)

a drama sung [Klein], 1640s, from Italian opera, literally a work, labor, composition, from Latin
opera work, effort (Latin plural regarded as feminine singular), secondary (abstract) noun from
operari to work, from opus (genitive operis) a work (see opus). Defined in Elson's Music Dictionary
as, a form of musical composition evolved shortly before 1600, by some enthusiastic Florentine
amateurs who sought to bring back the Greek plays to the modern stage. No good opera plot can be
sensible. ... People do not sing when they are feeling sensible. [W.H. Auden, 1961]As a branch of
dramatic art, it is attested from 1759. First record of opera glass small binoculars for use at the
theater is from 1738. Soap opera is first recorded 1939, as a disparaging reference to daytime radio
dramas sponsored by soap manufacturers.


operable (adj.)

1640s, practicable, from operate + -able, or else from Late Latin operabilis. Surgical sense,
capable of treatment by operation, recorded by 1904. Related: Operability.


operand (n.)

1886, from Latin operandum, neuter gerundive of operari (see operation).


operant (adj.)

that works, early 15c., from Latin operantem (nominative operans), present participle of operari to
work (see operation). Psychological sense of involving behavior modification coined 1937 by U.S.
psychologist B.F. Skinner (as in operant conditioning, 1938, Skinner).


operate (v.)

c.1600, to be in effect, back-formation from operation, or else from Latin operatus, past participle
of operari to work, labor, toil, take pains (in Late Latin to have effect, be active, cause).
Surgical sense is first attested 1799. Meaning to work machinery is from 1864 in American English.
Related: Operated; operating. Operating system in the computer sense is from 1961.


operatic (adj.)

1749, from opera on model of dramatic.


operation (n.)

late 14c., action, performance, work, also the performance of some science or art, from Old French
operacion operation, working, proceedings, from Latin operationem (nominative operatio) a working,
operation, from past participle stem of operari to work, labor (in Late Latin to have effect, be
active, cause), from opera work, effort, related to opus (genitive operis) a work (see opus). The
surgical sense is first attested 1590s. Military sense of series of movements and acts is from 1749.


operational (adj.)

1922, pertaining to operation, from operation + -al (1). Meaning in a state of functionality is from
1944.


operationalization (n.)

1966, noun of action from operationalize.


operationalize (v.)

1954, from operational + -ize. Related: Operationalized; operationalizing.


operative (adj.)

producing the intended effect, early 15c., from Old French operatif (14c.) or directly from Late
Latin operativus creative, formative, from operat-, past participle stem of operari (see operation).
Weakened sense of significant, important is from 1955.


operative (n.)

worker, operator, 1809, from operative (adj.); sense of secret agent, spy is first attested 1930,
probably from its use by the Pinkerton Detective Agency as a title for their private detectives
(1905).


operator (n.)

1590s, one who performs mechanical or surgical operations, agent noun from operate (v.) or from Late
Latin operator. Meaning one who carries on business shrewdly is from 1828. Specific sense of one who
works a telephone switchboard (1884) grew out of earlier meaning one who works a telegraph (1847).


operculum (n.)

1713, from Latin operculum cover, lid, from operire to cover, close (see weir), with instrumental
suffix *-tlom. Related: Opercular.


operetta (n.)

light opera, 1775, from Italian operetta, diminutive of opera.


operose (adj.)

involving much labor, 1670s, from Latin operosus taking great pains, laborious, active, industrious,
from opus (genitive operis) work (see opus). Related: Operosity.


Ophelia

fem. proper name, from Greek opheleia help, aid, from ophelein to help, aid, assist, ophelos
advantage, help, from PIE root *obhel- to avail (cognates: Greek ophelos advantage, Armenian avelum
increase, abound).


ophidian (adj.)

pertaining to snakes, 1883, from Greek ophidion, diminutive of ophis serpent (see ophio-). Hence,
ophiolatry serpent-worship (1862), and the 2c. sect of the Ophit&aelig;, who revered the serpent as
the symbol of divine wisdom.


ophidiophobia (n.)

1914, excessive fear of snakes or reptiles, from ophidio- apparently extracted from Modern Latin
ophidia, a word coined arbitrarily (to provide an -ia form to serve as an order name in taxonomy)
from Greek ophis serpent (see ophio-) + -phobia.


ophio-

before vowels ophi-, word-forming element meaning a snake, serpent, from Greek ophio-, comb. form of
ophis serpent, a snake, from PIE *ogwhi-.


ophiomancy (n.)

ancient art of divination by the movements of snakes, 1680s, from ophio- + -mancy. Related:
Ophiomantic; ophiomancer.


Ophir

name of a place mentioned in Old Testament as a source for fine gold; location still unknown. Hence
Ophir-gold (1610s).


Ophiuchus

constellation (representing Aesculapius), 1650s, from Latin, from Greek ophioukhos, literally
holding a serpent, from ophis serpent (see ophio-) + stem of ekhein to hold, have, keep (see scheme
(n.)). The constellation is equatorial, and Milton's Ophiuchus huge in th' Arctick Sky (Paradise
Lost) is a rare lapse for a poet who generally knew his astronomy.


ophthalmia (n.)

inflammation of the eye, conjunctivitis, late 14c., from Medieval Latin obtalmia, Old French
obtalmie, from Late Latin ophthalmia, or directly from Greek ophthalmia, from ophthalmos (see
ophthalmo-) + -ia.


ophthalmic (adj.)

pertaining to the eye, early 18c., from Latin ophthalmicus, from Greek ophthalmikos pertaining to
the eye, from ophthalmos eye (see ophthalmo-).


ophthalmo-

before vowels ophthalm-, word-forming element meaning eye, mostly in plural, the eyes, from Greek
ophthalmo-, comb. form of ophthalmos eye, originally the seeing, of uncertain origin. Perhaps from
ops eye (see optic) + a form related to thalamos inner room, chamber (see thalamus), giving the
whole a sense of eye and eye socket.


ophthalmologist (n.)

1834; see ophthalmology + -ist.


ophthalmology (n.)

1842; see ophthalmo- + -logy. Related: Ophthalmological.


ophthalmoscope (n.)

1857 in English; coined 1852 by  German physician and physicist Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von
Helmholtz (1821â&euro;&ldquo;1894) from ophthalmo- + -scope.


opiate (n.)

medicine containing opium, early 15c., from Medieval Latin opiatus, from Latin opium (see opium).
Figurative sense of anything that dulls the feelings is from 1640s. From 1540s in English as an
adjective, made with or containing opium.


opine (v.)

express an opinion, mid-15c., from Middle French opiner (15c.) and directly from Latin opinari have
an opinion, be of opinion, suppose, conjecture, think, judge, perhaps related to optare to desire,
choose (see option). Related: Opined; opining.


opiniated (adj.)

obstinately attached to one's opinion, 1590s, past participle adjective from opiniate (from Latin
opinio), a verb where now we use opine. Also see opinion.


opinion (n.)

c.1300, from Old French opinion opinion, view, judgements founded upon probabilities (12c.), from
Latin opinionem (nominative opinio) opinion, conjecture, fancy, belief, what one thinks;
appreciation, esteem, from stem of opinari think, judge, suppose, opine, from PIE *op- (2) to choose
(see option).    Where there is much desire to learn, there of necessity will be much arguing, much
writing, many opinions; for opinion in good men is but knowledge in the making. [Milton,
Areopagitica]


opinionate (v.)

to hold an opinion, c.1600, from opinion + -ate (2); now surviving mostly in past participle
adjective opinionated.


opinionated (adj.)

obstinate, c.1600, past participle adjective from opinionate.


opioid (n.)

1957, from opium + -oid.


opium (n.)

late 14c., from Latin opium, from Greek opion poppy juice, poppy, diminutive of opos vegetable
juice.Die Religion ist der Seufzer der bedr&auml;ngten Kreatur, das Gem&uuml;th einer herzlosen
Welt, wie sie der Geist geistloser Zust&auml;nde ist. Sie ist das Opium des Volks. [Karl Marx, Zur
Kritik der Hegel'schen Rechts-Philosophie, in Deutsch-Franz&ouml;sische Jahrb&uuml;cher, February,
1844]  The British Opium War against China lasted from 1839-42; the name is attested from 1841.


opossum (n.)

1610, from Powhatan (Algonquian) opassum, equivalent to a proto-Algonquian term meaning 'white dog'
[Bright].


opponent (n.)

1580s, from Latin opponentem (nominative opponens), present participle of opponere oppose, object
to, literally set against, set opposite, from ob against (see ob-) + ponere to put, set, place (see
position).


opportune (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French opportun and directly from Latin opportunus fit, convenient, suitable,
favorable, from the phrase ob portum veniens coming toward a port, in reference to the wind, from ob
to, toward (see ob-) + portus harbor (see port (n.1)). Related: Opportunely.


opportunism (n.)

policy of adopting actions to circumstances while holding goals unchanged, 1870, from opportune +
-ism. Compare opportunist.


opportunist (n.)

1881, from opportunism (q.v.) + -ist. A word in Italian politics, later applied in French by
Rochefort to Gambetta (1876) and then generally in English to any who seek to profit from the
prevailing circumstances.


opportunistic (adj.)

1889, see opportunist + -ic. Related: Opportunistically.


opportunity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French opportunite (13c.) and directly from Latin opportunitatem (nominative
opportunitas) fitness, convenience, suitableness, favorable time, from opportunus (see opportune).
Opportunity cost attested from 1911. Expression opportunity knocks but once (at any man's door)
attested from 1898.


opposable (adj.)

1660s, capable of being withstood, from oppose + -able. In reference to human thumbs, from 1833.
Related: Opposability.


oppose (v.)

late 14c., from Old French oposer oppose, resist, rival; contradict, state opposing point of view
(12c.), from poser to place, lay down (see pose (v.1)), blended with Latin opponere oppose, object
to, set against (see opponent). Related: Opposed; opposing.


opposite (adj.)

late 14c., placed on the other side of (something), from Old French oposite opposite, contrary
(13c.), from Latin oppositus standing against, opposed, opposite, past participle of opponere set
against (see opponent). Meaning contrary in nature or character is from 1570s. As a noun from late
14c. As a preposition from 1758. As an adverb from 1817. Related: Oppositely.


opposition (n.)

late 14c., an astrological term for the situation of two heavenly bodies exactly across from one
another in the heavens, from Old French oposicion (12c.) or directly from Latin oppositionem
(nominative oppositio) act of opposing, a placing against, noun of action from past participle stem
of opponere set against (see opponent). Meaning that which is opposite something else is from 1540s;
meaning contrast, antagonism first attested 1580s; sense of political party opposed to the one in
power is from 1704. Related: Oppositional.


oppress (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French opresser oppress, afflict; torment, smother (13c.), from Medieval Latin
oppressare, frequentative of Latin opprimere press against, press together, press down; figuratively
crush, put down, subdue, prosecute relentlessly (in Late Latin to rape), from ob against (see ob-) +
premere to press, push (see press (v.1)).    It is the due [external] restraint and not the
moderation of rulers that constitutes a state of liberty; as the power to oppress, though never
exercised, does a state of slavery. [St. George Tucker, View of the Constitution of the United
States, 1803]    Related: Oppressed; oppressing.


oppressed (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from oppress.


oppression (n.)

mid-14c., cruel or unjust use of power or authority, from Old French opression (12c.), from Latin
oppressionem (nominative oppressio) a pressing down; violence, oppression, noun of action from past
participle stem of opprimere (see oppress). Meaning action of weighing on someone's mind or spirits
is from late 14c.


oppressive (adj.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin oppressivus, from oppress-, past participle stem of opprimere (see
oppress). Related: Oppressively; oppressiveness.


oppressor (n.)

c.1400, from Old French opresseor, from Latin oppressor, from opprimere (see oppress (v.)).


opprobrious (adj.)

full of reproach, intended to bring disgrace, late 14c., from Old French oprobrieus (Modern French
opprobrieux), or directly from Late Latin opprobriosus, from Latin opprobare to reproach, taunt,
from ob against (see ob-) + probrum reproach, infamy. Etymological sense is disgrace attached to
conduct considered shameful. Related: Opprobriously; opprobriousness.


opprobrium (n.)

1680s, from Latin opprobrium disgrace, infamy, scandal, dishonor, from opprobare (see opprobrious).


oppugn (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin oppugnare to fight against, attack, assail, from ob- toward, against (see ob-)
+ pugnare to fight (see pugnacious). Related: Oppugned; oppugning.


opry (n.)

1914, U.S. dialectal pronunciation of opera. Especially in Grand Ole Opry, a radio broadcast of
country music from Nashville, registered as a proprietary name 1950.


opsimathy (n.)

1650s, from Greek opsimathia learning late in life, from opse late (related to opiso backward,
opisthen behind) + manthanein to learn (see mathematic). Related: Opsimath (n.).


opt (v.)

1877, from French opter to choose (16c.), from Latin optare choose, desire (see option). To opt out
is attested from 1922. Related: Opted; opting.


optative

in reference to grammatical mood expressing wish or desire, 1520s, from Middle French optatif
(15c.), from Late Latin optativus, from Latin optatus wished, desired, longed for, past participle
of optare to choose, wish, desire (see option).


optic (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French optique, obtique (c.1300) and directly from Medieval Latin opticus of
sight or seeing, from Greek optikos of or having to do with sight, from optos seen, visible, from
op-, root of opsesthai be going to see, related to ops eye, from PIE *okw- to see (see eye (n.)).


optical (adj.)

1560s, from optic + -al (1). Of abstract art, from 1964. Related: Optically.


optician (n.)

1680s, after French opticien maker or seller of optical instruments; see optic + -ian.


optics (n.)

science of sight and light, 1570s, from optic; also see -ics. Used for Medieval Latin optica (neuter
plural), from Greek ta optika optical matters, neuter plural of optikos optic.


optimal (adj.)

most favorable, 1890, from Latin optimus (see optimum). Originally a word in biology. Related:
Optimally.


optimism (n.)

1759 (in translations of Voltaire), from French optimisme (1737), from Modern Latin optimum, used by
Gottfried Leibniz (in Th&eacute;odic&eacute;e, 1710) to mean the greatest good, from Latin optimus
the best (see optimum). The doctrine holds that the actual world is the best of all possible worlds,
in which the creator accomplishes the most good at the cost of the least evil.En termes de l'art, il
l'appelle la raison du meilleur ou plus savamment encore, et Theologiquement autant que
G&eacute;om&eacute;triquement, le syst&ecirc;me de l'Optimum, ou l'Optimisme. [M&eacute;moires de
Tr&eacute;voux, Feb. 1737]Launched out of philosophical jargon and into currency by Voltaire's
satire on it in Candide. General sense of belief that good ultimately will prevail in the world
first attested 1841 in Emerson; meaning tendency to take a hopeful view of things first recorded
1819 in Shelley.


optimist (n.)

1759, from French optimiste (1752); see optimism + -ist.


optimistic (adj.)

1845, from optimist + -ic. Related: Optimistical (1809); optimistically.


optimization (n.)

1857, noun of action from optimize.


optimize (v.)

1844, to act as an optimist, back-formation from optimist. Meaning to make the most of is first
recorded 1857. Related: Optimized; optimizing.


optimum (n.)

1879, from Latin optimum, neuter singular of optimus best (used as a superlative of bonus good),
probably related to ops power, resources (in which case the evolution is from richest to the most
esteemed, thus from PIE root *op- to work) or to ob in front of, with superlative suffix *-tumos.
Originally in biology, in reference to conditions most favorable (for growth, etc.). As an adjective
from 1885.


option (n.)

c.1600, action of choosing, from French option (Old French opcion), from Latin optionem (nominative
optio) choice, free choice, liberty to choose, from root of optare to desire, choose, from PIE root
*op- (2) to choose, prefer. Meaning thing that may be chosen is attested from 1885. Commercial
transaction sense first recorded 1755 (the verb in this sense is from 1934). As a North American
football play, it is recorded from 1954.


optional (adj.)

1765, from option + -al (1).


optometrist (n.)

1903; see optometry + -ist.


optometry (n.)

1886, from optometer (1738), an instrument for testing vision, from opto- sight, from Greek optos
seen, visible (see optic) + -metry. Probably influenced by French optom&eacute;trie.


opulence (n.)

c.1510, from Middle French opulence (16c.), from Latin opulentia, from opulentus wealthy,
dissimilated from *op-en-ent-, related to ops wealth, power, resources, opus work, labor, exertion,
from PIE root *op- (1) to work, produce in abundance (see opus).


opulent (adj.)

c.1600, from Middle French opulent, from Latin opulentem (nominative opulens) wealthy, rich, from
opulentus (see opulence).


opus (n.)

a work, composition, especially a musical one, 1809, from Latin opus a work, labor, exertion (source
of Italian opera, French oeuvre, Spanish obra), from PIE root *op- (1) to work, produce in abundance
(Germanic *ob-) to work, produce in abundance, originally of agriculture later extended to religious
acts (cognates: Sanskrit apas- work, religious act; Avestan hvapah- good deed; Old High German uoben
to start work, to practice, to honor; German &uuml;ben to exercise, practice; Dutch oefenen, Old
Norse &aelig;fa, Danish &oslash;ve to exercise, practice; Old English &aelig;fnan to perform, work,
do, afol power). The plural, seldom used as such, is opera.


or (conj.)

c.1200, from Old English conjunction o&thorn;&thorn;e either, or, related to Old Frisian ieftha,
Middle Dutch ofte, Old Norse e&eth;a, Old High German odar, German oder, Gothic ai&thorn;&thorn;au
or. This was extended in early Middle English (and Old High German) with an -r ending, perhaps by
analogy with choice between alternative words that ended thus (such as either, whether), then
reduced to o&thorn;&thorn;r, at first in unstressed situations (commonly thus in Northern and
Midlands English by 1300), and finally reduced to or, though other survived in this sense until 16c.
The contraction took place in the second term of an alternative, such as either ... or, a common
construction in Old English, where both words originally were o&thorn;&thorn;e (see nor).


oracle (n.)

late 14c., a message from a god, expressed by divine inspiration, from Old French oracle temple,
house of prayer; oracle (12c.) and directly from Latin oraculum divine announcement, oracle; place
where oracles are given, from orare pray, plead (see orator), with material instrumental suffix
-culo-. In antiquity, the agency or medium of a god, also the place where such divine utterances
were given. This sense is attested in English from c.1400.


oracular (adj.)

1670s, from Latin oraculum (see oracle) + -ar.


oral (adj.)

1620s, from Late Latin oralis, from Latin os (genitive oris) mouth, opening, face, entrance, from
PIE *os- mouth (cognates: Sanskrit asan mouth, asyam mouth, opening, Avestan ah-, Hittite aish,
Middle Irish a mouth, Old Norse oss mouth of a river, Old English or beginning, origin, front).
Psychological meaning of the mouth as the focus of infantile sexual energy (as in oral fixation) is
from 1910. The sexual sense is first recorded 1948, in Kinsey. As a noun, oral examination, attested
from 1876. Related: Orally (c.1600); orality.


orange (n.)

c.1300, of the fruit, from Old French orange, orenge (12c., Modern French orange), from Medieval
Latin pomum de orenge, from Italian arancia, originally narancia (Venetian naranza), alteration of
Arabic naranj, from Persian narang, from Sanskrit naranga-s orange tree, of uncertain origin. Not
used as a color word until 1540s.    Loss of initial n- probably due to confusion with definite
article (as in une narange, una narancia), but perhaps influenced by French or gold. The name of the
town of Orange in France (see Orangemen) perhaps was deformed by the name of the fruit. Orange juice
is attested from 1723.    The tree's original range probably was northern India. The Persian orange,
grown widely in southern Europe after its introduction in Italy 11c., was bitter; sweet oranges were
brought to Europe 15c. from India by Portuguese traders and quickly displaced the bitter variety,
but only Modern Greek still seems to distinguish the bitter (nerantzi) from the sweet (portokali
Portuguese) orange. Portuguese, Spanish, Arab, and Dutch sailors planted citrus trees along trade
routes to prevent scurvy. On his second voyage in 1493, Christopher Columbus brought the seeds of
oranges, lemons and citrons to Haiti and the Caribbean. Introduced in Florida (along with lemons) in
1513 by Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de Leon. Introduced to Hawaii 1792.


orangeade (n.)

from French, from orange + ending from lemonade.


Orangemen (n.)

secret society founded 1795 in Belfast to promote Protestant power in Northern Ireland, named for
William of Orange (who became King William III of England and triumphed in Ireland at the head of a
Protestant army at the Battle of the Boyne), of the German House of Nassau. His cousins and their
descendants constitute the royal line of Holland.    The name is from the town of Orange on the
Rhone in France, which became part of the Nassau principality in 1530. Its Roman name was Arausio,
which is said in 19c. sources to be from aura a breeze and a reference to the north winds which rush
down the valley, but perhaps this is folk etymology of a Celtic word. The name subsequently was
corrupted to Auranche, then Orange. The town has no obvious association with the fruit other than
being on the road from Marseilles to Paris, along which masses of oranges were transported to
northern France and beyond. In this roundabout way the political/religious movement of Northern
Irish Protestantism acquired an association with the color orange, the Irish national flag acquired
its orange band, and Syracuse University in New York state acquired its Otto the Orange mascot.


orangutan (n.)

1690s, from Dutch orang-outang (1631), from Malay orang utan, literally man of the woods, from orang
man + utan, hutan forest, wild. It is possible that the word originally was used by town-dwellers on
Java to describe savage forest tribes of the Sunda Islands and that Europeans misunderstood it to
mean the ape. The name is not now applied in Malay to the animal, but there is evidence that it was
used so in 17c. [OED]


orate (v.)

c.1600, to pray, to plead, from Latin oratus, past participle of orare speak, pray, plead, speak
before a court or assembly (see orator). The meaning make a formal speech emerged c.1860 in American
English as a back-formation of oration. Related: Orated; orating.


oration (n.)

late 14c., prayer, from Late Latin orationem (nominative oratio) a speaking, speech, discourse;
language, faculty of speech, mode of expressing; prayer, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin orare to pray, plead, speak before an assembly (see orator). Meaning formal speech, discourse
first recorded c.1500.


orator (n.)

late 14c., one who pleads or argues for a cause, from Anglo-French oratour (Modern French orateur),
from Latin orator speaker, from orare to speak, speak before a court or assembly, pray, plead, from
PIE root *or- to pronounce a ritual formula (cognates: Sanskrit aryanti they praise, Homeric Greek
are, Attic ara prayer, Hittite ariya- to ask the oracle, aruwai- to revere, worship). Meaning public
speaker is attested from early 15c.


oratorical (adj.)

1580s, from orator or oratory + -ical, or else from Latin oratorius (see oratory (n.1)). Related:
Oratorical; oratorically.


oratorio (n.)

long musical composition, usually with a text based on Scripture, 1727 (in English from 1640s in
native form oratory), from Italian oratorio (late 16c.), from Church Latin oratorium (see oratory
(n.2)), in reference to musical services in the church of the Oratory of St. Philip Neri in Rome,
where old mystery plays were adapted to religious services.


oratory (n.1)

formal public speaking, the art of eloquence, 1580s, from Latin (ars) oratoria oratorical (art),
fem. of oratorius of speaking or pleading, pertaining to an orator, from orare to speak, pray, plead
(see orator).


oratory (n.2)

small chapel, c.1300, from Old French oratorie and directly from Late Latin oratorium place of
prayer (especially the Oratory of St. Philip Neri in Rome, where musical services were presented),
noun use of an adjective, as in oratorium templum, from neuter of Latin oratorius of or for praying,
from orare to pray, plead, speak (see orator).


orb (n.)

mid-15c., sphere, globe, something spherical or circular, from Old French orbe orb, globe (13c.) and
directly from Latin orbem (nominative orbis) circle, disk, ring, hoop, orbit, probably related to
orbita wheel track, rut, of unknown origin. Watkins suggests a connection with the root of orchid.
A three-dimensional extension of a word originally describing two-dimensional shapes. Astronomical
sense is in reference to the hollow spheres that carried the planets and stars in the Ptolemaic
system. As a verb from c.1600. Orb weaver spider is first recorded 1889.


orbicular (adj.)

round, circular, spherical, mid-15c., from Old French orbiculaire round, circular, or directly from
Late Latin orbicularis circular, orbicular, from Latin orbiculus, diminutive of orbis circle (see
orb). Related: Orbicularity.


orbit (n.)

late 14c., the eye socket, from Old French orbite or directly from Medieval Latin orbita,
transferred use of Latin orbita wheel track, beaten path, rut, course, orbit (see orb). Astronomical
sense first recorded 1690s in English; it was in classical Latin, revived in Gerard of Cremona's
translation of Avicenna.


orbit (v.)

1946, from orbit (n.). Related: Orbited; orbiting.


orbital (adj.)

1540s, with reference to eye sockets; 1839 with reference to heavenly bodies; from orbit (n.) + -al
(1).


orbiter 1954

agent noun from orbit (v.).


orc (n.)

ogre, devouring monster, Old English orc&thorn;yrs, orcneas (plural), perhaps from a Romanic source
akin to ogre, and ultimately from Latin Orcus Hell, a word of unknown origin. Revived by J.R.R.
Tolkien (1892-1973) as the name of a brutal race in Middle Earth.But Orcs and Trolls spoke as they
would, without love of words or things; and their language was actually more degraded and filthy
than I have shown it. [Return of the King, 1955]


orca (n.)

killer whale, introduced as a generic term for the species by 1841, from earlier use in scientific
names, from Latin orca cetacean, a kind of whale. Earlier in English, orc, ork large whale (c.1590),
from French orque, had been used vaguely of sea monsters (see orc).


orchard (n.)

late Old English orceard fruit garden, earlier ortgeard, perhaps reduced from wortgeard, from wort
vegetable, plant root + geard garden, yard (the word also meant vegetable garden until 15c.); see
yard (n.1). First element influenced in Middle English by Latin hortus (in Late Latin ortus) garden,
which also is from the root of yard (n.1).


orchestra (n.)

c.1600, area in an ancient theater for the chorus, from Latin orchestra, from Greek orkhestra,
semicircular space where the chorus of dancers performed, with suffix -tra denoting place +
orkheisthai to dance, intensive of erkhesthai to go, come, from PIE root *ergh- to mount (cognates:
Sanskrit rghayati trembles, rages, raves, rnoti rises, moves, arnah welling stream; Old Persian
rasatiy he comes; Greek ornynai to rouse, start; Latin oriri to rise, origo a beginning; Gothic
rinnan, Old English irnan to flow, run). In ancient Rome, it referred to the place in the theater
reserved for senators and other dignitaries. Meaning group of musicians performing at a concert,
opera, etc. first recorded 1720; part of theater in front of the stage is from 1768.


orchestral (adj.)

1811, from orchestra + -al (1).


orchestrate (v.)

to compose or arrange (music) for an orchestra, 1855, back-formation from orchestration. The
figurative sense is attested from 1883. Related: Orchestrated; orchestrating.


orchestration (n.)

1840, from French orchestration or else a native noun of action from orchestrate.


orchid (n.)

1845, introduced by John Lindley in School Botanty, from Modern Latin Orchide&aelig; (Linnaeus), the
plant's family name, from Latin orchis, a kind of orchid, from Greek orkhis (genitive orkheos)
orchid, literally testicle, from PIE *orghi-, the standard root for testicle (cognates: Avestan
erezi testicles, Armenian orjik, Middle Irish uirgge, Irish uirge testicle, Lithuanian erzilas
stallion). The plant so called because of the shape of its root. Earlier in English in Latin form,
orchis (1560s), and in Middle English it was ballockwort (c.1300; see ballocks). Marred by
extraneous -d- in an attempt to extract the Latin stem.


ordain (v.)

late 13c., to appoint or admit to the ministry of the Church, from stem of Old French ordener place
in order, arrange, prepare; consecrate, designate (Modern French ordonner) and directly from Latin
ordinare put in order, arrange, dispose, appoint, from ordo (genitive ordinis) order (see order
(n.)). The notion is to confer holy orders upon. Meaning to decree, enact is from c.1300; sense of
to set (something) that will continue in a certain order is from early 14c. Related: Ordained;
ordaining.


ordeal (n.)

Old English ordel, ordal, trial by physical test, literally judgment, verdict, from Proto-Germanic
noun *uz-dailjam (cognates: Old Saxon urdeli, Old Frisian urdel, Dutch oordeel, German urteil
judgment), literally that which is dealt out (by the gods), from *uzdailijan share out, related to
Old English ad&aelig;lan to deal out (see deal (n.1)). Curiously absent in Middle English, and
perhaps reborrowed 16c. from Medieval Latin or Middle French, which got it from Germanic.    The
notion is of the kind of arduous physical test (such as walking blindfolded and barefoot between
red-hot plowshares) that was believed to determine a person's guilt or innocence by immediate
judgment of the deity, an ancient Teutonic mode of trial. English retains a more exact sense of the
word; its cognates in German, etc., have been generalized.    Metaphoric extension to anything which
tests character or endurance is attested from 1650s. The prefix or- survives in English only in this
word, but was common in Old English and other Germanic languages (Gothic ur-, Old Norse or-, etc.)
and originally was an adverb and preposition meaning out.


order (n.)

early 13c., body of persons living under a religious discipline, from Old French ordre position,
estate; rule, regulation; religious order (11c.), from earlier ordene, from Latin ordinem
(nominative ordo) row, rank, series, arrangement, originally a row of threads in a loom, from Italic
root *ord- to arrange, arrangement (source of ordiri to begin to weave; compare primordial), of
unknown origin.    Meaning a rank in the (secular) community is first recorded c.1300; meaning
command, directive is first recorded 1540s, from the notion of to keep in order. Military and
honorary orders grew our of the fraternities of Crusader knights. Business and commerce sense is
attested from 1837. In natural history, as a classification of living things, it is first recorded
1760. Meaning condition of a community which is under the rule of law is from late 15c.    Phrase in
order to (1650s) preserves etymological notion of sequence. The word reflects a medieval notion: a
system of parts subject to certain uniform, established ranks or proportions, and was used of
everything from architecture to angels. Old English expressed many of the same ideas with
endebyrdnes. In short order without delay is from 1834, American English; order of battle is from
1769.


order (v.)

c.1200, give order to, to arrange in order, from order (n.). Meaning to give orders for or to is
from 1540s. Related: Ordered; ordering.


orderly (adv.)

late 15c., in due order, from order + -ly (2).


orderly (adj.)

arranged in order, 1570s, from order (n.) + -ly (1).


orderly (n.)

military attendant who carries orders, 1781, short for orderly corporal, etc. Extended 1809 to an
attendant at a hospital (originally a military hospital) charged with keeping things in order and
clean. See orderly (adj.).


ordinal (n.)

early 14c., book setting forth the order of services in the Church, from Late Latin adjective
ordinalis (see ordinal (adj.)).


ordinal (adj.)

late 14c., regular, ordinary, from Old French ordinel and directly from Late Latin ordinalis showing
order, denoting an order of succession, from Latin ordo (genitive ordinis) row, series (see order
(n.)). Meaning marking position in an order or series is from 1590s.


ordinance (n.)

c.1300, an authoritative direction, decree, or command (narrower or more transitory than a law),
from Old French ordenance (Modern French ordonnance) or directly from Medieval Latin ordinantia,
from Latin ordinantem (nominative ordinans), present participle of ordinare put in order (see
ordain). By early 14c. senses had emerged of arrangement in ranks or rows (especially in order of
battle), also warlike provisions, equipment (a sense now in ordnance).


ordinary (adj.)

early 15c., belonging to the usual order or course, from Old French ordinarie ordinary, usual and
directly from Latin ordinarius customary, regular, usual, orderly, from ordo (genitive ordinis)
order (see order (n.)). Its various noun usages, dating to late 14c. and common until 19c., now
largely extinct except in out of the ordinary (1893). In British education, Ordinary level (abbrev.
O level), lowest of the three levels of General Certificate of Education, is attested from 1947.
Related: Ordinarily.


ordinate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin ordinatus, past participle of ordinare arrange, set in order (see ordain).
Related: Ordinately.


ordinate (v.)

1560s, from Latin ordinatus, past participle of ordinare arrange, set in order (see ordain).
Related: Ordinated; ordinating.


ordination (n.)

early 15c., the act of conferring holy orders, from Old French ordinacion (12c.) or directly from
Latin ordinationem (nominative ordinatio) a setting in order, ordinance, noun of action from past
participle stem of ordinare arrange (see ordain).


ordnance (n.)

cannon, artillery, 1540s, a clipped form of ordinance (q.v.) which was attested from late 14c. in
the sense of military materials, provisions of war; a sense now obsolete but which led to those of
engines for discharging missiles (early 15c.) and branch of the military concerned with stores and
materials (late 15c.). The shorter word was established in these distinct senses by 17c. Ordnance
survey (1833), official survey of Great Britain and Ireland, was undertaken by the government under
the direction of the Master-General of the Ordnance (a natural choice, because gunners have to be
skilled at surveying ranges and distances).


Ordovician (adj.)

geological period following the Cambrian and preceding the Silurian, 1879, coined by English
geologist Charles Lapworth (1842-1920) from Latin Ordovices, name of an ancient British tribe in
North Wales. The period so called because rocks from it first were studied extensively in the region
around Bala in North Wales. The tribe's name is Celtic, literally those who fight with hammers, from
Celtic base *ordo hammer + PIE *wik- to fight, conquer (see victor).


ordure (n.)

late 14c., from Old French ordure filth, uncleanliness (12c.), from ord, ort filthy, dirty, foul,
from Latin horridus dreadful (see horrid).


ore (n.)

12c., a merger of Old English ora ore, unworked metal (related to eor&thorn;e earth, see earth; and
cognate with Low German ur iron-containing ore, Dutch oer, Old Norse aurr gravel); and Old English
ar brass, copper, bronze, from Proto-Germanic *ajiz- (cognates: Old Norse eir brass, copper, German
ehern brazen, Gothic aiz bronze), from PIE root *aus- (2) gold (see aureate). The two words were not
fully assimilated till 17c.; what emerged has the form of ar but the meaning of ora.


ore rotundo

Latin, literally with round mouth, from ablative of os mouth (see oral) + ablative of rotundus round
(see rotund). From Horace (Grais ingenium, Grais dedit ore rotundo Musa loqui, in Ars Poetica).


oread (n.)

1580s, from Latin Oreas (genitive Oreadis), from Greek Oreias mountain nymph, from oros mountain,
perhaps from PIE root *ergh- to mount (see orchestra).


oregano (n.)

1771, from Spanish or American Spanish oregano, from Latin origanus, origanum, from Greek oreiganon,
from oros mountain (see oread) + ganos brightness, ornament. The older form of the word in English
was the Latin-derived origanum (mid-13c.), also origan (early 15c.). In Europe, the dried leaves of
wild marjoram; in America, a different, and more pungent, shrub.


Oregon

1765 as the name of a large river in the west of North America, probably the modern Columbia; of
uncertain and disputed origin. It seems to be of Algonquian origin. From 1848 as the name of a U.S.
territory (admitted as a state 1859).


Oreo (n.)

derogatory word for black person felt to have a 'white' mentality, 1968, black American English,
from the snack cookies, which consist of dark chocolate wafers and white sugar cream filling (hence
brown outside, white inside). The cookies (made by Nabisco) date from 1912; the source of the name
has been forgotten.


Orestes

son of Agamemnon and Clytaemnestra, from Greek Orestes, literally mountaineer, from oros mountain
(see oread).


organ (n.)

fusion of late Old English organe, and Old French orgene (12c.), both meaning musical instrument,
both from Latin organa, plural of organum a musical instrument, from Greek organon implement, tool
for making or doing; musical instrument; organ of sense, organ of the body, literally that with
which one works, from PIE *werg-ano-, from root *werg- to do (cognates: Greek ergon work, orgia
religious performances; Armenian gorc work; Avestan vareza work, activity; Gothic waurkjan, Old
English wyrcan to work, Old English weorc deed, action, something done; Old Norse yrka work, take
effect).    Applied vaguely in late Old English to musical instruments; sense narrowed by late 14c.
to the musical instrument now known by that name (involving pipes supplied with wind by a bellows
and worked by means of keys), though Augustine (c.400) knew this as a specific sense of Latin
organa. The meaning body part adapted to a certain function is attested from late 14c., from a
Medieval Latin sense of Latin organum. Organist is first recorded 1590s; organ-grinder is attested
from 1806.


organdy (n.)

fine transparent muslin, 1829, from French organdi sorte de Mousseline ou toile de coton (1725), of
unknown origin. Barnhart suggests it is an alteration of Organzi, from medieval form of Urgench,
city in Uzbekistan that was a cotton textile center.


organelle (n.)

1909, from Modern Latin organella, a diminutive from Latin organum instrument, in Medieval Latin
organ of the body (see organ).


organic (adj.)

1510s, serving as an organ or instrument, from Latin organicus, from Greek organikos of or
pertaining to an organ, serving as instruments or engines, from organon instrument (see organ).
Sense of from organized living beings is first recorded 1778 (earlier this sense was in organical,
mid-15c.). Meaning free from pesticides and fertilizers first attested 1942. Organic chemistry is
attested from 1831.


organically (adv.)

1680s in reference to bodily organs; 1862 in reference to living beings; 1841 as as part of an
organized whole; from organic. From 1971 as without the use of pesticides, etc.


organisation (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of organization. For spelling, see -ize. Related: Organisational.


organiser (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of organizer (q.v.); for spelling, see -ize.


organism (n.)

1660s, organic structure, organization, from organize + -ism. Sense of living animal or plant first
recorded 1842. Related: Organismic.


organist (n.)

1590s, from organ + -ist, or from or influenced by Middle French organiste, from Medieval Latin
organista one who plays an organ, from Latin organum (see organ).


organization (n.)

mid-15c., act of organizing, from Middle French organisation and directly from Medieval Latin
organizationem (nominative organizatio), noun of action from past participle stem of organizare,
from Latin organum instrument, organ (see organ). Meaning system, establishment is from 1873.
Organization man is from title of 1956 book by American sociologist William H. Whyte (1917-1999).
Related: Organizational.


organize (v.)

early 15c., construct, establish, from Middle French organiser and directly from Medieval Latin
organizare, from Latin organum instrument, organ (see organ). Related: Organized; organizing.


organized (adj.)

1590s, furnished with organs, past participle adjective from organize (v.). Meaning forming a whole
of interdependent parts is from 1817. Organized crime attested from 1929.


organizer (n.)

1849, agent noun from organize.


organza (n.)

1820, from French organsin (1660s), from Italian organzino, of unknown origin; perhaps from the same
source as organdy.


orgasm (n.)

1680s, sexual climax, from French orgasme or Modern Latin orgasmus, from Greek orgasmos excitement,
swelling, from organ be in heat, become ripe for, literally to swell, be excited, related to orge
impulse, excitement, anger, from PIE root *wrog- to burgeon, swell with strength (cognates: Sanskrit
urja a nourishment, sap, vigor, Old Irish ferc, ferg anger). Also used 17c. of other violent
excitements of emotion or other bodily functions.


orgasm (v.)

1973, originally and usually in reference to a woman's sexual climax, from orgasm (n.). Related:
Orgasmed; orgasming.


orgasmic (adj.)

1935, from orgasm (n.). + -ic.


orgiastic (adj.)

1690s, from Greek orgiastikos fit for orgies, exciting, from orgiastes one who celebrates orgies,
from orgiazein to celebrate orgies, from orgia (see orgy).


orgy (n.)

1560s, orgies (plural) secret rites in the worship of certain Greek and Roman gods, especially
Dionysus, from Middle French orgies (c.1500, from Latin orgia), and directly from Greek orgia
(plural) secret rites, especially those of Bacchus, from PIE root *werg- to do (see organ). The
singular, orgy, was first used in English 1660s for the extended sense of any licentious revelry.
OED says of the ancient rites that they were celebrated with extravagant dancing, singing, drinking,
etc., which gives etc. quite a workout.


oriel (n.)

large recessed window, mid-14c., from Old French oriol hall, vestibule; oriel, of uncertain origin,
perhaps from Medieval Latin oriolum porch, gallery (mid-13c.), perhaps from Vulgar Latin *auraeolum,
dissimilated from aulaeolum, a diminutive of Latin aulaeum curtain. Despite much research, the sense
evolution remains obscure.


Orient (n.)

c.1300, the East (originally usually meaning what is now called the Middle East), from Old French
orient east (11c.), from Latin orientem (nominative oriens) the rising sun, the east, part of the
sky where the sun rises, originally rising (adj.), present participle of oriri to rise (see
orchestra). The Orient Express was a train that ran from Paris to Istanbul via Vienna 1883-1961,
from the start associated with espionage and intrigue.


orient (v.)

c.1727, originally to arrange facing east, from French s'orienter to take one's bearings, literally
to face the east (also the source of German orientierung), from Old French orient east, from Latin
orientum (see Orient (n.)). Extended meaning determine bearings first attested 1842; figurative
sense is from 1850. Related: Oriented; orienting.


oriental (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French oriental eastern, from the east (12c.) and directly from Latin orientalis
of the east, from orientem (see Orient (n.)). Originally in reference to the sky, geographical sense
is attested from late 15c.; oriental carpet first recorded 1868 (in C.Latin Eastlake).


Oriental (n.)

native or inhabitant of the east, 1701, from oriental (adj.).


Orientalism (n.)

in reference to character, style, trait, or idiom felt to be from the Orient, 1769, from oriental +
-ism. Related: Orientalist.


orientate (v.)

1849, back-formation from orientation. Related: Orientated; orientating.


orientation (n.)

1839, originally arrangement of a building, etc., to face east or any other specified direction,
noun of action from orient (v.). Sense of action of determining one's bearings is from 1868. Meaning
introduction to a situation is from 1942.


oriented (adj.)

having an orientation, 1918, past participle adjective from orient (v.)


orienteering

in reference to a competitive sport, 1948, from orient (v.).


orifice (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French orifice the opening of a wound (14c.) and directly from Latin
orificium an opening, literally mouth-making, from os (genitive oris) mouth (see oral) + facere make
(see factitious). Related: Orificial.


oriflamme (n.)

sacred banner of St. Denis, late 15c., from Old French orie flambe, from Latin aurea flamma golden
flame. The ancient battle standard of the kings of France, it was of red or orange-red silk, with
two or three points, and was given to the kings by the abbot of St. Denis on setting out to war.
Cotgrave says it was borne at first onely in warres made against Infidells; but afterwards vsed in
all other warres; and at length vtterly lost in a battell against the Flemings. It is last mentioned
in an abbey inventory of 1534.


origami (n.)

1956, from Japanese origami, from ori fold + kami paper.


origin (n.)

c.1400, ancestry, race, from Old French origine origin, race, and directly from Latin originem
(nominative origo) a rise, commencement, beginning, source; descent, lineage, birth, from stem of
oriri to rise, become visible, appear (see orchestra).


original (adj.)

early 14c., first in time, earliest, from Old French original first (13c.) and directly from Latin
originalis, from originem (nominative origo) beginning, source, birth, from oriri to rise (see
orchestra). The first reference is in original sin innate depravity of man's nature, supposed to be
inherited from Adam in consequence of the Fall. Related: Originally.


original (n.)

original text, late 14c., from Medieval Latin originale (see original (adj.)). Of photographs,
films, sound recordings, etc., from 1918.


originality (n.)

1742, from original (adj.) + -ity. Probably after French originalit&eacute; (1690s).


originate (v.)

1650s, probably a back-formation of origination. In earliest reference it meant to trace the origin
of; meaning to bring into existence is from 1650s; intransitive sense of to come into existence is
from 1775. Related: Originated; originating.


origination (n.)

1640s, from Middle French origination (15c.), from Latin originationem (nominative originatio), from
originem (see original (adj.)).


originator (n.)

1818, agent noun in Latin form from originate.


oriole (n.)

1776, from French oriol golden oriole, Old Proven&ccedil;al auriol, from Medieval Latin oryolus,
from Latin aureolus golden, from PIE *aus- (2) gold (see aureate). Originally in reference to the
golden oriole (Oriolus galbula), a bird of black and yellow plumage that summers in Europe (but is
uncommon in England). Applied from 1791 to the unrelated but similarly colored North American
species Icterus baltimore.


Orion

bright constellation, late 14c., from Greek Oarion, name of a giant in Greek mythology, loved by
Aurora, slain by Artemis, of unknown origin, though some speculate on Akkadian Uru-anna the Light of
Heaven. Another Greek name for the constellation was Kandaon, a title of Ares, god of war, and the
star pattern is represented in many cultures as a giant (such as Old Irish Caomai the Armed King,
Old Norse Orwandil, Old Saxon Ebu&eth;rung).


orison (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-French oreison, Old French oreisun (12c., Modern French oraison) oration, from
Latin orationem (nominative oratio) speech, oration, in Church Latin prayer, appeal to God, noun of
action from orare (see orator). Etymologically, a doublet of oration.


Orkney

name of a group of islands off the north coast of Scotland, from Old Norse Orkney-jar Seal Islands,
from orkn seal, probably imitative of its bark. Related: Orkneyman.


Orlando

masc. proper name, Italian form of Roland (q.v.). The city in Florida, U.S., so called from 1857,
supposedly in honor of a U.S. soldier, Orlando Reeves, who was killed there in 1835 by Seminoles. It
had been settled c.1844 as Jernigan.


Orleans

city in France, French Orl&#233;ans, Roman Aurelianum, named 3c. C.E. in honor of emperor Aurelius
(having formerly been called Genabum, from roots *gen- bend (in a river) + *apa water).


Orlon

proprietary name (Du Pont) of synthetic textile fiber, 1948, an invented word (compare nylon).


ormolu (n.)

alloy of copper, zinc, and tin, resembling gold, 1765, from French or moulu, literally ground gold,
from or gold (from Latin aurum, from PIE *aus- (2) gold; see aureate) + moulu ground up, past
participle of moudre to grind, from Latin molere to grind (see mallet).


ornament (n.)

early 13c., an accessory, from Old French ornement ornament, decoration, and directly from Latin
ornamentum apparatus, equipment, trappings; embellishment, decoration, trinket, from ornare equip,
adorn (see ornate). Meaning decoration, embellishment in English is attested from late 14c. (also a
secondary sense in classical Latin). Figurative use from 1550s.


ornament (v.)

1720, from ornament (n.). Middle English used ournen (late 14c.) in this sense, from Old French
orner, from Latin ornare. Related: Ornamented; ornamenting.


ornamental (adj.)

1640s, partly formed in English from ornament (n.) + -al (1); partly from Latin ornamentalis, from
ornamentum.


ornamentation (n.)

1839, noun of action from ornament (v.).


ornate (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin ornatus fitted out, furnished, supplied; adorned, decorated, embellished,
past participle of ornare adorn, fit out, from stem of ordo order (see order (n.)). Earliest
reference is to literary style. Related: Ornately; ornateness.


ornery (adj.)

1816, American English dialectal contraction of ordinary (adj.). Commonplace, hence of poor quality,
coarse, ugly. By c.1860 the sense had evolved to mean, cantankerous. Related: Orneriness.


ornitho-

before vowels ornith-, word-forming element meaning bird, birds, from comb. form of Greek ornis
(genitive ornithos) a bird (in Attic generally domestic fowl), often added to the specific name of
the type of bird, from PIE *or- large bird (see erne).


ornithological (adj.)

1802, from ornithology + -ical. Related: Ornithologically.


ornithologist (n.)

1670s, from ornithology + -ist.


ornithology (n.)

1670s, from Modern Latin ornithologia (1590s); see ornitho- + -logy.


ornithopod (n.)

1888, from Modern Latin Ornithopoda (1881), from ornitho- + Greek podos, genitive of pous foot (see
foot (n.)).


ornithopter (n.)

1908, from French ornithopt&egrave;re (1908), a machine designed to fly be mechanical flapping of
wings, from ornitho- + Greek pteron wing (see pterodactyl). A mode of flight considered promising at
least since Leonardo's day.


oro-

word-forming element meaning mountain, from Greek oros mountain (see oread).


orogeny (n.)

mountain forming, 1890, from French orog&eacute;nie; see oro- + -geny. Related: Orogenic.


orotund (adj.)

1792, from Latin ore rotundo in well-rounded phrases, literally with round mouth (see ore rotundo).
The odd thing about the word is that its only currency, at least in its non-technical sense, is
among those who should most abhor it, the people of sufficient education to realize its bad
formation; it is at once a monstrosity in its form &amp; a pedantry in its use. [Fowler]


orphan (v.)

1814, from orphan (n.). Related: Orphaned; orphaning.


orphan (n.)

c.1300, from Late Latin orphanus parentless child (source of Old French orfeno, Italian orfano),
from Greek orphanos orphaned, without parents, fatherless, literally deprived, from orphos bereft,
from PIE *orbho- bereft of father, also deprived of free status, from root *orbh- to change
allegiance, to pass from one status to another (cognates: Hittite harb- change allegiance, Latin
orbus bereft, Sanskrit arbhah weak, child, Armenian orb orphan, Old Irish orbe heir, Old Church
Slavonic rabu slave, rabota servitude (see robot), Gothic arbja, German erbe, Old English ierfa
heir, Old High German arabeit, German Arbeit work, Old Frisian arbed, Old English earfo&eth;
hardship, suffering, trouble). As an adjective from late 15c.


orphanage (n.)

1570s, condition of being an orphan, from orphan (n.) + -age. Meaning home for orphans is from 1865
(earlier was orphan house, 1711).


Orphic (adj.)

1670s, from Greek orphikos pertaining to Orpheus, master musician of Thrace, son of Eagrus and
Calliope, husband of Eurydice, whose name (of unknown origin) was associated with mystic doctrines.
Related: Orphism.


orpiment (n.)

late 13c., from Old French orpiment arsenic trisulphide, yellow color, from Latin auripigmentum,
from aurum gold (see aureate) + pigmentum coloring matter, pigment, paint (see pigment).


orrery (n.)

1713, invented c.1713 by George Graham and made by instrument maker J. Rowley, who gave a copy to
his patron, Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery (Cork) and named it in his honor.


Orson

masc. proper name, from French ourson, diminutive of ours bear, from Latin ursus (see Arctic).


ort (n.)

remains of food left from a meal, mid-15c., probably cognate with early Dutch ooraete, Low German
ort, from or-, privative prefix, + etan to eat (see eat (v.)). Perhaps from an unrecorded Old
English word.


ortho-

before vowels orth-, word-forming element meaning straight, upright, rectangular, regular; true,
correct, proper, now mostly in scientific and technical compounds, from Greek ortho-, stem of orthos
straight, true, correct, regular, from PIE *eredh- high (cognates: Sanskrit urdhvah high, lofty,
steep, Latin arduus high, steep, Old Irish ard high).


orthodontia (n.)

1849, from ortho- + Greek odon (genitive odontos) tooth (see tooth).


orthodontics (n.)

1909, from Modern Latin orthodontia + -ics.


orthodontist (n.)

1903; see orthodontia + -ist.


orthodox (adj.)

mid-15c., of opinions, faith, from Late Latin orthodoxus, from Greek orthodoxos having the right
opinion, from orthos right, true, straight (see ortho-) + doxa opinion, praise, from dokein to seem,
from PIE root *dek- to take, accept (see decent). As the name of the Eastern Church, first recorded
in English 1772; in reference to a branch of Judaism, first recorded 1853.


orthodoxy (n.)

1620s, from French orthodoxie and directly from Late Latin orthodoxia, from late Greek orthodoxia
right opinion, noun of quality from orthodoxos (see orthodox).


orthogonal (adj.)

1570s, from French orthogonal, from orthogone, from Late Latin orthogonius, from Greek orthogonios
right-angled, from ortho- straight (see ortho-) + gonia angle, related to gony knee (see knee (n.)).
Related: Orthogonally.


orthographic (adj.)

1660s, from orthography + -ic. Related: Orthographically.


orthography (n.)

correct or proper spelling, mid-15c., ortographie, from Middle French orthographie (Old French
ortografie, 13c.), from Latin orthographia, from Greek orthographia correct writing, from orthos
correct (see ortho-) + root of graphein to write (see -graphy). Related: Orthographer.


orthopaedics (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of orthopedics; for spelling, see pedo-. Related: Orthopaedic.


orthopedic (adj.)

1840, from French orthop&eacute;dique, from  orthop&eacute;die, coined by French physician Nicholas
Andry (1658-1742), from Greek orthos straight, correct (see ortho-) + paideia rearing of children,
from pais (genitive paidos) child (see pedo-).


orthopedics (n.)

1853, from orthopedic. Also see -ics.


orthopedist (n.)

1853, from orthopedy (1840), from French orthop&eacute;die (18c.); see orthopedic + -ist.


orthopraxy (n.)

1840, from ortho- + Greek praxis a doing, action, performance (see praxis).   Errata -- Page 263,
line 9 from bottom, for 'orthodoxy' read orthopraxy. This is a new coin from the mint of Dr.
[Andrew] Wylie [of Bloomington College, Indiana], at least I have not before noticed it. Its
etymology places it in a just contrast with orthodoxy: for if that consecrated word indicates
thinking right, orthopraxy will legitimately import doing right, and hence, as Mr. Wylie says,
orthopraxy in the last dread day will pass the divine ordeal incomparably better than orthodoxy. O!
that a zeal for orthopraxy would transcend the zeal for orthodoxy! [The Millennial Harbinger, vol.
IV, no. VIII, Bethany, Va., August 1840]


Orwellian (adj.)

1950 (first attested in Mary McCarthy), from English author George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Blair,
1903-1950), especially in reference to his novel Nineteen Eighty-Four. Ironically, it has come to be
used in reference to the totalitarian systems he satirized.It is as if George Orwell had conceived
the nightmare instead of analyzed it, helped to create it instead of helping to dispel its
euphemistic thrall. [Clive James]


oryx (n.)

late 14c., from Latin oryx, from Greek oryx (genitive orygos) North African antelope with pointed
horns, the digging animal, literally pick-axe. Used in Greek and Latin bibles to render Hebrew tho,
which early English Bibles misidentified as everything from a small hibernating animal to a wild
bull.


os-

frequent form of ob- before -c- and -t- in words from Latin.


Osage

name of a group of Siouxan Indians originally from Missouri, 1690s, via French, from their self-
designation Wazhazhe. The ornamental tree osage orange (Toxylon pomiferum), name first attested
1817, originally was found in their country.


Oscan (adj.)

of or pertaining to the ancient people of southern Italy, 1590s, from Latin Osci, Opsci (plural)
Oscans, literally worshippers of Ops, a harvest goddess, the name related to Latin ops (genitive
opis) abundance, plenty, wealth, riches, from PIE *op- (1) to work, produce in abundance (see opus).


Oscar

masc. proper name, Old English Osgar god's spear, from gar spear (see gar) + os god (only in
personal names); see Asgard.    The statuette awarded for excellence in film acting, directing,
etc., given annually since, 1928, first so called 1936. The name is said to have sprung from a 1931
remark by Margaret Herrick, secretary at Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, on seeing the
statuette: He reminds me of my Uncle Oscar. Thus the award would be named for Oscar Pierce, U.S.
wheat farmer and fruit grower.


oscillate (v.)

1726, back-formation from oscillation, or else from Latin oscillatus, past participle of oscillare
(see oscillation). From 1917 in electronics. Related: Oscillated; oscillating.


oscillation (n.)

1650s, from French oscillation, from Latin oscillationem (nominative oscillatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of oscillare to swing, supposed to be from oscillum little face, literally
little mouth, a mask of open-mouthed Bacchus hung up in vineyards as a charm (the sense evolution
would be via the notion of swing in the breeze); from PIE *os- mouth (see oral).


oscillator (n.)

agent noun in Latin form from oscillate; 1835 of persons, 1889 in reference to electric currents.


oscilloscope (n.)

instrument for visually recording an electrical wave, 1915, a hybrid formed from Latin oscillare to
swing (see oscillation) + -scope.


oscitant (adj.)

yawning, from Latin oscitans listless, sluggish, lazy, present participle of oscitare to gape, yawn,
from os citare to move the mouth (see oral and cite).


oscitation (n.)

1540s, from Late Latin oscitationem (nominative oscitatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of oscitare (see oscitant).


osculate (v.)

to kiss, 1650s, from Latin osculatus, past participle of osculari to kiss, from osculum a kiss;
pretty mouth, sweet mouth, literally little mouth, diminutive of os mouth (see oral). Related:
Osculated; osculating.


osculation (n.)

kissing; a kiss, 1650s, from Latin osculationem (nominative osculatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of osculari (see osculate).


osier (n.)

species of willow used in basket-work, c.1300, from Old French osier willow twig (13c.) and directly
from Medieval Latin osera willow, ausaria willow bed, of unknown origin, perhaps from Gaulish. Old
English had the word as oser, from Medieval Latin.


Osiris

name of a principal god of Egypt, judge of the dead, from Latin Osiris, from Greek, from Egyptian
Asar. Related: Osirian.


Oslo

Norwegian capital, probably based on Old Norse os estuary, river mouth, based on the place's
situation.


Osmanli

an Ottoman Turk, 1813, from Turkish Osmanli of or pertaining to Osman, founder of the Ottoman
dynasty (he reigned 1259-1326); his name is the Turkish pronunciation of Arabic Uthman. This is the
native word where English generally uses Ottoman.


osmium (n.)

metallic element, 1803, coined in Modern Latin by its discoverer, English chemist Smithson Tennant
(1761-1815) from Greek osme smell, scent, odor good or bad (cognate with Latin odor; see odor). So
called for the strong smell of its oxide.


Osmond

masc. proper name, from Old English Osmund, literally divine protection, from os a god (see Oscar) +
-mund (see mount (n.)).


osmosis (n.)

1867, Latinized from osmose (1854), shortened from endosmosis (1830s), from endosmose inward passage
of a fluid through a porous septum (1829), from French endo- inward + Greek osmos a thrusting, a
pushing, from stem of othein to push, to thrust, from PIE *wedhe- to push, strike (cognates:
Sanskrit vadhati pushes, strikes, destroys, Avestan vadaya- to repulse). Figurative sense is from
1900. Related: Osmotic (1854, from earlier endosmotic).


osprey (n.)

fishing hawk, mid-15c., from Anglo-French ospriet, from Medieval Latin avis prede bird of prey, from
Latin avis praed&aelig;, a generic term apparently confused with this specific bird in Old French on
its similarity to ossifrage.


osseous (adj.)

bony, early 15c., from Medieval Latin ossous, from Latin osseus bony, of bone, from os (genitive
ossis) bone, from PIE *ost- bone (cognates: Sanskrit asthi, Hittite hashtai-, Greek osteon bone,
Greek ostrakon oyster shell, Avestan ascu- shinbone, Welsh asgwrn, Armenian oskr, Albanian asht
bone). The word was later reformed in English (1680s), perhaps by influence of French osseux.


Ossianic (adj.)

1808, in reference to Oisin, name of a legendary Gaelic bard, literally little fawn; James
Macpherson claimed to have collected and translated his works (1760-1763) under the name Ossian, and
the poetic prose sparked a Celtic revival and fascination with the glamor of the lost world of the
bards. The work turned out to be Macpherson's forgery, and the style later was regarded as
bombastic, but the resulting swerve in European literature was real.


ossicle (n.)

1570s, from Latin ossiculum, diminutive of os bone (see osseous).


ossification (n.)

1690s, from Latin ossis of bones, genitive of os bone (see osseous) + -fication.


ossifrage (n.)

sea-eagle, osprey, c.1600, from Latin ossifraga vulture, fem. of ossifragus, literally bone-breaker,
from ossifragus (adj.) bone-breaking, from os (genitive ossis) bone (see osseous) + stem of frangere
to break (see fraction). By this name Pliny meant the lammergeier (from German, literally lamb-
vulture), a very large Old World vulture that swallows and digests bones and was believed also to
drop them from aloft to break them and get at the marrow. But in England and France, the word was
transferred to the osprey, perhaps on similarity of sound between the two words.


ossify (v.)

1713, to turn into bone, a back-formation from ossification, or else modeled on French ossifier
(18c.) and formed from Latin os (genitive ossis) bone (see osseous) + -fy. Figurative sense is from
1858. Related: Ossified; ossifying.


ossuary (n.)

urn for the bones of the dead, 1650s, from Late Latin ossuarium charnel house, from neuter of Latin
ossuarius of bones, from Latin os (plural ossua) bone (see osseous) on model of mortuarium.


ostensible (adj.)

1762, capable of being shown, presentable, from French ostensible, from Latin ostens-, past
participle stem of ostendere to show, expose to view; to stretch out, spread before; exhibit,
display, from ob in front of (see ob-) + tendere to stretch (see tenet). Meaning apparent, professed
is from 1771.


ostensibly (adv.)

1765, from ostensible + -ly (2).


ostensive (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin ostensivus showing, from Latin ostensus, past participle of ostendere to
show (see ostensible).


ostentation (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French ostentacion (mid-14c.) and directly from Latin ostentationem (nominative
ostentatio) showing, exhibition, vain display, noun of action from past participle stem of ostentare
to display, frequentative of ostendere to show (see ostensible).


ostentatious (adj.)

1701, from ostentation + -ous. Earlier in a similar sense were ostentative (c.1600); ostentive
(1590s). Related: Ostentatiously; ostentatiousness (1650s).


osteo-

before vowels oste-, word-forming element meaning bone, bones, from Greek osteon bone (see osseous).


osteology (n.)

1660s, from French ost&#232;ologie, from Modern Latin osteologia, from Greek osteon bone (see
osseous) + -logia (see -logy).


osteopath (n.)

1897, back-formation from osteopathy.


osteopathy (n.)

1857, disease of the bones, from Greek osteon bone (see osseous) + -pathy, from Greek -patheia,
comb. form of pathos suffering, disease, feeling (see pathos). As a system of treating ailments by
the manipulation of bones, it dates from 1889.


osteoporosis (n.)

1846, from osteo- + stem of Greek poros passage, pore, voyage (see pore (n.)) + -osis. Related:
Osteoporotic.


ostinato

1876, from Italian ostinato, literally obstinate, persistent.


ostler (n.)

late 14c., phonetic spelling of hostler.


ostomy (n.)

1957, abstracted from colostomy, etc.; ultimately from Modern Latin stoma opening, orifice, from
Greek stoma mouth (see stoma).


ostracise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of ostracize (q.v.); for suffix, see -ize. Related: Ostracised.


ostracism (n.)

1580s, a method of 10-year banishment in ancient Athens, by which the citizens gathered and each
wrote on a potsherd or tile the name of a man they deemed dangerous to the liberties of the people,
and a man whose name turned up often enough was sent away. From Middle French ostracisme (16c.),
Modern Latin ostracismus, or directly from Greek ostrakismos, from ostrakizein to ostracize, from
ostrakon tile, potsherd, from PIE *ost-r-, from root *ost- bone (see osseous). The Greek word is
related to osteon bone, ostreion oyster (and cognate with German Estrich pavement, which is from
Medieval Latin astracus pavement, ultimately from Greek ostrakon).    A similar practice in ancient
Syracuse (with banishment for five years) was by writing names on olive leaves, and thus was called
petalismos.


ostracize (v.)

1640s, from Greek ostrakizein to banish, literally to banish by voting with potshards (see
ostracism). Figurative sense of to exclude from society is attested from 1640s. Related:
Ostracization; ostracized; ostracizing.


ostrich (n.)

early 13c., from Old French ostruce ostrich (Modern French autruche) and Medieval Latin ostrica,
ostrigius, all from Vulgar Latin avis struthio, from Latin avis bird (see aviary) + Late Latin
struthio ostrich, from Greek strouthion ostrich, from strouthos megale big sparrow, perhaps from PIE
*trozdo- thrush (see thrush (n.1)). The Greeks also knew the bird as strouthokamelos camel-sparrow,
for its long neck. Among its proverbial peculiarities are indiscriminate voracity (especially a
habit of swallowing iron and stone to aid digestion), want of regard for its eggs, and a tendency to
hide its head in the sand when pursued.Like the Austridge, who hiding her little head, supposeth her
great body obscured. [1623, recorded in OED]Ostriches do put their heads in the sand, but ostrich
farmers say they do this in search of something to eat.


Ostrogoth (n.)

c.1600, one of the East Goths, who conquered Italy late 5c. and established, under Theodric, a
kingdom there that lasted from 493 to 555 C.E., from Late Latin Ostrogoth&aelig;, from Germanic,
literally eastern Goths from Proto-Germanic *aust(a)r- east (see east; for second element, see Goth;
also see Visigoth), but according to Klein this is a folk corruption of an earlier Austrogoti, from
a Germanic compound, the first element of which means shining or splendid, from Proto-Germanic
*austr-, from PIE *ausr- (see aurora), which is also, via sunrise, the root of the Latin word for
east.


Oswald

masc. proper name, from Old English Osweald god-power, god-ruler, from Old English os god (only in
personal names), from PIE *ansu- spirit (see Oscar) + Old English (ge)weald power.


otalgia (n.)

1650s, from Greek otalgia earache, from ous, aus (genitive otos) ear (see ear (n.1)) + algos pain
(see -algia).


other (adj.)

Old English o&thorn;er the second (adj.), also as a pronoun, one of the two, other, from Proto-
Germanic *antharaz (cognates: Old Saxon athar, Old Frisian other, Old Norse annarr, Middle Dutch and
Dutch ander, Old High German andar, German ander, Gothic an&thorn;ar other).    These are from PIE
*an-tero-, variant of *al-tero- the other of two (source of Lithuanian antras, Sanskrit antarah
other, foreign, Latin alter), from root *al- (1) beyond (see alias (adv.)) + adjectival comparative
suffix *-tero-. The Old English, Old Saxon, and Old Frisian forms show a normal loss of n before
fricatives [Barnhart]. Meaning different is mid-13c.    Sense of second was detached from this word
in English (which uses second, from Latin) and German (zweiter, from zwei two) to avoid ambiguity.
In Scandinavian, however, the second floor is still the other floor (Swedish andra, Danish anden).
Also compare Old English o&thorn;ergeara next year.   The other woman a woman with whom a man begins
a love affair while he is already committed is from 1855. The other day originally (mid-12c.) was
the next day; later (c.1300) yesterday; and now, loosely, a day or two ago (early 15c.). Phrase
other half in reference to either the poor or the rich, is recorded from c.1600.La moiti&eacute; du
monde ne s&ccedil;ayt comment l'aultre vit. [Rabelais, Pantagruel, 1532]


otherness (n.)

1580s, from other + -ness.


otherwise (adv.)

contracted from Old English phrase on o&eth;re wisan in the other manner (see other + wise (n.)),
which in Middle English became o&thorn;re wise, and mid-14c. o&thorn;erwise. As an adjective from
c.1400.


otherworldly (adj.)

1854, from other + world + -ly (1). Otherworldliness is recorded from 1819. Phrase other world world
of idealism or fantasy, afterlife, spirit-land is c.1200.


otic (adj.)

pertaining to the ear, from Greek otikos, from ous (genitive otos) ear (see ear (n.1)).


otiose (adj.)

1794, unfruitful, futile, from Latin otiosus having leisure or ease,unoccupied, idle, not busy
(source of French oiseux, Spanish ocioso, Italian otioso), from otium leisure, free time, freedom
from business, of unknown origin. Meaning at leisure, idle is recorded from 1850. Compare Latin
phrase otium cum dignitate leisure with dignity. Earlier adjective in English was otious- at ease
(1610s), and Middle English had noun otiosity (late 15c.).


ottava rima

1820, Italian, eight-lined stanza, literally eighth rhyme, from ottava eighth (see octave). A stanza
of eight 11-syllable lines, rhymed a b a b a b c c, but in the Byronic variety, they are English
heroic lines of 10 syllables.


Ottawa

Canadian capital, founded 1827 as Bytown, named for English officer John By, who oversaw
construction of the canal there; renamed 1854, when it became capital, for the Ottawa River, which
took its name from the Algonquian people who lived in Michigan and Ontario. Their name is said to be
from adawe to trade.


otter (n.)

Old English otr, otor otter, from Proto-Germanic *otraz (cognates: Old Norse otr, Swedish utter,
Danish odder, Dutch otter, Old High German ottar, German Otter), from PIE *udros, literally water-
creature (cognates: Sanskrit udrah, Avestan udra otter; Greek hydra water-serpent, enydris otter;
Latin lutra, Old Church Slavonic vydra, Lithuanian udra, Old Irish odoirne otter), from root *wed-
(1) water (see water (n.1)). Sea otter attested from 1660s, also known as sea-ape.


Ottoman

1580s (n.), c.1600 (adj.), from French Ottoman, from Italian Ottomano, from Arabic 'Uthmani of or
belonging to 'Uthman, Arabic masc. proper name, which in Turkish is pronounced Othman (see Osmanli),
name of the founder of the dynasty and empire. Ending altered in Italian by formation of a new false
singular, because -i was a plural inflection in Italian. Byron used the more correct form Othman,
and a few writers have followed him. The type of couch so called (1806) because one reclined on it,
which was associated with Eastern customs (see couch).


oubliette (n.)

secret dungeon reached only via trapdoor, 1819, from French oubliette (14c.), from Middle French
oublier to forget, show negligence, Old French oblier, oblider, from Vulgar Latin *oblitare, from
Latin oblitus, past participle of oblivisci to forget (see oblivion).


ouch

1837, from Pennsylvania German outch, cry of pain, from German autsch. The Japanese word is itai.
Latin used au, hau.


oud (n.)

lute or mandolin of Arab lands, 1738, from Arabic 'ud, literally wood. Also cognates: lute.


ought (v.)

Old English ahte owned, possessed, past tense of agan to own, possess, owe (see owe). As a past
tense of owe, it shared in that word's evolution and meant at times in Middle English possessed and
under obligation to pay. It has been detached from owe since 17c., though he aught me ten pounds is
recorded as active in East Anglian dialect from c.1825. As an auxiliary verb expressing duty or
obligation (late 12c., the main modern use), it represents the past subjunctive.


ought (n.)

zero, cipher, 1844, probably a misdivision of a nought (see nought; for misdivision, see N); meaning
probably influenced by aught anything.


Ouija

1891, a trademark name (originally by Kennard Novelty Co., Baltimore, Md.), compounded from French
oui + German ja, both meaning yes.


ounce (n.1)

unit of weight, early 14c., from Old French once, unce, a measure of weight or time (12c.), from
Latin uncia one-twelfth part (of a pound, foot, etc.), from Latin unus one (see one). The Latin word
had been adopted in Old English as ynce (see inch). It was one-twelfth of a pound in the Troy system
of weights, but one-sixteenth in avoirdupois. Abbreviation oz. is from older Italian onza. Also used
in Middle English as a measure of time (7.5 seconds) and length (about 3 inches).


ounce (n.2)

wildcat, c.1300, from Old French once lynx (13c.), from lonce, with l- mistaken as definite article,
from Vulgar Latin *luncea, from Latin lyncea lynx-like, from lynx (see lynx). Originally the common
lynx, later extended to other wildcats, now mainly used of the mountain-panther or snow leopard of
Asia.


our (pron.)

Old English ure of us, genitive plural of the first person pronoun, from Proto-Germanic *ons
(cognates: Old Saxon usa, Old Frisian use, Old High German unsar, German unser, Gothic unsar our),
from PIE *nes-, oblique case of personal pronoun in first person plural (source of Latin nos we,
noster our). Also compare ours. Ourselves (late 15c.), modeled on yourselves, replaced original
construction we selfe, us selfum, etc.


ours

c.1300, a double possessive (with genitive suffix -s (1)), originating in northern England, and has
taken over the absolute function of our (q.v.). In Middle English ourn, ouren also were used.


oust (v.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French oster (late 13c.), Old French oster remove, take away, take off;
evict, dispel; liberate, release (Modern French &ocirc;ter), from Latin obstare stand before, be
opposite, stand opposite to, block, in Vulgar Latin, hinder, from ob against (see ob-) + stare to
stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Related: Ousted; ousting.


ouster (n.)

ejection from property, 1530s, noun use of Anglo-French ouster (see oust). For other such usages,
see waiver.


out (adv.)

Old English ut out, without, outside, common Germanic (Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Gothic ut,
Middle Dutch uut, Dutch uit, Old High German uz, German aus), from PIE root *ud- up, out, up away
(cognates: Sanskrit ut up, out, uttarah higher, upper, later, northern; Avestan uz- up, out, Old
Irish ud- out, Latin usque all the way to, without interruption, Greek hysteros the latter, Russian
vy- out). Meaning into public notice is from 1540s. As an adjective from c.1200. Meaning unconscious
is attested from 1898, originally in boxing. Sense of not popular or modern is from 1966. As a
preposition from mid-13c.    Sense in baseball (1860) was earlier in cricket (1746). Adverbial
phrase out-and-out thoroughly is attested from early 14c.; adjective usage is attested from 1813;
out-of-the-way (adj.) remote, secluded is attested from late 15c. Out-of-towner one not from a
certain place is from 1911. Shakespeare's It out-herods Herod (Hamlet) reflects Herod as stock
braggart and bully in old religious drama and was widely imitated 19c. Out to lunch insane is
student slang from 1955; out of this world excellent is from 1938; out of sight excellent, superior
is from 1891.


out (v.)

Old English utian expel, put out (see out (adv.)); used in many senses over the years. Meaning to
expose as a closet homosexual is first recorded 1990 (as an adjective meaning openly avowing one's
homosexuality it dates from 1970s; see closet); sense of disclose to public view, reveal, make known
has been present since mid-14c.    Eufrosyne preyde &THORN;at god schulde not outen hire to nowiht.
[Legendary of St. Euphrosyne, c.1350]    Related: Outed; outing.


out (n.)

1620s, a being out (of something), from out (adv.). From 1860 in baseball sense; from 1919 as means
of escape; alibi.


out-bid (v.)

1580s, from out (adv.) + bid (v.). Related: Out-bidding; out-bidden.


out-building (n.)

a detached or subordinate building, 1620s, from out + building (n.).


out-take (n.)

rejected part of a film, 1960, from out + take (n.) in the movie sense.


out-thrust (adj.)

1820, from out (adv.) + thrust (v.).


outage (n.)

period or condition in which electrical power is disconnected, 1903, American English; formed from
out on model of shortage.


outback (n.)

back-country, interior regions of Australia, 1907, Australian English, originally an adverb, out in
the back settlements (1878), from out + back (adv.).


outboard (adj.)

situated on the outside of a ship, 1823, from out + board (n.2). In reference to motors, from 1909.


outbreak (n.)

eruption (of disease, hostilities, etc.), c.1600, from out + break (v.). Outbreak was a verb in
Middle English (c.1300).


outburst (n.)

1650s, from out + burst (v.). Outbresten was a verb in Middle English (mid-12c.), from Old English
utaberstan.


outcast (n.)

mid-14c., a person cast out or rejected, originally past participle of Middle English outcasten,
from out + casten to cast (see cast (v.)). The adjective is attested from late 14c. In an Indian
context, outcaste one who has been expelled from his caste is from 1876; see caste.


outclass (v.)

1870, to beat (a rival) so completely as to put him out of the same class, from out + class (v.).


outcome (n.)

1788, that which results from something, originally Scottish, from out + come (v.). Popularized in
English by Carlyle (c.1830s). Used in Middle English in sense of act or fact of coming out (c.1200).
Old English had utancumen (n.) stranger, foreigner.


outcrop (n.)

1805, in geology, exposure of rocks at the surface, from out + crop (n.) in its sense of sprout,
head.


outcry (n.)

mid-14c., act of crying aloud, from out + cry (v.). In metaphoric sense of public protest, first
attested 1911 in George Bernard Shaw.


outdated (adj.)

also out-dated, 1610s, grown obsolete, from out + past participle of date (v.1). Out-of-date is
attested from 1610s.


outdoor (adj.)

1748, from out + door. Out-of-door is from c.1800.


outdoors (adv.)

1817, from outdoor + adverbial genitive. As a noun, open spaces, recorded from 1857.


outdoorsman (n.)

1924, American English, from outdoors + man (n.).


outen (v.)

put out, 1916, American English dialectal; see out (adv.) + -en (1). An idiom in Pennsylvania
German.


outer (adj.)

late 14c., comparative of out (on analogy of inner), replacing by 18c. forms descended from Old
English uttera (comp. of Old English ut out) which developed into utter and was no longer felt as
connected with out. Outer space first attested 1901 in writings of H.G. Wells.


outermost (adj.)

1580s, from outer + -most.


outerwear (n.)

1921, from outer + wear (n.).


outface (v.)

1520s, from out (adv.) + face (v.). Related: Outfaced; outfacing.


outfield (n.)

1630s, outlying land of a farm (especially in Scotland), from out + field (n.); sporting sense is
attested from 1851 in cricket, 1868 in baseball. Related: Outfielder.


outfit (v.)

1840, from outfit (n.). Related: Outfitted; outfitting; outfitter.


outfit (n.)

1769, act of fitting out (a ship, etc.) for an expedition, from out + fit (v.). Sense of articles
and equipment required for an expedition first attested 1787, American English; meaning a person's
clothes is first recorded 1852; sense of group of people is from 1883.


outflank (v.)

1765, from out (adv.) + flank (v.). Figurative use from 1773. Related: Outflanked; outflanking.


outflow (n.)

1869, from out (adv.) + flow (n.).


outfox (v.)

outwit, 1939, from out + fox (q.v.). Related: Outfoxed; outfoxing.


outgoing (adj.)

1630s, that goes out, from out (adv.) + going. Meaning sociable, friendly, attested from 1950, on
same notion as in extrovert. Middle English had a noun outgoing a departure, mid-14c., from a verb
outgo to go forth, and Old English had utgangende outgoing (literal). Related: Outgoingness.


outgrow (v.)

1590s, to surpass in growth, from out + grow (v.). Meaning to become too large or too mature for is
attested from 1660s. Related: Outgrowing; outgrown.


outgrowth (n.)

1837, from out (adv.) + growth. Figurative sense natural product is earlier (1828).


outgun (v.)

1690s, from out (adv.) + gun. Related: Outgunned; outgunning.


outhouse (n.)

early 14c., shed, outbuilding, from out + house (n.). Sense of a privy (principally American
English) is first attested 1819.


outie (n.)

in reference to navels, by 1972, from out (adv.) + -ie.


outing (n.)

late 14c., action of going out; mid-15c., act of putting out; verbal noun from out (v.). Meaning
airing, excursion, pleasure trip is from 1821.


outlander (n.)

1590s, foreigner, from outland (see outlandish) + -er (1). Probably on model of Dutch uitlander,
German ausl&#228;nder. In South African English it had a specific sense of not of Boer birth (1892)
and was a loan-translation of S.African Dutch uitlander.


outlandish (adj.)

Old English utlendisc of a foreign country, not native, from utland foreign land, literally outland
(see out + land (n.)) + -ish. Sense of unfamiliar, strange, odd, bizarre (such as the customs of
foreigners may seem to natives) is attested from 1590s.


outlast (v.)

to last longer than, 1570s, from out (adv.) + last (v.). Related: Outlasted; outlasting.


outlaw (n.)

Old English utlaga one put outside the law (and thereby deprived of its benefits and protections),
from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse utlagi (n.) outlaw, from utlagr (adj.) outlawed,
banished, from ut out (see out (adv.)) + *lagu, plural of lag law (see law).[G]if he man to
dea&eth;e gefylle, beo he &thorn;onne utlah [Laws of Edward &amp; Guthrum, c.924] Meaning one living
a lawless life is first recorded 1880. As an adjective from Old English.


outlaw (v.)

Old English utlagian to outlaw, banish, from utlaga an outlaw (see outlaw (n.)). Related: Outlawed;
outlawing.


outlawry (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French utlagerie, a hybrid from Old English utlaga (see outlaw (n.)) + -ary.


outlay (n.)

act or fact of laying out (especially money) or expending, 1798, originally Scottish, from out
(adv.) + lay (v.).


outlet (n.)

mid-13c., a river mouth, from out + let (v.). Electrical wiring sense is attested from 1892. Meaning
a retail store is attested from 1933. Figurative sense means of relief or discharge is from 1620s.


outlier (n.)

c.1600, stone quarried and removed but left unused, from out + lie (v.2). Transferred meaning
outsider is recorded from 1680s; anything detached from its main body is from 1849; geological sense
is from 1833.


outline (n.)

1660s, lines by which a figure is delineated, from out + line (v.). Meaning rough draft in words is
from 1759.


outline (v.)

1790, to draw in outline, from outline (n.). Meaning to describe in general terms is from 1855.
Related: Outlined; outlining.


outlive (v.)

to live longer than, late 15c., from out (adv.) + live (v.). Related: Outlived; outliving.


outlook (n.)

mental view or survey, 1742, from out (adv.) + look (v.). The meaning prospect for the future is
attested from 1851. Earliest sense was a look-out (1660s). The literal sense of vigilant watch, act
or practice of looking out (1815) is rare; look-out being used instead for this.


outlying (adj.)

outside certain limits, 1660s, from out + present participle of lie (v.2). Meaning remote from the
center is first recorded 1680s.


outmoded (adj.)

no longer in fashion, out of date, 1894, from out + mode (q.v.); perhaps formed on model of French
d&eacute;moder.


outness (n.)

1709, from out (adv.) + -ness.


outnumber (v.)

to number more than, 1660s, from out + number (v.). Related: Outnumbered; outnumbering.


outpatient (n.)

also out-patient, 1715, person who is treated at a hospital but not admitted, from out + patient
(n.). The adjective is first recorded 1879.


outperform (v.)

1960, from out (adv.) + perform. Related: Outperformed; outperforming.


outpost (n.)

1757, military position detached from the main body of troops, from out + post (n.2). Originally in
George Washington's letters. Commercial sense of trading settlement near a frontier is from 1802.
Phrase outpost of Empire (by 1895) in later use often echoes Kipling.


outpouring (n.)

mid-15c., a pouring out, from out + infinitive of pour (v.). From 1757 as action of pouring out,
originally transferred, of things spiritual; sense of that which is poured out (again, usually
transferred) is from 1827.


output (n.)

1839, from out + put (v.). Till c.1880, a technical term in the iron and coal trade [OED]. The verb
is attested from mid-14c., originally to expel; meaning to produce is from 1858.


outrage (n.)

c.1300, evil deed, offense, crime; affront, indignity, from Old French outrage harm, damage; insult;
criminal behavior; presumption, insolence, overweening (12c.), earlier oltrage (11c.), from Vulgar
Latin *ultraticum excess, from Latin ultra beyond (see ultra-). Etymologically, the passing beyond
reasonable bounds in any sense; meaning narrowed in English toward violent excesses because of folk
etymology from out + rage. Of injuries to feelings, principles, etc., from 1769.


outrage (v.)

c.1300, to go to excess, act immoderately, from outrage (n.). From 1580s with meaning do violence
to. Related: Outraged; outraging.


outrageous (adj.)

c.1300, excessive, extravagant, from Old French outrageus, outrajos immoderate, excessive, violent,
lawless (Modern French outrageux), from outrage, oltrage (see outrage). Meaning flagrantly evil is
late 14c.; modern teen slang usages of it unwittingly approach the original and etymological sense
of outrage. Related: Outrageously; outrageousness.


outrank (v.)

1829, from out (adv.) + rank. Related: Outranked; outranking.


outre (adj.)

exaggerated, extravagant, eccentric, 1722, from French outr&eacute; exaggerated, excessive, extreme,
past participle of outrer to carry to excess, overdo, overstrain, exaggerate, from outre beyond (see
outrage).


outreach (n.)

an organization's involvement in the community, 1870, from out + reach (v.). The verb (c.1400) tends
to be used in literal senses.


outrider (n.)

mid-14c., from out (adv.) + rider.


outrigger (n.)

device used in Pacific and Indian oceans to stabilize canoes, 1748, altered (by influence of rig)
from outligger (late 15c.) a spar projecting from a vessel, probably from the same root as Dutch
uitlegger, literally out-lyer.


outright (adv.)

c.1300, completely, entirely; openly, directly; at once, without hesitation, from out (adv.) + right
(adj.1)). Meaning all at once is attested from c.1600. As an adjective, direct, downright, from
1530s.


outrun (v.)

mid-14c., to run out, from out (adv.) + run (v.). Sense of to outstrip in running is from 1520s;
figurative use from 1650s. Related: Outran; outrunning.


outscore (v.)

1921, from out (adv.) + score (v.). Related: Outscored; outscoring.


outset (n.)

act of setting out on a journey, business, etc. 1759, from out + set (v.). The earlier word for this
was outsetting (1670s).


outshine (v.)

1590s, from out (adv.) + shine (v.). Perhaps coined by Spenser. Figurative sense of to surpass in
splendor or excellence is from 1610s. Related: Outshone; outshining.


outside (n.)

c.1500, outer side, from out + side (n.). The adjective is attested from 1630s; the preposition from
1826; the adverb from 1813. Phrase outside of with exception of is from 1859.


outsider (n.)

1800, from outside; figurative sense of a person isolated from conventional society is first
recorded 1907. The sense of race horses outside the favorites is from 1836; hence outside chance
(1909).


outsized (adj.)

larger than average, 1880, from out (adv.) + size.


outskirt (n.)

outer border, 1590s, from out + skirt (n.). Now only in plural, outskirts. Originally in Spenser.


outsmart (v.)

to prove too clever for, 1926, from out + smart (adj.). Related: Outsmarted; outsmarting.


outsource (v.)

in reference to jobs going overseas, by 1981 (as outsourcing), from out + source (v.). Related:
Outsourced.


outspend (v.)

mid-15c., to consume totally, use up, from out (adv.) + spend (v.). Meaning to spend more than
another or others is from 1840. Related: Outspent; outspending. Outspent is attested from 1650s as
exhausted.


outspoken (adj.)

given to speaking freely, 1808, originally Scottish, from out (adv.) + spoken. The pa. pple. has
here a resultant force, as in 'well spoken', 'well read'. [OED]. Related: Outspokenly;
outspokenness.


outstanding (adj.)

1610s, projecting, prominent, detached, present participle adjective from outstand (v.) endure
successfully, hold out against, from out (adv.) + stand (v.). Figurative sense of conspicuous,
striking is first recorded 1830. Meaning unpaid, unsettled is from 1797. Related: Outstandingly.


outstay (v.)

c.1600, from out (adv.) + stay (v.).


outstretch (v.)

mid-14c., from out + stretch (v.). Related: Outstretched; outstretching.


outstrip (v.)

1570s, to pass in running, from out + Middle English strip move quickly, of unknown origin.
Figurative sense of to excel or surpass in anything is from 1590s. Related: Outstripped;
outstripping.


outward (adj.)

Old English utweard toward the outside, external (of an enclosure, surface, etc.), earlier
utanweard, from ute, utan outside (from ut; see out) + -weard (see -ward). Of persons, in reference
to the external appearance (usually opposed to inner feelings), it is attested from c.1500. Also as
an adverb in Old English (utaword). Outward-bound directed on a course out from home port is first
recorded c.1600; with capital initials, it refers to a sea school founded in 1941. Related:
Outwardly; outwardness.


outweigh (v.)

1590s, from out (adv.) + weigh (v.). Related: Outweighed; outweighing.


outwit (v.)

to get the better of by superior wits, 1650s, from out + wit. Related: Outwitted; outwitting.


outworn (adj.)

from out (adv.) + worn.


ouzel (n.)

also ousel, from Old English osle blackbird, from West Germanic *amslon- (cognates: Old High German
amsala, German amsel), probably from PIE *ams- black, blackbird (cognates: Latin merula blackbird,
Welsh mwyalch blackbird, thrush, Breton moualch ouzel).


ouzo (n.)

liquor flavored with aniseed, 1898, from Modern Greek ouzo, of uncertain origin. One theory [OED] is
that it derives from Italian uso Massalia, literally for Marsailles, which was stamped on selected
packages of silkworm cocoons being shipped from Thessaly, and came to be taken for of superior
quality.


oval (adj.)

1570s, from Modern Latin ovalis egg-shaped (source of French oval, 1540s), literally of or
pertaining to an egg, from Latin ovum egg (see ovary). The classical Latin word was ovatus.


oval (n.)

1560s, from Middle French ovalle oval figure, from Medieval Latin ovalis (see oval (adj.)).


Ovaltine

proprietary name of a drink mix, 1906, probably based on Latin ovum (see oval), because eggs are one
of the ingredients.


ovarian (adj.)

pertaining to an ovary or the ovaries, 1810, see ovary + -ian.


ovary (n.)

1650s, from Modern Latin ovarium ovary (16c.), from Medieval Latin ovaria the ovary of a bird
(13c.), from Latin ovum egg, from PIE *owyo-/*oyyo- egg (see egg (n.)). In classical Latin, ovarius
meant egg-keeper.


ovate (n.)

1723, from assumed Latin plural Ovates, from Greek Ouateis soothsayers, prophets, mentioned by
Strabo as a third order in the Gaulish hierarchy, from Proto-Celtic *vateis, plural of *vatis,
cognate with Latin vatis, Old Irish faith, Welsh ofydd. The modern word, and the artificial senses
attached to it, are from the 18c. Celtic revival and the word appears first in Henry Rowlands.


ovate (adj.)

1760, from Latin <span class=foreign&gt;ovatus&lt;/span&gt; >ovatus egg-shaped, from ovum egg (see
ovum).


ovation (n.)

1530s, in the Roman historical sense, from Middle French ovation or directly from Latin ovationem
(nominative ovatio) a triumph, rejoicing, noun of action from past participle stem of ovare exult,
rejoice, triumph, probably imitative of a shout (compare Greek euazein to utter cries of joy). In
Roman history, a lesser triumph, granted to a commander for achievements insufficient to entitle him
to a triumph proper. Figurative sense of burst of enthusiastic applause from a crowd is first
attested 1831.


oven (n.)

Old English ofen furnace, oven, from Proto-Germanic *ukhnaz (cognates: Old Frisian, Dutch oven, Old
High German ovan, German Ofen, Old Norse ofn, Old Swedish oghn, Gothic auhns), from PIE *aukw-
cooking pot (cognates: Sanskrit ukhah pot, cooking pot, Latin aulla pot, Greek ipnos), originally,
perhaps, something hollowed out. The oven-bird (1825) so called because of the shape of its nest. In
slang, of a woman, to have (something) in the oven to be pregnant is attested from 1962.


over (prep.)

Old English ofer beyond, above, upon, in, across, past; on high, from Proto-Germanic *uberi
(cognates: Old Saxon obar, Old Frisian over, Old Norse yfir, Old High German ubar, German &uuml;ber,
Gothic ufar over, above), from PIE *uper (see super-). As an adjective from Old English uffera. As
an adverb from late Old English. Sense of finished is attested from late 14c. Meaning recovered from
is from 1929. In radio communication, used to indicate the speaker has finished speaking (1926).
Adjective phrase over-the-counter is attested from 1875, originally of stocks and shares.


over-

word-forming element meaning above; highest; across; too much; above normal; outer, from Old English
ofer (see over). Over and its Germanic relations were widely used as prefixes, and sometimes could
be used with negative force. This is rare in Modern English, but compare Gothic ufarmunnon to
forget, ufar-swaran to swear falsely; Old English ofercr&#230;ft fraud.


over-abundance (n.)

late 14c., from over- + abundance.


over-abundant (adj.)

c.1400, from over- + abundant.


over-achiever (n.)

also overachiever, 1953, from over- + agent noun of achieve (v.). Related: Over-achieve; over-
achieving.


over-age (adj.)

1886, from over- + age (n.). Related: Over-aged those who are too old (late 15c.).


over-anxious (adj.)

1713, from over- + anxious. Related: Overanxiously; overanxiousness.


over-cautious (adj.)

1706, from over- + cautious. Related: Over-cautiously; over-cautiousness.


over-compensate (v.)

1758 (implied in over-compensated), from over- + compensate. Related: Over-compensating.


over-compensation (n.)

1917 in the psychological sense, translating German &uuml;berkompensation, from over- +
compensation. A term used by A. Alder to denote exaggerated striving for power in someone who has an
inner sense of inferiority.


over-confidence (n.)

c.1700, from over- + confidence.


over-confident (adj.)

1610s, from over- + confident. Related: Overconfidently.


over-correction (n.)

1828, from over- + correction.


over-educated (adj.)

1788, from over- + educated.


over-estimate (v.)

1768, from over- + estimate (v.). Related: Over-estimated; over-estimating.


over-estimation (n.)

1793, noun of action from over-estimate (v.).


over-excite (v.)

1708 (implied in over-excited), from over- + excite. Related: Over-exciting.


over-excitement (n.)

1815, from over- + excitement.


over-expose (v.)

1869, in photography, from over- + expose (v.). Figurative sense, in reference to celebrity, first
attested 1969 (implied in overexposure). Related: Over-exposed; over-exposing.


over-extend (v.)

to take on too much (work, debt, etc.), 1937, from over- + extend. Related: Over-extended; over-
extending.


over-indulge (v.)

1741, from over- + indulge. Related: Over-indulged; over-indulging.


over-indulgence (n.)

also overindulgence, 1630s, from over- + indulgence. First attested in Donne.


over-long (adv.)

for too long a time, late 14c., from over- + long (adj.).


over-populate (v.)

also overpopulate, to overrun with too many people, 1828 (implied in overpopulated), from over- +
populate (v.). Related: Overpopulating. Over-populous over-populated is attested from 1670s.


over-population (n.)

over-populousness, 1807, from over- + population. Malthus (1798) had over-populousness.


over-react (v.)

also overreact, 1961, from over- + react (v.). First attested in Lewis Mumford. Related: Over-
reacting; overreacting; over-reaction.


over-ripe (adj.)

1670s, from over- + ripe (adj.).


over-sexed (adj.)

1898, from over- + past participle of sex (v.).


over-stuffed (adj.)

also overstuffed, of furniture, completely covered with a thick layer of stuffing, 1883, from over-
+ past participle of stuff (v.).


over-trouble (v.)

1580s, from over- + trouble (v.). Related: Over-troubled; over-troubling.


over-use (v.)

1670s, from over- + use (v.). Related: Overused; overusing.


over-wind (v.)

also overwind, wind too tight, c.1600, from over- + wind (v.1). Related: Over-wound; over-winding.


overact (v.)

1610s, to go too far in action, from over- + act (v.). Meaning to play a part with too much
emphasis, to chew the scenery is from 1630s. Related: Overacted; overacting.


overage (n.)

a surplus amount, 1945, a banking term, coined from over on model of shortage.


overall (adv.)

everywhere, Old English ofer eall, from ofer over (see over) + eall (see all). Sense of including
everything is from 1894. The noun in the clothing sense (usually plural) of loose trousers of a
strong material worn by cowboys, etc. is from 1782. Specific sense loose fitting canvas trousers
with a bib and strap top (originally worn by workmen over other clothes to protect them from wet,
dirt, etc.) is attested from 1897.


overalls (n.)

see overall. Compare French surtout overcoat, literally an over all, from sur- over + tout all.


overarching (adj.)

1720, from present participle of verb overarch (1660s), from over- + arch (v.).


overawe (v.)

1570s, from over- + awe (v.). Perhaps coined by Spenser. Related: Overawed; overawing.


overbear (v.)

late 14c., to carry over, from over- + bear (v.). Meaning to bear down by weight of physical force
is from 1535 (in Coverdale), originally nautical, of an overwhelming wind; figurative sense of to
overcome and repress by power, authority, etc. is from 1560s.


overbearing (adj.)

figurative present participle adjective from overbear (v.) in its sense to bear down.


overbite (n.)

overlapping of the lower teeth by the upper ones, 1887, from over- + bite (n.).


overblown (adj.)

late 15c., blown over, passed away, past participle adjective from verb overblow to blow over the
top of, of a storm, to abate, pass on (late 14c.), from over- + blow (v.1). Meaning inflated, puffed
up (with vanity, etc.) is from 1864.


overboard (adv.)

over the side of a ship, Old English ofor bord, from over + bord side of a ship (see board (n.2)).
Figurative sense of excessively, beyond one's means (especially in phrase go overboard) first
attested 1931 in Damon Runyon.


overbook (v.)

to sell more tickets than there are seats, 1903, from over- + book (v.); originally in reference to
theaters. Related: Overbooked; overbooking.


overburden (v.)

also over-burden, to put too much weight on, 1530s, from over- + burden (v.). Earliest uses are
figurative. Related: Overburdened; overburdening.


overcast (adj.)

c.1300, of weather, past participle adjective from verb overcast (early 13c.), to overthrow, also to
cover, to overspread as with a garment, usually of weather, from over- + cast (v.).


overcharge (v.)

c.1300, to overload, overburden, from over- + charge (v.). Meaning to charge someone too much money
is from 1660s. Related: Overcharged; overcharging.


overcloud (v.)

1590s, from over- + cloud (v.). Related: Overclouded; overclouding.


overcoat (n.)

large coat worn over ordinary clothing, 1802, from over- + coat (n.).


overcome (v.)

Old English ofercuman to reach, overtake, also to conquer, prevail over, from ofer (see over) +
cuman to come (see come (v.)). A common Germanic compound (Middle Dutch overkomen, Old High German
ubarqueman, German &uuml;berkommen). In reference to mental or chemical force, to overwhelm, render
helpless, it is in late Old English. Meaning to surmount (a difficulty or obstacle) is from c.1200.
The Civil Rights anthem We Shall Overcome was put together c.1950s from lyrics from Charles
Tindley's spiritual I'll Overcome Some Day (1901), and melody from pre-Civil War spiritual No More
Auction Block for Me. Related: Overcame; overcoming.


overcrowd (v.)

1766, from over- + crowd (v.). Related: Overcrowded; overcrowding.


overdo (v.)

Old English oferdon to do too much, from ofer (see over) + don (see do (v.)). Common Germanic (for
example Old High German ubartuan). Meaning to overtax, exhaust (especially in phrase to overdo it)
is attested from 1817. Of food, to cook too long, first recorded 1680s (in past participle adjective
overdone).


overdone (adj.)

Old English ofer-done carried to excess; see overdo. Of cooking from 1680s.


overdose (n.)

1700, an excessive dose, from over- + dose (n.).


overdose (v.)

1727, to administer medicine in too large a dose (transitive); from 1968 as to take an overdose of
drugs; see over- + dose (v.). Related: Overdosed; overdosing.


overdraft (n.)

1878, in the banking sense, from over- + draft (n.).


overdraw (v.)

late 14c., to draw across; 1734 in the banking sense, from over- + draw (v.). Related: Overdrawn;
overdrawing.


overdrive (n.)

speed-increasing gear in an automobile, 1929, from over- + drive (n.).


overdub (v.)

1954, from over- + dub (v.). As a noun (over-dub) from 1953. Related: Overdubbed; overdubbing.


overdue (adj.)

past the due date, 1845 of bills, 1890 of library books, 1970 of menstrual periods, from over- + due
(adj.).


overeat (v.)

to eat too much, 1590s, from over- + eat (v.). Related: Overate; overeating. Old English had
ofer&#230;t (n.) gluttony; ofer&#230;te (adj.) gluttonous.


overfed (adj.)

1570s, from over- + fed (adj.).


overfeed (v.)

also over-feed, c.1600, from over- + feed (v.). Related: overfed; overfeeding.


overflow (v.)

Old English oferfleow to flow across, flood, inundate, also to flow over (a brim or bank); see over-
+ flow (v.). Related: Overflowed; overflowing.


overflow (n.)

1580s, act of overflowing, from overflow (v.).


overgrazed (adj.)

of grassland, 1929, from over- + past participle of graze (v.).


overground (adj.)

situated above ground (as opposed to underground), 1879, from over- + ground (n.).


overgrown (adj.)

late 14c., covered with growth, past participle adjective from overgrow overspread with foliage (Old
English ofergrowan); see over- + grown, and compare Old English verb ofergrowan to overgrow. Meaning
having grown too large is attested from late 15c.


overgrowth (n.)

c.1600, from over- + growth. Also see overgrown.


overhand (adv.)

1570s, upside down, from over- + hand. Sense in tennis, etc., in reference to hand position above
that which is gripped, is first recorded 1861. As an adjective, of throws, strokes, or bowls, done
with the hand raised above the shoulder, it is first recorded 1828 (in cricket).


overhang (v.)

1590s, from over- + hang (v.). Related: Overhung; overhanging.


overhang (n.)

fact of overhanging, 1864, from overhang (v.).


overhaul (v.)

1620s, from over- + haul (v.); originally nautical, pull rigging apart for examination, which was
done by slackening the rope by hauling in the opposite direction to that in which it is pulled in
hoisting. Replaced overhale in sense of overtake (1793). Related: Overhauled; overhauling.


overhaul (n.)

1826, from overhaul (v.).


overhead

1530s, above one's head (adv.), from over- + head. The adjective is attested from 1874. As a noun,
short for overhead costs, etc., it is attested from 1914.


overhear (v.)

to hear what one is not meant to hear, 1540s, from over- + hear. The notion is perhaps to hear
beyond the intended range of the voice. Old English oferhieran also meant to not listen, to
disregard, disobey (compare overlook for negative force of over; also Middle High German
&uuml;berhaeren, Middle Dutch overhoren in same sense). Related: Overheard; overhearing.


overheat (v.)

to make too hot (transitive), late 14c., from over- + heat (v.). Intransitive sense to become too
hot is from 1902, originally in reference to motor engines. Related: Overheated; overheating.


overindulge (v.)

also over-indulge, 1821, from over (adv.) + indulge.


overjoy (v.)

late 14c., to rejoice over, from over- + joy (q.v.); translating Latin supergaudere (in Psalms
xxxiv, etc.). Transitive sense of to fill with gladness is first recorded 1570s (now usually in past
participle overjoyed).


overkill (n.)

1958, from over- + kill (v.). Originally in reference to nuclear arsenals; the general sense is from
1965. The verb is attested from 1946.


overlap (v.)

to partially extend over, 1726, over- + lap (v.). Related: Overlapped; overlapping.


overlap (n.)

1813, from overlap (v.).


overlay (v.)

to cover the surface of (something), c.1300, in part from Old English oferlecgan to place over, also
to overburden, and in part from over- + lay (v.). There also was an overlie in Middle English, but
it merged into this word. Similar compounds are found in other Germanic languages, such as Gothic
ufarlagjan. Related: Overlaid; overlaying.


overlay (n.)

in the printing sense, 1824, from overlay (v.). Meaning transparent sheet over a map, chart, etc. is
from 1938. In earliest noun use it meant a necktie (1725).


overlie (v.)

late 12c., from over- + lie (v.2), or from an unrecorded Old English *oferlicgan. In use from 12th
to 16th c.; in 17-18th displaced by overlay; reintroduced in 19th c., chiefly in geological use.
[OED]. Related: Overlay; overlain.


overload (v.)

1550s, to place too great a burden on, from over- + load (v.). Intransitive sense from 1961.
Related: Overloaded; overloading. The noun is attested from 1640s; of electrical current, from 1904.
Middle English had overlade (v.) in this sense.


overlong (adj.)

excessively long, early 14c., from over- + long (adj.). Middle English also had overshort too short,
too brief.


overlook (v.)

mid-14c., to examine, scrutinize, inspect, from over- + look (v.). Another Middle English sense was
to peer over the top of. These two literal senses have given rise to the two main modern meanings.
Meaning to look over or beyond and thus not see, via notion of to choose to not notice is first
recorded 1520s. Seemingly contradictory sense of to watch over officially, keep an eye on,
superintend is from 1530s. Related: Overlooked; overlooking. In Shekaspeare's day, overlooking also
was a common term for inflicting the evil eye on (someone or something).


overlord (n.)

c.1200, from over- + lord (n.). Chosen 1943 as the Allied code-word for the D-Day invasion of
northern France.


overly (adv.)

excessively, Old English oferlice; see over + -ly (2). Often regarded as an Americanism in the U.K.
[OED].


overmaster (v.)

mid-14c., from over- + master (v.). Related: Overmastered; overmastering.


overmatch (v.)

mid-14c., be more than a match for, from over- + match (v.). Related: Overmatched; overmatching.


overmuch (adj.)

too great in amount, c.1300, over- + much (q.v.). As an adverb from late 14c. Old English had
cognate ofermicel.


overnight (adv.)

early 14c., from over- + night (n.). Originally on the preceding evening; sense of during the night
is attested from 1530s. Meaning in the course of a single night, hence seemingly instantaneously is
attested from 1939.


overpark (v.)

1938, American English, from over- + park (v.). Related: Overparked; overparking.


overpass (n.)

stretch of road that passes over another, 1929, American English, from over- + pass (v.). + Overpass
has been a verb since late 13c.


overpay (v.)

c.1600, from over- + pay (v.). Related: Overpaid; overpaying.


overplay (v.)

to emphasize (something) too much, 1933, a metaphor from card games, in to overplay (one's) hand, to
spoil one's hand by bidding in excess of its value (1926), from over- + play (v.). The word was used
earlier in a theatrical sense. Related: Overplayed; overplaying.


overpower (v.)

to overcome with superior power, 1590s, from over- + power (v.). Related: Overpowered; overpowering.


overprice (v.)

to price (something) excessively high, c.1600, from over- + price (v.). Related: Overpriced;
overpricing.


overproduction (n.)

1822, from over- + production.


overprotection (n.)

1929, originally in reference to children, from over- + protection.


overprotective (adj.)

also over-protective, 1930, from over- + protective. Related: Overprotectively; overprotectiveness.


overrate (v.)

1610s, from over- + rate (v.). Related: Overrated; overrating.


overreach (v.)

c.1300, to reach above or beyond (transitive), from over- + reach (v.). Meaning to extend over
something, to cover it is from c.1400. Sense of to reach beyond one's strength is from 1560s. As a
noun from 1550s. Related: Overreached; overreaching.


override (v.)

Old English oferridan to ride across, from ofer over (see over) + ridan to ride (see ride (v.)).
Originally literal, of cavalry, etc. Figurative meaning to set aside arrogantly is from 1827. The
mechanical sense to suspend automatic operation is attested from 1946. As a noun in this sense from
1946. Related: Overrode; overriding; overridden.


overrule (v.)

rule against; set aside, as by a higher authority, 1590s, from over- + rule (v.). It was used
earlier in a sense to govern, control (1570s). Related: Overruled; overruling.


overrun (v.)

Old English oferyrnan; see over- + run (v.). The noun meaning excess expenditure over budget is from
1956. Related: Overran; overrunning.


overseas (adj.)

1580s, from over + sea. Popularized during World War I as a British euphemism for colonial.


oversee (v.)

Old English oferseon to look down upon, keep watch over, survey, observe; see over + see (v.).
Meaning to supervise is attested from mid-15c. The verb lacks the double sense of similar overlook,
but this emerges in the noun form oversight. Related: Oversaw; overseen.


overseer (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from oversee (v.).


overshadow (v.)

Old English ofersceadwian to cast a shadow over, obscure; see over + shadow (v.). It was used to
render Latin obumbrare in New Testament, as were Middle High German &#252;berschatewen, Middle Dutch
overschaduwen, Gothic ufarskadwjan. Figurative sense is from 1580s. Related: Overshadowed;
overshadowing.


overshoe (n.)

1829, from over- + shoe (n.). Related: Overshoes.


overshoot (v.)

mid-14c., to shoot, run, or pass beyond (a point or limit), over- + shoot (v.). Related: Overshot;
overshooting.


overshot (adj.)

1530s, in reference to water-wheels, driven by water shot over from above, past participle adjective
from overshoot.


oversight (n.)

supervision, early 14c., from over- + sight. Meaning omission of notice, fact of passing over
without seeing attested from late 15c.; compare oversee.


oversimplification (n.)

also over-simpification, 1835, from over- + simplification.


oversimplify (v.)

1908, from over- + simplify. Related: Oversimplified; oversimplifying.


oversized (adj.)

1788, past participle adjective from oversize make too large (1670s), from over- + size (v.).


oversleep (v.)

late 14c., from over- + sleep (v.). Related: Overslept; oversleeping. Old English had a noun
ofersl&#230;p too much sleep.


overspend (v.)

1610s, to wear out, from over- + spend. Meaning to spend more than is necessary is attested from
1857. Related: Overspent; overspending.


overspread (v.)

c.1200, to spread throughout, from over- + spread (v.). Related: Overspread (past tense);
overspreading. Old English had oferspr&#230;dan to overlay, cover.


overstand (v.)

to stand over or beside, from Old English oferstandan; see over- + stand (v.).


overstate (v.)

1630s, assume too much grandeur; see over- + state (n.1). Meaning state too strongly is attested
from 1798, from state (v.). Related: Overstated, overstating.


overstatement (n.)

1803, from over- + statement.


overstep (v.)

Old English ofersteppan to step over or beyond, cross, exceed; see over- + step (v.). From the
beginning used in figurative senses. Related: Overstepped; overstepping.


overstock (v.)

1640s, from over- + stock (v.). Related: Overstocked; overstocking. The noun is attested from 1710.


overstrong (adj.)

too powerful, too harsh, early 13c., from over- + strong (adj.).


overt (adj.)

early 14c., open to view, from Old French overt (Modern French ouvert), past participle of ovrir to
open, from Latin aperire to open, uncover, from PIE compound *ap-wer-yo- from *ap- off, away (see
abo-) + base *wer- (5) to cover (see weir). Compare Latin operire to cover, from the same root with
PIE prefix *op- over; and Lithuanian atveriu open, uzveriu shut.


overtake (v.)

to come up to, to catch in pursuit, early 13c., from over- + take (v.). According to OED, originally
the running down and catching of a fugitive or beast of chase; it finds the sense of over- in this
word not so clear. Related: Overtaken; overtaking. Old English had oferniman to take away, carry
off, seize, ravish.


overtax (v.)

1640s, to demand too much of, from over- + tax (v.). Related: Overtaxed; overtaxing.


overthrow (v.)

early 14c., to knock down, from over- + throw (v.). Figurative sense of to cast down from power,
defeat is attested from late 14c. Related: Overthrown; overthrowing. Earlier in same senses was
overwerpen to overturn (something), overthrow; destroy, from Old English oferweorpan (see warp
(v.)).


overthrow (n.)

1510s, act of overthrowing, from over- + throw (n.).


overtime (n.)

time above the regular hours of work, 1846, from over- + time (n.). Sporting sense first attested
1921, in an ice hockey context.


overtire (v.)

1550s, from over- + tire (v.). Related: Overtired; overtiring.


overtly (adv.)

early 14c., from overt + -ly (2).


overtone (n.)

1867, in literal sense, from over + tone (n.); a loan-translation of German Oberton, first used by
German physicist Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz (1821-1894) as a contraction of
Overpartialton upper partial tone. Figurative sense of subtle implication is from 1890, first
attested in writings of William James.


overtop (v.)

1560s, from over- + top (v.). Related: Overtopped; overtopping.


overtower (v.)

1830, from over- + tower (v.). Related: Overtowered; overtowering.


overture (n.)

mid-13c., opening, aperture; early 15c. as an introductory proposal, from Old French overture
opening; proposal (Modern French ouverture), from Latin apertura opening, from aperire to open,
uncover (see overt). Orchestral sense first recorded in English 1660s.


overturn (v.)

early 13c., of a wheel, to rotate, roll over, from over- + turn (v.). Attested from c.1300 in
general transitive sense to throw over violently; figurative meaning to ruin, destroy is from late
14c. Of judicial decisions, to reverse, it is attested from 1826. Related: Overturned; overturning.


overuse (n.)

also over-use, 1862, from over- + use (n.).


overview (n.)

survey, summary, 1934, American English, from over- + view (n.). In 17c. it meant inspection,
supervision, but this became obsolete.


overweening (adj.)

mid-14c., from present participle of verb overwenen be conceited, presume, be presumptuous, be over-
confident, from Old English oferwenian to be proud, become insolent or presumptuous; see over- +
ween.


overweight (adj.)

in excess of proper or ordinary weight, 1630s, from over- + weight (n.). Of persons, as a noun,
obesity from 1917.


overwhelm (v.)

early 14c., to turn upside down, to overthrow, from over- + Middle English whelmen to turn upside
down (see whelm). Meaning to submerge completely is mid-15c. Perhaps the connecting notion is a
boat, etc., washed over, and overset, by a big wave. Figurative sense of to bring to ruin is
attested from 1520s. Related: Overwhelmed; overwhelming; overwhelmingly.


overwhelmed (adj.)

mid-15c., past participle adjective from overwhelm.


overwinter (v.)

Old English oferwintran; see over- + winter (v.). Related: Overwintered; overwintering.


overwork (v.)

to cause to work too hard, 1520s, from over- + work (v.). Old English oferwyrcan meant to work all
over, i.e. to decorate the whole surface of. Related: Overworked; overworking.


overwork (n.)

work beyond a person's strength, 1819; see overwork (v.). Old English oferweorc meant a
superstructure, sarcophagus, tomb.


overwrite (v.)

1690s, to write over other writing, from over- + write (v.). Of computers, it is attested from 1959.
Meaning to write too elaborately or ornately is from 1923. Related: Overwriting; overwritten.


overwrought (adj.)

worked up to too high a pitch, 1825, literally over-worked, from over- + wrought. Earlier it meant
exhausted by work (1660s) as a literal past participle of overwork.


overzealous (adj.)

also over-zealous, 1630s, from over- + zealous. Related: Overzealously; overzealousness.


Ovid

Publius Ovidius Nasso, Roman poet (43 B.C.E.-17 C.E.). Related: Ovidian.


oviduct (n.)

1757, from Modern Latin oviductus, from ovi ductus channel of an egg; see egg (n.) + duke (n.).


oviform (adj.)

egg-shaped, 1680s, from ovi-, comb. form of Latin ovus egg (see ovum) + forma (see form (n.)).


ovine (adj.)

pertaining to or of the nature of sheep, 1828, from Latin ovinus, from ovis sheep, from PIE Related:
*owi- sheep (see ewe).


oviparous (adj.)

producing eggs that are hatched outside the body of the female, 1640s, from Latin oviparus, from
ovum egg (see egg (n.)) + stem of parere to bring forth (see pare).


ovoid (adj.)

egg-shaped, 1828, from Modern Latin ovoides, a hybrid from Latin ovum (see ovum) + Greek -oeides
like (see -oid). Related: Ovoidal.


ovoviviparous (adj.)

1801, from comb. form of ovum + viviparous.


ovular (adj.)

1855, from ovule + -ar.


ovulate (v.)

1888, back-formation from ovulation. Related: Ovulated; ovulating.


ovulation (n.)

1848, from Modern Latin ovulum (see ovule) + -ation.


ovule (n.)

1821, from French ovule and directly from Modern Latin ovulum, literally small egg, diminutive of
Latin ovum egg (see ovum).


ovum (n.)

(plural ova), 1706, from Latin ovum egg, cognate with Greek oon, Old Norse egg, Old English
&aelig;g, all perhaps from PIE root *awi- (see egg (n.)).


ow (interj.)

14c. as an exclamation of surprise; 1919 as an expression of sudden pain.


owe (v.)

Old English agan (past tense ahte) to have, own, from Proto-Germanic *aigan to possess (cognates:
Old Frisian aga, Old Norse eiga, Old High German eigan, Gothic aigan to possess, have), from PIE
*aik- to be master of, possess (cognates: Sanskrit ise he owns, isah owner, lord, ruler; Avestan is-
riches, isvan- well-off, rich).    Sense of to have to repay began in late Old English with the
phrase agan to geldanne literally to own to yield, which was used to translate Latin debere (earlier
in Old English this would have been sceal shall); by late 12c. the phrase had been shortened to
simply agan, and own (v.) took over this word's original sense.    An original Germanic preterite-
present verb (along with can (v.1), dare, may, etc.). New past tense form owed arose 15c. to replace
oughte, which developed into ought (v.).


Owen

Celtic masc. proper name, ultimately from Greek eugenes well-born; via Gaelic Eoghann, Old Irish
Eogan, Old Welsh Eugein, Ougein. In Medieval records, frequently Latinized as Eugenius; the form
Eugene emerged in Scotland by late 12c. The Breton form Even led to modern French Ivain. Owenite in
reference to the communistic system of social reformer Robert Owen (1771-1858) is attested from
1829.


owl (n.)

Old English ule owl, from Proto-Germanic *uwwalon- (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch uil, Old High
German uwila, German Eule, Old Norse ugla), a diminutive of PIE root *u(wa)l-, which is imitative of
a wail or an owl's hoot (compare Latin ulula owl; also see ululation). The bird was employed
proverbially and figuratively in reference to nocturnal habits, ugliness, and appearance of gravity
and wisdom (often ironic).


owlish (adj.)

1610s, from owl + -ish. Related: Owlishly; owlishness.


own (adj.)

Old English agen one's own, literally possessed by, from Proto-Germanic *aigana- possessed, owned
(cognates: Old Saxon egan, Old Frisian egin, Old Norse eiginn, Dutch eigen, German eigen own), from
past participle of PIE *aik- to be master of, possess, source of Old English agan to have (see owe).


own (v.)

evolved in early Middle English from Old English geagnian, from root agan to have, to own (see owe),
and in part from the adjective own (q.v.). It became obsolete after c.1300, but was revived early
17c., in part as a back-formation of owner (mid-14c.), which continued. Related: Owned; owning. To
own up make full confession is from 1853.


owned (adj.)

possessed, 1620s, past participle adjective from own (v.).


owner (n.)

mid-14c., agent noun from own (v.).


ownership (n.)

1580s, from owner + -ship. Ownership society (2003) was popularized by U.S. president George W.
Bush.


ox (n.)

Old English oxa ox (plural oxan), from Proto-Germanic *ukhson (cognates: Old Norse oxi, Old Frisian
oxa, Middle Dutch osse, Old Saxon, Old High German ohso, German Ochse, Gothic auhsa), from PIE *uks-
en- male animal, (cognates: Welsh ych ox, Middle Irish oss stag, Sanskrit uksa, Avestan uxshan- ox,
bull), said to be from root *uks- to sprinkle, related to *ugw- wet, moist. The animal word, then,
is literally besprinkler.


ox-eyed (adj.)

1620s, from ox + eye (n.).


ox-hide

late 15c., from ox + hide (n.1).


oxalic (adj.)

1791, from French oxalique (1787, Lavoisier), from Latin oxalis sorrel, from Greek oxalis, from oxys
sharp (see acrid). So called because it occurs in sorrel.


oxbow (n.)

also ox-bow, mid-14c., wooden collar for an ox, from ox + bow (n.1). Meaning semicircular bend in a
river is from 1797, American English (New England); meaning curved lake left after an oxbow meander
has been cut off by a change in the river course is from 1898. The reference is to similarity of
shape.


Oxbridge

1849, a conflation of Oxford and Cambridge, used in reference to the characteristics common to the
two universities.


oxen (n.)

plural of ox, it is the only true continuous survival in Modern English of the Old English weak
plural. OED reports oxes occurs 14c.-16c., but has not survived.


Oxfam

1963, short for Oxford Committee for Famine Relief.


Oxford

university town in England, Middle English Oxforde, from Old English Oxnaforda (10c.) literally
where the oxen ford. In reference to a type of shoe laced over the instep, it is attested from 1721
(Oxford-cut shoes). Related: Oxfordian; Oxfordish; Oxfordist; Oxfordy.


oxidant (n.)

1859, from French oxidant (1806), from oxider (see oxidation).


oxidation (n.)

1791, from French oxidation (1787), coined by G. de Morveau and A. Lavoisier, noun of action from
oxider oxidize, from oxide (see oxide).


oxide (n.)

compound of oxygen with another element, 1790, from French oxide (1787), coined by G. de Morveau and
A. Lavoisier from ox(yg&egrave;ne) (see oxygen) + (ac)ide acid (see acid).


oxidize (v.)

1802 (implied in oxidizable), from oxide + -ize. Related: Oxidized; oxidizing; oxidization.


oxidizer (n.)

1875, agent noun from oxidize.


Oxo

proper name of a brand of beef extract, 1899, British.


Oxonian (adj.)

pertaining to Oxford or to Oxford University, 1640s, from Medieval Latin oxonia, Latinized form of
Middle English Oxforde (see Oxford). Earlier as a noun (1540s).


oxtail (n.)

Old English oxan t&aelig;gl; see ox + tail (n.1).


oxy-

word-forming element meaning sharp, pointed; acid, from Greek oxy-, comb. form of oxys sharp,
pungent (see acrid). Also used as a comb. form of oxygen.


oxycodone (n.)

from (hydr)oxy(l) + codeine. Developed 1916 in Germany; introduced in U.S. 1939.


OxyContin

brand name of an oxycodone compound marketed in U.S. from 1996. Second element from continuous (i.e.
time-released).


oxygen (n.)

gaseous chemical element, 1790, from French oxyg&egrave;ne, coined in 1777 by French chemist
Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier (1743-1794), from Greek oxys sharp, acid (see acrid) + French -g&egrave;ne
something that produces (from Greek -genes formation, creation; see -gen).    Intended to mean
acidifying (principle), it was a Greeking of French principe acidifiant. So called because oxygen
was then considered essential in the formation of acids (it is now known not to be). The element was
isolated by Priestley (1774), who, using the old model of chemistry, called it dephlogisticated air.
The downfall of the phlogiston theory required a new name, which Lavoisier provided.


oxymoron (n.)

1650s, from Greek oxymoron, noun use of neuter of oxymoros (adj.) pointedly foolish, from oxys sharp
(see acrid) + moros stupid (see moron). Rhetorical figure by which contradictory terms are conjoined
so as to give point to the statement or expression; the word itself is an illustration of the thing.
Now often used loosely to mean contradiction in terms. Related: Oxymoronic.


oy

Yiddish exclamation of dismay, 1892, American English. Extended form oy vey (1959) includes Yiddish
vey, from German Weh woe (see woe).


oyer (n.)

early 15c., a hearing of causes, from Anglo-French oyer, Old French oir, from Latin audire to hear
(see audience). Especially in phrase oyer and terminer (early 15c., but from late 13c. in Anglo-
Latin and Anglo-French), literally a hearing and determining, in England a court of judges of
assize, in U.S. a higher criminal court.


oyez (interj.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French oyez hear ye! (late 13c., Old French oiez), a cry uttered (usually
thrice) to call attention, from Latin subjunctive audiatis, plural imperative of audire to hear
(Anglo-French oier; see audience).


oyster (n.)

early 14c., from Old French oistre (Modern French hu&icirc;tre), from Latin ostrea, plural or fem.
of ostreum oyster, from Greek ostreon, from PIE *ost- bone (see osseous). Related to Greek ostrakon
hard shell and to osteon bone.Why then the world's mine Oyster, which I, with sword will open.
[Shakespeare, The Merry Wives of Windsor, II.ii.2]


Oz

mythical land in L. Frank Baum's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900) and sequels; according to an
anecdote written by Baum in 1903, inspired by a three-drawer desktop cabinet letter file, the last
drawer labeled O-Z. As Australian slang for Australia, attested by 1983.


oz.

abbreviation of ounce (n.1), 1540s, from Italian oz. (15c.), abbreviation of onza.


Ozark

mountains of southcentral United States, said to be from French aux Arcs, short for aux Arkansas to
the Arkansas (Indians), who once inhabited that region. See Arkansas.


Ozarks

see Ozark.


ozone (n.)

1840, from German Ozon, coined in 1840 by German chemist Christian Friedrich Sch&ouml;nbein
(1799-1868) from Greek ozon, neuter present participle of ozein to smell (see odor). So called for
its pungent odor.


